URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anderson, H --- "Shelter from the Storm: Phoenix Activity and the Safe Harbour" [2018] UMelbLRS 1
SHELTER FROM THE STORM:
PHOENIX ACTIVITY AND THE SAFE
A ‘safe harbour carve out’ from insolvent trading liability is
intended to encourage directors, particularly of large
companies, not to
prematurely liquidate financially troubled companies which could be rescued.
While the federal government has been
successful in introducing this measure,
which was part of its 2016 National Science and Innovation Agenda, this article
argues that
some of the underlying justifications for the safe harbour are
flawed and that it may not be effective. A more significant objection
the safe harbour could lead to a greater prevalence of illegal phoenix activity,
sheltering under the appearance of business
rescue. The benefit of the liability
carve out to the ‘big end of town’ is not worth this risk.
I INTRODUCTION
This article is concerned
with insolvent trading legislation, which imposes liability on directors for
allowing a company to incur
new debts when it is no longer able to pay existing
Choosing the
‘right’ course of action when insolvency looms has always been
difficult for directors. On the one hand,
a prompt liquidation ensures that
further creditors are not exposed to losses from the company’s collapse,
and that available
assets are distributed in the liquidation only to those
creditors whose losses have become unavoidable. On the other hand, continuing
trade in appropriate circumstances might see a turnaround in the company’s
fortunes, so that all creditors are paid or at
least receive more than they
would have if the company were quickly liquidated. Ensuring that
‘bad’ behaviour is deterred
and ‘good’ behaviour is
permitted when creditors are facing significant additional risk requires careful
drafting of
both the insolvent trading liability provision and its
directors benefit from the fact that the company is a separate legal entity and
that debts incurred in the company’s
name by them as its controllers are
payable by the company. Like companies themselves, liability imposed on
directors for insolvent
trading is a creation of statute, if a ‘somewhat
convoluted’ one.
This article
comes in the wake of the federal government’s introduction in 2017 of a
‘safe harbour’ carve out from
insolvent trading liability for
primarily aimed at encouraging directors of large companies not to liquidate the
prematurely.
The aim of the carve out is to allow directors in appropriate circumstances to
engage in an informal work-out, rather than placing
the company into liquidation
or voluntary administration (‘VA’), but nonetheless not face
liability where debts that
the company cannot pay are incurred during the
work-out period. Significant safeguards against abuse of the safe harbour have
included in the legislation.
On 28 March 2017, the government released
draft legislation and called for public
submissions.
The current interest in a safe harbour follows a Treasury discussion paper on
the same topic in 2010 (‘2010 Safe Harbour Paper’)
that dealt with
the concept of a safe harbour and proposed a business judgment rule as a means
to implement
fact that the 2017 safe harbour legislation was passed through federal
Parliament is not central to this article. Instead, it
makes two arguments:
first, that some of the policy justifications for a safe harbour for the
directors of large companies are questionable,
which leads to the second, that
the safe harbour runs the risk of increasing the prevalence of phoenix activity,
particularly among
small companies,
without achieving a compensating benefit in ‘the big end of town’.
For policy perspectives, this article relies on Treasury’s
Harbour Paper and subsequent submissions. These are used in preference to the
explanatory memorandum to the 2017 draft
legislation and subsequent submissions,
which largely concentrate on the operation of the legislation as proposed rather
than whether
a safe harbour itself is a good idea. This article also includes
the views of the Senate Economics Legislation Committee (‘Senate
ELC’) which were released
It recommended that the Bill be passed without
and it was duly
passed with some minor amendments on 12 September
Part II sets the scene
by briefly outlining our current insolvent trading provision and defences, the
relevance of liquidation and
VA, and the justifications for, and elements of,
the safe harbour. Part III examines the distinguishing features of phoenix
relevant to insolvent trading, principally insofar as they occur among
small companies. Part IV provides the analysis, asking first
whether the safe
harbour justifications stand up for companies of any size, and second, what
difficulties a safe harbour could produce
in the deterrence and prosecution of
directors of mainly small companies choosing to engage in phoenix activity. Part
V concludes
that the safe harbour carve out enacted in 2017 is unlikely to be
effective for directors of large companies and may well encourage
directors of
small companies towards phoenix activity.
II BACKGROUND
A Current Insolvent Trading Liability
current insolvent trading provision is contained in
Corporations Act 2001
and it owes much to the
recommendations of the
Harmer Report
justified imposing personal liability on directors for
the insolvent trading of their companies thus:
The concept of limited liability as a privilege available to the commercial
community was introduced into English law by the
Limited Liability Act
(UK). The limited liability company was seen then, and is seen now, as
a device for encouraging entrepreneurial activity and promoting
economic growth.
However, despite these desirable and widely accepted goals, the corporate form
was abused. In particular, its use
by persons who took advantage of being able
to conduct business through a company with a minimum paid up capital was in
marked contrast
to the original conception of a company as a means of attracting
substantial capital to undertake significant projects. There followed
to curb the abuses without derogating from the advantages of limited liability.
In strict legal theory, the measures taken
to curb abuses involve invasion of
the principle of the separate entity of the company, although they are sometimes
loosely characterised
as disturbing the principle of limited liability.
Initially, the development of the law of the limited liability company centred
upon the protection of investors (shareholders and debenture holders). It was
not until some 70 years after the introduction of the
concept of limited
liability that legislators turned to consider the protection of
main elements of s 588G are that the liable person is a director of the company,
the company is insolvent at the time the debt
is incurred or becomes insolvent
by incurring that debt, and ‘there are reasonable grounds for suspecting
that the company
is insolvent, or would so become insolvent, as the case may
Certain actions which
diminish the company’s assets are deemed to be debts, including paying a
dividend or entering an uncommercial
transaction.
Liability for the
director is imposed by s 588G(2) where the director is aware of the reasonable
grounds for suspecting insolvency
or a reasonable person in their position would
be so aware. According to s 95A, ‘[a] person is solvent if, and only if,
person is able to pay all the person’s debts, as and when they become
due and payable.’
person in question here is, of course, the company.
Contravention of s
588G(2) allows the liquidator to recover from directors by means of civil
proceedings.
The money recovered
is payable to the company and is available for distribution to all unsecured
creditors, not just those whose
debts were incurred during the period when the
director had reasonable suspicions of the company’s
insolvency.
However, in
creditor-initiated actions, which are permitted with
the amount recovered is
payable to the unsecured
Liquidator recovery
for contravention of s 588G(2) requires the company to be wound
This may have been intended
to encourage directors to find alternatives to liquidation, such as VA, not only
to benefit themselves
Placing an insolvent company into VA under
Corporations
gives an administrator time to explore possibilities for saving the
company or its business, failing which the assets are disposed
of in a way that
‘results in a better return for the company’s creditors and members
than would result from an immediate
winding up of the
said, upon recommending the introduction of VA, that
the aim is to encourage early positive action to deal with insolvency. It will
be worthwhile and a considerable advantage over present
procedures if it saves
or provides better opportunities to salvage even a small percentage of the
companies which, under the present
procedures, have no alternative but to be
submission of the Insolvency Practitioners Association of Australia
(‘IPAA’) to Treasury in 2010 recognised the role
of the insolvent
trading laws in achieving this aim:
Harmer Report
saw the insolvent trading laws as supplementing and
supporting the then new voluntary administration regime ... The strictness of
the insolvent trading laws were meant to give a serious incentive to directors
to focus on their company’s financial position,
something that the law at
that time did not
to place the company into VA can mean that directors avoid the personal
consequences of their culpable behaviour, even where
the damage to the creditors
However, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(‘ASIC’) retains the right to initiate proceedings for
trading in the absence of the company’s
liquidation,
and ASIC did so
against John Elliott and others despite their Water Wheel
entering VA and
executing deeds of company arrangement
The Victorian Court of Appeal held in
Elliott v Australian Securities and
Investments Commission
that the court may order compensation as a result of
a civil penalty action pursuant to
without the company being wound
As a result of
, VA may have has lost some of its attraction as a ‘safe
haven’ from personal liability for insolvent trading, and the
the popularity of VA may account for the increasing concern over the need for a
The relief from insolvent trading liability prior to the passage of the
legislation in 2017,
person has acted honestly
‘having regard to all the circumstances of the ... the person ought fairly
to be excused for the
contravention’
established,
and therefore does not act as a de facto safe harbour.
Section 588G(2)
imposes a positive duty on directors to prevent insolvent trading, subject to a
number of defences set out in
Liability requires little culpability on
the part of the director. Directors who choose to take no active part in
management have
no defence, and, under earlier legislation, wives and mothers
who had known nothing of the company’s conduct but who merely
documents had been held liable.
Defences include an actual expectation of solvency based upon reasonable
illness or some other
good reason,
and the taking of
all reasonable steps to prevent the incurring of the
The defences were
construed strictly in the Water Wheel action and
The defence under
was not made out where Mr Elliott, an
‘experienced businessman and company
was held to
lack reasonable grounds for believing that management was fulfilling its
responsibility to him to provide him with adequate
information about the
company’s solvency.
summary, as can be seen from this outline, the insolvent trading duty and its
defences were not intended to allow scope for directors
to engage in workouts
prior to liquidation. Where a work-out is appropriate, this could be achieved by
VA and the formal appointment
of an administrator. The justifications for change
will now be considered.
B Justifications for a Safe Harbour
As noted in the
introduction, the policy behind insolvent trading liability and its current
defences is to deter directors from gambling
with creditors’ money, while
at the same time protecting honest directors who have done their best prior to
the company’s
insolvency. The rationale is that a fear of liability ought
to curb improper behaviour, to the benefit of creditors’ ability
recover their debts from the company. Directors will avoid decreasing the few
assets left for the creditors or incurring further
debts which will compete for
payment. Credit for the company should be less risky and therefore
leading to a better
return for shareholders where the company is successful.
While the newly
enacted safe harbour is not limited to companies of any particular size, it
appears to be aimed at directors of large
While a director of a
small company might be willing to take the risk of trading insolvently in a
last-ditch attempt to save their
investment and
livelihood,
hoping to sail under the regulatory radar, the argument in favour of increased
risk-taking as insolvency approaches is unlikely to
hold for the directors of
large companies. Those directors may have no further incentive to save their
positions or to maintain enterprise
value for the company’s shareholders,
and therefore are likely to act
cautiously.
‘Insolvency’ itself in an extensive and complex business may be hard
to ascertain. The gain from successful risk-taking
when the company is in
significant financial distress — the gamble to ‘trade out of its
difficulties’ or even to
engage in an informal
— goes to the
company’s creditors and shareholders. The loss, if the gamble fails, is on
the director themselves, both
financially, through insolvent trading liability,
and through loss of reputation.
Moreover, for directors of large companies,
possible insolvent trading liability may not only deter unduly risky behaviour,
discourage appropriately risky behaviour which could benefit the
company, shareholders and creditors alike. Even before insolvency
directors of large companies may concentrate on strategies to minimise the risk
of possible liability, rather than on the
growth and prosperity of the company
for the benefit of its
shareholders.
The total social cost of directors’ risk aversion, including a dampening
of entrepreneurial spirit,
exceed the creditor losses that would result from insolvent
addition, a fear of personal liability and loss of reputation for directors of
large companies may make it difficult for those
companies to recruit suitable
board candidates.
This could be
particularly the case where the companies conduct businesses in
‘challenging’ areas, such as retailing,
property development or
natural resources, or where the companies are going through difficult
Non-executive directors
may be especially reluctant to join the boards of these
Directors who do
remain with the company may demand additional compensation for the risks to
which they are exposed.
because directors, especially executive directors, generally lack the ability to
diversify away their risk as a creditor
might, and they face unlimited personal
liability unless they have actively engaged in personal asset protection
strategies. That
said, these arguments are theoretical ones, and there is no
empirical evidence to suggest that there is actually a shortage of quality
directors in large companies or that they demand unreasonably high remuneration
packages to compensate them for the possibility of
insolvent trading
This leads to the issue of early and unnecessary liquidation.
Perhaps directors are willing to take board positions in large companies
demanding excessive compensation because they plan to appoint a liquidator at
the first sign of trouble,
whether or not the company could have been saved. This attitude has consequences
not only for each affected company and its stakeholders,
but also for the
economy as a whole. Employees lose their jobs, taxes are not remitted, and
unpaid trade creditors themselves may
face financial crises.
directors facing corporate financial distress do not need to place the company
into liquidation, given the availability of
VA, the motivation for the 2010 Safe
Harbour Paper was an attempt to add a third option — informal
It has been asserted that the insolvent trading laws may have the effect of
aiding in business rescue by inducing directors to place
companies into external
administration [ie VA] while there is still a possibility to reorganise and
rescue the company (or at least
its business). However, concerns have also been
raised in respect of the insolvent trading laws’ effects on work-outs. It
been asserted by some stakeholders that the laws may cause companies to be
placed into external administration prematurely or in
circumstances where
external administration is not appropriate, by directors who fear personal
liability if the company engages in
insolvent trading while attempting some sort
of informal
question therefore is, why is there a need for
workouts outside
of VA? The 2010 Safe Harbour Paper acknowledged that
[v]oluntary administration provides an efficient, non-court based, procedure to
enable a company to come to a binding arrangement
with its unsecured creditors.
However, placing a company into external administration may not always be the
most appropriate method
to affect a business rescue or to otherwise realise
value for the benefit of the company’s creditors and members. Such
may more appropriately be effected through a
informal work-out, as an unregulated restructure of the company’s affairs,
has the advantages of maximum flexibility and
less cost than the appointment of
an external administrator.
can also avoid triggering ipso facto clauses, which precipitate the withdrawal
of key contracts underpinning the
The ability of
existing management to maintain control of the business is also a major
This allows companies to
maintain whatever goodwill is attached to the participation of these
individuals, and can give the appearance
of ‘business as usual’ so
that customers are not scared away, resulting in lost enterprise
KordaMentha’s
submission noted that retaining customer confidence was particularly vital in
businesses with prepayments, such
as travel businesses, or with ongoing service
commitments.
Although the data is somewhat dated, it appears that VA as a way of a company
returning to normal business does not have a high rate
and Schaffer has
described VA as ‘the scenic route to winding
On the other hand, it
is possible that directors delay entry into VA for too long, possibly so they do
not lose control of the company,
and this can jeopardise the VA’s chance
of success.
recommendations of the Productivity Commission’s 2015 investigation into
business set-up, transfer and closure was
that the administrator of a VA must
certify within a month of taking the appointment that the company is capable of
being a viable
business, in the absence of which the company must be
liquidated.
The 2010 Safe
Harbour Paper did not lead to any draft legislation. However, the idea of a safe
harbour was revived as part of the
Turnbull government’s National Science
and Innovation Agenda in
C Elements of the 2017 Safe Harbour Carve Out
Draft legislation was
released in March 2017 with calls for feedback to the
government.
According to the
Minister for Revenue and Financial Services, the draft legislation was intended
‘to promote a culture of entrepreneurship
and innovation and help reduce
the stigma associated with business failure’ with the aim of driving jobs
and business growth
through cultural
A key element of the
legislation is that
operates as a ‘carve out’ from,
rather than a defence to,
liability. While the director bears the burden
of adducing evidence that they took ‘one or more courses of action that
reasonably likely to lead to a better outcome for the
necessary for the liquidator or regulator to establish the elements of
breach, and now additionally, to overcome the evidence of entitlement to
claim the safe harbour.
contrast, the burden of proving entitlement to the defences under
the director. This is a
significant difference.
Nonetheless, adducing
evidence of the safe harbour carve out will not be easy. Under
court will look at steps taken: to prevent misconduct; to ensure proper record
keeping; to obtain appropriate advice; to remain
informed about the
company’s financial position; and to develop a restructuring plan for the
company to improve its financial
position. In particular, the director cannot
utilise the safe harbour under
if the company fails to provide for
employee entitlements and fails to keep up to date with taxation documentation
in a way that
a solvent company would reasonably be expected to
The legislation also
addresses the vexed question of missing books and uncooperative behaviour. It
warns the director that if the
company’s books and corporate information
are not forthcoming as required by the liquidator or court, they cannot be
on later by the director in seeking to make out the safe
As a result of the
safeguards built into the safe harbour, it might appear to be simply a harmless
signal of encouragement to directors
of large companies not to liquidate
prematurely and risk losing enterprise value. However, since the safe harbour
has no limitations
in relation to the size of the company to which it can apply,
the carve out is equally available to directors of small companies.
This has the
potential to encourage illegal phoenix activity, which will be explained in the
III PHOENIX ACTIVITY
This part will describe
the common characteristics of phoenix activity relevant to insolvent trading,
which will be scrutinised in
terms of the safe harbour carve out in
Phoenix activity typically involves the corporate failure of one company,
‘Oldco’, and a second company, ‘Newco’,
arising from
Oldco’s ashes where Newco’s controllers and business are essentially
the same as
Phoenix activity can be legal where the previous controllers start another
similar company in order to genuinely rescue the failed
Illegal phoenix
activity is procedurally similar but is distinguished by an intention to exploit
the corporate form at the expense
of unsecured creditors, usually via the speedy
liquidation of Oldco, with its assets sold for less than they are worth to
This is a breach of the duties of Oldco’s directors to act for a proper
purpose, and not to misuse their positions in respect
of the company and its
Illegal phoenix
activity is frequently, although not exclusively, the realm of small
because the failed company has little reputation to lose by liquidating and
being resurrected unobtrusively through another company,
possibly with a similar
The relatively small size
of these companies means that ASIC, with limited resources for investigations
and prosecutions,
does not bring
actions against these directors for insolvent trading where phoenix activity is
At most, those caught
‘red-handed’ are likely to be disqualified administratively by
External administrators regularly report large numbers of suspected instances of
insolvent trading to ASIC at the conclusion of their
engagements.
For example, in 2015–16, it was the top of the ‘top 3 alleged
possible misconduct’, with civil breaches alleged
in ‘5,736 or 61%
In addition, there were allegations of 150 instances of criminal insolvent
with evidence held by
the liquidator in 93 of those
However, comparatively
little appears to be done in response to those
insolvent trading liability aims to deter directors from trying to ‘trade
out of their difficulties’ — delaying
liquidation and incurring new
debts when their company is unable to pay existing
— it appears to be
the antithesis of the usual conception of phoenix activity. However, since 2000,
insolvent trading has also
included ‘uncommercial
transactions’,
Corporations Act
, expressly to capture phoenix
Uncommercial transactions are ones that ‘
a reasonable person in the
company’s circumstances would not have entered
... having regard
(a) the benefits (if any) to the company of entering into the transaction;
(b) the detriment to the company of entering into the transaction; and
(c) the respective benefits to other parties to the transaction of entering
into it; and
(d) any other relevant
Undervalued transfers
of assets from Oldco to Newco are clearly within the section’s reach.
Unfortunately, it is not known how
many of the liquidator reports of insolvent
trading, noted above, relate to uncommercial transactions, because the question
asked on the external administration reporting form, nor is there a
question about suspected illegal phoenix
It is also difficult
to estimate how many actions by liquidators against directors for insolvent
trading are avoided by the director
making a payment towards meeting the debts
of the company. Indeed, this was expressly contemplated as an outcome by the
Harmer Report
therefore be seen, broadly speaking, as a ‘successful’ application
of the law. Pragmatically, the
Harmer Report
recognised that
‘settlement of a claim by a payment to forestall legal proceedings is a
common and recognised phenomenon in
all areas of civil
litigation’.
company liquidations, secured lenders such as banks seize the secured assets and
are typically repaid.
Comparatively, with the exception of employees, unsecured creditors including
revenue authorities, and trade creditors are left wholly
or partly unpaid in a
higher proportion of cases.
is in contrast to the situation in large company insolvencies which are the
focus of the safe harbour. A joint submission to
Treasury in 2010 by the Law
Council of Australia, the IPAA and the Turnaround Management Association
Australia pointed out that
in an informal work-out of a major corporation, it is usually the case that the
claims of its financiers are so significant as a
percentage of its total
liabilities, that it is in their commercial interests to permit the company to
continue to trade under agreed
funding arrangements while a restructuring is
pursued. In such cases, the business continues to operate and trade creditors
in the ordinary course of business during the period of
restructuring.
small companies differ from large companies when it comes to handing
documentation to the company’s external administrator.
It is an offence
for a director to fail to provide books and records to a company’s
external administrator at the commencement
administration,
but directors
of small companies, with little personal reputation at stake, may still choose
to destroy books and records to thwart
regulator or liquidator action for more
serious breaches. While this is the most common area for ASIC insolvency
enforcement,
the ‘slap on the wrist’ fine of what currently amounts to up to
means that it is a useful strategy to
While a 2013 study
showed that 96% of all prosecutions resulted in fines, this was an average of
just $917.85 per
IV ANALYSIS
A Do the Safe Harbour Justifications Stand Up?
1 Premature Liquidation
both the 2010 Safe Harbour Paper and the explanatory memorandum to the 2017
legislation suggest that insolvent trading liability
could cause premature
liquidation,
it is unclear
whether this is actually true. The submission of the Australian Institute of
Company Directors (‘AICD’)
to Treasury in 2010 quoted a series of
statistics to support the contention that the fear of personal liability
resulted in ‘overly
decision-making.
The Insolvency Professionals Joint Submission cited
the example of the Henry Walker Eltin group, ‘where the directors, citing
concerns regarding insolvent trading liability, placed the company into
administration. Ultimately, all creditors were paid 100¢
in the dollar, and
the destruction of enterprise value was experienced at the shareholder
MacFarlane disputes that fear of personal liability leads to
early entry
into external
administration,
and KordaMentha’s 2010 submission to Treasury, based on a review of 20
large administrations and liquidations conducted by
themselves and other
practitioners, agreed. Their submission said:
[W]e found that in all but a few cases those involved did not believe that the
external administration had occurred predominantly
because of the trading whilst
insolvent laws ... We found that the decision to appoint external administrators
occurred mainly because
the company had run out of options. The fundamental
problem was the loss of key stakeholder support, without which any form of
restructuring
could not have
2 Director Penalty Notices
All the attention on a
company’s premature liquidation, to the exclusion of
an informal
work-out, seems to be focused on possible insolvent trading
However, a more potent reason to enter external administration —
liquidation or VA — is liability for unremitted withholding taxes and
unpaid superannuation.
director is required to ‘cause the company to comply with its
obligation’ to pay certain withholding tax
liabilities.
This obligation continues until the company has paid that tax or is liquidated
or placed into VA. Directors become liable for a penalty,
equal to the amount
owing by the company, through the issuance of a ‘standard’ director
penalty notice (‘DPN’)
if they do not do one of those three things
within 21 days.
regime was amended in 2012 to make directors personally liable not only for
their company’s unpaid Pay-As-You-Go (Withholding)
instalments, but also
for superannuation guarantee charge
liabilities.
amendments also limited the circumstances in which directors can discharge a DPN
by placing their company into liquidation
or VA. This was through the
introduction of so-called ‘lockdown’ DPNs, which are issued where
the amount owing by the
company was not reported in a timely manner to the
Australian Taxation Office (‘ATO’) and the relevant amount was not
This deprives the
director of the ability to avoid personal liability for the unremitted amounts
by placing the company into external
administration. ‘Standard’
DPNs, as described above, remain available for reported, but unpaid, withholding
Given the incentive towards formal external administration —
either liquidation or VA — to avoid personal liability for
these unpaid
taxes via a ‘standard’ DPN, it seems clear that the safe harbour
proposed in 2010 would not have provided
sufficient encouragement towards
informal workouts.
legislation approached the matter from a different angle, depriving the director
of the safe harbour carve out under
where the company is failing to
‘give returns, notices, statements, applications or other documents as
required by taxation
laws (within the meaning of the
Income Tax Assessment
However, this is not the same as saying that the taxes themselves need to be
paid, in contrast to employee entitlements where payment
is explicitly
directors who report company tax liabilities and may otherwise be entitled to
rely on the 2017 safe harbour carve out may
still be exposed to personal
liability for unremitted withholding taxes and unpaid superannuation via a
‘standard’ DPN
because they did not place the company into formal
external administration within the 21-day period. The issue of DPNs was
by the Productivity Commission in 2015 and it concluded, in response
to suggestions that the safe harbour extend to DPNs, that
[t]he Commission disagrees, and considers that
the defence should only apply
to insolvent trading
, as its purpose is to remove distorted incentives
arising from the fear of insolvent trading liability, and thus improve
opportunities
for ongoing solvency or restructure. It should not be used to
excuse directors from other existing regulatory
requirements.
the footnote to this passage, the Productivity Commission then com-
[o]f course, the appointment of a safe harbour adviser could still be used as a
component in existing [DPN] defences. For example,
it could indicate that the
director had taken ‘all reasonable steps’ to ensure that the company
paid the amount outstanding,
appointing an administrator or winding up the
company depending on the advice received — that is, fulfilled defences
can negate liability for a director
respect, this misses the point entirely. The DPN defences, as stated, involve
the company actually paying the tax or placing
the company into external
administration. A safe harbour informal work-out does not require any of these
things. The appointment
of an advisor does not satisfy any of the DPN
considerably more strict than the current insolvent trading defences. In
addition, the DPN cannot be avoided through the
Corporations Act
grant relief against liability ‘in any civil proceeding against a person
to whom [s 1318] applies for negligence,
default, breach of trust or breach of
While it is
likely that a director will receive a
it is considerably less likely that insolvent trading action will be brought.
This is now considered.
3 The Likelihood of Insolvent Trading Action
Deterrence of improper
behaviour at the time of the company’s insolvency is a function both of
the liability and defence provisions
themselves, and the extent to which they
are enforced. In 2000, David Knott, then Deputy Chairman of ASIC, recognised the
‘notoriously
complex and resource intensive’ nature of insolvent
trading prosecutions because of the high evidentiary burdens that must
discharged.
difficult to obtain information about the extent to which ASIC brings insolvent
trading action. The 2004 empirical study
by James, Ramsay and
, which looked at the prevalence of insolvent
trading actions, noted that there had been only 103 cases since 1961, as at the
of that study.
recently, ASIC has produced six-monthly enforcement reports but they do not
refer to the particular section under which action
While media releases
reveal that ASIC does bring some insolvent trading actions against large
this is not always
4 Difficulties for Liquidators
Liquidators are also in
a difficult position in bringing insolvent trading proceedings against
directors. The IPAA submission to the
2010 Safe Harbour Paper stated:
[T]he discussion paper proceeds on a misapprehension that a company is either
‘solvent’ or ‘insolvent’. While
this is so in legal
terms, our members find that, despite their experience in assessing insolvency,
determining whether
any business of even moderate size is insolvent is
difficult unless it is
IPAA remarked that this difficulty is compounded by the fact that ‘
claims ... are litigation
intensive’,
Hall v Poolman
Reasons include a
conservative approach to the question of whether there were suspicions of
insolvency at the relevant time, whether
the action may be defeated by the
raising of defences under
or a relief claim under
whether there is a prospect of recovery from the
So while there
might be concerns from the director’s perspective that they should
liquidate unless there is clear solvency,
it appears from the
liquidator’s, and perhaps ASIC’s, perspective that they should steer
away from action unless there
There are two
further complications for liquidators where there is a ‘safe
harbour’ period claimed. The first is simply
that corporate assets might
be diminished during that period if the rescue fails, leaving less for the
company’s creditors,
both pre-safe harbour and newly incurred. The second
is the more complicated issue of voidable transactions. Under
Corporations Act
, liquidators have the right to ‘claw back’
amounts paid by the company prior to liquidation in various
circumstances.
The right to
recover these amounts is in part determined by the time when the payment is made
relative to the date of the company’s
entry into external administration.
This is known as the ‘relation-back’
For example, the
liquidator can recover the value of transactions entered into when the company
was insolvent if this occurs within
six months before the relation-back
Uncommercial
transactions,
above, and unfair
preferences,
can be clawed
back if they occur within two years of the relation-back
Anything that delays the
start of the liquidation — in this case, the safe harbour — has the
potential to place these
voidable transactions beyond the reach of the
liquidator and therefore could diminish the amount of money available for
distribution
to creditors.
Tax payments as voidable preferences require
special mention. As noted earlier, the safe harbour requires the company to be
date in its tax reporting. This may well result in the directors of a
company that is struggling to pay its debts in a timely manner,
and is therefore
technically insolvent, causing the company to pay the tax owing to avoid a DPN
being issued to themselves. This
tax payment is just as susceptible to recovery
by the liquidator from the Commissioner of Taxation as any other preferential
If the liquidator is successful in clawing back the payment from the
Commissioner of Taxation, the directors themselves may then
be personally liable
The voidable
preference provisions therefore provide significant incentive for directors to
pay tax liabilities, invoke the safe
harbour by complying with its requirements,
and delay entry into formal external administration, if it comes to that, by at
six months. This delay might have the practical consequence of elevating
the claims of the Commissioner of Taxation above those of
other unsecured
Liquidators are not the only professionals who may be adversely
affected by the safe harbour carve out. The next section considers
how the safe
harbour may operate for restructuring advisors.
One of the ways in which
a director can show that they have developed a course of action that is
reasonably likely to lead to a better
outcome for the company is through
obtaining appropriate advice.
The pre-existing defence under
makes it clear that the advice
directors should seek is about whether the company is
the company could trade out of its difficulties or whether a work-out would be
more beneficial to creditors than an immediate
liquidation.
ASIC’s 2010
regulatory guide about insolvent trading is somewhat less clear. It states
[d]irectors should consider obtaining advice on:
(a) the solvency of the company and whether there is a risk that the company
is trading while insolvent;
(b) the options available to the company to deal with its financial
difficulties; and
(c) whether it is realistically possible for the company to continue to
trade while attempting to restructure the company’s
affairs to enable it
to meet its obligations (including whether it can renegotiate its obligations)
and return the company to long-term
financial health.
Advisers may also be able to assist directors to prepare cash flow budgets and
negotiate with
safe harbour carve out certainly provides some clarity about what advice the
director may obtain when a company faces these ‘financial
difficulties’. It is advice that allows the director to start
‘developing one or more courses of action that are reasonably
lead to a better outcome for the
while the safe harbour might clarify an advisor’s role within the company
in relation to the insolvent trading liability
of the director who normally
runs the company
, there is a risk that the advisor themself might face
liability as a shadow director. This may result in high-quality company
restructuring
advice being unavailable precisely when it is needed most. The
Insolvency Professionals Joint Submission to Treasury in 2010 commented
chief restructuring officer would likely be considered a shadow director, and
that ‘[i]t is unlikely that many sensible
professionals would be prepared
to assume that risk’.
Corporations Act
, a person is defined as a director even
if not appointed to that position, if ‘the directors of the company or
body are accustomed
to act in accordance with the person’s instructions or
Nonetheless, the status of shadow director is likely to be
found only in very limited circumstances. For a start,
makes it clear that
the director definition ‘does not apply merely because the directors act
on advice given by the person
in the proper performance of functions attaching
to the person’s professional capacity, or the person’s business
relationship
with the directors or the company or body’. Nor are courts
willing to label advisors as shadow directors on the basis of isolated
Re Akron Roads Pty Ltd (in liq) [No 3]
, the Supreme Court of Victoria
considered a claim for insolvent trading brought by a liquidator against a
management consulting company,
on the basis that it was a shadow director of
Buzzle Operations Pty Ltd (in liq) v Apple Computer Australia Pty
Robson J concluded
that even deep involvement in the management and administration of Akron was
insufficient to establish that the
management consulting company was a shadow
This was because it
had not overborne the directors of Akron nor had Akron’s directors acted
in accordance with its wishes
instructions.
director’s instructions or wishes must be habitually complied with by the
appointed directors over a period of time
even though those instructions or
wishes do not need to cover every aspect of running the
even though an advisor is unlikely to be found to be a shadow director, the
risks for advisors, particularly in lengthy
and complex workouts of large
companies, are considerable. If such a finding were made, it would expose them
to the full range of
directors’ duties and responsibilities under the
Corporations Act
, including insolvent trading liability in their own
capacity. More concerning for advisors is that being considered a
Corporations Act
director allows a DPN to be issued by the ATO in
applicable circumstances.
6 Out of the Frying Pan?
Even if directors are
able to invoke the safe harbour against insolvent trading liability by complying
with its various requirements,
they still face the potential for other forms of
liability. In addition to liability under a DPN, as discussed above, directors
become criminally liable for insolvent trading where their behaviour is
considered to be dishonest,
does not apply beyond civil penalty
Curiously, honesty
is not one of the requirements for the safe harbour carve out.
Directors may
also face liability for breach of their duty of care to the company, and while
that duty does have the benefit of the
business judgment rule, its applicability
has different requirements to the safe harbour carve
There is no business
judgment rule defence for other relevant breaches of directors’ duties,
including acting for an improper
purpose and conflicts of
This is a genuine
risk, particularly where the informal work-out has not led to the
company’s salvation and the directors have
gained something for themselves
during the safe harbour period. Again, avoiding a conflict of interest is not a
requirement of the
safe harbour carve out. There is also a possibility of
liability for directors of companies with continuous disclosure obligations,
where the directors have caused the company to engage in a ‘business as
usual’ informal work-out without informing the
When the company is
teetering on the brink of insolvency, an undisclosed informal work-out unfairly
exposes new creditors to a greater
risk of loss, as the market cannot price
credit properly in the absence of sufficient information.
The concern here is
that the safe harbour might lure unwitting directors towards an informal
work-out that exposes them to other forms
of liability. The same arguments, with
the exception of continuous disclosure, apply to the directors of small
companies. While directors
of large companies are likely to be in receipt of
good legal advice on this matter, honest small company directors may
inadvertently
be encouraged by the safe harbour to engage in an informal
work-out and find themselves saddled with personal liability, particularly
DPN. The effect of the safe harbour carve out on their less honest brethren,
determined to use the corporate form to separate
their business from its debts,
will now be discussed.
B The Safe Harbour, Small Companies and Illegal Phoenix
1 Inapplicability of Safe Harbour Justifications
was seen above that the justification for the introduction of a safe harbour was
to overcome directors’ fears of insolvent
trading liability, leading to
risk-averse behaviour, particularly through premature liquidation of the
company. However, it is important
to differentiate directors of small companies
from those of large companies. As a broad generalisation, directors of small
may take excess risks around the time of insolvency because they have
less to lose in terms of their reputation and more to gain
in their capacity as
shareholders compared to the directors of large
Directors of small
companies are the ones who are most likely to succumb to ‘moral
and engage in
risky behaviour in a last-ditch attempt to save not only their directorship but
also their livelihood.
2010 Safe Harbour Paper acknowledged that directors of companies in financial
difficulties could be tempted to engage in insolvent
trading to benefit
themselves as shareholders, at the expense of
It recognised that
the ‘laws against insolvent trading are therefore an important tool in
addressing phoenix company behaviour’
because ‘phoenix company
behaviour involves the transfer of assets out of a company instead of applying
them toward the payment
of the company’s liabilities, [so] it commonly
involves the company, at some point, carrying on business without the capacity
to meet its liabilities as they become
In cases of
illegal phoenix activity, where an informal work-out is attempted, there is no
real intention to save the company, because
that would involve the resurrected
company being obliged to pay its debts. On the contrary, the aim may be to
separate the company
from its remaining assets via a sale of those assets to
the liquidator is appointed and the directors are displaced
from management. Liquidation is anything but premature, as the
less-than-11-cents-in-the-dollar
recovery for unsecured creditors would
and there is no
destruction of enterprise value for shareholders, who are commonly also the
directors. The value of the enterprise
is in fact maintained through Newco and
it is the creditors of Oldco who suffer. For these reasons, by encouraging an
informal workout,
the safe harbour sends the opposite message to the one that
needs to be sent, which is that directors need to preserve the assets
for the benefit of its creditors, not themselves, and that doing otherwise is a
breach of their duty not to misuse their
position to make a gain for themselves
or someone else.
Senate ELC report in August 2017 briefly touched on the relevance of the safe
harbour to illegal phoenix activity and reported
the views of submitters who
considered it would act as a ‘disincentive’ to illegal phoenix
The report quoted
the AICD’s submission that ‘the reforms proposed in the bill will
not encourage, increase or support
illegal phoenixing
to say that
[t]he ASBFEO [Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman]
echoed this view
, asserting that:
The introduction of a
safe harbour provision should be an incentive to directors try and save their
businesses, generating greater
accountability and loyalty to the ongoing
existence of an entity. This may reduce incentives to ‘phoenix’
companies and
this may create greater stability for stakeholders such as
employees and
This shows an
unfortunate conflation of legal phoenix activity with illegal phoenix
It may well be true
that an honest small business owner, faced with debts that the company cannot
pay, will take the chance to enter
the safe harbour rather than liquidating. If
the director takes that option, the company remains saddled with those debts
creditors can be persuaded to enter a compromise as part of a
restructure. The other legal, and more appealing, option is to place
insolvent company into liquidation and start the business again through a new
company with an entirely clean slate. Illegal phoenix
activity, on the other
hand, is the deliberate liquidation of the company, in breach of
directors’ duties, precisely to shed
those debts or other legal
obligations.
As discussed
above, the safe harbour carve out will
not discourage this sort of behaviour
and has the capacity to make it
more prevalent.
2 Difficulties for Liquidators (Again)
In addition to the
difficulties for liquidators outlined above, the lack of transparency and
accountability surrounding informal arrangements
within small companies,
particularly where they might in time be followed by a formal liquidation,
raises concerns.
echoes of the debate concerning ‘pre-pack administrations’, which
have been examined recently in the
Its review, led by Teresa
Graham, was particularly concerned with connected-party sales as almost
two-thirds of the 499 companies
it examined involved such a
Allegations made particularly against connected party sales
perpetuating a failed business it interferes with the process of productive
churn, which is the process by which the weak businesses
fold and finance can be
freed-up for new entrants. ...
enabling a company to resume trading shorn of many of its debts
benefit of its existing owners, this allows it to unfairly undercut
allows ‘bad businesses’ with poor business models to continue
— that the pre-pack delays the inevitable and that
the business will fail
again, in its new corporate guise taking down more creditors on its way;
allows balance sheet re-engineering of businesses that may be technically rather
than actually insolvent;
most damning allegation is that the whole thing was a sham
simply to ditch
debt and that a pre-pack was ‘always on the cards’ at some
be assumed that in the event that directors do breach their duties as described
above, the liquidators can bring action against
them in the name of the company.
However, this is unlikely to be the case where phoenix activity is involved.
Recovery action brought
by liquidators must be funded. Asset transfers between
Oldco and Newco are considered problematic to liquidators because of a lack
evidence of wrongdoing. The transfer itself proves nothing: Newco may have been
the highest or only bidder for the assets. To
establish fault, costly
investigations must be undertaken. This is challenging in the phoenix context
where commonly Oldco has few
assets to pay for the liquidator’s
Corporations
expressly states that the liquidator is not required to do this work for
Compounding this
problem is the Assetless Administration Fund (‘AAF’)
‘Catch-22’.
The liquidator needs funding to look for evidence of wrongdoing, but in
the absence of evidence, the AAF will not make a grant to
liquidator.
In the event
that the company does have money remaining, liquidators have a difficult
decision to make about spending it. Do they
pay it out to creditors or do they
use it on an action against the directors in an attempt to bolster what can be
distributed? They
risk being criticised by creditors in the event that the
litigation is unsuccessful and its costs diminish the pool of company assets,
but they share none of the upside if the action is successful. The trouble with
the safe harbour carve out is that when the liquidator
comes to deciding whether
to use that remaining money, the path to a successful recovery action is harder
than ever. Where a director
is intent upon phoenix activity in breach of their
director’s duties, the conditions for a safe harbour can be confected. A
small company director might ensure that employee entitlements are paid and tax
returns are up to date. A set of books and records,
accurate or not, are handed
to a restructuring advisor who may be complicit in the
The company fails
to achieve ‘rescue’ during the safe harbour period and is eventually
liquidated. Even with suspicions
that the safe harbour may not stand up to close
scrutiny, the liquidator, keen to ensure that creditor money is not wasted on
investigations and litigation, and now with the additional forensic
obligation to disprove the safe harbour carve out, simply concludes
engagement and reports their suspicions
3 Advisors (Again)
The situation for
advisors of small companies is arguably the opposite of that for restructuring
advisors of large companies outlined
above. Pre-insolvency advisors are an
increasing source of concern for ASIC and
As noted above, some
of these turnaround specialists facilitate the stripping of the assets of Oldco
and the creation of Newco, to
ensure that there are few assets within the
company to fund a liquidator’s investigations. As a result, ASIC receives
information that would help it take action against the director or the
pre-insolvency advisor as their accessory. In addition, a
pre-insolvency advisor
of a small company can undertake the work in a very short time — closing
Oldco down, establishing Newco
and selling it Oldco’s assets —
making it unlikely that they would be a shadow director of the
The issue of pre-insolvency advisors was raised in submissions to
the Senate ELC on the draft 2017 provisions which speak of ‘obtaining
advice from an appropriately qualified entity who was given sufficient
information to give appropriate
Council of Australia, ASIC and the Australian Restructuring Insolvency and
Turnaround Association
sounded similar notes of caution about unregulated pre-insolvency
although other
voices preferred the more flexible, less prescriptive approach that was
eventually enacted.
V CONCLUSION
The 2017 safe harbour
carve out legislation has been passed. Its objective of encouraging directors
not to liquidate prematurely,
resulting in loss of enterprise value for
shareholders and other economic detriment to society more broadly, is laudable.
It is clear
that the current insolvent trading liability and its defences do
not, and were not intended to, allow scope for informal work-outs.
formal work-outs through VA have become increasingly unpopular.
This article
does not set out to critique the provisions of the legislation or the
shortcomings of the VA regime that might be fuelling
the repeated call for a
safe harbour. Rather, it highlights deficiencies in the justifications for
encouragement towards informal
workouts, including whether companies are in fact
prematurely liquidated because of a fear of liability for insolvent trading, or
whether DPNs might play a greater role. The safe harbour will create a forensic
burden for liquidators in addition to requiring that
they prove the already
difficult factual issue of insolvency at the relevant time. It will interfere
with the recovery of preferences,
which will have an adverse effect on creditor
recovery. Unwitting, honest directors risk exposing themselves to other forms of
such as a DPN, while avoiding what is a reasonably unlikely action
for insolvent trading. Advisors need to be careful, particularly
complex workouts, that they do not become shadow directors of the
For the directors of small companies who are likely to also be the
main shareholders, the situation is different. Some will attempt
liquidation of their company as a strategy to continue their business, minus its
debts, through a new company. Because
liquidation is already necessary to shed
those debts, these directors will avoid a DPN provided they liquidate within 21
its issue. Insolvent trading liability under
is unlikely, and
therefore the uncommercial transaction ‘deemed debt’ provision,
inserted expressly to target asset transfers
in phoenix circumstances, becomes
The safe harbour as enacted has multiple disadvantages. Liquidators
face an additional burden in court of establishing their case
where a safe
harbour has been claimed. However, given the unlikelihood of action by ASIC or
the liquidator, the main concern with
the safe harbour is the message it sends.
Pre-insolvency advisors, already on regulators’ radars, can take on the
of respectability in a confected safe harbour informal workout.
Liquidators, suspicious of what has taken place but struggling to
investigations of a company with few or no assets, simply report their limited
findings to ASIC. ASIC, in the absence
of evidence of wrongdoing, does not act.
Consequently, while the safe harbour legislation fails to provide the expected
reassurance
to the ‘big end of town’, illegal phoenix activity
shelters under the cloak of a pro-rescue measure that has ignored
misunderstood it.
It is pleasing to see that the legislation as passed
contains an amendment providing that there must be an independent review after
two years of the commencement of the legislation to consider the impact of the
availability of the safe harbour on directors of companies,
their conduct, and
the interests of creditors and employees of those
At that time, it
is vital that the government looks not only at the benefits, if any, to large
company rescues but also at the effect
of the legislation on small company
insolvencies.
LLB (Hons) (Melb), Grad Dip
Bus (Acc), LLM, PhD (Monash); Professor, Melbourne Law School, The University of
Melbourne. The author
would like to thank the Australian Research Council for
its generous support of this research: Australian Research Council Discovery
Grant (DP140102277: Phoenix Activity: Regulating Fraudulent Use of the Corporate
Form). I thank the anonymous referees for their
expressed in this article are my own.
Corporations Act 2001
Liability is also imposed if the incurring of this debt is the one
that renders the company unable to pay this debt and others: at
See Jason Harris,
‘Director Liability for Insolvent Trading: Is the Cure Worse than the
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
268–9. Street CJ has observed that ‘where a company is insolvent the
interests of creditors intrude. They become prospectively
entitled, through the
mechanism of liquidation, to displace the power of the shareholders and
directors to deal with the company’s
Kinsela v Russell
Kinsela Pty Ltd (in liq)
(1986) 4 NSWLR 722
Fryer v Powell
[2001] SASC 59
159 FLR 433
, 442 [56] (Olsson J).
Treasury Laws Amendment
(2017 Enterprise Incentives No
2) Act 2017
Treasury Laws
Amendment Act
’). The draft legislation followed publication of
Australian Government, Improving Bankruptcy and Insolvency Laws
(Proposals Paper, April 2016) 10–16.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Treasury Laws Amendment (2017 Enterprise Incentives No 2) Bill 2017
5–6 [1.7]–[1.10] (‘Enterprise Incentives Explanatory
Memorandum’).
Treasury Laws Amendment
(2017 Enterprise Incentives No 2) Bill 2017
(Cth) (‘Treasury Laws
Amendment Bill’); ‘National Innovation and Science Agenda: Improving
Corporate Insolvency
The Treasury, Australian Government
Page, 28 March 2017)
http://192.195.49.161/ConsultationsandReviews/Consultations/2017/NISA-Improving-corporate-insolvency-law
archived at <
https://perma.cc/SU73-TQCF
Treasury, Australian
Government, ‘Insolvent Trading: A Safe Harbour for Reorganisation Attempts
outside of External Administration’
(Discussion Paper, January 2010)
(‘2010 Safe Harbour Paper’). The 2010 Safe Harbour Paper proposed,
as one of three options,
an equivalent to the business judgment rule to apply to
insolvent trading: at 16–19 [5.3]. The other two were to maintain the
status quo and, alternatively, to insert a moratorium provision.
Clearly, companies are not
just small or large. However, this characterisation is made to simplify the
discussion. Here, the term
‘small’ includes micro-companies which
typically have up to four employees.
Senate Economics Legislation
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Treasury Laws Amendment (2017 Enterprise
Incentives No 2) Bill 2017
[Provisions]
(Report, August 2017).
Ibid 22 [2.78]. The Senate
ELC concluded that issues with the details of the provisions would be dealt with
by regulations accompanying
the legislation, given there had been broad support
for the Bill: at 21 [2.76].
Treasury Laws
Amendment Act
); ‘Treasury
Laws Amendment (2017 Enterprise
Incentives No 2) Bill 2017’,
Parliament of Australia
(Web Page) <
www.aph.gov.au/
Parliamentary_Business/Bills_Legislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=r5886
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7JW8-CN46
See Law Reform Commission,
General Insolvency Inquiry
(Report No 45, 1988) (‘
’). In November 1983, the Law Reform Commission had been asked
by the federal Attorney-General to review the law and practice
of companies,
inter alia, in relation to insolvency. Its report was tabled in Parliament in
December 1988 and the
Corporate Law Reform Act 1992
(Cth) introduced s
588G into what was then the Corporations Law (the
Corporations Act 1989
(Cth)). For further discussion of the evolution of the insolvent trading
provisions, see
Southern Cross Interiors Pty Ltd v Deputy Commissioner of
[2001] NSWSC 621
(2001) 188 ALR 114
, 132 [98];
Harmer Report
) 122–5 [277]–[280]; Justin
Dabner, ‘Trading whilst Insolvent: A Case for Individual Creditor Rights
against Directors’
[1994] UNSWLawJl 19
University of New South Wales Law
, 552–6; Niall F Coburn, ‘Insolvent Trading in
Australia: The Legal Principles’ in Ian M Ramsay (ed),
Directors’ Liability for Insolvent Trading
(CCH Australia, 2000) 73,
Harmer Report
) 122–3 [277].
Corporations Act 2001
items 1, 7.
The significance of the latter for a safe harbour in the context of phoenix
activity is discussed further below.
While cash flow is the
appropriate test of insolvency, the balance sheet is not irrelevant:
Group Ltd (in liq) v Westpac Banking Corporation [No 9]
(2008) 39 WAR 1, 141
[1072]–[1073] (Owen J).
Corporations Act
(liquidator),
s 588M(1)(d).
Abe Herzberg, ‘Why
Are There So Few Insolvent Trading Cases?’ in Ian M Ramsay (ed),
Company Directors’ Liability for Insolvent Trading
(CCH Australia,
2000) 148, 158.
Corporations Act
Harmer Report
Insolvency Practitioners
Association of Australia, Submission to Treasury (Cth),
Insolvent Trading: A
Safe Harbour for Reorganisation Attempts outside of External Administration
(18 March 2010) 2 (‘IPAA Submission’). Clearly, Harmer was speaking
before cases such as
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Healey
[2011] FCA 717
(2011) 196 FCR
Dale A Oesterle,
‘Corporate Directors’ Personal Liability for “Insolvent
Trading” in Australia, “Reckless
Trading” in New Zealand and
“Wrongful Trading” in England: A Recipe for Timid Directors,
Hamstrung Controlling
Shareholders and Skittish Lenders’ in Ian M Ramsay
Company Directors’ Liability for Insolvent Trading
Australia, 2000) 19, 35.
Corporations Act 2001
The insolvent trading provision itself —
— says nothing about the company being in liquidation.
Water Wheel Mills Pty Ltd
and Water Wheel Holdings Ltd.
Elliot v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2004] VSCA 54
(2004) 10 VR 369
[172]–[174].
Ibid 417–18
[184]–[185]; Colin Anderson and David Morrison, ‘Should Directors Be
Pursued for Insolvent Trading
Where a Company Has Entered into a Deed of Company
Arrangement?’
Insolvency Law Journal
In 2015–16, there
were 10,306 (74.3%) court or creditor winding ups out of a total of 13,853
insolvency appointments, compared
to 1,652 (11.9%) voluntary administrations. In
contrast, in 2005–06, there were 8,243 (64.9%) court or creditor winding
out of a total of 12,689 insolvency appointments, compared to 2,909 (22.9%)
voluntary administrations: ASIC,
Australian Insolvency Statistics
(Report, June 2017) table 2.3. See also Ron Schaffer, ‘The Rise and
Fall of Voluntary Administration’
Insolvency Law Bulletin
Corporations
This provision applies to all civil penalty
provisions under
Corporations Act
: at sub-s (1)(a).
1317S(2)(b)(i).
s 1317S(2)(b)(ii).
Harris, ‘Director
Liability for Insolvent Trading’ (n
) 284; Patrick J Lewis, ‘Insolvent
Trading Defences after Hall v Poolman’
Company and Securities
Law Journal
, 408. See also Jason Harris, ‘Relief from Liability
for Company Directors: Recent Developments and Their Implications’
[2008] UWSLawRw 7
University of Western Sydney Law Review
, 166. Case examples
Hall v Poolman
[2007] NSWSC 1330
(2007) 215 FLR 243
McLellan v Carroll
[2009] FCA 1415
(2009) 76 ACSR 67.
Morley v Statewide
Tobacco Services Ltd
[1993] VicRp 32
[1993] 1 VR 423.
Metal Manufacturers Pty Ltd
(1988) 13 NSWLR 315
, 324 (Mahoney JA), 327, 329 (McHugh JA). See
also Irene Trethowan, ‘Directors’ Personal Liability for Insolvent
At Last, a Degree of Consensus’
Company and
Securities Law Journal
Corporations Act
Securities and Investments Commission v Plymin
[2003] VSC 123
(2003) 175 FLR 124
220–1 [420], 223–4 [424];
) 401–2 [116].
) 261 [560].
[559]–[560].
See 2010 Safe Harbour Paper
Enterprise Incentives
Explanatory Memorandum
Productivity Commission,
Australian Government,
Business Set-Up, Transfer and Closure
Report No 75, 30 September 2015) 367 (‘
PC Business Set-Up
See Harris, ‘Director
Liability for Insolvent Trading’ (n
Enterprise Incentives
Explanatory Memorandum (n
Mark Byrne, ‘An
Economic Analysis of Directors’ Duties in Favour of Creditors’
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
, 283. As Byrne observes,
‘the more serious cost is the effect the liability regime will have on the
performance of the director.
Their inability to efficiently cope with the
liability would logically mean further incentive to avoid the riskier ventures
raise the potential losses. It is this cost which may be seen to be of
significant social consequence. It is extremely difficult
to measure the size of
such cost and, therefore, whether or not it will outweigh the benefits to
creditors.’
2010 Safe Harbour Paper (n
See Victor CS Yeo and Joyce
Lee Suet Lin, ‘Insolvent Trading: A Comparative and Economic
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Enterprise Incentives
Explanatory Memorandum (n
[1.7]; Dabner (n
) 561; Oesterle (n
) 29–30. Oesterle remarked that
‘executives on boards will be more likely to resign at the first sign of
trouble. Firms
may find themselves looking for directors to fill vacancies and
to make critical decisions just when good business people will slam
the door on
inquiries’:
See Oesterle (n
that non-executive directors ‘face legal risks (they can be sued) and
reputational risks (they are vilified if the
company goes bust). ... And while
their pay packet might appear to be nominally decent to the average worker, it
seems it is not
enough to attract and keep non-executive directors’:
Gabrielle Costa, ‘More Non-Execs Wonder if the Pay Is Worth the
Business News, The Age
(Melbourne, 25 September 2004) 5.
Oesterle commented: ‘Expose [non-executive] directors to personal
liability and one will
see many resign from all but the healthiest of companies.
Firms cannot pay them enough to compensate them for the personal risk.
outside directors are the least needed in the best running companies and are the
most needed in companies that are suffering
through difficult times’:
Oesterle (n
See Yeo and Lin (n
) 231–2. The ‘haste
effect’ is seen in the United Kingdom even with different provisions:
Rizwaan J Mokal, ‘An
Agency Cost Analysis of the Wrongful Trading
Provisions: Redistribution, Perverse Incentives and the Creditors’
Cambridge Law Journal
2010 Safe Harbour Paper (n
) 8 [3.12].
Ibid 2 [1.8].
[4.3.7]–[4.3.8].
Note that the
Laws Amendment Act
includes legislation to allow for the removal of ipso facto
According to the accompanying explanatory memorandum, ‘[a]n ipso facto
clause creates a contractual right that allows
one party to terminate or modify
the operation of a contract upon the occurrence of some specific event. In the
current insolvency
context, such rights may allow one party to terminate or
modify the contract solely due to the financial position of the company
(including insolvency) or due to the commencement of formal insolvency
proceedings, such as on the appointment of an administrator.
This type of
termination can occur regardless of the counterparty’s continued
performance of its obligations under the contract’:
Enterprise Incentives
Explanatory Memorandum (n
) 25 [2.3].
This article does not consider the ipso facto legislation and only notes the
relevance of these clauses in the context
of informal work-outs.
2010 Safe Harbour Paper (n
) 11 [4.3.2]. Directors lose control of
the company when entering VA:
Corporations Act 2001
2010 Safe Harbour Paper (n
) 11 [4.3.3]–[4.3.5].
KordaMentha, Submission to
Insolvent Trading: A Safe Harbour for Reorganisation Attempts
outside of External Administration
(2 March 2010) 3.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Corporate Insolvency Laws: A Stocktake
(Report, June 2004) 74 [5.12]. The
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services quoted a
1998 survey of companies
in VA by ASIC’s predecessor, the Australian
Securities Commission. Of 5,760 companies surveyed, only 592 had resumed
Australian Securities Commission, ‘A Study of Voluntary
Administrations in New South Wales’ (Research Paper No 98/01,
1998) app 2,
20. Nor does VA appear to be a cheap option or lead to a high rate of return for
creditors. More recent research into
VAs and DOCAs reports that, of the
administrations sampled, ‘the average remuneration of the administrators
period from their appointment to the execution of the subsequent
DOCA — was $54,670’: Mark Wellard,
A Sample Review of Deeds of
Company Arrangement under
Corporations Act
(ARITA Terry
Taylor Scholarship Report, 19 May 2014) 17 (emphasis omitted). Across 71 DOCAs
sampled, there was ‘a weighted
average dividend of 5.86 cents in the
Schaffer (n
James Routledge and David
Morrison, ‘Voluntary Administration: Patterns of Corporate Decline’
Company and Securities Law Journal
PC Business Set-Up
) 377 recommendation
Improving Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Laws
‘National Innovation
and Science Agenda: Improving Corporate Insolvency Law’ (n
Corporations Act
s 588GA(1)(a)
, as inserted by
Treasury Laws Amendment Act
) sch 1 item 2. The first
iteration of the legislation included the words ‘and the company’s
creditors’, but these
were later removed:
Exposure Draft,
Treasury Laws Amendment (2017 Enterprise Incentives No 2) Bill
(Cth) sch 1 item 2.
Enterprise Incentives
Explanatory Memorandum
[1.75]. The carve out and evidential burden on the director is based on criminal
law concepts of burdens of proof, drawn from
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) pt 2.6 div 13.
Treasury Laws Amendment
) s 588GA(4)(a). The
legislation is not draconian in this regard, because the inability to rely on
the safe harbour due to a failure
to comply with employee entitlements and tax
obligations only occurs if ‘that failure: (i) amounts to less than
substantial
compliance with the matter concerned; or (ii) is one of 2 or more
failures by the company to do any or all of those matters during
the 12 month
period ending when the debt is incurred’: at sub-s (b).
Ibid s 588GB.
Helen Anderson et al,
Defining and Profiling Phoenix Activity
(Research Report, Melbourne Law
School and Monash Business School, December 2014) 1; Helen Anderson et al,
‘Profiling Phoenix
Activity: A New Taxonomy’ (2015) 33
and Securities Law Journal
Anderson et al,
and Profiling Phoenix Activity
) 1; Anderson et al, ‘Profiling
Phoenix Activity’ (n
Anderson et al,
and Profiling Phoenix Activity
) 1; Anderson et al, ‘Profiling
Phoenix Activity’ (n
Corporations Act 2001
See, eg, Treasury,
Australian Government,
Action against Fraudulent Phoenix Activity
(Proposals Paper,
November 2009) 6 [2.3]. See also Fair Work
Ombudsman and PwC,
Phoenix Activity: Sizing the Problem and Matching
(Report, June 2012) 4 [2.1].
For a discussion of the
difficulty of detecting phoenix activity, see generally Helen Anderson,
‘Sunlight as the Disinfectant
for Phoenix Activity’ (2016) 34
Company and Securities Law
‘ASIC’s Approach to Enforcement’ (Information Sheet No 151,
September 2013) 2. ASIC’s decision
process involves asking the following
questions: ‘What is the extent of harm or loss? What are benefits of
pursuing the misconduct,
relative to the expense? How do other issues, like the
matter? Is there an alternative course of action? ... What is the nature and
seriousness of the misconduct? What was the post-misconduct
behaviour of the
offender? What is the strength of the case? What impact will the remedy have on:
the person or entity? the regulated
population? the public? Are there any
mitigating factors?’
Michelle Welsh and Helen
Anderson, ‘The Public Enforcement of Sanctions against Illegal Phoenix
Activity: Scope, Rationale
and Reform’
Federal Law Review
Corporations Act
See, eg, ASIC, ‘ASIC Bans Director of Failed
Companies for Maximum Five Year Period’ (Media Release No 16-295MR, 6
http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2016-releases/16-295mr-asic-bans-director-of-failed-companies-for-maximum-five-year-period/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/83WN-L7M7
>. See also
Helen Anderson et al,
Phoenix Activity: Recommendations on Detection,
Disruption and Enforcement
(Research Report, Melbourne Law School and Monash
Business School, February 2017) 57–9 [2.2.1]; Jasper Hedges et al,
Phoenix Activity and Disqualification from Managing Corporations:
An Unenforceable Regime?’ (2018) 36(1)
Company and Securities Law
(forthcoming).
See Helen Anderson, Ian
Ramsay and Michelle Welsh, ‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Quantifying Its
Incidence and Cost’
Insolvency Law Journal
, 100. This
reporting is done in compliance with ASIC,
External Administrators:
Reporting and Lodging
(Regulatory Guide No 16, July 2008). The form
completed by the external administrator is Form EX01 (‘Report to ASIC
Corporations Act 2001
or for Statistical
Purposes’): at sch B.
Statistics: External Administrators’ Reports
(July 2015 to June
(Report No 507, December 2016) 7.
Ibid 25 [52].
Comprehensive data on
disqualification orders imposed by ASIC under
Corporations
is not available to the public. It is therefore impossible to comment
precisely on how many
orders have been made in the context of phoenix
activity and insolvent trading. However, in a search of ASIC’s media
from 1 January 2004 to 30 June 2014, there were 32 media releases
reporting that 51 directors were disqualified under
in circumstances
involving phoenix activity. This amounts to an average of about 4.9 orders
reported in ASIC’s media releases
per year. For data on other forms of
enforcement action taken against illegal phoenix activity, see Helen Anderson et
Quantifying Phoenix Activity: Incidence, Cost, Enforcement
Report, Melbourne Law School and Monash Business School, October 2015)
63–81; Anderson, Ramsay and Welsh (n
) 103, 109–10.
See Helen Anderson et al,
Submission to Treasury (Cth),
Treasury Laws Amendment (2017 Enterprise
Incentives No 2) Bill 2017
[Provisions]
(7 April 2017) 1.
Corporations Act 2001
Explanatory Memorandum,
Corporations Law Amendment (Employee Entitlements) Bill 2000
(Cth) 4 [10]
(‘Employee Entitlements Explanatory Memorandum’): ‘The
inclusion of uncommercial transactions in section
588G(1A) has implications for
the protection of employee entitlements, the prosecution of directors involved
in “phoenix”
activity and recovery actions by liquidators for the
benefit of creditors generally.’ See also David Morrison, ‘The
of Uncommercial Transactions to s 588G and Its Implications for Phoenix
Activities’
Insolvency Law Journal
Corporations Act 2001
(emphasis added).
For further discussion of
deficiencies in the external administrator reporting process, see Jasper Hedges
et al, ‘No “Silver
Bullet”: A Multifaceted Approach to Curbing
Harmful Phoenix Activity’
Company and Securities Law
, 280; Anderson et al,
Phoenix Activity
) 15–17 [1.2.2].
Harmer Report
) 129–30 [288].
Ibid 50, 53. Even though
employees are priority creditors in a liquidation (
Corporations Act 2001
ss 556(1)(e)
–(h)), in 2015–16 ‘$281.51
million was paid to 14,337 claimants under the Fair Entitlements
Guarantee’, a
scheme administered by the Department of Employment that
makes advances to the employees of insolvent employers, incorporated or
unincorporated: Department of Employment, Australian Government,
Great Workplaces: Annual Report 2015–16
(Annual Report, 20 June 2016)
Law Council of Australia,
the IPAA and the Turnaround Management Association Australia, Joint Submission
to Treasury,
Insolvent Trading: A Safe Harbour for Reorganisation
Attempts outside of External Administration
(2 March 2010) 2 n 1
(‘Insolvency Professionals
Joint Submission’).
Corporations Act
–(2) (voluntary administration), 530A(1)
(liquidation).
A 2013 Australian
Institute of Criminology study found that, between 2006 and 2010, an average of
80% of successful summary prosecutions
by ASIC were for breaches of
Corporations Act
: Peter Keenan,
Convictions for Summary
Insolvency Offences Committed by Company Directors
(Report No 30, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Australian Government, February 2013) 4.
Section 475
relates to the Report as to Affairs (‘RATA’), a document that
directors are obliged to give the external administrator
at the commencement of
the insolvency engagement: see ASIC, ‘Report as to Affairs’ (Form
507, 20 September 2017). The
Keenan study did not examine voluntary
administrations, so there is no data available on summary prosecutions of
directors for failure
to provide administrators with books and
records: Keenan (n
Corporations Act
(Cth) sch 3 items 123, 134. Offences under
be punished by imprisonment for up to one year, but in practice prison sentences
are very rarely imposed: Keenan (n
Helen Anderson et al,
‘Illegal Phoenix Activity: Is a “Phoenix Prohibition” the
Company and Securities Law Journal
) 5–6. This figure relates to the
period 2006–10.
2010 Safe Harbour
) 8 [3.12]; Enterprise
Incentives Explanatory Memorandum
) 5–6 [1.7].
For example, according
to a survey of the top 200 listed companies, ‘78 per cent said the risk of
personal liability occasionally
or frequently made them take an “overly
cautious” approach to decision making. ... 45 per cent of Survey
respondents
said that the duty to prevent insolvent trading ... was responsible
to a medium to high degree for overly cautious approach decision
AICD, Submission to Treasury,
Insolvent Trading: A Safe Harbour for
Reorganisation Attempts
utside of External Administration
Insolvency Professionals
Joint Submission (n
[3.11]. The circumstances surrounding this group’s administration were
complex: see ‘Case Studies: Henry Walker
Eltin Group Limited’,
McGrathNicol
(Web Page, 2017) <
www.mcgrathnicol.com/case-studies/henry-walker-eltin-group-limited-2/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/2B8E-SJ8G
Anna MacFarlane,
‘Safe Harbour Reforms: Should Insolvent Trading Provisions Be
Insolvency Law Journal
KordaMentha (n
) 2. The Henry Walker Eltin group was one
of the case studies examined by KordaMentha: at 1.
Commissioner of Taxation v Arora
[2017] NSWSC 1016
, where the director was
liable to pay $1,894,929 under a director penalty notice. ‘[I]t cannot be
of any relevance whether
the money will ultimately be found in the liquidation
to pay the amounts that were formerly due by the company. At the relevant time,
the Defendant became liable for those amounts as a primary and principal debtor
... Accordingly, what is pleaded in this way as a
defence to the claim is no
defence at all’: at [38].
Administration Act 1953
(Cth) s 269-
269-20–269-25.
Administration Act 1953
(Cth), as amended by the
Tax Laws Amendment (2012
Measures No
2) Act 2012
(Cth) and the
Pay As You Go Withholding
Non-Compliance Tax Act 2012
(Cth), came into effect on 29 June 2012.
Administration Act
(Cth) s 269-30(2) item 1, as inserted by
Tax Laws Amendment (2012 Measures No
2) Act 2012
See also MacFarlane (n
) 146: ‘Without reform to
directors’ personal liability for unremitted tax, reforms to insolvent
trading provisions are
meaningless.’
Treasury Laws
Amendment Act
588GA(4)(a)(ii). See also Enterprise Incentives Explanatory Memorandum (n
) 20 [1.79].
Treasury Laws
Amendment Act
) s 588GA(4)(a):
‘the company is failing to do one or more of the following matters: (i)
pay the entitlements of its employees
by the time they
PC Business Set-Up
) 386 (emphasis in
Ibid 386 n 63 (citations
Administration Act 1953
(Cth) s 269-35(2).
Corporations Act 2001
See ibid s 269-35(5).
For statistics as to the
numbers of DPNs issued between 2010 and 2015, see Anderson et al
Quantifying
Phoenix Activity
total, there were 23,674 companies where one or more of their directors were
issued a DPN during that period. No statistics
are available to show how many of
those notices resulted in director liability, ie where the director did not
cause the company to
pay the amount owing or enter liquidation or VA within 21
David Knott,
‘Regulatory Issues Impacting on Insolvency’ (Speech, National
of the Insolvency Practitioners Association of Australia,
Adelaide, 13 October 2000) 5
http://download.asic.gov.au/media/1339298/insolvency_speech.pdf
archived at <
perma.cc/L6SB-69LP
Paul James, Ian Ramsay
and Polat Siva,
Insolvent Trading: An Empirical Study
(Research Report,
Clayton Utz and Centre for Corporate Law and
Securities Regulation
University of Melbourne, 2004) 14. The study noted that this statistic excludes
actions which were settled, or where the directors
pleaded guilty to insolvent
trading charges. See also Jasper Hedges et al, ‘The Policy and Practice of
Enforcement of Directors’
Duties by Statutory Agencies in Australia: An
Empirical Analysis’
[2017] MelbULawRw 13
Melbourne University Law Review
At the time of writing,
the latest is ASIC,
ASIC Enforcement Outcomes: January to June 2017
(Report No 536, August 2017).
See, eg, ASIC,
‘Former Kleenmaid Director Sentenced to Nine Years Imprisonment for
Fraud and Insolvent Trading’ (Media Release No 16-257MR, 15 August
http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2016-releases/16-257mr-former-kleenmaid-director-sentenced-to-nine-years-imprisonment-for-fraud-and-insolvent-trading/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/5AAS-JBNB
According to the
, ‘Tagara Builders went into liquidation owing
800 creditors up to $27m’, with a firm having completed $630,000 worth
work for the company the previous day. ‘[I]nvestigations by Tagara’s
liquidator Clifton Hall determined directors
Tullio Tagliaferri and John
Kassara, whose company went bust in June last year, were trading insolvent for
“some time”
prior to putting their company into administration. But
Clifton Hall partner Simon Miller told creditors at a meeting on Tuesday
ASIC would not act on his company’s investigations because the corporate
watchdog had limited resources’: Renato
Castello, ‘Tagara Creditor
Angry that ASIC Won’t Investigate Insolvent Trading’,
(Adelaide, 13 October 2016) <
www.adelaidenow.com.au/business/tagara-creditor-angry-that-asic-wont-investigate-insolvent-trading/news-story/
979b29bc7698050630d4bf3b58c6d142
IPAA Submission (n
). See also
Hall v Poolman
75 NSWLR 99.
IPAA Submission (n
Corporations
up ‘insolvent transaction’ from
This is a payment of a
debt giving a creditor more than they would receive if they proved their debt in
a liquidation: ibid
s 588FA(1).
s 588FE(3).
s 588FGA(2).
s 588GA(2)(d)
Enterprise Incentives Explanatory Memorandum (n
) 12 [1.43],
13 [1.48], 15–16
[1.62], 16–19 [1.66]–[1.74].
Corporations Act 2001
‘it is a defence if it is proved that, at the
time when the debt was incurred, the person: (a) had reasonable grounds to
and did believe: (i) that a competent and reliable person (the other
person) was responsible for providing to the first-mentioned
person adequate
information about whether the company was solvent; and (ii) that the other
person was fulfilling that responsibility;
and (b) expected, on the basis of
information provided to the first-mentioned person by the other person,
the company was solvent at that time and would remain solvent
incurred that debt and any other debts that it incurred at that time’
(emphasis added).
Duty to Prevent
Insolvent Trading: Guide for Directors
(Regulatory Guide No 217, July 2010)
13–14 [RG 217.41]–[RG 217.42].
Treasury Laws
Amendment Act
588GA(1)(a).
Insolvency Professionals
Joint Submission (n
) 9 [3.25].
[2016] VSC 657
(2016) 348 ALR 704.
[2011] NSWCA 109
(2011) 81 NSWLR 47.
Re Akron Roads
) 755–6 [318]–[320].
Administration Act 1953
(1): ‘The directors
(within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
) of the company (from
time to time) ... must cause the company to comply with its
obligation.’
Corporations Act 2001
Enterprise Incentives
Explanatory Memorandum (n
Corporations
The business judgment rule requires that the
directors ‘(a) make the judgment in good faith for a proper purpose; and
not have a material personal interest in the subject matter of the
judgment; and (c) inform themselves about the subject matter of
the judgment to
the extent they reasonably believe to be appropriate; and (d) rationally believe
that the judgment is in the best
interests of the corporation.
Listed and other
disclosing entities are subject to disclosure requirements in the
Corporations Act 2001
respectively. A director who
gives, or authorises or permits the giving of, materially false or misleading
information to the ASX,
without taking reasonable steps to ensure that the
information was not false or misleading, breaches
Directors as
accessories face up to two years jail for this offence: at sch 3 item 337.
Because breaches of
are included in
as financial services
civil penalty provisions
(definition of ‘financial services
civil penalty provision’), 1317E item 14), there is also the potential for
pecuniary penalty order
(s 1317G(1B)(a))
and for a compensation order
in favour of the company
(s 1317HA).
PC Business Set-Up Report
) 366; Luke Hastings,
‘Enforcing the Continuous Disclosure Regime: Three Case
in Michael Legg (ed),
Regulation, Litigation and Enforcement
133, 136–8.
Yeo and Lin (n
) 231: ‘The argument that the
debtor’s self-interest will restrain unnecessary risk-taking does not
stand when the company
is in financial distress. As the company may have no
future to think about, accordingly it is less likely to be concerned about its
credit rating. Self-interest may cause the company to take only a short-term
perspective of the gain from high-risk activity.’
See Helen Anderson,
‘FEG, Moral Hazard and the Innovation Agenda’ (2016) 28(2)
Australian Restructuring Insolvency and Turnaround Association Journal
Some commentators have
even advocated an unlimited liability regime for these companies as a means of
reducing the incentive to transfer
the risk of insolvency to creditors: Paul
Halpern, Michael Trebilcock and Stuart Turnbull, ‘An Economic Analysis of
Liability in Corporation Law’
University of Toronto
Law Journal
, 147–9. See also Judith Freedman, ‘Limited
Liability: Large Company Theory and Small Firms’
, 331: ‘law and economics analysts are concerned primarily
with public quoted corporations, precisely because their theories
are designed
to explain that phenomenon. ... The result is that the close corporation is seen
as something of an irritant, a problem
for the theorists or an exception to a
general rule rather than a widespread phenomenon in its own right which appears
in numerous
2010 Safe Harbour Paper
Ibid 7 [3.6].
Insolvency Statistics
Corporations Act
s 182(1)(a).
Senate ELC (n
) 16 [2.47]–[2.48].
Ibid 16 [2.47].
Ibid 16 [2.48] (emphasis
For further discussion
of the distinction between these concepts, see Anderson et al, ‘Profiling
Phoenix Activity’ (n
For example, the
avoidance of product warranties, or of paying employee entitlements: see Fair
Work Ombudsman and PwC (n
2010 Safe Harbour Paper
[4.4.3]–[4.4.10].
Teresa Graham,
Review into Pre-Pack Administration
Report to The Rt Hon Vince Cable
(Report, June 2014).
Ibid 37 [7.50].
Ibid 36 [7.46].
Helen Anderson et al,
‘The Productivity Commission, Corporate Insolvency and Phoenix
Company and Securities Law Journal
Corporations Act 2001
Only the statutory report and other documentary obligations
to ASIC must be done, regardless of whether the liquidator is paid: at
The AAF is administered
by ASIC. With funds provided by the government, it finances insolvency
practitioners in their work on behalf
of companies with few or no assets. The
aim of the fund is to overcome the inability of liquidators to make proper
investigations
due to financial constraints. ‘A particular focus of the AA
Fund is to curb fraudulent or illegal phoenix activity’:
Assetless Administration Fund
(Regulatory Guide No 109, November 2012) 6
[RG 109.6].
Ibid 7 [RG 109.10]. A
survey of members of ARITA revealed low levels of satisfaction with AAF funding:
Helen Anderson et al, ‘At
the Coalface of Corporate Insolvency and Phoenix
Activity: A Survey of ARITA and AICM Members’ (2016) 24
Insolvency Law
See generally Helen
Anderson and Jasper Hedges, ‘Catching Pre-Insolvency Advisors:
Hidden Culprits of Illegal Phoenix Activity’ (2017) 35(8)
Company and
Securities Law Journal
(forthcoming).
Strategic Outlook
(Report, October 2014) 8. ‘[Liquidators] don’t
want to bite the hand that feeds them. That I think goes to the crux of
issue’: ARITA, ‘Pre-Insolvency Advisors Behaving Badly: The
Profession’s View on the Pre-Insolvency Phenomenon’
(2016) 28(3)
Australian Restructuring, Insolvency and Turnaround Association Journal
15, 16. This comment was attributed to Adrian Brown, ASIC Senior Executive
Leader — Insolvency Practitioners: Dan Oakes and
‘Investigators Raid Offices of Melbourne Man Linked to
Multi-Million-Dollar Tax Avoidance Scheme’,
April 2017) <
www.abc.net.au/news/2017-04-03/investigators-raid-offices-man-linked-to-tax-avoidance-scheme/8411256
archived at <
https://perma.cc/594P-K3Y8
>. See also
ASIC, ‘Turnaround Business Advisor Sentenced for Aiding and Abetting
Breach of Director’s Duty’ (Media
Release No 16-127MR, 28 April
http://asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2016-releases/16-295mr-asic-bans-director-of-failed-companies-for-maximum-five-year-period/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/GQ7W-JTX6
>; Dan Oakes
and Sam Clark, ‘Pre-Insolvency Business Advisers Investigated by ASIC and
ATO over Missing Millions’,
(Online, 12 April 2017) <
www.abc.net.au/news/2017-04-12/pre-insolvency-business-advisors-being-investigated-by-asic-ato/8438562
archived at <
Treasury Laws Amendment
The Australian Institute
of Credit Management (‘AICM’) supported ARITA’s views: Senate
) 15 [2.42]. See also Jason
Harris and Anil Hargovan, ‘Productivity Commission Safe Harbour Proposal
for Insolvent Trading’
Governance Directions
Senate ELC (n
) 14 [2.38] (Law Council of Australia), 14
[2.39] (ASIC) and 14–15
[2.43]–[2.46].
Treasury Laws
Amendment Act
) s 588HA(1).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (911 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter