URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2015/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Handsley, Elizabeth; Lynch, Andrew --- "Facing Up to Diversity? Transparency and the Reform of Commonwealth Judicial Appointments 2008-13" [2015] SydLawRw 10; (2015) 37(2) Sydney Law Review 187
I Introduction
II The McClelland Reforms
A Tradition and the Impetus for Change
B A New Approach
C The Limits of Reform
III Transparency of Selection: Criteria and Beyond
A Selection Criteria — Unpacking ‘Merit’
B The Limit of Selection Criteria — What Lies Beyond?
C Merit and Diversity
IV Transparency of Selection: Justification
V Conclusion
Facing up to Diversity? Transparency and the Reform
of Commonwealth Judicial Appointments 2008–13
Elizabeth Handsley
Andrew Lynch
In this article, we describe and consider the impetus for the reforms to
federal judicial appointments that were initiated by Attorney-General
McClelland in 2008 and applied during the life of the Labor Government until
2013. We then proceed to evaluate those reforms
by reference to the central idea
of transparency. Looking first at the role of the express criteria in
identifying a candidate and
then at the way in which particular appointments
were publicly justified by the Attorney-General, we assess how adequately all
factors leading to an individual’s selection were acknowledged under
the reformed process. This takes us to a fairly familiar
controversy — the
relationship between ‘merit’ (whether expressed as a one-word
concept or through elaborate criteria)
and diversity. Our discussion of this
relationship draws on the experience of judicial appointments reform in the
United Kingdom
over the last decade. McClelland was candid about his interest in
promoting diversity, but refrained from its direct inclusion in
the design of
the appointments model. Nevertheless, we argue that diversity considerations
found a way into the appointments process.
We suggest this was both inevitable
and defensible. However, the failure to acknowledge the role of those
considerations meant that
the model did not ultimately deliver the degree of
transparency that was proclaimed as its central rationale.
I Introduction
In 2008, the Commonwealth Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, made
significant changes to the process of appointing individuals to
the federal
judiciary. These included a public description of the criteria and processes for
identifying and assessing candidates
for appointment to the Federal Court, the
Family Court and the Federal Circuit Court. Although undoubtedly modest by
international
McClelland reforms were a substantial development towards greater transparency
and public confidence that the selection of members
of the federal judiciary was
uninfluenced by political considerations. The basic features of the new system
received the bipartisan
endorsement of the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Committee (‘Senate Committee’) in its 2009 inquiry into the
Australian judiciary and McClelland’s two Labor Party successors as
Attorney-General maintained the new criteria and processes
in making judicial
appointments.
However, the Attorney-General in the current Coalition Government, Senator
George Brandis QC, has discontinued those practices and
reverted to the
traditional approach. With neither fanfare nor warning, all trace of the
processes initiated by McClelland slipped
from the departmental website. On the
topic of court appointments, the Attorney-General’s Department now simply
advises that,
‘As the nation’s first law officer, the
Attorney-General is responsible for recommending judicial appointments to the
Australian Government’.
making appointments to the federal judiciary since taking office, the
Attorney-General has not advertised the relevant vacancy
beforehand, nor has
there been anything in the media releases announcing these appointments to
suggest that they were the outcome
of any particular
The reversion to an unfettered discretion to select persons for judicial
appointment (neatly described as being ‘in the gift
indicates that the
political consensus of the 2009 Senate inquiry (in which Brandis was a
participating member) has been lost. The
process by which judges are appointed
to a court — or rather, to be more precise, whether or not there is a
publicly-articulated
process at all — is now apparently a matter of
contest between the two main Australian political
Ironically, not long after the Commonwealth reforms were discarded, the
desirability of ensuring that judicial appointments are made
ascertainable criteria and with greater independence from partisan
considerations was sharply underscored by controversy
over a state appointment.
The selection of Tim Carmody as the new Chief Justice of Queensland in June 2014
drew unprecedented public
criticism — including from past and present
members of the judiciary.
was doubt openly expressed that Carmody possessed the necessary qualities and
skills for the position, but concerns about
the integrity of the process leading
to his selection also prompted the President of the Queensland Bar Association
to resign and
the Australian Bar Association to express its
consternation.
Neither Carmody
nor the Queensland Government backed down, and he was duly sworn in as Chief
Justice. However, the extraordinary
boycott of his welcome ceremony by every
serving Supreme Court judge indicated that the controversy over his elevation
was unlikely
to simply dissolve.
Evidence of that was provided by press reports early in 2015, which unfavourably
compared the number of Carmody’s decisions
after six months as Chief
Justice with the performance of his predecessor, and also highlighted the
overturning of a number of his
decisions by the State’s Court of
Regardless of its
fairness or otherwise, this subsequent media attention unquestionably stems from
the circumstances under which
Carmody came to office. Further controversy flared
in March 2015,
and just two
months later the Chief Justice, while on medical leave from the Court and
following his reluctant recusal from an appeal
matter at the urging of his
colleagues, publicly revealed his willingness to resign if certain conditions
were satisfied, including
his receipt of ‘just terms’ from the
Queensland government.
affair highlights that the case for clear and consistent processes of
appointment, with some devolution of executive control,
is not abstract. Quite
aside from the likely benefit of ensuring public confidence in a quality
judiciary, government itself might
recognise that adopting a more rigorous
process is in its own interest — if only to save it from the repercussions
audacity. Thus it seems highly probable that the McClelland reforms,
or something similar, will remain attractive and may be reintroduced
later time either federally or in a state jurisdiction.
For that reason, we offer some considered reflection on those initiatives.
In particular, we seek to examine the way in which the model operated —
and also was explained — from the perspective
of the Labor
Government’s stated goal of increasing judicial
highlighted gender, residential location, professional experience and cultural
background as targeted attributes, but
we do not discount the relevance of other
forms of diversity, including the widely accepted relevance of an
individual’s area
of legal expertise. Diversity provides an ideal lens
through which to assess the McClelland model’s achievement of the
much-vaunted
objective of transparency.
A central way in which that transparency was to occur was through publicly
available criteria, unpacking the qualities and skills
assumed within the
traditional rubric of ‘merit’. While any attempt to articulate the
composite meaning of that concept
is commendable, there appears to be a natural
limit to its ability to determine appointment in the majority of, if not all,
As Malleson has written, ‘the determination of merit beyond a
threshold of key measurable qualities and abilities is a highly
contextualised
and dynamic process which involves a significant qualitative and subject [sic]
This does not
merely create space for other considerations to bear upon the
Attorney-General’s selection of a ‘preferred’
candidate, but
such a supplementation of the criteria. Those
considerations may encompass ‘diversity’ in its various wide or
forms, but attention to any of them necessitates a ‘comparative
assessment’ of the individual’s profile and the
current membership.
entirely desirable since what any particular individual will bring to the court
as a collective institution must surely
be relevant to his or her selection.
Our exploration of the relationship between ‘merit’ and diversity
draws upon recent debates in the United Kingdom (‘UK’).
reform of judicial appointments in that jurisdiction was cited by McClelland as
a catalyst for his own effort in respect
of Australia’s federal court
system. But while the public presentation of both models features identical
rhetoric of promoting
judicial diversity while retaining merit as the sole
criterion, the two are distinct in key respects. For one thing, the McClelland
reforms did not apply to the High Court, while appointment to the UK Supreme
Court is covered by its statutory scheme, albeit with
some modifications. We
discuss this difference, but our main focus is upon the way the design of the UK
model so closely adheres
to the ‘merit principle’. This has resulted
in the model drawing criticism for being based on untenable assumptions and
thwarting efforts to broaden the profile of the UK judiciary. However, the UK
model displays a consistency between rhetoric and form
that was less obvious in
the Australian experiment. In the latter, it was unclear exactly
Attorney-General selected from among a shortlist of ‘highly
suitable’ candidates, presumably of relatively commensurate
most cases. This suggested a gap between how the Government described the
process and its operation in practice.
We also assess transparency from a slightly different angle, being the use
made of diversity in justifying particular appointments.
To what extent were
Labor Attorneys-General candid about individuals’ satisfaction of
diversity considerations as relevant
to their appointment? In this regard, the
experience was mixed. The fact that an individual would bring to the court to
were appointed some experience or attribute that was otherwise
underrepresented was certainly mentioned in media releases or swearing-in
speeches during the life of the reforms. But, as we explain, this trod a careful
line, never stepping over to an explicit acknowledgment
of such considerations
having influenced selection. The picture is further muddied when we consider the
messaging of Attorney-General
Nicola Roxon regarding her two appointments to the
High Court. Having initially, and to a unique degree, laid great emphasis upon
diversity as a factor before making those decisions, Roxon then retreated to a
flat invocation of ‘merit’ to justify
her eventual choices. Although
the High Court was exempt from the McClelland reforms, this episode is
instructive — both in
its contrast with the public explanations of other
appointments over the same time and also for illuminating the constraints upon
public justification. We conclude this aspect of the discussion by asking
whether reticence about diversity, and especially the executive’s
deliberately advancing it, is understandable — and even defensible.
The structure of this article follows those general contours. In Part II, we
describe the traditional approach to judicial appointments
and the lead-up to
McClelland’s reform, before detailing the new process he initiated. In
Part III, we examine the content
and role of the express criteria and describe
their inherent limitations as a full explanation of how persons were selected
for appointment.
This involves a close consideration of the relationship between
‘merit’ and diversity, informed by contrasting the Australian
approaches. Part IV looks at the part played by public justification of
individual appointments toward the overarching goal
of a transparent process
that the public understands and in which they can have confidence. Part V offers
concluding observations
on the McClelland experiment and the future of
II The McClelland Reforms
Tradition and the Impetus for
The traditional approach of the Australian Commonwealth to judicial
appointments may be succinctly described as informal — lacking
stipulated criteria or consistent and open process. There are only two types of
statutory requirement imposed upon the executive
in making an appointment. The
first is an eligibility threshold for all federal courts of judicial service or
enrolment as a legal
practitioner for not less than 5
Additionally, in the case
of appointment to the Family Court of Australia, it is required that ‘by
reason of training, experience
and personality, the person is a suitable person
to deal with matters of family
The second type of
requirement is procedural, existing only in respect of appointments to the High
Court of Australia: the Commonwealth
Attorney-General must ‘consult’
with his or her state counterparts before filling a vacancy on that
This statutory
recognition of state interest in appointments to the court at the apex of the
nation’s judicial system is a
gesture towards concerns about the
geographical diversity of the Court’s members and its role as an arbiter
of constitutional
disputes between the Commonwealth and the
Beyond those very minimal requirements, the manner of judicial appointment
adopted by the Commonwealth Government at any point in
time is unconstrained. As
Chief Justice Gibbs remarked in 1987, ‘sometimes an appointment may be
made without any consultation
... [or] the advice given by those consulted may
be ignored’.
Even prior to
the McClelland reforms, the extent of consultation exceeded the statutory
requirement of state Attorney-Generals to
include the head of the court, other
judges, and legal professional bodies such as the Law Council of
However, in the
absence of explicitly stated criteria by reference to which the feedback
elicited might be structured, there was
a danger such consultations would gather
largely impressionistic
On at least three occasions, the Attorney-General is known to have
communicated with individuals under consideration for a vacancy
on the High
Court — the first being via the infamous telegram exchange between
Attorney-General Billy Hughes and Albert Piddington
and the other two being a
number of private interviews held by Attorney-General Daryl Williams with
individuals before appointing
Murray Gleeson and Dyson Heydon to the High Court
in 1998 and 2003 respectively.
It is not known whether, in respect of other vacancies, the views of candidates
on various questions have been directly sought by
the government of the day, but
it is fair to assume that perceptions of what those views might be have been a
factor in at least
some selections — along with ‘politics, state of
origin, friendships, and the views of sitting
considerations also feature in the decision of the Cabinet to accept or reject
the Attorney-General’s
That the appointments process might benefit from greater clarity and
consistency has been recognised for some time. Commencement of
the modern era of
Australian debate on the issue may be pinpointed to the 1993 production of a
discussion paper by the Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s Department under
the Labor Party’s Michael Lavarch. The discussion paper did much to open
up the topic
of judicial appointments and subject the traditional opacity to
A notable way in which it did so was through the compilation of a list of
possible criteria for the selection of judges. As one of
us has written
elsewhere, ‘the radical nature of this list cannot be
overestimated’.
among the criteria were ‘vision’; ‘fair reflection of society
by the judiciary’; ‘practicality
and common sense’ and
‘temper, gender and cultural
sensitivity’.
discussion paper provocatively suggested that advocacy skills were not of
predominant importance in choosing judges, even asserting
that some of those
skills ‘might be counter-productive to judicial
performance’.
following year, in response to community concern over gender bias, the Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs produced a report that
recommended the creation of explicitly stated appointment criteria and the
establishment of a committee,
on which lay persons would serve alongside judges
and lawyers, to advise the Attorney-General on individuals suitable for
to the Bench.
neither the discussion paper nor the Senate Committee report resulted in any
alteration to Commonwealth practice in the
appointment of federal judges.
Nevertheless, the issue remained a fertile one, garnering regular academic
and community attention. This was so for two reasons. First,
occasions on which the topic of appointments to the High Court became a matter
of public disquiet. Among these we might
identify the remark in July 1997 by the
Deputy Prime Minister, Tim Fischer, that the Coalition Government wished to
appoint ‘capital
C conservatives’ to the
This was an unusually
blatant acknowledgment of the executive’s capacity to use its broad
discretion over appointments to produce
an institution more politically
sympathetic to the Government. In 2003, the Court’s return to an
exclusively male membership
upon the retirement of Justice Gaudron also prompted
dissatisfaction with the
status quo.
Second, the reform of appointments processes in other common law
continued reliance on unconstrained executive discretion. Of particular
significance was the establishment of a highly sophisticated
appointments
system, including the establishment of an independent Judicial Appointments
Commission (‘JAC’), in the UK
Constitutional Reform Act
The JAC handles the
majority of judicial appointments while special selection commissions are
convened for senior positions.
The composition of the latter were originally specified in the CRA and were
amended in 2013 in order to reduce the representation
of serving members of the
Depending on the
judicial office, the JAC or special commission recommends to the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice or nominee,
a single name for the filling of
any vacant judicial post.
Although that recommendation need not be accepted, if the appropriate authority
rejects it or requests its reconsideration (either
action must be accompanied by
reasons) this simply returns the question of selection back to the commission.
After three separate
recommendations have been made, the appropriate authority
must select one of the names
The overall effect of
the CRA reform of judicial appointments has been described as leaving the
executive with ‘a much reduced
role in the process, almost a purely formal
The contrast between the UK reforms and the untrammelled discretion retained
by the Commonwealth Attorney-General over judicial appointments
is stark. But as
significant as that experience was in fuelling Australian discussion of the
topic, it would be remiss not to acknowledge
the possible influence of
developments elsewhere. These include the Canadian Government’s
experimentation with parliamentary
involvement in the confirmation of
appointments to that country’s Supreme
similar interest in an
appointments commission across the Tasman following the establishment of the
Supreme Court of New Zealand,
and incremental reforms at the state level, notably in Victoria and
A New Approach
It was against this backdrop that Attorney-General McClelland unveiled
changes to the processes and criteria for Commonwealth judicial
appointments
early in 2008.
Acknowledging the
‘wealth of literature’ on the topic and steps taken in comparable
succinctly stated his own motivations for reform:
The mystery surrounding the current judicial appointments process and
controversy over past appointments has two negative consequences.
First, it can
tarnish or detract from the honour of being appointed to judicial office.
Second, at a broader level it can diminish
public confidence in the courts and
the justice system.
I am committed to reviewing this process to ensure:
• greater transparency and public confidence in the process
• that all appointments are based on merit and suitability, and
• that everyone who has the qualities necessary for appointment as a
judge or magistrate is fairly and properly considered —
whether they are
barristers, solicitors or academics, and whether or not they are well known to
government. This will increase the
likelihood of greater diversity in the
Government’s appointments as well as ensuring their
McClelland’s concern that the community should be confident that
appointments were not determined by ‘personal or political
affiliation and
that consultation beyond a small circle of insiders has
initiate systematic and criterion-based processes. The key features of the
reforms were as follows.
Once a decision to appoint a judge to a federal court was made, the
Attorney-General would seek nominations
from a broad range of individuals and organisations including the Chief
Justices of the Federal Court and Family Court, the Chief
Federal Magistrate,
the Chief Judge of the Family Court of Western Australia, Law Council of
Australia, Australian Bar Association,
Law Societies and Bar Associations of
each State and Territory, Deans of law schools, Australian Women Lawyers,
National Association
of Community Legal Centres, National Legal Aid,
Administrative Appeals Tribunal, Council of Australasian Tribunals and the
In respect of the appointment of a High Court justice, the chief justices of
the federal and family courts, and the Chief Federal
Magistrate, the same
individuals and organisations were to be contacted, but also state
attorneys-general (statutorily required in
respect of High Court appointments)
and justices of the High Court, and state and territory chief
Additionally, in respect of general appointments to the federal courts,
expressions of interest or nominations from eligible individuals
were publicly
sought through advertisement of the judicial vacancy online and in print media.
This was geared towards the third objective
revealed by McClelland above —
by consulting much more widely and enabling individuals to come forward and
indicate their own
interest, the appointments process is better placed to find
talent and increase the diversity of the Bench. The specific attributes
respect of which the Labor Government expressed its desire to diversify the
federal judiciary were gender, residential location,
professional experience and
cultural background.
For all judicial vacancies, excepting those on the High Court or as head of
the three other federal courts, the Attorney-General convened
an advisory panel.
The Panel assessed nominated individuals against an extensive set of
Membership of the
panel typically comprised the Chief Justice of either the Federal Court or
Family Court or Chief Judge of the Federal
Circuit Court, or their nominee; a
retired judge or senior member of the federal or state judiciary; and a senior
member of the Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s
Department.
McClelland flagged that only for the Federal Circuit Court was there ‘an
expectation that short-listed candidates
will have an opportunity to meet with
the selection panel and put forward their claims to
appointment’.
of the federal and family courts, he was content for the particular panel to
decide whether interviews would be of
assistance.
Upon concluding its consideration of eligible individuals, the panel then
reported to the Attorney-General with a list of those persons
recommended as
‘highly suitable for
appointment’.
list the Attorney-General would select one name to take to Cabinet. Upon Cabinet
approval, the name would be forwarded
to the Governor-General in Executive
Council, in whom the power of appointment is formally placed by
Constitution
In sum, the three pillars of the reformed process were: (1) the articulation
of publicly available criteria; (2) the advertisement
of vacancies and call for
nominations; and (3) the use of an advisory panel to make recommendations to the
Attorney-General.
The Limits of Reform
The appointment of persons to the High Court of Australia or as head of one
of the three other federal courts was essentially insulated
from the broader
reform agenda. In fact, beyond a commitment to consult widely with professional
and community bodies, it is no exaggeration
to say that in relation to these
judicial posts — arguably those which are most susceptible to the
intrusion of political considerations
and the operation of powerful networks
— there was simply no change to past practice. Those particular vacancies
were not advertised
in order to procure expressions of interest or nominations
directly from interested individuals themselves. Nor was an advisory panel
convened by the Attorney-General to assist him or her in narrowing down
potential appointees for these positions. Without a panel
to consider
nominations, it is also not clear whether the published criteria for judicial
appointment had any relevance in the context
One reason offered for treating the High Court and heads of court positions
differently was that these appointments ‘are likely
to come from the
serving judiciary and would therefore already be known to
government’.
course, there is no requirement that the individual selected be one who already
holds judicial office, with Justices Callinan
and Gageler being two recent
examples of appointments direct to the High Court from the Bar. It is also open
to question whether
the Commonwealth enjoys a comparable degree of familiarity
with potential candidates serving on state courts. But the critical point
that the justification, that such appointments are ‘already ... known to
government’,
disregards the purported value of developing a more arm’s length and
inclusive process.
More enigmatic was the claim that the High Court’s exclusion from the
reforms was justified merely because, ‘as the apex
of Australia’s
judicial system, [it] enjoys a different status to other federal
The Law Council
of Australia, in its submission to the 2009 Senate inquiry, endorsed this view
that the ‘High Court is in a
unique position as the ultimate appellate
court for Australia’.
this stance invites more questions than it answers — especially when
comparable legal systems, notably the UK, have been
willing to adopt systematic
reform that reaches all the way to their very highest courts.
In the absence of any clearer explanation, the particular exclusions from the
McClelland reforms suggest an attitude that there is
something slightly
undignified about nominating oneself for high office or the prospect of
transparent processes being applied to
highly visible courts with few members.
As to the former consideration, Justice Ruth McColl, representing the Judicial
of Australia before the 2009 Senate inquiry, confirmed that
‘those who are in the pool from which appointment at the High Court
be considered would not expect to have to
self-nominate’.
discomfort of scrutiny, meanwhile, was cited by the Law Society of New South
Wales as the basis for rejecting any suggestion
that a JAC should be established
at all: ‘The creation of an official selection body is opposed for the
reason that many eminently
suitable persons would be reluctant to go through a
public process of
selection’.
It is fair to
extrapolate from this that candidates for appointment to the High Court might,
given its prominence, be especially
wary. Either or both factors may account for
a reluctance to extend transparency measures to loftier institutions. This is
not, perhaps,
terribly surprising: in the course of such a major cultural shift,
it is only natural that certain aspects of the old culture should
either temporarily or permanently. But it is important to understand these
objections for what they are. Neither is an adequate
basis for assuming that the
higher a court, then the less formality or transparency is required or justified
in appointments to it.
In fact, the visibility of the High Court, both as the apex of the Australian
court system and in making decisions that bear upon
important national political
debates, suggests it must logically be the central focus of efforts to ensure
community confidence in
the independence of the Australian judiciary. The Senate
Committee, which was ‘not persuaded that a model identical to that
other federal courts is necessary to maintain confidence in judicial
appointments to the High
still saw the
value of much greater transparency. It recommended that, apart from use of an
advisory panel, all features of the McClelland
reforms be extended to the Court,
even suggesting that distinct ‘selection criteria that constitute merit
for appointment to
the High Court’ should be
The committee also
included the Court in its general recommendation that ‘the
Attorney-General will make public the number
(not the names) of candidates
considered for appointment (whether they were nominated by another person,
selfnominated or suggested
government)’.
While these
recommendations lend further support to the view that a total exemption of the
senior judicial positions is hard to justify,
the Committee was still unable to
explain why use of an advisory panel was problematic in making such
appointments.
In the remainder of this article, we evaluate the McClelland reforms by
reference to the central idea of transparency. Looking first
at the role of the
express criteria in identifying a candidate and then at the way in which
particular appointments were publicly
justified by the Attorney-General, we
assess how adequately all the factors leading to an individual’s selection
were acknowledged
under the reformed process. As indicated in the Introduction,
this takes us to a fairly familiar controversy — the relationship
‘merit’ (whether expressed as a oneword concept or through elaborate
criteria) and diversity. McClelland was
candid about his interest in promoting
diversity, but refrained from its direct inclusion in the design of the
appointments model.
Nevertheless, we argue below that diversity considerations
found a way into the appointments process. That is something we suggest
inevitable and defensible. But the failure to acknowledge this meant that the
model did not ultimately deliver the degree
of transparency that was proclaimed
as its central rationale.
III Transparency of Selection: Criteria and
In public law and political theory, the value of transparency is almost
axiomatic. However, it is worth briefly unpacking the reasons
why this is so
broadly accepted. The first is captured by United States Supreme Court Justice
Louis D Brandeis’ aphorism on
sunlight as a disinfectant: if procedures
are transparent — meaning that their workings are readily visible to
outsiders —
then that is likely to result in them operating as
Normally this would
mean that they are fair and rational, not corrupt and arbitrary. If there is no
general agreement on how a procedure
should work, keeping it transparent at
least leaves room for an effective debate on this question, leading ultimately
to the establishment
of some optimal process. Transparency throughout this
development makes it possible for outsiders to initiate and participate in
debate on the basis of the fullest possible information.
The second reason is related to the first, but worth mentioning separately
since it was emphasised as a key rationale for the 2008
reforms to federal
judicial appointments: transparency enables observers to
have confidence
that procedures are operating as intended. Public institutions, including the
judiciary, cannot operate effectively unless there
is broad acceptance of their
legitimacy, and that includes (or is another way of saying) confidence in them.
The precise form which
that confidence takes will vary depending on the role and
functions of different types of institutions, but in the case of the courts
their authority depends greatly on the community’s faith in their
independence and probity. Avoiding any perception that political,
familial networks are a key means to appointment, and that all those who are
properly qualified for appointment are given
the same consideration, is
obviously vital to this end.
McClelland encapsulated this connection when he stated that:
‘Australians rightly demand that justice should be administered
“without fear or favour”. It is just as important that judges and
magistrates should be
on a similarly
impartial basis’.
Australia, this consideration has effectively ended the earlier practice of
governments occasionally appointing party politicians
to the Bench. But, as the
recent controversy over the appointment of Tim Carmody as Chief Justice in
Queensland illustrates, the
danger to be avoided need not be so blatant as that
— a perception that an appointee has, through prior words or actions,
himself or herself to be ‘too close’ to government may be
hugely damaging.
matter of political sympathies, these days a more frequently cited factor
bearing upon public confidence in the courts
is the extent to which those
appointed to them are seen to reflect the community’s
This may be put most
strongly as the need to dispel any perception that the selection of judicial
officers reflects some systemic
discrimination against women or minority
At least two things generally support the achievement of transparency and
confidence in a process: first, ensuring that criteria are
publicly articulated
and used as a yardstick to guide decision-making; and second, a meaningful
public justification of the outcome.
In the context of Australian judicial
appointments, both the criteria and justification have traditionally been
reduced to a single
word: ‘merit’. Despite unanimity that those
persons appointed to judicial office should be of the highest quality, there
long been dissatisfaction over the insufficiency and opacity of
‘merit’ as a guide to selection. So far as what the
actually signify, one of us has reflected elsewhere that
[d]efenders of the status quo reveal a dismaying tendency to attack
proponents of change for wanting to dilute “merit”
but rarely show
any evidence of having properly reflected on whether the traditionally assumed
content of merit really describes
what makes a good
Faced with that traditional reticence, in the last decade various academic
studies have offered an articulation of the criteria by
which meaning might be
given to the term.
Ultimately,
these were reflected in the criteria introduced by Attorney-General McClelland
and to which we now turn.
Selection Criteria — Unpacking
If it is to have value, any attempt to articulate the constituent elements of
‘merit’ must be meaningful. If the selection
criteria are
unconvincingly broad or vague then any purported transparency is an illusion.
There is a danger that criteria will be
simply retrofitted so as to describe
those who have always been chosen to do the job, failing to articulate
attributes shared by
others who might perform it at least as well. In this
regard, the determination of relevant criteria matters greatly to the aim,
albeit routinely couched as subsidiary to ‘merit’, of enhancing
judicial diversity. In particular, the goal of attracting
to the Bench persons
with a range of different legal professional backgrounds and experiences risks
being undone if criteria affirm
the importance of particular skillsets which
have been traditionally used to guide appointment — most notably,
Under the McClelland reforms, advisory panels evaluated persons under
consideration against the following ‘requisite qualities
appointment’:
• legal expertise;
• conceptual, analytical and organisational skills;
• decision-making skills;
• the ability (or the capacity quickly to develop the ability) to
deliver clear and concise judgments;
• the capacity to work effectively under pressure;
• a commitment to professional development;
• interpersonal and communication skills;
• integrity, impartiality, tact and courtesy; and
• capacity to inspire respect and
confidence.
These approximate the qualities identified by academic studies and
professional bodies as relevant to judicial work and were endorsed
by the 2009
Senate Committee Inquiry as ‘not inconsistent with a selection process
based on merit’.
similar to an equivalent list used by the JAC in the
The degree of consensus
around these attributes as ones ideally possessed by effective members of the
judiciary is unsurprising.
They are all clearly things we would expect, or at
least aspire to have, in persons holding judicial
Ideally, the criteria should be such that an advisory panel may be satisfied
of an individual’s possession of them independently
of the views of
professional peers in support. Otherwise it may appear that reputation, more
than the criteria themselves, is determinative.
While the opinion of an
individual’s professional peers as to his or her qualities and skills is a
matter to be properly considered
by a panel, the precise role of those views
needs to be articulated and limited. We might also assess the utility of the
in enabling a panel to evaluate the respective merits of different
candidates and sort them from each other. How, for instance, is
a person not
currently holding judicial office evaluated against the third and fourth
criteria? We do not think challenges of that
sort inevitably reveal the criteria
to have been a mere veneer. Even less do they suggest that they are inapt for
what is required
of those holding judicial office. But clearly the utility of
the criteria in assisting selection depends greatly on the processes
adopted for
their evaluation.
It is here that the other features of the McClelland changes reinforced the
value of the criteria. The call for nominations —
both directly from
persons interested in being considered and from others supporting a particular
individual — provided a means
by which direct evidence could be adduced.
For example, in order to demonstrate ‘commitment to professional
development’
a candidate might bring forward an array of indicators:
conference attendance and presentation; teaching in continuing legal education,
Legal Profession Admission Board or university programs; service on professional
associations or advisory boards; pro bono work and
so on. The opportunity for
these to be explicitly identified in writing, rather than left to unreliable
impression ensures the meaningfulness
of such a criterion in practice. The much
wider public consultation — beyond the comparatively closed circles of the
also had the potential to elicit information that could be used to
construct a well-rounded picture of the individuals under consideration
examine their relative strengths as against each other under the criteria.
Lastly, the use of face-to-face meetings with possible
appointees provided the
opportunity for an advisory panel to make its own firsthand assessment of many
of the attributes of an individual,
as well as ensuring it had a full and
correct appreciation of the extent of his or her accomplishments.
The Limit of Selection Criteria —
What Lies Beyond?
Quite aside from the utility of the criteria, it is open to question just how
significant they are beyond the panel’s shortlisting
of candidates. The
Senate Committee expressed concern that the Attorney-General’s ultimate
selection was described as ‘the
person whom he [or she] considers most
suitable’ — suggesting that the final decision was not guided by the
In 2010, the
Government signalled this even more strongly, by stating that the
Attorney-General identified ‘a preferred candidate’
from the names
forwarded to him or her by the advisory
This invites speculation as to the extent of the criteria’s purpose and
the degree to which the decision-making power of the
executive is constrained at
the point of selection. After enabling the advisory panel to shortlist those
persons who are ‘highly
suitable’ for appointment, have the criteria
effectively done their work? Is it feasible that they can really be used to
narrow down the shortlisted contenders to a final selection? If there is
a clearly discernible gap between one individual and other
shortlisted
candidates in their satisfaction of the criteria, then the latter may be said to
operate to present the Attorney-General
with an obvious outcome. But it would
seem unlikely that the panel would typically devise a shortlist comprising
persons of dramatically
different quality and standing. Instead, it seems
implicit in the scheme that the individuals reported by the panel to the
Attorney-General
are ones whose qualities would be essentially on par with each
other. It would be surprising if the criteria per se served to distinguish
between them moving forward from that point. At best we might say that the
shortlisted candidates each meet
those criteria are relevant. For example, the disparate areas of law in which
individuals have developed
‘legal expertise’ may lean the
Attorney-General towards one candidate over others based on an assessment of the
areas of strength or deficiency on the relevant
Similarly, the form in
which individuals demonstrate their respective ‘commitment to professional
development’ might
guide selection.
However, it seems awkward to say that bringing such considerations to bear is
a decision, in the words of the Senate Committee, ‘directly
based on the
selection criteria’.
Instead, there is a broader and simpler way of characterising the use of such
considerations to choose among approximate equals at
the final stage of the
process: judicial diversity. The examples just cited show that
‘diversity’ can refer to a variety
of considerations. Surely the
least controversial of these is attending to the underrepresentation of specific
areas of legal expertise
on the Bench. Almost everyone agrees that the High
Court should be comprised of the nation’s best legal
but no one would suggest
that the institution is strengthened by ignoring what each individual is able to
contribute to its collective
wisdom. Instead, we are quite accustomed to the
idea that, while all High Court judges should be strong
‘generalists’,
should be some kind of breadth in the doctrinal expertise found on its bench. It
would, for example, be undesirable for no
member to have a professional
background in criminal law, given the many appeals the Court hears in that area.
Conversely, an overrepresentation
of criminal law expertise might suggest a
worrying weakness in other areas, say, commercial or public law. Similar
arguments apply
to other courts, though of course their larger size may mean
that the importance of each individual appointment to meeting the same
institutional need is less acute. Yet even this form of judicial diversity
— widely appreciated, we suggest, among the
— is seldom, if
ever, acknowledged by the executive as something that legitimately bears upon
judicial selection.
Slightly more broadly, a commitment to judicial diversity may describe the
practice of consciously appointing people with a range
of different types of
career, even within the narrow confines of the senior Bar. In its stated
objective of ‘pursuing the evolution
of the federal judiciary into one
that better reflects the rich diversity of the Australian community’, the
Labor Government
included ‘professional
background’.
that was placed the more personal attributes that have dominated, and indeed
characterised, this debate for many years
— gender, ethnicity and
But the Labor Government clearly baulked at including diversity — in
either a general or any particular sense — among
its stated criteria for
appointment. That reluctance not only accords with substantial academic and
political opinion in this
but also, as discussed
below, with the similar insistence in the UK that, while judicial diversity is
to be ‘encouraged’,
appointment is to be ‘solely on
However, it seems
highly likely that diversity in some sense must enter into the process —
and, in fact, strange to argue that
it should not. There is already broad
recognition of the benefits that accrue from a more diverse
but for present
purposes it suffices to merely note Blackshield’s astute observation that
the size of appellate courts alone
suggests that judicial
homogeneity
cannot be an objective of
appointment.
Accordingly, the
qualities and experiences that are among the judiciary both as a whole and on
the particular court to which an appointment
is being made are surely relevant
institutional
considerations that bear upon the selection of any
individual.
But even more simply, some recourse to ‘diversity’
considerations, either to a narrow or a wide degree (even so as to
candidates on the basis of them) will almost inevitably be
required in order that a choice is made of one candidate from among others.
Gageler, before his own appointment to the High Court, highlighted this
necessity when he stated that a belief that appointments
are made on
‘merit’ alone is ‘naïve’, since ‘at any time
there would be fifty people in Australia
quite capable of performing the role of
a High Court justice’.
Having dismissed the proposition that ‘merit’ alone determined
appointment, he went on to make a positive case for the
relevance of other
factors, saying that ‘considerations of geography, gender and ethnicity
all can, and should, legitimately
weigh in the
Acknowledging
that it was ‘perhaps more controversial’, Gageler also opined that
‘considerations of judicial style
and legal policy ... ought not to be
That the McClelland criteria did not accord weight to such personal
attributes and experiences does not mean that the criteria are
just a more
elaborate version of the flat insistence upon ‘merit’ to obscure the
real basis for the Attorney-General’s
selection. As already noted, the
list of criteria undeniably illuminates the several and varied qualities that
comprise ‘merit’.
It effectively decodes that all-important label
and ensures that the persons under consideration by the Attorney-General are
that the panel has identified as having the requisite skills and aptitude
for appointment. This is very different from the Attorney-General
appointing a
judge from an entirely open field and justified against a one-word
But the question remains: what guides the ultimate decision after the
criteria have done their job of establishing the ‘merit’
of those on
the shortlist? The Senate Committee was dissatisfied with the lack of clarity
over the relevance of the criteria to the
Attorney-General’s final
If the Attorney-General identifies the most suitable person based on their
assessment against the selection criteria then it is desirable
for this to be
articulated. On the other hand, if the Attorney-General is not willing to state
that selection is directly based on
the selection criteria then this should also
be articulated.
That seems a reasonable request. In his preferred model of appointments,
Gageler advocated an explicit sequencing of the process,
and was plain as to
when the role of the standard criteria was fulfilled:
I would have one method for identifying the pool of potential judicial
candidates and another for choosing amongst them. Both stages
transparent. The first stage would be solely concerned with identifying persons
having what I have described as the essential
judicial attributes. At the second
stage, I would be happy to see the broader considerations to which I have
referred openly brought
to the fore and
This approach is commonly referred to in the literature as one of
‘minimal merit’ and is distinguished from an insistence
alone supplies the only acceptable basis for selecting an individual for
judicial office (so-called, ‘maximal
We submit that
the McClelland reforms essentially brought about the model that was presented by
Gageler — except in one key
respect: there was only muffled acknowledgment
of the ‘broader considerations’ that influenced or guided the
at the second stage. Later, in
of this article, we examine the
extent to which Labor Attorneys-General recognised diversity in the public
justification of their
appointments. But before that, we reflect on the
significance of a two-stage model — that of recommendation followed by
— for the legitimacy of the stated criteria. Specifically, is
such a model, as the Government claimed, still one that is ‘based
Merit and Diversity
The traditional retort to any suggestion that judicial diversity should be
consciously addressed when making appointments is that
doing so risks improperly
reducing the emphasis upon
This explains a
persistent political wariness about giving explicit weight to diversity in the
process of selection — which
remains stubbornly presented as dictated by
the ‘sole criterion’ of merit (including its expression as itemised
and skills).
fact the use of other considerations to guide the selection of one individual
from among a group all identified as suitably
meritorious presents no departure
from a merit-
model. While Rackley is correct to say of the
‘minimal merit’ model that ‘the upshot of this approach is
to this extent, appointments will no longer be made simply on
merit’, the conclusion she goes on to draw from this does not
follow. She
argues that:
we should see this for what it is: appointment on
something in addition to
merit. As such those making these arguments would do better to bite the
bullet and to make the case
appointment on merit, to present the
argument for why the gains of diversity should trump appointing the person best
able to do the
But the candid recognition of factors in addition to merit does not amount to
any kind of rejection of merit. On the contrary, merit
remains central as the
threshold that all individuals must cross before they are seriously in the
running for appointment. Rackley’s
anxiety about how this model will be
seized upon by opponents of judicial diversity and who will object that it is a
diminishment
of the ‘merit principle’ is understandable. But for
them to insist that ‘merit’ must remain the
for appointment requires them either to dispute Gageler’s assessment that
there are, at any point in time, a sizable
number of persons with the requisite
qualities for appointment to judicial office or to believe that the suitability
of those candidates
may be objectively measured and ranked with
exactitude.
Regarding the
latter, Malleson has argued that the usual statement of criteria for appointment
are simply not fit for such an exercise:
‘they are essentially qualitative
in nature and difficult to measure in the sort of precise comparative way which
is required
for a rigorous ranking merit
Recent UK experience appears to demonstrate the problems associated with
constructing a formal process around the fiction of ‘merit
the basis for appointment. The practice in that jurisdiction of the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Chief Justice or nominee
receiving only a single name from the
JAC or a specially convened selection commission, was described earlier. The
appropriate authority
is limited as to the grounds upon which he or she may
reject the selection or require its reconsideration and must give the relevant
commission reasons in writing for taking either
Consequently, this is
unlikely to be done lightly.
Even allowing for the fact that up to two replacement nominations may be
required of the commission, the process is manifestly predicated
upon the idea
that merit is ultimately determinative. The requirement that the commission
identify a single individual who satisfies
the criteria signals, however
improbably, that the latter dictate a certain ranking of eligible persons. It
may never be baldly acknowledged,
but it is surely implicit that when put by the
appropriate authority to the task of furnishing him or her with a second or
name the commission must inevitably be turning to a person it earlier
identified as runner up to its first recommended candidate.
That unfortunate impression might be easily avoided if the JAC or special
commission was empowered to provide a shortlist of persons
it viewed as meeting
the criteria for appointment. Such an approach would recognise the open-textured
qualitative nature of the assessment,
and the availability of several persons of
suitable merit. But this was apparently seen to produce an insufficiently
depoliticised
method of judicial appointments. The determination to severely
reduce the executive’s role in selection has reinforced the
notion that at
any point in time there is but a single individual whose meritorious qualities
trump those of anyone else. Traditionally,
Australian governments have justified
appointments made in their absolute discretion on the basis of the
individual’s unequalled
It is interesting that
the substantial removal of that discretion in the UK has not been accompanied by
any greater frankness about
the existence of sufficient merit more broadly
across the profession.
This reluctance has been criticised as contributing to the slow pace of the
diversification of the UK judiciary. Malleson, prior to
the 2013 divesting of
the Lord Chancellor as the decisional authority in respect of all judicial
appointments, advocated that a move
toward that officeholder receiving a
shortlist of candidates ‘whom the commissions consider to be very
well-qualified and appointable
... would open space for the Lord Chancellor to
promote greater diversity though his choice of candidates while maintaining
She argued that diversity ‘requires political will to drive forward
proactive changes, some of which are not supported by the
judiciary or the legal
profession’.
of Lords Select Committee on the
Constitution
rejected this view because
‘unless a Lord Chancellor is committed to the promotion of diversity, the
use of shortlists could
have the reverse effect of reducing the diversity of the
judiciary’.
the CRA was amended to make it clear that while appointments remain
‘solely on merit’, this does not prevent
the selection commission,
‘where two persons are of equal merit, from preferring one of them over
the other for the purpose
of increasing
diversity’.
remains tightly conceived — and is expected to be the sole determinative
of appointment in most cases.
The fact that the so-called ‘tipping point’ provision itself refers
only to a situation ‘where two persons are
of equal merit’, also
signals that Parliament did not contemplate that a greater number of individuals
might, through their
possession of a diverse range of experiences and
qualifications, be judged to be equally meritorious. The JAC, in announcing how
it intends to implement the provision, avoided being so
It is unlikely that any future reform of Australian judicial appointments
would limit the power of the Attorney-General to accepting
recommendation from an advisory panel or commission. For one thing, there is, of
course, a constitutional difficulty with
any model that appears to fetter the
executive’s choice under
Constitution
also amount to a polar, rather than incremental shift, along the spectrum of
design options; the practice of forwarding,
in the first instance, just one name
to the executive is itself ‘unique’ to the
But it is useful to be
able to observe that system as illustrating why the familiar insistence upon
‘merit alone’ should
be resisted. The House of Lords Committee went
so far as to declare that ‘the use of shortlists would undermine judicial
independence
and be contrary to the principle of appointment on
That is not a
view that found any support in Australia’s consideration of appointment
processes — the 2009 Senate Committee
inquiry did not receive a single
submission from the judiciary, legal professional associations or academics
voicing that concern.
While the Committee itself made the usual noises about
selection on merit, it clearly did not see the forwarding by advisory panels
shortlists to the Attorney-General as existing in any tension with that
principle. Indeed, the Committee went so far as to recommend
that the number of
persons shortlisted for a vacancy be made
Whatever criticisms may be made of assumptions underlying the UK approach,
there is at least a consistency between the rhetoric of
alone’ and the process of appointment in that jurisdiction. By contrast,
it seems that the Labor Government in
Australia experimented with a process that
highlighted the nondeterminative nature of the criteria for judicial appointment
reticent about acknowledging how other considerations were brought into
play. So much was evident from the use of shortlists, but
also from the
Government’s candour that the Attorney-General identified his or her
‘preferred candidate’ from that
list. In the next Part, we assess
whether that tension might be avoided by making explicit the ‘broader
considerations’
guiding that preference, as Gageler advocated. Although
the Senate Committee saw this as a matter regarding the relevance and
transparency
of criteria throughout the entire process, it appears, in line with
our discussion to this point, better to examine the question
as a matter of how
the executive publicly justifies its ultimate selection from the shortlist.
IV Transparency of Selection: Justification
A public statement by the Attorney-General announcing judicial appointments
has been more or less common practice in Australia for
some time. While such
statements provide a succinct account of the individual’s professional
experience and qualifications,
traditionally they have revealed nothing about
the process by which the choice was made nor the criteria that were applied
beyond perhaps that of ‘merit’ as a single-word concept.
They have certainly offered no acknowledgment of the existence
candidates also possessing sufficient merit and from among which the new judge
is selected.
During the currency of the McClelland reforms, the information provided by
the Attorney-General’s Department about the criteria
and the use of
advisory panels to consider nominees and prepare a shortlist explained those
particular mysteries about the process.
But the reasons justifying the ultimate
selection by the Attorney-General of one individual over the others on the
shortlist were
left enigmatic.
This is not to say, however, that there was no allusion to the considerations
beyond those articulated in the criteria. The press
statement of McClelland,
announcing the first appointments to the Federal Court made after the
introduction of his reforms, was actually
rather revealing:
Mr McClelland said, ‘The more transparent process can give the public
confidence that the appointments were made on merit.’
‘I am also pleased that this process has resulted in appointments
reflecting expertise, diversity and experience.’ ...
‘I am impressed that more than 100 nominations and expressions of
interest were received for the positions.’
All three appointees are respected as extremely talented lawyers, with
experience across many areas of law and will bring new diversity
to the Federal
Although McClelland did not say that diversity considerations guided his
selection of Justices Jagot, Foster and Perram, his remarks
confirmation that such factors were relevant. As we have seen, diversity was not
included in the criteria, nor was it
a matter within the advisory panel’s
purview. Although the Government had said the development of a more diverse
was a desired outcome of the move towards calling for
nominations,
it would be
strange for this to be the only means employed, especially when the
Attorney-General holds the discretion to choose from
among several meritorious
candidates. Given the latter, it is odd that McClelland depicted his own role in
the appointment of three
persons who will ‘bring new diversity to the
Federal Court’ as passive, rather than active. Additionally, although the
brief profiles of each new judge attached to the Media Release detailing their
respective areas of practice provided some clues,
the specific way in which each
of the appointments contributed to the achievement of such diversity was not
made explicit.
This approach of emphasising the appointee’s satisfaction of the
‘merit’ criteria before acknowledging the different
perspective which he or she brings to the Bench is also demonstrated by the
remarks of McClelland’s successor, Nicola
Roxon, when she welcomed Justice
Farrell to the Federal Court in 2012. The Attorney-General said:
In the history of the Federal Court, the appointment of a solicitor is a rare
event. I have made no secret of my view that improving
the professional,
cultural and gender diversity of courts across the country can only strengthen
and deepen the role, and the respect
in which the court is held. Of course these
appointments must also be of the highest professional and legal calibre, and
your appointment,
easily, meets all of those
When one looks through announcements of the appointment of other new judges
and the speeches the Attorneys-General made at their swearing-in
ceremonies over
the life of the McClelland reforms, similar references to matters falling within
what Gageler called the ‘broader
considerations’ can be found. But
each Attorney-General stopped short of explicit affirmation that he or she was,
in the words
of the Senate Committee, ‘making appointments other than
based on an assessment against selection
that so much was simply obvious both from the process itself and from the
relevant remarks. But it is interesting to ponder
the reason for the
Government’s disinclination to acknowledge the influence of the
‘broader considerations’ as
a distinct second stage in the
appointments process, after an individual’s merit had been established at
the threshold.
Political wariness about an open embrace of judicial diversity as a factor in
Commonwealth appointments is understandable. While the
view that diversity and
merit are antithetical has significantly
acknowledged, unease appears to linger about explaining judicial appointments in
any way that risks complicating their
description as ‘merit-based’.
Although it is wellrecognised that public confidence in the courts depends upon
generally representative of the wider
there is an
obvious danger in exposing the appointments process to allegations of
‘tokenism’ or ‘political correctness’
that undermine
faith in the quality of the
That possibility
is magnified in respect of specific appointments as distinct from the process
generally. While it is one thing for
the Attorney-General to observe that an
individual’s background further enhances the diversity of persons sitting
in the court
to which he or she is appointed, it risks sending quite a different
message to state that this was a distinct consideration in their
Although the individual’s merit has been unquestionably established before
such factors assume any relevance, there
is a distinct danger that this will be
lost sight of in the way the appointment is subsequently reported and discussed.
Neither the
individual concerned, nor those who were shortlisted but passed
over, would benefit from the process being construed as driven by
None of this is to take issue with Gageler’s suggestion that the
‘broader considerations’ should be ‘openly
brought to the fore
and debated’.
him to mean this generally, rather than in specific cases. McClelland was
commendably precise in this regard, nominating
‘residential location’, ‘professional background and
experience, and cultural background’
as the areas in which its efforts to
increase diversity were
It was perhaps
surprising that the 2009 Senate Committee did not individually assess these
various fields, nor consider the acceptability
of others. So far, it might be
said there has been little debate on these
considerations,
but perhaps
this reflects a consensus about their relevance and desirability?
Ultimately, and with an appreciation of the need for some political
pragmatism, we submit that the Labor Government under Prime Ministers
Gillard struck a sound balance in the public justification of its appointments
— emphasising that these continued
to be based on merit, while also
highlighting the growing diversity of the federal judiciary.
However, this was far less convincingly managed in respect of High Court
appointments. In particular, Attorney-General Roxon sent
confusing signals about
Labor’s priorities in judicial appointments by repeatedly stressing her
desire to draw on a much wider
pool of candidates in order to diversify the
senior judiciary
after making two squarely traditional appointments to the High Court in the form
of Justices Keane and Gageler, falling
back on unsatisfyingly generic claims
While Roxon’s mixed messaging did not help, in many respects the
opacity was only to be expected given the exclusion of the
High Court from the
reach of most aspects of the McClelland reforms — particularly the use of
explicit criteria and an advisory
panel. It is conceivable that either or both
of Roxon’s appointments, while superficially orthodox in appearance, may
featured nontraditional considerations as some part of the equation, not
discernible to those outside the selection process. Indeed,
the very distinct
institutional features of the High Court might be expected to require that
weight be given to a range of matters
that are less obviously important when
appointing individuals to a lower court. We have already, for example,
acknowledged the desirability
of a spread of specialist expertise on the High
Court. Additionally, the selection may be influenced by that Court’s
role in providing intellectual leadership for the legal profession at
large and impressing upon the whole community the importance
of the rule of law
and its requirements. Individual judges, to varying degrees, contribute to this
aspect of the Court’s function
through their extra-judicial speeches and
writings. It seems quite defensible for a willingness and capacity to engage in
those activities
to be considered when selecting a new High Court appointment
from among a shortlist of contenders. A further consideration might
be the fact
that the individual will work alongside six colleagues. Paterson’s recent
examination of the institutional practices
and culture of the UK Supreme Court
led him to remark that it ‘requires a different skill set in the
participants than was
once required of the Law Lords’; these include an
‘ability to negotiate, to compromise, to persuade whilst robustly
a position of
principle’.
years in Australia, High Court judges have given starkly contrasting conceptions
of the judicial role on a multi-member
individual’s demonstration of certain interpersonal skills and a
temperament and capacity for professional cooperation
also be appropriate
factors in his or her selection for judicial appointment?
Essentially, it remains very difficult to know how High Court judges are
selected. That presents as nothing new, but the contrast
of approaches under
Labor only highlighted the importance of transparency in respect of the
nation’s most senior appointments.
It is for these, more than any other,
that the public should be given a clear explanation as to how the
Attorney-General has determined
the identity of his or her
‘preferred’ candidate.
V Conclusion
Reform of judicial appointments to federal courts is at a crossroads. It is
conceivable that the current Attorney-General’s
reversion to unfettered
executive discretion will diminish Labor’s commitment to reviving some
more transparent and accessible
process upon its eventual return to government.
After all, abnegation of power is the least likely of political impulses. If the
Coalition holds government for several terms, then the fact that the McClelland
reforms were on foot for only a brief time may lead
to them being seen as merely
a novel experiment that did not take hold. However, the case for a more
transparent and independent
process will remain undimmed, bolstered by reform in
comparable jurisdictions. The McClelland model, albeit modest by international
standards, will be undoubtedly influential on any future attempt to meet that
McClelland deserves credit for initiating change and his approach had
numerous strengths. It cast a wide net for candidates and consulted
broadly with
stakeholders. It articulated a sophisticated and informative meaning of
It identified suitable candidates for appointment through the involvement of
an independent and well-qualified advisory panel. All
these aspects of the model
were likely to instil public confidence in the quality and independence of the
judiciary, and dispel any
sense that appointment was determined by establishment
networks or partisan allegiances.
However, we have focused on two deficiencies of the reforms that would
warrant a different approach in future. The simplest of these
to remedy is the
exclusion of the High Court and heads of jurisdiction. The weak justifications
for that exclusion are overwhelmed
by the clear importance of ensuring that
these appointments, above all others, be seen to be free from political taint.
Quite aside
from this being reflected in the design of overseas appointment
models, the recent Carmody affair in Queensland provides local confirmation
this point. The fact that Tim Carmody was not simply elevated to the Bench of
the Supreme Court, but to the head of the State’s
judiciary, undoubtedly
fuelled and sustained criticism of his appointment. The higher the office, the
stronger the need to ensure
public confidence in the independence and qualities
of the person appointed to it.
The second deficiency of the McClelland model is more challenging.
It concerns the tension between the goal of a transparent process and the
tendency to leave unacknowledged the role that ‘broader
considerations’ inevitably still play in the selection of one individual
from among others for appointment. Overcoming this
requires candour about the
obvious inability of express criteria defining ‘merit’ to
conclusively determine the outcome
in the vast majority of cases. The McClelland
reforms avoided the restrictive approach to ‘merit’ of the UK model
suggests the concept enables a precise ranking of candidates. That
assumption, which goes hand-in-hand with the very limited discretion
left to the
executive, underpins much of the continued criticism of the UK model for its
failure to appreciably diversify the English
judiciary over the last decade.
However, and as the Senate Committee noted, if the criteria’s role is
essentially exhausted
by the shortlisting of the advisory panel, there was a
failure by the Australian model to make plain what considerations guided the
Attorney-General in selecting his or her ‘preferred candidate’. We
have argued that those considerations should be ones
that go to judicial
diversity — whether narrowly in the sense of fields of legal expertise and
professional experiences, or
attuned more generally to personal attributes such
as gender or ethnicity. In contradistinction from other considerations that have
perhaps informed selection in the past, these are ones that are legitimate, or
at least debatable. They should be publicly articulated.
McClelland did go so
far as to identify the attributes Labor wished to see diversified in the federal
judiciary — but refrained
from explaining the actual role these were to
play in the process.
Acknowledging the utility of diversity considerations in supplementing merit
as a threshold satisfies the objective of a truly transparent
appointments
model. But there is an even wider point that arises from this. Admitting the
existence and necessity of choice at the
second stage of selection sharpens our
appreciation of the executive function in this context. A narrow notion of
has been used to virtually oust the executive from being
responsible for appointments in the
It would be
understandable, particularly in the immediate wake of a controversy such as that
which has occurred in Queensland, if
reformers were tempted to emulate that
approach. But as much as we need to develop an appointments process that
provides an independent
judiciary, government should be kept in the picture.
Quite aside from the importance of ensuring a basic democratic accountability
for the judicial arm, the executive has an important role to play. Accepting
that ‘merit’ may be demonstrated in diverse
ways and that the
Australian judiciary is constructed through the selection of some individuals
from among others of a comparable
calibre should lead to support for retaining a
role for the executive, while also ensuring this is both better understood and
meaningfully guided.
Professor, Flinders Law
School, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia.
Professor, Gilbert + Tobin Centre of
Public Law, Faculty of Law, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
For two surveys of different
national approaches to judicial appointment, see Kate Malleson and Peter H
Russell (eds),
Appointing Judges in an Age of Judicial Power: Critical
Perspectives from Around the World
(University of Toronto Press, 2006); and
H P Lee (ed),
Judiciaries in Comparative Perspective
University Press, 2011).
Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Australia’s
Judicial System and the Role of Judges
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government,
Court Appointments
<http://www.ag.gov.au/
LegalSystem/Courts/Pages/Courtappointments.aspx>.
Attorney-General’s Department, Australian Government, ‘Appointments
to the Federal Judiciary’ (News Release,
11 December 2014).
Elizabeth Handsley,
‘“The Judicial Whisper Goes Around”: Appointment of Judicial
Officers in Australia’ in
Kate Malleson and Peter H Russell (eds),
Appointing Judges in an Age of Judicial Power: Critical Perspectives from
Around the World
(University of Toronto Press, 2006), 122, 141.
That division was in fact
signalled during the 2013 Federal election campaign by the different answers
given by Brandis and Labor’s
Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus QC to the
question ‘What will your government do to promote greater diversity in the
judiciary?’.
While Dreyfus pointed to his Government’s instigation
of advertising judicial vacancies and ‘merit-based selection through
independent advisory panels’, Brandis responded merely by stating,
‘The Coalition believes judicial appointments should
be based on
merit’: Cover Story, ‘Dreyfus v Brandis: Federal Election
(2013) 87(7)
Law Institute Journal
, 19. We are grateful
to William Mudford for pointing out this reference.
Andrew Lynch, ‘Chief
Justice Carmody and the “Merit Principle”’,
(online), 18 August 2014
http://inside.org.au/chief-justice-carmody-and-the-merit-principle/
Australian Bar Association,
‘Independence of Judiciary Under Threat in Queensland’ (Media
Release, 14 June 2014)
http://www.austbar.asn.au/archives/1369
Australian Associated Press,
‘Queensland Judges Snub Chief Justice Tim Carmody’s Welcome
The Guardian
1 August 2014
<http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/
aug/01/queensland-judges-snub-chief-justice-tim-carmodys-welcome-ceremony>.
Joshua Robertson,
‘Queensland Chief Justice Tim Carmody’s Work Rate Far Less Than
Predecessor’
The Guardian
(online), 9 January 2015
http://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/09/queensland-chief-justice-tim-carmody-work-rate-less-than-predecessor
For an account of these
subsequent developments see Andrew Lynch, ‘Campbell Newman’s Most
Contentious Legacy’,
Inside Story
(online), 13 April 2015
http://insidestory.org.au/campbell-newmans-most-contentious-legacy
Hedley Thomas, ‘Chief
Justice Tim Carmody: I’ll Quit to ‘Stop the Bleeding”
(Sydney), 25 May 2015, 1.
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government,
Judicial Appointments: Ensuring a Strong,
Independent and Diverse Judiciary through a Transparent Process
(April 2010)
Kate Malleson, ‘Gender
Quotas for the Judiciary in England and Wales’ in Ulrike Schultz and
Gisela Shaw (eds),
Gender and Judging
(Hart Publishing, 2013) 481,
Erika Rackley,
‘Rethinking Judicial Diversity’ in Ulrike Schultz and Gisela Shaw
Gender and Judging
(Hart Publishing, 2013) 501, 505.
High Court of Australia
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 22(2)(a);
Federal Circuit Court of
Australia Act 1999
(Cth) sch 1
cl 1 (which does not refer to
prior judicial service).
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) s 22(2)(b). No guidance is offered as to how that suitability is to be
established.
High Court of Australia
See John Wanna et al,
‘Common Cause: Strengthening Australia’s Cooperative
Federalism’ (Report,
Council for the Australian Federation
2009) 21. For discussion of those concerns, see Andrew Lynch and Marianna
Matevosian, ‘Preserving the ‘Federal Balance’
Through Judicial
Diversity: Clutching at Straws?’
(2011) 13(3)
Constitutional Law &
Policy Review
Sir Harry Gibbs, ‘The
Appointment of Judges’
Australian Law Journal
Presumably, Sir Gibbs was not suggesting the absence of consultation pursuant to
High Court of Australia Act 1979
(Cth) after the introduction
of that requirement.
Phillip Hudson, ‘Call
To Appoint Woman Judge’,
The Sunday Age
(Melbourne), 11 September
George Williams, ‘High
Court Appointments: The Need for Reform’
Sydney Law Review
See Morris Graham,
‘Piddington, Albert Bathurst’ in Michael Coper, Tony Blackshield and
George Williams (eds),
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
(Oxford University Press, 2001) 533, 534.
The former occasion was only
recently revealed in Michael Pelly,
Murray Gleeson: The Smiler
Federation Press, 2014) 178, while Williams’ practice was discussed in Sir
Anthony Mason, ‘The Centenary of the High
Court of Australia’
Constitutional Law & Policy Review
Troy Simpson,
‘Appointments that Might Have Been’, in Tony Blackshield, Michael
Coper and George Williams (eds), The
Oxford Companion to the High Court of
Australia (2001) 23, 23. For example see AJ Brown, ‘The ‘Inevitable
A Biographer’s Note’ in Ian Freckelton and Hugh Selby
Appealing to the Future: Michael Kirby and His Legacy
Reuters, 2009) 49, 69.
An example of this was
Cabinet’s rejection of Attorney-General Daryl Williams’ choice of
John von Doussa QC in favour
of Ian Callinan QC in 1998: Pelly, above n 24,
Handsley, above n 5, 132.
Michael Lavarch,
‘Judicial Appointments: Procedure and Criteria’ (Discussion Paper,
Attorney-General’s Department,
Australian Government, 1993)
Senate Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
Gender Bias and
the Judiciary
(1994) 90–91 [5.44]–[5.55].
Bernard Lagan,
‘Conservatives on Court Shortlist’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 19 July 1997, 3.
Rachel Davis and George
Williams, ‘Reform of the Judicial Appointments Process: Gender and the
Bench of the High Court of Australia’
[2003] MelbULawRw 32
Melbourne University
Constitutional Reform Act
(UK), s 61, sch 12. The Australian work that most directly draws upon
the UK reforms to propose a detailed model for judicial appointments
Australia is Simon Evans and John Williams, ‘Appointing Australian Judges:
A New Model’
[2008] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
For example, the
establishment and composition of the selection panel convened by the Lord
Chancellor for Supreme Court vacancies
is addressed by
Constitutional Reform
(UK), ss 26(5), (5A), 27, 27A;
The Supreme Court (Judicial
Appointments) Regulations 2013
(UK), regs 5, 11.
Crime and Courts Act 2013
(UK), sch 13; see also
The Supreme Court (Judicial Appointments)
Regulations 2013
The Judicial Appointments Regulations 2013
(UK). For a description of the changes, see Alysia Blackham, ‘Court
Appointment Processes and Judicial Diversity’
, 237. For concerns about the appointments model enabling serving
judges to self-perpetuate the judiciary in their own image and democratic
deficit, see Michael Kirby, ‘A Darwinian Reflection on Judicial Values and
Appointments to Final National Courts’ in
James Lee (ed)
From House of
Lords to Supreme Court: Judges, Jurists and the Process of Judging
Publishing, 2011) 9, 33; Kate Malleson, ‘Appointment, Discipline and
Removal of Judges: Fundamental Reforms in the United
Kingdom’ in H P
Judiciaries in Comparative Perspective
(Cambridge University
Press, 2011) 117, 122; Alan Paterson and Chris Paterson,
Guarding the
Guardians? Towards an Independent, Accountable and Diverse Senior Judiciary
(Centre Forum, March 2012)
http://www.centreforum.org/assets/pubs/guarding-the-guardians.pdf
The Supreme Court
(Judicial Appointments) Regulations 2013
(UK), reg 19;
The Judicial
Appointments Regulations 2013
(UK), regs 7, 13, 19, 25, 31.
The Supreme Court
(Judicial Appointments) Regulations 2013
(UK), reg 20;
The Judicial
Appointments Regulations 2013
(UK), regs 8(4), (5), 14(4), (5), 20(4), (5),
26(4), (5), 32(5), (6).
Vernon Bogdanor,
Constitution
(Hart Publishing, 2009) 67. See also, Mark Bevir,
Democratic Governance
(Princeton University Press, 2010) 163.
Nadia Verrelli,
‘Introduction’ in Nadia Verrelli (ed),
The Democratic Dilemma:
Reforming Canada’s Supreme Court
(Institute of Intergovernmental
Relations, 2013) 1, 1–2.
Philip A Joseph,
‘Appointment, Discipline and Removal of Judges in New Zealand’ in
H P Lee (ed),
Judiciaries in Comparative Perspective
University Press, 2011) 66, 70–71.
Ronald Sackville,
‘Judicial Appointments: A Discussion Paper’
Judicial Administration
; Lenny Roth, ‘Judicial
Appointments’
(Briefing Paper No 3, Parliamentary Library,
Parliament of New South Wales, 2012) 10–15.
Robert McClelland,
‘Judicial Appointments Forum’ (Speech delivered at Bar Association
of Queensland Annual Conference,
Gold Coast, 17 February 2008).
Ibid [31]–[33].
Ibid [18]–[20].
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 13 [3.12]. In 2008,
McClelland stated that ‘this process
of consultation is broader than has
occurred in the past’: McClelland, above n 42, [43].
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 13 [3.8].
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 1.
These are discussed in
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 14 [3.17]. Though
greater representation of former judicial
officers seems to have occurred: see
Kirby, above n 35, 29.
McClelland, above n 42,
Ibid [51]–[53].
McClelland added that ‘face-to-face meetings with candidates are
inappropriate for appointments to the
High Court’: ibid [62].
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 2.
Though it seems from the
report of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee that
the criteria applied only
to general appointments to the federal, family and
federal circuit courts: above n 2, 13–14 [3.15]–[3.16].
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 3. See further, in respect of the
High Court, McClelland,
above n 42, [63], where he said that serving judges
‘are already well known to the Government, the judiciary, the legal
profession,
and, often, the general public’. A similar justification was
given in the UK for exclusion of senior judicial posts from the
remit of the
Commission for Judicial Appointments, the forerunner to the JAC: Kate Malleson,
‘Selecting Judges in the Era of
Devolution and Human Rights’ in
Andrew Le Sueur (ed),
Building the UK’s New Supreme Court: National and
Comparative Perspectives
(Oxford University Press, 2004) 295, 305.
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 3.
Law Council of Australia,
Submission No 11 to Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into Australian Judicial System
and the Role of Judges
, 30 April 2009, 17.
Justice Ruth McColl quoted
by the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2,
23 [3.64]. See also H
P Lee, ‘Appointment, Discipline and Removal of
Judges in Australia’ in H P Lee (ed),
Judiciaries in Comparative
Perspective
(Cambridge University Press, 2011) 27, 30.
Law Society of New South
Wales, Submission No 7 to Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into Australian Judicial System
and the Role of Judges
, 30 April 2009, 1.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 25 [3.69].
Ibid 25 [3.70].
Ibid 25 [3.71].
‘Publicity is justly
commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases. Sunlight is said to be
the best of disinfectants;
electric light the most efficient policeman’:
Louis D Brandeis,
Other People’s Money and How the Bankers Use It
(Frederick A Stokes Company, 1914) 92.
Advisory Panel on Judicial
Diversity, ‘The Report of the Advisory Panel on Judicial Diversity
2010’, (Ministry of Justice
(UK) 2010) 15.
McClelland, above n 42,
See Michael Pelly,
‘Tim Carmody’s Words Have Not Helped His Cause’,
20 June 2014
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/legal-affairs/tim-carmodys-words-have-not-helped-his-cause/story-e6frg97x-1226960437425
Davis and Williams, above n
32, 846; Justice Ruth McColl, ‘Judicial Appointment’
Sydney Law Review
, 157; Michael H McHugh, ‘Women Justices for
the High Court’ extracted in George Williams, Sean Brennan and Andrew
Blackshield & Williams’ Australian
Constitution
Theory: Commentary & Materials
(Federation Press, 6
2014) 224, 225.
Handsley, above n 5,
See, eg, Sharyn Roach Anleu
and Kathy Mack, ‘Judicial Appointment and the Skills for Judicial
Office’ (2005) 15
Journal of Judicial Administration
Davis and Williams, above n 32, 830–47; Evans and Williams, above n 33,
Department of
Attorney-General, Australian Government,
Federal Court of Australia:
Information for Persons Who Wish to Nominate Another Person for Appointment or
Lodge an Expression of
http://www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/Courts/Documents/Federal%20Court%20information%20pack.doc
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 18 [3.41].
Select Committee on the
Constitution
Judicial Appointments
, House of Lords Paper No 25, Session
2010–2012 (2012) 29–30 [85].
This is not to ignore the
perspective that our attempts to articulate what is meant by merit reflect
certain gendered assumptions
and that efforts to increase judicial diversity require a reappraisal of either
the criteria themselves or the ways in which we identify their satisfaction.
This discussion is beyond the scope of this article,
but see Margaret Thornton,
‘“Otherness” on the Bench: How Merit is Gendered’
[2007] SydLawRw 16
Sydney Law Review
; Hilary Sommerland, ‘Diversity, Merit, and
the English Judiciary: The Lessons that can be Learned from the Reform of
Processes, a UK Contribution’ (2013) 40
Fordham Urban Law
Journal City Square
94, 99–103.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 14 [3.20].
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 2.
For reflection on the role
of individual expertise in the decision-making of judges on multimember courts,
see Justice Stephen Gageler,
‘Why Write Judgments?’
[2014] SydLawRw 9
Sydney Law Review
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 14 [3.20].
For an argument against the
appointment of ‘uber-smart judges’, see James Allan,
‘Objections Must Be Ruled Out
The Australian
(online), 20 June 2014 <http://www.theaustralian.com.au/
business/legal-affairs/objections-must-be-ruled-out-of-order/story-e6frg97x-1226960443280>.
For a judicial response to Allan, see
Justice Patrick Keane, ‘The Idea of
the Professional Judge: The Challenges of Communication’ (Speech delivered
at Judicial
Conference of Australia Colloquium, Noosa, 11 October 2014)
The term used by Gageler,
above n 77, 196.
In evidence to a 2012 House
of Lords committee inquiry, Lord Phillips suggested that the UK Supreme Court
appointments might be described
as ‘that candidate who will best meet the
needs of the Court having regard to the judicial qualities required of a Supreme
Court Justice and to the current composition of the Court’: Select
Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, 32 [91].
See also Lord Jonathan Sumption, ‘Home Truths about Judicial
Diversity’ (Speech delivered at the Bar Council Law Reform
London, 15 November 2012) 4.
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 1.
For its part, the Senate
Committee effectively endorsed the description of the UK approach offered by
Evans and Williams, above n
33, 313, as one which ‘emphasises merit and
promotes diversity’: Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
above n 2, 23 [3.60]. The debate about the relation between these two
concepts has continued in that jurisdiction: see Advisory Panel
on Judicial
Diversity, above n 65, 32–3 [97]–[100]; and Select Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, ch 3.
Constitutional Reform Act
(UK), s 137A.
Constitutional Reform Act
(UK), s 63(2). With respect to the Supreme Court, s 27(5) says simply:
‘Selection must be on merit’.
In addition to those
examples cited above n 68, which emphasise public confidence, there are
firsthand accounts that stress the value
of diversity for judging itself: see
Lord Justice Terence Etherton, ‘Liberty, the Archetype and Diversity: A
Philosophy of
; Baroness Hale,
‘A Minority Opinion?’ (2008) 154
Proceedings of the British
319; Lady Baroness Hale, ‘Equality in the Judiciary’
(Speech delivered at the Kuttan Menon Memorial Lecture, London, 21
2013); Justice Michael Kirby, ‘Judicial Dissent — Common Law and
Civil Law Traditions’
Law Quarterly Review
sustained presentation of the argument that ‘the judiciary is stronger,
and the justice dispensed better, the more
diverse its decision-makers’ is
from Erika Rackley,
Women, Judging and the Judiciary: From Difference to
(Routledge, 2013), 201. Further, Rackley’s argument about
the capacity for diversity on the Bench to result in different outcomes
demonstrated by the outputs of the Feminist Judgments Project: Rosemary Hunter,
Claire McGlynn and Erika Rackley,
Feminist Judgments: From Theory to Practice
(Hart Publishing, 2010); Heather Douglas et al (eds),
Australian Feminist
Judgments: Righting and Rewriting Law
(Hart Publishing, 2014). Cf Sumption,
above n 81.
Anthony R Blackshield,
‘The Appointment and Removal of Federal Judges’ in Brian Opeskin and
Fiona Wheeler (eds),
The Australian Federal Judicial System
University Press, 2000) 400, 429–30.
Stephen Gageler,
‘Judicial Appointment’
Sydney Law Review
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 14 [3.20].
Gageler, above n 89,
Dawn Oliver,
Constitutional Reform in the United Kingdom
(Oxford University Press,
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 1.
See Bruce Debelle QC,
‘Judicial Appointments: the Case for Reform’ in
Upholding the
Constitution
– Volume 21
(Sir Samuel Griffith Society,
82; Gibbs, above n 20, 10.
Select Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, 33 [97]; (more ambiguously) Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 23 [3.60];
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 1.
Rackley, above n 87, 190
(emphasis in original). To be clear, Rackley does not advocate such a course.
Rather, she insists that merit
is validly prioritised, but she is uncomfortable
with it being merely supplemented by diversity factors. Instead, and building on
the substantial case she has made that ‘diversity is essential to the
of judicial decision-making’, she wants merit and diversity
to operate holistically to, ‘stand and fall together’:
above n 87, 195 (emphasis in original). While we accept her central argument
that a more diverse judiciary results in
substantive
benefits to the work
of courts, we do not accept that an appointments model which applies individual
merit as a threshold and then
allows the final selection to be guided by
publicly-articulated diversity considerations is accurately described as one
requires us ‘to choose between advancing diversity and
appointment on merit’: Rackley, above n 87, 194. As we argue in
text, this is because we reject Rackley’s portrayal of the ‘minimal
merit’ model as amounting to one which
is essentially ‘
appointment on merit’: Rackley, above n 87, 190 (emphasis in
Malleson, above n 14, 489.
But she says: ‘The sort of judiciary, which fits with a ranking merit
model of judicial selection,
is the career judiciary common in many European
civil law systems’.
The Supreme Court
(Judicial Appointments) Regulations 2013
(UK), reg 21;
The Judicial
Appointments Regulations 2013
(UK), regs 9, 15, 21, 27, 33.
Bogdanor suggests that a
convention may ultimately develop that the Lord Chancellor simply appoints the
first name received: above
Simon Evans,
‘Appointment of Justices’ in Michael Coper, Tony Blackshield and
George Williams (eds),
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
(Oxford University Press, 2001) 19–23; Williams, above n 22, 164.
Kate Malleson,
‘Taking the Politics Out of Judicial Appointments?
(21 February
2012)’ UK Constitutional Law Association
http://ukconstitutionallaw.org/2012/02/21/kate-malleson-taking-the-politics-out-of-judicial-appointments/
Malleson had emphasised the importance of shortlists at the time of the
JAC’s creation: Malleson, above n 55, 313.
Ibid. See also Kirby,
above n 35, 26–7.
Select Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, 16–17 [36].
Constitutional Reform
(UK) ss 27(5A), 63(2), 63(4), inserted by
Crimes and Courts Act
(UK) schs 13, 9, 10 respectively.
This sentiment was
expressed by both the JAC: Ministry of Justice (UK), ‘Improving Judicial
Diversity: Progress Towards Delivery
Report of the Advisory
Panel on Judicial Diversity 2010’, May 2011, 33; and senior judges: Select
Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, 34 [99]. See also Graham Gee and Kate
Malleson, ‘
Judicial Appointments, Diversity and the Equal Merit
’ (6 May 2014)
UK Constitutional Law Association
http://ukconstitutionallaw.org/2014/05/06/graham-gee-and-kate-malleson-judicial-appointments-diversity-and-the-equal-merit-provision/
The JAC policy is to
apply the provision in relation to ‘two or more candidates’ of equal
merit: JAC,
Equal Merit Provision Policy
(8 April 2014) 3 [3]
<https://jac.judiciary.gov.uk/sites/default/
files/sync/basic_page/emp_policy_0.pdf>.
Evans and Williams, above
Professor Cheryl Thomas
quoted by House of Lords: Select Committee on the
Constitution
above n 73, 16 [36].
Select Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, 17 [37].
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 14 [3.23]–[3.24]
(Recommendation 3).
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, ‘Three New Judges Appointed To The
Federal Court’ (News Release,
051/2008, 25 June 2008).
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 1.
Nicola Roxon, Speech
delivered at the Swearing In of the Honourable Justice Kathleen Farrell, Federal
Court of Australia, Sydney,
5 December 2012.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above n 2, 14 [3.21].
Only the submission of
the Association of Australian Magistrates received by the 2009 Senate Committee
expressed the view that an
active policy of increasing judicial diversity is
unnecessary: Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, above
n 2, 22 [3.59].
See McHugh, above n 68;
Malleson, above n 55, 304.
These concerns have been
more fully ventilated in discussions in the UK regarding the use of quotas and
targets for the gender and
racial diversification of the judiciary: see Select
Committee on the
Constitution
, above n 73, 34–6 [102]–[108];
Malleson, above n 14; Geoffrey Bindman and Karon Monaghan, ‘Judicial
Accelerating Change’ (Report prepared for Shadow Secretary of
State for Justice, Sadiq Khan, November 2014)
<http://www.matrixlaw.co.uk/uploads/
other/06_11_2014_12_11_31_06.11.14.pdf>.
Gageler, above n 89,
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, above n 13, 1.
Though regarding
geography see Lynch and Matevosian, above n 19.
Attorney-General’s
Department, Australian Government, ‘Wide Net Cast in Search for Two New
High Court Justices’
(Media Release, 23 March 2012); Nicola Roxon,
‘Fairness: Good Laws, Good Application and Good Processes’ (Speech
at the Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration and National
Judicial College of Australia Discovery Seminar, Melbourne,
23 March 2012).
See also Andrew Lynch, ‘Roxon’s High Court Dilemma’
(online), 9 July 2012
http://inside.org.au/roxon-high-court-dilemma/
We do not, we are keen
to stress, suggest that either Gageler or Keane JJ was not an eminently suitable
appointment to the High
Alan Paterson,
Judgment: The Last Law Lords and the Supreme Court
(Hart Publishing, 2013)
Justice Dyson Heydon,
‘Threats to Judicial Independence: The Enemy Within’
Law Quarterly Review
; Gageler, above n 77; Justice Susan Kiefel,
‘The Individual Judge’ (2014)
Australian Law Journal
; Keane, above n 79.
Rackley laments the
curtailment of the Lord Chancellor’s role, saying that it was never
intended that it ‘should be downgraded
to that of the selection
panel’s messenger’: Rackley, above n 87, 86.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (579 KB)
PDF format (446 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter