URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2009/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goldsworthy, J --- "Justice Windeyer on the Engineers' Case" [2009] UMonashLRS 13
JUSTICE WINDEYER ON THE ENGINEERS' CASE
Goldsworthy
1 WINDEYER J'S DICTUM
In their majority judgment in
Work Choices Case
, five Justices of the High Court endorsed a well
known obiter dictum of Windeyer J in
Victoria v Commonwealth
Payroll Tax
dictum concerns the
, which famously repudiated the
doctrines of implied intergovernmental immunities and reserved state powers,
previously held by the
Griffith Court to be entailed by the federal principle
implicit in the basic structure of the
Constitution
The Court in
declared that both doctrines, and the reasoning on
which they were based, were erroneous. But Windeyer J disagreed with this.
said that he had never regarded the decision in
correction of antecedent errors or as the uprooting of heresy': it 'does not to
my mind mean that the original judges of
the High Court were wrong in their
understanding of what at the time of federation was believed to be the effect of
Constitution
and in reading it accordingly.' Rather, the decision
'was a consequence of developments that had occurred outside the law courts':
'in 1920 the
Constitution
was read in a new light, a light reflected from
events that had, over twenty years, led to a growing realisation that
Australians
were now one people and Australia one country and that national laws
might meet national needs'. 'In any country where the spirit
of the common law
holds sway the enunciation by courts of constitutional principles based on the
interpretation of a written
Constitution
may vary and develop in response to
changing circumstances.' He implied that the relevant circumstances had not
changed since
: 'To return today to the discarded theories would
indeed be an error and the adoption of a
This was not the reason given for its decision by the majority in
, which argued at length that the repudiated doctrines had
always been legally erroneous. It is not clear whether Windeyer J thought
some or all of the majority chose to conceal the real reasons for their
decision, or were ignorant of them because they operated
at a subconscious
level. In another well known assessment of the decision, which no doubt
influenced Windeyer J, Richard Latham seems
to have taken the former view, when
he said that 'its real ground is nowhere stated in the majority judgment', which
it been stated — would have been 'frankly a quasi-political
This real ground was supposedly the majority's opinion that the
Constitution
had been designed to create a nation; that during the First
World War that objective had been significantly advanced; that a merely
contractual view of the
Constitution
had become out of date; and that
'the times demanded' a new federal
relationship.
Suspicions about underlying motivations are difficult to prove. Professor
Goldring has expressed the opposite opinion, that the Griffith
Court had paid
'lip-service' to legal principle, and was dominated by 'their political, rather
than their legal socialisation', whereas
'Higgins and Isaacs never ceased to
look at the
Constitution
from the perspective of a
Windeyer J's
suggestion that Isaacs and Higgins JJ were heavily influenced by 'developments
that had occurred outside the law courts',
especially the rise of nationalism
during the War, overlooks their consistent opposition to the Griffith Court
doctrines in a series
of dissenting judgments starting in
Moreover, as Professor Sawer concluded in his detailed study of the interactions
of law and politics in the early years of the Commonwealth,
at the time
was decided, the majority political view was opposed to the
expansion of national powers: 'Hence in the post-war period, there was
dissociation between politics and constitutional
It is possible that, all along, Isaacs and Higgins JJ were primarily
motivated by their personal political views — Isaacs by
his centralising
nationalism, and Higgins by his social radicalism, favouring an expanded
Commonwealth industrial power — which
anticipated
developments outside the law courts. This may have been Professor Sawer's view,
although he thought it likely that it
was the logic of their arguments that won
over the other members of the majority in
Knox CJ, Rich and Starke JJ had been distinguished barristers and, unlike the
other early Justices, had no involvement in framing
Constitution
other political experience. They presumably approached the issues as lawyers
interpreting the constitutional text without preconceptions,
based on personal
experience and conviction, concerning the nature of the federation it was
intended to
Brian Galligan agreed with Sawer:
For Isaacs and Higgins the more literal methods of construction established by
served as a carefully chosen means to a preferred political
end. For the majority of judges, however, the method may well have been
for its own sake since it fitted with their legal experience and the orthodoxy
profession.
and Higgins JJ's motivations cannot be proved, and in the absence of convincing
evidence to the contrary, they are entitled
to the presumption that they were
sincere in asserting that the Griffith Court's doctrines were erroneous as a
matter of strict legal
principle. Of course, it is still possible to argue that
in this respect they were wrong — that those doctrines were not erroneous
— but that the decision in
should nevertheless be
applauded on the alternative ground that it was better suited to the changed
social and political circumstances
of its time. That is probably how Windeyer
J's dictum is best understood.
The dictum is approvingly cited so often that it has arguably become an
iconic statement of a pragmatic, 'evolutionary' understanding
of constitutional
meaning and interpretation. For many lawyers it expresses a mature,
sophisticated
no doubt regard a more 'legalistic' analysis as naive, pedantically formalistic,
or both. I respectfully dissent from
this assessment. I will show that the
dictum is inconsistent with some of Windeyer J's other stated opinions, and
therefore with
the constitutional orthodoxy that they
dictum should be repudiated, not celebrated. The Griffith Court doctrines should
be regarded as having been either right or wrong
as a matter of law, even though
it is difficult to decide the issue, which I will not in this article attempt to
Later in the same judgment, Windeyer J said that the only implications the
Court has authority to enforce are those that are truly
part of the
Constitution
: 'I would prefer not to say "making implications", because
our avowed task is simply the revealing or uncovering of implications
But if so, how can his observations about
just five pages
possibly be justified? Either the supposed implications that the
Griffith Court purported to find within the
Constitution
were really part
of it — 'already there' — or they were not. If they were not, then
the Court in
corrected an 'antecedent error'. If they were
really there, then the Court in
must have been in error to
repudiate them. Neither extrinsic social and political developments, nor the
High Court, can remove an
express limitation on legislative power from the
Constitution
. To do that, a formal amendment pursuant to
Constitution
is required. How, then, could either of them remove an
implied limitation? If implied limitations truly are part of the
Constitution
, as Windeyer J apparently believed, there can be no
difference in status between implied and express limitations. A referendum
be needed to remove one of either kind.
Can Windeyer J's views be rescued from incoherence? Three possibilities are
worth considering.
2 THE 'SPONTANEOUS MUTATION' THESIS
One possibility is that the meaning of a
constitution, express and implied, depends partly on the context in which it
operates, and
can therefore evolve in response to external social and political
developments. If so, then perhaps the supposed implications were
truly part of
Constitution
until some time before 1920, but then disappeared from
Constitution
, with the Court in
recognising but not
itself causing their disappearance. As Windeyer J said of the judicial role on
another occasion, 'discerning growth
is not the same thing as making
But this is a very odd view. It entails that the High Court was right when it
originally recognised these implications, and also
right when it repudiated them
in 1920. It also entails that Isaacs and Higgins JJ were wrong when they
initially dissented from the
Court's recognition of the
implications
— the required external social and political developments had not yet
occurred — but had become right by the time their
dissenting position won
majority support in 1920 (although not for the reasons they provided, but for
unstated and possibly unrecognised
reasons having to do with extra-legal
developments).
This peculiar transformation could have taken place only if the content of
Constitution
can somehow spontaneously mutate due to changes in
society. The possibility of such a spontaneous mutation is inconsistent with
of Windeyer J's views, that 'in the interpretation of the
Constitution
the connotation or connotations of its words should remain
constant. We are not to give words a meaning different from any meaning
they could have borne in
spontaneous mutation of the
Constitution
, due to changes in society,
could cause the disappearance of an implied implication that it previously
contained, then surely it
could also cause the meanings of its words to change.
Conversely, anyone who denies the latter possibility (as Windeyer J did) should
also deny the former. Moreover, if a spontaneous mutation in the meaning of the
Constitution
could cause an implied limitation to disappear, why could it
not also cause an express limitation to disappear? If implied and express
limitations are both truly part of a constitution, how could the former but not
the latter be liable to disappear as a result of
external social developments?
The very idea of express provisions spontaneously disappearing is, of course,
here is that the idea of genuine implications — ones that are truly part
Constitution
— spontaneously disappearing is equally
Professor Detmold has proposed an interpretation of Windeyer J's dictum
according to which the meaning of the
Constitution
is always 'in
movement', in that it evolves in response to social developments that the
founders intended the
Constitution
to foster, such as the gradual
advancement of Australian nationhood and independence. On this view, the meaning
Constitution
might initially reflect the founders' 'immediate
intentions', but then gradually grow apart from them, in order to facilitate
longer term
objectives.
it really likely that their 'immediate intentions' would have been inconsistent
with, and eventually have to give way to,
their longer term objectives? If, for
example, their longer term objectives included the development of a centralising
nationhood, it seems unlikely that their 'immediate intentions' would
have included implied prohibitions on Commonwealth legislation
governing State
instrumentalities or intruding into subject matters reserved to the States. Why
would they have intended to erect
these obstacles to the realisation of their
longer term objective? If, on the other hand, they did intend the Commonwealth
to be subject to such prohibitions, surely they must have intended to
constrain the centralising tendencies of any developing Australian
nationhood.
It therefore seems much more likely that they either did or did not intend
permanently to constrain Commonwealth legislative
powers (subject to the
possibility of a constitutional amendment), than that they intended to impose
constraints that would —
within a relatively short period of time —
spontaneously dissolve as their longer term objective was
It is notable that in contemporary constitutional theory, the 'spontaneous
mutation' thesis is sometimes repudiated even by those
who might have been
expected to promote it. For example, the pre-eminent legal philosopher Ronald
Dworkin has been harshly critical
of the theory called 'originalism', which
maintains that until it is amended a constitution continues to mean what it was
intended to mean. Yet he contemptuously rejects the notion that
constitutional provisions 'are chameleons which change their meaning
to the needs and spirit of new times' as 'hardly even
intelligible'.
Harvard Professor Laurence Tribe, another well known critic of originalism, also
emphatically denies that he regards the
United States
Constitution
something that "grows and changes" by some mystical kind of organic, morphing
The strange idea that the meaning of the
Constitution
spontaneously mutate (and that the judges may recognise but not cause the
mutation) is at best a fig leaf for the quite different
idea that the judges are
entitled to act creatively, and give it a new, more 'up-to-date' meaning. That
different idea will be discussed
in section 4.
3 THE 'INEVITABLE JUDICIAL CHOICE' THESIS
The second possibility is that it was simply unclear
whether or not the limitations in question were really implied by, and therefore
part of, the
Constitution
. The Griffith Court was neither clearly right
nor clearly wrong in recognising them, and the Court in
therefore at liberty to take a different view. Sir Kenneth Bailey put it thus:
'It is difficult, and probably futile, to say
that the current view is wrong,
and it is, in my own opinion, just as difficult to say that the former view is
wrong. There is ample
warrant for both, both in principle and upon
authority'.
Professor Zines endorses Windeyer J's dictum for this
But this suggestion must overcome several difficulties. For a start, it can
be forcefully argued that on this account Windeyer J is
still wrong: the Court
must have corrected an antecedent error, because such an
uncertain implication could not be regarded as a 'necessary' one as required
orthodox principles of interpretation.
Admittedly, the strength of this argument depends on what is meant by an
implication having to be 'necessary'. Two different kinds
of 'necessity' can be
found in the case law on implications, both statutory and
contractual.
One is a kind of 'psychological necessity': it concerns whether or not
interpreters are, as it were, compelled to acknowledge an
alleged implication
because it is so obvious as not to be reasonably deniable. This has been called
the 'obviousness
has sometimes been asked whether the court was 'necessarily driven' to the
conclusion that some term was
whether 'the force of the language in its surroundings carries such strength of
impression in one direction, that to entertain
the opposite view appears wholly
unreasonable.'
'officious bystander' test in contract law is possibly a version of this
approach: it requires that an implication must be so
obvious that the
contracting parties, had they been asked by an officious bystander whether it
was included, would have testily replied
conception of necessity must be satisfied, then a suggested implication whose
existence is quite unclear cannot satisfy it
— in which case
corrected an antecedent error.
The second kind is 'practical necessity' (or in contract law, 'business
efficacy'): it concerns whether or not an alleged implication
is practically
necessary to enable some or all of the provisions of a legal instrument achieve
their intended
might be called the 'practical efficacy' test. But if practical efficacy is the
conception of necessity that must be satisfied
for constitutional implications
— and High Court authority suggests that it
there is scope for uncertainty about a suggested implication, given that it
might be uncertain whether or not it is,
indeed, practically necessary for
express provisions to achieve their intended purposes, or what those intended
purposes are.
Most of us are, by now, 'realists' to this extent: we accept that when the
meaning of a legal text remains stubbornly unclear, after
all relevant legal
considerations (language, context, purpose, etc) have been taken into account,
judges have no alternative but
to choose, on extra-legal grounds such as justice
and public policy, which meaning to
relevant legal considerations leave the matter unresolved, legal arguments on
both sides being evenly balanced, the judges
must resort to an extra-legal
'tie-breaker'. They must resolve all disputes that are properly brought before
them: they cannot wash
their hands of a dispute and require the parties to fight
it out in the street. Therefore, if a stubborn ambiguity or other indeterminacy
in the meaning of a constitutional provision must be resolved in order to settle
a dispute, judicial choice on extra-legal grounds
is legitimate because there is
no alternative. Jeremy Kirk seems to interpret Windeyer J's dictum along these
lines, to mean that
'in making the inevitable choices involved in constitutional
interpretation judges are influenced by the evolution of Australian
society (as
well as by their own perceptions, preferences and
Could Windeyer J have believed that the Griffith Court's doctrines were
uncertain in the sense that (contrary to the opinions expressed
both by it, and
by the Court in
) it could not confidently be said either that
they were, or that they were not, practically necessary for the
Constitution
to achieve its intended purposes, because there were equally
strong arguments on both sides of the question; that therefore some
tie-breaker
was needed to resolve the issue; and that in effect (even though they did not
understand themselves in this way) the
Griffith Court, and the Court in
, were guided — with equal legitimacy — by different
tie-breakers, leading to different conclusions?
There are several reasons why this seems far-fetched. First, given the
principle of
stare decisis
, how could the Court in
been justified in repudiating very important and longstanding doctrines if they
were not demonstrably erroneous? That earlier
doctrines are deemed erroneous may
not be sufficient to warrant their overruling, but it does appear to be
necessary; indeed, it
has often been stated that they must be 'clearly' or
'manifestly'
course, the Court in
sought to demonstrate that the doctrines
it repudiated were demonstrably erroneous; but according to this hypothesis, it
to do so. If so, it was (again
Windeyer J) probably also
wrong to overrule the many precedents that established those doctrines.
Secondly, the possibility that legal arguments for and against the existence
of an implication might be evenly balanced is surely
very low, and unlikely to
have been realised in the case of these implications. Admittedly, this is
somewhat subjective: my own experience
is that, once the strongest arguments on
both sides of a legal disagreement have been set out, they rarely seem evenly
Thirdly, the assumption that a tie-breaker is required if arguments for and
against the existence of an implication are evenly balanced,
is dubious. The
conclusion that the express terms of a legal instrument are qualified by an
implication is a very serious one that
should not be lightly reached, due to the
risk of the instrument being rewritten rather than interpreted. The party
arguing in favour
of the implication should bear the burden of persuading the
court that it exists. As the majority in
put it: 'where the
affirmative terms of a stated power would justify an enactment, it rests upon
those who rely on some limitation
or restriction upon the power, to indicate it
Constitution
If the arguments for and against it are evenly balanced, that burden has not
been discharged, and the implication should not be recognised.
The Court is not
placed in a predicament similar to that created by an ambiguity, which must be
resolved one way or the other, with
no presumption either way. If no implication
can be shown to exist, the party who argued for it should lose.
Fourthly, and most importantly, there is nothing in Windeyer J's dictum that
supports this interpretation of his views. As we are
suggests that he meant to adopt a more radical position.
4 THE 'JUDICIAL UPDATE' THESIS
The third possibility is that genuine implications
(ones that, in Windeyer J's words, are 'already there') can legitimately be
Constitution
, and spurious ones (which are not already
there) can be added to it, by the exercise of a more robust kind of judicial
than that which is required to resolve indeterminacies in meaning.
The Court would be entitled to do this if it were authorised to
modernise the
Constitution
, in order to keep it abreast with social
developments, without any need for formal constitutional amendment. If so, the
legal meaning
Constitution
would be like the common law, which the
judges may creatively adapt to community needs and values.
There is strong evidence that this is indeed the best interpretation of
Windeyer J's position. One year after his judgment in the
Payroll Tax
, he provided a further explanation of his views. He said that the
decision in
a demonstration that in a country which has inherited the common law its
essential characteristic, a capacity to grow and develop
as the needs of men
change, can govern fundamental law, even the concepts that a written
constitution embodies. In 1901 many men
and women in Australia felt strong ties
with the Colony to which they belonged. They had not begun to think of
themselves as belonging
to the Commonwealth. But by 1920 a new generation had
arisen who thought of themselves as Australians and of Australia, not a State,
as the country to which they belonged. That public law, whether given by courts
or by legislators, should be responsive to public
sentiment is not surprising.
And since an entrenched constitution is not easily altered as other statutes
are, it is not surprising
that developing case law puts an ever growing body on
its bones which may come to be seen in unexpected new
dimensions.
suggests that courts in a common law system, when interpreting a written
constitution, have lawful authority to remove real implications
from it, or add
spurious ones to it, in response to changes in social 'needs' or 'public
sentiment', partly because such a constitution
is difficult to formally amend.
This is inconsistent with Windeyer J's opinion that 'in the interpretation of
Constitution
the connotation or connotations of its words should
remain constant. We are not to give words a meaning different from any meaning
which they could have borne in
in social needs or public sentiment can justify judges removing real
implications from, and adding spurious ones to, the
Constitution
can surely justify judges changing the meanings of its express terms. Changing
the meanings of express terms is a less drastic
exercise of judicial creativity
than adding or deleting terms. There cannot be a good reason to prohibit the
former but permit the
It should be acknowledged that the courts do sometimes add spurious
implications to legal instruments. I have argued elsewhere that
the obviousness
test should be preferred to the practical efficacy test as the test for genuine
implications. Since it is possible
for a provision that is essential to the
practical efficacy of a legal instrument to have been omitted due to any number
of possible
mistakes by its drafters, its practical efficacy cannot by itself
show that it was included by implication. Sometimes, what we have
written turns out to be deficient: genuine implications do not magically spring
up to protect us from our
cases, therefore, the practical efficacy test really serves to justify the
judicial repair or rectification of legal instruments,
to save them from
drafting omissions that would otherwise prove fatal to their efficacy.
This may explain the idiosyncratic legal terminology that describes terms
being 'implied into' or 'read into' legal instruments. Terms
that are genuinely
inferred from
implied into
it: the latter are oxymoronic expressions that, in trying to
have it both ways, defy ordinary English. They presumably function as
euphemisms, by blurring the distinction between the discovery of genuine
implications, and the insertion of spurious ones. If a court
is really inserting
terms into an instrument, it should say
In the case of
a statute, this is consistent with constitutional orthodoxy, provided that its
intended purpose is obvious and the
court alters its meaning only to ensure that
it achieves that purpose. If so, no damage is done either to the principle of
legislative
supremacy, because the court is guided by the legislature's purpose,
or to the rule of law, because that purpose is obvious to reasonable
these cases, Windeyer J's statement that the courts merely reveal implications
that are 'already there' is somewhat naive,
and must be
But such a revision could not vindicate his dictum in the
Payroll Tax
as subsequently elaborated one year later. The practical efficacy test
for 'necessity' is strictly confined. There is a qualitative
difference between
adding to a legal instrument a term that is essential to its practical efficacy,
and adding a term that, in the
opinion of the judge, will keep it abreast with
changes in 'public sentiment' or extraneous social 'needs'. It is also difficult
to see how an implication that is necessary to the practical efficacy of an
instrument could disappear or be removed due to such
Admittedly, whether or not a term is practically necessary for some or all of
the provisions of a legal instrument to achieve their
purposes depends on what
those purposes are. If the purposes of the instrument could change, as a result
of extrinsic social developments,
then a term that was originally necessary for
its practical efficacy might become unnecessary, and vice versa. This would be
if the purposes of the
Constitution
are not its originally
intended purposes (as modified by subsequent amendments), but whatever a
majority of the Australian people
at any particular time believe its purposes to
be. Perhaps this was Windeyer J's view: that the rise of Australian nationalism
caused most Australians to attribute new purposes to the
Constitution
, which superseded some of its original ones. That might
explain why he denied 'that the original judges of the High Court were wrong
their understanding of what at the time of federation was believed to be the
effect of the
Constitution
and in reading it
accordingly.'
was generally believed to be 'the effect of the
Constitution
changed, and what was needed to ensure that it had its effect had also
consequently changed.
This is an unorthodox and unappealing view of the purposes and implications
of legal instruments. Implications depend on some ingredient
in addition to the
words of the instrument, which is usually taken to be some purpose, or implicit
intention, discernible within
it. But surely this must be found within its 'text
and structure', understood in the historical context of its
judges could attribute to a constitution whatever new purposes they think a
majority of their fellow citizens currently believe
it has (assuming the judges
are capable of distinguishing these from the purposes they themselves would
prefer it to have), they
would have power to make sweeping constitutional
changes through pseudo-interpretation. If they could 'discover' in a
constitution
whatever implications are practically necessary for it to achieve
its purposes, and these purposes could change according to the
perceptions of contemporary values, then in effect they could add to the
Constitution
anything at all that is practically necessary to fulfil
their perceptions of contemporary values — without any formal amendment
They could also remove previously recognised implications that were and remain
practically necessary to fulfil the
Constitution's
originally intended
purposes, on the ground that those purposes have become obsolete. The people
would not need to be consulted in
a referendum, and asked whether they really
did believe that the
Constitution
should fulfil the supposed new purpose,
or whether, on reflection, they really did want added to it the new terms that
are necessary
for it to do so. That surely cannot be right. What the Canadian
Supreme Court rightly said of legislation is just as true of constitutions:
'Purpose is a function of the intent of those who drafted and enacted the
legislation at the time, and not of any shifting
In explaining his views a year after the
Payroll Tax Case
, Windeyer J
went on to add these qualifications:
new needs as well as new things may be met by old words. Of course none of that
means that an individual judge is free to change
the law, either in its
doctrines or the denotation of words, according to some view of his own of what
it ought to be. Judicial idiosyncrasy
is not to be legitimated by being called
sociological response. The capacity for growth that is inherent in the common
law may produce
changes in the manner in which its doctrines are applied in
particular circumstances. But discerning growth is not the same thing
gives rise to further puzzlement. It is hard to see how the decision in
amounted merely to 'discerning growth' in inherited legal
principles, rather than 'making changes' — indeed, quite radical ones
5 CONCLUSION
It is impossible to resist the conclusion that
Windeyer J's views on these issues lacked coherence. Given his other stated
which affirmed constitutional orthodoxy, his famous dictum cannot be
regarded as expressing a mature, sophisticated wisdom. In that
context, it is
illogical. Justice Heydon has remarked that
despite Windeyer J's unquestioned greatness, there is an inconsistency in his
judgments on the present question, and sometimes ambiguity
within a single
judgment. In part this is because he was a pioneer, often an unconscious one, of
modern theories of progressive interpretation
in an age when originalist
may be right. An alternative possibility is that Windeyer J simply adopted
Richard Latham's assessment of
without adequate reflection on its compatibility with his (Windeyer J's) other
Of course, it could be argued that if the famous dictum is inconsistent with
Windeyer J's other, more orthodox, opinions, so much
the worse for them. Its
wise pragmatism exposes their naivety and pedantic formalism. The lesson should
be that, in response to social
and political developments, the Court may
legitimately change the meanings of the words of the
Constitution
genuine implications from it, and add spurious implications to it. The Court
should openly espouse an 'evolutionary' or 'progressive'
theory of the meaning
Constitution
. Something like this might be Kirby J's response to
my argument. He has cited Windeyer J's dictum to support his often stated thesis
that the meaning of the
Constitution
evolves in response to contemporary
The final puzzle is why the majority in
Work Choices
endorse the dictum, given that this seems tantamount to endorsing Kirby J's
approach to constitutional interpretation,
and repudiating the more orthodox
approach that several of them (Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Heydon JJ in particular)
have adopted in other
Professor Zines' surprise to find them approving the
the following inference:
The approval of this passage suggests that the demand of the Court in recent
years that primacy be given to the text and structure
Constitution
is not simply based on the principle that that is the correct legal way to
construe a constitution, but rather it is correct because
of social and
political considerations that required the
Constitution
to be read 'in a
that really be what the
Work Choices
majority meant? If so, then future
judges will be free to reject the current emphasis on text and structure, and
Constitution
a radically novel construction, if they believe
that relevant social and political conditions have, once again, changed.
Professor of
Law, Faculty of Law, Monash University. Correspondence to <
jeff.goldsworthy@law.monash.edu.au
Wales v Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 52
(2006) 229 CLR 1
, 119 (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Heydon and Crennan JJ) ('
Work Choices
Commonwealth
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353
, 396–7 (Windeyer J) ('
Amalgamated
Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
(1920) 28 CLR 129
Payroll Tax
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353
Richard Latham,
The Law and the Commonwealth
(1970) 564.
John Goldring,
'The Path to
' in Michael Coper and George Williams (eds),
How Many Cheers for Engineers?
(1997) 1, 39.
Baxter v Commissioners of Taxation (NSW)
[1907] HCA 76
(1907) 4 CLR 1087.
This point is
made in Stephen Gageler, 'Foundations of Australian Federalism and the Role
of Judicial Review'
Federal Law Review
, 181–2; Sir
Anthony Mason, 'The High Court of Australia: A Personal Impression of its First
[2003] MelbULawRw 33
Melbourne University Law Review
Geoffrey Sawer,
Australian Federal Politics and Law 1901–1929
(1956) 329.
Australian Federalism in the Courts
(1967) 128.
Goldsworthy, 'Australia: Devotion to Legalism' in Jeffrey Goldsworthy (ed),
Interpreting Constitutions, A Comparative Study
(2006) 106, 121.
The Politics of the High Court
(1987) 102. See also Jeffrey
Goldsworthy, 'Australia: Devotion to Legalism' in Jeffrey Goldsworthy (ed),
Interpreting Constitutions: A Comparative Study
(2006) 106,
It is said to
express 'a more sophisticated view' in Gageler, above n
I previously
pointed this out in Jeffrey Goldsworthy, 'Originalism in Constitutional
Interpretation'
[1997] FedLawRw 1
Federal Law Review
My views are
expressed in Jeffrey Goldsworthy, 'Australia: Devotion to Legalism', above n
[1971] HCA 16
(1970) 122 CLR 353
, 402 (approved in
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 186 CLR 140
, 168–70 (Brennan CJ), 184 (Dawson J), 202
(Toohey J)).
Windeyer, 'Some Aspects of Australian Constitutional Law' (Speech delivered at
the J A Weir Memorial Lecture, Edmonton,
13–14 March 1972), 38 (for
the full quote and further discussion see the text to n 37 below).
Commissioners of Taxation (NSW)
[1907] HCA 76
(1907) 4 CLR 1087.
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; Ex parte Association of
Professional Engineers
[1959] HCA 47
(1959) 107 CLR 208
, 267; see also
Bonser v La
[1969] HCA 31
(1969) 122 CLR 177
One referee
asked how this proposition is consistent with
Constitution
The answer is that
is still in the
Constitution
— it has not
disappeared. That it is no longer used is beside the point.
Detmold, 'Original Intentions and the Race Power'
, 244–5, 250–1. For an earlier and somewhat different
version of this argument see Michael Detmold, 'Australian Law: Federal
[1991] SydLawRw 4
Sydney Law Review
The general
idea that the founders intended the High Court to adopt a 'progressive' or
'evolutionary' interpretive methodology is
refuted in Greg Craven, 'Heresy as
Orthodoxy: Were the Founders Progressivists?'
[2003] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law
Dworkin, 'Comment' in Antonin Scalia (ed),
A Matter of Interpretation:
Federal Courts and the Law
(1997) 115, 122. Whether or not this coheres with
his rejection of originalism is debatable: for an argument that Dworkin is
a kind of originalist, see Jeffrey Goldsworthy, 'Dworkin as an
Originalist'
Constitutional Commentary
Tribe, 'Comment' in Scalia, above n 22, 73.
Sir Kenneth
Bailey, 'The Working of the
Constitution
Since Federation' in Garnet Vere Portus
Studies in the Australian
Constitution
(1933) 23, 44.
Leslie Zines,
The High Court and the
Constitution
Discussed in
Jeffrey Goldsworthy, 'Implications in Language, Law and the
Constitution
Geoffrey Lindell (ed),
Future Directions in Australian Constitutional
(1994) 150, 168–70. See also Elisabeth Peden,
Good Faith in the
Performance of Contracts
(2003) 60–71.
Goldsworthy,
'Implications in Language, Law and the
Constitution
, 168; Peden, above n
[1891] UKLawRpKQB 154
[1891] 2 QB 488
, 494 (Kay LJ), quoted with approval by Lord
Atkinson, speaking for the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in
[1908] UKLawRpAC 58
[1908] AC 477
, 482. See also
[1910] HCA 27
(1910) 10 CLR 560
, 586 (Isaacs J) and H K Lucke, 'Ad Hoc
Implications in Written Contracts'
[1973] AdelLawRw 3
Adelaide Law Review
Commercial Banking Co of Sydney Ltd
[1917] HCA 67
Goldsworthy,
'Implications in Language, Law and the
Constitution
, 161; Peden, above n
The version
found in contract law is called the 'business efficacy' test: see Joseph Starke,
Nicholas Seddon and M P Ellinghaus,
Cheshire & Fifoot's Law of
(6th Australian ed, 1992) 212–13. As for statutes, see
Slipper Island Resort Ltd v Minister of Works & Development
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106
135 (Mason CJ), cited with approval in
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
, 168–9 (Brennan CJ), 231 (McHugh J);
Legal Services Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
(2005) 224 CLR 322
, 409 (Gummow J),
Carr v Western Australia
[2007] HCA 47
(2007) 232 CLR 138
, 145 (Gleeson CJ).
proposition is denied by Ronald Dworkin, who maintains that the law is so rich
in underlying principles that it never fails
to provide an answer to a legal
dispute: see Ronald Dworkin,
Taking Rights Seriously
(1977) and Ronald
Law's Empire
(1986). On his view, Windeyer J's dictum must
surely be erroneous: in 1920, the implied constitutional doctrines that were
must have been either right or wrong as a matter
of law, with no room for judicial choice.
Jeremy Kirk,
'Constitutional Interpretation and a Theory of Evolutionary Originalism'
Federal Law Review
Gian Boeddu
and Richard Haigh, 'Terms of Convenience: Examining Constitutional Overrulings
by the High Court'
[2003] FedLawRw 5
Federal Law Review
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
(1920) 28 CLR 129
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission; Ex parte Association of
Professional Engineers
[1959] HCA 47
(1959) 107 CLR 208
, 267; see also
Bonser v La
[1969] HCA 31
(1969) 122 CLR 177
Goldsworthy,
'Implications in Language, Law and the
Constitution
Chief Justice
James Spigelman denies that terms can be legitimately added to statutes, and
disapproves of the expression 'reading
into' because it suggests the opposite:
see the lucid summary of views he has expressed in several cases, in his
Statutory Interpretation and Human Rights
(2008) chapter 3,
possible that his carefully chosen words convey a more subtle message than is
first apparent? He said: 'I would prefer
not to say "making implications",
because our avowed task is simply the revealing or uncovering of implications
that are already
Payroll Tax Case
[1971] HCA 16
(1970) 122 CLR 353
, 402, quoted
at n 15 above. Could he have intended this to imply: although 'I would prefer
not to say' that we make implications,
we sometimes do; and although our
'avowed' task is simply to reveal already existing implications, that is not
always our real task?
I think not.
[1971] HCA 16
(1970) 122 CLR 353
terminology emphasised in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
and subsequent cases: see below n 50.
See Jeffrey
Goldsworthy, 'Interpreting the
Constitution
in its Second Century'
[2000] MelbULawRw 27
Melbourne University Law Review
Drug Mart Ltd
1985 CANLII 69
[1985] 1 SCR 295
See Justice J
D Heydon, 'Theories of Constitutional Interpretation: A Taxonomy' (2007, Winter)
Bar News (NSW)
See above n
Governor, Goulburn Correctional Centre; Ex parte Eastman
(1999) 200 CLR 322,
355 [87]. For criticism of that thesis see Goldsworthy, 'Interpreting the
Constitution
in its Second Century', above n
Those cases
Re Wakim; Ex parte McNally
(1999) 198 CLR 511 (Gleeson CJ and
Singh v Commonwealth
[2004] HCA 43
(2004) 222 CLR 322 (Gleeson
XYZ v Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 25
(2006) 227 CLR 532 (Heydon
v Electoral Commissioner
(2007) 233 CLR 162 (Gleeson
CJ, Hayne and Heydon
JJ). For a more recent discussion of these issues, see Jeffrey Goldsworthy,
'Original Meanings and Contemporary
Understandings in Constitutional
Interpretation' in H P Lee and Peter Gerangelos (eds),
Constitutional
Advancement in a Frozen Continent
Leslie Zines,
'The High Court and the
Constitution
[2007] UNSWLawJl 8
University of New
South Wales Law Journal
High Court and the
Constitution
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (217 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter