URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:59:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Forbes, Marissa --- "A Comment on Plaintiff M61/2010E: Are Independent Contractors Officers of the Commonwealth'?" [2023] WAStuLawRw 1; (2023) 6 Western Australian Student Law Review 1
A COMMENT ON PLAINTIFF M61/2010E: ARE INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS ‘OFFICERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH’?
A COMMENT ON
PLAINTIFF M61/2010E
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS ‘OFFICERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH’?
MARISSA FORBES
JUDICIAL REVIEW—ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISION-MAKING—EXECUTIVE POWER—OFFICER OF THE
COMMONWEALTH—OUTSOURCING—INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTORS
Whether an independent contractor may be considered an ‘officer of
the Commonwealth’ per s 75(v) of the Australian
Constitution
issue the High Court appears reluctant to resolve. This hesitancy was exhibited
in Plaintiff M61/2010E v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 41
(2010) 243 CLR 319
where the High Court avoided fraught questions of executive power and
administrative decision-making. After
discussing the context and implications of
M61, this article explores what the High Court should consider when the issue of
outsourcing
re-emerges. Given the intricacies of modern government and the
Federal Government’s increased reliance on outsourcing, it is
that the High Court would embrace independent contractors within the scope of
However, it appears this legal issue will only be resolved if no other
legal principle can be applied to decide the matter at hand.
I INTRODUCTION
Australia’s first Prime Minister, Sir Edmund Barton, believed s 75(v)
Constitution
would serve an accountability function by
ensuring judicial review would protect against arbitrary exaction of
Section 75(v)
entrenches a
minimum standard of judicial
stipulating that the High
Court of Australia has original jurisdiction in all matters in which a writ of
mandamus or prohibition
or an injunction is sought against an officer of the
Commonwealth.
Defining and
characterising the term an ‘officer of the Commonwealth’ has not
been subjected to substantive consideration
by the High Court. In particular,
the High Court has exhibited reluctance in deciding whether an independent
contractor may be considered
an officer of the Commonwealth for the purposes of
This hesitancy was
exhibited in
Plaintiff M61/2010E v Commonwealth
where the High Court left the issue open ‘for another
sits within
a corpus of jurisprudence which reveals the High Court’s general
disinclination to grapple with issues of executive
authority, particularly in
the context of the privatisation of administrative decision‑making. The
decisions in the 10 years
show that the High Court is no closer
to ruling on this issue.
may reflect a desire to wait for the issue of outsourcing to arise unaccompanied
by other constitutional issues requiring
assessment. However, the increased
reliance by the Australian Government on both the outsourcing and privatisation
of administrative
decision-making calls for greater clarity on the meaning of an
officer of the Commonwealth.
II THE BACKDROP TO
The High Court first adverted to the minimum provision of judicial review in
Plaintiff S157/2002 v Commonwealth
observing that
is a means of ensuring officers of the Commonwealth
‘neither exceed nor reject any jurisdiction to which the law confers on
This was confirmed
v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
where attempts to implement absolute time limits for judicial review
applications were found to be constitutionally
indicated that
, as a minimum constitutional provision, offers
‘practical, and not merely theoretical, access to the High Court’s s
Resultantly, attempts to shield administrative decisions from judicial review
will eventually run aground on
Officers of the Commonwealth
The term ‘officer of the Commonwealth’ has generally been
interpreted broadly.
prevailing approach of Isaacs J
Murray; Ex parte
Commonwealth
suggests there
must be some connection between the Commonwealth and the person against whom an
order under
Those with no
link, or an insufficient link, are not considered to be officers of the
Commonwealth.
definition is all the more relevant at a time when the executive increasingly
relies upon the outsourcing of administrative
decision-making. However, the
arguably falters where a decision-maker is not clearly an
officer of the Commonwealth but rather is appointed by the Commonwealth
undertake administrative functions. Several decisions from the 1980s and 1990s
suggest employees of ‘arms-length’
statutory corporations (such as
the Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Commission)
generally lie beyond the reach of
However, increased
outsourcing and corporatisation of administrative decision-making reveals the
age of Isaacs J’s characterisation
of what constitutes an officer of the
Commonwealth.
characterisation, formulated in in the early 1900s, is now incompatible with the
operation of modern government.
Political and Legal Background to M61
An increase in the number of unauthorised boat arrivals by asylum seekers in
the late 1990s resulted in a rise in legal issues involving
administrative
decision-making.
Government’s response to the ‘Tampa Crisis’ in 2001 and
subsequent ‘Pacific Solution’, an
off‑shore processing regime,
attempted to deprive asylum seekers of access to judicial review by excising
certain off‑shore
territories from the definition of the migration
The decision in
Kirk v Industrial Court
acknowledged the
existence of an integrated national judicial structure. The High Court held that
the right to appeal from state
Supreme Courts to the High Court supported a
constitutionally entrenched place for state Supreme Courts within the national
It was considered
that any lesser level of protection of state Supreme Courts could create
‘islands of power’ immune
from supervision or
The decision in
invites the question of whether other ‘islands of power’
require input from the High Court. Professor Matthew Groves suggests,
article ‘Outsourcing and
Constitution
’, that if the
apparent disparity between the level of constitutional protection afforded to
state and federal courts is thought
to be ‘too great to tolerate,’
then the same considerations should apply to the use of independent contractors
for administrative
The decision in
indicates that the High Court will not countenance
legislation that seeks to shield non-judicial decisions from its supervisory
Yet, the High Court has not seized any opportunity to expand its
supervisory jurisdiction to include decisions made by independent
contractors of
the Commonwealth.
AN OVERVIEW
concerned a complex and fragmented administrative arrangement in
determining the plaintiffs’ eligibility for protection visas.
plaintiffs were Sri Lankan nationals who had been detained on Christmas Island
pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
’). The plaintiffs’ applications for protection visas were
processed in an ‘unusual two-stage
to determine
whether Australia owed them protection
obligations.
An officer of the
Department of Immigration and Citizenship conducted a Refugee Status Assessment
(‘RSA’) which concluded
that the plaintiffs were not persons to whom
Australia owed protection
obligations.
Following the
Department’s decision, the plaintiffs sought an ‘Independent Merits
Review’ (‘IMR’).
The IMR was conducted by a private company,
Wizard People Pty Ltd
(‘Wizard’).
produced the same unfavourable outcome as the
Assessors and reviewers for the RSA and IMR were not authorised to grant
visas; rather, they made recommendations to the Minister
for Immigration and
Citizenship.
The Minister could
then exercise a non-compellable and non-delegable discretion under
Migration Act
to allow for an application for a protection
plaintiffs instituted proceedings in the original jurisdiction of the High Court
against the Commonwealth, the Minister, the
assessor and
The High Court dealt with various issues including procedural fairness,
statutory versus non‑statutory power, and the lawfulness
The Commonwealth
argued that the individuals conducting RSA and IMR were not bound by
requirements of procedural fairness because
they were conducted under a
‘non-statutory power to
The High Court
rejected this view and unanimously found the requirements of procedural fairness
applied, and had been breached in
each of the plaintiff’s case.
After making this finding, the High Court thought
it unnecessary to consider whether the Wizard employee was an officer of the
Commonwealth
The High Court had already established undoubted
given the Commonwealth,
Minister, and Departmental Officer were parties to the action. As such, the High
Court did not need to find
pertaining to the
Wizard employee. Hence, the High Court avoided the question of whether decisions
made by private, non-governmental
agents are reviewable under
IV IMPLICATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS SINCE
Political Implications and Developments
When the decision in
was handed down in 2010, it was considered
the ‘latest in a series of matters in which the Australian courts have
attempts to restrict judicial oversight of immigration
decision-making’.
Following the decision, RSA and IMR processes were
with a new scheme that
promised greater procedural fairness and access to
Consequently, offshore
applicants were granted further
rights to procedural fairness and access
to judicial review as a result of
—an outcome not anticipated by
the Government.
The decision in
was a significant step forward for asylum seekers’ rights, and
a significant step backwards in the Government’s case for
processing.
Legal Implications and Developments
The corpus of jurisprudence since 2010 reveals minimal progress and the High
Court’s continuing hesitancy to reconsider the
scope the meaning of an
officer of the Commonwealth per
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v
considered the review
of a visa application by a senior social worker at Centrelink.
Justices Flick, Foster, and Katzmann referred
in finding that
the inquiries of an independent body contracted to undertake administrative
reviews were subject to requirements
of procedural
This finding
‘raises the possibility that the independent expert is effectively an
officer of the
Commonwealth’.
appears to be the closest an Australian Court has come to acknowledging that an
independent contractor may be considered
an officer of the Commonwealth.
The Full Court of the Federal Court acknowledged in
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v
that whether or not an
independent contractor is an officer of the Commonwealth is an ‘open
In that case,
Mansfield, Gilmour and Foster JJ thought the title of an IMR was ‘somewhat
misleading’,
‘reviewer’, properly understood, is not independent of the
On this view, an
independent contractor would not be considered an officer of the Commonwealth,
as any jurisdictional error would
be fielded back to the Minister. By contrast,
the Federal
Court applied
in finding an officer of the Commonwealth is a person appointed, paid,
responsible to, and removable by the
Commonwealth.
Therefore, an
independent contractor who fulfils those requirements could reasonably be
considered an officer of the Commonwealth
for the purposes of
Court’s reluctance to deal with matters of executive authority re-emerged.
The plaintiff in
was a Bangladeshi national who entered Australia's
migration zone as an unauthorised maritime arrival and was detained at a
Processing Centre on Nauru. Chief Justice French, Kiefel, and
Nettle JJ and Keane J found the plaintiff was being detained by the
government, rather than the Australian Commonwealth
government.
constitutional limitations on the Commonwealth government’s power to
detain the transferees were not
Justice Gageler,
in the minority, held that Wilson Security (the sub‑contracted service
provider for the Regional Processing
Centre) staff had acted as ‘de facto
agents of the Australian government’ in physically detaining the
His Honour did not
consider whether a de facto agent is, or is not, an officer of the Commonwealth.
Overall, the judgment tended
to avoid fraught questions about executive power
and the corporatisation of administrative decisions. In some ways, this was a
opportunity to address the question of whether a private entity can be
considered an officer of the Commonwealth under
However, perhaps
understandably,
the High Court
appears reluctant to decide on this question until a matter arises requiring
direct consideration of the issue.
This reluctance may be explained
by the two avenues by which the High Court could decide on such matters; first,
the possibility of
extending the definition of an officer of the Commonwealth,
which is at odds with government interference; and second, leaving the
unresolved, which provides no clarity for future cases. With this in mind, it is
clear to see the challenges faced by the
High Court in deciding cases involving
the exercise of executive power.
In 2018, Thawley J of the Federal Court heard the matter of
applicant sought damages for false imprisonment from the Commonwealth and the
company contracted to operate the relevant
detention centre, Serco Australia Pty
Ltd (‘Serco’). Two issues were raised: first, whether a detention
centre established
Migration Act
may be operated by
and second, whether the
detention by Serco impermissibly involved the exercise of executive power by
persons other than officers
of the Commonwealth, contrary to
Justice Thawley
found on the facts that it was
an officer of the Commonwealth (and not
Serco) who detained the
His Honour stated
‘it is not necessary to decide [on the question of officers of the
Commonwealth] ... given my earlier
conclusions’,
side-stepped the need to define the term ‘officer of the
Commonwealth’ under
and avoided implementing
boundaries on the privatisation or outsourcing of administrative
decision‑making.
Although Australian courts will not tolerate the Commonwealth shielding
administrative processes from judicial review, these recent
decisions reveal a
tendency for the courts to identify an alternative legal basis upon which to
decide a matter involving independent
contractors.
Court’s continued avoidance of this issue is concerning given the
increasing extent to which the Commonwealth outsources
administrative processes
to unelected officials.
Datafin—Is there a place for the ‘public
function’ test in Australia?
The English ‘public function’
test, derived from
Panel on Takeovers and Mergers; Ex Parte Datafin p/c
established that the extent of supervisory review should be assessed by
reference to the nature of the power being exercised, not
just the identity of
the decision‑maker.
enables the supervisory jurisdiction of courts to encompass private entities
whose activities are sufficiently public to warrant
the imposition of public law
At the time of writing,
has not gained much traction in
the majority
of the High Court did not address the question of whether public law remedies
may be granted against private
Justice Kirby,
dissenting, acknowledged the usefulness of the
principle in
analysing whether particular decisions are of a sufficiently administrative
nature as to warrant an amenability to judicial
Justice Kyrou
suggested in
CECA Institute Pty Ltd and Another v Australian Council for
Private Education and
principle is ‘essential in enabling superior courts to
continue to perform their vital role of protecting citizens from abuses
exercise of powers of a governmental
However, it is doubtful whether
could be suitably integrated
into our constitutional system. The
test would skew the focus of
from the identity of the
decision‑maker (officers of the Commonwealth) to the nature of the power
being exercised. It may also
present difficulties for the High Court in
delineating public from private
In any case, deciding
whether a private entity has a public function has no bearing unless it shows
the body is also an officer of
the Commonwealth.
V THE UNANSWERED QUESTION
Discussion thus far invites the question of what approach the High Court
ought to take in future cases like
. It is unlikely Isaacs J’s
characterisation, in
constitutes an officer of the Commonwealth—being a person with a
sufficient connection to the Commonwealth—will
withstand the intricacies
of modern government. Michael Taggart has criticised the High Court’s
decision in
the High Court has ‘failed to grapple with the changing nature of
government’.
‘changing nature’ is evident in the increasing fusion between the
legislature and the executive, the increase in
private contracting, and public
expectations that government processes be run expeditiously. Given the
increasing interconnection
between public and private spheres, the High Court
will likely soon be called on to redefine the scope of
Further, Professor Groves suggests the High Court should recognise that
people can ‘wear two
It follows that a
person conducting an IMR may work in a private sector but be performing a
function on behalf of a government official.
Such a connection should be
sufficient to enliven the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court. This
approach would be fundamental
in ensuring there are fewer ‘islands of
beyond the reach of
the High Court. The High Court’s avoidance of reviewing matters of
‘public administration in private
will not withstand
the test of time and may lead to unfavourable outcomes, such as decision-makers
acting ultra vires and limited
access to judicial review. It would therefore be
prudent for the High Court to consider this issue when the next opportunity
to ensure the central tenets of the rule of law are upheld.
Consistent with Sir Edmund Barton’s view on the purpose of
accountability is
paramount when determining whether an administrative decision should fall within
the supervisory jurisdiction of
the High Court. Principles of the rule of law
and accountability dictate that the decisions of private contractors—who
granted independence in conducting reviews and making
recommendations—should be directly subjected to judicial review. In the
context of accountability,
justifies independent
contractors being considered officers of the Commonwealth. Contrastingly, James
Stellios posited that the line
of accountability remains intact because
‘the ultimate decision rests with the
This suggests
it is not necessary to answer the question of whether an independent contractor
should be considered an officer of
the Commonwealth as, ultimately, the Minister
responsible for outsourcing will be held accountable. The better view is that
all parties
who are involved in a jurisdictional error be held responsible for
their actions (or inaction), with regard to a certain administrative
VI CONCLUSION
Sir Edmund Barton remarked that the inclusion of
Constitution
‘cannot do harm, and may protect us from a great
Chief Justice
Robert French has since commented that this was a ‘masterly
understatement’,
significance placed on
in safeguarding the High Court’s
the High Court will
not tolerate attempts to shield administrative decisions from its jurisdiction.
Despite over 10 years having
passed since the decision in
down, the question of whether an independent contractor may be considered an
officer of the Commonwealth remains unanswered.
Recent jurisprudence on the matter indicates that courts have attempted to
resolve a matter relating to the privatisation of administrative
decision‑making on an alternative legal
as opposed to responding
to the issue of private contractors under
The increase of
outsourcing governmental functions into private hands is a burgeoning area of
law. It will soon be crucial for the
High Court to accept and embrace modern
forms of public administration, including greater interconnection with private
However, it remains to be seen when the day will come for the High
Court to tackle these issues.
Bachelor of Arts, Juris Doctor
(University of Western Australia).
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention,
Melbourne, 4 March 1898,
1876 (Edmund Barton) (‘
Constitutional Debates
’). See also
Hazeldell Ltd v Commonwealth
[1924] HCA 36
(1924) 34 CLR 442
, 446 (Isaacs ACJ);
Bodruddaza v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2007] HCA 14
228 CLR 651
, 668–9 (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Heydon and
Crennan JJ) (‘
Plaintiff S157/2002 v
Commonwealth
[2003] HCA 2
(2003) 211 CLR 476
, 513 [103] (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby
and Hayne JJ) (‘
Constitution
Plaintiff M61/2010E v
Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 41
(2010) 243 CLR 319
Ibid 345 [51] (French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v Maman
[2012] FCAFC 13
(2012) 200 FCR 30
Broadbent v Medical Board of Queensland
[2011] FCA 980
(2011) 195 FCR 438
Plaintiff M68/2015 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] HCA 1
(2016) 257 CLR 42
Tanioria v Commonwealth of Australia [No 3]
(2018) 266 FCR 610
Ibid 513–14 (Gaudron,
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Ibid 672 (Gleeson CJ,
Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
James Forsaith,
‘Graham and its Implications’ (Edited Conference Paper, Australian
Institute of Administrative Law National
Conference, 27 September 2018)
Re Refugee Review
Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
, 140 (Hayne J). See, eg,
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Whybrow
[1910] HCA 33
R v Murray; Ex parte Commonwealth
[1916] HCA 58
(1916) 22 CLR 437 (Isaacs
James Stellios,
‘Exploring the Purposes of
Section 75(v)
Constitution
[2011] UNSWLawJl 3
(2011) 34(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
As such, a governor of a
state or a judge of an inferior state court purporting to exercise federal
officers of the Commonwealth: see, eg,
Governor of the State of South Australia
[1907] HCA 31
(1907) 4 CLR 1497
13). See further Duncan Kerr, ‘The Red Queen’s Law: Judicial Review
and Offshore Processing after Plaintiff S157/2002’
[2007] UTSLawRw 4
of Technology Sydney Law Review
Aboriginal Land Council
(NSW) v Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island Commission
(Federal Court of
Australia, Hill J, 30 August 1995);
Re Waterhouse v Australian Broadcasting
(Federal Court of Australia, Wilcox J, 21 October 1987) [10];
Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd v National Companies and Securities Commission
(1986) 67 ALR 545
Vietnam Veterans’ Affairs Association
of Australia NSW Branch Inc v Cohen
(1996) 70 FCR 419
Post Office
Agents Association Ltd v Australian Postal Commission
(1989) 84 ALR 563
Businessworld Computers Pty Ltd v Australian Telecommunications
[1988] FCA 206
(1988) 82 ALR 499
, 500. See also Matthew Groves,
‘Outsourcing and
Constitution
(2011) 22(1)
, 4; Aaron Moss, ‘Tiptoeing through the Tripwires: Recent
Developments in Jurisdictional Error’
(2016) 44(3)
Federal Law
Groves (n 17) 4. See also
Domestic Trading Pty Ltd v AWB Ltd
[2003] HCA 35
(2003) 216 CLR 277
’), where the High Court considered the amenability of
corporations to judicial review.
[2001] FCA 1329.
See also Mary Crock and Daniel Ghezelbash,
‘Due Process and Rule of Law as Human Rights: The High Court and the
Processing of Asylum Seekers’
(2011) 18(2)
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
Kerr (n 16) 65.
Kirk v Industrial Court
(2010) 239 CLR 531 (‘
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Ibid 581 (French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Groves (n 17) 4.
332–3 [1]–[2] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and
333 [3] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Ibid 333 [3], 344–5
343 [44], 344
[49] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
333 [2] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
[14]–[28] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell
347–8 [61] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell
Australian Constitution
In any case, the High Court
further established jurisdiction for the matter under ss 75(i), (ii).
(n 18). See
General Newspapers Pty v Telstra Corporation
[1993] FCA 473
(1993) 45 FCR 164
Griffith University v Tang
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR 99.
See also Crock and
Ghezelbash (n 19) 106.
Crock and Ghezelbash (n 19)
‘Chapter 6—the
Assessment Process’,
Australian Parliament House
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Former_Committees/immigrationdetention/report/c06>.
This scheme was the
Protection Obligation Determination process, which applied to offshore entry
persons. This was introduced on
1 March 2011 following the decision of
: Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Submission No 32 to the
Joint Select Committee,
Australia’s Immigration Detention Network
(September 2011) 48
<https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/reports-and-pubs/files/diac-jscaidn-submission-sept11.pdf>.
See further Hannah Stewart-Weeks, ‘Case Note: Out of Sight but Not Out
Plaintiff M61/2010E v Commonwealth
[2011] SydLawRw 33
(2011) 33(4)
Stewart-Weeks (n 41)
[2013] FCAFC 161
(2013) 219 FCR 287.
Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration; Ex parte Brisbane
Tramways Co Limited [No 1]
[1914] HCA 15
(1914) 18 CLR 54
, 62 (Griffith CJ), 66–7
(Barton J), 79–80 (Isaacs J), 82–3 (Gavan, Duffy and Rich JJ),
Northern Territory of Australia v Lane
(1995) 59 FCR 332
(O’Loughlin J) and
Trimbole v Dugan
[1984] FCA 323
(1984) 3 FCR 324
(Woodward J).
[100]. See also ibid 452–3 (Isaacs J).
Australian Constitution
See ibid [47]–[52]
(French CJ, Kiefel and Nettle JJ), [199] (Keane J).
Ibid [173].
Australian Constitution
See Janinia Boughey and
Greg Weeks, ‘“Officers of the Commonwealth” in the Private
Sector: Can the High Court
Review Outsourced Exercises of Power’
[2013] UNSWLawJl 14
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 316. Boughey and
Weeks consider that the High Court’s reluctance is based on the need to
wait until a matter arises requiring
resolution of this issue, and as such, the
Court’s hesitancy is warranted.
Ibid [54]–[58].
Ibid [59]–[60].
Australian Constitution
Moss (n 17) 489; Boughey
and Weeks (n 59) 318.
R v Panel on Takeovers
and Mergers; Ex Parte Datafin p/c
[1986] EWCA Civ 8
[1987] QB 815
See generally Boughey and
Weeks (n 59) 321.
Although, some decisions
suggest that
has in fact been adopted: see, eg,
Masu Financial
Management Pty Ltd v Financial Industry Complaints Service Ltd [No 2]
50 ACSR 554, 559–60 (Shaw J);
McClelland v Burning Palms Surf Life
Saving Club
[2002] NSWSC 470
(2002) 191 ALR 759
, 790–1 (Campbell J);
Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
[2005] VSC 161
(2005) 12 VR 42
55–9 (Ashley J);
Whitehead v Griffith University
[2002] QSC 153
[2003] 1 Qd R 220
225 (Chesterman J). Boughey and Weeks suggest that, even if the test has been
implemented in some form in Australia, ‘it simply
will not make a
difference’: (n 59) 321.
Ibid 297 [49] (McHugh,
Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Ibid 314 [115].
CECA Institute Pty Ltd
and Another v Australian Council for Private Education and Training
[2010] VSC 552
Ibid 564 [42].
Constitution
See, eg, Paul Craig,
‘Contracting Out, the Human Rights Act
and the Scope of Judicial
Law Quarterly Review
Michael Taggart,
‘“Australian Exceptionalism” in Judicial Review’
[2008] FedLawRw 1
Federal Law Review
Australian Constitution
Groves (n 17) 7.
581 (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Margaret Allars,
‘Public Administration in Private Hands’
(2005) 12(2)
Journal of Administrative Law
Constitutional Debates
1876 (Edmund Barton).
Australian Constitution
Stellios (n 15) 85.
Constitutional Debates
1876 (Edmund Barton).
Robert French,
‘Constitutional Review of Executive Decisions: Australia’s US
[2010] UWALawRw 2
(2010) 35(1)
University of Western Australia Law
Australian Constitution
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
PDF format (429 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter