URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:50:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rock, Ellen --- "Fault and Accountability in Public Law" [2018] UTSLRS 5; Jason Varuhas and Shona Wilson Stark (eds) The Unity of Public Law (Hart Publishing, 2018)
This is a pre-publication copy of a
chapter appearing in Mark Elliot, Jason Varuhas and Shona Wilson Stark (eds),
The Unity of Public Law
(Hart Publishing, 2018)
Fault and Accountability in Public Law
I. INTRODUCTION
There are few who would deny that accountability is a core value that
underpins our public law system. However, there are equally
few who have
explicitly explored the manner in which public law contributes to government
accountability. On closer analysis, it
is clear that while public law makes a
number of important contributions to government accountability, the remedial
limitations of
public law prevent us from describing it as a comprehensive
accountability regime. In the context of public governance, accountability
be understood as a set of four interrelated objectives. The first is to provide
transparency in government decision-making. The
second is to control the
exercise of public power and ensure that it stays within legal bounds. The third
is to punish abuse of power,
and the fourth is to restore interests that are
affected as a result. Public law supports the first two of these objectives,
it fails to provide any meaningful contribution to the latter two;
public law remedies do not punish or restore.
This raises somewhat of a
predicament. How can accountability be a core public law value, on the one hand,
but not be adequately reflected
in our public law principles, procedures and
remedies, on the other? Is accountability simply a rhetorical aspiration, rather
a concrete objective of public law? Are there fundamental or pragmatic
reasons why accountability cannot or does not apply in a comprehensive
the public law sphere? The purpose of this chapter is to commence a dialogue
as a comprehensive
accountability regime. This is not intended as a proposal for law reform, but
rather to stimulate discussion about
how and why public law has developed in the
way that it has, and what this might say about the place of public law as an
accountability
mechanism within our system of governance. In the context of this
discussion there are a whole host of valuable issues that warrant
consideration,
to which the present chapter offers insufficient space to do justice. Instead,
this chapter kick-starts the proposed
dialogue by focussing on just one issue:
are the norms that are enforced via public law consistent with the punitive and
restorative
objectives of accountability?
In answering this question, the
first issue to consider is when the punitive and restorative objectives of
accountability might be
relevant. Though there might be a number of ways of
approaching this issue, one possibility is to take the lead from those who have
identified a close connection between the concepts of accountability and
responsibility. Based on this close connection, one way
of giving shape to these
objectives is to adopt a personal responsibility-based approach, in which
punishment and restoration are
viewed as functions of culpability. The notion of
fault would play an important role in a culpability-driven accountability
if we wish to hold officials accountable outside cases of intentional
wrongdoing, we would need to identify a justification for doing
position adopted in this chapter is that in searching for this justification, we
might adopt a different approach for each of
accountability’s objectives.
The control objective arguably supports a
strict liability
wherein regulatory orders are justified irrespective of fault. This is because
control is about policing the boundaries
of public power, a goal that could not
be achieved if we could only intervene where a boundary was knowingly or
negligently transgressed.
At the other extreme, punishment would only be
justified when an official acts in a
subjectively faulty way
example, intentionally causing harm). This is because the punitive objective of
accountability is concerned with condemning
reprehensible conduct, a goal that
would be undermined if innocent excesses of power attracted punishment. Finally,
accountability’s
restorative objective is concerned with putting wrongs
right for the purpose of supporting the legitimacy of government. If legitimacy
is threatened, we can justify reparative remedies outside cases of fault.
However, at least in relation to the exercise of discretionary
powers, the most
coherent approach would be to limit the obligation to restore to cases where an
official acts in an
objectively faulty way
(for example, falling short of
a prescribed standard of reasonableness). To summarise, in a
culpability-focussed accountability regime,
we can likely justify imposing
regulatory orders on a strict liability basis. However when it comes to
punishment and restoration,
liability in such a regime would depend on whether
an official’s contravention is accompanied by the relevant degree of fault
that engages those remedial responses: subjective fault for punishment and
objective fault for restoration.
We tend not to think about public law in
terms of fault. Indeed, in many ways we think about public law as being a style
liability regime, in which public law norms might be contravened
irrespective of an official’s actual degree of knowledge or
This might lead us to wonder whether our public law principles are capable of
working within the accountability regime
outlined above. If public law is not a
fault-based regime, how could it accommodate a remedial framework that hinges
off concepts
of fault? This chapter explores the generally uncharted fault-based
foundations of public law, concluding that two of our core grounds
of judicial
review can be understood as ‘benchmarks’ of fault. Bad faith stands
as a benchmark of subjectively faulty
behaviour, capturing conduct that rises to
an unacceptable level of dishonesty or malice. 'Legal unreasonableness', which
the place of the traditional
unreasonableness test in
stands as a benchmark of objective fault, capturing conduct that falls short of
an objective measure of reasonableness and rationality
in government
decision-making. This analysis demonstrates that, at least insofar as
accountability is dependent on notions of fault,
our public law norms are
consistent with the punitive and restorative objectives of
accountability.
The purpose of this analysis is to demonstrate the value in
using accountability as a ‘lens’ through which to analyse
of our public law system. We are prompted to think about public law in new ways,
and to recognise features of our current
system that we might previously have
taken for granted. As demonstrated in this chapter, one thing that the
accountability perspective
shows us is that public law is not the strict
liability regime that we often treat it as. Rather, there are shades of
fault-based
liability that are bound up in our public law grounds of review. We
can therefore conclude that to the extent that accountability
fault-based assessment of government decision-making, our public law principles
are well adapted to this purpose. This
argument does not go so far as to state
that we should therefore be comfortable in expanding our public law remedies to
neglected punitive and restorative objectives of accountability: that
is a much wider question of law reform than is considered here.
Rather, it shows
us that if there are good reasons for public law’s failure to provide
punitive and restorative contributions
to government accountability, these
reasons do not lie in any inconsistency between our grounds of review and the
fault-based foundations
of accountability.
II. AN ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK
I have written elsewhere about the concept of
accountability, and its place within the public law
A brief summary of that argument is set out here for convenience. In the context
of public governance, I have argued that accountability
is regarded as a core
public law value, tied to our rule of law and separation of powers principles.
One of the overriding purposes
of accountability is to support the broader
legitimacy of government, which it does through the pursuit of four objectives.
objective of accountability is to provide transparency in government
operations, by facilitating public scrutiny. In some cases,
the transparency
achieved through this process may be an end in and of itself, revealing sound
administrative procedures and rigorous
adherence to principles of good
decision-making. However, in cases where transparency exposes a breach of norms
of good administration,
we must turn to the remaining three results-oriented
objectives of accountability: to control public power, to punish abuse of power,
and to restore interests affected as a result.
The control objective of
accountability is best understood by viewing accountability as a principal-agent
relationship. The ability
to control one’s agent is a fundamental feature
of an agency relationship, enabling a principal to ensure that the agent acts
not out of self-interest, but in pursuit of the best interests of their
principal. This control may be manifested in a number of
different ways, but the
key characteristic is coercion; control is not merely a matter of influence, but
instead enables the principal
to compel their agent to comply with prescribed
norms. The punitive objective of accountability serves a different purpose. It
concerned with condemning reprehensible conduct; a ‘tar and
feather’ response to wrongdoing. This objective of accountability
an essentially expressive purpose, though some suggest that punishment may also
serve as a deterrent against future
transgressions.
If the punitive
objective of accountability is focussed on the actions of the wrongdoer, the
restorative objective is more concerned
with the effects of those actions on
others. The obligation to repair harm is an important way in which
accountability reinforces
the legitimacy of government, providing the assurance
that where the government causes harm as a result of its wrongdoing, that harm
will not go unremedied.
In a practical sense, each of the four objectives of
transparency, control, punishment and restoration are supported through the
and mechanisms that make up our system of public governance. For
example, when we think about the legal system as a whole, we can
range of court procedures contribute to transparency, including various
evidentiary procedures, trial procedures and even
the open nature of the court
forum itself. The remaining three results-oriented objectives are in turn
supported through the different
courts: regulatory orders (such as injunctions) to provide control, punitive
(such as fines) to provide punishment, and reparative remedies (such
as compensation) to provide restoration. When viewed as a whole,
then, the legal
system contains a number of mechanisms and procedures that are capable of
supporting the four objectives of accountability.
I have argued, however,
that public law does not make full use of the arsenal of accountability
mechanisms that make up our legal
When an official’s
compliance with public law norms is in question, proceedings for judicial review
may play a role in securing
transparency by compelling the official to justify
his or her conduct in an open public forum. However, if it is discovered that
the official has in fact breached norms of good administration, the available
public law remedies are inherently regulatory in nature,
supporting only the
accountability goal of control. Along with injunctive and declaratory relief,
the writs of certiorari, prohibition
and mandamus are essentially limited to
policing the boundaries within which public power can be exercised. These
remedies play no
meaningful role in punishing abuse of power. In some cases, an
applicant might derive a restorative advantage from these remedies
(eg where the
court quashes a decision to revoke a benefit, the effect of that remedy is to
restore the benefit). However, such advantages
are largely a matter of
co-incidence rather than design. These advantages do not reflect the true
character of the remedy, which
is to contain public power within defined limits.
This all leads to the conclusion that public law is not a comprehensive
accountability
regime, as it fails to contribute to two of the core objectives
of accountability: punishment and restoration.
III. A VALUABLE THOUGHT EXERCISE
Before launching into the argument addressed in
this chapter, it is useful to set out a hypothetical scenario. This not only
us with a concrete way to explore the arguments presented, but also
gives us an idea of what might be at stake. This hypothetical
is one that I have
used before,
though for present
purposes we can embellish it with a little colour. Imagine that Odette is an
official with the local planning
authority, and one of her responsibilities is
to determine whether applications for proposed new developments should be
or rejected. Odette has just been handed a new file relating to a
particular development. She reviews the file and decides to reject
application on the basis that the applicant has not provided sufficient
supporting evidence. As it transpires, the applicant,
Alex, phoned the planning
authority last week to inform them that he had just put some additional
supporting documents in the post.
There are three alternate scenarios that
this chapter.
In the first scenario, assume that the administrative assistant
who took Alex’s call recorded the filenote on the wrong file,
meaning that
Odette was unaware that Alex was sending further evidence when she made her
decision. In the second scenario, the filenote
has been correctly recorded on
Alex’s file. However, when Odette reads this note, she decides that Alex
has had plenty of time
to get his evidence in: ‘enough is enough!’
Accordingly, she decides to reject the application before the additional
evidence arrives. In the final scenario, Odette is a little more underhanded. On
reviewing the file, she recognises Alex’s
name as one of her neighbours,
with whom she is involved in an ongoing dispute. She accordingly decides to
reject the application
out of spite.
Under our current public law regime,
Alex could bring proceedings for judicial review to challenge the legality of
decision. In all three scenarios, the claim might be based on
allegations of denial of procedural fairness, or failing to take into
relevant considerations. The decision in the second scenario may also be framed
as one that is legally unreasonable: Odette’s
decision not to wait for the
additional evidence may be characterised as arbitrary, as in
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v
In the third scenario, the
decision may also be framed as one made in bad faith. Irrespective of which
ground Alex stakes his claim
on, the available remedies are limited to the
prerogative writs and injunctive and declaratory relief. Public law cannot
punish Odette,
nor can it repair any harm suffered by Alex as a result of her
conduct. While the retaking of the decision might have the effect
of remedying
losses in some cases, there are limitations as to what this might achieve. Most
significantly, if Odette ultimately
re-decides the matter in Alex's favour, this
will not repair any of the harm that Alex has suffered in the meantime.
accountability demands punishment and restoration in appropriate cases, and if
we assume that this is a case in which those responses
might be appropriate,
what do these shortcomings in our public law system tell us?Are we simply wrong
when we describe accountability
as a core public law value? Or are we wrong to
assign it punitive and restorative functions? Neither of these explanations for
limitations of public law is particularly compelling. There is much to be
said for treating accountability as a core public law value.
The concept has
close ties to our constitutional principles of rule of law and separation of
powers, and there are convincing arguments
to the effect that accountability is
critical to secure the legitimacy of
government.
There is also much to
be said for treating punishment and restoration as core objectives of
accountability. Though some might express
doubt about whether both of these
features are essential in an accountability
there is something very
hollow in the idea of an accountability regime which is designed simply to
expose wrongdoing, or to limit
the possibility of future infractions. If we
discover that an official has engaged in a flagrant abuse of public power, would
say that they have been held accountable simply by reason that their
wrongdoing has been unmasked and that they have been told not
do it again? In
appropriate cases, accountability demands that wrongdoers be punished, and their
wrongs put right.
If we accept that accountability is a core public law
value, and that it demands punishment and restoration in appropriate cases,
then can we make of the lack of punitive and restorative remedies in public law?
It is my argument that we have much to gain
from exploring whether there are
fundamental or pragmatic reasons why public law cannot or does not perform a
punitive or restorative
role in securing government accountability. By
investigating these reasons, we may ultimately conclude that there is a valid
explanation
for why our public law regime does not comprehensively reflect one
of its core values. However, whether or not we manage to resolve
that question,
using accountability as a lens through which to explore our public law
principles, procedures and remedies provides
us with an opportunity to better
understand the makeup of our public law system and why it might have developed
in the way that it
Bearing this goal in mind, there are a number of
potential explanations for the limitations of public law that we might explore
accountability ‘spectacles’. I have briefly canvassed two
such possible explanations
The first is that
Australia’s separation of powers framework renders public law an
unsuitable vehicle to impose accountability
via punitive and restorative
remedies. This is an idea that is sometimes implicit in arguments against the
adoption of a public law
The separation of
powers concerns that underlie this position might stem, for example, from
concerns about whether the award of damages
moves the courts into the
impermissible field of 'merits' review, or perhaps from more general concerns
that this involves the courts
in decisions about the distribution of public
funds that are more appropriately assigned to the elected branches of
government.
A second possibility
is a more pragmatic one: that the remedial limitations of public law are
overcome through alternate judicial
and non-judicial mechanisms that provide
punishment and restoration in cases of government wrongdoing (eg liability in
tort, liability
under the criminal law, and
compensation
schemes, amongst others).
This chapter is concerned with a third possible
explanation: that the principles making up our public law system are
incompatible
with the objectives of punishment and restoration, thereby making
it unfeasible to use public law to pursue these objectives. In
other words, is
public law capable of performing the theoretical acrobatics necessary to allow
the courts to perform a robust accountability-enforcing
role in public law
cases? For instance, is there something in the nature of punitive and
restorative remedies (eg awards of punitive
and compensatory damages) that is
fundamentally inconsistent with the structure and functions of public law? Is
public law capable
of dealing with questions of causation that must naturally
arise in determining whether an official has caused harm so as to be responsible
to repair it? Are our public law standing tests sufficiently well adapted to
confine the availability of any punitive or restorative
public law remedies to
those who ought to be entitled to obtain them? Are the procedural aspects of our
public law system (eg evidentiary
procedures and the burden of proof) compatible
with the determination of claims involving punishment and restoration? All of
questions offer interesting opportunities to explore and better understand
our public law system. In order to demonstrate the value
of this thought
exercise, this chapter focusses on just one question: are our public law grounds
of review capable of supporting
the fault-based analysis that might be required
within a comprehensive accountability regime?
IV. FAULT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Some take the view
that accountability is closely tied to the notion of
responsibility.
This chapter
takes the lead from these authors, looking at the potential shape of an
accountability regime that is framed by reference
to notions of personal
responsibility. Fault would stand as a starting point in such a regime,
requiring us to identify justifications
for holding a person accountable for
unintentional conduct. Before going on to outline the potential justifications
that might be
relevant in the context of government accountability, it is
necessary to expand on what we mean when we speak about
A. What is Fault?
The concept of fault plays an important role in
criminal and civil law. With some exceptions, it plays a far less important role
public law. The notion of fault captures a range of factors relating to an
individual’s state of mind, including intention,
motive, knowledge and
belief. Intention refers to the degree of deliberateness attaching to a
person’s conduct, being intentional,
reckless, or negligent. Intentional
conduct involves a deliberate choice to act. A person may act deliberately with
a view to achieving
a particular outcome, or may act deliberately with no
awareness of what the results of their conduct might
Recklessness, while also deliberate in
sits one step behind
intention, involving ‘awareness of a risk that certain consequences will
result from conduct, and indifference
In this context, it
is important to distinguish between ‘not caring’ whether a risk may
eventuate, and the legal notion
of recklessness, which is more properly
characterised as ‘deliberately taking a known
Negligence, though sometimes thought about in terms of
‘inadvertence’ or
‘inattention’,
more appropriately described as a failure to adhere to a prescribed
In other words, the
intentionality of a defendant’s conduct is irrelevant to the enquiry, as
they can be equally accountable
for an oversight as for an intended
Motives are also often relevant in the assessment of fault. In simple
terms, motivation refers to a person’s reason for doing
something. While
related to the concept of intention, the two terms are not synonymous. For
example, a person may drive over the
speed limit with a murderous desire to harm
others, or out of a desire to experience the thrill of driving fast, or out of a
to race an ill child to the hospital. In each case the conduct of driving
over the speed limit is deliberate (intentional), but the
motive for that
intentional conduct differs. The consequences of that conduct (eg injuring a
pedestrian) may therefore correlate
with intention (as with a murderous motive),
or may be an unintended side effect. This example also says something about the
of motives that may underlie a person’s behaviour. Good motives
(such as racing an ill child to seek medical care) may in certain
circumstances
justify otherwise blameworthy
motives may be further divided into intrinsically malicious and collaterally
malicious categories.
Intrinsically malicious motives are those which are inherently reprehensible,
such as wanting to injure others. Other such motives
would include spite, or
wanting to gain at another’s expense. Collaterally malicious motives are
those which, while not intrinsically
bad, are not authorised in the
circumstances. The thrill-seeking desires of our dangerous driver might fall
into this category, as
would acting for personal gain or some other goal which,
while acceptable in some situations, would not be allowed in the circumstances.
A person’s knowledge is a further state of mind that contributes to
their degree of fault. There are a number of observations
that we can make about
a person’s knowledge. First, the fact that a person turns out to have been
wrong about what they
they knew is not determinative of fault. To
take an example, a person may set fire to a house believing it to be inhabited.
house is in fact inhabited, we can say that the wrongdoer
‘knew’ of it. If it transpires that the inhabitants were not
we cannot say that the wrongdoer ‘knew’ them to be inside, but
instead that the wrongdoer ‘believed’
them to be inside. In either
case, we are generally concerned with attributing fault based on the
wrongdoer’s state of knowledge
or belief, rather than the empirical
correctness of their state of knowledge or
Secondly, there are
varying degrees of knowledge that may be relevant in determining fault. For
instance, we may define fault by
reference to a wrongdoer’s actual,
subjective knowledge or belief. Or we may extend fault to also capture knowledge
been wilfully disregarded, in the sense that a wrongdoer has
‘shut their eyes’ to information, in the manner of recklessness
discussed above. We may further extend fault into an objective enquiry, so as to
capture information that we say a wrongdoer ‘ought
to have known’,
or further, by imputing a wrongdoer with
information.
Taking these
various ideas as a whole, we can view fault as an amalgam of various enquiries
into a wrongdoer’s mind. We might
pull together these ideas to describe
three categories of fault, as follows. The first category,
, would capture conduct that is inherently wrongful. Drawing from the
three states of mind, this category might include intentional
conduct undertaken
out of an inherently wrongful motive, such as spite, or desire to harm, or to
seek personal gain in circumstances
where that would be inappropriate.
Irrespective of motive, we might also include intentional or reckless conduct
undertaken in the
belief that harm would, or was likely to, arise. The second
objective fault
, would not be concerned with subjective
intention, motives and knowledge. Instead, it would be focussed on what a person
have done, desired or known. Liability within this category of fault
involves an implicit judgment that a person ought to have acted
differently, or
ought to have appreciated that their conduct was likely to have certain
consequences. While it uses the label ‘fault’,
what we are really
dealing with here is a failure to comply with a standard of
The final category,
strict liability
, is not a quality of fault, but instead reflects
the notion of liability irrespective of fault. In this category, a
wrongdoer’s
degree of intention, motives and knowledge are irrelevant, as
is the question of whether the wrongdoer has failed to meet an objective
standard. All that matters is whether a wrongdoer has committed a prohibited act
or produced a prohibited result. Therefore, this
category is capable of
attaching liability to innocent as well as malicious breaches. It is important
to note that these three categories
of fault are not mutually exclusive. For
example, a strict liability provision may make it an offence to cause water
pollution. If
a person deliberately pollutes a river out of a desire to damage a
neighbour’s property, we may not only conclude that they
have contravened
the strict liability provision, but also that their actions are intentionally
malicious (subjective fault), and
that they ought to have acted differently
(objective fault).
B. Why is Fault Relevant in the Context of
Accountability?
identified the different qualities of fault that might attach to conduct, the
next important question to ask is why should
we be concerned with fault in the
context of accountability? This chapter considers the potential shape of an
accountability regime
if it were informed by notions of personal
responsibility.
There are close
ties between the concepts of responsibility and accountability, to the extent
that they are sometimes treated as
synonymous.
Relevantly for present purposes, there are some who would view the concept of
‘responsibility’ as referring to the normative
‘accountability’.
this view, responsibility involves being a responsible
while accountability
involves the external process of being held to account. A failure to act
responsibly is what exposes a person
to an accountability process, and being
held accountable can be seen to reinforce the underlying norms of responsibility
going forward.
Though accountability and responsibility are best not reduced to
synonyms, there are clear symbiotic elements to the relationship
between the two
concepts. If we take the approach that accountability has its basis in notions
of personal responsibility, what might
this tell us about when and how it is
appropriate to hold government officials accountable?
Fault is a recurring
theme in the literature on responsibility. Many explanations of responsibility
employ as their starting point
the idea that a person should only be held
responsible in circumstances where they are culpable, and that a person can only
be culpable
in circumstances where they possess a requisite level of mental
engagement (usually that their conduct was intentional and the resulting
consequences were intended, or at least
At its core, the idea of restricting responsibility (or accountability) to cases
in which a person acted intentionally is bound up
in the notion of choice: it is
appropriate to hold people accountable for the consequences of the choices that
they have made.
For this reason,
we have little difficulty holding a person responsible (or accountable) if they
have acted on the basis of subjective
fault, out of a desire to cause harm, or
foreseeing but not caring that they will cause harm. The rationale becomes more
the further we move away from deliberate choice, or subjective
On what basis can we
impose liability where a person has not actually averted to the possibility of
harm in any subjective sense?
Three possible justifications are the theories of
unexercised capacity, outcome-responsibility, and relational
responsibility.
The idea of unexercised capacity informs Hart’s
justification for criminal punishment in the absence of subjective fault. The
crux of the theory is that a person might be held responsible not only for their
deliberate conduct, but also for failing to exercise
‘the capacities and
powers of normal persons to think about and control their
In other words,
if a person could have acted differently, we can justify holding that person
responsible for their choice not to
have done so. This enquiry becomes one part
objective and one part subjective: we ask whether a person has failed to meet an
standard, and then ask whether that person was in fact capable of
meeting that
It is in this respect that the unexercised capacity theory falls short of
offering a complete explanation for responsibility in absence
of deliberate
wrongdoing. Asking what an individual could have done differently is a
subjective enquiry into their available alternatives.
But the objective fault
criteria considered in this chapter go further, asking what a reasonable person
in the circumstances (not
the individual in question) might have done
differently. In this sense, when we say that a person ought to have acted
differently,
it is not a complete answer to say that factors outside the
person’s control influenced their ability to meet the relevant
Therefore, the idea of unexercised capacity does not take us much further than
liability based on subjective fault.
Outcome-responsibility, as posited by
Honoré, provides a second possible justification for responsibility in
absence of subjective
fault. For Honoré, the notion of responsibility
cannot be explained solely by reference to a person’s behaviour, or
Rather, a person can also take on responsibility
voluntarily,
or it may be
imposed through societal norms.
Irrespective of its source, responsibility for Honoré ‘involves a
combination of actual or assumed control and risk’,
and within that frame
it is appropriate that a person who can take the credit arising from their
conduct is also subjected to the
‘discredit’).
Honoré employs this notion of a credit-discredit balancing act to argue
that when applied consistently over time, imposing
responsibility derives
overall benefit for individual members of
However, he
distinguishes between the idea of outcome-responsibility and liability: some
‘extra element’ is needed to
superimpose a legal
Beyond cases of fault,
Honoré suggests that legal sanctions may be appropriate where the
wrongdoer’s conduct ‘carries
with it a special risk of
Again, this theory
does not take us much further in our accountability analysis. The attribution of
responsibility for outcomes does
not of itself extend to imposing sanctions, and
the search for Honoré’s ‘extra element’ leads us into a
circular quest for the elusive justification for strict liability.
theoretical justification holds more promise. This view, proposed by Cane,
relies on the relational nature of responsibility
to justify remedial responses
outside cases of fault.
the unexercised capacity and outcome-responsibility theories, which are
essentially focussed on the wrongdoer, Cane’s
argument is that
responsibility is a two-sided affair that should take into account not only the
wrongdoer, but also the interests
of the victim and society more generally.
Through a distributional analysis, a balance is struck between the interests of
the parties,
in some cases supporting the imposition of obligations to repair in
absence of fault.
words, a person might be held responsible beyond cases of subjective fault by
virtue of burdens inherent in the relationship
between the parties. These
observations take on particular significance in the context of accountability,
which is by definition
a relational concept. There is much to be said for the
view that an accountability mechanism should strike a balance between the
interests of the two parties to that relationship, which in some cases may
justify remedial responses beyond cases of subjective
C. How Would a Comprehensive Accountability Regime Approach
adapt the foregoing analysis to ask how fault might determine the availability
of remedial responses in a comprehensive public
law accountability regime. To
reiterate the conclusions drawn earlier in this chapter, once transparency has
exposed a breach of
obligations, the three results-focussed objectives of
accountability are to control the exercise of power, punish excess of power,
restore interests affected as a result. The current public law regime serves the
accountability objective of control through
regulatory orders. Fault presently
plays very little part in determining whether or not an official has contravened
a public law
norm, or in selection of the appropriate public law remedy. In
essence, liability under the current regime is strict, and the available
remedies are regulatory. In a comprehensive accountability regime, it is
appropriate that regulatory orders continue to be available
irrespective of
fault. Accountability’s control objective is concerned with policing the
boundaries of public power. We could
not achieve this goal if only faulty
excesses of power were the subject of a remedy, and so we would have little
concern about maintaining
a strict liability approach to the award of regulatory
orders. The current regime effectively serves the objective of control, but
might it operate in the context of punishment and restoration?
accountability objective of punishment, served by way of punitive sanctions, is
concerned with public condemnation of inherently
wrongful conduct. It is this
condemnatory character of punishment that might lead us to confine punishment to
cases of subjective
fault, in line with the choice theory. Where a person has
acted maliciously, or knowing they are likely to cause harm, accountability
demand a sanction that signifies the inherent wrongfulness of their conduct.
Returning to the earlier hypothetical, Odette’s
spiteful conduct in the
third scenario may be of such a character as to warrant condemnation via
punitive sanctions. However, if
we were to go further and extend the reach of
punishment into objectively faulty and unfaulty conduct (as in the first two
scenarios),
we risk undermining this primary condemnatory characteristic of the
sanction. For this reason, we might conclude that there is merit
in restricting
the punitive objective of accountability to cases of subjective
Turning to the restorative objective of accountability, served by
reparative remedies, different considerations apply. These remedies
do not bear
the same stigma of condemnation as punitive sanctions, and so we might have
fewer concerns about moving beyond the limits
of subjective fault. Having
removed this ideological roadblock, it is necessary to identify what quality of
fault best supports the
restorative function of accountability. In this respect,
Cane’s relational justification for responsibility is of
assistance.
The relational
approach, as framed in this chapter, sees accountability as a relationship in
which the interests of each party must
be balanced against one another, so as to
appropriately distribute losses between them. The starting point in any such
exercise must be to identify the relevant interests at stake, and in
this respect it might be tempting to turn to concepts of individual
constitutional rights. However, this would be an unnecessary complication. The
relevant standards that are enforced via public
law are not determined primarily
by the failure to respect or protect individual rights and interests, but relate
more generally
to proper administration of public power. As Varuhas notes, these
norms are concerned with ensuring that ‘public powers are
properly... and in the public interest’, and to the extent that they
operate to the benefit of individuals, this
is a ‘subsidiary’ rather
than ‘primary’ function of the
Bearing this in mind, it is necessary to identify the quality of fault that best
balances the interests of the government against
those of the individual who has
been harmed as a result of the relevant ‘public
It may be that
there are certain public law norms that justify a strict liability approach in
respect of the obligation to restore.
For instance, accountability might be
thought to demand the restoration of taxes to individuals who pay pursuant to
an invalid demand,
irrespective of the degree of fault accompanying that demand.
The nature of the public wrong in such a case (taxation without parliamentary
approval) might be thought sufficiently fundamental that to limit restoration
only to cases of intentional or negligent wrongdoing
might threaten the
legitimacy of government. Accordingly, we might reach the view that it is
appropriate to expand reparative remedies
(here, restitution) to such cases on a
strict liability basis, consistently with the approach adopted by the House of
may be other public law norms that would justify a strict liability approach to
the obligation to restore, however we can leave
the task of identifying these
for another day. This chapter is concerned with fault, and a fault-based
approach to liability is appropriate
in at least one key area of government
activity: the exercise of discretionary powers.
Where Parliament confers
discretionary powers on an official, a more finely tuned approach to the
restorative objective is required.
In deciding when the obligation to restore
might be enlivened in such cases, we must ask: what is the minimum degree of
necessary to maintain public confidence in our system of government?
The blanket adoption of either strict liability or subjective
fault represents
extreme alternatives, neither of which seems advisable. Limiting reparative
remedies to cases of intentional misuse
of discretion fails to provide
accountability in cases of wrongful (but not intentional) excess of power. For
instance, an official
might unknowingly exercise their powers in a manner that
we might describe as extremely unreasonable and arbitrary. We might be
justifiably
concerned about the legitimacy of our system of government if
individuals who suffer harm as a consequence of such an exercise of
left to bear their own losses. Accordingly, limiting reparative remedies to the
subjectively faulty exercise of discretionary
power would not further the
important objectives of accountability. But does accountability demand that we
make reparative remedies
available for all reasoning errors that may arise in an
official's exercise of discretion (strict liability)? Or only those which
short of an acceptable standard of reasonableness (objective fault)? While a
valid case might be made for the former argument,
the position adopted in this
chapter is that in the context of discretionary powers, the more cohesive
approach is to adopt objective
fault as the relevant criterion for the
availability of reparative remedies. This approach represents a 'middle ground',
a distinction between those public law contraventions that demand
restoration and those that do not, while taking into account the
interests of
parties in the accountability relationship. This approach also
conforms to the modern Australian understanding of unreasonableness,
as is drawn
out in the following section.
To summarise, then, in an accountability
regime that is informed by notions of personal responsibility, the concept of
fault might
be used to define the circumstances in which it is appropriate to
engage each of the three results-focussed objectives of accountability.
via regulatory orders would be appropriate on a strict liability basis,
punishment via punitive sanctions would be appropriate
in cases of subjective
fault, and, at least in connection with the exercise of discretionary powers,
restoration via reparative remedies
would be appropriate in cases of objective
fault. Keeping this framework in mind, we can turn to consider whether our
system is compatible with this approach.
V. FAULT IN PUBLIC LAW
Judicial review grounds
are not traditionally thought about in terms of fault, and indeed, are often
treated as forming a largely
strict liability
While it is correct that
fault is not determinative of contravention of the majority of the grounds of
judicial review, on closer
analysis we can see that issues of intention, motive,
knowledge and belief do play an important role in public law. In particular,
can see that the judicial review grounds establish benchmarks of subjective
fault (in the form of bad faith) and objective fault
(in the form of legal
unreasonableness). The argument drawn out in this chapter is that there is
therefore no inconsistency between public law and the punitive
and restorative
objectives of accountability, at least insofar as the concept of fault is
A. Fault in Judicial Review Grounds
we look at the grounds of judicial review, we can see that two of the grounds of
review entail a finding of fault: bad faith
and legal unreasonableness. Other
grounds also invite an assessment of an official’s knowledge, intention
and motives, though
not necessarily leading to a conclusion of fault.
(i) Bad Faith: Subjective Fault
The ground of bad faith invites a direct
fault-based assessment of an official’s conduct. ‘There is no such
thing as...
constructive bad
and so determining
contravention of this standard is an inherently subjective enquiry. An official
will contravene this ground if
they act ‘in a way that [they] actually
knew was wrong’,
they are ‘reckless as to whether [the exercise of power] was in a manner
required by law’.
there are many types of behaviour which might amount to bad faith, dishonesty
and acting for an improper purpose are most
to the language of fault adopted above, bad faith will invariably amount to
subjective fault on the part of an official,
capturing intentional or reckless
conduct engaged in for malicious or prohibited ends. Accordingly, we can
conclude that the bad
faith ground entails a finding of subjective
(ii) Legal Unreasonableness: Objective Fault
Another ground of
review that might be thought to entail fault is that of unreasonableness. Until
recently in Australia, this ground
was identified by the well-known (and often
verbal formula derived from the
decision, which provides a
basis to challenge an exercise of power that is so unreasonable that no
reasonable official might have
adopted that same
Taken at face value, the wording of the
formulation
reflects the notion of objective fault, in the sense that it requires evaluation
of an official’s failure to adhere
to a prescribed standard of
However, this raises
two related difficulties. The first is whether it is possible for the
formula to simultaneously operate as a test of invalidity and
fault. For instance, we might wonder whether this touches on the well-canvassed
debate around the interaction between public and private law concepts of
reasonableness.
The supposed movement towards ‘convergence’ of public and private
law standards of reasonableness has many
detractors.
However, it is
unnecessary to enter into the merits of this debate here. The present question
is not whether public law unreasonableness
can be equated with private law
understandings of fault, but whether public law unreasonableness is, in its own
right, indicative
of fault. This chapter has framed the concept of objective
fault in terms of failure to adhere to a prescribed standard of conduct,
involving a judgment that a person ought not to have acted as they did. It is
difficult to see how the
test of unreasonableness is not an
objective standard of this nature. The task undertaken by the court is to
evaluate an official’s
conduct by reference to an external
official’s conduct falls short of this standard, it is beyond power. In
this respect, it is neither here nor there that
public law unreasonableness is
not solely concerned with individual interests (as is the focus for private law
unreasonableness).
Rather, the
public law norm represents an objective standard of reasonable decision-making,
breach of which is objectively faulty,
irrespective of whether it relates to a
failure to respect or protect individual interests.
The second difficulty is
whether it is still possible to equate
unreasonableness with
objective fault following recent moves to define it as a dynamic, rather than
fixed, standard in Australian
the Australian
High Court adopted a new formulation of ‘legal unreasonableness’,
indicating that
should not be treated as either the
‘starting point’ or the ‘end point’ in determining the
relevant standard.
Instead, it
was to ‘be the standard indicated by the true construction of the
The implication
to be drawn from these statements is that unreasonableness may mean different
things in different contexts, a move
which has been described as having robbed
the standard of ‘any meaningful
For the purpose
of this chapter, what is critical to note is that (whatever its content) the
unreasonableness test remains an
objective standard
effect of the
decision was to alter the source or content of the
standard, not its nature as a yardstick by which government conduct can be
So much is evident in the Full Federal Court’s subsequent
description of the test as a ‘standard of legal unreasonableness
apply across a range of statutory powers’, with its ‘indicia to be
found in the scope, subject and purpose of the
particular statutory
provisions’.
recent Australian Federal Court decision, Manousaridis J emphasised that legal
unreasonableness remains an external
For Manousaridis J, to
say that an official must act reasonably ‘presupposes the formulation of a
rule of conduct that [an
official] must have been obliged to
meaning that
there can be no conclusion on reasonableness until after determining the content
of the relevant standard.
Manousaridis J’s view, to conflate the two enquiries (being determination
of the relevant standard and evaluation of unreasonableness)
increases the risk
that the courts will simply adopt their own view of reasonableness, rather than
measuring the conduct against
an objective
This must be correct.
In reaching a view that a decision is ‘arbitrary’,
‘capricious’, ‘lacking in
evident or intelligible
justification’ or any of the various other verbal formulae used to
describe unreasonableness,
court must determine and apply an objective standard in order to avoid
encroaching on the merits of the decision.
Therefore, even if the source of
the reasonableness standard has shifted in Australian law, the underlying task
remains the same;
the role of the courts is to determine whether an official has
failed to adhere to an objective standard of conduct, failing which
the official
will have exceeded the scope of their powers. In this sense, the
formula provides a basis to conclude that an official’s
exercise of discretion is objectively faulty.
(iii) Other Grounds of Review
A number of the remaining grounds of review
invite assessment of an official’s subjective intention, motives,
knowledge and
belief, though not necessarily for the purpose of determining
fault. The first such ground is that of improper purpose, which involves
direct enquiry into an official’s motives in exercising a power. However,
unlike the ground of bad faith, conduct that contravenes
the improper purpose
ground will not necessarily amount to subjective fault. For instance, an
official might refuse an import licence
out of a desire to harm the applicant,
or with seemingly good intentions, such as desiring to promote the interests of
local goods
over imported goods. While both purposes might be improper in light
of the terms of the statute, only the former would amount to
subjective fault.
In this way, the improper purpose ground involves analysis of an
official’s intention and motives, without
signifying a particular type of
fault. Failure to exercise discretion involves a similar
as while the court
enquires into whether an official was motivated by the desire to simply rubber
stamp a policy or to exercise independent
judgment, a finding of contravention
does not necessarily equate to a particular degree of fault.
Actual bias is
another ground of review that falls into this category. At first glance, this
ground may appear to be tied to the notion
of subjective fault. An official will
contravene this ground if they make a decision in circumstances where they have
an interest
in the outcome, bear personal ill-will, or have already reached a
decision before hearing the evidence. Actual biases are clearly
a subjective
matter, in the sense that we are enquiring into an official’s actual
mindset in determining whether the standard
has been contravened. However, it is
doubtful that this ground will always involve subjective fault. Many biases may
be subversive
in nature, with the effect that an official may not even be aware
of their predisposition. For example, a racist official may treat
applicant’s application more favourably than another based their bias. If
the official is aware of their bias, and
acts on it knowingly, this would be a
clear case of subjective fault. On the other hand, if the official is unaware of
their bias,
can we say that they have acted in a subjectively faulty way?
Answering this question would draw us into theoretical disputes as
blameworthiness of particular character
that are beyond the
scope of this chapter. What we can say, however, is that actual bias may rise to
the level of subjective fault
in some cases, and may constitute a lesser degree
of fault in others.
Issues of intention, motives and knowledge are irrelevant
in relation to the remaining grounds of review. For instance, it is no defence
to an allegation of taking into account irrelevant considerations to say that
the official did not appreciate the irrelevance of
the information. Similar
observations might be made with respect to the grounds of procedural fairness,
no evidence, uncertainty,
and reasonable apprehension of
(iv) Summary
The foregoing analysis demonstrates that at
least two of the judicial review grounds are directly tied to concepts of fault,
faith equates to subjective fault and legal unreasonableness equates to
objective fault. The remaining grounds, some of which invite
assessment of an
official’s intention and motives, may be contravened deliberately,
negligently or innocently, with the effect
that we cannot describe conduct
contravening these grounds as necessarily entailing fault of a particular
quality. This tells us
that public law can certainly be understood as involving
some assessment of an official’s degree of fault. But can we go further
as to link these fault-based assessments to the accountability framework set out
B. Benchmarks of Subjective and Objective Fault
framed in this chapter, a comprehensive accountability regime would provide for
control by issuing regulatory orders irrespective
of fault, punishment by
issuing punitive sanctions in cases of subjective fault, and (at least in
relation to the exercise of discretionary
powers) restoration by issuing
reparative remedies in cases of objective fault. The following discussion shows
that our public law
grounds of review are in fact compatible with this
framework, as we can view bad faith as a benchmark of subjective fault, and
unreasonableness as a benchmark of objective fault.
Contravention of
the judicial review ground of bad faith will invariably involve subjectively
faulty conduct, as it is tied up in
the concepts of intentional or reckless
pursuit of malicious or prohibited motives. This is not to say that other
grounds of review
may not also be contravened accompanied by a subjectively
faulty mindset. For example, it would be a subjectively faulty contravention
the improper purpose ground for an official to act out of a desire for personal
gain. It is difficult to see, though, how such
subjectively faulty behaviour
would not also contravene the ground of bad faith. In this way, we can view bad
faith as a benchmark
of subjective fault in public law. The accountability
framework set out in this chapter is directed at punishing precisely the type
conduct that is encompassed by this benchmark, and accordingly we might take the
view that it would be consistent with the objectives
of accountability to allow
the courts to impose punitive sanctions where an official’s conduct rises
to the level of bad faith.
Turning to accountability’s restorative
objective, it was suggested above that in the exercise of discretionary powers,
remedies might be engaged where conduct exceeds a minimum threshold
of objective fault. In the public law context, subjectively faulty
conduct (that
is, conduct rising to the level of bad faith) will naturally go beyond these
limits. However, the critical question
for present purposes is where to set the
threshold of objective fault in public law. It was concluded
unreasonableness can be viewed as equating to objective fault, being an external
yardstick against which an official’s
exercise of discretion can be
measured, and found wanting. It is possible to think about this ground as
setting a benchmark of objective
fault in public law, as other types of errors
can be made in a way which rises to the level of unreasonableness or
irrationality
reflected in the standard. This is perhaps implicit in the
Australian High Court’s description of unreasonableness in
plurality indicated that unreasonableness may either be a conclusory label
applied to other errors in
or a conclusion to be
drawn where, despite no identifiable error, the decision ‘lacks an evident
and intelligible
justification’.
‘legal unreasonableness’ is an umbrella-style concept that reflects
the minimum requirements of reasonableness and
rationality in the exercise of
public power, it can be employed as a benchmark against which particular errors
in reasoning can be
measured. In this way, it is possible to think about legal
unreasonableness as a benchmark of objective fault in public law.
these ideas together, we can start to see that public law is indeed compatible
with a fault-based assessment of liability
for punitive and restorative remedial
responses. Though we ordinarily think about public law standards of conduct (and
accompanying
exposure to regulatory orders) as strict liability in nature, our
grounds of review are well-adapted to the fault-based analysis
contemplated in
this chapter. Restoration might be relevant where an official exercises their
discretionary powers in an objectively
faulty way, by exceeding the generous
limits of rationality and reasonableness offered by the legal unreasonableness
standard, while
officials who act in a subjectively faulty way, as typified by
the bad faith ground, might be liable for punishment. The use of 'might'
of these instances is deliberate, as any discussions around, in particular,
restoration, must go on to address questions
of causation and loss.
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
start to see that the public law grounds of review
are in fact quite cohesive
with the fault-based accountability framework set out above. Odette’s
conduct in each scenario could
be characterised as a breach of a range of
different public law norms. In all three scenarios, she has failed to accord
fairness, or perhaps to take into account relevant considerations.
However, both the second and third scenarios go beyond procedural
expanding into faulty conduct. In the second scenario, Odette has exercised her
discretion in an arbitrary way that might
characterise her decision as legally
unreasonable, while in the third scenario her decision was motivated by spite,
and was therefore
made in bad faith.
If we were concerned with approaching
these breaches of public law norms from the perspective of enhancing government
accountability,
the type of breach would be indicative of the accountability
objective that might be relevant in each scenario, and the character
remedies that might be thought appropriate to serve those objectives. The
control objective of accountability would be engaged
in all three scenarios, and
would be supported by the raft of regulatory orders that are already available
in public law cases. The
restorative objective of accountability, as understood
in this chapter, is engaged in cases where an official’s exercise of
discretion is objectively faulty, as measured against the standard of legal
unreasonableness. Odette’s conduct in both the
second and third scenarios
falls short of this standard, and so restoration (via reparative remedies) might
potentially be relevant
in both of those
The punitive
objective of accountability is engaged where an official acts in a subjectively
faulty way, rising to the level of bad
faith. Only Odette’s conduct in the
third scenario satisfies this criterion, and so punishment (via punitive
sanctions) could
only be relevant in that context.
Of course, reparative
remedies and punitive sanctions do not presently form part of the court’s
public law arsenal, and so Alex
cannot rely simply on breaches of public law
(however faulty) in order to avail himself of remedies that serve these
functions. The
purpose of this chapter is not to suggest that this shortfall in
public law reflects an ‘accountability gap’ that ought
immediately
to be filled through the creation of public law remedies that perform punitive
and restorative roles.
a whole host of important matters that would need to be considered in the
context of such discussions, including valid
concerns regarding how the courts
might go about determining causation in public law cases, and the impact that
this might have on
the separation of powers. This is particularly so in
Australia, which maintains a strict distinction between legality and merits
review. Further, it might validly be argued that there are other mechanisms
outside public law that are well-adapted to performing
these roles, perhaps to
better effect than the courts.
As was noted at the outset, the purpose of
this chapter is not to suggest any immediate campaign for law reform centred
around increasing
government accountability. Rather, its primary purpose is to
demonstrate that focussing on government accountability can allow us
understand the principles that make up our system of public law. In this chapter
the ‘lens’ of accountability
has shown us that if the punitive and
restorative objectives of accountability require an assessment of an
official’s degree
of fault, there is nothing in our public law principles
that is necessarily inconsistent with such an approach. On the contrary,
public law grounds of review already embody the types of enquiries that such an
approach might demand. This all tells us that
if there are good reasons for
public law’s failure to hold the government accountable through
restorative and punitive mechanisms,
these reasons do not lie in the public
law’s inability to embrace a fault-based analysis of the exercise of
public power.
I am grateful to the
participants at the Unity of Public Law Conference for their valuable feedback,
as well as to Peter Cane for
his, as always, insightful comments on earlier
drafts. My thanks also to the editors of this collection for their comments and
All errors remain my own. This research is supported by an Australian
Government Research Training Program (RTP)
Scholarship.
‘legal unreasonableness’ was adopted by the High Court of Australia
in place of the traditional ‘
unreasonableness’
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR
The implications of the
decision are detailed in the text
accompanying n
below. This case
represents a move away from the strictness of the
formula and
towards a variable content standard of reasonableness in Australia. However,
there remain doubts as to whether this might
open the door to variegated
intensity review underpinned by rights-consciousness as has been developed in
other jurisdictions: see
eg L McDonald, ‘Rethinking Unreasonableness
Public Law Review
, 132; M Barker and A Nagel,
‘Legal unreasonableness: life after Li’
[2015] AIAdminLawF 1
, 9; G Weeks,
Soft Law and Public Authorities: Remedies and Reform
(Oxford, Hart Publishing, 2016) 154. Therefore comments on the legal
unreasonableness ground must be read within the context of that
limitation, though many of the broader themes explored in this chapter are
common to other jurisdictions.
E Rock, ‘Accountability: A Core Public Law Value?’ (2017) 24(3)
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
For an overview of
theorists who adopt this stance, along with an opposing view, see N Hanna,
‘Facing the Consequences’
(2013) 8(3)
Criminal Law and
I have expanded on these ideas in an earlier article: Rock (n
See eg C Harlow and R
Rawlings, ‘Promoting Accountability in Multilevel Governance: A Network
European Law Journal
, 545; M Philp,
‘Delimiting Democratic Accountability’
See eg Administrative
Review Council,
Federal Judicial Review in Australia
(2012) 180–81.
The first of these concerns
is of particular relevance in the Australian jurisdiction, in which the orthodox
position is that the
courts are confined to reviewing the legality, rather than
the merits, of administrative action:
Attorney-General v Quin
, 35-36. The latter concern is perhaps of broader interest to those in
other jurisdictions.
text accompanying n
P Cane, ‘Mens
Rea in Tort Law’
Responsibility in Law and Morality
(Oxford, Hart Publishing, 2002)
See eg ibid
This is the terminology
proposed by Cane: ibid 539.
Note, however, that this is not always the case. The criminal law sometimes
distinguishes between these two states of mind in punishing
attempts less
severely than completed
eg a minister may be
taken to have constructive knowledge of information contained in a relevant
departmental file:
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
See eg Cane
responsibility-based approach is not the only possible way to understand
accountability. This chapter is concerned with exploring
what might follow from
adopting this approach, and different conclusions would be drawn if a different
premise were adopted.
generally R Mulgan, ‘“Accountability”: An Ever-expanding
Concept?’ (2000) 78
Public Administration
555, 557–58; J
Koppell, ‘Pathologies of Accountability: ICANN and the Challenge of the
“Multiple Accountabilities
Administration Review
, 98; M Dubnick, ‘Accountability and the
Promise of Performance: in Search of the Mechanisms’ (2005) 28
Performance & Management Review
376, 380; M Bovens, T Schillemans and PT
Hart, ‘Does Public Accountability Work? An Assessment Tool’ (2008)
Public Administration
225, 227; C Harlow, ‘Accountability and
Constitutional Law’ in M Bovens, R Goodin and T Schillemans (eds),
Oxford Handbook of Public Accountability
(Oxford, OUP, 2014) 195,
See eg Mulgan
These are ‘the
“internal” functions of personal culpability, morality and
professional ethics’: ibid
Concept of Law
(Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1961) 173, cited in Cane (n
) 95. Lord Bingham expresses a good
example of this view in
[2003] UKHL 50
[2004] 1 AC 1034:
‘It is clearly
blameworthy to take an obvious and significant risk of causing injury to
another. But it is not clearly blameworthy
to do something involving a risk of
injury to another if ... one genuinely does not perceive the risk. Such a person
may fairly be
accused of stupidity or lack of imagination, but neither of those
failings should expose him to conviction of serious crime or the
punishment’ (at [32]).
and Responsibility: Essays in the Philosophy of Law
, 2nd edn (Oxford, OUP,
Such an approach
excuses those who were unable to meet objectively established standards by
reason of physical or mental incapacity,
for example, and has been described as
the ‘individualisation of the negligence standard’: see eg M Moore
and H Hurd,
‘Punishing the Awkward, the Stupid, the Weak, and the Selfish:
The Culpability of Negligence’
Criminal Law and Philosophy
Responsibility and Fault
(Oxford, Hart Publishing, 1999)
As may be the case
where a political leader assumes responsibility by taking on that
Such as the
responsibility owed to one’s family: Honoré (n
108–09. Discussed
JNE Varuhas,
‘Against Unification’ in H Wilberg and M Elliott (eds),
and Intensity of Substantive Review: Traversing Taggart’s Rainbow
(Oxford, Hart Publishing, 2015) 91,
Woolwich Equitable
Building Society v Inland Revenue Commissioners
[1993] AC 70.
factor that may support the imposition of an obligation to restore in such cases
is that the applicable remedy (restitution)
is less intrusive than compensatory
remedies: see eg P Cane, ‘The Constitutional Basis of Judicial Remedies,
in Public Law’
in P Leyland and T Woods (eds),
Administrative Law
Facing the Future: Old Constraints and New Horizons
(London, Blackstone
Press, 1997) 242, 257.
Minister for
Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs v SBAN
[2002] FCAFC
SCAZ v Minister
for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous Affairs
ibid. Cited with
approval in
SBBS v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural &
Indigenous Affairs
[2002] FCAFC 361
SBAP v Refugee
Review Tribunal
[2002] FCA 590
Usually on the basis
that it is tautological and vague: See eg McDonald (n
The original
formulation was set out in
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v
Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223
230: ‘so unreasonable
that no reasonable [official] could ever have come to it’. Note also that
the Australian courts
have drawn a distinction between the application of the
ground to reasoning processes (irrationality review) and to the exercise
discretion (unreasonableness review): see eg M Aronson and M Groves,
review of administrative action
(5th edn, Pyrmont, Thomson Reuters, 2013)
284. There remain reasons to maintain the distinction between the two ideas: see
eg G Airo-Farulla,
‘Reasonableness, rationality and proportionality’
in Matthew Groves and HP Lee (eds),
Australian administrative law:
Fundamentals, principles and doctrines
(Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press, 2007) 212, 215. Nothing much turns on this distinction for the purpose of
this chapter.
See eg P Cane,
‘Fault and Strict Liability for Harm in Tort Law’ in W Swadling and
G Jones (eds),
The Search for Principle: Essays in Honour of Lord Goff of
(New York, OUP, 1999) 171, 178–79; Cane (n
) 271. Harlow wonders whether it might be
described as an ‘objective bad faith standard’: C Harlow,
Liability: Tort Law and Beyond
(Oxford, OUP, 2004)
See eg P Craig and D
Fairgrieve, ‘
, Negligence and Discretionary Powers’
, 648; TR Hickman, ‘The Reasonableness
Principle: Reassessing its Place in the Public Sphere’
; R Bagshaw, ‘Monetary Remedies in Public
Law—Misdiagnosis and Misprescription’
Legal Studies
Airo-Farulla (n
This was one of the
criticisms of the convergence theory raised by Bagshaw: Bagshaw (n
), 17–18. Varuhas makes a similar
point in reference to the suggested convergence of administrative law and human
rights law:
As noted at n
, there remain doubts as to whether
this movement towards a dynamic standard of reasonableness in Australia
potentially represents
a broader movement towards variegated intensity review or
perhaps ‘anxious scrutiny’ in cases where rights are at stake,
approach which has been developed in other jurisdictions: see eg M Taggart,
‘Proportionality, deference, Wednesbury’
New Zealand Law
, 433-435. At the very least, there would be serious questions as
to how such an approach might be realised in Australia, which lacks
‘normative hierarchy established by rights’ against which the
approach in other jurisdictions is anchored: McDonald
ibid [68]. Further implications of the
decision are discussed below.
Note however that Gageler J applied
in the traditional sense
of a generic, externally defined standard of reasonableness (at
McDonald (n
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v Singh
[2014] FCAFC 1
(2014) 231 FCR 437
SZVMG v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCCA 631
ibid [19]. See also
Airo-Farulla (n
A catalogue of
descriptions was referred to in
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v Eden
[2016] FCAFC 28
(2016) 240 FCR 158
Incorporating the
grounds of acting under dictation or the inflexible application of
See eg Moore and
Unlike actual bias, apprehended bias may be made out irrespective of whether the
official was actually biased or entirely innocent.
All that is relevant for the
purpose of determining breach of this ground is external
appearances.
See section
V.A.ii above.
‘having... given disproportionate weight to some factor or reasoned
illogically or irrationally’:
) [72] (Hayne, Kiefel and Bell
ibid [76] (Hayne,
Kiefel and Bell JJ).
noted above, the use of ‘might’ here is deliberate; any discussion
around reparative remedies must address important
issues of causation and loss
which are not considered in this
One remedy that may
be viewed as performing a dual role in this context is an award of damages,
which is able to take compensatory
or punitive form.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (309 KB)
PDF format (373 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter