URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Belporo, Lydie C --- "Flat-Pack Reintegration? National Ownership, Promises and Flaws in Cameroon's Disarmament and Demobilization Program for Ex-Boko Haram Combatants" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 18; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 107
Never Again? The Institutionalization of Far-Right Negationism and
Shrinking Space in Argentina: Impacts on Transitional Justice Trials
Rosario Figari Layús
University of Bonn, Germany
Far-right forces; shrinking practices; transitional
justice; negationism; Argentina.
Introduction
(Never again) is one of the main mottos and objectives shaping
the paradigm of transitional justice (hereafter TJ) in Latin America
last 40 years. It refers to the establishment of the democratic and peaceful
conditions that can contribute to the non-repetition
of state and mass violence
in post-transitional contexts where systematic human rights violations and mass
violence once occurred.
Never again
was also the title of the final
report published in 1984 by the Comisión Nacional sobre la
Desaparición de Personas
(CONADEP, National Commission on the
Disappearance of Persons) in Argentina, which gave an account of the crimes
against humanity
committed by the military regime that ruled Argentina from 1976
to 1983. However, in recent years many of the principles contained
are increasingly being threatened by the arrival to power of the
far right and the institutionalization of its ideologies. With the
presidential
rise of different conservative populist politicians, such as Jair Bolsonaro in
Brazil in 2018, Nayib Bukele in El Salvador
in 2019, Javier Milei in Argentina
in 2023 and Donald Trump in the United States in 2025, the far-right has become
more prominent,
impinging on TJ policies and human rights movements, especially
in Latin America.
Over the past four decades, Latin America – with Argentina at the
forefront – has become the region where the greatest
implementation of TJ
policies has occurred. TJ concerns the adoption of state and civil society
measures and initiatives aimed at
addressing human rights crimes and violations,
committed within the framework of armed conflicts and/or authoritarian and
dictatorial
regimes, for the sake of facilitating and consolidating a transition
to a peaceful and democratic social order and guaranteeing victims’
to justice, truth, reparation and non-recurrence (Teitel, 2000). Tools such as
truth commissions, reparation programs for
victims of heinous crimes, memorials,
museums and, notably, criminal prosecutions have become part of common parlance
the transitional processes undertaken in multiple countries in the
region to address the consequences of massive human rights violations.
mechanisms such as prosecutions can offer victims the opportunity of access to
more information about the past as well as the
chance to speak about their
experiences in a public forum and thus become active participants in the justice
process. The reparative
power of truth-telling has been highlighted by various
scholars (Goldstone, 1996; Hayner, 1994; Lawry-White, 2015). Indeed, two of
most acknowledged dimensions of trials, but also of other TJ mechanisms and
memory initiatives, are their investigative function
and their visibility and
impact in the public sphere. According to Shelton (1999, p. 52), “remedies
for public wrongs must
be seen ... as serving not only private redress but also
public policy”. Trials, when conducted as public hearings with space
storytelling and the presence of the public and media, can also have an
important impact on the social context and relations
in which victims are
embedded. If recognition through TJ efforts is so important, it is precisely
because of their public nature,
paving the way for the facts of past human
rights violations to be disseminated to wider sectors of society. Some scholars
that the public exposure of state crimes during trials, truth commissions
and public commemorations can even have a “pedagogical
benefit” to
wider sectors of society beyond the targeted victims and perpetrators (Di
Paolantonio, 2004) and facilitate public
debate that was previously foreclosed.
Thus, TJ policies can open up the possibility for dialogue and reunion among
groups that have
been separated for a long time.
Throughout these years, the implementation of TJ initiatives has also had to
coexist with the moves of radicalized far-right forces
that have stood out for
their negationist discourses denying and/or justifying various forms of heinous
crimes committed under dictatorships
and during armed conflicts in the region.
Although some recent work has provided relevant insights into some of the
challenges posed
by the expansion of populist forces for the continuity of TJ
(Couperus et al., 2022; Dias et al., 2024; Gallo & Botelho Soares,
there is still little knowledge about what specifically happens when far-right
parties come to power and institutionalize
negationist discourses and
space-shrinking practices for human rights stakeholders and TJ policy. By
analysing the impact of the
current far-right Milei government on TJ policies in
Argentina, this article seeks to contribute to a better understanding of how
rise of far-right forces and the democratic backlash they generate can have
serious negative implications for memory and accountability
policies, objectives
and key actors, even in the context of a significant and well-established human
rights apparatus designed to
deal with the crimes of the past.
During the Argentine dictatorship, state
repression was systematically carried out by military and police forces that
abducted, tortured
and, in most cases, murdered and disappeared what human
rights organizations estimate to be some 30,000 people. When Argentina returned
to civilian rule in 1983, the government of President-elect Raul Alfonsín
enacted some relevant initiatives to respond to
demands for justice and truth
made by survivors, relatives of the disappeared and human rights organizations.
Those initiatives included
the creation of the CONEDEP, tasked with
investigating the whereabouts of the disappeared as well as with the so-called
Trial” (1984-1985) to prosecute the Commanders-in-Chief of
the first three military dictatorship juntas. Furthermore, several
laws for victims of the dictatorship were passed. However, hopes were dashed
that most perpetrators would be prosecuted
following the adoption in the 1980s
of what were called “impunity laws” and presidential pardons granted
in the 1990s
that foreclosed most of the prosecutions of ex-military leaders for
human rights crimes. However, following years of demands from
the human rights
and victims’ movement, in 2003 Argentina’s Congress finally repealed
the amnesty laws (a decision upheld
by the Argentine Supreme Court in 2005),
opening a new period of trials for human rights violations. These are ongoing
the country. Between 2005 and 2024, 332 verdicts were handed down
against 1228 former members of the security forces and civilians
responsibility in human rights violations (Ministry of Public Prosecution,
2024). These trials, together with other TJ
and memory policies, have
constituted a major step forward towards strengthening accountability for human
rights violations, while
providing recognition and reparation to victims of
state crimes and institutionalizing the demand of non-recurrence. For these
achievements,
Argentina has been recognized nationally and internationally, even
being described as a champion of TJ and an “exportable model”
(Vasquez Caruthers, 2022, p. 39). Against this backdrop, this article aims to
address the following questions: What are the main
impacts of far-right forces
and their institutionalization of negationist rhetoric and practices, including
shrinking spaces, on
TJ accountability and policies in Argentina? And what form
does negationism take and what role does it play in shrinking space in
post-transitional contexts?
The current backlash against democratic institutions and norms, as well as
the dissemination of negationist narratives affecting TJ
agendas, is taking
place in an ever broader and growing global trend that several scholars and
practitioners have described as “shrinking
space”. This involves an
increase in persecutory and restrictive practices, targeted in particular at
civil society actors,
notably those linked to the defence of human rights (Front
Line Defenders, 2024; Van Tuijl, 2000). Different forms of violence and
intimidation strategies are being used more and more frequently against civil
society activists, albeit under formally democratic
governments. This political
climate has also been described as “disabled environments” and
“restricted operational
space” (Borgh & Terwindt, 2012). In
Latin America, many NGOs and activists are increasingly being attacked for
taking part
in peaceful protests, for documenting and publicly denouncing human
rights abuses and violations, and for defending their rights
and seeking
justice, truth, reparation and the non-repetition of violations such as those
analysed in this article. While defenders
of environmental, land and Indigenous
peoples’ rights – mostly in the context of so-called mega projects
by extractive
industries and big business – are the main targets of
killings (Global Witness, 2023), human rights stakeholders involved in
memory policies are also being harshly harassed, stigmatized and criminalized,
particularly in those contexts where the far
right holds positions of power in
state institutions. These complex contexts also raise critical questions for TJ
regarding the feasibility
of providing truth, justice and reparation to victims
in adverse settings.
Argentina has become one of the most striking
cases in this milieu. This is partly due to the arrival to power in December
far-right political party La Libertad Avanza (hereafter LLA) and its
leader, Javier Milei, who in various and virulent ways has exhibited
disdain for
and constantly attacked the country’s outstanding achievements over the
last four decades in the field of TJ and
in what is known in Argentina as the
“Memory, Truth and Justice Policies” for the reparation of victims
and accountability
of perpetrators of human rights violations committed during
the last civilian-military dictatorship in Argentina (1976–83).
in this article, after more than a year of Milei’s administration, it is
clear that the institutionalization and attendant
legitimization of negationist
discourses have also translated into the use of restrictive and intimidating
practices that shrink
human rights spaces. They have also undermined four key
dimensions of TJ’s functioning and objectives: obstructing investigations;
limiting access to information; reducing the public impact of TJ; and weakening
human rights and victims’ organizations’
activism and participation
in TJ. This poses a serious risk not only to the continuity and social
effectiveness of TJ, but also to
the security of the individuals and
organizations involved.
The findings presented here are the result of a qualitative research
methodology approach, drawing on a range of secondary sources
(press articles,
international and local NGO and government reports). The analysis was carried
out through two main methods: the
collection and systematization of published
official data on current government policies on TJ and human rights in
Argentina; and
research into journalistic sources on the current administration
in Argentina. The article is organized in three sections. It first
conceptual perspective on the meaning and implications of negationist discourse
and shrinking spaces and their insidious
impact on democratization processes,
human rights and civil society. The second section focuses on Argentina,
describing the TJ policies
in place there since the 2000s, its advances and
challenges in terms of memory, justice and reparation policies, as well as
for crimes against humanity committed during the dictatorship. Finally,
the article analyses the concrete consequences of the arrival
of Javier Milei to
power and offers some preliminary conclusions on the relationship between
negationist discourse and memory politics
regarding human rights and justice
outcomes. Finally, by analysing the impact of far-right government agendas on TJ
in Argentina,
it is important to consider the topicality of this process, which
is still ongoing. Long-term outcomes are yet to be seen.
The Expansion and Institutionalization of
Far-Right Negationism
The term “negationism” was originally used to describe narratives
that denied the Holocaust by claiming it to be an exaggeration
or lie (Eatwell,
1991; Evans, 2001). Once the Holocaust was constituted as paradigmatic to memory
culture, from the late 1960s onwards,
negationism extended to other cases in
which the historical record was denied, concealed or distorted, especially in
relation to
acts of mass violence, genocide and massacres, such as those that
took place in Latin America between the 1960s and 1980s (Lvovich
Grinchpun, 2022). In recent years, the term has been extended further still to
account for the denial of current concerns,
rather than past ones, such as those
related to scientific development, climate change and the COVID-19 pandemic,
particularly by
far-right forces (e.g., Hochsprung Miguel, 2022).
Negationist discourses can take different forms, such as the relativization
or banalization of events that took place (Lvovich &
Grinchpun, 2022).
Relativization occurs when the severity of the crimes committed is diminished.
Banalization involves the omission
and/or distortion of historical facts and
processes to condition their interpretability and meaning in the present. Once
it is accepted
that proven criminal historical facts can no longer be denied,
justification strategies can be deployed to relativize the gravity
of crimes and
lend them validity or legitimacy. All these different forms of denial have taken
place not only in Argentina, but also
in many other contexts.
Negationist discourses are usually part of broader political ideologies.
Indeed, several works have shown that the ideological position
of a government
has a strong influence on the specific TJ and human rights agendas implemented
in a given context (Dias et al., 2024;
Gallo & Botelho Soares, 2024; Nalepa,
2021; Solís Delgadillo, 2015). In particular, the surge of far-right
populist parties
and the support for and dissemination of negationist narratives
and politics are part of a traceable and growing global trend across
In Western Europe, several investigations have analysed the ideological
positioning of current far-right parties, linking
them to the fascist
authoritarian past (Couperus et al., 2022) of countries such as Italy
(e.g., Bolzonar, 2022) and some members
of the Alternative for Germany
party to neo-Nazi rhetoric in Germany (Kaya, 2021). Worryingly, this party
received more than 20 per
cent of the vote in the last national elections in
February 2025. Similarly, some studies show how the populist far-right party VOX
in Spain also uses memory of the Franco dictatorship as a political tool,
although it stops short of presenting itself as a direct
successor to the
authoritarian regime (Ferreira, 2019). Indeed, this coincides with the strong
opposition of VOX to the adoption
of TJ measures by the left-wing PSOE in recent
years (Dias et al., 2024, 779).
In Latin America, several scholars have examined how the former presidency of
Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil (2018–22) promoted a
re-evaluation of the
political memory of the military dictatorship, consistently denying that there
had been a dictatorship in the
country and justifying the use of torture during
that period (Benetti et al., 2020, Gallo & Botelho Soares, 2024; Schneider,
2020). Contrary to the TJ policies established in the last three decades –
mainly by the first Leftist administrations of Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva
(2002–06, 2007–10) and later by Dilma Rousseff (2011–16), who
together ruled for more
than a decade, Bolsonaro actively justified the
repression deployed by the Brazilian military regime (1964–-85). So too
the administration of Ivan Duque (2018–22) in Colombia, which
disseminated negationist narratives about the internal armed
conflict that had
dogged the country for more than 50 years. An example of this was the
appointment of Ruben Acevedo as director
of the previously prestigious National
Historical Memory Centre (Centro Nacional de Memoria Histórica). Acevedo
claimed that
no armed conflict existed, only terrorism, thus denying the
responsibility of the security forces for serious human rights violations
marking a backslide in memory reconstruction of state-sponsored wrongdoing
(Cardenas Castañeda, 2024; Torres Ayala, 2020).
Indeed, a review of the
political positions of Latin American right-wing or far-right governments
towards TJ and memory politics
in recent decades makes it clear that the right
is either less amenable or even opposed to the implementation of reparations and
accountability measures (Figari Layús, 2020; Solís Delgadillo,
2015,). This is particularly so because in many cases
there is a close political
and ideological proximity between far-right sectors and those involved in past
state violence exposed
by TJ mechanisms. Indeed, in Latin America, most of the
Southern Cone dictatorships exhibited a far-right ideology and mainly targeted
those individuals and groups they deemed left-leaning or progressive.
Negationist discourses are characterized by their disregard for historical
evidence and proven scientific research, distorting available
information and
knowledge to earn the position of the “truth possessors” in a
hegemonic struggle over the representation
of the past (Ranalletti, 2010, p.
161). Negationists discredit the testimonies of survivors and the systematic
extermination of individuals
and groups, as ratified by research, judicial
investigations and other TJ mechanisms. Thus, negationism constitutes a
lie for political ends, becoming an apologia for a criminal political
regime (p. 162).
The institutionalization of negationist ideologies has the potential to
foster consensus around distorted constructions of the past
and to legitimize
the attendant intimidation measures aimed at silencing human rights and TJ
activists. These restrictions are part
of a “space-shrinking” trend
observed in different regions of the world. The phrases “shrinking civic
(Carothers & Brechenmacher, 2014), “closing space”
or, in particularly drastic cases, “no space for civil society”
(Albrecht, 2017) have been widely used in recent years to describe the growth of
state measures aimed at restricting the work of
different civil society actors,
including human rights defenders. As several reports show, human rights
defenders in different fields
– TJ, the environment, LGBTIQ+ and so on
– are increasingly becoming targets of different intimidations, funding
criminalization, defamation, threats and violence (Front Line Defenders,
2024). It is worth noting here that the trend towards space-shrinking
increased authoritarianism is not exclusive to far-right governments, but is
observable in many recent contexts where far-right
parties have come to power
(Couperus, 2022; Gallo & Botelho Soares, 2024). Indeed, when far-right
forces and ideologies enter
institutional spaces and become officialized, the
risk of legitimizing authoritarian and negationist discourses, as well as
space-shrinking
practices, is enormous – all while delegitimizing
international human rights norms and undermining democracy. As the Argentine
case shows, the institutionalization and thus officialization of negationist
narratives usually translates into restrictive and intimidating
practices aimed
at shrinking democratic space for the defence of human rights, thus limiting the
public impact of TJ mechanisms and
weakening already established human rights
norms and policies, the respect and fulfilment of which may counter their
political, economic
and social interests.
The End of Argentina’s Human Rights “Golden Age” and the
Rise of the Far-Right
The 2000s have been described by several scholars as a “golden
age” for the left in Latin America (Levitsky & Roberts,
2011; Weyland
et al., 2011), leading to the advancement of several progressive rights in
favour of groups that had long been marginalized.
In Argentina, this shift to
the centre-left was the hallmark of Peronist President Néstor Kirchner
(2003–07), and later
of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner
(2007–15), whose governments supported and gave space – though not
without their
challenges and differences – to the voices of the human
rights and victims’ movements that in the 1980s and 1990s had
played a key
role in the struggle for memory, truth and justice for the crimes of the
dictatorship, as well as to collectives with
gender and diversity demands
(especially feminist and LGBTIQ+ rights). These groups have today become the
target of attacks by the
extreme right.
From the moment Néstor Kirchner came to office in 2003, he spoke out
strongly against the crimes of the dictatorship and called
for the annulment of
the so-called “impunity laws” of 1986 and 1987 that hindered the
prosecution of those responsible
for crimes against humanity. These laws were
declared unconstitutional by Congress in 2003 and by the Supreme Court in 2005,
rise to a new period of human rights violation trials that are ongoing
today. This marked a very significant change in state policy
and narrative
through the acknowledgement of the seriousness of the crimes committed by the
civilian-military regime. In this sense,
publicity and information about trials
and the content of verdicts and testimonies have been crucial to their social
impact in Argentina.
The public hearings afforded survivors a public voice, as
they were able to describe a wide range of their own experiences. The
institutionalization
of the acknowledgement of dictatorship crimes was also
reflected in other relevant memory and human rights policies, such as a purge
many top-ranking officers from the military (Roehrig, 2009, p. 737) and the
deployment of a multiplicity of symbolic reparation
policies, including the
creation of the so-called Sites of Memory (Espacios de Memoria) in reference to
the transformation of several
former clandestine detention and torture centres
across the country. These memory museums and memorials were opened to the
(Schindel, 2012). Over the last two decades, many public events have
been organized around the trials and Sites of Memory, such as
commemorations,
guided tours, book launches and even music festivals; these have allowed
survivors and activists, as well as other
sectors of society who may previously
have remained largely uninvolved, to come together. As shown below, it is this
public dimension
of TJ that has become one of the main targets of
Argentina’s far-right government.
With the inclusion of these measures in the government’s agenda, the
state assumed a prominent role in the development and progress
of TJ policies,
recognizing and enforcing the right of victims to access justice and truth
– rights that had been denied to
them for decades. Notwithstanding an
institutional context that better favoured human rights and TJ, coexistence
continued with the
denialist narratives of pro-military groups that vindicated
the actions of the civilian-military dictatorship, and opposed the trials
truth, memory and justice initiatives. Indeed, victims, human rights
stakeholders and court staff taking part in the human rights
prosecutions
repeatedly reported being the target of threats and security incidents, the most
serious of which was the disappearance
of survivor and witness Julio
López in the city of La Plata in
To a greater or lesser extent and degree of intensity, TJ and memory policies
have always been challenged by conservative and pro-military
sectors and have
coexisted with negationist narratives over the past 50 years (Feld & Salvi,
2019; Lvovich & Grinchpun, 2022).
Even before the current far-right
administration, TJ had already been severely threatened by the conservative
government of Mauricio
Macri (2015–19), which was characterized by its
contempt for human rights norms and accountability measures. However, the rise
to power of the far-right LLA party has given these earlier attacks on TJ a
newfound strength and radicalized tenor, worse even than
Paradoxically, the 40th anniversary of the return to democracy in 2023 became a
political shock with the electoral
victory of Javier Milei as president and
Victoria Villarruel as vice-president, earning 56 per cent of the vote. Their
campaign slogans
had already signalled vindication of the military dictatorship
and denial and/or justification of its crimes. After more than a year
Milei’s government, it is clear that the institutionalization, and with it
legitimization of negationist discourses, have
also translated into the use of
restrictive and intimidating practices to shrink human rights spaces. What is
paradoxical about this
worrying scenario, however, is the strong popular support
that such far-right governments continue to enjoy. As some scholars (Caruncho,
2024; Levitsky & Ziblatt, 2018) show, far-right leaders share a number of
characteristics that have contributed to their success:
they emerge in contexts
of socioeconomic crisis and growing political polarization, and tend to
prioritize issues such as efficiency
and security in their public discourses.
All of this has allowed them to reach out to the poly-class electorate (Norris
& Inglehart,
2019) and to massively capture the vote of citizens who are
distrustful of or disappointed with politics. In the Argentine context,
widespread support for these far-right parties has further been related to
factors such as the impact of the pandemic and containment
measures, the
economic crisis and thus deterioration of living conditions, and hopelessness
– all situations that had
begun several years earlier.
The Right-Wing Radicalization of Power
While the Argentine case is one of the most extreme in the Latin American
region, the increase in and institutionalization of negationist
discourses and
their violent and authoritarian impacts on TJ and human rights initiatives are
not an isolated phenomenon, but rather
part of the exponential growth of what is
known as “new right-wings” (Semana, 2023). It is undeniable that the
far- right forces in the past few years has translated into a democracy
backlash, including increased attacks on human rights and
memory policies as
much as social inclusion policies geared towards the promotion of the rights of
historically discriminated groups.
Against this backdrop, the concept of
“new” right forces has emerged to understand the unprecedented
phenomenon of massive
societal support enjoyed by these groups in various
countries in Latin America. However, in debates about the ideological profile
these far-right parties in the region, such as LLA, some scholars have
characterized them as ‘new right-wings’, while
others argue that
they are not a radical new phenomenon, but rather a continuation of strains
within traditional right parties. Nevertheless,
this continuity has not
prevented the far right from adjusting and adapting its narratives in order to
capture a wider electorate.
As stated by Morresi and Vicente (2023, pp.
43–45), the Argentine case of LLA reflects both trends, as LLA represents
and defends
the economic interests of the most conservative and traditional
Argentine groups while incorporating some new contemporary elements,
such as its
disruptive and “anarcho-capitalist” rhetoric, the use of social
media and an aim to appeal to the youth electorate.
There is considerable scholarly consensus that
the political proposals of the far right are at odds with the expansion of
progressive
values and rights that have been gaining ground over time in regard
to transitional justice, human rights, gender inclusivity and
identity politics,
reproductive rights, minority rights, environmental protection and so on (Mudde,
2007; Rovira Kaltwasser, 2023).
Now, even though the far-right is generally
critical of the traditional right wing and seeks to differentiate itself from
and sideline
it by winning over its voters, there are often alliances and
cooperation among them, either implicitly or explicitly, to varying
degrees. In
many cases, such cooperation is due to the fact that there are often common
interests, especially – but not only
– economic ones, as the
Argentine case shows. According to Vommaro (2023), Milei and its LLA political
party have developed
a series of innovative rhetorical and political proposals.
Many of them are quite opportunistic, considering the crisis of traditional
parties and coalitions in the 2023 election. Nonetheless, the LLA still benefits
the same private sectors of the economy as the traditional
right wing, such as
Mauricio Macri’s PRO party. It is therefore not surprising to see
strategic alliances between the two parties,
both in the 2023 runoff election
and in the inclusion of PRO members in the current libertarian government.
At the same time, in recent years LLA has
reinforced its conservative discourse against progressive rights (Morresi &
2023, pp. 67–68). For example, in previous electoral campaigns
– first in 2021 and then in 2023 – Milei intensified
conservative positions on moral and sociocultural issues, becoming quite
outspoken against abortion and women’s and LGBTIQ+
rights. This
libertarian position entails a criticism of a welfare state – that is, a
strong and present role of the state
as guarantor of social and economic rights
and as responsible for the reduction of various kinds of inequality. In fact,
government has so far shown explicit contempt for the expansion of the
rights advocated by feminism, social and labour movements,
the LGBTIQ+
community, environmental movements and anti-racists, and for the ancestral
claims of Indigenous peoples to their territories,
as well as other core
positions of left and centre-left parties. Milei’s public
anti-traditional-right statements are also
seen as part of a political strategy
to co-opt support from the more reactionary right wing, which was quite
effective for his electoral
victory (p. 68). Moreover, Argentina went into the
presidential election with an economy in crisis and a society hard-hit by high
inflation rates and the pandemic (Vommaro, 2023, p. 5). The inability of
Argentina’s previous governments – both the
Macri administration and
the more recent Peronist-Kirchnerist government of Fernandez (2019–23)
– to stabilize the economy
sparked resentment towards the political
establishment, which was very shrewdly exploited by Milei’s libertarian
and populist
discourse against what he called
caste”), a concept used by him to exacerbate indignation and discontent
among a large swathe of voters and the
ruling class with regard to the
country’s situation. This kind of rhetoric is one reason why Milei’s
ideology has been
described by some authors as “populism” –
that is, a discourse that portrays society as divided between two opposing
groups, “the people” versus “the corrupt”
Rovira Kaltwasser, 2023). A criticism of political
caste is combined with a clearly libertarian critique of the state, radicalizing
the naturalization of economic inequality as defended by the far-right (Luna
& Rovira Kaltwasser, 2014). As seen in countries
where the far right has
come to power, such as Brazil with Bolsonaro and El Salvador with Bukele, this
rhetoric frames these rights
movements and their achievements as part of a
global ill, with local manifestations, positioning the government to correct
consider to be “deviations” (Rovira Kaltwasser, 2023, p.
3). On this basis, far-right populists advocate for dismantling
public social
safety nets, claiming that the market is the most efficient – and,
according to them, just – allocator
of resources. The LLA administration
in Argentina represents a turning point in the political, economic, social and
human rights
realms, and marks a serious rupture in the agenda of memory, truth
and justice – in stark contrast to recent Argentine history,
as described
Negationism in Power: The Transitional Justice System Under Siege
During his election campaign, and once in office, Milei and other members of
the LLA government explicitly demonstrated their contempt
for internationally
accepted human rights norms and local gains in transitional justice over the
past 40 years. The LLA government
has continually downplayed the severity of the
crimes committed during Argentina’s military dictatorship; through a
of statements using negationist and relativist language, it has referred
to state repression as ‘excesses’ rather than
acknowledging the
systematic human rights violations that led to the disappearance of thousands of
people. For instance, in a presidential
debate Milei used old and tired
discourses to deny and legitimize the actions of the armed forces by equating
and framing illegal
state violence during the military regime to acts of
“war”. This rhetoric has been used by the military and related
ideological
groups ever since the dictatorship itself (Lvovich & Grinchpun,
2022; Ranalletti, 2010). While the public discourse employed
by the Milei
administration in reference to the dictatorship is not new, it reveals an
important ideological and policy turn from
the official and institutionalized
interpretation of the past by previous Kirchnerist governments. The
characterization of the dictatorship
as a “war” between two equal
parties, rather than as a regime of state terror and genocide, not only denies
official interpretation but also all national and international
judicial rulings that proved the systematic use of illegal repression
1970s and 1980s. With Milei and Villarruel’s arrival to the government in
2023, what had previously been residual negationist
discourse against policies,
actors, victims of state terrorism and human rights organizations came to assume
an official character.
Just over a year into the far-right Milei administration, the government has
adopted nothing but denialist positions and offensive
statements against TJ and
human rights movements. The current vice-president, Villarruel, is the daughter
of a military officer who
was active during the dictatorship. She is a
well-known lawyer who, in previous years, defended former military officers
of crimes against humanity and supported the so-called “theory of
two demons”, a narrative that equates the seriousness
perpetrated by state agents or state terrorism with the acts of violence
committed by guerrilla organizations (Feierstein,
2018). She discredits the
human rights movement, lauding the actions of the armed forces throughout the
dictatorship. Villarruel,
Javier Milei, Security Minister Patricia Bullrich and
other top officials of the current government characterize the trials of crimes
against humanity as ‘acts of harassment and humiliation’ against the
armed forces, and describe memory and human rights
education policies as
“indoctrination” (Cels, 2024). There are many derogatory expressions
and rhetorical strategies
used by the government to devalue the longstanding
struggle and demands of human rights organizations. One of the most common, also
used by the pro-military sectors, is a so-called “numbers battle”,
initiated during the dictatorship itself, that questions
“30,000 disappeared” statistic, the historical drumbeat of the
human rights movement in Argentina. In the 1980s,
CONADEP had documented 8960
cases of disappearance, although the true number is believed to be much higher
(2013, 297). Human rights
organizations have estimated 30,000 disappeared,
venturing that for each known disappearance, two had not been made public (Filc,
1997, p. 37). Other estimates oscillate between 12,000 and 20,000 persons
(Calveiro, 1998, p. 29). Indeed, even today it is still
impossible to know the
exact number of disappeared persons in Argentina. The state needs to conduct a
proper investigation to arrive
at an official number. Regardless, the number of
disappeared people is not really the relevant point, but rather the
government’s
open provocation to attack and discredit the human rights
movement. For instance, on the occasion of the 48th anniversary of the
d’état of 24 March 2024, Milei’s government officially
denied the statistic of 30,000 disappeared during
the dictatorship, posting a
video on an official government social media account stating that the figure was
(Clarin, 2024). On 2 April 2024, Milei used the 42nd
commemoration of the Argentine landing at Malvinas to launch a slogan for the
future; in it, he urged “reconciliation” with the Armed
This approach seeks to deny, justify or even vindicate the military’s
actions during the dictatorship and to endorse state violence
in the present
against all those who opposed the governmental agenda. Thus, the arrival to
power of far-right actors has not only
meant an institutional setback for human
rights norms and policies as a whole; while their very continuity has been
jeopardized,
so too has the safety of individuals and organizations involved in
human rights work, as we will see below.
Acts of vandalism of human rights sites, symbols and organizations have
increased during Milei’s government, though they also
occurred in the
past. In particular, during the pandemic and Alberto Fernandez’s Peronist
government, we witnessed a large
expansion of far-right movements, with some of
their members even becoming deputies in the Argentine Congress. Dissatisfaction
pandemic measures became a breeding ground for the rise of this type of
ultraconservative force and its negationist discourse. Thus,
as early as 2021,
attacks were reported that included the destruction with a hammer of a Mothers
of Plaza de Mayo handkerchief, broadcast
on TikTok; the striking of the number
“30,000” at remembrance sites for those who disappeared during the
dictatorship;
and insults written on memorial murals and across handkerchiefs
painted on the ground at Plaza de Mayo (Bullentini, 2021). The activists
artists that created – and later restored – these popular
expressions have attributed the vandalism to the “emboldening
negationist attitudes”, which they tie to the arrival in national Congress
of LLA deputies regarded as “pro-dictatorship”
(“Vandalizan
2022). The vandalism against
emblematic human rights organizations lends visibility to and reinforces
negationist narratives in public
spaces, inciting attacks and intimidating
actions against the human rights movement and its years-long struggle for
memory, truth
and justice.
While in previous years Milei was not the main referent in the battle for a
“complete memory”, as is the case for his
vice president, combatting
the human rights movement has become part of his anti-progressive
“cultural battle” (Semana,
2023). In her first months in government,
Villarruel made public statements related to the attack launched on the
historical referents
of human rights organizations, such as Estela de Carlotto
(from the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo organization) or Taty Almeida
the same organization, Mothers of Plaza de Mayo). One of the most affected
organizations by these extremely violent attacks
has been Hijos e Hijas por la
Identidad y contra el Olvido (HIJOS, Sons and Daughters for Identity and Against
Forgetfulness). This
civil society organization represents the children of
persons disappeared during the military dictatorship. The organization has
vocal in its criticism of Milei’s government, particularly with regard to
its defence of military officers convicted of
crimes against humanity. In the
past few months, some of its members have been the targets of terrible attacks.
For instance, in
March 2024, a female activist was brutally attacked and
sexually abused in her home in the city of La Plata (a Buenos Aires province)
assailants who threatened her and identified themselves using a slogan linked to
President Javier Milei. Before leaving, they
scrawled on a wall
“VLLC”, a reference to
Viva la libertad, carajo
freedom, damn it), Milei’s trademark political slogan. According to the
organization, the perpetrators of this attack
claimed, “We know you work
in human rights and we want you to shut up. Next time we’ll kill
you” (“Brutal
Attack on Rights Activist”, 2024). Human rights
groups expressed their horror at the news, raising concerns about how the
government’s
rhetoric is inciting violence against human rights
Negationism in Action: Defunding and Silencing TJ Voices and
Negationism is much more than words. It does not
just exist on a discursive level. Once negationist discourses are
institutionalized,
legitimized and disseminated in the public sphere, they tend
to be translated into concrete consequences that undermine the functioning
scope of TJ and memory actors and spaces. In Argentina, the government’s
anti-TJ stance has materialized in specific official
measures aimed at
undermining four key dimensions of TJ’s functioning and objectives:
obstructing investigations; limiting
access to information; reducing the public
impact of TJ; and undermining human rights and victims’
organizations’ activism
and participation in TJ. In particular, these
deliberate attacks are being carried out by a combination of constant derogatory
expressions
against the human rights movement, general budget cuts, defunding
and the deliberate dismantling of state structures supporting accountability
reparation programs, as well as civil society work and the explicit control and
prohibition of human rights and memory-related
activities.
Ongoing trials of human rights violations under the dictatorship are among
those TJ endeavours that have become the focus of numerous
attacks by the
current government. The fact that a primary function of the trials is to punish
the perpetrators with whom the current
administration has a strong political and
ideological affinity puts them under a critical spotlight. Thus, faced with the
impossibility
of directly suppressing them, the government has found indirect
ways to deprive them of the institutional support they need and to
obstruct the
investigations involved in the trials. One of the first measures of Defence
Minister Luis Petri put an end to the work
of the Equipo de Relevamiento y
Análisis de las Institutciones Militares (ERyA, Armed Forces Archive
Survey and Documentary
Analysis Team), which, based on the reconstruction of key
information from its archival work, used to respond to judicial requests
crimes against humanity trials and to unearth significant information in
documents that helped solve several dictatorship-era
crimes (Juareguy &
Iricibar, 2024). Since its creation in 2010, the group has produced more than
170 reports for the justice
system to investigate and prosecute the actions of
members of the armed forces during the dictatorship (Bertoia, 2024a). The armed
forces have since taken over requests for documentation previously handled by
the archives team. However, according to human rights
activists, the armed
forces are incapable of the same analytical work due to a lack of training; at
the same time, it is feared that
their work could be politically biased in
favour of the military personnel on trial.
Nonetheless, this was not the only defunding
measure used to obstruct investigations and public access to information. At the
(Federal Intelligence Service), the Joint Committee on Intelligence
Documentation Related to Human Rights Violations, established
in 2021, was also
closed down. General declassification and public access to intelligence
documents from that period have been a
long-standing demand of human rights
organizations since the return to democracy, but it has never been realized.
Even as documents
from the CIA and FBI in the United States were successfully
declassified, those from SIDE or the intelligence structures of the Argentine
Federal Police were not (Cels, 2024). The Committee represented a significant
step forward in organizing and potentially initiating
the declassification
process before its indefinite suspension. As in the case of the ERyA, the
government argued that the files should
only be accessible through specific
judicial request, and answered by the security forces or agents themselves
(Cels, 2024).
In the same vein, in August 2024 the government exacted yet another deadly
blow to the truth and justice process. Javier Milei issued
a decree to shutter a
special government unit, the National Commission for the Right to Identity
(Comisión Nacional por el
Derecho a la Identidad – CONADI), a
ministerial body created in 1992 for the collection and analysis of
documentation related
to potential cases of identity – that is, the
investigation into
the disappearance of children who were kidnapped as
babies during the dictatorship (Juareguy,
The government argued that
the unit’s work overlapped with that of the judiciary when, in fact
– as the judges themselves
stated – it made the process more
effective and efficient (Cels, 2024). All these measures feign an appearance of
maintaining
access to information while seriously limiting it to exchanges
between the judiciary and military archives, to the exclusion of other
actors from the investigation process (such as civilian experts who could
conduct independent investigations). By monopolizing
the management of and
access to information among the judiciary and security forces, the government
curtails society’s access
to historical research and precludes its ability
to uncover and publicize the truth. It reverses the principle of public access
state documents, making everything classified unless otherwise requested by
the judiciary.
Amid this context, in January 2025 it was made public that the navy had
ordered the destruction and transfer of documents from its
general archive,
which contains a variety of documents such as military files, personnel files,
birth and death certificates, medical
reports and naval bulletins. The documents
that were not selected for the new location were classified for
“purging” and the head of the Navy authorized that material be
shredded (Juareguy, 2025). Fearing that the destruction
of documents could
hamper the investigation into the torture and disappearances carried out by the
navy in various cities across
the country – including at the Naval
Mechanics School (ESMA), a former secret detention centre where around 5000
believed to have been held – human rights groups took the
matter to the courts and a judge ordered that the navy preserve documents
could serve as evidence of the dictatorship’s crimes and, furthermore, not
move or destroy them, but rather prioritize
their preservation (Juareguy,
The state should guarantee both the investigation and preservation of all
documents of historical value that contain unique information
for judicial
investigations and institutional memory; otherwise, it seriously violates the
rights of victims, impedes ongoing and
even future investigations and breaches
the country’s international human rights obligations. Indeed, the manifold
to obstruct investigations are accompanied by measures that constrain
the public reach of transitional justice, by preventing access
to documents,
blocking publicity or prohibiting the practice of different activities.
As mentioned above, one of the most significant and reparative dimensions of
TJ and memory initiatives is the possibility of impacting
the public sphere,
expanding knowledge about wrongdoing and giving victims’ voices broader
purchase among wider sectors of
the population. To do so, the visibility and
publicity of TJ events is a crucial condition for allowing the public debate
previously foreclosed. Thus, public exposure of TJ activities can open
the opportunity for dialogue among individuals and groups.
Dismantling
mechanisms or bodies that contribute to increasing TJ visibility and publicity
not only silences or limits the reach
of victims’ voices, but also limits
space for public debate and awareness-raising about crimes and patterns of
violence. These
are essential conditions to guarantee non-repetition. In
Argentina, the public nature of the trials, through public hearings and
online streaming, allowed information about the trials and the content of the
verdicts and testimonies to reach a section
of the population that would
otherwise not have had access (Figari Layús, 2018). This access of the
citizenry to public information
and the public dimension and scope of TJ have
been the targets of defunding and dismantling measures in the Milei
administration.
In fact, one of the first measures taken to reduce the
visibility of the prosecutions was the dismantling of the Programa Memoria
Colectiva e Inclusión Social (Collective Memory and Social Inclusion
Programme), which had been created to publicize the trials
by recording public
hearings, therefore acting as an audio-visual archive with educational ends
(Zylberman, 2021). Such work was
essential to deepen public impact and provide
information about the crimes of the dictatorship to different and wider
a goal that does not coincide with the current official negationist
agenda. Here we see how the expansion of denialism is based not
only on the
reproduction and dissemination of distorted accounts of a violent past, but also
on the downplaying or silencing of any
testimony from victims – themselves
living proof – that can challenge and expose the falsehood of negationist
in the public sphere.
With the arrival of LLA to power in 2023, strategies to silence civil society
actors have been deployed in different ways. These have
included not only
intensified defunding of JT and human rights activities and programs, but also
the explicit prohibition of activities
related to memory and the commemoration
of dictatorship victims. During that period, at least 814 sites were used for
torture and disappearance (Cels, 2024). As explained above, many of
these sites were turned into memory spaces and museums. The Sites
of Memory in
Argentina are part of a government policy in 2011 that has sought to raise
awareness of state crimes, to officially
recognize them, to disseminate the
experiences and voices of victims and to contribute to guaranteeing the
non-repetition of the
mass atrocities committed during the dictatorship. Such
sites are material proof of what happened, and they serve as symbolic
reparations
for the victims and as places for reflection and formation of a
citizenry aware of the value of human rights and democracy. The transformation
of illegal detention and torture centres into memorial sites is a global trend,
and Argentina stands out as a reference due to the
richness and diversity of its
memory projects and the legal framework supporting them.
During the first year of the far-right administration, as part of the attacks
on these memory policies, the government cut funding
for Sites of Memory and
dismissed a large proportion of their workers, making continuity of their
activities almost impossible. Furthermore,
planned infrastructure projects were
suspended, including archaeological excavations and conservation efforts at
locations that also
serve as judicial evidence (Cels, 2024). Hundreds of human
rights workers in government agencies, and research and investigative
organizations, have been laid off or fired as part of the government’s
austerity policy. State agencies, including the Archivo
Nacional de la Memoria
(National Archive for Memory),
Registro Unificado de Víctimas del Terrorismo de Estado (Central Registry
for Victims of State Terrorism)
the Haroldo Conti Cultural Centre have also suffered either serious staff cuts
or been shuttered indefinitely.
Along with the dismantling of state agencies supporting TJ initiatives, the
Milei government has consistently shown its contempt for
human rights
organizations, none of which has ever received an invitation from any official
of the current government. In a further
attempt to undermine their work, the
government decided in 2024 to cancel all subsidies that for decades had been
granted to human
rights organizations, such as the Grandmothers of the Plaza de
Mayo, for their search for disappeared children (“El Gobierno
desfinancia
a Abuelas”, 2024). The withdrawal of economic aid to civil society
organizations in a context of extreme economic
crisis and inflation leaves them
in a critically vulnerable situation; some do not know whether they will have to
close their doors
in the near future. The lack of resources is exacerbated in a
context where changes to international cooperation – especially
Europe and the United States, which used to financially support many of the
human rights organizations in Latin America –
are also reducing their
budgets, partly due to the arrival of far-right governments in their countries
(Wola, 2025).
The attack on TJ endeavours and stakeholders has gone one step further in
recent months with a prohibition on public events organized
together with human
rights organizations at the Sites of Memory. As explained before, over the last
two decades, various public activities
have taken place to commemorate and
publicize the crimes committed in the 1970s. Public art exhibitions, guided
tours, book launches
and even music festivals have allowed survivors and
activists, as well as other sectors of society that may previously have remained
largely uninvolved, to learn more about the past and generate space for
dialogue. Thus, with just hours before show time in February
2025, a judge
ordered the cancellation of a trap concert scheduled to take place at the
ex-ESMA memory site. The decision came after
the Justice Ministry petitioned the
justice to stop the event. The scheduled concert was by Milo J, an
eighteen-year-old rising star
of the Argentine trap scene whose grandmother was
a victim of the dictatorship. The concert was free and 20,000 people had
online to attend. This ban was followed by others, such as the
cancellation of a memory and resistance festival that was to take
Site of Memory in the city of Mar del Plata. In fact, since then, the Minister
of Justice has issued a new control regulation
stating that no activity can take
place at Sites of Memory without government authorization, which has led to the
immediate cancellation
of all their planned activities, including book
presentations, public talks and meetings (Del Bianco, 2025). All these
would have been open to the community.
Many of Argentina’s Sites of Memory, including the former ESMA, have a
mixed management model, meaning joint decision-making
by government officials
and human rights organizations like the Mothers and Grandmothers of Plaza de
Mayo and HIJOS. Mixed models
of memorial site management are internationally
favoured because they safeguard a degree of independence from government agendas
and require negotiated decision-making, which is essential for a diversity of
perspectives and the avoidance of authoritarian and
arbitrary actions by state
bodies (Instituto de Políticas Públicas en Derechos Humanos, 2012,
p. 29). The new governmental
requirement of authorization for every potential
activity is a severe control that excludes any consultation or dialogue with
society organizations. This leads to worrisome hierarchization and stifled
participation, silencing the perspectives of civil society
and increasing
authoritarianism. While shutting down human rights activities, the government
has supported the organization of several
official commemorative events to pay
tribute to the dictatorship and military victims who died as a result of the
actions of illegal
armed organizations in the 1970s. Relatedly, retired military
officers even held a commemorative event at the emblematic ESM with
the Ministry
of Defence’s endorsement (Bertoia, 2024b). Here we see once again how the
strategy of denial works: displacing
and silencing the voices of victims,
occupying their traditional sites of memory and reparation, especially in public
upraising the narratives of those who defend the state repression of
those years.
Several demonstrations under the motto “without workers, there is no
memory” have taken place to oppose layoffs, dismantlement
authoritarian measures (“Thousands Descend on Ex-ESMA Site”, 2025).
However, the government has shown indifference
and offered no space for
dialogue. The withdrawal of funding and mass dismissal of organizational staff
not only silences ongoing
public debate and dialogue, but also denies the once
official recognition of the state’s responsibility for the crimes it has
committed, a necessary condition for the
for which so
many in the country have been fighting for decades.
Along with these anti-TJ and human rights policies, the implementation of new
measures that restrict the free expression of current
social movements and aim
to reinforce the role of the military in internal public security issues is
worrisome. The negationist positions
on the dictatorship and the legitimization
of state violence serve current security and defence positions. The shrinking
critical civil society actors and social movements through increased
threats and repressive measures is reflected in the new police
authorizing the use of high-toxicity gases against anyone obstructing public
roads while protesting. Since Milei took office
in December 2023, poverty in
Argentina has risen to 53 per cent, while social protection measures are being
cut and their reach is
inadequate (“La Argentina de Milei”, 2024).
All the while, the government is pushing for tax reductions for the
wealthiest sectors (Cels, 2024). This economic policy has led to
an increase in social mobilization by laid-off public employees,
leftist and opposition activists, and cultural program defenders, and has been
met with severe repression by the government
in Milei’s first year as
president. In all of these protests, the police severely injured journalists and
media workers covering
the events. This fits into a broader strategy of
attacking press freedom and the public’s right to information. These
have been harshly criticized by international organizations such as
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (“UN
Office”, 2024) and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR,
Conclusions
The formulation and implementation of TJ, memory and human rights measures,
particularly in cases involving judicial processes, are
a field of contestation,
not only about the reconstruction of the past, but also about current actors and
interests. While reactionary
and negationist discourses that vindicate crimes
against humanity are hardly a new phenomenon within and beyond Latin America,
Argentina’s
case shows the recent emergence of a process to
institutionalize such discourses at different state levels. This
institutionalization
and consequent attempts to delegitimize a consensus that
was all but consolidated on human rights issues has a serious negative impact
memory, truth and justice processes, as well as for the actors engaged in
supporting these TJ initiatives. Thus, the negationist
discourse of
Milei’s government has very concrete consequences for human rights
policies and the harassment of those advocating
them. This rhetoric is coupled
with political gestures and specific actions – such as defunding key state
aimed at hindering the process of judicial investigations into
crimes against humanity, hampering access to public information and
civil society voices and activities. This creates an institutional framework
that allows those who were already acting
marginally against memory, truth and
justice policies to act more brazenly without fear of sanction. In other words,
the arrival
of a far-right party in power presented an opportunity for
negationist groups to emerge from the shadows into the mainstream. The
institutionalization of negationist discourses operates by lending social
legitimatization to the actors that reproduce them, while
shrinking space for
human rights organizations, re-victimizing survivors of state violence and
undermining state obligations under
international human rights treaties.
Beyond fomenting societal uncertainty about the past, negationism encourages
or tolerates hateful narratives and aggressive and discriminatory
certain state and non-state actors that can result in human rights violations,
censorship and increased authoritarianism
in the present. Thus, the defence of
truth, memory and justice policies amounts to more than the protection of
symbols, public policies
and jobs. Safeguarding memory initiatives is essential
for preserving the very conditions that enable dissent, dialogue and advocacy
for the non-recurrence of violence and the recognition of difference -
foundational pillars of a democratic and inclusive society.
It is a way of
setting limits and sending a clear message to those who seek to impose a regime
through violence, terror and authoritarianism
that they will be remembered and
held accountable. Far from only being the way we recount and remember the events
of a violent past,
memory politics determine what we as a society will consider
acceptable or unacceptable for the generations to come, so that we can
Acknowledgment
I would like to thank Jeanine Legato for her great editorial support and
precise suggestions, which significantly improved this text.
Correspondence:
Rosario Figari Layús, Assistant professor at
the Institute of Sociology, University of Bonn, Germany.
rfigari@uni-bonn.de
Shrinking, closing, shifting: A changing space for civil
Alliance Magazine
https://www.alliancemagazine.org/blog/shrinking-closing-shifting-changing-space-civil-society
Bertoia, L. (2024a, March 30). Luis Petri desmanteló el área de
Defensa que investiga los crímenes de la dictadura.
https://www.pagina12.com.ar/725130-luis-petri-desmantelo-el-area-de-defensa-que-investiga-los-c
Bertoia, L. (2024b, May 19). Los dinosaurios volvieron a la exESMA para
reivindicar la dictadura.
https://www.pagina12.com.ar/737910-los-dinosaurios-volvieron-a-la-exesma-para-reivindicar-la-di
Benetti, P., Cateb, C., Franco, P., & Osmo, C. (2020). As
políticas de memória, ver- dade, justiça e
no primeiro ano do governo Bolsonaro: Entre a
negação e o desmonte.
Mural Internacional
Bolzonar, F. (2022). Dealing with a difficult past: Historical memories of
the Vichy regime and fascism in the ideology of the Rassemblement
National and
Journal of Contemporary European Studies
https://doi.org/10.1080/14782804.2022.2056730
Borgh, C., & Terwindt, C. (2012). Shrinking operational space of NGOs: A
framework of analysis.
Development in Practice
https://www.jstor.org/stable/41723169
Brutal attack on rights activist rocks Argentina on eve of coup anniversary.
(2024, March 21).
Buenos Aires Times.
https://www.pagina12.com.ar/387391-pisotear-la-memoria-por-que-se-multiplico-en-los-ultimos-mes
Bullentini, A. (2021, December 6). Pisotear la memoria, por qué se
multiplicó en los últimos meses la vandalización
símbolos de memoria, verdad y justici.
www.pagina12.com.ar/387391-pisotear-la-memoria-por-que-se-multiplico-en-los-ultimos-mes
Calveiro, P. (1998).
Poder y desaparición. Los campos de
concentración en Argentina.
Cardenas Castañeda, L. (2024). Colombia in times of post-truth: The
case of the national center of historical memory: A philosophical
reflection.
(56), 81–96.
Carothers, T., & Brechenmacher, S. (2014).
Closing space: Democracy
and human rights support under fire.
Carnegie Endowment for International
Caruncho, L. (2024). La extrema derecha en el extremo sur: los liderazgos de
Javier Milei y Jair Bolsonaro en Argentina y Brasil.
Revista Temas y
Cels – Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales (2024).
Terrorismo de
estado y políticas de memoria, a seis meses del gobierno de javier
Centro de Estudios Legales y Sociales.
Clarin (2024, March 24). El Gobierno de Javier Milei negó oficialmente
la cifra de 30 mil desaparecidos y difundió un
relato de cómo se
habría creado.
www.clarin.com/politica/gobierno-javier-milei-nego-oficialmente-cifra-30-mil-desaparecidos-difundio-relato-creado_0_YwH5izgdNs.html?srsltid=AfmBOooPmot9108Phu8pgLM_3-2SmsdYoYMEC66SzuSY_IZ7NrhMiVqt
CONADEP – Comisión Nacional sobre la Desaparición de
Personas. (2013).
Nunca más. Informe de la Comisión Nacional
sobre Desapirición Forzada
. Eudeba-Editorial Universitaria de Buenos
Couperus, S., Tortola, P. D., & Rensmann, L. (2022). Memory politics of
the far right in Europe.
European Politics and Society
https://doi.org/10.1080/23745118.2022.2058757
Del Bianco, C. (2025, February 15). Tras el show de Milo J, el Gobierno
extiende la censura a los Sitios de memoria.
https://www.pagina12.com.ar/804136-tras-el-show-de-milo-j-el-gobierno-extiende-la-censura-a-los
Di Paolantonio, M. (2004). Tracking the
transitional demand for legal
recall: The foreclosing and promise of law in Argentina.
Social and Legal
(3), 351–375.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0964663904044999
Dias, A. L., Manucci, L., & Raimundo, F. A. (2024). Populism and
transitional justice: Talking the talk without walking the walk.
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41269-023-00307-5
Eatwell, R. (1991). The Holocaust denial: A study in propaganda technique. In
L. Cheles (Ed.),
Neo-Fascism in Europe
El Gobierno desfinancia a Abuelas, en un nuevo ataque a los organismos de
(2024, October 1).
Tiempo Argentino.
https://www.tiempoar.com.ar/ta_article/el-gobierno-desfinancia-a-abuelas-en-un-nuevo-ataque-a-los-organismos-de-ddhh
Evans, R. (2001).
Lying about Hitler: History, Holocaust and the David
Irving trial
. Basic Books.
Feierstein, D. (2018).
Los dos demonios (recargados).
Feld, C., & Salvi, V. (2019).
Las voces de la represión
Declaraciones de perpetradores de la dictadura argentina. Miño &
Ferreira, C. (2019). Vox como representante de la derecha radical en
España: Un estudio sobre su ideología.
Revista Española
de Ciencia Política
, 51, 73–98.
Figari Layús, R. (2018).
The reparative effects of human
rights trials: Lessons from Argentina
. Routledge.
Figari Layús, R. (2020). The state against the state: The impact of
governmental contradictions on human rights trials and
victims in Argentina. In
R. Figari Layús, & U. Capdepon (Eds.),
The impact of human
rights prosecutions: Insights from European, Latin American, and African
post-conflict societies
(pp. 103–122)
Leuven University
Filc, J. (1997).
Entre el parentesco y la política. Familia y
dictadura 1976–1983
Front Line Defenders (2024).
Annual report on human rights defenders at
. Front Line Defenders.
Gallo, C., & Botelho Soares, F. (2024). Políticas de memoria y
gobiernos de derecha en Argentina y Brasil: un panorama
sobre los gobiernos de
Macri y Bolsonaro.
Revista Temas y Debates
Global Witness (2023).
Annual report 2023: Challenging polluters,
championing people.
https://globalwitness.org/en/about-us/annual-reports/annual-report-2023-challenging-polluters-championing-people/
Goldstone, R. (1996). Justice as a tool for peacemaking: Truth commissions
and international criminal tribunals.
New York University Journal of
International Law and Politics, 28
(3), 485–503.
Hayner, P. B. (1994). Fifteen truth commissions – 1974 to 1994: A
comparative study.
Human Rights Quarterly
Hochsprung Miguel, C. (2022). A “meada” do negacionismo
climático e o impedimento da governamentalização
Sociedade E Estado
(1), 293–315.
IACHR – Interamerican Commission of Human Rights (2024) CIDH: Estados
deben superar el negacionismo que obstaculiza respuestas
estatales efectivas
frente a la desaparición forzada, 30 August.
www.oas.org/es/CIDH/jsForm/?File=/es/cidh/prensa/comunicados/2024/200.asp
Instituto de Políticas Públicas en Derechos Humanos del
Mercosur – IPPDH (2012).
Principios Fundamentales para las
Políticas Públicas sobre Sitios de Memoria.
https://ippdh.mercosur.int/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Sitios_de_memoria_FINAL_ES_INTERACTIVO.pdf
Juareguy, M. (2025, February 2). Argentine navy ordered to preserve
dictatorship archive.
Buenos Aires Herald
https://buenosairesherald.com/human-rights/argentine-navy-ordered-to-preserve-potential-evidence-of-dictatorship-crimes
Juareguy, M. (2024, August 14). Milei dissolves investigation unit that
Buenos Aires Herald
https://buenosairesherald.com/human-rights/milei-dissolves-investigation-unit-that-helped-find-dictatorship-era-appropiated-children
Juareguy, M., & Iricibar, V. (2024, September 1). This archive team
brought dozens of dictatorship criminals to trial. Now it’s
Buenos Aires Herald
https://buenosairesherald.com/human-rights/this-archive-team-brought-dozens-of-dictatorship-criminals-to-trial-now-its-gone
Kaya, A. (2021). The use of the past by the
Alternative for Germany
Front National
: Heritage populism,
Journal of Contemporary European Studies
https://doi.org/10.1080/14782804.2021.1981835
La Argentina de Milei, un año después: menor inflación
pero mayor pobreza. (2024, December 12).
New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/es/2024/12/12/espanol/america-latina/javier-milei-argentina-inflacion.html
Lawry-White, M. (2015). The reparative effect of truth seeking in
transitional justice.
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
(1): 141–177.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020589314000645
Levitsky, S., & Roberts, K. M. (Eds.). (2011)
. The Resurgence of the
Latin American Left.
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Levitsky, S., & Ziblatt, D. (2018).
Democracies Die
Luna, J. P., & Rovira Kaltwasser, C. (2014).
The resilience of the
Latin American right
. John Hopkins University Press.
Lvovich, D & Grinchpun, B. (2022).Banalización,
relativización, negacionismo. Un escenario en los campos de batalla
la memoria del pasado argentino reciente.
Revista Contenciosa,
Ministry of Public Prosecution (2024).
La Procuraduría de
Crímenes contra la Humanidad actualiza el dossier con los
resúmenes de las 332 sentencias
dictadas desde la reapertura de los
www.fiscales.gob.ar/lesa-humanidad/la-procuraduria-de-crimenes-contra-la-humanidad-actualiza-el-dossier-con-los-resumenes-de-las-332-sentencias-dictadas-desde-la-reapertura-de-los-juicios
Morresi, S., & Vicente, M. (2023). Rayos en cielo encapotado: la nueva
derecha como una constante irregular en la Argentina. In
P. Semana (Ed.),
Esta entre Nosotros
(pp. 43–80). Siglo Veintiuno.
Mudde, C. (2007).
Populist radical right parties in Europe.
University Press.
Nalepa, M. (2021). Transitional justice and authoritarian backsliding
Constitutional
Political Economy
, 32, 278–300.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10602-020-09315-5
Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2019)
. Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit
and authoritarian populism
. Cambridge University Press.
Ranalletti, M. (2010). Denial of the reality of state terrorism in Argentina
as narrative of the recent past: A new case of “negationism”?
Genocide Studies and Prevention
(2): 160–173.
https://digitalcommons.usf.edu/gsp/vol5/iss2/4
Roehrig, T. (2009). Executive leadership and the continuing quest for justice
in Argentina.
Human Rights Quarterly
(3), 721–747.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40389965
Rovira Kaltwasser, C. (2023).
La ultraderecha en América Latina: de
iniciones y explicaciones
. Fundación Friedrich Ebert.
Semana, P. (Ed.). (2023).
Esta entre Nosotros
. Siglo Veintiuno.
Shelton, D. (1999).
Remedies in international human rights law.
University Press.
Schindel, E. (2012). “Now the neighbors lose their fear”:
Restoring the social network around former sites of terror in
International Journal for Transitional Justice
, 6(3), 467–485.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijs020
Schneider, N. (2020). Bolsonaro in power: Failed memory politics in
post-authoritarian Brazil?
Modern Languages Open,
https://doi.org/10.3828/mlo.v0i0.324
Solís Delgadillo, J. M. (2015).
Los s de la memoria en las agendas
políticas de Argentina y Chile
Teitel, R. (2000).
Transitional justice.
Oxford: Oxford University
Thousands descend on ex-ESMA site to protest layoffs and affirm human rights.
(2025, January 5).
Buenos Aires Herald
https://buenosairesherald.com/culture-ideas/thousands-descend-on-ex-esma-site-to-protest-layoffs-and-affirm-human-rights
Torres Ayala, D. (2020). Museo de Memoria Histórica de Colombia
(2012–2019) ¿Un lugar para el diálogo memorial?
UN rights office: Milei’s measures
undermine human rights. (2024, June 20).
Buenos Aires Herald
https://buenosairesherald.com/human-rights/un-rights-office-mileis-measures-undermine-human-rights
Van Tuijl, P. (2000).
Promoting rights while offsetting risks. An overview
of NGOs in a disabled environment.
Vandalizan homenajes a víctimas de la dictadura en Floresta, Brown y
Lomas. (2022, September 8).
Tiempo Argentino.
https://www.tiempoar.com.ar/ta_article/vandalizan-homenajes-a-victimas-de-la-dictadura-en-floresta-brown-y-lomas/
Vasquez Caruthers, J. (2022). Transitional justice and political opportunism.
In N. Weiss (Ed.),
Transitional justice: Theoretical and practical
(pp. 39–73). University of Potsdam.
Vommaro, G. (2023).
La Ultraderecha en Argentina: entre el oportunismo y
la innovación
. Friedrich Ebert Stiftung.
Weyland, K., Madrid, R., & Hunter, W. (Eds.) (2011).
governments in Latin America: Successes and shortcomings
. Cambridge
University Press
Wola (2025). La suspensión de Trump de la ayuda internacional
estadounidense a América Latina: Una política equivocada.
https://www.wola.org/es/analysis/la-suspension-de-trump-de-la-ayuda-internacional-estadounidense
Zylberman, L. (2021).
Un archivo insomne. El Programa Memoria
Colectiva e Inclusión Social y la filmación de los juicios.
Revista de la Carrera de Sociología
Julio López, a
survivor-witness, was disappeared from the province of Buenos Aires after he
testified in the case brought
against former superintendent Miguel Etchecolatz,
in charge of 21 clandestine detention, torture and extermination centres. His
whereabouts
remain unknown as of March 2025 and those responsible for his
disappearance have yet to be identified.
In the Argentine context, this
notion has been used as a synonym for impunity and was primarily used to justify
a public stance of
“forgive and forget” towards past crimes. The
term “reconciliation” has often been invoked as both the objective
of, and justification for, issuing amnesty laws and pardons.
This unit was also in line with
the International Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Right to
Identity, which Argentina
ratified in 1990.
The National Archive of Memory,
located at ESMA, is where primary source documents related to the dictatorship
are catalogued and
used as a valuable resource for criminal prosecutions.
Responsible for compiling and
updating a database containing systematic information on the victims of the
dictatorship’s illegal
repressive measures.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (751 KB)
PDF format (431 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter