URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2022/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sheehy, Benedict; Diaz-Granados, Juan; Fitzgerald, Tomas --- "What To Teach When Teaching Law: The Categories, Rights, Duties And Test ('CRDT') Framework" [2022] CanLawRw 3; (2022) 19(1) Canberra Law Review 36
What To Teach When Teaching Law:
The Categories, Rights, Duties And Test (‘CRDT’)
Ben Sheehy, Juan Diaz-Granados and Tomas
This article provides a framework for law academics to teach law to all
levels of students. It develops a ‘Categories, Rights,
Test’ (CRDT) conceptual framework which provides a structure for thinking
can be developed in a more systematic
fashion. The article introduces the CRDT framework, a framework which focuses
attention on
the distinctly legal concepts that provide the core building blocks
for any legal system. Use of the framework also has the advantage
that it helps
students develop the core analytical skills necessary for legal practitioners.
The distinctions created in the CRDT
framework facilitates student learning as
the students are able to transfer the same conceptual framework between
different subjects.
Further, we explain how this approach supports consideration
of positive, professional, and policy aspects of law. Having repeated
CRDT framework strengthens students’ grasp of law not only as a practice
and as an intellectual activity but the
contribution law makes to policy.
Finally, it facilitates sharper thinking about law and areas of law as it helps
to distinguish
the conceptual core of law as a discipline from the substantive
content of a specific area of law. It moves the ‘what to teach’
beyond the doctrine-skills debate that has dominated the law academy for
INTRODUCTION
Whether coming to law as an academic, or as a law student, the study of law
is markedly different from other disciplines in a variety
of ways. Among other
things, when one delves into the details of any area of law, one is presented
with an array of apparently poorly
organised rules and ideas, principles and
theories all ensconced in great, centuries long debates. While a university
education ought
to include different intellectual traditions, each of the
disciplines addresses their traditions differently. Indeed, even within
disciplines, including law, a variety of epistemologies and philosophies from
empiricism, materialism and positivism through
to postmodernism are important
and utilised. The broad view of legal education properly includes what Webb
describes as: ‘an
education of humane breadth, grounded in the liberal
arts, and with a strong philosophical footing ... [in which] students are
to learn about the values and principles which underpin the discipline
Such broad liberal
arts objectives, however, while part of a traditional approach to legal
are difficult to advance
today as not only are they in conflict with management strictures on
but also for many
lecturers whose degrees are professionally focused law
and not steeped in a liberal arts tradition.
For the new-comer to law, however, the study of law looks a bit like a
second-hand shop with weird little odds and ends, piled up
in apparently random
places that leaves one perplexed about what to do about the
Some law academics find a
solution in the phrase advising teaching students to ‘think like a
lawyer’. This phrase is
often used as if it has a settled meaning. Perhaps
the most that can be said about it is that it has to do with the ability to
Socratic type arguments
argue under the IRAC method.
scholar of disciplinary education, Donald notes, however, ‘the composition
of legal education remains controversial
... [and] the path from profession to
modern scholarly discipline has been
At a fundamental level legal education is normative and political
and, of course, these matters are controversial. Further, as Cownie
‘law teachers disagree about [legal education’s] objectives, the
relevance of other disciplines to the study
of law, its place relative to the
legal professions and a host of other
This disagreement is underpinned at a deeper level of disagreement between
three broad groups of scholars who have different views
as to what should be
taught. One group, the positivists, are the doctrinal scholars who emphasise the
teaching of positive law. Another
group is composed of the professionally
focused scholars who believe legal education should be focused on building
skills preparing
students for professional
Yet a third group
wishes to focus on law in its social and ideological contexts—the law as
We refer to this broad tripartite grouping of scholars as
‘positivists’, ‘professional’ and ‘policy’.
Given the range of distinct focuses and disagreement about underlying
traditions, including of course, the groupings just identified,
unsurprising therefore that many law teachers are confused and through their
teaching consequently leave many law students
befuddled by the questions: what
to teach when teaching law? and for the student: what to focus on when learning
The foregoing is not to say that there has not been concerted thinking about
teaching law at a curriculum
Journals dedicated to law
teaching and education include: Journal of Legal Education, Legal Education
Review, Journal of Commonwealth
Law and Legal Education, Journal of Legal
Studies Education, and Law Teacher and Legal Education Review. These fine
journals provide
articles in support of and against the different views. This
research is supplemented by a host of articles on legal education in
generalist journals of the discipline.
To date, we lack an analytical framework for teaching and learning law
broadly and across the curriculum, which is able to draw these
disparate strands
of scholarship and focal points together. As a result, each law academic
develops his or her own approach. In his
address on how law lecturers approach
teaching, R E Megarry Q C. (as he then was) and President of the Law
Teachers’ Association
stated: ‘The material may be presented as from
a pogo stick, hopping all over the place; or hobby horses may be pursued at
inordinate lengths, leaving untouched vast intervening tracts of important
Accordingly, it is obvious that the problem is not new and that many still
struggle to approach the vast field that makes up the
This article offers an approach to structuring one’s thinking about
law, and in particular, its teaching and learning. It aims
to answer what Cownie
has described as the objective of legal education which ‘involves the
ability to organise our knowledge
of facts using
We introduce a ‘Categories, Rights, Duties and Test’ (CRDT) positive
conceptual framework which is then used as a foundation
for embellishment by
analysis of the professional and policy dimensions of the positive rule. Our
position is that the three—the
positive, professional, and
policy—are not mutually exclusive alternatives. Rather, that the
foundation for both professional
application and policy critique rests on a
text, which provides the foundation of an analysis of positive law followed by
professional
application and policy critiques. We illustrate that understanding
Accordingly, students are to begin with the text, developing a clear
understanding of the substantive rule and its working. Unlike
understandings of law, however, this understanding is not the end point –
nor does it present legal conclusions as
correct answers, arrived at by narrow
‘scientific’ analysis of the case material. Rather, as will be
demonstrated below,
it provides the starting point for understanding the
professional significance and critical discussion of the policy implications
the rule. Thus, CRDT is not mere re-packaged positivism: it is a critical
realist approach to the understanding of the relationship
of positive text and
its implications for broader social relations.
II THE PROBLEM OF TEACHING LAW
Law as a discipline is about ordering and categorising relationships using
principles and positive rules. Coming to this realisation
provides some law
lecturers with relief. It allows them to focus on something substantive and
clear—the recitation of the minutiae
of positive law—to put in front
of students which can be readily assessed through tests and examinations. Even
more helpful
to the lecturer is that this minutiae is perceived as something
‘practical’ and not more ‘ivory tower’ nonsense.
Expounding on positive law connects law teaching directly to the profession. As
Webb observes:
academic law has tended to be defined primarily as (i) those areas of
technical knowledge which the professions deem it appropriate
for academic
lawyers to teach and (ii) a rule-focused 'task' scholarship, monitoring what
Schlegel calls 'the small changes in the
law: a new development in an eminent
domain, a new wrinkle in consideration', rather than a concern with the wider
This narrow positivist focus, superficially aligned with professional concern
is at odds, however, with the wider picture—a
view that is more readily
accessible to law students who are trying to place their new knowledge into
familiar contexts. This learning
need of the student—order and familiarity
—-sits at the opposite end of the spectrum of much of the formalist
to the case law method. This conflict leads to our question: What
should the law lecturer teach?
Award winning scholar and teacher, Michael Whincup, wrote openly on the topic
some fifty years ago. His observation still bears quotation
in full today:
An American Professor of Law I once studied
under scathingly rejected the ‘facile professorial synthesis’ style
of teaching.
He thought it was deceptive and unfair to students for a teacher to
treat a difficult subject as if it were simple and straightforward.
preference, not surprisingly, was for the case study method. This required a
minute examination of perhaps two or three cases
during each lecture period. So
far as I was concerned the result was an unusual familiarity with a handful of
individual instances,
but only the haziest understanding of the overall rules of
law-the old ‘wood for the trees’
Whincup continued:
my own preference is for that same ‘facile synthesis’ which can
be so roundly condemned. Experience confirms for me that
what a student needs
most in any subject is an initial grasp of basic principles. These are by
definition generalizations. The teacher's
first duty, if I am right, is to
establish for himself what these principles
The long hours of tedious reading of law lecturers as they work through the
learned tomes and cryptically written judgments are not
appealing and appear not
to provide a reward equivalent to the task. Nevertheless, it is the price to be
paid for developing the
expertise required to lecture an area of law. Yet, one
must question whether this is the only way, or indeed the best way to approach
the problem for oneself or one’s students, generating still either the
‘haziest understanding of the overall rules’
or a set of abstract
principles applicable exclusively to a single, substantive area of law.
We believe that the CRDT model we present below provides a readily
transferable framework that helps make sense of legal materials
in any area of
law and that helps students develop a useful method to tackle unfamiliar
judgements and pieces of legislation, to
extract the positive content, make
well-founded professional judgements and critique the policies embedded in law.
Importantly, such
an approach is compatible with a variety of assumptions about
the appropriate place of professional and policy assessments in the
practice of
law. That is, the CRDT framework acknowledges the possibility of assessment of
each of the stages, without committing
its adopters to any particular style of
assessment, or assessment per se. Hence, it might be used as a heuristic by both
originalists and transgressive progressives alike; as well as any other
permutation of views about the desirable methods of undertaking
method. To understand the nature of the problem of teaching law and traditional
answers which still inform teaching practice
today, we turn to consider the
powerful legacy of Langdell’s case method.
PART III THE TRADITIONAL
TEACHING OF LAW: ORIGINS AND CRITIQUE
The distinction Whincup draws and dilemma he identifies above is not new.
Rather, it echoes a historical debate about the proper method
of legal teaching
which has its origins in the dramatic reforms championed by the progenitor of
the case method, Christopher Columbus
Langdell. It is worth considering the
origin of the Case Law method, its historical context and contemporaneous
Langdell’s Case Method
Christopher Columbus Langdell was the Dean of Harvard Law School between 1870
and 1895. A reformer in legal education, Langdell championed
approaches to the
teaching of law we now take for granted. Among the reforms attributed to
Langdell we find ‘tiered, multi-year
curriculum with sequences of
introductory courses followed by advanced courses’; written examinations;
professional, full-time
law teachers; the law library as a ‘scholarly
resource for students and faculty’; blind marking of students; admission
of students on academic merit and, most notably, the ‘case method’
of teaching.
In terms of
pedagogy, Langdell has been described as ‘arguably the most influential
teacher in the history of professional
education in the United
Langdell's pedagogical method –– familiar to all contemporary law
teachers and
revolutionary in his time. Kleefeld describes it as a ‘Langdellian
revolution in which law is seen as a science,
the library its laboratory, case
study its method.’
Langdell opposed the mere repetition of scholarly opinions as to the state of
the law. Instead, he focused on investigating the original
sources, particularly
the judgments of appellate courts. Students were instructed to examine
particular cases with a view to distilling
legal principles from the judgments
themselves. Kimball illustrates the distinction in an extract from Batchelder,
describing the
distinction between the approaches taken by professors in
examination of students:
The older professors called wholly for definitions and rules-- ‘When
and by what statute were lands made alienable in England
after the conquest?'
... Langdell presented actual problems for solution. ... If a debtor tended to a
creditor the amount of the
debt on the day it becomes due, and the creditor
refuses to receive it, and afterwards sues the debtor, how should the latter
Underlying Langdell's approach to legal education was a particular legal
theory. At the core of Langdell's critique of his contemporaries
was that they
were insufficiently scientific. Again, citing Batchelder, Kimball describes
Langdell's approach in practice;
In Langdell's case method classroom, the small group of students who remained
‘were finding out how the law was made, and the
reasons for it, and how it
applied in actual practice. Langdell was working it out for himself with them.
Every step of that reasoning
was scrutinized and tested and re-examined til it
proved right or wrong. The law was being taught as a science, not a rag-bag of
rules and exceptions.’
It is this commitment to a ‘scientific’ approach to the
understanding of law, known as the formalist method, which has
characterised
Langdell's reception in legal theory. That characterisation has become
intimately intertwined with those theorists
who rejected Langdell's central
claims – though not necessarily his teaching methods – the American
Legal Realists.
Early Criticism of
Case-Law Method
Whincup’s critique of the case method essentially contends that it
presents an incoherent account of law insofar as it substitutes
minute detail
for general principle. Yet the central theoretical basis of Langdell’s
method was his belief that a formalist
approach to the law was the best and most
appropriate method for obtaining a coherent picture of law; that appellate cases
the empirical observations from which coherent, scientific study of law
can be undertaken. In this light, Whincup’s complaint
is that insufficient
attention is paid to establishing generalisable legal principles extracted from
close analysis of appellate
cases, and perhaps that lecturers themselves have
gotten lost in the detail and failed to generate larger coherent
frameworks.
Another criticism of Langdell’s ideas about coherence and core legal
theory, stems from competing ideas about the underlying
structure of the legal
system and fundamental disagreement about its objectives. American legal realist
and supreme court justice,
Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr, objected to
Langdell’s theory arguing that integrity, not coherence, was central to
legal decision
making and that, as Freeman puts it,
integrity regards coherence as an
, a normative
Thus, our best efforts may only achieve an approximation of coherence. This is
especially true of law. Oliver Wendall Holmes pressed
this point against C. C.
Langdell and the formalists of his
Curiously, Holmes’ thoroughgoing rejection of Langdell’s
formalism was not a rejection of the case method of teaching.
Kimball quotes
With some misgivings, I plunged a class of beginners into a collection of
cases, and we began to discuss them together in Mr. Langdell's
method. The
result was better than I even hoped it would be. After a week or two, when the
first confusing novelty was over, I found
that my class examined the questions
proposed, with an accuracy of view which they never could have learned from text
which often exceeded that to be found in the text books. I at least,
if no one else, gained a good deal from our daily
encounters.
One interesting note from this disclosure is Holmes’ own learning from
the case-law method—something that needs to be
seen against the background
of his extensive understanding of law at that time. Holmes notes that he
himself, a towering jurisprudential
intellect, is still busy sorting, refining
and building his own framework within the different areas of law. In other
detail of the areas and complexity involved are serious challenges to
be surmounted before one can claim mastery. As educators in
the twenty-first
century teaching students who have come through very different educational
traditions, traditions which have not
included the training of close reading and
careful exegesis of training in classical languages which were part of that
earlier curriculum.
current context, can we reasonably expect our students to have the skills to do
that reading and construction of conceptual
frameworks?
Jerome Frank continued the broader realist tradition and extended
Holmes’ objection to Langdell’s formalism. In particular,
objected to Langdell’s focus on appellate courts because he argued it
distracted students from the more relevant consideration
of the trial process.
In a typically personal attack, Frank charged;
This philosophy of legal education was that of a man who cherished
‘inaccessible retirement.’ Inaccessibility, a nostalgia
forgotten past, devotion to the hush and quiet of a library, exclusion from
consideration of the all-too-human clashes of
personalities in law oﬀice
and courtroom, the building of a pseudo-scientific system based solely upon
book-materials –
of these Langdell compounded the Langdell
Like Holmes, Frank contended that Langdell’s attempts to analyse legal
determinations scientifically from the material of appellate
court judgements
fails to recognise the many professional, social and policy realities of how law
as a social institution works.
It ignores the requirement for deliberative
choice by judges – an aspect of law which the realists consider to be at
of legal integrity. Frank’s advance on Holmes is to point out
that the constructive, inherently normative choices which attend
‘coherent’ legal system are made not only at the level of
determination of law, but also with respect to determinations
of facts. In other
words, Frank argued that essentially, all legal determinations turn on the facts
of particular cases, and that
in every case it is the facts – and their
particular interpretation – that fall to be determined. Hence, Frank
Langdell’s disembodied scientific approach and
‘inaccessible’ ideal of legal pedagogy by advocacy for clinical
legal education—a type of precursor to problem-based learning –
which of necessity requires attention to determinations
Interestingly, despite his personal and professional objection to
Langdell’s pedagogy, Frank did not suggest a complete rejection
case method.
initially recommended adapting that method to the broader normative assessments
demanded by the presentation of a ‘coherent’
system of legal
a new case system would be formulated which would carry the records of legal
and governmental problems into the field of the other
social arts
–history, ethics, economics, politics, psychology and anthropology. Mere
pre-legal courses in those fields, unconnected
with the live material of present
human action, have proved a failure; the integration needs to be achieved by
following an actual
institution through its social
ramifications.
This approach – the fusion of clinical legal education, case method and
a broader social sciences analysis of legal institutions
in context – was
Frank’s attempt to build a system of education which took seriously the
demands of integrity.
Harold Lasswell and Myres McDougal –
contemporaries of Frank at Yale Law School and the progenitors of the New Haven
of Jurisprudence (NHSJ) – took up Frank’s call for an
expanded role of policy sciences education in the law curriculum.
Their advocacy
for reform to legal education began with their 1943 paper
Legal Education and
Public Policy
and culminated
in the development of their system of jurisprudence, most fully articulated in
the 1992 text
Jurisprudence for a Free
Lasswell and McDougal are realists in the sense of conceiving of law as
decision, that is, a choice made by legal officials. They
agree that choices are
required; however, they view the realist project as essentially incomplete in
that while the realists were
quick to tear down the shibboleths of earlier legal
theory – formalism, natural law theory and earlier legal idealism –
they did not offer a systematic attempt to rebuild a jurisprudential approach to
replace those they rejected. Lasswell and McDougal
argued that this rebuilding
and reformulating work was necessary and essential if we were to train lawyers
to deal with the sorts
of problems we expect them to solve. In the absence of a
‘configurative’ jurisprudence – to use the obscure jargon
the New Haven School – which guided approaches to the choices required, in
policy assessment, doctrine and factual determinations,
the critiques of the
realists were merely preliminary to the real task of jurisprudence.
Frank singled out their efforts specifically;
I thoroughly agree with those who, like Professors Laswell and McDougal, urge
that law schools should emphasize democratic values
and ideals, and should
stimulate future lawyers to think of themselves in the role of makers of
policies which will implement such
Frank’s assessment, however, was not whole-hearted. He noted;
I dissent when McDougal seems to say that ‘realism’ represents a
‘destructive’ phase of legal scholarship
which must now be
superseded by another phase which will ‘center its energies upon conscious
efforts to create the institutions,
doctrines and practices of the
future,’ and give prime emphasis to policy. For constructive skepticism is
not at odds with
but essential to such policy
Our argument echoes Frank’s, but given the different educational
traditions, we believe developing skills in positive law are
the critical
starting point. In Frank’s case, his concern with the NHSJ project mirrors
his objection to the inaccessibility
of Langdell’s method. Indeed, by his
Both Ends Against the Middle
, Frank cautioned against the
implementation of ‘the so-called “social science
approach”’ as,
harmful in that it tends to foster, among law teachers and their students, an
indifference, and therefore, an insensitivity, to the
unique particular features
of particular law suits. And sensitivity to those uniquenesses is imperative, if
the trial courts are
to do real justice, to avoid cruel, callous
injustices.
Against this, Lasswell and McDougal contend that sensitivity to particular
cases is not at all incompatible with a broader systemic
project which permits
assessment of whether those choices are preferable or not. Indeed, the absence
of such a project condemns realist
jurisprudence to the same kind of
discontinuity Whincup identifies in the case method system. As they put it,
None of the American realists, despite this deep concern for the consequences
of decision and the impact of the law on human beings,
have ever developed a
comprehensive set of value and institutional categories, or a systematic set of
procedures, for goal clarification
and the other tasks, to aid them in their
study and appraisal of decisions. The abstractions which they have formulated
exclusively low-level abstractions, and the problems with which they
work, in the absence of a comprehensive guiding theory, can
be related to each
other only anecdotally.
In survey then, Whincup’s concern with the case method system revisits
much of the earlier anxiety about the appropriate method
of legal training.
Against a classically formalist attempt to extract doctrine and rules from
particular cases, among a range of
criticisms,
stands the desirability of giving understandable and coherent statement about
doctrine generally which Whincup advocates and which
we extend by providing a
structured method for doing so.
Holmes’ focus on inquiring about integrity rather than mere coherence
of legal decision making lends itself to concern with
both the doctrinal choices
required of legal decision making, and in the more extreme fact-skeptical
approach of realism adopted
by Frank, concern with the choices made in
determinations about the facts – and the meaning of those facts – in
any particular
case. Over and above these concerns, stands the question of what
role jurisprudence has in setting out a systematic approach to the
evaluation of
those choices. As the New Haven School argues, recognition of the various
policy, doctrinal and factual choices which
fall to the lawyer implies a
pragmatic need for ‘a systematic and deliberate theory and procedure for
clarifying community
policy about particular problems in public
Finally, the
policy dimension of law is critical and needs to be addressed in law school. The
positivist error is to see law as sterile
doctrine, neutral in society and
equally applicable to all. As Kennedy has argued, law is far from some neutral
value free exercise
and an uncritical positivist legal education is training for
the hierarchy. As he puts it, a positivist approach to legal education
teach students
that your initial reaction of outrage is naïve, nonlegal, irrelevant to
what you’re supposed to be learning and maybe substantively
wrong into the
bargain. There are ‘good reasons’ for the awful result, when you
take a legal and logical ‘large’
view, as opposed to a knee-jerk
passionate view, and if you can’t master those reasons, maybe you
aren’t cut out to be
Whereas the realists were at pains to emphasise the political nature of law,
and politically focused scholars drew attention to the
critical need for
consideration of law as a value laden, political enterprise, for many lecturers
(and professional accrediting bodies)
law is essentially a professional pursuit.
Each area of law is considered to be a unique area—having its own rules
and doctrines—and
to be studied independently with little need to consider
it either as an academic discipline or a policy endeavour.
While the debate about Langdell’s case law method has gone through
various twists and turns in the intervening decades, the
basic issues in legal
education—law as text versus law as social institutions of practice and
policy—were identified
in these early years of the university based legal
education. These on-going debates and diverging views about the nature of law
leave those charged with teaching law and students struggling to learn law
confused. There is confusion about and a lack of consistent
approach to law as a
positive rule system, an institution, social practice, and substantive area of
investigation. The need to teach
substantive law at some point in the
curriculum, a position agreed upon by all, is further confounded by opposing
points of view
on pedagogic methods, including preferences for problem-based
group work, drafting
exercises, moots and other
approaches.
We argue that an understanding of law as a
discipline, regardless of positive, professional or policy emphasis, is a
critical step
to settling some of the confusion. Denominating law as a
discipline does not exclude any of the three focuses but provides law lecturers
with a way to organise their thinking about ‘what to teach.’
Donald describes a discipline as follows:
Disciplines provide homes within the larger learning community because they
determine the discourse: the domain or parameters of knowledge,
the theoretical
or conceptual structures, and the mode of inquiry. Disciplines provide examples
of systematic scholarly inquiry,
and therefore serve as scaffolding for students
in the process of exploring different ways of constructing meaning. In
disciplines,
faculty need to explain the main principles and tenets governing
their field of study, describe how they establish and validate knowledge,
show the necessity for engaging in further research and
discussion.
Further, it supports an interest in and an effort to look for a consistent
disciplinary approach which not only improves law lecturers
own understanding
but makes it easier both for them to teach and for students to learn. We argue
that our CRDT framework provides
a method for a ‘systematic scholarly
inquiry’ and a way of ‘constructing meaning’. Like any
disciplinary
framework properly understood, we do not claim it is the
exclusively correct method. Rather, we argue that it serves a foundational
purpose for subsequent analysis and critique.
In proposing the framework below, we attempt to address the issue Langdell
identified earlier in which law is taught as ‘a rag-bag
of rules and
exceptions’, by offering it as a foundation for identifying and analysing
substantive legal concepts, readily
transferable across all areas of law. It
provides a basis for clarity in how the fact determinations that concerned Frank
and subsequent
realists are potentially applied by professionals within the
legal system as well as a foundation for critical consideration of the
of law. The CRDT analytical framework requires students to construe the rule
first, understanding it as exclusion or inclusion,
to consider how it may apply
in the context specific facts and how at a systemic it may work to the advantage
of one group over another.
Of particular importance, a clear understanding of
the framework helps students to identify and analyse the features common to
area of law, for every area of law is a category of law in its own right,
provides rights and duties, and sets tests for the applicability
of the category
and for the exercise of those rights and duties. It is in educational terms what
Webb would refer to as a ‘holistic’
approach to law teaching and
understanding. We turn next to examine this framework in
PART IV A PROPOSED
FRAMEWORK: CATEGORIES, RIGHTS, DUTIES AND TESTS
As every law student to her or his great disappointment discovers, each area
of law is hermetically sealed to every other area of
law in terms of substantive
content. This discovery leads to a feeling of being overwhelmed by the sheer
amount of positive law that
needs to be mastered not only in each subject but in
the degree as a whole.
student rightly asks: ‘How can I learn all this material?’. Law
lecturers know the answer is: ‘You cannot.
The solution is to learn to
research.’ Yet, such an answer is an insufficient answer. Law students
need to learn what to focus
on when researching as well as needing a framework
to deal with the results of their research. More importantly, they need a
to approach legal problems generally: ‘IRAC’ simply
IRAC, a simple
method for briefing cases and structuring law assessment answers hardly amounts
to a method for analysis of areas
or rules of law. At least from a disciplinary
perspective, we can teach students to ‘think like a lawyer’—in
disciplinary sense.
Accordingly, we propose a transferable analytical framework that helps
students to ‘think like a lawyer’ that is broadly
applicable across
the discipline of law. That framework is composed of the following four contents
of law’s rule: Categories,
Rights, Duties and Tests (CRDT). This CRDT
framework is applicable to all areas of law, transferable from introductory
in law to more substantive areas such as Contracts and on to areas such
as Advanced Cyber Law and Tax Law. It is readily applicable
to all primary
sources of law including constitutions, legislation, regulation and case law.
The CRDT framework is an exegetical framework for legal rules. It is a
foundation for professional application and policy critique.
It requires the
student to ask a series of questions when analysing any piece of law. The
questions are as follows:
(1) What category (and subcategory) of law is applicable?
(2) What are the rights created by/in that category? And, who has those
(3) What are the duties created by/in that category? And, who has those
(4) What are the tests to enter and exit that category? And what tests are
within that category?
This framework is supplied to students in the first lecture and then applied
consistently in subsequent lectures whenever cases or
legislation is analysed.
When students work to interpret and apply rules, they are asked to do so using
the framework. As they do
so, they are invited to consider both the professional
and policy aspects of the rules.
Thus, for example:
1. Category: Professionally, we ask: does your client fit into the category?
In policy terms, we enquire: Why was this category created?
Who does it benefit?
Which part of society advocated for it and who opposed it?
2. Rights: Professionally, the question is: does your client have the right?
Or, who holds rights against your client? In policy terms
we ask: Why was this
right created? Why was it granted to people/parties category X rather than
people/parties category Y? Why was
a property right (right
created as opposed to right (right
in personam
3. Duty: Professionally, we ask: does your client have a duty? Or who owes
your client the duty? In policy terms, we enquire: Why
was this duty created?
Why was it imposed on people/parties category X rather than people/parties
category Y? Who benefits for this
allocation?
4. Test: Professionally, we ask: does your client meet the test? Are there
other associated tests that require analysis? In policy
terms we inquire: Why
was the test created with these elements? Is it easy to meet or difficult? That
level of difficulty benefits
whom? What is included and what is excluded?
We turn next to illustrate the CRDT framework using two examples—one
drawn from a tort statute and the other from an employment
CRDT Statute Example:
Applying CRDT to
Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
) we review the section.
This section provides:
43 Precautions against risk—general principles
(1) A person is not negligent in failing to take precautions against a risk
of harm unless—
(a) the risk was foreseeable (that is, it is a risk of which the person knew
or ought to have known); and
(b) the risk was not insignificant; and
(c) in the circumstances, a reasonable person in the person’s position
would have taken those precautions.
Applying the CRDT framework facilitates
identification and analysis of the substantive core of the section. Answering
the questions
provides the following:
(1) Category
Subcategory:
Negligence.
Sub-subcategory:
Breach of duty of care (standard of care)
: Test established for negligence: cumulative test
–– 43 (1) (a) and (2) and (3)
: A right to be free from liability OR a right to impose
: Take precautions against risk of harms OR a duty to
Starting with the analysis of
, it can be identified that
legal category
is tort, the
subcategory
is negligence,
and the specific
sub-subcategory
is breach of duty of care.
Additionally, a thorough analysis reveals that breach of duty of care is part
that determines the tort of negligence. The other
subcategories of the tort of negligence are the different elements that the
must prove to establish a cause of action for negligence: duty of
care, harm or damage, and
The following diagram assists in visualizing the analysis (see Figure 1):
Category of Law
Sub-Category
Sub-Subcategory
Tort of Negligence
Duty of care
Breach of duty of care
Harm or damage
The next concept of analysis is the concept of
. The section
provides a test for determining whether a person’s conduct meets the
statutory standard for the duty of care.
That is, whether a defendant in a tort
action has failed to take reasonable
In other words, the test
in this section provides criteria for an assessment of whether a defendant has
breached the duty of care
and, as a result, has acted negligently.
section 43(1)
is a three-prong, cumulative test
–– 43(1) (a) and (2) and (3). All the three elements of the test
must be satisfied
to find breach of duty of care. Under this test, the courts
will consider (1) the foreseeability of the risk of injury
(s 43(1)(a))
(2) the absence of insignificance of the risk or, simply put, its
probability
(s 43(1)(b))
(3) the reasonable response to the risk
Each one of these
three elements have, in turn, another
Accordingly, in applying the
section 43(1)
breaches his or her duty of care when he or she fails to avoid a risk of harm
that a reasonable person in the same position
would have avoided, and the risk
was both foreseeable and probable. Figure 2
illustrates how this
fits within the previous diagram:
Sub-Category
Sub-Subcategory
Tort of Negligence
Duty of care
Breach of duty of care
1) Foreseeability:
2) Probability:
3) Reasonableness of precautions:
Harm or damage
The last two core concepts of analysis,
intertwined.
. Accordingly, the
concepts must be analysed together.
In this case, the
that arises is twofold. First, a person who
has not met the
section 43(1)
not to be held
liable for breach of duty of care (negligent conduct). Second, a person has the
to hold someone liable for negligence when the latter satisfies the
and the other elements required to bring legal action in negligence
– duty of care, harm or damage, and causation.
The correlative
that arises is also twofold. First, there is a
to take reasonable precautions against risks that are foreseeable
and probable. Second, there is a
to pay for damages caused when a
party can demonstrate that the defendant is captured in each of the categories
or elements needed
to establish the tort of negligence. The following figure
includes the last core concepts of analysis within the general framework
Sub- Category
Sub-Subcategory
Tort of Negligence
Duty of care
Breach of duty of care
1) Foreseeability: 43(1)(a)
2) Probability: 43(1)(b)
3) Reasonableness of precautions: 43(1)(c)
1) Right not to be held liable
2) Right to hold someone liable
1) Duty to take reasonable precautions
2) Duty to pay damages
Harm or damage
In terms of professional application, students are advised to think about
what this example of the CRDT framework means for a client.
The professional
question is: ‘What must a lawyer be able to advise a client as a result of
this section?’ In a nutshell,
a client will be held liable for negligence
and have to pay where the client has failed to take precautions where the risk
was foreseeable,
not insignificant and a reasonable person would have taken
those precautions. A professional approach also requires consideration
other elements and tests comprising the tort of negligence –– duty
of care, harm or damage, and causation ––
to provide accurate,
thorough legal advice. Explaining that the issue is a matter of payment, helps
students to focus their minds
on the professional, practical implications of
In terms of policy, the
attempts to create a single legal regime
for all personal injuries and deaths resulting from
negligence,
with special rules for medical
practitioners.
Additionally,
each prong of the
cumulative test has an underlying policy concern to
address. The first prong aims to exclude from liability those persons who fail
to take precautions against risks in respect to which they had no knowledge or
means of knowledge.
‘not insignificant’ in the second prong was deliberately used as a
double negative ‘to indicate a risk
that is of a higher probability than
is indicated by the phrase “not far-fetched or fanciful”, but not so
high as might
be indicated by a phrase such as “a substantial
prong completes the analysis to remind the judiciary that reasonableness is
different from foreseeability and probability
in factoring
negligence.
While reasonableness
refers to ‘what the reasonable person in the position of the defendant
would have done or not done in
order to avoid harm to the
plaintiff’,
foreseeability indicates knowledge and inference, and probability incorporates a
more objective, scientific
As this example illustrates, a clear understanding of the positive law is not
necessarily an end; rather, it is the foundation for
professional application
and policy critique. In the absence of such positive analysis, it is difficult
to see how effective discussion
of professional implications or critique of
policies can occur.
CRDT Example in Case Law:
Employment Law
The second example is drawn from the case law in the category of employment
law. It applies the CRDT framework to the facts of the
relationship between a
worker and a potential employer to determine whether the legal relationship is
an employment relationship.
Again, the proposed CRDT framework allows law
students to identify the core concepts of analysis as the following:
(1) Category:
Employment Law,
Subcategory
: Employment
relationship (employer and employee)
: Multi-factor tests
: Defined by the
Fair Work Act 2009
: Defined by the FWA
legal category
in question is the employment relationship. There
is no statutory definition of an employment
relationship.
Instead, courts have developed multi-factor tests to identify whether an
employment relationship
There is no definitive common law multi-factor
Rather, a detailed,
comprehensive factual analysis is necessary to establish whether the person
supplying the service is an employee
and the party paying for the service is an
employer. The analysis includes several factors such as the degree and nature of
exercised by the potential employer, the work that the worker performs
for competitors, the mode of remuneration, the provision of
tools and equipment,
and the terms of the agreement between the worker and the potential
The applicable
, therefore,
is not just one; it comprises all those factors
developed at common law to identify an employment relationship.
Once the judiciary has defined that a
particular legal relationship falls within the legal category of employment,
arise for both the worker, now
employee, and the employer.
These rights and duties are for the most part set out in the
person categorised as an employee, for instance, is entitled to flexible working
arrangements, different types of leaves, and
These rights arise once the
legal requirements for each of them are met –– a situation which
constitutes another set
of tests. Employee’s rights create correlative
in the employer once the applicable legal requirements are
satisfied. The following figure summarises the application of the framework
the classification of a legal relationship as one of employment (see Figure
Category of Law
Sub-category
Employment Law
Employment Relationship
Multifactor Tests
1) Flexible working arrangements
3) Redundancy payments
1) Flexible working arrangements
3) Redundancy payments
In terms of the professional, students are able to consider the implications
for a client. For example, would an Uber driver be considered
an employee? If
so, consider what that categorisation would mean for the driver in terms of sick
leave, superannuation and job security.
Similarly, students would consider what
costs and potential legal implications this categorisation would have for Uber.
Understanding
the implications of an application of the test for the client
might press for interpretations or garner evidence to support an application for
In terms of the policy critique, it is evident that a massive power imbalance
underlies the employer-employee
relationship.
And further, that
while the costs to the party determined to fit into the employer category are
significant, law’s policy of
redistribution, shifts substantial wealth
from investors looking to live off their wealth without working to people whose
daily existence
is precarious depending on the whims of weather and days of the
week in order to determine whether they will be able to feed themselves
The two examples above evince the utility and portability of the CRDT
framework. The CRDT framework was effectively used to analyse
different sources
of law, a piece of legislation and a common law case, in different areas of law,
torts and employment law. The
CRDT framework simplifies the teaching and
learning processes, providing a straightforward method of legal analysis.
Student feedback on the use of the CRDT model has been strongly positive.
Students have made comments such as: ‘I wish I would
have learned this in
first year. It would have made learning law so much
finally understand what this [law] is about. I couldn’t make sense of it
or see how it tied together before.’
While such anecdote is no more than
such, it provides support for the suggestion of wider use of CRDT across the
curriculum.
Our article has identified a novel framework for understanding, teaching and
learning law. The framework has the great benefit that
it is readily
transferable between different areas of substantive law. Further, it provides a
systematic way for approaching legal
materials of all types — statutes and
case law — learning to ‘think like a lawyer’. It also provides
for addressing the professional and policy aspects of law. Finally,
it is easily grasped and implemented by teacher and student alike.
We hope we have achieved our aim of introducing a new and useful tool to
colleagues in the profession of law teaching and ultimately
improving the
learning and implementation of law, by law students and future law professionals
of all types.
Benedict Sheehy BTh, MA, JD,
MA, LLM, PhD is a Professor of Law at Canberra Law School. His research focuses
on corporate law and
regulation and the law and society interface. Juan
Diaz-Granados LLB (Hons), LLM, PhD (Grad Dip Comm Law, Grad Dip Bus Law, Grad
Dip Insc Law), is a Lecturer at the Canberra Law School. He works primarily in
law and technology and commercial law. Tomas Fitzgerald
BA, LLB is a Lecturer at
the Curtin School of Law. His research specialises in legal theory,
international trade and effective regulatory
Julian Webb, ‘Taking
Values Seriously: The Democratic Intellect and the Place of Values in the Law
School Curriculum’
(Research Paper No 2009-06, Warwick School of Law, 12
November 2009), 18.
Fiona Cownie,
‘Alternative Values in Legal Education’
(2003) 6(2)
Julian Webb, 'Post-Fordism and
the Reformation of Liberal Legal Education' in Fiona Cownie (ed),
School - Global Issues, Local Questions
(Routledge, 2019) 228.
The Australian legal academy
has largely been practitioner driven well into the mid-twentieth century.
Australia had only 15 full
time academics in the 1940’s, the rest being
legal practitioners. David Barker, ‘A History of Australian Legal
(PhD Thesis, Macquarie University, 2016). Unsurprisingly, while
Australia has a long and not insignificant tradition of advocates
for liberal
education in the law schools, the positivist approach has often dominated
Australian legal education. Bartie notes the
strong interest in progressive
ideas and rejection of formalism by the first generations of Australian legal
scholars. See Susan
Bartie and David Sandomierski,
American Legal Education
Abroad: Critical Histories
(NYU Press, 2021).
See Westerman’s metaphor
of arranging bric-a-brac in a house. ‘The work of my legal colleagues
reminded me very much
of my mother, how, after having bought a new item for the
household, was always busy, for hours it seemed, to find a proper place
It commonly brought with it a massive rearrangement of the entire household ...
but after all that was done our apartment
looked as if nothing had happened and
as a if the order hand never been upset.’ Pauline Westerman, 'Open or
Autonomous? The
Debate on Legal Methodology as a Reflection of the Debate on
Law' in Mark Van Hoecke (ed),
Methodologies of Legal Research: Which Kind of
Method for What Kind of Discipline?
(Hart Publishing, 2011) 87.
Jamie R Abrams, 'Reframing the
Socratic Method'
(2015) 64(4)
Journal of Legal Education
See below n 45 and accompanying
Janet Gail Donald,
To Think: Disciplinary Perspectives. The Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult Education
(ERIC, 2002) 167, cited in Fiona Cownie, ‘Twining, Teachers of
Law and Law Teaching’
(2011) 18(1-2)
International Journal of the Legal
William Twining, 'Legal
skills and Legal Education'
(1988) 22(1)
The Law Teacher
; Lucille A
Jewel, 'Oil and Water: How Legal Education's Doctrine and Skills Divide
Reproduce Toxic Hierarchies'
Columbia Journal of Gender and Law
Duncan Kennedy, ‘Legal
Education and the Reproduction of Hierarchy’
(1982) 32(4)
Legal Education
Duncan Kennedy ‘Form and Substance in Private Law
Adjudication’
(1976) 89(8)
Harvard Law Review
Avrom Sherr and David
Sugarman, 'Theory in Legal Education'
(2000) 7(3)
International Journal of
the Legal Profession
Michael H Whincup, ‘On
Teaching Industrial Law’
(1970) 11(1)
Journal of the Society of Public
Teachers of Law
Jeremiah A Ho, 'Function,
Form, and Strawberries: Subverting Langdell'
(2015) 64(4)
Journal of Legal
Fiona Cownie, ‘The
Importance Of Theory In Law Teaching’
(2000) 7(3)
International Journal
of the Legal Profession
J Webb, ‘Why Theory
Matters’ in J S Webb and C Maughan (eds),
Teaching Lawyers’
(Butterworth, 1996) 107, citing J H Schlegel (1984) 'Searching for
Archimedes',
Journal of Legal Education
Whincup (n 13) 36.
Bruce A Kimball,
‘Christopher Langdell: The Case of an ‘Abomination’ in
Teaching Practice’ (2004)
Thought & Action
23, citing the
Boston Daily Advertiser
in 1906, who described Langdell as ‘the
greatest teacher ... that this country has ever produced’.
Margaret Davies,
the Law Question
(Law Book Company, 1994).
John C Kleefeld, 'Rethinking
"Like a Lawyer": An Incrementalist's Proposal for First-Year Curriculum Reform'
(2003) 53(2)
Journal of Legal Education
See above 18 and companying
Michael D A Freeman,
Lloyd’s Introduction to Jurisprudence
(Sweet & Maxwell, 8th ed,
In Australia, for example,
requirements for admission as a barrister in 1848 required passing tests in
Latin and Greek. Barker (n
Jerome Frank, ‘A Plea
for Lawyer-Schools’
Yale Law Journal
Jerome Frank, ‘A
national Bar program subject: What constitutes a good legal education?’
American Bar Association Journal
Harold D Lasswell and Myres
S McDougal, ‘Legal Education and Public Policy- Professional Training in
the Public Interest’
The Yale Law Journal
Harold D Lasswell and Myres
S McDougal,
Jurisprudence for A Free Society: Studies in Law, Science and
(Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1992) vol 1.
Frank (n 29) 1323.
Jerome Frank, ‘Both
Ends Against the Middle’
University of Pennsylvania Law
Lasswell and McDougal (n 33)
Myron Moskovitz,
‘Beyond the Case Method: It's Time to Teach with Problems’
Journal of Legal Education
Moskovitz (n 38) 270.
For an entertaining example,
see D A Jeremy Telman, ‘Langdellian Limericks’
(2011) 61(1)
Journal of Legal Education
Donald (n 8) 292.
Webb, cited in Cownie (n
Lasswell and McDougal (n 33)
Jessica E Slavin, ‘Did
You Learn About IRAC in Law School? How did IRAC Become Such an Important Part
of Legal Writing Teaching?
And Should it Be?’,
Marquette University Law
School Faculty Blog
(online, 11 September 2008).
Bernadette Richards and
Melissa de Zwart,
Tort Law Principles
(Thomson Reuters, 2nd ed, 2017)
Joanna Kyriakakis et al,
Contemporary Australian Tort Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2020)
Benic v New South
[2010] NSWSC 1039
Gunnersen v Henwood
[2011] VSC 440.
For instance, the test
associated with the third element is known as the ‘calculus of
negligence’: see
Wyong SC v Shirt
(1980) 146 CLR 40;
(Wrongs) Act 2002
This is not to say that
there are only rights and duties in law; rather, using these concepts crudely,
law and legal relations as correlatives. The
necessary refinement comes as the specific provisions are analysed-- in
terms, correlative jural relations: see Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld,
'Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning'
(1913-1914) 23(1)
Yale Law Journal
Review of the Law of
(Final Report, September 2002) [7.1]– [7.2].
Ibid [7.5].
Ibid [7.7].
Ibid [7.15].
‘There should also be
a statutory provision to the effect that whether failing to take precautions,
against a not insignificant
risk of personal injury or death to another, was
negligent depends on whether, in the opinion of the court, the reasonable person
would have taken precautions against the risk.’ Ibid [7.7].
Ibid [7.9].
The provision reads:
(2) In deciding whether a reasonable person would have taken precautions
against a risk of harm, the court must consider the following
(among other
relevant things):
(a) the probability that the harm would happen if precautions were not
(b) the likely seriousness of the harm;
(c) the burden of taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm;
(d) the social utility of the activity creating the risk of harm.
Review of the Law of
(n 52) [7.10].
See Andrew Stewart,
Steward's Guide to Employment Law
(The Federation Press, 6
ed, 2018) 54.
Cai (t/as French Accent)
v Do Rozario
[2011] FWAFB 8307
Putland v Royans
Wagga Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 910
para [30] (‘Putland’); Stewart (n
(n 61) para [30].
Bromwich J explained that ‘[w]hile the degree of control remains
important, the modern approach is multifactorial
and the totality of the
relationship must therefore be considered.’
(n 62) para
[30] (Bromwich J).
There are, however, rights
and duties that apply equally to employees and independent contractors, such as
laws dealing with discrimination
and work health and safety: see Stewart (n
See the National Employment
Standards (NES) in
Fair Work Act 2009
Benjamin Means and Joseph A
Seiner explain that ‘[a]lthough at-will employment has a formal symmetry,
substantial inequality
of economic power distorts the actual structure of labor
markets.’ Benjamin Means and Joseph A Seiner, 'Navigating the Uber
Economy' (2016) 49(4)
University of California Davis Law Review
1520. See also Paul Davies and Mark Freedland,
Kahn-Freund's Labour and the
(Stevens & Sons, 3rd ed, 1983) 5.
Student feedback in
Corporations Law, University of Canberra, 2020
Student feedback in
Corporations Law, University of Canberra, 2020
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (308 KB)
PDF format (450 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter