URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/42.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chia, Joyce --- "Inquiring into inquiries: the review of the Royal Commissions Act" [2009] ALRCRefJl 42; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 49
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 49–50 of the original
Inquiring into inquiries
The review of the Royal Commissions Act
By Joyce Chia*
Dr Mohamed Haneef’s visa was cancelled. Cornelia Rau was illegally
detained. Saddam Hussein’s regime pocketed kickbacks
from the Australian
Wheat Board. These are the issues that prompted the most recent Australian
federal public inquiries.
The Australian Law Reform Commission’s (ALRC’s) inquiry into
Royal Commissions and other forms of public inquiry is the
first comprehensive
review of the structure and mechanisms of federal public inquiries. Much has
changed since the
Royal Commissions Act
was enacted in 1902, and much has
been learnt since then. Despite the rapid growth of other accountability
mechanisms, public inquiries
still play an important and high-profile role in
Australian public life. The ALRC’s proposals are designed to ensure that
inquiries are more useful and effective, as well as more accountable, in
the future.
A Royal Commission, or a public inquiry of some sort, is often called for
when something goes badly wrong in Australian public life.
Those calling for a
Royal Commission are attracted by the independence and status of a Royal
Commission, and its ability to get ‘at
the truth’ by compelling
witnesses to give evidence in its investigations. Royal Commissions, however,
are often also very
expensive, lengthy, and formal, and the glare of the media
spotlight can ruin lives and careers forever.
Faced with a call for a Royal Commission, the Australian Government can
establish a Royal Commission, or it can establish a form of
public inquiry which
has no statutory basis and therefore has no legal power to get anyone to answer
its questions or provide information.
A member of a non-statutory inquiry,
unlike a Royal Commissioner, also has no automatic legal protection from being
sued. Of course,
a government can also choose to do nothing, or it could in some
cases appoint a standing body, such as the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
into the matter.
All of these options have disadvantages for a government. The length and cost
of the typical Royal Commission, and the court-like
procedures that tend to be
followed in Royal Commissions, may be unsuitable for the particular inquiry. A
non-statutory inquiry may
be perceived as toothless, since a witness can simply
refuse to answer its questions. Doing nothing may not be a politically feasible
option. A standing body may not have the power to inquire into the matter, or
may be considered insufficiently high-profile for the
subject of inquiry.
An alternative would be to enable the establishment of a quicker, cheaper and
more flexible form of inquiry than a Royal Commission,
with the powers and
protections of a Royal Commission. This is what the ALRC proposes in its recent
Discussion Paper,
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
The ALRC proposes, however,
that this form of inquiry should not have the most intrusive powers available to
Royal Commissions, and
should not be able to require a person to incriminate him
or herself.
The Discussion Paper proposes that a two-tier structure of public inquiry
should be created in a new
Inquiries Act.
The proposed Act is designed to
give the Australian Government greater flexibility in establishing public
inquiries. Some events,
while not justifying the expense or status of a Royal
Commission, may justify a smaller inquiry with statutory powers to compel
Similar two-tier structures can be found in other jurisdictions such
Under the ALRC’s proposals, Royal Commissions will remain the highest
form of executive inquiry in Australia, and will be established
Governor-General to inquire into matters of ‘substantial public
importance’. The second tier of inquiry will be
an ‘Official
Inquiry’, which may be established by a Minister to inquire into a matter
of ‘public importance’.
An ‘Official Inquiry’ may,
however, be converted into a Royal Commission, and inquiries established outside
the proposed
statutory framework may be converted into Official Inquiries or
Royal Commissions. This gives the Australian Government flexibility
‘upgrade’ inquiries if this appears necessary during the course of
an investigation.
Both forms of inquiry will be able to: compel a person to attend or appear
before the inquiry; take evidence on oath or affirmation;
compel a person to
answer questions; and compel a person to produce documents or other things. The
ALRC proposes, however, that certain
powers will be available only to Royal
Commissions, to ensure appropriate protection of the rights and interests of
those affected
by inquiries. Powers which will be restricted to Royal
Commissions include the power to apply to a judge for a warrant to arrest
person who fails to attend or appear, or for a warrant to exercise powers to
enter premises and search and seize information.
The proposal for the introduction of Official Inquiries is only one aspect of
the ALRC’s inquiry. Another important aspect of
the review is the need to
ensure the independence and accountability of Royal Commissions and Official
Inquiries. As Dr Scott Prasser
has argued, the primary value of public inquiries
lies in the public perception of their
independence.
independence of such inquiries is critical to their effectiveness, the ALRC
proposes that the new
Inquiries Act
should provide that Royal Commissions
and Official Inquiries are to be independent in the performance of their
Public inquiries are also unusual in that, as ad hoc mechanisms, they are not
generally subject to the same forms of accountability
as standing bodies. The
ALRC proposes a number of measures to improve the accountability of public
inquiries. For example, it proposes
that the Australian Government should be
required by statute to table final reports of such inquiries (or a statement of
why part of a report is not being tabled); publish updates on
implementation of any recommendations the Australian Government accepts;
summary information on the costs of the inquiry; and consult Indigenous peoples
in the development of procedures in inquiries
significantly affecting Indigenous
The ALRC’s inquiry also considers ways to improve the effectiveness of
Royal Commissions and other inquiries. For example, the
ALRC proposes reforms to
the powers of Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries to obtain, and ensure
appropriate protection, of
national security information. Difficulties in
accessing and using national security information have arisen in previous
such as the Clarke Inquiry into the Case of Dr Mohamed Haneef.
The ALRC also proposes the publication of an
Inquiries Handbook
address matters relating to the administration of inquiries, the appointment and
remuneration of legal practitioners assisting
an inquiry or representing
witnesses, and the suitability and use of different procedures. This proposal is
designed to consolidate
the institutional knowledge in establishing,
administering and conducting inquiries, so that there is no need to
the wheel’ each time a new inquiry is established, and so
that lessons learned from one inquiry can be passed on.
Other proposals designed to improve the effectiveness of inquiries include
providing that inquiries have the power to: appoint expert
advisors; refer
questions of law to the Federal Court; and apply to the Federal Court for
enforcement of its notices and directions.
The use of expert advisors is
designed to enhance the capacity of inquiries to investigate matters requiring
specialist expertise,
and should also give the Australian Government greater
flexibility in appointing members of public inquiries. For example, a technical
expert may be able to conduct an investigation more effectively if a legal
expert is able to advise on the legal issues arising in
the investigation.
The power to refer questions of law to the Federal Court would enable an
inquiry to resolve a dispute about the exercise of its powers,
rather than
waiting for a party to seek judicial review. The power to apply to the Federal
Court for enforcement of notices and directions
is designed to enable more
timely, and therefore more effective, punishment for failing to comply with an
inquiry than relying on
the threat of a prosecution some time down the
The ALRC’s inquiry into Royal Commissions and other forms of public
The ALRC began its current inquiry in January 2009, with its Terms of
Reference requiring it to review the operation and provisions
Commissions Act 1902
, and to examine whether an alternative form or forms of
Commonwealth executive inquiry should be established by statute.
The Discussion Paper,
Royal Commissions and Official Inquiries
75), was released in August 2009 following
extensive consultations around
the country. The ALRC’s
final report was due to be delivered to the
federal Attorney-General on 30 October 2009 and will be publicly available
after it has been tabled in the federal Parliament. All ALRC
publications are available online as soon as they are
* Dr Joyce Chia is a Legal Officer at the Australian Law Reform
Commission and is currently assigned to the Royal Commissions
The final report of the Royal Commissions
Inquiry was being finalised at the time of publication and is under a
parliamentary embargo.
This article is based on proposals made in the Australian
Law Reform Commission’s Discussion Paper
Royal Commissions and Official
The ALRC also proposes that an Official
Inquiry would not have power to require information subject to client legal
privilege. Presently,
Royal Commissions do not have this power, although the
ALRC’s 2007 report,
Privilege in Perspective
, recommended that
Royal Commissions should have this power if it is specified in the letters
patent. See Australian Law Reform Commission,
Privilege in
Perspective: Client Legal Privilege in Federal Investigations
(2007), Rec 6–2. The Australian Government has not yet provided a formal
response to the recommendations in this
A tiered model was also recently proposed
in the New Zealand Law Commission’s report,
A New Inquiries Act
Report No 102 (2008). The New Zealand Parliament is presently considering the
Inquiries Bill 2008 (NZ), which is based on the recommendations
Zealand Law Commission.
Royal Commissions and
Public Inquiries in Australia
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (180 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter