URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2011/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Charlesworth, Hilary --- "The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission" [2011] ALRS 3
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
Hilary Charlesworth
Introduction
Following the end of the Cold War, United Nations (UN) engagement in
post-conflict situations developed sporadically without any clear
institutional
or normative structure. Indeed, UN peacebuilding activities were largely
unaccountable, leading to significant criticism.
Some observers recommended that
the UN Trusteeship Council be revitalised to become the focus of peacebuilding
activities.
Eventually, however, the UN reform process initiated by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan created a new body to oversee the increasing
UN investment in
peacebuilding. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) was established by concurrent
resolutions of both the Security
Council and the General Assembly on 30 December
first such advisory subsidiary organ created within the United Nations and it
has an intriguing hybrid structure with
direct relationships with both the
Security Council and the General Assembly. The resolutions style the PBC as a
institutional mechanism’, an ‘intergovernmental
advisory body’ to provide advice on, and develop an ‘integrated
approach’ to, post-conflict peacebuilding and to allow discussion between
states that have an interest in and experience of
peacebuilding. The ambitious
primary aim of the PBC set out in the joint resolutions is the creation of
‘sustainable peace’.
Structure of the PBC
The procedural hub of the PBC is its Organisational Committee. This body has
31 members drawn from four categories, which inevitably
overlap. They serve for
two year, renewable, terms. Seven members are from the Security Council
(Resolution 1646, adopted at the
same time as the one already referred to,
mandated that this means the P5 and two other members); seven members elected by
the Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC), taking regional representation and
experience in post-conflict situations into account; five of the
contributors to the UN budget; five members who are ‘top providers’
of military and police for UN missions; and seven
additional UN members
including those with experience of recovering from conflict. Countries can only
be selected in one category.
The concurrent resolutions invite international
financial institutions to participate in all PBC meetings.
The PBC also has the capacity to meet in the format of
‘country-specific meetings’ in which participants can include
of the Organisational Committee, the country being considered, other
countries that are involved in peacebuilding in that country,
international or regional institutions, UN representatives and representatives
from relevant institutional donors such as
the World Bank.
Situations may come onto the PBC’s agenda as requests for advice from
four different quarters: from the Security Council; from
ECOSOC or the General
Assembly if the state concerned is ‘on the verge of lapsing or relapsing
into conflict’ and has
agreed to PBC involvement; from a member state who
is in such a situation; and from the Secretary-General. The PBC does not, then,
have the capacity to take independent action to place a country situation on its
The PBC is required to reach all decisions through consensus. It reports
annually to the General Assembly, which makes that body the
major forum for
review of the progress of the PBC. The PBC’s constitutional resolutions
also established a ‘Peacebuilding
Fund’ to receive voluntary
contributions from member states and other donors and foreshadowed a
Peacebuilding Support Office
within the UN Secretariat, which has been duly
established. Although these two entities engage with the situations being dealt
by the PBC, they also have the capacity to interact with cases that are not
on the PBC’s agenda.
· Political objectives for reform
The PBC emerged from a reform agenda initiated by UN
Secretary-General Kofi Annan partly as a response to the turmoil created by the
Security Council’s failure to endorse the United States invasion of Iraq,
and partly to create an ‘Annan legacy’.
This project began with the
Secretary-General establishing a ‘High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change’ in
September 2003. A year later, the High-level Panel made a
number of proposals, including the creation of a UN Peacebuilding Commission,
which was to be established under the Security Council. The Panel noted a
‘key institutional gap’ within the UN: the
lack of any mechanism
devoting to preventing states collapsing into conflict, or supporting countries
in the transition from conflict
Accordingly,
the Panel described the PBC’s role as one of both conflict prevention and
post-conflict peacebuilding:
to identify countries which are under stress and risk sliding towards State
collapse; to organise, in partnership with the national
Government, proactive
assistance in preventing that process from developing further; to assist in the
planning for transitions between
conflict and
post-conflict.
The Secretary-General included the idea of a PBC in his March 2005 report,
which set out an agenda for the September World Summit
of Heads of State and
Government. He spoke of a ‘gaping hole’ in the UN because of the
lack of an institution that assisted
countries in transition from war to lasting
however, a significant amendment to the proposal made by the High-level Panel,
because the Secretary-General omitted any
reference to an ‘early
warning’ function for the
and any role in
conflict-prevention. Instead, the PBC would deal only with countries that had
gone through a period of conflict
and its focus would be advice and
coordination. It is likely that this change was designed to mollify members of
the Security Council
who may have read the High-level Panel proposal as usurping
their Chapter VII
High-level Panel proposal was changed also in its translation into the
Summit’s Outcome document from being a small, expert
body funded by new
resources to being an intergovernmental body dependent on existing resources or
voluntary contributions and through
the introduction of links to the General
Assembly as well as the Security Council. The insertion of the General Assembly
into peacebuilding
activities was the result of lobbying by Asian and African
countries which were keen to displace the Security Council’s monopoly
this area. The PBC, then, started its life with limited responsibilities in the
area of peacebuilding, and, as an advisory and
coordinating body, without a
mandate to set the direction of UN peacebuilding missions.
The formal creation of the PBC was a product of the World Summit in September
2005. The Summit Outcome document, adopted on 24 October
2005 set a very tight
timetable (just over two months) for the establishment of the
The PBC offered
a sense of immediate and practical reform on an issue that had consumed much
international energy, but its design
as an advisory body did not threaten state
sovereignty.
· Actualising reform
The PBC was inaugurated on 23 June 2006 with Angola elected as
chair. The chair of the PBC has changed annually, with Japan, Chile
and Germany
having now taken on this role and Rwanda serving as chair in 2011. The objects
of PBC deliberations have all been from
Africa. The Security Council requested
that the PBC place Burundi and Sierra Leone on its agenda in its first year,
both countries
having agreed to this process. Since then, Guinea-Bissau, the
Central African Republic and Liberia have been added to the PBC’s
The PBC has adopted workplans and organised field missions to all these
countries and it has supported consultations with
major local players about
consolidating peace. The Peacebuilding Fund has allocated funding to the PBC
cases. The PBC also set up
a Working Group on Lessons Learned to identify
‘best practice’ in peacebuilding, which reported in
In February
2011, the PBC added Guinea to its agenda, the first time it has acted without a
Security Council referral.
· Appraising reform
Some observers regard the establishment of the PBC as one of the
few 2005 Summit reform success
of ‘Integrated peacebuilding strategies’ has promoted coordination
of consultative and collaborative plans for
peace that go beyond security and
economic issues. The PBC has also placed a spotlight on countries recovering
from conflict that
receive little international attention. More critical views
emphasise the PBC’s slow start and its possible redundancy, pointing
that the UN already has extensive capacity and expertise in peacebuilding and
that all that is required is better coordination.
Others query the value of
institutionalising peacebuilding and support ad hoc country-specific
approaches.
others argue that NGOs, rather than intergovernmental institutions, are
best-placed to monitor
peacebuilding.
review of the UN’s peacebuilding architecture in 2010 was unusually
trenchant in criticising the operations of the
It noted the
limited range of countries on the PBC’s agenda and expressed concern that
so few countries had sought the PBC’s
advice. The review did not find
clear evidence that the PBC had made a difference on the ground. It also
criticised the weakness
of the relationships the PBC had forged with the
Security Council, the General Assembly and ECOSOC. A major concern identified by
the review was the PBC’s lack of practical attention to national ownership
of peacebuilding. The review found that national
perspectives did not play a
major role in the planning process, or in the implementation
To some extent, the PBC is caught up in North-South politics. The developed
North tends to favour an active and interventionist PBC,
while the South is wary
of an institution that could morph into a new system of
trusteeship.
is also evidence that some countries fear that being listed on the PBC’s
agenda will not only label them as dysfunctional,
but also reduce the amount of
attention they receive from the Security
The Security Council and General Assembly resolutions that establish the PBC
illustrate some of the problems it faces. The role of
the PBC is expressed in
general terms, for example bringing together ‘all relevant actors to
marshal resources and to advise
on and propose integrated strategies for
post-conflict peacebuilding and
‘to focus attention on the reconstruction and institution-building efforts
necessary for recovery from
‘to provide recommendations and information to improve the coordination of
all relevant actors within and outside the United
Nations to develop best
practices...’.
This broad canvas does not provide a clear direction for the fledgling
institution. The PBC has a mandate only in the context of
post-conflict
peacebuilding. It will however often be difficult to determine whether a country
has attained a ‘post-conflict’
status; and this status may well be
only temporary. The redefinition of the role of the PBC to remove the early
warning function
envisaged by the High-level Panel has also reduced its
potential impact.
The PBC is an advisory body, operating on the basis of consensus. The effect
of this is that any member state has a de facto veto.
The fact that the
permanent members of the Security Council all have a seat on the PBC may lessen
potential friction between the
two bodies, but it has caused tensions with the
General Assembly and has imported Security Council politics directly into the
On the other hand, the General Assembly has the important function of
debating the PBC’s annual reports.
The PBC’s budget is dependent on a voluntary fund and contributions
from UN member states have been uneven. It took some time
for the Fund to get
close to the aim of US $250 million (at the end of 2010 it had got to $342
million), and less than a quarter
of UN members have made contributions, ranging
from Sweden ($US 72 million) to Peru ($US 5000). Given that peacebuilding in a
country such as Afghanistan has cost many billions of dollars, the Fund
may well be inadequate. Moreover, most donors made one off
commitments to the
Fund. This is an uncertain financial foundation for the PBC and a major
challenge is securing a viable long-term
funding base. There are also concerns
that countries may seek to be placed on the PBC’s agenda simply to attract
an injection
of money. In both Burundi and Sierra Leone, funds were provided
before a peacebuilding framework had been agreed and monitoring and
accountability mechanisms were
The resolutions establishing the PBC envisaged a role for civil society. The
preambular paragraphs refer to ‘the important contribution
society and non-governmental organisations, including women’s
organisations, to peacebuilding
This contribution has been undermined in practice. The PBC adopted provisional
guidelines on the participation of civil society,
which create complex
procedures and restrict access to the PBC. The 2010 review of the UN’s
peacebuilding architecture noted
civil society’s disengagement and
isolation from the
On the other
hand, the role defined for international monetary institutions in the
resolutions has been expanded in practice, with
the IMF, the World Bank, the
European Community and the Organisation of Islamic Conference allowed to
participate as full members
in PBC meetings.
Another area where the PBC has become engulfed by UN traditions is in the
area of attention to women and issues of gender. The Security
Council and
General Assembly resolutions made a number of references to women and gender;
indeed the PBC is the first UN institution
to have gender incorporated in its
constitutional resolutions. The resolutions reaffirm ‘the important role
of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacebuilding’ and call for women’s ‘equal participation and
involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace and
security.’ The resolutions also call upon the PBC
‘to integrate a
gender perspective into all its
In the PBC’s work in both Sierra Leone and Burundi gender equality was
designated as a ‘cross-cutting issue’. Reviews
of the workings of
the PBC, however, suggest that these commitments have been given low priority.
Women are routinely left out of
policy development with respect to peace, and
the PBC has operated with narrow understandings of security. Women’s
organisations
have argued for recognition that gender-related violence and
discrimination can undermine peacebuilding efforts and thus are integrally
connected to
review of the PBC argued that the PBC had not ensured that women’s voices
were adequately heard in peacebuilding
activities.
concern is not peculiar to the PBC: a ten year review of the implementation of
the historic Security Council resolution 1325
of 2000, which called for greater
engagement of women in peacebuilding, found that it had had limited impact on
post-conflict
Overall, the first five years of the PBC’s work suggest that it has not
yet developed a secure identity. As an intergovernmental
body, it cannot readily
operate as a technical, or an implementing body. It is above all a political
institution, but one that so
far has been wary of operating politically, of
bridging the gap between post-conflict countries and the UN
See Ralph Wilde,
International Territorial Administration - How Trusteeship and the civilizing
mission never went away (Oxford University
Press, 2008) 424-428. See also
Matthias Ruffert, ‘The administration of Kosovo and East Timor by the
International Community’
(2001) 50 International and Comparative Law
Quaterly 613, 631; Carsten Stahn, ‘Institutionalizing Brahimi’s
footprint” – A comment on the role and mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission’
(2005) 2 International Organizations Law Review
, 404; and generally Tom Parker, The Ultimate Intervention: Revitalising the
UN Trusteeship Council for the 21st Century (Norwegian
School of Management,
Council Resolution on Operationalising the Peacebuilding Commission, SC Res
1645, UN SC, 5335th mtng, [2(a)], UN Doc S/Res/1645
(2005); General Assembly
Resolution on Operationalising the Peacebuilding Commission, GA Res 60/180, UN
GAOR, 60th sess, [2(a)],
UN Doc A/Res/60/180
Nations Report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, A more
secure world: Our shared responsibility (2004)
of the United Nations Secretary-General, In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all, UN GAOR,
[114], UN Doc A/59/2005
Gerhard Thallinger, ‘The UN Peacebuilding Commission and Transitional
(2007) 8 German Law Journal 681
Summit Outcome, GA Res 60/1, UN GAOR, 60th sess, [97-105], UN Doc A/Res/60/1
Lessons and Practices in Peacebuilding 2007-2009, Report of the Working Group on
Lessons Learned of the Peacebuilding Commission
Murthy, ‘New Phase in UN Reforms: Establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Human Rights Council’ (2007)
44 International Studies 39,
Miall, ‘The United Nations and peacebuilding: prospects and perils in
international regime (trans)formation. The EU and
the Peacebuilding
Commission’ (2007) 20 Cambridge Review of International Affairs 29,
the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, UN GAOR,
sess, UN SC, 65
UN Doc A/64/868-S/2020/393
paras 17-19,
Farrall, Interviews with United Nations officials (New York, April 2007).
Above n 13,
Ibid, para.
para. 2(c).
ActionAid, CAFOD & Care International, Consolidating the Peace? Views from
Sierra Leone and Burundi on the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission (2007).
The Peacebuilding Fund has been reviewed twice: see Report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on the
Independent Evaluation of the Peacebuilding
Fund (2008); Nicole Ball and Mariska van Beijnum, Review of the Peacebuilding
Fund (2009).
Above n 13.
Above n 2, para. 20. See also SC Res 1325, UN Security Council, 4213th mtg, [5,
8, 15, 16, 17] UN Doc S/Res/1325
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security & International Alert,
Enhancing Security and the Rule of Law: How can Gender
be better integrated into
the Priorities of the UN Peacebuilding Commission?
n 13, paras 29-30,
Impact Study on Implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on
Women, Peace and Security in Peacekeeping,
Final Report to the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Department of Field Support (2010).
Above n 13,
paras 168-169.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (84.3 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter