URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Miller, Peta --- "Mentoring: The Good, the Bad and the Complex" [2024] PrecedentAULA 6; (2024) 180 Precedent 18
Mentoring: The good, the bad and the complex
By Peta Miller
John C Crosby described mentoring as having ‘a brain to pick, an ear to
listen, and a push in the right
direction’.
This is something
we need at all stages of our careers in the legal profession, but mentoring has
an even greater value and importance
when you are in the early stages of your
career. During the first years of practice you are likely to face your steepest
curve and find yourself in stressful situations, navigating first
experiences of running files and many other unknowns. You may also
be facing a
lot of expectations – both from your firm and of yourself.
A good mentor will inspire and motivate you while they push you to break
barriers and achieve more. They will also help you develop
professionally and
expand your perception while, most importantly, not judging you. They can also
be the person to walk you through
tough situations.
For early career lawyers, having a mentor can help you develop a
comprehensive understanding of the different options open to you
as you look to
build your career in the legal profession. Your mentor is most likely to be more
experienced than you and will have
undoubtedly faced some similar challenges in
achieving their career goals. As such, you will be able to learn from their
experiences
hopefully be able to avoid or better navigate them.
As a result, one benefit of having a mentor at the early stages of your
career is that they can help guide you towards making the
choices that will
benefit your career progression most. This is because they can help answer some
of the following questions:
• What are your observable strengths and weaknesses?
• Which position should you target and how do you get there?
• Should you take that leap of faith into a new firm or career pathway
altogether or remain where you are?
• How do you position yourself to take advantage of future
opportunities?
• Should you hang in there or throw in the towel and look
A mentor is also someone who generally has the leadership or other attributes
that you want to develop. As such, they are often someone
who, due to their
experience, has developed an understanding of how to think and behave in certain
professional situations to ensure
that they have the mindset necessary to excel
in their chosen corner of the legal profession. This is important as
understanding
how successful leaders think and behave will enable you to model
these traits as you look to grow and develop as a legal practitioner.
MENTORING OR COACHING?
Although similar, mentoring is distinctly different from coaching. Coaching
in a professional sense is about embedding a different
behaviour or habit, while
mentoring is about seeking guidance and exploring options for development.
As such, coaching is typically more structured and goal oriented while aimed
at improving specific skills and achieving short-term
objectives.
By comparison,
mentoring is generally longer term and more
It focuses on broader
personal and professional development, and often involves a mentor with
industry-specific expertise.
It is incredibly important that you have a clear understanding of what you
want to achieve, whether it is through coaching or mentoring
before approaching
a potential mentor asking for assistance.
WHO CAN BE A MENTOR AND HOW DO YOU FIND
No one size fits all when it comes to mentoring. You need to find the person
and form of mentoring that best suits the goals you are
looking to accomplish.
The things that suit the person in the office next to you may not suit you. So,
while other experiences can
different and that is okay.
While there is no wrong place to find the right mentor, there are some common
places to start looking. This is because mentors are
often the experienced
practitioners around you. They may be an experienced acquaintance who recognises
your potential, or a boss
who takes it upon themselves to guide you. Whoever you
find, your mentor should be someone you look up to and someone you have
in and feel comfortable taking mentorship from.
FORMAL OR INFORMAL?
Formal and informal mentoring have several key differences, such as purpose,
scope, relationship, accountability and impact. The most
preferable is likely to
depend on your goals, needs and preferences.
Formal mentoring
Formal mentoring is generally a structured process, where an external party
will match a mentee with a mentor based on a consideration
of specific criteria
such as skills, interests, desired outcomes or career paths. As they are more
structured, formal mentoring arrangements
often have specific and measurable
purposes, such as certain skills or goals, that mentees will be aided in
developing throughout
the program.
This means that there is often a clear, written agreement that mentees and
mentors agree to before the commencement of the program.
It will include a
defined timeline, a set of goals and expectations, and a requirement for regular
structured approach to developing a professional relationship based on a mutual
commitment to an outcome, formal mentoring
will often be more limited or
focused. However, the formal agreements often involved in these types of
programs mean that there is
a higher level of accountability and that the
expectations and roles of both parties are clearly articulated. Finally, due to
focused nature of this approach, formal mentoring, when done effectively,
will generally have more tangible and identifiable outcomes,
such as improved
performance or increased confidence. Alongside programs that may be offered
within firms, formal mentoring can be
facilitated through external
organisations, programs or platforms that provide guidance, resources and
support to participants.
The benefits of a more formal mentoring relationship include that it is
• provide short-term and long-term development and reinforcement of
• promote self-driven learning and development;
• allow participation only from individuals who are truly interested
and qualified;
• require maintenance from the host organisation to successfully match
and pair individuals and ensure successful relationships;
• provide training to ensure participants understand their roles.
In addition, while mentoring relationships can extend beyond the structured
program or process, formal mentoring programs often operate
for a period of 12
months. However, the conclusion of this fixed period could also represent an
opportunity to reflect on whether
your needs and desired goals for the mentoring
relationship have changed.
Several programs or options for formal mentoring may be available to you
depending on your firm and location, including:
• The Law Society of New South Wales Mentoring Program.
• Law Institute of Victoria Mentoring Program.
• The Law Society of Western Australia Mentoring Program.
• The Law Society of South Australia Mentoring Program.
• Queensland Law Society Women Lawyers Association of Queensland Ladder
Mentoring Program.
• Women Lawyers Association of NSW initiatives.
• Victorian Women Lawyers Professional Mentoring Program and Law
Student Mentoring Program, a joint initiative with the Women
Barristers’
Association.
• Asian Australian Lawyers Association National Mentoring Program.
• Hellenic Australian Lawyers Mentoring Program.
Informal mentoring
Informal mentoring tends to be a more spontaneous and organic process that
develops as potential mentees and mentors meet through
their networks,
professional interactions or other common interests. It has the potential to be
less limited and more diverse in
Informal mentoring does not usually include written agreements, fixed periods
or predetermined outcomes. As a result, informal mentoring
tends to be more
flexible and adaptable to the changing needs and situations of the mentor and
the mentee. The relationship may also
be more relaxed and personal with mutual
affinity and rapport. It is important to keep in mind that such an arrangement
have low accountability and the roles and expectations for both
parties are likely to be vague. Finally, the outcomes of informal
mentoring may
be broader, such as an increased awareness or enriched perspective.
The benefits of a more informal mentoring relationship include:
• providing just-in-time and immediate learning;
• promoting self-driven learning;
• offering fast and immediate networking;
• allowing anyone to participate as there are no specific requirements
of participants;
• requiring minimal maintenance from any organisation; and
• the option of changing to a longer term or more formal mentoring
relationship over time.
Be clear as to what exactly you want to achieve before deciding on the best
option for you, whether it is formal mentoring, informal
mentoring or coaching.
A FRAMEWORK FOR
One important aspect of setting up a mentoring relationship for success is
establishing firm and clear ground rules. It is important
to clarify what both
the mentor and the mentee expect from the relationship to ensure that these
expectations match and that you
can reach a consensus. A misunderstanding of the
expectations of both parties can be costly, in terms of both time and the
relationship.
In addition, both parties must agree on the method and frequency of
communication. This may involve agreeing to meet in person each
month to discuss
issues in depth. However, it is also important to consider how unexpected or
time-sensitive issues that arise outside
of such meetings can be addressed. For
example, are both parties prepared to agree to an email or call that is on point
with questions
framed to facilitate 'yes' or 'no' answers?
For a mentoring relationship to work, the mentor and mentee have to be
disciplined about keeping their scheduled meetings.
Tips for being a good mentee
Some tips to keep in mind as a mentee are as follows:
Be clear about what you are seeking
. You must set achievable
goals. While you are not expected to have a step-by-step plan, you need to know
what your goals are to learn
what you need to do to reach those goals.
Take a professional and businesslike approach
. You should
always approach a potential mentor as if it is a business friendship. This means
you can be more casual and friendly
but still professional. Try not to ask
awkward questions like ‘Will you be my mentor?’ Instead, you could
ask whether
they are willing to have a chat with you about their career.
Look for a mentor within your existing professional network
Particularly if you believe informal mentoring is best for you, you may already
have a potential mentor in your professional network
who provides you with
advice in various ways. All it takes is a little effort to grow that connection
into an ongoing relationship.
Be prepared
. While it is okay not to know the answers, there
is an expectation when approaching a more experienced legal practitioner,
for mentoring, coaching or even general direction, that you have
prepared and researched first. Please do not walk in expecting them
to just give
you all the answers.
Be open to receiving feedback and advice
. As a young
practitioner, you should be taking every opportunity given to you to soak up as
much knowledge as you can from the more
experienced professionals you work with
and engage with them regardless of whether they are an assistant, paralegal or
lawyer. This
is a humbling career: very few practitioners know everything. You
are seeking the assistance, guidance and input of more experienced
professionals
for a reason. So, take the opportunity to soak up as much as you can.
Be respectful of the relationship and nurture it
. Mentoring
can be a lifelong partnership, but you are asking someone to set aside a lot of
time by asking them to mentor you. While
most people who agree to be mentors are
happy to do so, you should be appreciative of the help, support and guidance
that they are
providing you.
Be prepared to admit that you made a mistake
. This is more
general advice but as a young practitioner, you will make mistakes. We all do.
But you should ensure that you are doing
two things when this happens. The first
is to tell the person who needs to know, which will probably be your supervisor.
is to learn from it. You should also learn from the mistakes of
Do not be disheartened or take it personally when told no
Senior practitioners are busy as we juggle larger file loads or more complex
matters alongside additional supervisory and practice-related
responsibilities.
It can often feel like two or three jobs in one. While most who are interested
in mentoring (and not everyone is)
will try to make time for the young
practitioners they work with, there will be days when you are told that unless
it is urgent (and
that means urgent) come back later
Tips for being a good mentor
There are probably two key questions that you need to ask before you consider
being a mentor. The first is whether you can provide
advice and guidance,
without judgment, to a younger version of yourself.
The second question is what advice you have that would be useful for someone
at the same stage of their career as the person you are
considering mentoring.
Once you have decided to mentor others, it is important to consider whether
you genuinely have the time to commit to mentoring. Effective
mentoring takes
time, and you will need to trade away hours that you would otherwise be using to
pursue your own goals to address
someone else's.
As legal practitioners, we tend to be high achievers with a long list of
extra-curricular activities. While you may want to do everything
all at once,
you need to be strategic when it comes to your time and your energy. You neither
want to disappoint your mentee nor
burn yourself out by trying to do too much.
So, think carefully about this before agreeing. You are not selfish if you
decide that
your current circumstances will just not accommodate something
ongoing. However, it could be an opportunity for comprise: you could,
example, be honest about your time constraints but confirm your willingness to
meet for a one-off.
The second thing to keep in mind is that you do not have to wait until you
are a senior practitioner before you start mentoring. A
legal practitioner with
only two or three years post-admission experience is just as able to speak to
someone in the first year of
their career, as their own lived experience will be
particularly fresh.
Once again, we return to the question of being able to talk to your younger
self. You are also likely to find that you grow the most
when you start
mentoring others, so take the opportunity whenever it arises, even if that is
early in your career, as you will still
have something valuable to contribute.
Finally, a good mentor listens to their mentee but also provides their own
opinion. They do not dictate but rather advise. They are
available to their
mentee for support and as a resource. As a mentor, you listen and act as a guide
for your mentees before suggesting
possible courses of action and helping them
think through and act on concerns.
Some final tips from my
include that the
greatest opportunity for reflection as to your strengths and weaknesses as a
mentee is when you become a mentor
and a supervisor. You may realise that you
owe a few apologies to those people who mentored and supervised you earlier in
your career.
Another tip, whether you are looking to be a mentee, mentor or both, is to
find people who will not only support you but push you
to be better. You want to
find people who will give you some guidance and clarity as to the next steps to
take. It will help if you
find people who have taken a similar path, are in the
position that you want to be in, or have some skillset or attribute that you
want to learn. Everyone is different and has their race to run but knowing that
someone has stood in your shoes is infinitely helpful.
Finally, it is important to keep in mind that
being a mentor and being mentored is a lifelong and life-changing process. You
never be too old or too young to be one or the other.
FURTHER RESOURCES
The Mentorloop Help Hub offers a range of articles on mentoring at
<https://helphub.mentorloop.com/hc/en-us>.
Peta Miller
is senior associate and practice group leader at
Smith’s Lawyers. Prior to joining Smith’s Lawyers, she has worked in
government and national plaintiff law firms. Email:
pmiller@smithslawyers.com.au
SG Honavar, ‘Mentoring is
a Serious Business’,
Indian J Opthalmol
Become a Master
, a panel discussion with A Hebron, S Jacobs and N Graham 2023).
How to Find a Mentor
in the Legal Profession
, a panel discussion with K Grumley, J Nel, N
Palasrinne and B Woolstencroft (2021)
<https://www.collaw.edu.au/resources/2021/11/19/how-to-find-a-mentor-in-the-legal-profession>.
Mentoring Complete,
‘Difference between nformal and ormal Mentoring’ (25 October 2012)
<https://www.mentoringcomplete.com/what-is-the-difference-between-informal-and-formal-mentoring/>.
College of Law, above n 5.
Over the last months I have
stepped into a role as a practice group leader, which means I have regular
exposure as both a mentor
and supervisor to our more junior staff and as a
mentee by our principals as I continue to grow into my role. This experience has
served as my greatest opportunity to reflect on my strengths and weaknesses as a
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (51.5 KB)
PDF format (180 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter