URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sjoholm, Maria --- "Framing Obstetric Violence and Associated Rights to Respectful Care in Childbirth Through International Human Rights Law" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 11; (2024) 25(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 286
I Introduction
II Standards of Care in Childbirth
A IHRL and Facility-Based Childbirth
B Medical Interventions, Ethical Principles and IHRL Values
III Delineating the Concept of Obstetric Violence
A The Approach in IHRL So Far
B Physical and Verbal Abuse
C Harmful Medical Interventions
D Non-Pathologisation of Childbirth and Consent to Interventions
E Choosing the Circumstances of Childbirth
IV Obstetric Violence as Gender-Based Violence
A Gender-Based Causes and Consequences
B Using the “Violence” Framework and Delineating Obligations
V Conclusion
FRAMING OBSTETRIC VIOLENCE AND ASSOCIATED RIGHTS TO
RESPECTFUL CARE IN CHILDBIRTH THROUGH INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS LAW
Maria Sjöholm
Mistreatment of women during facility-based childbirth is globally widespread
and normalised. Common forms include physical and verbal
over-medicalisation, harmful medical interventions and the undermining of
women’s informed consent during labour. Such
ill-treatment impacts
women’s health both during childbirth and post-partum, and may dissuade
women from turning to facility-based
maternal care. Increasingly,
“obstetric violence” is used as a framework of analysis in
international human rights law
(‘IHRL’). However, there is a lack of
consistency in terms of its scope. In order to develop effective preventive
to monitor the prevalence of obstetric violence and to evaluate the
outcome of clinical practices, concretisation is necessary.
The article systematises the use of the term
“obstetric violence” and associated rights to respectful care in
IHRL. Additionally,
legal and feminist theories on decisional autonomy, equality
and vulnerability are used to reflect on the concept of obstetric violence.
Bioethical principles and their correlation with IHRL values are considered. In
conclusion, obstetric violence is mainly understood
as involving violations of
women’s integrity during facility-based childbirth. Physical and verbal
abuse are clear forms of
violence, as are select harmful medical interventions.
Meanwhile, pathologised childbirth and restrictions of women’s choices
to the circumstances of childbirth may also, individually or cumulatively,
constitute obstetric violence. Nevertheless, this is
balanced against other
interests, such as the reduction of maternal mortality and the well-being of the
child. Suggestions for a
gender-sensitive interpretation of rights —
grounding their content more firmly in women’s autonomy — are thus
put forward.
I Introduction
Mistreatment of women during facility-based
childbirth is globally widespread, systematic and
normalised.
forms include physical and verbal abuse, over-medicalisation, the use of harmful
medical interventions and the undermining
of women’s informed consent
during labour. These types of obstetric violence impact women’s health
both during childbirth
and post-partum, increasing the risk of maternal
morbidity and post-partum
depression.
This in turn may affect social relationships and decisions to have additional
general level, women may be dissuaded from turning to facility-based maternal
care for fear of abuse, pain or not having their
wishes respected, thus
undermining access to care.
Ill-treatment during childbirth is increasingly addressed through the
framework of “obstetric violence” in international
human rights law
(‘IHRL’). Deriving from women’s health movements in Latin
America — which in turn have influenced
domestic legislation —
obstetric violence is a relatively new term
internationally.
While the Committee of Experts of the Follow-up Mechanism of the Belém do
Pará Convention was the first international
mechanism to address
obstetric violence as a human rights violation, a World Health Organization
(‘WHO’) report in 2014
on the ‘disrespectful, abusive or
neglectful treatment’ of women during childbirth gave this type of harm
broader recognition.
Obstetric violence
— and similar concepts — have since been used by a range of
international and regional
organisations.
Several of the constituent parts of this type of violence have also been
addressed without mention of the umbrella term “obstetric
Given that a human rights-based approach is essential for ensuring quality
maternal healthcare and to prevent mistreatment, it is
natural for the scope of
“obstetric violence” to be delineated through
the current disjointed global and regional standards undermine the development
of effective preventive measures. In order
to monitor the prevalence of
obstetric violence and evaluate the outcome of legal standards, health policies
and clinical practices,
concretisation of the concept is necessary. This lack of
cohesion has thus led to calls to further clarify its
The article systematises the application of the
concept of obstetric violence and associated rights to respectful care in
by international and regional IHRL institutions by identifying common
principles. The focus lies on facility-based childbirth, which
is a reflection
of the current stance in IHRL. While the main aim is the delineation of
“obstetric violence”, certain
rights to respectful care are also
addressed in order to explore the interplay between “violence” and
the violation of
The lack of cohesion in IHRL can in part be traced to varying theoretical
approaches to the concept of violence, the scope of human
rights and the
balancing of conflicting interests. Legal and feminist theories on decisional
autonomy, equality and vulnerability
are thus used to reflect on the scope of
obstetric violence. This allows for the potential unearthing of ideologically
coloured assessments
by IHRL bodies in balancing exercises — when a
woman’s decision-making conflicts with other interests — and in
delineation of which decisions during childbirth reach the threshold of rights.
Bioethical principles and their correlation with
IHRL values are also
considered. Furthermore, the suitability of using the framework on gender-based
violence in IHRL to address
mistreatment in childbirth is discussed. This
article asks whether the terminology of obstetric violence brings any added
such as enhancing obligations of prevention or accountability, or if
there is a risk of diluting the concept of violence.
II Standards
of Care in Childbirth
and Facility-Based Childbirth
The principle of equality is a core aspect of the right to health in
Substantive equality requires the consideration of both biological and social
differences between men and women. Owing to their biological
capacity to
conceive and give birth, sexual and reproductive health has particular
implications for
must accordingly provide specialised and differentiated health services for
women during pregnancy and childbirth, and for
a reasonable period after
care is to be non-instrumentalised, meaning that women’s biological
functions are not treated as mere means of
reproduction.
While non-pathologisation is thus a stated goal in IHRL, facility delivery
rates are increasing globally.
often incentivised or required to give birth in healthcare facilities through,
inter alia, law, education and economic
IHRL, particularly in relation to
the right to health, actively promotes access to healthcare facilities to ensure
safe motherhood.
This includes obligations for states to establish essential
primary maternal healthcare, including emergency
obstetrics.
On the basis of the right to
health framework developed by the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (‘CESCR’),
international organisations such as
the WHO measure the number and distance of healthcare facilities at the national
level, with
minimum standards for urban and rural
socio-economic rights are subject to progressive implementation by states
— mindful of resource restraints affecting
healthcare infrastructure
— facility-based care is a clear
Similarly, while certain
standards of care must also be guaranteed by states if homebirths are an option,
these are rarely addressed
The preference for facility-based care derives from standards on the quality
of healthcare.
IHRL promotes evidence-based
medical care, meaning care grounded in the best available scientific evidence
subject to systematic
Guidelines by
the WHO and the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics
(‘FIGO’) — of great importance
to the right-to-health
framework — build on studies evaluating the effectiveness of medical
procedures, advising when interventions
are clinically indicated and which
measures are
appropriate.
The emphasis in IHRL on facility-managed pregnancy and childbirth is thus based
on current knowledge of the causes of maternal morbidity
and mortality and the
effectiveness of specific medical interventions. In hospitals, women have access
to, inter alia, obstetricians,
anaesthesiologists and necessary medical
equipment for obstetric emergencies. The approach to childbirth as a
standardised and medically
controlled experience has led to an ‘obstetric
transition’ in many states, where rates of maternal mortality have
substantially
decreased and mainly occur as a result of indirect
The increased use of interventions
such as C-sections and episiotomies, primarily in middle-income countries, is
part of this
transition.
While this shift is thus generally beneficial in terms of reducing maternal
mortality, it simultaneously increases the risk of over-medicalisation
birthing process, which may undermine women’s autonomy and dignity.
However, according to the WHO, ‘experience of care’ is a critical
aspect of the quality of care.
A shift from
a biocentric approach to medicine to a biopsychosocial concept is in fact
underway. From this viewpoint, the focus is
no longer solely on physical markers
of health but also psychological and social
determinants.
Arguably, the scientific studies that underlie evidence-based obstetric
guidelines often reflect a narrow approach to health by not
validating a broad
range of women’s interests and
This includes a lack of
recognition of the psychological harm women may suffer in having to undergo or
be denied certain interventions
in childbirth. The generalised approach in such
guidelines should thus give way to more individualised considerations so that
person’s background and preferences are taken into
Through standardised care,
personal choices may be disregarded, and women are frequently assigned passive
roles. With advancements
in medical science and technology, the medical field is
in fact increasingly turning towards individualised care, which involves
considering a person’s physiological, emotional and cultural
This is also encouraged in view of
ethical principles in obstetric care.
example, birth plans detailing a woman’s preferences for childbirth are
increasingly more common and encouraged by the
While resource restraints may affect
the realisation of individualised care, measures to ensure women’s agency
in childbirth
— also in standardised settings — strengthen the
quality and acceptability of healthcare.
Interventions, Ethical Principles and IHRL Values
Medical interventions involve ‘all medical acts, in particular
interventions performed for the purpose of preventive care, diagnosis,
treatment, rehabilitation or
A range of medical
interventions are generally used during childbirth, either as standardised
procedures or upon request. In fact,
there has been a substantial increase in
the last few decades of childbirth practices being used to initiate, accelerate,
and monitor the birthing process in order to improve outcomes for the
characteristic of the obstetric transition. Interventions include the monitoring
of the baby and the progression of labour,
such as the use of cardiotocography
(‘CTG’) scans for monitoring. Childbirth may be induced through
hormonal treatment
when stalling. Epidural or other forms of pain relief are
often available upon request. Additionally, the WHO estimates that approximately
15% of women in any given population develop a potentially life-threatening
complication during pregnancy or at the time of
The use of forceps,
suction cups and C-sections, or the examination of the uterine cavity, may thus
be clinically indicated if there
is a risk to the life or health of the woman or
baby during childbirth. Swift decisions are often made in such
circumstances.
Medical practice is guided by ethical principles, including beneficence,
non-maleficence, autonomy and justice.
While beneficence involves acting for the benefit of the patient,
non-maleficence is the duty to do no harm. The former includes
medically reasonable alternatives to manage the patient’s
also involves optimising the natural process of
childbirth.
Meanwhile, non-maleficence
entails that the risks and discomforts inherent in treatment are balanced
against proportionate gains
benefits for the patient in question are to be considered and not the interests
of the physician or third parties.
Obstetrics care is in certain regards medically distinctive in that it may
involve interference and potential harm to the patient
for the benefit of
another (the baby). However, generally, individuals retain the right to reject
treatment even when aiding a third
right to refuse treatment or procedures is embedded in patient autonomy, which
also aligns with the principle of doing no harm.
Conditions for genuine consent
are set out in medical guidelines issued, at the international level, mainly by
Autonomy also includes a positive right to request treatment. However, this
is not as extensive as the right to be free from
interference.
For example, values of beneficence and distributive justice may set limits. The
principle of justice involves ensuring equal opportunity
in healthcare and the
allocation of limited resources to procedures and treatments for which there is
clear evidence of a net benefit
Cost-effectiveness is thus an acceptable consideration from this standpoint.
Meanwhile, the exclusion of marginalised and socially
disadvantaged persons must
be prevented.
These principles are embodied in IHRL, where the protection of individual
autonomy includes respect for physical integrity and
decision-making.
While physical and
psychological abuse, in addition to certain procedures, is categorised as
harmful per se, harm in relation to
other medical interventions primarily arises
in instances of a lack of consent.
Individuals have a right to decline and request certain types of medical
treatment, although this may be limited. The approach of
bioethics to autonomy
affects whether certain decisions are encompassed in human rights provisions
that embody this right, which
are themselves informed by legal theories of
autonomy. The right to decline and request certain types of medical treatment
substantive theories of autonomy — precluding certain decisions
on the basis of their harmful content — and procedural
approaches —
content-neutral.
As will be seen, the main approach adopted by IHRL institutions is procedural,
involving requirements in the form of capacity for
internal self-reflection and
the absence of external
interference.
However, in certain instances such IHRL bodies subscribe to a substantive
approach in obstetrics care, where decisions of non-interference
and requests
for intervention are curtailed on the basis of indicated harm to the woman
and/or the baby.
IHRL specifies certain conditions that must be met in order for consent to be
valid, such as consent being voluntary and fully
Information on the health status
of the woman and foetus must be provided.
Various steps and procedures must be explained in a manner accessible to the
individual by properly trained personnel throughout
childbirth. This explanation
must include the likely benefits and potential adverse effects —
short-term and long-term —
of proposed procedures, as well as available
alternatives.
Consideration of
vulnerability is relevant for conditions of validity. Vulnerability refers to
the individual’s susceptibility
to harm — be it physical,
psychological, economic or institutional — and their degree of dependence
Childbirth is generally
considered to be an intrinsically vulnerable situation. In this situation,
certain processes must be followed
to ensure that the individual has given their
IHRL, individuals are also considered particularly vulnerable when under state
control, which is generally the case during facility-based
childbirth.
This vulnerability may be
compounded when gender intersects with, inter alia, ethnicity, socio-economic
status, age or sexual orientation.
instance, racialised persons and young women are more likely to be subjected to
Distributive justice is also an aspect of IHRL — including under the
right to health — through provisions on non-discrimination
principle of equality, although its scope is theoretically
Aligned with medical ethics, the
principle of equality may serve to limit individual autonomy. It is also linked
to vulnerability
in that broader obligations are placed on states in relation to
vulnerable groups or persons in vulnerable
situations.
Given that IHRL is increasingly
adopting a ‘multidimensional disadvantage’ model —
acknowledging asymmetrical structures
of power in society and thus non-uniform
obligations — a contextualised approach to obstetrics care is encouraged.
What these principles and values entail in the context of childbirth has been
developed in various medical guidelines and, to a certain
extent, by IHRL
bodies. Nevertheless, gaps and inconsistencies still remain. Given the
requirement in IHRL of substantive equality
in healthcare, it is important that
these principles are interpreted and implemented in a gender-sensitive manner in
obstetric care.
This includes ensuring the non-instrumentalisation of women and
the birthing process — even as childbirth is increasingly medicalised
— as well as rigorous processes for ensuring consent. Nevertheless,
whereas respect for ethical principles in medical interventions
remains the
yardstick as medico-technical knowledge evolves, the manner in which ethics are
applied may change alongside this development.
While the pathologisation of the
birthing process requires a general consideration of its potentially
paternalistic underpinnings,
new technologies to monitor the well-being of the
foetus bring to the fore conflicts of interest, evident in the two-patient care
approach applied in many
demands for the biopsychosocial well-being and autonomy of women during
childbirth may thus in certain instances exacerbate
conflicts of norms and
III Delineating
the Concept of Obstetric Violence
Approach in IHRL So Far
While IHRL standards on the conditions of childbirth — such as access
to care, physical integrity, dignity, autonomy and confidentiality
mainly been developed through the right-to-health framework, violations are also
increasingly examined through the language
of violence. Whereas early work on
mistreatment in maternal healthcare in IHRL focused on ensuring evidence-based
care and developing
infrastructure,
the recognition of patients
as rights-holders with more extensive autonomy rights has contributed to this
development.
The concept of obstetric violence has been defined by various international
and regional human rights mechanisms. The UN Special Rapporteur
on Violence
against Women — subsequently adopted by the UN Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women (‘CEDAW
Committee’)
— has broadly described it as ‘violence experienced by women during
facility-based childbirth’
with examples of acts and
The Council of Europe
(‘CoE’) has adopted a similar
Meanwhile, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (‘IACHR’)
defines it as ‘all situations of disrespectful,
abusive, neglectful
treatment or denial thereof that take place during the pregnancy, childbirth or
post-partum period, in private
or public health
facilities’.
Building on this approach, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
(‘IACtHR’) in the recent case of
Brítez Arce v Argentina
gave a more detailed definition, listing forms of obstetric violence such as
dehumanising, disrespectful, abusive or negligent treatment
of pregnant women;
withholding treatment or complete information about their health and available
treatments; forced or coerced medical
interventions; and the pathologisation of
natural reproductive processes during pregnancy, childbirth and post-partum.
At times, terminology other than “violence” is employed, such as
‘mistreatment’ and ‘disrespect and
childbirth.
Certain aspects of reproductive autonomy and mistreatment have also been
addressed in case law and soft law without the mention of
With limited explicit
regulation, the evolutive treaty interpretation method in relation to, inter
alia, the right to privacy and
the prohibition on torture, inhuman or degrading
treatment has been
Obstetric violence has also been defined in academic scholarship —
medical, sociological and legal — which ranges from
narrow to broad
approaches.
current framework is thus characterised by a ‘conceptual chaos’,
undermining effective strategies.
Despite this lack of consistency, common themes on the scope of obstetric
violence appear through IHRL sources. Facility-based healthcare
is in focus.
This is explained by the fact that efforts to recognise obstetric violence at
the domestic level arose through movements
for the humanisation of healthcare,
including support for the natural birthing
Although obstetric violence may
occur in any setting — whether in medical institutions or in the home
— a central aspect
has been the power dynamic inherent in facility-based
Furthermore, while certain sources
take an expansive approach, considering care during pregnancy, childbirth and
post-partum, the
concept mainly centres on childbirth.
In terms of acts and omissions, obstetric violence broadly involves
transgressions of women’s autonomy and integrity. The least
aspect is the prohibition on physical and verbal abuse in childbirth. Beyond
this, specific medical interventions are categorised
as obstetric violence as
follows. The pathologisation of the birthing process is increasingly addressed
as a form of mistreatment,
although there is no cohesive approach as to what
this entails for facility-managed
childbirths.
The undermining of decisional
autonomy as to the conditions of childbirth is also an aspect of obstetric
violence. However, it is
not clear which forms of decisions are encompassed in
the IHRL framework and if such rights are conditional, whether involving
of specific medical interventions or the choice of homebirth.
Often various types of harm with differing levels of severity are addressed
cumulatively, ranging from verbal humiliation to forced
surgery. This aligns
with the concept of gender-based violence, which encompasses a spectrum of
violations. Whereas certain forms
of harm are objectively determined, many of
the experiences of obstetric violence are subjective, assessed contextually. The
part will further address these typologies of violence.
and Verbal Abuse
Empirical studies indicate that physical and verbal abuse occur during
childbirth in a range of contexts. Physical abuse commonly
involves being
slapped, hit, punched or held down.
may also be physically restrained or gagged while giving birth in
state-controlled facilities, such as detention or
abuse includes being shouted at and berated by healthcare
This includes sexist and offensive
comments and threats of physical harm.
These forms of abuse frequently occur during the final stages of labour —
from 30 minutes before birth to 15 minutes after
The reasons given by providers
include the need to ensure positive outcomes for the baby in instances where
women are uncooperative
during delivery.
No complexities arise from an ethical or legal standpoint in relation to such
non-maleficence principle,
involve violations of the physical and psychological integrity of the individual
and are categorised as
obstetric violence and gender-based violence in
There are no valid reasons, such as
medical necessity, for these types of conduct. Nevertheless, issues may arise in
specifying the
threshold for physical and verbal abuse. Here, general approaches
to violence in IHRL provide a basis, for instance under the right
to privacy and
the prohibition on torture, inhuman or degrading treatment. However, the
particular context of childbirth must be
borne in mind in relation to subjective
experiences of harm and vulnerabilities. The physical and emotional
vulnerability often associated
with childbirth, such as physical exposure,
exertion and institutional control, is a relevant factor.
Medical Interventions
International organisations have categorised certain medical interventions as
harmful and unnecessary per se, deviating from clinical
practice guidelines on
childbirth. This categorisation is based on the short- or long-term harm caused
by the intervention and the
availability of alternative methods to reach the
same result. It thus primarily concerns transgressions of physical integrity and
the do-no-harm principle. Harmful interventions include manual fundal pressure
used to initiate the expulsion of the baby,
symphysiotomy,
and membrane
The approach to episiotomy
varies. Episiotomy is primarily used to speed up delivery and involves making an
incision in the perineum
to allow the child to pass through more easily and to
prevent serious vaginal tears.
CoE categorises episiotomies as harmful per se, with alternative methods
considered equally effective,
recommends that the percentage of episiotomies not exceed 10% of
childbirths.
the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women and the UN Special
Rapporteur on the Right to Health note that although
an episiotomy may be
medically indicated, it can have adverse physical and psychological effects on
the mother and in certain instances
amount to gender-based violence and torture
or inhuman or degrading
While forced sterilisations are clear violations of IHRL and at times mentioned
as forms of obstetric violence, such interventions
also occur in instances other
than childbirth and may thus not fall within the scope of the
definition.
With technical and medical scientific development, the list of interventions
considered harmful and unnecessary will naturally evolve.
For example, the
European Court of Human Rights (‘ECtHR’) has in several cases
addressed the use of symphysiotomies in
Ireland during the 1960s and 1970s,
noting that while such procedures would generally not be used in light of
current obstetric knowledge
— given the physical and psychological trauma
involved — this practice was considered justifiable at the time in cases
where vaginal birth was not possible.
Categorising certain types of medical interventions as violations of IHRL is
not contested per se. Nevertheless, a unified approach
to which procedures are
harmful — and under what circumstances — is needed in current
international guidelines. This
includes recognising their structural, gendered
dimensions. Although certain interventions are categorised as harmful in IHRL,
use is at times presented as an inappropriate choice made by medical
professionals rather than the emanation of structural
Non-Pathologisation
of Childbirth and Consent to Interventions
A general call to reduce the pathologisation of childbirth, meaning the
non-medicalisation of the birthing process, is increasingly
made by IHRL
institutions.
As noted, this is a central
aspect of the discourse on obstetric violence. Pathologisation is considered a
in itself and a cause of other forms of abuse in
childbirth.
According to the WHO, most
women wish to have a physiological birthing process with a sense of
Qualitative studies indicate that
while women generally accept that medical interventions may be needed during
childbirth, most object
to unnecessary
interventions.
Meanwhile, the majority of
healthy pregnant women undergo at least one clinical intervention during
childbirth.
While IHRL in general encourages facility-based childbirth — to reduce
maternal mortality and morbidity — non-pathologisation
entails that
medical intervention is not undertaken in the absence of clear medical
indication.
Clinical intervention should
thus only be used when expected to improve outcomes in relation to potential
harm in view of the non-beneficence
As noted, taking measures to
support the biologically natural birthing process is also an aspect of the
beneficence principle. Meanwhile,
the issues of non-pathologisation and consent
to intervention are interlinked. According to the CEDAW Committee, women are
infantilised through pathologised childbirths as their consent is
overlooked.
While broader measures to reduce over-medicalisation are thus a general
objective, a woman’s consent must be at the centre
of the decision to
intervene in a particular instance.
Pathologisation derives from the view of childbirth as a medical risk and the
normalisation of medical interventions such as
Control of childbirth is considered to enhance
protection.
As medical care is
evidence-based, this standpoint adheres to developments in the medical and
technological fields.
However, this does
not mean that the full range of interventions commonly practised today is
necessary. The risk of maternal morbidity
can in certain instances increase with
over-medicalisation, which indicates that the balancing of interests may be
skewed toward
the protection of the child rather than the patient. Interventions
such as frequent vaginal examinations, episiotomies, C-sections
and culturally
unfamiliar birthing practices can create a barrier to seeking care, especially
in low- to middle-income
Over-medicalisation
may even result in reduced access to and affordability of services, where
alternative methods performed outside
of clinics or by medical personnel other
than doctors are not
It may also
decrease resources for necessary interventions, which undermines equity in
healthcare.
Resources are
spent on monitoring and accelerating births, and on unnecessary referrals to
secondary and tertiary levels of care,
which may reduce the overall quality of
intrapartum care in low-resource settings.
The CEDAW Committee has addressed the pathologisation of childbirth in three
separate communications involving
pregnancies in all instances evolved without complications yet the women
underwent a broad range of medical interventions. These
included early admission
to the hospital despite a lack of complications, unnecessary digital vaginal
examinations, administration
of oxytocin without information or consent, forcing
a woman to give birth in the lithotomy position and performing an instrumental
extraction, episiotomy and C-section without information or consent where
alternative procedures could have been used. The interventions
in these cases
were addressed in a cumulative manner as pathologised childbirths and forms of
obstetric violence
that in turn
constituted gender-based discrimination.
The lack of medical indication and consent were thus central components.
More extensive possibilities to monitor the well-being of the child and the
progression of labour spur on pathologisation. The moral
status of the baby is
enhanced, leading to a two-patient care stance being practised in various
states. This sets in motion a range
of interventions to ensure the health of the
baby without clear medical indication of the benefit for the patient. For
while CTG upon admission to gauge foetal well-being may be valuable
— particularly in low-income states with poor antenatal
WHO advises against its automatic use for healthy pregnant
Rather, alternative methods, such
as the Dopler ultrasound device, may be suitable. The reason is that CTG
increases the likelihood
of a range of other interventions without improving
birth outcomes and restricts women’s freedom of movement during labour,
which in turn can prolong labour.
Monitoring may also involve more direct health risks for the woman. For
example, excessive digital vaginal examinations increase the
risk of infectious
morbidity for the mother and child.
is suggested that women solely undergo this upon admission to assess the status
of labour and at four hour intervals, with the
The performance of vaginal
examinations by inexperienced or multiple caregivers has in fact been raised as
a human rights issue.
Forceful or
inexperienced vaginal palpation is painful and may be a form of institutional
Vaginal examinations without consent have in fact been categorised as a form of
sexual violence by the IACtHR, albeit when performed
without a clear objective
and by untrained
The ECtHR in
Konovalova v Russia
also addressed examinations lacking in
respect for dignity and
attendance of medical students during childbirth without the consent of the
woman was considered a violation of the right to
As noted by the CEDAW Committee, unwarranted induction of labour is an
example of pathologisation.
pregnancy has gone beyond term and there is a risk to the unborn child or
mother, induced labour with the use of artificial
hormones, such as oxytocin,
may be medically indicated.
reports suggest that, at times, it is also used for the sake of
cost-effectiveness — to reduce time spent in labour
and maternity
The use of hormones can
accelerate contractions with risks to both mother and child, such as stillbirth
and uterine rupture, as well
as heightened
Furthermore, the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women, the CEDAW
Committee and the WHO have commented on the excessive
use of C-sections
performed when not medically
This includes using C-sections for reasons of cost-efficiency or to pre-empt
legal proceedings where childbirth leads to negative
outcomes. While C-sections
are effective in preventing maternal and foetal mortality when medically
justified, there are no such
noted benefits when not medically indicated, which
is generally the case when C-sections exceed 10% of
childbirths.
Although not medically
conclusive, studies demonstrate that C-sections increase the risk of obstetrical
complications and may affect
future pregnancies and
childbirths.
Certain reports also indicate negative health effects for the
While there may be psychological
benefits associated with elective C-sections, discussed below, their routine and
non-consensual
use is thus problematic.
The requirement of consent to medical interventions derives from the
principle of individual autonomy and is as such a standalone
requirement as well
as an aspect of non-pathologisation. As noted, medico-ethical principles and
IHRL indicate that an individual’s
preference for non-interference is
generally more extensive than requests for
intervention.
Nevertheless, autonomy is
not unlimited in bioethics or IHRL. Interferences may be deemed justified, inter
alia, from the perspective
of public health or the protection of the woman
and/or child. However, the weight given to a woman’s consent in the
of interests is in many instances unclear. From the standpoint of
ethical principles, when risks to the life and health of a woman
do-no-harm principle can generally be fulfilled by informing the patient of
expected outcomes. Meanwhile, situations where
a refusal by the woman
jeopardises the well-being of the child are more complex, for example where
induction of labour or the use
of C-sections are medically indicated. The unborn
child has no right to life under IHRL but a degree of protection arises that
incrementally as the pregnancy
progresses.
Furthermore, choices made
during pregnancy and childbirth may affect not only the foetus but also the
child after birth. While the
woman in childbirth is the actual patient —
with third-party interests of no relevance under the principle of beneficence
the approach in IHRL is inconsistent.
For instance, the CEDAW Committee in
SFM v Spain
affirmed that the
right to safe motherhood includes ascertaining that ‘free, prior and
informed consent [is] to be obtained
for any invasive treatment performed during
childbirth,
except in situations where the life of the mother and/or the baby
However, in the
NAE v Spain
case, the Committee affirmed a woman’s right
to decline invasive treatments during childbirth, without qualifying this with
an exception in life-threatening
situations.
In the recent
, the CEDAW Committee categorised the non-consensual C-section as a
form of gender-based violence and thus
discrimination.
Alternative procedures
should have been explored, information should have been given and consent should
have been sought.
Similarly, the UN
Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women has opined that C-sections
performed without a woman’s consent
may be a form of gender-based violence
and inhuman or degrading treatment given the physically and psychologically
invasive nature
This latter approach accordingly does not balance the autonomy of the woman
vis-a-vis potential harm to the child or mother and focuses
on the rights of the
patient in question.
the Circumstances of Childbirth
Advocacy for individual choice in the circumstances of childbirth, including
the place of birth and elective interventions, is
increasing.
Such interventions may not be considered medically necessary in the narrow sense
but can be psychologically beneficial. Where individuals
experience a loss of
control during childbirth, it can impact their physical and mental health, thus
involving privacy-related
However, restrictions on elective interventions have to a lesser degree been
addressed within the context of obstetric violence in
IHRL despite being linked
to such issues as pathologisation. The complexity mainly concerns whether
requests for specific forms of
medical care reach the threshold of rights and
the weight given to competing interests in balancing exercises. A tentative
line between violations of rights in childbirth that may constitute
obstetric violence and those not considered forms of violence
thus appears, with
certain exceptions.
Human rights set out fundamental conditions for a
person to lead a good life. Ethical and legal theories on values such as
and human dignity inform what is considered fundamental. Meanwhile,
balancing assessments delineate which forms of decisions fall
within the scope
of particular rights, such as the right to privacy. The value of the issue
— as core or peripheral to the
right — affects the degree of
accepted interference.
This balancing of
interests arises in relation to interventions considered harmful or risky
— such as homebirths — or
harmful when not indicated — such as
C-sections. Here, it is of particular relevance to consider the ideologies and
legal theories
underlying assessments of the limits of autonomy, including the
weight given to interests in conducting balancing exercises. A gender-sensitive
perspective and the identification of vulnerability may, for instance, shift the
view on the scope of rights.
The discourse on ensuring the choice of homebirth is gaining momentum at the
domestic and international
preference for homebirths often stems from a wish for comfort and control. For
example, it may come from a wish to avoid instances
of obstetric violence in
facility-based childbirth.
However, the
approach to whether this choice is encompassed by IHRL has been cautious so far.
For instance, the UN Special Rapporteur
on Violence against Women urges states
the possibility of allowing home birth and avoiding
the criminalisation of home
The CEDAW Committee has
also called for states to ‘
taking steps to make
midwife-assisted childbirth outside hospitals a safe and affordable option for
Meanwhile, the ECtHR has in a range of cases assessed whether restrictions on
assisted homebirths were in violation of the right to
has held that choices regarding the circumstances of childbirth fall within the
scope of a person’s
private life, in the majority of cases restrictions on
legitimate aim of protecting the health of the mother and
general debate in medical science on the risks and benefits of homebirths and
the lack of consensus on this issue in CoE states
Dubská v the Czech Republic
the Court held that
‘while there is generally no conflict of interest between the mother and
her child, certain choices made
by the mother as to the place, circumstances or
method of delivery may be seen to give rise to an increased risk to the health
safety of newborns’.
this approach primarily focused on the protection of the child, the well-being
of the mother was also an aspect. As noted by
the Court, giving birth in
maternity hospitals — which are fully staffed and adequately equipped from
a technical and material
perspective — is generally safer, since
unexpected emergencies may occur even in low-risk pregnancies requiring
immediate specialist
intervention, such as
C-sections.
In the balancing of
interests, relevant factors included whether the mother and child had access to
postnatal care in the hospital
and whether IHRL bodies, for example the CEDAW
Committee, had noted a general failure to ensure dignified and consent-based
care in the state.
on harmful decision-making in childbirth arguably reflects pathologisation. As
noted by concurring Judges Sajó and
Ternovszky v
, the free will of classical liberalism is at odds with the
contemporary welfare state, especially in relation to the medical
environment.
The regulated sphere is
considered safe and the non-regulated sphere a risk.
Meanwhile, the fact that homebirths involve economic policy considerations
— since resources must be shifted from a facility-based
system to a
framework allowing for homebirths — generates a broad margin of
appreciation for states.
The degree of
this latitude also implies that the right to choose the place of delivery is not
considered of fundamental importance.
For example, concurring Judge Yudkivska in
the Chamber case of
Dubská v the Czech Republic
argued that the
decision to give birth at home did not, in fact, give rise to human rights law
protection, since human rights norms
cover values that are
human dignity and personal autonomy and should not be interpreted as requiring
the state to ‘guarantee the level of comfort
an individual seeks, even at
the crucial moment of giving
In contrast, the
dissenting judges in the Grand Chamber case criticised the majority for failing
to categorise the issue as a core
aspect of article 8 of the
Convention for
the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
and a choice that
must be ensured through domestic legal and institutional
frameworks.
The sole case where a
violation has been found —
Ternovszky v Hungary
— centred on
the lack of clarity in domestic law as to whether assistance in homebirths was
The trend of increased elective C-sections similarly concerns the choice as
to the circumstances of childbirth but brings other legal
aspects to the fore,
such as the contribution of this trend to the over-medicalisation of the
birthing process, equity in healthcare
and the do-no-harm principle. FIGO has
held that where there is no evidence-based clinical indication of a C-section,
vaginal delivery
should be recommended to the patient as it is safer for both
mother and baby.
Accordingly, vaginal
and Caesarean delivery should be offered as medically reasonable alternatives
solely if there is clinical uncertainty
However, the psychological benefits must be weighed against potential
physical harm. The reasons for requesting C-sections vary but
commonly involve
difficulties in previous vaginal deliveries and fear of pain or foetal distress
Physical benefits include the
avoidance of potentially prolonged and painful vaginal deliveries through the
use of such interventions
as episiotomies as well as the prevention of harm to
the pelvic floor and urethral and anal
sphincters.
As such, elective C-sections
may not violate the do-no-harm principle from the standpoint of harm to the
mother. Nevertheless, the
option of electing C-sections undermines the broader
goal of reducing the pathologisation of childbirth. Linked to this, principles
of distributive justice — such as equity in healthcare — may be
affected. C-sections generally require more resources
than vaginal deliveries
and may thus detract from resources spent on necessary obstetric
interventions.
FIGO has thus argued that
from this perspective it is not ethically justified to perform C-sections for
non-medical reasons.
Meanwhile, withholding pain relief, such as an epidural, when requested
during labour is a form of mistreatment.
For example, the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has noted widespread
ill-treatment in maternal healthcare, including stitching
after delivery without
pain relief.
This may occur due to a
lack of resources or a failure to take women’s pain seriously. Women may,
conversely, feel pressured
to use pain relief, for instance, where medical
personnel have limited time to provide other types of support due to a heavy
Applying epidural anaesthesia
without consent has been considered an aspect of obstetric violence by the CEDAW
Other decisions also test the limits for the threshold of rights. In certain
instances, some choices — such as the patient’s
choice of position
during delivery — have cumulatively been considered rights in terms of
respectful care during childbirth.
noted in the CEDAW Committee communications, being forced to give birth in a
particular position was an aspect of obstetric
Nevertheless, as certain
positions may be more medically effective in reducing perineal tears and blood
loss during expulsion, the
choice of position should be guided by medical
professionals.
While a woman may thus
opt for a position that heightens the risk of physical harm, this falls within
the scope of autonomy and does
not violate the do-no-harm principle if the
decision is informed. The choice of a birth companion has also been considered
the scope of rights, given that it may be a factor reducing the duration
of labour and experiences of pain.
Furthermore, in
NAE v Spain
, being separated from the baby immediately
after birth and thus being denied skin-to-skin contact — contrary to the
wishes — were aspects of the
According to the WHO,
newborns without complications should be placed skin-to-skin on their mothers to
prevent hypothermia and to
breastfeeding.
The ECtHR has also found
that obligating a woman to stay in the hospital with a newborn baby for a
specific period of time directly
after giving birth violated the autonomy of the
woman given that there were no indicated medical
While certain choices as to the circumstances of childbirth may not appear
central to autonomy, viewing them as mere preferences may
discount the
individual woman’s experiences and points of view. Medical research also
indicates that choosing the place of
delivery and birth companions may be ways
to ensure the acceleration of childbirth and reduce
There is thus reciprocity of
psychological and physical benefits and an interplay between medico-technical
knowledge, ethics and
IHRL on these issues. With a more expansive approach to
the right to health involving respectful care during childbirth —
the aim of respectful care beyond solely preventing maternal mortality
— many choices that arise during and incidental to childbirth
gain a heightened status as rights. However, a balancing of interests may still
arise. Both the choice to refrain from
a medically indicated intervention and
requests for homebirth involve a balancing of interests where individual
autonomy is weighed
the reduction of health risks to the woman
and/or child. Nevertheless, so far, the right to refuse treatment has been
accepted to
a greater extent. While this reflects ethical principles in which
non-interference is given broader protection, a heightened status
of elective
interventions as ensured by IHRL may affect the current approach to conflicts of
interest. Further, non-consensual interventions
are more frequently categorised
as forms of obstetric violence, although the denial of certain choices —
such as birth position
— has only sporadically been addressed as such. The
issue of which forms of transgressions of individual autonomy rise to the
of violence thus warrants clarification.
IV Obstetric
Violence as Gender-Based Violence
Gender-Based
Causes and Consequences
Obstetric violence is considered a form of gender-based violence and thus sex
discrimination by a range of international actors including
UN treaty bodies and
special rapporteurs, the CoE and the
instance, the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women uses the general
definition of gender-based violence in the
Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women
as a framework for obstetric
This categorisation affects
the content of obligations and commands a gender-sensitive interpretation of
such concepts as “harm”
and “consent”. It also places
obstetric violence on the “continuum of
The gender-based nature of obstetric violence relates to its causes and
consequences. Biological differences between the sexes entail
reproductive process and medical interventions in childbirth affect
women’s bodies, and mistreatment undermines their
reproductive autonomy
and physical integrity. They also contribute to gender inequality at large.
Meanwhile, gender stereotypes regarding
sexuality, motherhood and autonomy
foster this form of violence and are reflected in institutional practices, laws
and procedures.
While obstetric violence
may appear in different forms depending on the context and healthcare
infrastructure, these are central
Harmful gender stereotypes affect both healthcare infrastructure at large and
the power dynamics in provider-patient
relationships.
In terms of
infrastructure, economic constraints in healthcare contribute to mistreatment,
with staff shortages, limited resources,
low salaries and an excessive workload
affecting how women are treated and the extent to which autonomous
decision-making is given
of proper education and training of medical personnel is also a major
These factors are linked to
gendered social, economic and political structures, with maternal healthcare
often being of low priority.
Meanwhile, stereotypes of women as incompetent decision-makers — more
emotional than rational — drive regulation and practices
that control
female bodies. Under such regulatory frameworks and healthcare policies, women
are frequently viewed as reproductive
objects rather than
From a critical feminist
perspective, requirements of facility-based delivery and the development of
medical technology are ideological
and may serve to increase control over female
bodies, transforming wombs into public
The CEDAW Committee has in
several communications held that the prerogative of medical professionals to
decide whether a particular
intervention is performed reflects gender
stereotypes of women as incompetent
decision-makers.
The medical provider
possesses the knowledge and the moral, social and — to a degree —
legal authority to make medical
decisions during childbirth. The knowledge of
medical staff is thus privileged over women’s knowledge of their bodies
and previous
experiences, undermining women as speakers with
The overrepresentation of men in the gynaecological and obstetric medical field
has in this regard been raised as a concern, with
the gender balance of
healthcare professionals being a requirement in
Being in labour is per se often described as a situation of vulnerability
— in view of the emotional stress and pain frequently
experienced —
to the detriment of women’s competency as
decision-makers.
Vulnerability is as
such contextual, rather than inherent in gender. Considering situational
constraints on decision-making, related
to the stages of labour and its
progress, is appropriate. However, there is a risk that the emphasis on
vulnerability may foster
a protectionist, essentialising approach. Rather than
using vulnerability as a factor negating agency, this should place more
obligations on states to ensure autonomy and consent during
childbirth. For example, in
Konovalova v Russia
, the ECtHR considered
that the extreme stress and fatigue during prolonged contractions affected the
woman’s ability to make
an informed decision regarding whether medical
students should be present during
childbirth.
The consequence of this was
that the hospital should have found a means to ensure that the woman had a
genuine opportunity to refuse
to allow medical students to be
Furthermore, stereotypes about women’s natural role as mothers, and
discomfort as an expected part of childbirth, may lead to
the non-validation of
women’s choices and descriptions of
For example, the pain suffered by
women in the CEDAW Committee communications was described by domestic
administrative and judicial
bodies as ‘mere
perception’.
The notion that women
are reproductive vessels — willing to sacrifice themselves for the
well-being of the baby — also
normalises pain and violence during
childbirth where the main focus is on the health of the
This comports with broader gender
stereotypes about women as submissive and their bodies as
The process for ensuring
consent in obstetrics care is generally not as rigorous as in other medical
fields where interference similarly
occurs for the benefit of a third party,
such as organ donation and
transplantation.
Altruism is ascribed to
motherhood, meaning that consent to invasive medical interventions for the
well-being of the baby is often
This implies that certain
moral responsibilities vis-a-vis the child are placed on women through their
choice to continue the pregnancy.
Accordingly, patient morality and/or social roles are considerations affecting
ethical principles in this area of medicine, in contrast
While ensuring the health of the
baby may be psychologically beneficial to the mother, any specific interventions
must be based on
explicit consent.
These stereotypes related to autonomy are in part bolstered by the approach
to the right to health and the broader ideological underpinnings
of IHRL, which
involve both protectionist and liberalist strands. Certain characteristics of
facility-based obstetrics care reflect
a protectionist approach. Under this
approach, the space for women’s decision-making is limited for the
overarching goal of
ensuring the health of mother and child. Choices as to
location, birth position, pain management and other interventions are seldom
offered to women. Meanwhile, the view on consent, within the right to privacy in
IHRL, is coloured by liberalism and the social contract
theory. The individual
is presumed to be morally independent, capable of expressing free will and
offering resistance unmarked by
contextual restraints, such as social power
hierarchies. This image of the unencumbered individual as the blueprint for
has been challenged in critical feminist
scholarship.
Rather, factors undermining
genuine consent include institutional and provider-patient relationships
reflecting stereotyped views
of women, such as the view that all women are
“good mothers”. A failure to recognise such factors will lead to
Meanwhile, potential gender stereotypes underlying the call for recognising
certain aspects of childbirth as rights should be considered,
as well as the
broader implications for gender equality and equity. For example, do any gender
stereotypes operate behind the increasing
demands for homebirths? These may, for
instance, involve the social conditioning and ideology of the “good
mother” choosing
natural birth. And what are the potential effects of this
trend on equity in maternal healthcare? Whereas increased choice in childbirth
may enhance individual autonomy, it can undermine equity in healthcare at a
broader level. For example, the proliferation of C-sections
will necessitate
significant reallocations of healthcare resources. The recognition of obstetric
violence as gender-based and a form
of sex discrimination thus not only comports
with its causes and consequences — in terms of individual and social harm
but also provides space for these types of ideological considerations
vis-a-vis autonomy, vulnerability and equality.
the “Violence” Framework and Delineating Obligations
The importance of labelling obstetric harm is both symbolic and practical. A
coherent concept can be used as a tool for communication
consciousness-raising. It is necessary for a well-developed legal framework and
to measure instances of abuse and preventive
efforts. Meanwhile, as noted,
various concepts are used to categorise mistreatment in facility-based
childbirth. Often the choice
of term is strategic and depends on the role of the
author. The terminology of “violence” in relation to healthcare is
contested, not only in the medical profession but also by international
organisations.
The traditional and more narrow approach to violence — particularly at the
domestic level — is to define it as intentional
physical harm. This
definition does not involve psychological and institutional ill-treatment as
constituent elements.
“mistreatment” is more inclusive of omissions and
negligence.
Framing mistreatment as
violence may also instil fear of prosecution among medical professionals and
potential animosity in patient-provider
relationships.
Nevertheless, the approach to “violence” in IHRL is generally
broad since it recognises psychological and economic abuse
and includes acts,
omissions and institutional harm.
approach to obstetric violence by IHRL bodies such as the CEDAW Committee, the
UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women,
the IACHR and the IACtHR in
fact comports with theories equating violence with violations of rights
protecting integrity.
There is thus a
close connection between the concept of obstetric violence and the undermining
of rights ensuring respectful care
during childbirth through such acts as
non-consensual interventions and the denial of choice in the circumstances of
childbirth.
That said, not all forms of choices in childbirth have been
categorised as human rights, or the denial of choices as obstetric violence.
This phenomenon appears to be linked to the level of importance attached to core
rights values and the risk of harm to mother and
By using the concept of violence in this manner, the structural and
institutional character of ill-treatment is recognised rather
than approached as
comprised of individual instances of mistreatment by healthcare professionals.
In fact, a parallel has been drawn
between obstetric violence and coercive
control as a form of domestic violence. The focus on single incidents fails to
explain ongoing
relationships of coercive control. Through obstetric violence,
pregnant women are in a continual situation of institutional and social
as a guardian of the foetus.
violence is thus, arguably, a form of violence used to reinforce expectations of
how women should behave.
This approach
aligns with developments in other areas of international law, such as the
concept of ‘reproductive violence’
in international criminal law,
which involves severe restrictions of reproductive
using terminology other than violence, the dominant narrative — set by
healthcare institutions themselves — may in
fact minimise women’s
experiences.
At the same time, by
addressing a range of acts and omissions cumulatively, minor transgressions of
autonomy are also categorised
as violence, which may undermine the authority of
the concept.
From a practical perspective, the IACtHR has noted the importance of denoting
acts as “obstetric violence” in order to
ensure access to justice,
including reparations.
categorisation engages the framework on gender-based violence in IHRL in
addition to the right to health. It sets in motion
particularly extensive state
obligations, such as the obligation to criminalise certain acts. The CoE, the
CEDAW Committee, and the
UN Working Group on the Issue of Discrimination against
Women in Law and in Practice all call for the criminalisation of obstetric
violence in domestic law.
criminalisation arguably is a narrow intervention — focusing on
interpersonal harm — general obligations under
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
and regional
treaties on women’s rights and/or gender-based violence also
These require states to address
the underlying causes of violence, such as harmful gender stereotyping.
Additionally, the prohibition
of gender-based violence is considered customary
international law.
The characterisation of abuse in childbirth as gender-based violence also
affects general obligations under the right to health that
entail more targeted
interventions. Given the institutional character of obstetric violence, these
obligations involve strengthening
healthcare infrastructure. They include
allocating a sufficient budget to maternal healthcare, providing mandatory
training for all
healthcare professionals on patients’ rights and related
ethical standards in obstetrics care, and conducting awareness-raising
While obligations vis-a-vis
infrastructure and budgeting are generally progressive within the
right-to-health framework, the principle
of non-discrimination requires
immediate respect.
At the interpersonal
level, states must take measures to prevent unnecessary medical interventions
(that is, non-pathologisation),
improve communication between patients and
providers and ensure that all interventions are performed only with the
free, prior and informed
A wide range of measures is
thus required corresponding to the severity of the harm that can be inflicted
during and incidental to
childbirth.
V Conclusion
With an increasingly biopsychosocial approach to health, more expansive
standards for ensuring autonomy and integrity in obstetrics
care are being
developed through IHRL. As part of this evolution, mistreatment and abuse in
childbirth are more frequently addressed
as forms of obstetric violence. The
overarching purpose of categorising such acts and omissions as obstetric
violence is to provide
a consistent tool for communicating, measuring and
addressing violations in childbirth. While certain organisations view the
of obstetric violence with apprehension — bearing in mind its
potential non-acceptance by the medical profession — the
general approach
in IHRL is that it reflects the severity of the physical and psychological harm
that may be experienced by women.
The term also places such harm on the spectrum
of institutional gender-based violence in view of the causes and consequences of
mistreatment.
This in turn appears to transform certain acts and decisions
during childbirth into rights — individually and cumulatively
recognising their inherent or operational value. The concept is accordingly more
than an umbrella term for already-existing
rights and principles, including
standards under the right to health and privacy under
. The choice of language is also strategic in
the sense that violence — particularly gender-based — enlivens more
obligations under IHRL, including criminalisation. This strengthens
individual and state accountability.
Currently, certain broad themes appear in relation to the concept of
obstetric violence in IHRL. The main focus is on acts and omissions
facility-based childbirth. Physical and verbal abuse are clear forms of
violence, as are specific medical interventions categorised
as harmful per se in
guidelines, such as those issued by the WHO and FIGO. Meanwhile, pathologised
childbirth involves unnecessary
physical interventions undermining women’s
autonomy and heightening the risk of morbidity. Restricting women’s
as to the circumstances of childbirth — whether to refrain from or
to choose specific interventions — may also, individually
or cumulatively,
constitute obstetric violence. However, not all choices during the birthing
process are considered human rights
and not all violations of rights to
respectful care in childbirth rise to the level of violence. While the concept
of violence in
IHRL is sufficiently broad to encompass a range of transgressions
of a person’s integrity, it involves violations of a certain
severity and that affect values central to human rights. From this standpoint,
protection against non-consensual interventions
is broader than the protection
of rights to elective interventions. However, such protection may evolve with a
broader understanding
of autonomy.
The scope of rights — and linked to this, the concept of violence
— are also delimited by conflicting interests. The aim
of ensuring
consensual, non-pathologised childbirth is balanced against the interests of the
reduction of maternal mortality and
morbidity, the well-being of the child and
the financial and practical aspects of healthcare infrastructure. Medico-ethical
of doing no harm and ensuring equity in healthcare in practice curb
the scope of individual autonomy. For example, these principles
curb the scope
of individual autonomy where there is a risk of negative health consequences for
the child or where the greater medical
need of others necessitates the
redistribution of healthcare resources.
A central aspect of the “obstetric violence” framework is the
treatment of childbirth as a medical condition in need of
control as opposed to
a natural, biological occurrence. IHRL, to a great extent, abides by this
position, as is evident in the right-to-health
framework and in the view of
international bodies such as the ECtHR. The focus on measuring childbirth
outcomes in terms of preventing
maternal mortality and morbidity reduces
delivery to such end goals. The substantial decrease in maternal mortality and
is related to the obstetric transition, with facility-based childbirth
and the attendant medical interventions during the birthing
process being
essential means to ensure such objectives. Calls to reduce pathologisation by,
for example, the CEDAW Committee thus
do not aim to undermine such important
contributions to women’s health and gender equality. Rather, they aim to
limit interventions
that are not medically indicated and to establish processes
for ensuring women’s consent.
While consent is thus central and — in the more recent approach by the
CEDAW Committee — not to be balanced against other
interests in obstetric
interventions, institutions such as the ECtHR have been more restrictive, at
least in the context of homebirths.
The ECtHR has acknowledged that not only the
risk of harm to the child but also the protection of a woman’s health may
autonomous decision-making. This is a protectionist approach that is
difficult to reconcile with IHRL and ethical principles. Nevertheless,
gender-sensitive approach to the limits of autonomy clearly includes informing
and respecting choices involving a risk of
harm to the woman herself, whether to
adopt a two-patient approach to care is an ethically charged and theoretically
divisive issue.
As noted, medico-ethical principles —reflected in IHRL
— require the consideration of risks and benefits solely to the
hand and not third parties. Acknowledging some level of rights of the foetus may
lead to a concomitant undermining of
women’s right to health and autonomy
through which the state assumes control of the female body for the protection of
interests. This in turn may influence other areas of law, such as abortion
As this area of IHRL is at its inception, greater clarification of the scope
of obstetric violence is necessary, not only in terms
of prohibited
interventions but also the content and weight of values to be ensured. With the
evolutive approach to the scope of
human rights, advances in medico-technical
knowledge will allow for a continual development. This entails that values such
as integrity,
autonomy and equality will need to be interpreted and applied in
new circumstances. The importance given to values in balancing exercises
similarly shift.
In doing so, it is necessary to expose the ideological approaches to autonomy
underlying interpretations of rights, including both
gendered and stereotypical
protectionist notions and liberal atomistic views of the individual. A
contextualised approach with more
careful consideration of both structural
constraints and individual circumstances — rather than abstract principles
is thus relevant both in relation to non-pathologisation and consent.
While bearing in mind such aspects, there is much potential
in using the concept
of obstetric violence as a framework for developing associated rights in
childbirth, for delineating broad and
effective obligations for states and for
increasing accountability for a type of abuse that has long lingered in
* Maria Sjöholm, LLM, LLD, is an Associate Professor in international
law at the School of Behavioural, Social and Legal Sciences,
University, Sweden.
World Health Organization,
Prevention and Elimination of Disrespect and Abuse during Facility-Based
, WHO Doc WHO/RHR/14.23 (2015) (‘
Prevention and
Elimination of Disrespect
’); Tlaleng Mofokeng, Special Rapporteur,
Violence and Its Impact on the Right to Health
UN Doc A/HRC/50/28
(14 April 2022) 11 [44]; Dubravka Šimonović, Special Rapporteur,
Human Rights-Based Approach to Mistreatment and Violence against Women in
Reproductive Health Services with a Focus on Childbirth
and Obstetric
, UN Doc A/74/137 (11 July 2019) 4 [4].
Morbidity involves negative health
conditions attributed to childbirth: Ana Cristina Ferrão et al,
‘Analysis of the
Concept of Obstetric Violence: Scoping Review
Protocol’ (2022) 12(7)
Journal of Personalized Medicine
Maryvonne Blondin, Committee on Equality
and Non-Discrimination,
Obstetrical and Gynaecological Violence
14965, 16 September 2019) 9 [32]; Silvia Brunello et al,
Obstetric and
Gynaecological Violence in the EU: Prevalence, Legal Frameworks and Educational
Guidelines for Prevention and Elimination
(Study, April 2024) 18.
Prevention and Elimination of
Obstetric violence is mainly regulated
in Latin America: see, eg,
Ley de Protección Integral para Prevenir,
Sancionar y Erradicar la Violencia contra las Mujeres en los Ámbitos en
Desarrollen Sus Relaciones Interpersonales
[Comprehensive Protection Law
for Preventing, Punishing and Eradicating Violence against Women in Their
Interpersonal Relations]
(Argentina) Law No 26.485, 11 March 2009, art 6(e);
Ley Orgánica sobre el Derecho de las Mujeres a una Vida Libre de
[Organic Law on the Right of Women to a Life Free from Violence]
(Venezuela) Law No 38.668,
23 April 2007, art 15(13).
Committee of Experts of the Follow-Up
Mechanism to the Belém do Pará Convention,
Second Hemispheric
Report on the Implementation of the Belém do Pará Convention
(Report, April 2012) 39;
Prevention and Elimination of Disrespect
Brítez Arce v
Merits, Reparations and Costs
) (Inter-American Court of
Human Rights, Series C No 474, 16 November 2022) (‘
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Decision Adopted by the Committee under Article 4(2)(c) of the
Optional Protocol, concerning Communication No 138/2018
sess, UN Doc CEDAW/C/75/D/138/2018 (28 February 2020) (‘
’); Šimonović (n
); Dainius Puras et al, ‘Joint
Statement by UN Human Rights Experts, the Rapporteur on the Rights of Women of
the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights and the Special Rapporteurs on the
Rights of Women and Human Rights Defenders of the African Commission
and Peoples’ Rights’,
Office of the High Commissioner for Human
(Web Page, 24 September 2015) <
https://www.ohchr.org/en/statements/2015/09/joint-statement-un-human-rights-experts-rapporteur-rights-women
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9W65-AUFV
For example, the issue of homebirth and
certain types of harmful medical interventions during childbirth have been
addressed by
the European Court of Human Rights without mention of obstetric
violence: see Part III(B)–(E) of this article.
Šimonović (n
World Health Organization,
WHO Recommendations:
Intrapartum Care for a
Positive Childbirth Experience
(Report, 2018) 1 (‘
Intrapartum
) 1; Camilla Pickles,
‘“Everything Is Obstetric Violence Now”: Identifying the
Violence in “Obstetric Violence”
to Strengthen Socio-Legal Reform
(2024) 44(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
(‘Everything Is Obstetric Violence Now’).
Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights,
General Comment No 14: The Right to the Highest Attainable
Standard of Health (Art 12)
sess, UN Doc E/C.12/2000/4 (11
August 2000) para 43(a) (‘
General Comment No 14
Manuela v El Salvador
Preliminary Objections, Merits, Reparations and Costs
) (Inter-American
Court of Human Rights, Series C No 441, 2 November 2021) 56 [193]
’). There is no coherent approach to the concept of
“woman” in IHRL as of yet. Increasingly, the rights of trans-
intersex women are recognised, indicating that “woman” extends
beyond cisgender women: see, eg, Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination
against Women,
General Recommendation No 35 on Gender-Based Violence against
Women, Updating General Recommendation No 19
, UN Doc CEDAW/C/GC/35 (26 July
2017) [12] (‘
General Recommendation No 35
’). This article
uses the term in a broad sense. In terms of addressing women in relation to
their reproductive capacity, the
arguments also encompass other persons who may
Brítez Arce
) 24 [81]; Human Rights Council,
Report of the Working Group on the Issue of Discrimination against Women in
Law and in Practice
sess, Agenda Item 3, UN Doc A/HRC/32/44
(8 April 2016) [24] (‘
Report of the Working Group on the Issue of
Discrimination against Women
also Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
General Comment No 22 (2016) on the Right to
Sexual and Reproductive Health (Article 12 of the International Covenant on
Social and Cultural Rights)
, UN Doc E/C.12/GC/22 (2 May 2016) para
General Comment No 22
Report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women: Twentieth Session (19
January–5 February 1999)
Twenty-First Session (7-25 June
, UN GAOR, 54
sess, Supp No 38, UN Doc A/54/38/Rev.1
(1999) [12(a)] (‘
General Recommendation No
’); Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Communication No 17/2008
sess, UN Doc
CEDAW/C/49/D/17/2008 (27 September 2011) (‘
Alyne da Silva Pimentel
Teixeira v Brazil
Report of the Working Group on the
Issue of Discrimination against Women
) [12], [33].
Prevention and Elimination of
International Conference on
Population and Development,
Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development
, Res 1, UN Doc A/CONF.171/13/Rev/1
(13 September 1994) annex (‘
Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development
General Comment
General Comment No 14
) para 43(e) requires
‘equitable’ distribution of facilities. Meanwhile, the World Health
Organization (‘WHO’)
specifies quantity goals: see
Health Organization,
Monitoring Emergency Obstetric Care: A Handbook
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 3 January 1976) art 2(1).
Dubská v Czech
(European Court of Human Rights, Grand Chamber, Application Nos
28859/11 and 28473/12, 15 November 2016) [186]–[187]
For the “Availability,
Accessibility, Acceptability, Quality” (‘AAAQ’) standards
General Comment No 14
) para 12; Paul Hunt, Special
Rapporteur,
The Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable
Standard of Physical and Mental Health
, UN Doc E/CN.4/2004/49/Add.1 (1 March
2004) 10–11 [34]–[38].
For a definition, see David L Sackett
et al, ‘Evidence Based Medicine: What It Is and What It Isn’t’
(1996) 312(7023)
British Medical Journal
International Federation of
Gynaecology and Obstetrics, ‘Ethical Framework for Respectful Maternity
Care during Pregnancy
and Childbirth’ (Web Page, 17 September 2021) <
https://www.figo.org/resources/figo-statements/ethical-framework-respectful-maternity-care-during-pregnancy-and-childbirth
archived at <
https://perma.cc/DB6S-PACQ
Intrapartum Care
Intrapartum Care
Ibid. However, increased use of
interventions may also in part be explained by social changes, such as increased
obesity, older
mothers and multiple pregnancies etc: see
World Health
Organization,
WHO Recommendations: Non-Clinical Interventions to Reduce
Unnecessary Caesarean Sections
(Report, 2018) 8 (‘
Non-Clinical
Interventions to Reduce Unnecessary Caesarean Sections
Intrapartum Care
Júlia Martín-Badia,
Noemí Obregón-Gutiérrez and Josefina Goberna-Tricas,
‘Obstetric Violence
as an Infringement on Basic Bioethical Principles:
Reflections Inspired by Focus Groups with Midwives’ (2021) 18(23)
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
Camilla Pickles, ‘Leaving Women
Behind: The Application of Evidence-Based Guidelines, Law, and Obstetric
Violence by Omission’
in Camilla Pickles and Jonathan Herring (eds),
Childbirth, Vulnerability and Law: Exploring Issues of Violence and
(Routledge, 2020) 140, 144.
Joni Strom Williams, Rebekah J Walker
and Leonard E Egede, ‘Achieving Equity in an Evolving Healthcare System:
Opportunities
and Challenges’ (2016) 351(1)
American Journal of the
Medical Sciences
‘Ethical Framework for
Respectful Maternity Care during Pregnancy and Childbirth’ (n
Intrapartum Care
Council of Europe, ‘Explanatory
Report to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the
Human Being
with Regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Convention
on Human Rights and Biomedicine’ (Report, 4 April 1997)
Intrapartum Care
World Health Organization,
Managing Complications in Pregnancy and Childbirth: A Guide for Midwives and
Basil Varkey, ‘Principles of
Clinical Ethics and Their Application to Practice’ (2021) 30(1)
Principles and Practice
International Federation of
Gynaecology and Obstetrics, ‘FIGO Ethics and Professionalism Guideline:
Decision Making about
Vaginal and Caesarean Delivery’ (Web Page, 29 June
https://www.figo.org/decision-making-about-vaginal-and-caesarean-delivery
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4Y8V-UU4C
(‘FIGO Ethics and Professionalism Guideline’).
‘Ethical Framework for
Respectful Maternity Care during Pregnancy and Childbirth’ (n
Susan S Mattingly, ‘The
Maternal-Fetal Dyad: Exploring the Two-Patient Obstetric Model’ (1992)
Hastings Center Report
Elselijn Kingma, ‘Harming One
to Benefit Another: The Paradox of Autonomy and Consent in Maternity Care’
(2021) 35(5)
See, eg, E Goknur Topcu et al,
‘FIGO Best Practice Guidance in Surgical Consent’ (2023) 163(3)
International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics
Intrapartum
Jan E Christilaw, ‘Cesarean
Section by Choice: Constructing a Reproductive Rights Framework for the
Debate’ (2006) 94(3)
International Journal of Gynecology and
‘FIGO Committee for the Ethical
Aspects of Human Reproduction and Women’s Health’ (1999) 48(2)
Gynecologic and Obstetric Investigation
73, 74 (‘FIGO Committee for
the Ethical Aspects of Human Reproduction’).
‘Ethical Framework for
Respectful Maternity Care during Pregnancy and Childbirth’ (n
Jill Marshall,
Personal Freedom
through Human Rights Law: Autonomy, Identity and Integrity under the European
Convention on Human Rights
(Martinus Nijhoff, 2009) 6.
See, for example,
Solomakhin v
(European Court of Human Rights, Fifth Section, Application No
24429/03, 15 March 2012) [33];
Csoma v Romania
(European Court of Human
Rights, Third Section, Application No 8759/05, 15 January 2013) [48].
Erin Nelson,
Law, Policy and
Reproductive Autonomy
(Hart Publishing, 2013) 14.
General Recommendation No 24
RR v Poland
, [159]–[161], [197] (‘
Šimonović (n
) [38]. See
generally ibid 14.
SFM v Spain
) [8(b)(i)];
General Recommendation No 24
) [159]–[161], [197].
Šimonović (n
General Comment No 22
Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the
Application of Biology and Medicine
, opened for signature 4 April 1997, ETS
No 164 (entered into force 1 December 1999) art 5.
Lourdes Peroni and Alexandra Timmer,
‘Vulnerable Groups: The Promise of an Emerging Concept in European Human
Rights Convention
(2013) 11(4)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
Šimonović (n
) 15–16 [49]; Diana Bowser and
Kathleen Hill,
Exploring Evidence for Disrespect and Abuse in Facility-Based
Childbirth: Report of a Landscape Analysis
(Report, 20 September 2010)
YF v Turkey
[2003] ECHR 391
(2004) 39 EHRR 34
[34], [43];
Maslova v Russia
[2008] ECHR 72
(2009) 48 EHRR 37
Alyne da Silva Pimentel Teixeira v
Xákmok Kásek Indigenous Community v Paraguay (Merits,
Reparations, and Costs)
(Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Series C No
214, 24 August 2010) [232]–[233]; Mofokeng (n
Report of the Working Group on
the Issue of Discrimination against Women
European Parliament Resolution of
24 June 2021 on the Situation of Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights in
the EU, in the Frame
of Women’s Health
[2021] OJ C 81/43, Preamble
para AB; Šimonović (n
8–9 [21]; Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,
Indigenous Women
and their Human Rights in the Americas
(Doc No 44/17, 17 April 2017) 61 [81]
Indigenous Women
Alicia Ely Yamin, ‘Shades of
Dignity: Exploring the Demands of Equality in Applying Human Rights Frameworks
(2009) 11(2)
Health and Human Rights
1; John W Lango,
‘Global Health, Human Rights, and Distributive Justice’ in Rosamond
Rhodes, Margaret Battin and Anita
Silvers (eds),
Medicine and Social Justice:
Essays on the Distribution of Health Care
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2012) 231;
General Comment No 14
) paras 19, 43(a).
See, for example,
Artavia Murillo
v Costa Rica
(Preliminary Objections, Merits, Reparations and Costs)
(Inter-American Court on Human Rights, Series C No 257, 28 November 2012) [292];
Yordanova v Bulgaria
(European Court of Human Rights, Fourth Section,
Application No 25446/06, 24 April 2012) [130].
Oddný Mjöll
Arnardóttir, ‘A Future of Multidimensional Disadvantage
Equality?’ in Oddný Mjöll
Arnardóttir and Gerard Quinn
The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities:
European and Scandinavian Perspectives
(Martinus Nijhoff, 2009) 41, 54,
This means that not only the risks
and benefits to the mother but also to the foetus/child are considered. It
should be noted that
the categorisation of women’s reproductive decisions
as a “conflict” vis-a-vis the interests of the foetus/child
criticised: see, eg, Elizabeth Kukura, ‘Obstetric Violence’
Georgetown Law Journal
Rachelle Chadwick, ‘Practices
of Silencing: Birth, Marginality and Epistemic Violence’ in Camilla
Pickles and Jonathan
Herring (eds),
Childbirth, Vulnerability and Law:
Exploring Issues of Violence and Control
(Routledge, 2020) 30, 30.
Šimonović (n
) 6–7 [12];
SFM v Spain
); [3] See also Mofokeng (n
Indigenous Women
Brítez Arce
Prevention and Elimination of
); Meghan A Bohren
et al, ‘How Women Are Treated during Facility-Based Childbirth in Four
Countries: A Cross-Sectional Study
with Labour Observations and Community-Based
Surveys’ (2019) 394(10210)
1750, 1750–1. For a general
discussion,
see Camilla Pickles, ‘“Obstetric Violence,”
“Mistreatment,” and “Disrespect and Abuse”:
Reflections
on the Politics of Naming Violations during Facility-Based Childbirth’
(2023) 38(3)
628, 629–30 (‘“Obstetric
Violence,” “Mistreatment,” and “Disrespect and
See Part III(B)–(E) of this
eg, Šimonović
) [8]; For a list of applicable
rights, see Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,
Violence and
Discrimination against Women and Girls: Best Practices and Challenges in Latin
America and the Caribbean
(Doc No 233,14 November 2019) 89 [182]
Violence and Discrimination against Women
Bowser and Hill (n
) 8. For a ‘typology of
mistreatment of women during facility-based childbirth’, see Rajat Khosla
et al, ‘International
Human Rights and the Mistreatment of Women during
Childbirth’ (2016) 18(2)
Health and Human Rights
131, 139; Lynn P Freedman et al, ‘Defining Disrespect and Abuse of
Women in Childbirth: A Research, Policy and Rights Agenda’
(2014) 92(12)
Bulletin of the World Health Organization
915, 915–16; Pickles,
‘Everything Is Obstetric Violence Now’ (n
Pickles, ‘“Obstetric
Violence,” “Mistreatment,” and “Disrespect and
Pickles, ‘Everything Is
Obstetric Violence Now’ (n
Gemma McKenzie, ‘Learning from
Obstetric Violence in UK Births at Home: Reaffirming and Challenging Current
Understanding
of Abuse during the Maternity Period’ (2024) 8(3)
of Gender-Based Violence
The UN Special Rapporteur on Violence
against Women and the CEDAW Committee have focussed on childbirth:
Šimonović (n
SFM v Spain
The CoE, the IACHR and the IACtHR also include care during pregnancy and
post-partum: Blondin (n
Indigenous Women
Brítez Arce
Report of the Working Group on the
Issue of Discrimination against Women
Indigenous Women
) 90 [183].
Khosla et al (n
Ibid 133–4. See
Šimonović (n
) 9 [22], [23];
Mofokeng (n
) 12 [50]; Juan E
Report of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
, UN Doc A/HRC/31/57 (5 January
2016) 13 [47]; Committee against Torture,
Consideration of Reports Submitted
by States Parties under Article 19 of the Convention
UN Doc CAT/C/USA/CO/2 (25 July 2006) 8 [33];
) 58–9 [199]–[200]; Bohren
Violence and Discrimination
against Women
) 90 [183];
Khosla et al (n
Šimonović (n
Kukura, ‘Obstetric Violence’ (n
Šimonović (n
11–12 [31]; Bohren et al (n
Bohren et al (n
Šimonović (n
) 9–10 [22]–[23], 11–12
Manual fundal pressure involves a
birth attendant pushing on the upper part of a woman's uterus to assist vaginal
birth: see Šimonović
[27]; World Health Organization,
WHO Labour Care Guide: User’s
(2020) 30; Blondin
This entails the surgical separation
and widening of the pelvis to facilitate childbirth: see Šimonović (n
) 8 [20]; Human Rights Committee,
Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of Ireland
sess, UN Doc No CCPR/C/IRL/CO/4 (19 August 2014) 4 [11];
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Observations on the Combined Sixth and Seventh Periodic Reports of Ireland
sess, UN Doc CEDAW/C/IRL/CO/6-7 (9 March 2017) 3–4
Amniotomy is the intentional rupture
of the amniotic sac by an obstetrical provider. It may increase the risk of
perinatal HIV transmission:
Intrapartum Care
This involves a provider inserting
fingers into the cervix and sweeping between the membranes of the amniotic sac:
see Blondin (n
) 7 [18]. Clinical
pelvimetry has also been mentioned as being painful and with no clear benefit
for birth outcomes.
Intrapartum Care
Ibid 5–6 [7], 8
World Health Organization,
Normal Birth: A Practical Guide
(Report, 1996). Nevertheless, in a more
recent guide, the WHO does not specify a certain percentage: see
Intrapartum
Šimonović (n
) 10 [25]; Mofokeng (n
) 12 [50]. See also
Report of the
Working Group on the Issue of Discrimination against Women
) 21 [106(h)]; Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Concluding Observations on the
Sixth Periodic Report of the Czech Republic
sess, UN Doc
CEDAW/C/CZE/CO/6 (14 March 2016) 9 [30(c)] (‘
Observations on the Czech
Rather, it may be a form of
reproductive violence:
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
against Women and Domestic Violence,
opened for signature 11 May 2011, CETS
No 210 (entered into force 1 August 2014) art 39 (‘
Šimonović (n
) 8–9 [21];
Indigenous Women
) 60 [80]; Mofokeng (n
LF v Ireland
(European Court
of Human Rights
Fifth Section,
Application No 62007/17, 10
November 2020) [118]. See
KO’S v Ireland
Court of Human Rights, Fifth Section, Application No 61836/17, 10 November
WM v Ireland
(European Court of Human Rights
Section, Application No 61872/17, 10 November 2020).
See, eg, Committee against Torture,
Concluding Observations on the Second Periodic Report of Ireland
sess, UN Doc CAT/C/IRL/CO/2 (31 August 2017)
Report of the Working Group on the
Issue of Discrimination against Women
Violence and Discrimination
against Women
) 90 [183].
Violence and Discrimination
against Women
) 90 [183];
Brítez Arce
Intrapartum Care
Ibid 49, 58.
Intrapartum Care
Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women,
Views Adopted by the Committee under Article
7(3) of the Optional Protocol, concerning Communication No 149/2019
sess, UN Doc CEDAW/C/82/D/149/2019 (13 July 2022) 16–17
NAE v Spain
Jonathan Herring,
‘Identifying the Wrong in Obstetric Violence: Lessons from Domestic
Abuse’ in Camilla Pickles and
Jonathan Herring (eds),
Childbirth,
Vulnerability and Law: Exploring Issues of Violence and Control
(Routledge,
2020) 67, 83.
Kukura, ‘Obstetric
Violence’ (n
Evident through such evidence-based
guidelines as
Intrapartum Care
), which details necessary interventions
for safe childbirth.
Intrapartum Care
62, 85, 127.
Report of the Working Group on
the Issue of Discrimination against Women
Intrapartum Care
SFM v Spain
) 13 [7.5];
NAE v Spain
(n 102) 15–16
[15.6]–[15.7]; Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Views Adopted by the Committee under Article 7(3) of the Optional
Protocol, concerning Communication No 154/2020
sess, UN Doc
CEDAW/C/84/D/154/2020 (9 March 2023) 16 [7.12]–[7.13] (‘
SFM v Spain
) 11–12 [7.2].
SFM v Spain
) 13 [7.5];
NAE v Spain
) 17 [15.8];
MDCP v Spain
) 16 [7.13].
Intrapartum Care
Elizabeth Kukura, ‘Obstetric
Violence through a Fiduciary Lens’ in Camilla Pickles and Jonathan Herring
Childbirth, Vulnerability and Law: Exploring Issues of Violence and
(Routledge, 2020) 204, 214.
Intrapartum Care
Ibid 61, 69. However, more
frequent examinations may be necessary in certain situations.
Šimonović (n
) 10–11 [26], [28];
Intrapartum
Miguel Castro-Castro Prison v
(Merits, Reparations and Costs)
(Inter-American Court of Human
Rights, Series C No 160, 25 November 2006) [312].
The sensitive nature of the
medical procedure and the access to confidential medical information were of
particular relevance:
Konovalova v Russia
(European Court of Human
Rights, First Section, Application No 37873/04, 9 October 2014) [41]
NAE v Spain
) 14 [15.2].
Šimonović (n
) 10–11 [26].
Šimonović (n
) 10–11 [26].
Ibid 10 [24]; Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Consideration of Reports
Submitted by States Parties under Article 18 of the Convention
sess, UN Doc CEDAW/C/CZE/CO/5 (10 November 2010) 9–10
[36]–[37] (‘
Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties
under Article 18
’); World Health Organization,
WHO Statement on
Caesarean Section Rates
, WHO Doc WHO/RHR/15.02 (14 April 2015) 1
Statement on Caesarean Section Rates
’). See also Blondin
Statement on Caesarean Section
) 1. Nevertheless, the
WHO notes that data is limited and more research is needed to understand the
health effects of C-sections.
Report of the Working Group on
the Issue of Discrimination against Women
Statement on Caesarean
Section Rates
Non-Clinical Interventions to Reduce Unnecessary Caesarean Sections
) 12; Tore Nilstun et al,
‘Caesarean Delivery on Maternal Request: Can the Ethical Problem Be Solved
by the Principlist Approach?’
BMC Medical Ethics
11:1–8, 1, 5. This includes short-term effects like haemorrhage,
infection and pulmonary embolism and long-term morbidity in
the form of
intestinal obstruction and uterine rupture. It also increases the risk of
ectopic pregnancy and placenta previa in subsequent
pregnancies.
There is an increased risk of
respiratory problems for the child during delivery and long-term risks of asthma
and obesity:
Non-Clinical Interventions to Reduce Unnecessary Caesarean
Nilstun et al (n
Boso v Italy
[2002] VII Eur
Court HR 452, 458–9;
(1992) 73 Eur Comm HR (ser A)
) 13 [8(b)(i)] (emphasis added).
NAE v Spain
) 17 [16b(i)].
MDCP v Spain
[7.12]–[7.13].
Ibid 16 [7.13].
Šimonović (n
) 10 [24]; Mofokeng (n
Non-Clinical Interventions to
Reduce Unnecessary Caesarean Sections
Anna Nelson and Elizabeth C
Romanis, ‘The Medicalisation of Childbirth and Access to Homebirth in the
UK: COVID-19 and Beyond’
(2021) 29(4)
Medical Law Review
Stijn Smet, ‘Freedom of
Expression and the Right to Reputation: Human Rights in Conflict’
American University International Law Review
Nelson and Romanis (n
Šimonović (n
) 22 [81(e)] (emphasis added).
Consideration of Reports
Submitted by States Parties under Article 18
) 9–10 [37] (emphasis added). The
language is slightly more assertive in
Observations on the Czech Republic
) 9 [30(d)].
) [172–91];
(European Court of Human Rights, First Section, Application No
18568/12, 4 October 2018) [74]–[76] (‘
Kosaitė-Čypienė v Lithuania
(European Court of Human
Rights, Second Section, Application No 69489/12, 4 June 2019) [98]–[99]
Kosaitė-Čypienė
Ternovszky v Hungary
(European Court of Human Rights, Second Section, Application No 67545/09, 14
December 2010) [24] (‘
Ibid [186]. See also
Kosaitė-Čypienė
) [187]–[188]. See
Kosaitė-Čypienė
) [17]–[19].
) 11 (Judges Sajó and
Dubská v Czech
(European Court of Human Rights, Former Fifth Section, Application
Nos 28859/11 and 28473/12, 11 December 2014) 31 (Judge Yudkivska).
) 50 (Judges Sajó, Karakaş,
Nicolaou, Laffranque and Keller).
) [26]–[27].
‘FIGO Ethics and
Professionalism Guideline’ (n
Christilaw (n
Olubusola Amu, Sasha Rajendran and
Ibrahim I Bolaji, ‘Maternal Choice Alone Should Not Determine Method of
(1998) 317(7156)
British Medical Journal
Kukura, ‘Obstetric
Violence’ (n
) 767. C-sections
necessitate an operating theatre, a surgeon, an anaesthetist and a longer stay
in hospital after delivery. However,
in view of common forms of morbidity in
vaginal delivery, such as incontinence, the difference may not be substantial:
see Rebecca
CH Brown and Andrea Mulligan, ‘“Maternal Request”
Caesarean Sections and Medical Necessity’ (2023) 18(3)
Clinical Ethics
‘FIGO Committee for the
Ethical Aspects of Human Reproduction’ (n
Šimonović (n
Report of the Working Group on the Issue of
Discrimination against Women
Intrapartum Care
MDCP v Spain
Šimonović (n
Intrapartum Care
SFM v Spain
) 11–12 [7.2].
Intrapartum Care
Šimonović (n
) 22 [81(d)];
NAE v Spain
) 14–15 [15.4];
Intrapartum
) 30; ‘Childbirth: A
Bill of Rights’,
International Federation of Gynecology and
(Web Page, 17 September 2021) <
https://www.figo.org/resources/figo-statements/childbirth-bill-rights
archived at <
https://perma.cc/CY47-FSY9
NAE v Spain
) 16–17 [15.7]. See
Observations on the Czech Republic
) 9 [30(a)].
Intrapartum Care
Hanzelkovi v Czech Republic
(European Court of Human Rights, Fifth Section, Application No 43643/10, 11
December 2014) [79].
Intrapartum Care
) [201], [259];
Brítez Arce
) [75]–[81];
Differentiated Approaches with Respect to Certain Groups of Persons Deprived
(Advisory Opinion)
(Inter-American Court of Human Rights,
Series A No 29, 30 May 2022) [160]; Mofokeng (n
) 12–13 [50]; Šimonović
) 6–7 [12];
) 13 [7.5];
) 17 [15.8].
Declaration on the Elimination
of Violence against Women
, GA Res 48/104, UN GAOR, 48
plen mtg, Agenda Item 111, UN Doc A/RES/48/104 (20 December
1993) arts 1–2; Šimonović (n
Pickles, ‘Everything Is
Obstetric Violence Now’ (n
618. The concept of a “continuum of violence” draws on Liz
Kelly’s approach to sexual violence: see Liz Kelly,
‘The Continuum
of Sexual Violence’ in Jalna Hanmer and Mary Maynard (eds),
Violence and Social Control
(Macmillan Press, 1987) 46.
SFM v Spain
) 13 [7.5].
Pickles, ‘“Obstetric
Violence,” “Mistreatment,” and “Disrespect and
) 6 [11]; Šimonović (n
) 14 [40], 15–16 [49].
) 5 [6]; Šimonović (n
) 13 [39]; Khosla et al (n
Šimonović (n
Ibid 5 [9]; Blondin
Rebecca J Cook and Simone Cusack,
Gender Stereotyping: Transnational Legal Perspectives
(University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2010) 20.
Judy Wajcman,
Confronts Technology
(Pennsylvania State University Press, 1991) 54, 57;
Robyn Rowland, ‘Motherhood, Patriarchal Power, Alienation and the Issue
“Choice” in Sex Preselection’ in Gena Corea et al (eds),
Man-Made Women: How New Reproductive Technologies Affect Women
(Hutchinson and Co, 1985) 74, 80; James Lindemann Nelson, ‘Foreword’
(1992) 22(1)
Hastings Center Report
SFM v Spain
) 13 [7.5];
NAE v Spain
) 17 [15.8].
Sara Cohen Shabot,
Amigas, Sisters: We’re Being Gaslighted
Obstetric Violence and Epistemic Injustice’ in Camilla Pickles and
Jonathan Herring (eds),
Childbirth, Vulnerability and Law: Exploring Issues
of Violence and Control
(Routledge, 2020) 14, 25.
Šimonović (n
Brítez Arce
) [77]. See also Nelson and Romanis (n
Šimonović (n
SFM v Spain
) 13 [7.5];
NAE v Spain
) 17 [15.8].
Cohen Shabot (n
Violence and Discrimination
against Women
) 89 [182]. This
in turn is a form of objectification: see
Martha C Nussbaum,
‘Objectification and Internet Misogyny’ in Saul Levmore and Martha C
Nussbaum (eds),
The Offensive Internet: Speech, Privacy, and Reputation
(Harvard University Press, 2010) 68, 68–71.
) 456. In transplantation cases,
recommendations of non-therapeutic treatment are unethical. It is permissible at
the subject’s
or donor’s request: see Mattingly (n
Mattingly (n
Andrea Veltman and Mark Piper,
‘Introduction’ in Andrea Veltman and Mark Piper (eds),
Oppression, and Gender
(Oxford University Press, 2014) 1, 4.
See generally Pickles,
‘“Obstetric Violence,” “Mistreatment,” and
“Disrespect and Abuse”’
); JP Vogel et al, ‘Promoting
Respect and Preventing Mistreatment during Childbirth’ (2016) 123(5)
An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Pickles, ‘“Obstetric
Violence,” “Mistreatment,” and “Disrespect and
Vogel et al (n 196) 672.
‘Obstetric Violence’ (n
Etienne G Krug et al (eds),
World Report on Violence and Health
(World Health Organization, 2002)
See, eg, Vittorio
Violence and Social Justice
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2009) 40.
Herring (n 103) 72.
International Criminal Court,
Policy on Gender-Based Crimes: Crimes Involving Sexual, Reproductive and
Other Gender-Based Violence
(Report, December 2023) 15 [37].
Pickles, ‘“Obstetric
Violence,” “Mistreatment,” and “Disrespect and
Kukura, ‘Obstetric
Violence’ (n
Differentiated Approaches with
Respect to Certain Groups of Persons Deprived of Liberty
(n 170) [162].
NAE v Spain
Report of the Working Group on the Issue of Discrimination against
) 21 [106(g)]; Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,
Concluding Observations
on the Ninth Periodic Report of Germany
sess, UN Doc
CEDAW/C/DEU/CO/9 (31 May 2023) 13 [45(e)].
Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
, opened for signature 1 March
1980, 1249 UNTS 13
(entered into force 3 September 1981);
Inter-American
Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against
, opened for signature 9 June
1994, 33 ILM 1534
(entered into force 5
March 1995);
Istanbul Convention
Protocol to the African Charter on
Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa
, opened for
signature 11 July 2003 (entered into force 25 November 2005).
General Recommendation No
SFM v Spain
) 13 [8(b)(iii)]; Blondin (n 3) [8.5],
[8.8]–[8.9];
Intrapartum Care
General Comment
Blondin (n 3) [8.6];
Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties under Article 18
124) 9–10 [37].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (406 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter