URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlRRuralRLawP/2021/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ldhteenmdki-Uutela, Anu --- "Human Nature Vs Food System Transitions" [2021] IntJlRRuralRLawP 3; (2021) 9(1) International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Law & Policy, Article 3
International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR)
Law and Policy
[ISSN: 1839-745X]
[Formerly known as International Journal of Rural Law and
Rural American Jails: Rising Demands, Tight Money, and
Limited Options
Rick Ruddell,
G. Larry Mays
There are about 1,500 U.S. jails with fewer than 100 beds, and many of these
stand-alone facilities are in sparsely populated counties.
As these rural jails
are out-of-sight and out-of-mind, few correctional scholars are examining the
operations of these places and
these agencies are largely ignored unless a
disaster, mistake, or act of misconduct is reported by the media. In this
we identify 20 challenges rural jail administrators and sheriffs are
confronting. Many of these issues were identified a century
ago and a key
challenge for these jail administrators is to formulate solutions to these
long-term entrenched problems to provide
humane treatment for the people
incarcerated in these places. We contend the solutions to these challenges are
dependent upon increases
in funding and reimagining or reforming existing
arrangements in rural justice systems where counties are relying upon small,
stand-alone
facilities to hold pretrial and sentenced populations.
Corresponding author: Rick Ruddell.
rick.ruddell@uregina.ca
Rural American Jails: Rising Demands, Tight Money, and
Limited Options
Incarceration rates are rising throughout rural America and many of the
people admitted into the 1,500 small jails in the countryside
are suffering from
mental and physical health problems, disabilities, and addictions; and women are
now accounting for a greater
share of the jail population
These challenges are taking
place throughout the countryside and the least populated counties are often
experiencing the greatest
rise in jail incarceration rates due to high crime
rates associated with an opioid
These problems are
compounded as jail budgets are being stretched thin due to deteriorating
economic conditions, job losses, and
an eroding rural tax
Because these small jail
operations are out-of-sight they seldom come to the attention of the media,
government policymakers, advocacy
organizations, or university researchers who
are instead focused on what is happening in the justice systems in urban
America. When
these rural jails do capture our attention, it is often after they
become front-page news following a disaster, mistake, or act of
misconduct.
Except for the integrated jail-prison systems in six states and the District
of Columbia, most American jails are stand-alone facilities
dependent on local
funding and operated by elected sheriffs. Rural jails often serve as the center
of a county’s justice system
and the demands on these places are
increasing.
The Vera Institute of
Justice found, for instance, that the rural jail population increased by 26
percent between 2013 and 2020,
whereas jail populations in urban America
decreased by 22 percent.
the challenges confronting jail operations, such as reliance upon local funding,
the difficulty of recruiting and retaining
professional staff, and managing
special needs residents were identified a century
but sheriffs, who operate most
of these facilities, have often resisted attempts at
The presence of such a large number of stand-alone and locally run
correctional arrangements that are operated by elected officials
distinctively American approach to detaining arrestees and persons serving
sentences of less than one year. Another factor differentiating
correctional facilities from those in other developed nations is that universal
health care is not provided by the state or
federal government, and jails are
responsible for paying for the medical and psychological care of their inmates,
which is a costly
undertaking. These small jails are often located in rural
areas and in this commentary we use the terms rural and small interchangeably,
and define these facilities as having a rated capacity of fewer than 100 beds.
Most correctional stakeholders agree that American jails require reforms, and
local and state government officials, activists, and
advocates for jail inmates
have called for reimagining or reinventing local
corrections.
However, there is
little consensus on what practices should be reformed or who should pay for
these proposed changes. In what follows,
we take a closer look at the
operational obstacles created by the stand-alone nature of rural facilities, the
economic and political
environments in which they operate, and the
characteristics of their populations.
Rural American Jails
Jails are busy places, and although annual admissions dropped by almost
one-quarter between 2008 and 2019, over 10 million people
are admitted to U.S.
facilities every year.
comes to local corrections, most of the public’s attention is focused on
what happens in big city jails that hold thousands
of individuals. Yet, Zeng and
Minton reports there are about 1,500 jails that hold fewer than 100 inmates, and
on any given day there
are almost 60,000 people behind bars in these
A review of the extant literature shows that jail scholarship is relegated to
the margins of correctional research, and while this
topic was more popular in
the 1980s it seems to have fallen out of favor. As a result, there have been
comparatively few books or
articles published on this topic between 2010 and
2021. There is even less scholarly interest in what happens in rural jails.
and colleagues say that “the bulk of research has ignored jails
in rural locations despite smaller jails demonstrating higher
jail rates in
recent years.”
are rural incarceration rates rising, but this is happening in an environment
that is culturally, demographically, economically,
and politically different
than suburban or urban America. This has created a distinctive set of challenges
that local governments
must confront, and they are described in the following
Operational Challenges Confronting Small Jails
One of the best ways to learn about jail operations is to ask sheriffs and
jail administrators about their experiences and perceptions.
Ruddell and Mays
summarize the findings of four such studies and observe that irrespective of the
methods used, the respondents who
participated, or the year in which these
studies took place, jail administrators indicate that funding, crowding, and
workforce concerns
were key priorities, regardless of the size of their
operations. Inmate health—and to a lesser extent misconduct and
violence—were
also identified as important
In addition, respondents
in these studies indicated that limitations in their physical plants, such as
antiquated designs, crowding,
space limitations, or inadequate technological
capability were problematic issues.
The findings summarized by Ruddell and Mays were unsurprising given the
problems identified in jails reported throughout the early
and updated by scholars
throughout the 1980s and 1990s.
Although jail conditions have improved, the challenges their administrators are
confronting today are persistent and entrenched problems
defying simple
solutions. Many of these problems are interconnected and their origins can be
traced back to historical and political
arrangements including operating
stand-alone facilities at the county level administered by elected sheriffs.
There are two points to consider when thinking about the challenges
confronting local corrections. The first is that sheriffs or jail
administrators—whether they are managing small or large
operations—have little control over the types or numbers of persons
end up in their facilities. In many respects jails have become a default
mechanism for the inability of social and health-related
systems to respond to
the unmet needs of community populations, and this has long-been recognized as a
Individuals in
crisis—and often suffering from substance abuse problems—are
arrested and jailed because there are no
alternatives, and this challenge is
more pronounced in rural counties lacking 24/7 health and social services. The
second key point
is that jail administrators are competing for funding with
other county services. Most taxpayers, however, would rather see their
funding services for more sympathetic populations, such as children or the
elderly, instead of persons accused of committing
crimes. The public seldom
considers that today’s jail inmate is tomorrow’s neighbor, and it is
in everybody’s interest
if those people are returned to the community less
damaged than when admitted to jail.
The following section briefly identifies 20 challenges affecting contemporary
jail management. With respect to methodology, we started
with the issues
identified by Ruddell and Mays and expanded on those factors after an extensive
review of the extant jail literature.
The presentation of these issues is
admittedly brief and each of these topics could be expanded to an entire book
chapter. Our intent
in writing this commentary is to identify these topics to
establish a starting point for subsequent research and debate. Our hope
work inspires reforms in rural justice systems to improve the care of over a
million Americans who pass through these places
every year.
Twenty Challenges Confronting Rural Jails
High admissions of people with mental health and substance abuse
Jails are one of the few agencies operating around the clock in rural
counties and many of the people admitted into these facilities
would be managed
by mental health, juvenile, or other social service agencies in urban American.
In their summary of jail populations
Ruddell, Mays, and Winfree found they are
ten times more likely to suffer from substance abuse problems than members of
the public.
These problems may
be more prevalent in the countryside and Raggio, Hoffmann, and Kopak found that
almost three-quarters of a rural
jail population were assessed as having a
severe substance abuse disorder.
Ruddell, Mays, and Winfree also report that jail residents were five times
more likely to have a mental health problem than members
Torrey and colleagues
found, for instance, that there are ten times the number of people with severe
mental illnesses (SMI) in prisons
and jails than in state
Like substance abuse,
the prevalence of people with SMI may be higher in rural populations. One study
found that over one-third of
the people admitted to rural Michigan jails had a
SMI, compared with one-fifth of urban or suburban
Those Michigan
researchers also found that people with SMI spent, on average, 14 days longer in
custody than those without a
One reason for the high
prevalence of these inmates is that “police often engage in what they call
‘mercy bookings’:
arresting someone for a minor offense because they
believe jail is the only place that person will have access to food, a place to
sleep, and basic medical
Using statistics from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National
Institute of Mental Health, we calculated that jail residents
are over three
times more likely to commit suicide than members of the general population
and residents in small jails
more likely to commit suicide than inmates in the
nation’s 50 largest
facilities.
Altogether we find
that the psychological health of rural jail inmates creates numerous challenges
for jail administrators. As most
rural jails are too small to operate
specialized units, inmates with SMI are mixed with the general population and
this elevates
their risks of victimization from other
In addition, because
these stand-alone facilities are not part of a larger network, they cannot send
these individuals to facilities
with the capacity to better respond to their
unmet needs.
High admissions of people with physical health problems
Mental and physical health conditions are often interrelated, and prior
research shows that jail residents are likely to suffer from
a range of physical
health problems, including disabilities, histories of having infectious diseases
and the presence of HIV/AIDS.
These health problems affect jail mortality rates, and about 500 jail inmates
die from illnesses every year.
In a national study of jail mortality for the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics
published in 2012, Noonan reports that the mortality
rate in facilities of 50 or
fewer beds was twice the national
Furthermore, Weidner
and Schultz found that counties with high incarceration rates are associated
with premature deaths and self-reported
poor health, and these effects were
pronounced in rural and Southern
These problems have
become more evident in rural jails since the onset of the COVID-19
and the responses to
the pandemic have been criticized as jails in some states have high infection
Rising incarceration rates
Rural incarceration rates have been rising and Kang-Brown and Subramanian
found that the smallest counties had the greatest growth
populations.
The Vera Institute
of Justice estimates the rural jail incarceration rate is now more than twice
that of urban counties. That outcome
is due to holding a larger proportion of
pretrial inmates and detaining them
Rachael Riley and
colleagues point out that increased rural poverty rates were associated with
high jail incarceration rates and
attributed this finding to a lack of diversion
or drug treatment programs that might reduce jail
populations.
Reliance upon local funding
Small facilities often have a similar set of operational issues as large
jails, but few have the resources needed to address these
concerns. Almost all
the challenges reported in this commentary are related to inadequate funding and
it is unlikely that jail administrators
and sheriffs will be able to overcome
this problem given the stand-alone nature of their operations. In contrast, six
states—Alaska,
Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island,
Vermont—and the District of Columbia have integrated jail-prison systems.
incarceration are borne by all state taxpayers rather than county residents.
There are several advantages with these arrangements as jail operations are
consolidated into a smaller number of centrally managed
facilities. Moreover, as
these places fall under the auspices of the state’s Corrections
Department, there is likely to be
more operational consistency than stand-alone
facilities lacking state jail standards. State-level correctional arrangements
reduces political interference in jail operations.
Deteriorating physical plants
Many rural jails are overcrowded or aging structures, and Ruddell and Mays
found the average rural jail in their study was over 40
As a result, many need to
be refurbished, expanded, or relocated although these options may not be
economically feasible or politically
acceptable. While many counties have
replaced their antiquated jails with newer facilities, hundreds of aging jails
are still in
service. Some are showing wear and tear from high population
turnover rates as well as vandalism, neglect, and the lack of on-going
preventative maintenance; this again relates to funding. Older facilities are
also expensive to operate given their high rates of
energy consumption, and
outdated architectural designs are not as safe as modern designs, therefore
requiring more officers to provide
adequate inmate supervision. This may be one
reason the smallest counties in a study conducted by the Pew Charitable Trusts
the highest per resident jail
Whereas modernizing,
expanding, or rebuilding these facilities may be desirable to jail
administrators, the Vera Institute of Justice
claims that communities should
instead invest in policies that reduce incarceration
Managing crowding
A 2006 survey of rural sheriffs and jail administrators reveals that facility
overcrowding was one of the top five problems they
confronted.
Although information
from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics reports the average facility under
100 beds operates at less than
full capacity, national averages do not identify
facilities that are perpetually
Moreover, while the
average daily population is a good comparative benchmark, it does not account
for weekend or seasonal population
admissions spikes.
Crowding has negative implications for the physical plant as well as resident
and staff safety. Jail crowding may increase misconduct
or violence because of
an inability to separate violent and non-violent residents, a reduced number of
structured activities such
as work placements and increasing the number of
inmates a single officer must
Surveys of jail
administrators also reveal that residents in crowded facilities are also more
likely to attempt suicide.
Furthermore, managing crowding places high demands on the time, resources, and
creativity of the agency personnel, which is usually
at the expense of
rehabilitative efforts.
The failed potential of regionalization
Ruddell and Mays observe “regionalization occurs when a number of
There are a number of
benefits associated with regionalization, although the primary rationale is
financial, as these arrangements
enable the justice system to take advantage of
economies of scale that reduce operational
As regional jails
are larger than the facilities they replace, their size enables them to be more
responsive to the changing needs,
populations, and priorities of the justice
system. Despite those advantages, regionalization is a concept that is popular
but the practice has not caught on. In fact, most jurisdictions where
regionalization took place only happened after state governments
financial incentives to consolidate these
operations.
Any jail reform is
apt to generate negative outcomes, and regionalization increases transportation
costs, makes it difficult for
families to visit their loved ones, and is
inconvenient for justice system professionals, including the inmates’
Lack of gender responsive jail programming
Between 2005 and 2019 the nation’s female jail population increased by
17 percent while the male population dropped 4.5 percent:
in 2019 women
accounted for 15 percent of all jail
Much of this growth
in women’s incarceration has occurred in small
Because almost all
jails are co-ed facilities and women represent such a small proportion of a
facility’s population, they
often receive health care or rehabilitative
interventions that are designed for men and do not consider the distinctive
to women’s incarceration, including the likelihood that most are
suffering from trauma from prior
victimization.
Swavola, Riley,
and Subramanian observe that “With limited resources, jails are often ill
equipped to address the challenges
women face when they enter the justice
system, which can have serious and lasting public safety and community health
implications.”
Thus, it appears we have not made much progress since McGuirl called
incarcerated women a forgotten population almost a half century
Failing to take advantage of technology
Technology has been playing an increasingly important role in corrections:
from communicating with the public through department websites
and social media,
and by increasing inmate and staff safety using scanners, body worn cameras,
drones, and closed-circuit
television.
Introducing video
arraignments, utilizing Zoom and similar applications for attorney-inmate
meetings, and inmate videophone for family
increase family engagement. Researchers from the Pew Research Center also
believe these “tele-justice”
applications increase the courts’
ability to manage cases remotely, which may, in turn, reduce pre-trial
incarceration in rural
Residents of some jails are also able to use computer applications called kiosks
to enable them to find information, arrange commissary
purchases, or arrange
video visitation.
Moreover, telemedicine has long been used in some jurisdictions to provide
physical and mental health consultations, although only
a fraction of jails are
utilizing this technology.
Altogether, incorporating technology into everyday jail operations enables small
facilities to lower costs and enhance safety and
security. For example, the more
an agency can reduce the number of times an inmate leaves the facility, the
easier it is to maintain
the security envelope. In addition, technology allows
for better staff utilization and reduces transportation costs. Like other issues
addressed in this section, however, utilizing technology can be expensive and
the up-front costs may be prohibitive for some small
A lack of alternatives to incarceration
There has been increased interest in reducing the number of people admitted
to jails, and this has happened in four ways. First, between
2019 and 2021
reformist district attorneys were elected throughout the country on promises to
reduce pretrial incarceration. Second,
consistent with that goal a growing
number of jurisdictions are eliminating cash bail for minor
Thirdly, a growing
number of large jurisdictions are increasing the use of diversionary programs or
pretrial supervision to reduce
jail admissions, although some commentators have
observed that rural counties are often unable to implement these
Lastly, some large
counties are introducing sobering centers to reduce the number of jail
admissions of intoxicated people; this
intervention reduced jail admissions by
one-half in Houston.
Bureau of Justice Statistics study reveals that since death by intoxication in
jails of 50 or fewer beds is three times the
national average for all jails,
placing these individuals in alternative facilities may be safer for
Jail personnel are also supervising pretrial detainees and people serving
sentences in the community. For example, of the nearly 800,000
jail inmates in
2019, less than 50,000 were supervised in the community in weekender programs,
electronic monitoring, home detention,
day reporting, community service,
pretrial supervision, and other work or treatment
While these approaches
to reducing populations are conceptually appealing and less expensive than
incarceration, the proportion of
jail inmates participating in community-based
alternatives
by 37 percent between 2005 and
Thus, it seems as though
jail administrators are not taking advantage of these methods of reducing
incarceration although the small
populations of some rural jails may be a
barrier to implementing these programs. Oppel suggests that another reason for
implement these programs in rural counties is that the population
tends to be more conservative and prefers that pretrial detainees
bars, rather than living in the
Reliance upon holding individuals for other jurisdictions
There is a long history of rural jails holding pretrial detainees and
prisoners for the federal
and since the 9/11
attacks hundreds of counties expanded their jail capacities to house immigration
detainees, inmates from other
counties, as well as state and federal
Copp and Bales
observe that “many rural facilities have added capacity to take in
out-of-county boarders... [and] the influx
of state prisoners and undocumented
immigrants has brought in money to help sustain struggling
and Subramanian report that 84% of U.S. jails hold inmates for other
authorities, and some jails rent out more beds than
they use for their
county’s arrestees.
taking these steps enables sheriffs to modernize or expand their jail
operations, some counties added too much capacity and
cannot fill their empty
beds, which has provided a poor return on their investment in
incarceration.
A growing number of county jails are contracting with state governments to
hold their prisoners, and this practice has been supported
by federal rural
economic development funding.
The problem is that few jail operations have the rehabilitative infrastructure
to keep long-term residents constructively occupied,
either through recreational
or rehabilitative programming. One of the perennial problems in jails is the
lack of opportunities for
residents to constructively occupy their time, and
consistent with that observation researchers examining the surveys of almost
U.S. jail inmates found that individuals who spent more time watching TV
or working had fewer rule violations, including violent
misconduct.
programming may be one reason why assault and misconduct levels increased in
these facilities after they started housing
Managing jail violence
Given the population turnover and the high proportion of special needs
inmates—including persons with serious mental illnesses
members—both inmate-on-inmate and inmate-on-staff assault rates in some
facilities are high, although these assaults
may be less frequent in jails
located in suburban and rural
These acts have also
increased in jail facilities that are holding prisoners for state corrections
departments.
One limitation in
understanding the scope of the jail violence problem is a lack of national-level
estimates of these offences, although
anecdotal accounts suggest these acts are
seldom reported. The federal government surveys incarcerated people about sexual
and victimization, and their researchers found rates of substantiated
incidents are higher in jails than in
Rehabilitating jail inmates
Few jails offer extensive rehabilitative programs as about two-thirds of
their residents are not sentenced but are awaiting their
appearances.
Of the jails
offering work programs, most are based on doing unskilled chores within the
living units—such as cleaning—or
vocational training in the kitchen
or laundry. In jails where they are offered, rehabilitative programs are often
based on counseling
(including substance abuse treatment), education, and
developing vocational skills.
Given their short sentences and their low numbers in the population few rural
jails offer rehabilitative opportunities. Even when
these programs are offered,
rural jail inmates reported they lacked rehabilitative resources in the facility
and these shortfalls
remained once they returned to the
One emerging approach to delivering low-cost jail programming is using
closed-circuit television to deliver inspirational messages
and information
earning general equivalency
Failing to address the
unmet needs of these individuals does little to inhibit their recidivism, and
some frequent utilizers are
returned to local jails dozens of times, and they
also tend to place inordinate demands on emergency
As the adage goes,
this is doing “life on the installment plan.” Although rural jail
personnel try to develop and deliver
meaningful programs, they often lack the
funding, staffing, and public support needed to deliver these initiatives. In
order to supplement
the efforts of their staff, some rural jail administrators
solicit help from Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, and religious
groups to provide programing and supports to residents.
Lack of community re-entry programs
While about one-third of jail residents are sentenced, we know little about
their long-term outcomes once released. Average jail sentences
are short, and
many inmates will earn an early release, although there are no standard policies
on the amount of time they
As a result, only a small
proportion of jail residents receive meaningful rehabilitative interventions
while incarcerated. Even fewer
jails have formal community re-entry programs to
provide ongoing support for these individuals. In their study of rural Tennessee
jails Miller and Miller observe the following barriers to implementing these
re-entry programs, including:
Few professional service vendors and treatment providers from whom to choose,
resulting in more generalized versus specialized expertise,
greater travel times
leading to higher total costs, and less time for individualized counselling
sessions which, in turn, encourages
efficiency approaches such as increased
reliance on group treatment and dosage intensification through merging
intervention components
to cover more material in less time and fewer
Although many jail administrators may see community reentry programs as
falling outside their scope of services, some individuals
leaving the jail
require supports to prevent their recidivism. Consequently, an investment in
reentry programs may reduce recidivism
and reduce the jail’s population
over the long term.
Emerging external threats
Jails are often the hub of a rural county’s justice system and are
typically adjacent to the local courthouse. Whereas ensuring
the safety and
security of these facilities has traditionally focused on internal threats such
as riots or escapes, the protests
carried out by groups opposing government
legitimacy suggests jail administrators take steps to prevent external threats,
assaults on these facilities. While the 2020-2021 riots and protests
were directed at urban facilities, including the January 2021
attack on the U.S.
Capitol, there is a long history of rural anarchist movements and
forward-looking jail administrators and sheriffs
are preparing for potential
risks by establishing policies and procedures to deal with these threats and by
increasing internal and
perimeter security. Sturgeon observes that
“Correctional facilities must begin preparing to manage a new type of
holds the belief that you represent the government that they are
trying to replace and, therefore, correctional officials, and the
courts, have
no authority over them. They will resist in every way
Abiding by jail standards
Both the federal and state governments require that incarcerated people
receive levels of care that are constitutionally appropriate,
although there is
little agreement on what constitutes cruel and unusual treatment when it comes
to local corrections. Throughout
the 1970s and 1980s public interest attorneys
and advocacy organizations such as the American Civil Liberties Union were able
work toward improving jail and prison conditions using class action lawsuits
to force correctional facilities to provide more humane
care, although these
efforts were later hamstrung by the passage of the
Prison Litigation Reform
in 1996, which limited the ability of inmates to launch lawsuits to
improve their living conditions. While efforts to reform local
corrections are ongoing, some incarcerated individuals receive care that does
not meet their needs. Agencies delivering
this inadequate care are at increased
jeopardy of litigation and Schlanger found that the top three sources of jail
lawsuits were
medical care, the inappropriate use of force, and personal
In addition to abiding constitutional requirements and federal legislation
such as the
Americans with Disabilities Act
, more than one-half of states
have established formal jail standards, although abiding by these standards is
sometimes voluntary
and there can be a lack of state oversight in these
operations.
Worsley and Memmer
point out, for instance, that in about half the states with standards there is
no enforcement mechanism to ensure
that jails will follow the
guidelines.
As a result, there
appears to be few downsides in failing to comply with by state-level standards
in most states.
One mechanism that has been used to improve the care of incarcerated people
is requiring that local correctional facilities holding
inmates for the federal
(including immigration detainees), or for state governments, to be accredited
with the American Correctional Association (ACA), creating
a powerful incentive
for jails to become accredited. Accreditation indicates compliance with a set of
national standards and the
ACA highlights the advantages of becoming accredited
including improving staff training, program development, contributing to a safer
environment, and cheaper liability
In contrast with
those claims, Senator Elizabeth Warren has been critical of ACA accreditation
and calls the process unreliable and
a “rubber stamp.” Warren
contends there are conflicts of interests in the accreditation process as the
ACA promotes the
privatization of corrections as well as accredits those
facilities.
Recruiting jail personnel
Writing about jails, Paoline and Lambert observe that “staff are the
heart and soul of these institutions,” and “Satisfied,
staff, who do not suffer from undue job stress, are critical in ensuring that a
jail is successful, whereas highly stressed,
unhappy, and uncommitted staff can
result in disaster.”
some rural jails attract highly motivated and skilled personnel, many rural
counties draw from a very shallow labor pool, and
it is difficult to attract
out-of-town employees if the jail offers low salaries. The U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics reports that
average annual salaries are lower for local corrections
compared with state and federal prison staff, and workers in California and
Northeastern states received higher salaries than jail personnel working in the
South or Midwest.
Rural jails
can also have a familiarity problem that has to be acknowledged and managed.
Because there is a great chance the staff
will know the inmates, and may even be
related to some of them, there exists the potential for favoritism that can lead
to management
and security problems.
Retaining jail officers
Although training and mentoring can build the jail officer’s knowledge,
skills, and abilities it may be difficult to retain
them after they developed
their expertise, and rural agencies often lose employees to other correctional
or law enforcement employers.
This can be problematic and Leip and Stinchcomb point out that in jails with 100
or fewer beds, losing several employees “can
have sizable fiscal and
operational implications.”
One of the limitations in our understanding of employee turnover in rural jails
is that most research has been conducted in large
jails. Although scholars have
generally found that factors such as organizational commitment and job
satisfaction are tied with turnover
intention, salaries and career opportunities
also matter. Consequently, two reasons for turnover in rural jails are that
are higher in state or federal corrections, and there are defined
career ladders and formal promotion boards. Consequently, there
potential for career mobility and promotion as compared with opportunities in a
small, stand-alone facility.
Risks to jail officers
Although the greatest fear expressed by most jail personnel is being
assaulted on the job their risks of being killed are relatively
Many of the characteristics
of rural jails, with high rates of inmate turnover, a lack of activities to
constructively occupy the
inmates, and a high proportion of inmates with special
needs have the potential for higher violence levels. However, there are few
studies confirming that proposition, as there are no national-level data on
inmate-on-staff assaults in local corrections. The risks
of psychological
injuries, however, are high and many correctional personnel are suffering from
mental health problems that are shaped
by their on-the-job experiences. Jaegers
and colleagues, for example, found that over one-half of jail officers in the
Midwest were
suffering from symptoms of post-traumatic stress
Those findings were
very similar to those reported by Canadian researchers who surveyed thousands of
correctional officers about
their psychological
well-being.
Lastly, the deaths
of jail personnel from COVID-19 throughout America have drawn our attention to
their risks of contracting communicable
Admitting juveniles into adult jails
Although the federal government has provided financial incentives for
counties to remove juveniles from adult jails since the 1970s,
approximately
2,900 juveniles were held in these facilities on the last weekday of June 2019.
Using the same methodology as Zeng
and Minton for calculating adult admissions
we estimate that approximately 50,000 juveniles pass through adult jails in any
While some are charged as
adults or transferred from juvenile courts, all of them are vulnerable to
emotional, physical, and sexual
victimization from their adult counterparts and
this might also raise their risks of self-harm or
Rural jails may hold a higher proportion of these young people because few
sparsely populated counties operate juvenile detention
centers. Like other
elements of rural justice systems, the lack of alternatives makes jails the
default option to house these youth.
This has implications for their well-being.
As separate juvenile units are not available, some youth are placed in solitary
confinement
to separate them from adult residents, and that practice might
increase their risks of developing mental health problems or engaging
self-harm or suicide.
adults receive few rehabilitative opportunities, some long-term detainees held
as adults may receive programing from the
local school district if they have
Individual Educational Plans.
The Vera Institute of Justice observes that rural jails are at a crisis point
and long-term entrenched problems such as crowding,
rising incarceration rates,
and managing special needs populations with inadequate funding defies an easy
Although these issues
have been reported for generations, jail scholars have become so accustomed to
these shortcomings they are
no longer shocking. Over a century ago, Louis
Robinson called jails “a serious menace to the community” and
for the consolidation of jail operations, suggesting that 500 to 1,000
bed facilities operated by state authorities—rather
than county
officials—would be safer, more humane, and
rehabilitative.
calls for reform may be as unpopular today as they were in 1915. This is because
reducing our reliance on jails
at the county-level is opposed by many
stakeholders, the foremost being county sheriffs, who would relinquish some of
their autonomy,
influence, and status if jails were consolidated. Moreover,
consolidating local jails would also increase some law enforcement costs,
including the need to transport arrestees further distances to the jail itself,
and afterwards to attend their court appearances.
In many respects the 20 challenges we identified are interconnected, and a
lack of adequate funding is a key issue underlying most
of these problems. Yet,
even if funding were increased, it is unlikely that personnel in a 50-bed jail
could develop and deliver
cost-effective intervention programs for a relatively
small number of special needs inmates or offer comprehensive rehabilitative
programs for a dozen sentenced residents. The problem is that small, stand-alone
facilities cannot take advantage of the economies
of scale for delivering
evidence-based correctional interventions given their population
characteristics. When jail operations are
consolidated, however, it becomes
practical to develop units offering interventions for persons with mental health
or substance abuse
problems, and it becomes economically feasible to develop
diversionary, pretrial, and community re-entry programs.
There has been increasing awareness about the relationships between jails and
the community, and whether high jail incarceration rates
disrupt community
functioning. This may, in turn, increase crime and the use of incarceration.
Weidner and Schultz observe that “high
levels of neighborhood
incarceration can be detrimental to the social ecology of communities by
damaging social capital and interfering
with the kinds of family and social
networks that are required for sustaining community’s well-being as well
as individuals’
mental health.”
While jail administrators
may not pay much attention to what is happening in their community, when
families and friendship networks
are no longer able to informally regulate
behavior, crime will increase, and this places additional demands on the entire
justice system, including local corrections.
Conclusions
Ruddell and Mays argue that the long-term solutions to the structural
shortcomings of rural jails are political in nature and require
governments to re-evaluate the need for these small, stand-alone
facilities.
In many respects
the United States is an outlier in the use of local corrections, as most
developed nations hold pretrial detainees
in correctional facilities funded by
state or federal governments. It is unlikely, however, that state governments
want to assume
the $25 billion costs for local
corrections.
Regionalizing
jail services might be an option in some places, although legislators would need
to create incentives to reduce the
number of county jails. This leaves local
governments with few viable alternative options to operating these
facilities.
As rural jails have historically been out-of-sight and out-of-mind their
administrators must now comply with growing demands during
an era when county
budgets are stretched thin or shrinking. At the same time, all operations of the
justice system are highly scrutinized
and mistakes or misconduct taking place in
local corrections can quickly become headline news and a costly expense for
local governments.
In this paper we outlined 20 lingering issues that plague
small jails, and hope that researchers use our observations to examine
issues more closely and search for solutions to America’s rural jail
Rick Ruddell,
University of Regina
G. Larry Mays,
New Mexico State University
William Sturgeon,
Independent Researcher
Rick Ruddell, G Larry Mays, and
L Thomas Winfree Jr,
Contemporary Corrections
(Routledge, 2021) 174.
Hannah Pagel, ‘Sheriffs:
We can’t ‘arrest our way out of the rural drug problem,’
(Web Page, 20 January 2021) <
https://www.agri-pulse.com/articles/15065-rural-america-needs-opioid-crisis-intervention-courts-they-save-lives
Kim Parker et al,
Unites and Divides Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities
(Pew Research
Center, 22 May 2018) 16.
Brandon Applegate and Alicia
Sitren, ‘The Jail and the Community: Comparing Jails in Rural and Urban
Contexts’ (2008)
The Prison Journal
Vera Institute of Justice,
‘People in Jail in 2019’
Vera Institute of Justice
December 2020) <
https://www.vera.org/publications/people-in-jail-in-2019
Fishman, Joseph,
of Crime: The Shocking Story of the American Jail
(Patterson Smith,
Jessica Pishco, ‘When
a Sheriff’s Jail is Emptied’
(Web page, 24 January
https://theappeal.org/politicalreport/sheriffs-and-bail-reform-the-badge/
Jennifer E Copp and William
D Bales, ‘Jails and Local Justice System Reform’ (2018) 28(1)
Future of Children
103, 117-18.
Zhen Zeng and Todd D Minton,
Jail Inmates in 2019
(US Bureau of Justice Statistics, March 2021) 1.
Melissa A Kowalski et al,
‘Jails in the Time of Coronavirus’
Corrections: Policy, Practice
and Research
Corrections: Policy, Practice and Research
DOI: 10.1080/23774657.2020.1834471.
Rick Ruddell and G Larry
Mays, ‘Trouble in the Heartland: Challenges Confronting Rural Jails’
(2011) 1(1)
International Journal of Rural Criminology
Edith Abbott,
Hundred and One County Jails in Illinois and why they Ought to be Abolished
(Juvenile Protective Association, 1916); Nina Kinsella, ‘County Jails and
the Federal Government’ (1933) 24(2)
Journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology
428; Louis N Robinson, ‘Solution of the Jail
Problem’ (1915) 6(1)
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology
John Irwin,
Managing the Underclass in American Society
(University of California Press,
1985); Paul A Katsampes, ‘A National Strategy for Change in Rural
Jails’ in SD Cronk
Criminal Justice in Rural America
(National Institute of Justice, 1982) 231; Dennis A Kimme,
The Nature of
New Small Jails: Report and Analysis
(National Institute of Corrections,
1985); Ken Kerle ‘The Rural Jail: Its People, Problems and
Solutions’ in SD Cronk
Criminal Justice in Rural America
(National Institute of Justice, 1982); Ken Kerle,
American Jails: Looking to
(Butterworth Heinemann, 1998).
Roy Casey, ‘Catchall
Jails’ (1954) 193(1)
Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science
Ruddell, Mays, and Winfree
Jr (n 1) 175.
Alyssa L Raggio, Norman G
Hoffmann and Albert M Kopak, ‘Results from a comprehensive assessment of
behavioral health problems
among rural jail inmates’ (2017) 56(3)
Journal of Offender
Rehabilitation
217, 225-26.
Ruddell, Mays, and Winfree
Jr (n 1) 175.
E. Fuller Torrey,
Treatment of Persons with Mental Illness in Prisons and Jails: A State
(Treatment Advocacy Center, 8 April 2014) 6.
Michigan Joint Task Force on
Jail and Pretrial Detention,
Report and Recommendations
(Michigan Joint
Task Force on Jail and Pretrial Incarceration, 2020) 8.
Lauren Jones, Sandra van den
Heuvel and Amanda Lawson,
The Cost of Incarceration in New York State
(Vera Institute of Justice, January 2021) 8.
E Ann Carson and Mary P
Mortality in Local Jails, 2000 to 2016
(US Bureau of Justice
Statistics, 12 February 2020); National Institute of Mental Health,
(Web page, January 2021) <
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/suicide.shtml#part_154969
Margaret E Noonan,
Mortality in Local Jails and State Prisons, 2000-2010 – Statistical
(US Bureau of Justice Statistics, December 2012) 5. See also Christine
Tartaro and Rick Ruddell, ‘Trouble in Mayberry: A National
Analysis of
Suicides and Attempts in Small Jails’
(2006) 31(1)
American Journal of
Criminal Justice
Rick Ruddell and G Larry
Mays, ‘Rural jails: Problematic inmates, overcrowded cells, and
cash-strapped counties’ (2007)
Journal of Criminal Justice
251, 256-7.
Jennifer Bronson, Laura M
Maruschak and Marcus Berzofsky,
Disabilities Among Prison and Jail Inmates,
(US Bureau of Justice Statistics, December 2015) 1; Laura M
Medical Problems of Jail Inmates
(US Bureau of Justice
Statistics, November 2006) 1.
Carson and Cowhig (n 23)
Noonan (n 24) 5.
Robert R Weidner and
Jennifer Schultz, ‘Examining the Relationship Between Incarceration and
Population Health: The Roles of
Region and Urbanicity’ (2021) 32(4)
Criminal Justice Policy Review
403, 417; See also, Sandhya Kajeepeta et
al, ‘Association Between County Jail Incarceration and Cause-Specific
County Mortality
in the USA, 1987-2017: A Retrospective, Longitudinal
Study’ (2021) 6(4)
Vera Institute of
‘Guidance for prevention and responsive measures to
coronavirus for rural justice systems’,
Vera Institute of Justice
(Web page, 24 March 2020)
<https://www.vera.org/downloads/publications/coronavirus-guidance-rural-justice-systems.pdf>.
John Cheves,
‘Thousands of People Infected as Overcrowded KY Jails Create
‘Reservoirs for COVID’’,
Lexington Herald Leader
page, 29 January 2021).
<https://www.kentucky.com/news/coronavirus/article248757880.html>.
Jacob Kang-Brown and Ram
Subramanian,
Out of Sight: The Growth of Jails in Rural America
Institute of Justice, June 2017) 11.
Mark Levin and Michael
Open Roads and Overflowing Jails: Addressing High Rates of Rural
Pretrial Incarceration
(Texas Public Policy Foundation, May 2018) 3.
Rachael W Riley et al,
‘Exploring the urban-rural incarceration divide: Drivers of local jail
incarceration rates in the United
States’ (2018) 36(1)
Technology in Human Services
Ruddell and Mays (n 25)
Pew Charitable Trusts,
‘Local Spending on Corrections Tops $35 Billion in Latest Nationwide
Pew Charitable Trusts
(Web page, 29 January 2021) 9 <
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2021/01/local-spending-on-jails-tops-$25-billion-in-latest-nationwide-data
Vera Institute of Justice,
‘Reducing the use of Jails’, (Web page, 2020) <
https://www.vera.org/ending-mass-incarceration/reducing-the-use-of-jails
Rick Ruddell and G Larry
Mays (n 25) 251.
Zeng and Minton (n 9) 7.
Jared M Ellison, Benhamin
Steiner and Emily M Wright, ‘Examining the Sources of Violent
Victimization Among Jail Inmates’
(2018) 45(11)
Criminal Justice and
1723, 1728.
Tartaro and Ruddell (n 24)
Ruddell and Mays (n 12) 117.
Erik Alda, ‘Does Size Influence Jail Efficiency? An
Analysis of Local Jails in the United States’ (2020)
Corrections:
Policy, Practice and Research
DOI 10.1080/23774657.2020.1731725
Jim Dennis,
‘Cooperation works: Six Ohio jurisdictions join forces to create regional
jail’ (1998) 60(6)
Corrections Today
Zeng and Minton (n 9) 6.
Elizabeth Swavola, Kristi
Riley and Ram Subramanian,
Overlooked: Women and Jails in an Era of
(Vera Institute of Justice, 2016) 6.
Dana DeHart,
‘Women’s pathways to crime: A heuristic typology of offenders’
(2018) 45(10)
Criminal Justice and Behavior
1461, 1472.
Swavola et al, (n 45) 7.
Marlene C McGuirl,
‘The Forgotten Population: Women in Prison’ (1975) 32(4)
Quarterly Journal of the Library of Congress
National Institute of
Corrections,
Technology in Corrections
(US National Institute of
Corrections, 2020).
Janna Anderson, Lee Rainie
and Emily A Vogels, ‘Experts Say the ‘New Normal’ in 2025 will
be far More Tech-Driven,
Presenting more Big Challenges’
Pew Research
(Web page, 18 February 2021)
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2021/02/18/experts-say-the-new-normal-in-2025-will-be-far-more-tech-driven-presenting-more-big-challenges/
Kiosk Information Systems.
‘Government and Inmate Kiosk Systems’,
Kiosk Information
(Web page, 2021) <
https://kiosk.com/market-solutions/government-kiosks/
Martin Krsak et al,
‘Access to Specialty Services: Opportunities for Expansion of Telemedicine
to Support Correctional Health
Care in Colorado’ (2020) 26(6)
Telemedicine and e-health
Copp and Bales (n 8)
Richard A Oppel, ‘A
Cesspool of a Dungeon: The Surging Population of Rural Jails’
(online, 2019) <
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/13/us/rural-jails.html
Suzanne V Jarvis et al,
‘Public Intoxication: Sobering Centers as an Alternative to Incarceration,
Houston, 2010-2017’
(2019) 109(4)
American Journal of Public Health
Noonan (n 24) 5.
Zeng and Minton (n 9) 9.
Zeng and Minton (n 9) 9.
Oppel (n 54).
Fishman (n 6); Kinsella (n
Kang-Brown and Subramanian
(n 32) 13-14.
Copp and Bales (n 8)
Kang-Brown and Subramanian
Anna Duan, ‘Beds for
Rent: Economic Motives Behind Rural Jail Growth Since 1970’,
(Web page, 30 April 2020) <
https://www.mackseysymposium.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1110&context=virtual2020
Jack Norton and Jacob
Kang-Brown,
Federal Farm Aid for the Big House
(Vera Institute of
Justice, 22 October 2018).
Mateja Vuk and Dalibor
Dolezal, ‘Idleness and Inmate Misconduct: A New Perspective on Time Use
and Behavior in Local Jails’
(2020) 41(11)
Deviant Behavior
Ryan M. Labrecque,
‘Interpersonal Violence and Institutional Misconduct in the Los Angeles
County Jail System: A Mixed Method
Investigation’ (2021)
International
Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306624X21990834
Christine Tartaro and
Marissa P Levy, ‘Density, inmate assaults, and direct supervision
jails’ (2007) 18(4)
Criminal Justice Policy Review
Jonathan W Caudill et al,
‘Correctional Destabilization and Jail Violence: The Consequences of
Prison Depopulation Legislation’
(2014) 42(6)
Journal of Criminal
Ramona R Rantala,
Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional Authorities, 2012-15
of Justice Statistics, July 2018) 9.
Zeng and Minton (n 9) 6.
Applegate and Sitren (n 4)
John M Keesler et al,
‘If we can Feel Like we Have Purpose and we Belong – Exploring the
Experiences of Drug-Involved
Individuals in a Rural Jail’ (2020) 38(4)
Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly
Julie D Garman et al,
‘Bringing Jails into the Twenty-First Centry: Evaluating Jail TV as a
Method of Programming’ (2020)
Corrections: Policy, Practice and
, DOI: 10.1080/23774657.2020.1742248.
National Association of
Counties, ‘Identifying high utilizers’,
National Association of
(Web page, 2019)
<https://www.naco.org/resources/index/identifying-high-utilizers>.
Lara Hoffman,
‘Separate but Unequal – When Overcrowded: Sex Discrimination in Jail
Early Release Policies’ (2009)
William and Mary Journal of Race,
Gender, and Social Justice
J Mitchell Miller and Holly
Ventura Miller, ‘Treating Dually Diagnosed Offenders in Rural Settings:
Profile of the Middle Tennessee
Rural Reentry Program’ (2017) 42(2)
American Journal of Criminal Justice
William Sturgeon, ‘Is
your Facility Prepared for Future Challenges?’,
Corrections.Com
(Web page, 18 January 2021)
http://www.corrections.com/news/article/51709-is-your-facility-prepared-for-future-challenges
Margo Schlanger,
‘Inmate Litigation’
Harvard Law Review
William Patrick,
‘State Jail Standards can’t Protect Employees, Prisoners’,
Palestine Herald-Press
(Web page, 1 August 2018) <
https://www.palestineherald.com/columnists/state-jail-standards-cant-protect-employees-prisoners/article_469db654-95c8-11e8-9ffc-cf893ca83a5c.html
Melanie K Worsley and Amy
Memmer, ‘Transparency Behind Bars: A History of Kansas Jail Inspections,
Current Practices, and Possible
Reform’ (2017) 1(2)
Journal of Criminal
Justice and Law
American Correctional
Association,
(Web page, 2019)
http://www.aca.org/ACA_Prod_IMIS/ACA_Member/Standards_and_Accreditation/StandardsInfo_Home.aspx
Elizabeth Warren,
Accreditation Con: A Broken Prison and Detention Facility Accreditation System
that puts Profits over People
(Book, on1226781297, 16 December 2020) 2.
Eugene A Paoline and Eric G
Lambert, ‘Exploring Potential Consequences of Job Involvement Among Jail
Staff’ (2012) 23(3)
Criminal Justice Policy Review
US Bureau of Labor
Statistics, ‘Correctional Officers and Bailiffs’
Bureau of Labor Statistics
(Web page, 2020) <
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/protective-service/correctional-officers.htm#tab-5
See also: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, ‘Occupational Employment
Statistics’
US Bureau of Labor Statistics
(Web page, 2020)
https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes333012.htm#st
Richard Kiekbusch, William
Price, and John Theis, ‘Turnover Predictors: Causes of Employee Turnover
in Sheriff-Operated Jails’
(2003) 16(2)
Criminal Justice Studies
Leslie A Leip and Jeanne B
Stinchcomb, ‘Should I Stay or Should I go? Job Satisfaction and Turnover
Intent of Jail Staff Throughout
the United States’ (2013) 38(2)
Criminal Justice Review
Weiwei Liu and Bruce Taylor,
‘Correctional Officer Fatalities in Line of Duty During 2005 to 2015: A
Survival Analysis’
(2019) 99(1)
The Prison Journal
Lisa A Jaegers et al,
‘Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Job Burnout Among Jail Officers’
(2019) 61(6)
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine
R Nicholas Carleton et al,
‘Mental disorder symptoms among public safety personnel in Canada’
(2018) 63(1)
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry
Todd D Minton, Zhen Zeng,
and Laura M Maruschak,
Impact of COVID-19 on the Local Jail Population,
January-June, 2020
(US Bureau of Justice Statistics, 10 March 2021) 7.
Zeng and Minton (n 9) 1.
Campaign for Youth Justice,
Jailing Juveniles: The Dangers of Incarcerating Youth in Adult Jails in
(Campaign for Youth Justice, November 2007) 4.
Tamar R Birckhead
‘Children in Isolation: The Solitary Confinement of Youth’ (2015)
Wake Forest Law Review
Vera Institute of Justice (n
Robinson (n 13) 101.
Robert R Weidner and
Jennifer Schultz, ‘Examining the Relationship Between Incarceration and
Population Health: The Roles of
Region and Urbanicity’ (2020) 32(4)
Criminal Justice Policy Review
403, 407-408.
Ruddell and Mays (n 12)
Pew Charitable Trusts,
Local Spending on Corrections tops $25 Billion in Latest Nationwide Data
(Pew Charitable Trusts, 29 January 2021) 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
PDF format (293 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter