URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Finn, Jeremy --- "The Schoolgirl and the Horse-whipped Parson: An Account of an Early Wellington Cause Celebre" [2005] AUJlLegHist 10; (2005) 9(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 175
The Schoolgirl and the Horse-whipped Parson: An Account of an Early Wellington Cause Celebre
I Introduction
II Opening and Overview
III The Protagonists
IV The Setting and Local Politics
V The ‘Event’
VI The First Legal Proceedings
VII The Resort to Publicity
VIII Successful Challenging the Conviction in the Supreme Court
IX The Publicity Intensifies and the Opposition finds its Voice
X Challenging History
XI The Civil Suit in the Supreme Court
XII Attitudes to Legal Institutions and Custom
The Schoolgirl and the Horse-whipped Parson: An
Account of an Early Wellington Cause Celebre
JEREMY FINN
I Introduction
This paper examines the unusual litigation involving the Reverend Arthur
Baker an Anglican priest prominent in early Wellington affairs.
This litigation
included the criminal prosecution of Baker for allegedly indecently assaulting
Mary Schroder, a schoolgirl; the quashing
of that conviction on appeal and then
renewed scrutiny of the whole matter in a civil action for assault brought by
Baker against
George Schroder, Mary’s father, because Schroder had
publicly horsewhipped Baker in the street outside Baker’s church.
Although the truth or otherwise of Mary Schroder’s allegations may
never be determined, the case provides a rare – indeed
probably unequalled
– example from 1850s New Zealand of the trial of a person in a position of
social privilege for a sexual
offence. The very substantial public discussion of
various incidents of the litigation in the newspapers of the time – again
apparently unparalleled – provides valuable insights into aspects of the
legal process in early colonial New Zealand, such
as the rules relating to
admissibility of evidence of litigants in cases where sexual misconduct was
alleged and the tension between
adherence to legal processes and
‘self-help’ remedies for grievances. In particular, much can be
learned about the extent
of public discussion of cases before the courts,
perceptions of the merits of jury trial and the legally ill-defined but socially
important role of Justices of the Peace in the administration of justice.
II Opening and Overview
On 13 August 1858 the Reverend Arthur Baker was standing in the street
outside St Paul’s Anglican Church in central Wellington
following the
morning service when he was accosted by George Schroder, a Nelson merchant with
the words ‘You have insulted
my daughter’. Baker offered to speak to
Schroder in private but he replied ‘It comes to this – either you
liar or my daughter – I believe you are’ and struck Baker
‘thirty or forty’ blows with ‘a thick riding
(horsewhipping being the traditional expression of anger and contempt) while
calling Baker ‘scoundrel, liar’
repeatedly. As he finished his
assault, he then said ‘Now take your
As Schroder’s
words indicated, he regarded his actions as justified by his belief that, months
earlier, Baker had indecently
assaulted Schroder’s twelve year old
daughter Mary, a pupil at a Wellington school, when Mary had visited
Baker’s residence.
On the following day Baker filed a writ in the Supreme Court seeking damages
for assault. Two weeks later, well before the civil suit
could come on for
hearing, Schroder’s lawyer, William Locke Travers, laid an information in
the Resident Magistrate’s
Court, charging Baker with indecent assault.
That information was heard by the Resident Magistrate, Henry St Hill, and a
15 other Justices of the Peace. By a majority vote, Baker was convicted
and fined £5. Baker was successful in having the conviction
set aside in
the Supreme Court, on the basis that the conviction was tainted by
pre-determination and bias on the part of one Justice
of the Peace. However
Baker’s success on appeal was apparently outweighed in the public mind by
the outcome of the civil suit
for assault (tried in Christchurch rather than
Wellington so as to get a more neutral jury). Although Baker was awarded
damages by the jury, in their words ‘in vindication of the
law’, this was but a tenth of the damages sought, and the
jury professed
itself unable to agree on the truth or otherwise of the accusation of indecent
assault, a matter relied on by Schroder
to minimise damages.
III The Protagonists
George Schroder was an early (1841) settler in Wellington, before moving to
Nelson, where he was in business as a wholesale
dealing, it seems
principally in agricultural
He had clearly prospered
sufficiently in that business, and by participation in the large-scale sheep
farming that gave an early
economic impetus to the South Island in the late
1840s and 1850s,
to be able to
educate his family, for Mary Schroder was the youngest of three sisters at the
same private lady’s school in
Wellington in 1858.
Mary Schroder is an even more shadowy figure. She was at the time of the
alleged assault twelve years old and was described by her
schoolmistress as
being ‘a very nice girl; when first she came to me she was a little
She seems to have been
possessed of a degree of strength of character, as she maintained her position
and testimony despite very
lengthy cross-examination on two different
Much more is known of the other protagonist. Arthur Baker was English,
apparently born in Newbury, Berkshire around the year 1817.
He appears to have
been destined to the Church from his teenage years – he went up to Oxford
in 1835, at the age of 18, and
graduated in 1840. He was initially a deacon and
then a priest in London, serving as a curate in four different parishes in
between 1841 and 1853. In that latter year he emigrated to New Zealand,
in the company of his sister and her husband, one Henry Bunny,
who will feature
briefly later in the story. Baker had no official church position in his first
year of residence in New Zealand,
but after moving to Wellington in 1855 he
became first an assisting master at a church school and later vicar of St
Church, one of the principal Anglican parishes of the Wellington
Baker’s character is hard to assess. His supporters, most of whom are
writers within the Anglican Church,
allow that he was a controversialist and stirred up varied, and vigorous,
reactions. A less generous reading is that when engaged
in a controversy he was
perfectly willing to make unsubstantiated verbal attacks on opponents in terms
which, even by the robust
standards of the day, were intemperate and
ill-founded.
A further light on Baker’s character is that at the trial in the
Resident Magistrate’s court counsel for Baker introduced
into evidence a
number of private letters written by Elizabeth Burbridge, Mary Schroder’s
teacher, to Baker after Mary Schroder’s
accusation to challenge her later
evidence. Burbridge, who had not been asked to consent to this, saying these
letters were all written
under a misapprehension as to Baker’s
intentions.
Baker later had these
letters printed and published in a pamphlet on the case.
He was, however, apparently able in person to attract others –
Elizabeth Burbridge considered him kind to the children, and
described her then
confidence in him and her disbelief at Mary’s
accusations.
At that time Miss
Burbridge was, she told the Resident Magistrate’s Court, under the
impression from his manner that ‘Mr
Baker was paying me
would appear any matrimonial proposal might well have been accepted.
The later history of George and Mary Schroder is not known. Baker appears
however to have been fatally handicapped in his career by
the failure to win a
clear verdict in the Supreme Court. After the lawsuits, Baker was reinstated by
the newly elevated Bishop Hadfield
in March 1859, but served for only a few
months before quitting the colony in October 1859 to return with his bride of
five months
to England, where he
served again as a curate in various parishes till his death in July 1868.
IV The Setting and Local Politics
Colonial Wellington was a small community, much affected by partisan
political divisions. The litigation in
Baker v Schroder
occurred during
particularly acute political strife between the party of Isaac Featherston, the
elected Provincial Superintendent,
whose faction drew support from the
working-class and smaller business and from some of the liberal middle-class,
and an eclectic
coalition dominated by large land-holders, the urban
conservatives and supporters of the New Zealand Company. Although Featherston
had been elected to the Superintendency in 1857, his opposition controlled the
Provincial Council. Featherston had then refused to
accept an administration
proposed by the majority in the Provincial Council, and to make his point
resigned and stood for
re-election.
That election took
place in June 1858, with Featherston defeating the opposition candidate, one
Henry St Hill, the Resident Magistrate
in Wellington. The newspapers of the time
were, perhaps unsurprisingly, on opposite sides of the divide – the
Wellington Independent
a strident champion of Featherston; the
Zealand Spectator
an equally vehement voice in
opposition.
As will be seen, in
dealing with the various events in Baker’s affairs the newspapers
eventually took similarly partisan approaches;
supportive of Baker while the
Independent
was very much the reverse.
It seems clear that Baker was firmly in the St Hill political camp, perhaps
because of connections through his brother-in-law or,
more probably, because the
Featherston party insisted that education be secular and resisted any attempts
to use provincial funds
for Church-based
Baker was frequently
(if most unconvincingly) to attempt to portray the proceedings against him as
tainted by political machinations.
V The ‘Event’
It is not now possible to determine (though it is clearly possible to
surmise) what happened between Arthur Baker and Mary Schroder
on 1 June 1858.
The Schroder sisters were all staying temporarily, at Baker’s invitation,
at his residence. Mary was recovering
from an attack of influenza which had been
severe enough that she had been splitting blood but, in the opinion of her
saw her the same day, this would not have been likely to mean that
‘she would be attacked with lightheadedness or
nervousness’.
According to
Mary Schroder, after ‘dinner’ at about 2pm, her sisters left to go
to Miss Burbridge’s; the convalescent
Mary remained.
I was lying on the sofa, Mr Baker was writing in the same room, there were three
tables in the room; he was writing at the table
by the window. I had some notes
in my pocket from Miss Burbidge. I had been reading them, and after reading them
I put them in my
pocket and lay down. I put my shawl over my feet. I fell asleep
over to me. He
took the shawl off my feet and pulled my dress out from under me, and put his
hand in my pocket. He then put his hand
under my dress, he touched my flesh * *
* * he kept his hand there about a minute. I did not say anything. He did what I
have stated
without my leave. I thought it wrong that he should do it. He knelt
down and asked me whether I would not make friends. I said no,
that I wanted Mrs
. There was a noise like
somebody coming in at the door. Mr Baker got up and went away. I again asked for
Mrs Langley and Mr Baker
rang the bell. Mrs Langley asked me what was the
matter, I did not tell her; I told her I wanted Miss Burbidge, she said she
send for her. Mr Baker said he would go; he then told Mrs Langley she was
to go. Mrs Langley did not know which to believe. Mr Baker
told Mrs Langley when
she came into the room, that I woke up crying. Mr Baker went for Miss Burbidge
and brought her back with him.
Miss Burbidge asked me what was the matter, I
took my sister Kate and Miss Burbidge into the bed room and told Kate what Mr
had done to me, and Kate told Miss Burbidge in the bed room before I left.
Miss Burbidge could not hear me when I told my
In her evidence in the Supreme Court in Christchurch, Mary Schroder was to
amplify this by saying ‘… he came from the
table, knelt down and
kissed me and put his hand under my clothing. He said nothing before he did
this, he kept his hand on my flesh
for about a
In that trial
Mary Schroder gave further evidence (in response to questions from the judge and
from the jury) as to exactly where
she was touched; the newspapers declined to
print the details. The exact nature of the allegation appears only once in a
report of the re-examination of Arthur Baker, cites Baker as denying he had
touched the ‘private parts’ of
Mary Schroder.
Baker at first appears simply to have agreed with suggestions that Mary had
dreamed the incident. Elizabeth Burbridge described his
conduct when he arrived
to call her to see Mary, and subsequently, thus.
Mr Baker’s manner was calm and collected. The girls were ready to go with
me and we all went together. When I got to Mr Baker’s
I saw Mary in the
sitting room … She was quiet and pale, and looked as if she had been
crying. She looked unhappy
Burbridge later described her reaction to Mary’s accusation (as relayed
by her sister), and Baker’s response when she
conveyed it:
At the time I thought there was something I could not understand. I could not
suppose such a thing possible. I came out of the bedroom
a few minutes after I
had recovered myself. Mr Baker was in the sitting room. I said to him I did not
know what to understand, I
thought the child must have been dreaming. He said he
thought so, and went on writing. I was undecided whether to stay or go away.
Baker asked me to stay to tea and I remained. It was fair that evening but not
very light. Mary refused to remain at Mr Baker’s
unless I stayed with
She later added that after they had had tea, Baker left to go to the
Archdeaconry Board. Clearly Baker displayed little reaction at
the time to what
he was invariably to characterize as a most serious allegation. Whether one
should ascribe his sang-froid to a clear
conscience or to brazen effrontery is
perhaps a matter of opinion.
In the following month, Burbridge continued to keep up good relations with
Baker, on some occasions visiting him with the Misses Schroder.
In the meantime,
not at all surprisingly, gossip carried the substance of Mary’s
allegations throughout much of Wellington
- Elizabeth Burbridge indicating that
Mrs Featherston, having heard the rumour, had visited her to ask about the
Baker was later to claim
that the rumours had been augmented by invented allegations of previous similar
conduct for which he said
there was no foundation in
His response was to
consult St Hill and others, to draw up a written account of affairs in which he
denied any wrong-doing and to
offer, via intermediaries who included St Hill, an
‘independent investigation’ by persons to be agreed
– a matter of which
Baker was repeatedly to make
In the meantime, Burbridge had written to George Schroder to come to
Wellington, ostensibly on account of the illness of Kate Schroder,
Schroder visited Wellington around the 15 July. At that time Burbridge informed
him of Mary’s accusation. Although
Baker’s offers, and a copy of his
statement, were conveyed to Schroder after his arrival in Wellington around 15
July, he determined
not to respond to them but rather to await the arrival of
his wife from Nelson.
surmise, therefore, that Schroder found any of Baker’s proposals
unsatisfactory or, more likely, saw them as an attempt
to evade responsibility
for conduct which George Schroder believed had taken place. Hence the assault.
The choice of the street outside
Baker’s church after a Sunday service as
a venue for the horsewhipping becomes explicable as being one of the few, if not
only, time Schroder could be assured of locating Baker, and of there being
an audience which would ensure the matter would become
VI The First Legal Proceedings
Following Schroder’s attack on him, Baker sought legal advice.
Curiously enough for a man whose brother-in-law was a lawyer,
Baker seems to
have sought legal advice first from the leader of his political party –
and parishioner – the Resident
Magistrate, Henry St
It appears Baker was
advised to bring a civil action for assault against Schroder, rather than the
speedier resolution of seeking
to have Schroder prosecuted for assault. The
choice was probably dictated by the law relating to the giving of evidence.
a civil action both plaintiff and defendant could give evidence, in
criminal cases the defendant was not allowed to give evidence
As Baker was to say, a
civil action afforded him ‘an opportunity of clearing my reputation, with
evidence given by myself on
oath, in the highest Court of Justice’. By
contrast, Baker claimed in regard to the criminal prosecution brought by
‘the only witness who could
give evidence
directly contradictory of the main charge, is prohibited from
He therefore
initiated the civil action, claiming the very substantial sum of £500.
Schroder reacted swiftly. His lawyer, William Locke Travers, commenced a
criminal prosecution of Baker for indecent assault. The necessary
information
was laid on Monday 30 August; with Baker being summonsed to appear on Friday 3
September. It appears that St Hill, who
was sitting alone on the Friday morning,
had expected Baker’s lawyer to bring some objection to the prosecution
which would
delay the hearing. When no objection was forthcoming St Hill
declined to decide the matter himself, instead delaying the matter for
hours until a bench of Justices of the Peace could be
It is an interesting
indication of the importance attached by JPs to their judicial duties, or
perhaps of their interest in this
particular case, that on three hours notice 15
Justices of the Peace had joined St Hill. We may well ascribe St Hill’s
to seek a full bench of Justices to a belief that the matter was too
sensitive, and his own position too delicate, for him to deal
with the matter by
himself. It is clear from our knowledge of the operation of the Resident
Magistrates Court in another New Zealand
settlement at this time that Resident
Magistrates frequently discharged the function of the court by themselves, but
quite frequently
sat with one or more
There are, however, no
parallels for a bench of fifteen justices sitting in a case. It appears there
was then some discussion as
to whether to hear and decide the case, or instead
to consider only whether to send Baker for trial in the Supreme Court. It should
go for trial but the decision, apparently by a majority vote, was to proceed.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to determine the legality of the decision
to hear the case. In the early part of the nineteenth
century the law
regulating, if that is the right word, the judicial activities of Justices of
the Peace was vague indeed. It would
certainly appear that in England JPs rarely
tried serious offences against the person but rather decided whether or not to
alleged offenders to trial at Assizes or Quarter Sessions. Minor property
offences might be dealt with by the JPs
themselves.
New Zealand had
inherited this amorphous body of law, with no clear delineation of the actual
powers of Justices of the Peace. Nor
was New Zealand legislation of much
assistance. Under the Resident Magistrates Court Ordinance 1846, a Resident
Magistrate had ‘all
such powers of dealing summarily with cases of assault
as any two Justices’
those powers were nowhere clearly stated, even though an 1845 Ordinance had
authorized Justices hearing assault cases summarily
to impose fines rather than
terms of imprisonment.
appears that the court in Wellington was proceeding on the basis that
Sessions Court Ordinance
1842, which allowed two or more JPs to act as Petty Sessions, and the Summary
Proceedings Ordinance 1842
which allowed the court to determine some criminal
matters summarily, without indicating the exact jurisdiction of the court.
Baker appears to have believed this to be the case, as he later
complained of being deprived of any right of appeal because the penalty
was the exact sum of £5, an apparent reference to s18 of the Summary
Proceedings Ordinance 1842.
As might be expected in cases where the jurisdiction of the court was not
clearly regulated, there was no guidance as to its procedure.
It would appear
therefore that the magistrate and the justices decided between themselves how
they would operate. We know from the
successive epistles appearing in the
newspapers that the conviction of Baker was by a majority vote. It seems
probable that the quantum
of punishment was equally decided by a vote. It
certainly does not seem that St Hill as Resident Magistrate was accorded any
voice than his colleagues.
Even though the law may appear in retrospect to be less than clear, Baker was
never to challenge the jurisdiction assumed or the procedure
adopted by the
Court, although he was often to claim the decision was otherwise flawed. We may
assume that his legal advisers saw
a challenge of this kind as not worth
The hearing of the case occupied both the afternoon of Friday 3 September
1858 and the whole of the following Monday – by contemporary
standards an
extraordinarily long period. The evidence only concluded after midnight, at
which time the bench retired for an hour
before returning with a majority
verdict of guilty. The larger part of the trial appears to have been involved in
lengthy examination
and even longer cross-examination of the two principal
prosecution witnesses, Mary Schroder and Elizabeth
The stilted newspaper
report may obscure the thrust of Baker’s case, but it appears he advanced
the (somewhat inconsistent)
propositions that Mary Schroder was ill and may have
dreamt the whole episode and that she was an ill-brought up child prone to
lying and therefore to be disbelieved. On this latter limb, there appears to
have been extensive cross-examination as to the nature
and circumstances of her
complaint to her sister, later to Miss Burbridge and as to disclosure to her
parents. The lengthy cross-examination
of Elizabeth Burbridge appears to have
been directed firstly at trying to find an inconsistency in the account of Mary
disclosure, and then, at greater length, at showing that
Burbridge herself appeared not to believe the charge by showing that she
continued to associate with Baker in friendly
The only other
prosecution witness was Mary Schroder’s doctor, who gave evidence she was
unlikely to have been lightheaded
or (in effect) hallucinating.
As Baker could not give evidence, the defence relied principally on Langley,
Baker’s housekeeper, who gave extensive evidence
she had not heard Mary Schroder cry out (as Mary had testified she had done) and
that she had not observed
any disarrangement of a shawl around Mary’s body
and legs. Langley also gave evidence as to Baker’s calm demeanour. The
other defence witnesses were called to give evidence of Elizabeth Burbridge
having expressed the view Mary Schroder was a liar.
As indicated above, the JPs voted, (apparently by a vote of 10-6) to convict.
Baker was convicted, fined £5 and ordered to pay
costs. As we have seen,
Baker later claimed the small penalty was deliberately chosen to limit his
ability to appeal against
conviction.
VII The Resort to Publicity
So far the case, while unusual in that it involved an allegation of sexual
impropriety by a member of the socially privileged classes,
is not particularly
very remarkable. What sets it apart from any other proceedings of the period is
that Baker and his supporters
chose to carry their defence of Baker’s
cause into the public arena – and to do so by publicly impugning not only
prosecution and the verdict but also the course of proceedings and indeed
many members of the Court. There appears to be no comparable
use of the media in
New Zealand in any other nineteenth century case so far discovered. While on
occasion litigants or defendants
appealed to public opinion personally and in
other cases publicity was courted by lawyers involved in the case on the behalf
remarkable to find a person involved in legal proceedings taking such a
prominent personal role over such a sustained period
in publicizing his case
and, it appears, orchestrating other expressions of opinion.
The first salvo in the publicity campaign was dispatched by Baker himself. He
wrote (effectively identical) letters to the editors
of both Wellington papers
during the trial, and these letters were (at his request) published in the same
issue as the reports of
the trial. This first letter advanced a range of
arguments against the proceedings and the verdict, starting with an argument
reporting of the trial would be, in the event he was later exonerated,
‘highly prejudicial to public morals, to myself, and
to other parties
concerned’. He then argued, with remarkable inconsistency, that it was
unfair he should be called to answer
to a charge made ‘… not days,
or weeks, but more than a quarter of a year ago’ and where Burbridge had
not believed
the allegation.
One knows how a fancy long dwelt upon grows into the mind, and become
incorporated with it, as a truth. One knows also, how exceedingly
difficult it
is to disprove apparent circumstances after a lengthened lapse of time, of which
at the moment the explanation is self
evident. I maintain it to be a case of
very gross injustice, that the fact of this charge was withheld from the party
principally
concerned until memories had grown weak and ideas had hardened into
seeming realities.
It is difficult to see any factual basis for this effusion, since the
substance of the allegation was conveyed to him on the very
day it happened. It
might be thought neither the claim of embellishment nor the claim that the
‘fact of the charge’ was
concealed from him have the slightest
foundation. Nor can the latter claim easily stand with Baker’s averment in
the following
paragraph that ever since the allegation had been made, he had
been ready to have it investigated, and this had been refused him.
He then transferred his attack to the fairness of proceedings in which he
could not give evidence, alleging the choice of a criminal
charge had been made
to prevent his ventilating the matter in the Supreme Court. In terms which bear
a remarkable contrast to his
later arguments, he wrote:
I sincerely believe that, in any Court of Justice in England, the charge, under
the circumstances, would not have been entertained.
Legal technicalities would
have yielded to the plain equity of the case, (and a Police Court especially is
a Court of Equity as well
as law), the plaintiff would have been ousted as
incompetent, and the matter at issue been left for adjudication before a jury in
the higher Court, to which the appeal had been made.
He then passed to the purported unfairness of a matter being decided by a
majority of the Justices, instead of requiring the unanimous
verdict of a jury
What is the deep principle of Trial of Jury, which has made it for so many
centuries, the bulwark of British liberty and justice.
Surely it is this –
that a minority, even of one dissentient juror, implies a
possible doubt
of guilt, which doubt is justly given in favor [sic] of the
Baker noted that he had not had the benefit of the doubts entertained by some
The next target was the nature of the hearing itself and, more directly, the
behaviour of those justices who had voted to convict.
Here for the first time
came the signature tune of Baker’s whole publicity campaign – that
the verdict was the result
of bias – that ‘a considerable
majority’ of the bench of justices were biased against Baker ‘on
personal, or religious grounds’ – though at this stage he
did not allege deliberate unfairness but the ‘natural
bias of prejudice
and predilection’.
To round out his attack, he then complained the proceedings had been
improperly conducted – that some justices had not attended
the whole of
the hearing, some had cried ‘hear, hear’ when evidence against Baker
was adduced, and that leading questions
had been put to Mary Schroder
‘prompting the very words on which the fact of the alleged crime
principally depended’.
This latter allegation is the only one for which there is some external, though
far from independent, support as Baker’s lawyer
was later to write to the
newspaper complaining that
The words which the witness Mary Schroder stated in answer to my question, were
of that peculiar kind that no child of her age could
have given unless
previously tutored, and on my commenting strongly upon the subject Mr Carkeek,
one of the Magistrates, stated openly
that the words were not the words of Mary
Schroder in answer to my question, but were the words in which he had asked her
the question
pointedly, to which she had answered ‘yes’. Whereupon I
stated to the bench that I had not heard the question put by
Mr Carkeek, and had
I done so I should have objected to its being put – and the Chairman H St
Hill, Esq, also stated that he
did not hear the question, and thought it an
improper one. Without this question and answer no legal offence could have been
To round out his case, Baker then argued that his housekeeper’s
evidence demonstrated the untruth of Mary Schroder’s account
although to a logician evidence that the housekeeper did not hear a cry is no
proof one was not made; nor evidence a shawl
was in place proof it had always
Baker’s letters appeared in the same editions of the local papers as
the report of the trial. Both newspapers were published
bi-weekly, so there was
time for responses and news of developments to be published in the next editions
– frequently being
published together. In the newspapers of 11 September
there appeared a letter of complaint by Baker’s lawyer John King taking
issue with the manner in which the bench had been summoned and the use of
leading questions by a JP
going on to repeat the allegations of bias. The claim was of political animus,
and that Justices:
whose political feelings against Mr Baker are well known could find it
convenient to neglect their public duties to sit on the Bench,
for the purpose
of hearing a charge against their political opponent, and whose votes on the
occasion, were as is well known against
him. I am sure all impartial persons
will at once say that it would have been more honorable, and shown a delicate
feeling had they
The bias argument made here was effectively countered in the successor
edition of the
NZ Spectator
, by a letter from Travers, Schroder’s
lawyer, in reply to Baker’s first letter. Travers was quick to point out,
more measured terms, that the allegation of bias could be made by either
side, especially in relation to St Hill, and other political
associates of
Baker, who had nevertheless sat in judgment.
Travers’s letter was published alongside a letter from ‘A
Dissenter’, an anonymous correspondent who claimed to
acquainted with Baker nor even of the Anglican community. The writer attacked
the verdict on the basis of some difference
in the evidence as reported in the
two different newspaper reports (!) and, perhaps a little more cogently, on the
basis that there
had been evidence Mary Schroder had been characterized as
untruthful (conveniently ignoring Burbridge’s denial of any such
If indeed ‘A
Dissenter’ was independent of the Baker camp, such a critique suggests
many Wellingtonians would reject
a complaint of sexual offending unless the
complainant’s prior character had been virtually irreproachable.
The newspapers of 15 September 1858 carried reports of a further development
– the drawing up and signature of a ‘Memorial’
to the Bishop
of New Zealand supporting Baker and urging his case. The Memorial was stated by
NZ Spectator
to have been signed in the course of a single afternoon
by 112 people ‘including members of various Religious Denominations
different political opinions’ and that many of the signatories had
‘spontaneously’ asked to sign it. The
gravamen of the memorial was
that firstly the memorialists were not satisfied the charge had been proved;
secondly given the degree
of doubt the case should not have been tried in the
Resident Magistrate’s Court. The memorialists also raised the issue of
inability of a defendant to give evidence. It seems likely that, despite the
claim of non-sectarian support, the Memorial was
organized by friends or
supporters of Baker. The leading name was that of Edward Toomath, to whose
position as a teacher in an Anglican
school Baker had succeeded in
The tone and content of
the terms of the memorial clearly follow some of the arguments raised by Baker
at the time of the trial,
although it is notable no argument as to the alleged
bias of the Bench is made.
Following these pro-Baker effusions, or perhaps following up on them, came a
second letter to the
NZ Spectator
by Arthur Baker himself –
ostensibly responding to the support from ‘A Dissenter’. The letter
is a remarkable document,
indicating a very significant shifting of ground by
Baker. He no longer argued that his prosecutor, and the majority of the bench
who convicted him, were misguided. Instead he characterized the prosecution as
‘persecution’, alleging an intent to condemn
him without a hearing
(presumably meaning without his being able to give evidence, rather than without
a trial), and alleged the
facts themselves had shown him not guilty. This
version must strike the modern reader as a remarkably selective reading of the
it may well be it had a similar effect when first published.
Baker then went on to raise two fresh matters. Firstly he alleged he had been
convicted by ‘a bare majority’ of the Justices
(rather than the 10
– 6 vote apparently widely reputed), and further claimed that of the 9
voting to convict, one had (according
to Baker) earlier pronounced him innocent.
Baker thus argued this Justice should have voted for acquittal, which he claimed
have made the numbers equal and he would have been acquitted on St
Hill’s casting vote. Baker was on what proved to be a more
successful tack
when he alleged that the pro-conviction forces had committed the ‘outrage
of tampering with my own household
in the hope of turning evidence against
‘tampering’, it was to emerge, had taken the form of a JP speaking
to Baker’s housekeeper prior to the trial.
The exact nature of the
conversation in question, and its consequences, will be discussed later.
The first, tentative, criticism of Baker’s epistles came with a letter
Independent
with a letter from ‘ABC’ which suggested
that Baker should name those he alleged were misusing their position on the
Bench to persecute him; that Baker was wrong as to the margin of the vote to
convict, and that if some Justices were lead to vote
to convict by the evidence,
there was no reason to think the majority were doing other than judging the
facts as they saw them.
VIII Successful Challenging the Conviction in
the Supreme Court
Baker had sensibly not been content to leave his campaign to the forces of
public opinion. Instead he had challenged its legality,
in proceedings by way of
certiorari.
The grounds alleged
are interesting, not least for the inclusion of several technicalities of the
kind Baker had argued – at
the time of his trial – should not stand
in the way of justice.
substantively, though equally unsuccessfully, he argued that one of the
Justices, C D R (Dudley) Ward,
should not have sat because he was a Solicitor of the Supreme Court, by virtue
of admission to the fused profession in New Zealand)
and in England solicitors
could not sit as Justices.
also reiterated his claim the proceedings were improper as being brought to
prejudice his civil case against Schroder.
The most substantial ground, however, and the one which was to succeed, was a
challenge to the verdict for bias and pre-determination
by another JP, Charles
It was clear Pharazyn
had discussed the allegations against Baker with his housekeeper, Langley, prior
to the trial. The divergent
recollections of the conversation, as shown in
affidavits (later printed in full in the newspapers) suggest that Pharazyn had
that Baker’s involvement in local politics had been both unwise and
inappropriate for a clergyman; Langley went on to allege
(and Pharazyn to deny)
that he had indicated she would face awkward questions about her own
relationship with a local man if she
gave evidence supporting Baker, and that
Baker’s political opponents would ensure his conviction. On 29 September
granted the rule nisi for certiorari – thus bringing the
conviction before the Supreme Court – though not at that stage
On 5 October, Gresson J made the rule nisi absolute – that is, formally
quashed the conviction.
plethora of objections urged by Baker’s counsel – some of which
Gresson apparently considered might have had
merit – the judge singled out
the issue of bias, and held that, whatever the reason for Pharazyn’s
conduct, it revealed
bias on his
Relying on reputable
English authority,
Gresson held
that bias by a single justice tainted the proceedings, without the court needing
to enquire whether that Justice’s
views had affected the rest of the
bench, and he therefore quashed the conviction. Curiously in a system where
normally costs followed
the event, he did not make an award of costs in
Baker’s favour.
IX The Publicity Intensifies and the Opposition
finds its Voice
In perhaps the most remarkable incident in the whole media coverage of the
case, the reports of the first Supreme Court hearing were
accompanied in the
NZ Spectator
of 29 September by the publication (apparently sanctioned by
the writer) of a letter from Abraham Hort, one of the Justices who sat
original trial in the Resident Magistrate’s Court. The letter indicates
that Baker had sought, and received, the leave
of the Resident Magistrate, St
Hill, for Baker to canvass the minority of the bench to disclose their reasons
for voting for acquittal.
Hort described this as placing the minority in an
invidious position – not least because St Hill himself had declined to
his reasons – but while acknowledging that this disclosure was most
unusual and would be open to criticism, Hort was prepared
in the interests of
justice as he saw them to give his reasons. Remarkably the
NZ Spectator
saw no objection to Baker’s approaches to the Justices, nor showed any
reluctance to publish the result of those enquiries
The reasons given by Hort shed an interesting light on at least one
contemporary view of such offences. His first reason for believing
ill-founded was an (unspecified) difference of evidence between Miss
Burbridge’s evidence and that of Mary Schroder;
his second was that Mary
Schroder had made no complaint to Baker’s housekeeper when she had the
opportunity. The other reasons
all have to do with the conduct of Mary’s
sisters in associating further with Baker even though pressed to do so by
‘at their age when fully cognizant (if properly trained) of the
modesty and propriety essential to, and the safeguard of, the
character’; matters from which Hort apparently deduces the sisters did not
believe Mary’s account.
Once again, it seems evident that some Wellingtonians would not give a female
complainant a sympathetic hearing.
Up until the end of September, therefore, the expressions of opinion, and the
apparent probability of a successful challenge to the
conviction, suggest some
considerable degree of public support for Baker, and relatively little feeling
the other way. This was to
change, and throughout October and most of November
1858 the case became a true cause celebre, with the two political factions, and
the two newspapers, in strident controversy. The
Independent
hand with the publication of a letter, ostensibly by a reader self-styled as
‘Scrutator’.
letter was clearly written by someone with both considerable knowledge of the
case (to an extent that it suggests it was written
by one of the majority
Justices) and by someone who was either a lawyer or conversant with the law.
However the identity of the writer
determined.
Whatever his
identity, ‘Scrutator’ was clearly in no doubt as to the propriety of
the verdict. While prophesying that
the verdict would be set aside on the
grounds of bias, Scrutator echoed in very strong terms the point made by Travers
trial that any allegation of bias affecting the judgment of one or
more of the majority could be overwhelmingly countered by the
overt bias shown
by St Hill and others of Baker’s supporters in the minority. The writer
went on to attack Baker for the manner
in which the trial had been conducted
(particularly the very lengthy cross-examination of Mary Schroder – which
suggested justified a decision not to remit the matter for trial in
the Supreme Court, where such cross-examination could be repeated).
‘Scrutator’ then took issue with the assessment of the evidence
offered by Hort in his letter to the
and then, in a novel
fashion, proceeded to attack Baker on the basis of matters not before the court,
including the exculpatory pamphlet
containing letters from
and a statement by
Baker in that pamphlet that he had been in the habit of kissing all the Misses
… and a pathetic lamentation that a clergyman ‘could not salute with
a holy kiss, young children whom he dearly loved’,
without being subject
to such sad misrepresentation.
‘Scrutator’ pointed out that the elder Misses Schroder were 15
and 16 and enquired ‘At what age has Mr Baker been
accustomed to drawing
the kissing line?’
The setting aside of the conviction seems only to have made the debate as to
Baker’s conduct more spirited and partisan, although
Baker’s own
behaviour undoubtedly contributed significantly to the asperity of the
Independent
had reported the Supreme Court hearing in its issue of
28 September, where for the first time there appeared explicit (and lengthy)
editorial comment on the case, criticising many of the grounds of appeal taken.
While acknowledging the bias shown by Pharazyn, the
editor pointed out once more
the extent to which similar criticisms could be made of St Hill and the
minority. To a large extent
Independent
seems to have been taking
issue with allegations in the
of political conspiracy by the
majority justices,
by suggesting
the minority had as great or greater reason to allow political ties to warp
their judgment. The
Independent
went on, in words later to be
controverted by Baker, to say the majority for conviction included JPs of all
shades of political opinion.
Independent
, not coincidentally, broadened its attacks to include
John King, Baker’s principal counsel. King was also involved, together
with Henry Bunny (Baker’s brother-in-law) as counsel in other litigation
brought by members of the anti-Featherston coalition
against the printers of the
Independent
Those proceedings, which were also to be resolved by jury trial in Christchurch
rather than Wellington, resulted in a triumphant
win for the
Independent
and its editor, Fox. The fact of this suit and the involvement of King and Bunny
undoubtedly contributed to the
Independent
’s anti-Baker stance.
The two lawyers were clearly tempting targets. King was vulnerable because at
the time Baker’s case was before the courts, proceedings
were brought to
‘attach’ King (that is, to take him into custody as a debtor) for
moneys owed to the heirs of an estate
of which King was
He was only to escape
debtor’s prison after friends agreed to pay part of his debts on condition
the heirs accepted the lesser
Independent
delight in pointing out that in England King’s conduct would be punishable
as theft from the estate; and urging the enactment
in New Zealand of the same
statutory provisions.
Bunny was in worse case. He had been admitted in June 1858 – for which
purpose Arthur Baker had provided a certificate
of good character without
mentioning their relationship – over opposition from other lawyers who
pointed to allegations of
forgery of a document concerned with his legal
practice in England before he came to New Zealand. These allegations were later
and Bunny earned the distinction of becoming the first lawyer struck off
in New Zealand.
The ethical
qualities of Baker’s legal advisers reflect little credit on him. To adapt
Oscar Wilde’s aphorism, the misfortune
of having a dishonest lawyer may
happen to anyone; to have two dishonest lawyers looks a little like consorting
with thieves.
It would appear that at least some of Baker’s supporters were beginning
to find his behaviour difficult to stomach. In early
October both newspapers
published a letter by Henry St Hill in which the Resident Magistrate replied to
criticisms of the Bench made
and denied the
judgment had been hasty or ill-considered, and St Hill personally took
responsibility for any defects in the formal
documents in the case, as he has
drafted them.
Baker regarded the first ruling, on the order nisi, as removing not only any
legal but also any moral stigma attaching to him, as
evidenced by his own
letters (of which more anon) and by his resumption of his ecclesiastical
functions in advance of any decision
on his case by Bishop Hadfield. Not all of
his congregation were content with this approach, and some refused to attend
he conducted or to attend meetings of church committees on which he
insisted in sitting.
However the
Independent
was somehow lured into error in publishing on 13 October that
Bishop Selwyn had suspended
Baker was quick to refute
this, asserting that Selwyn had in fact said that he would not be justified in
inflicting any ecclesiastical
censure upon Baker based on the finding of the
bench of Magistrates in his case, and that ‘Mr Baker cannot be advised to
in the decision of the magistrates if he is conscious of being
unjustly convicted’.
Had Baker simply left matters there, he might have attracted some sympathy.
However he then proceeded, in characteristically tendentious
fashion, to claim a
vindication which had not occurred:
For my own part I cannot sufficiently express my contempt for the verdict, which
has been set aside in the Supreme Court as worthless,
on the grounds of its
Baker should by now have had a better idea of the calibre of his opponents.
Independent
printed an editorial comment below Baker’s own
letter, first giving an apology for the ‘misstatement’ as to
suspension,
while pointing out that in his reply to Toomath and the other
memorialists, the former Bishop (Selwyn) had also said that Baker had
‘… acted very judiciously is suspending himself for the present at
least, from his clerical duties’. The Editor
then, pointedly added:
[W]e feel compelled to point out that Mr Baker’s assertion, in the above
letter, that the Supreme Court has set aside the decision
of the Bench as
on the grounds of its injustice
is incorrect. The question of
Mr Baker’s guilt or innocence never came before the Supreme Court at
X Challenging History
After this, there seems to have been a lull for some days, until the
Independent
referred to the matter in an editorial at the end of October,
repeating its earlier assertion that the margin for conviction had
This drew a remarkable response from Baker who, in a lengthy letter published
over two issues of the
Independent
, proceeded to challenge the
‘received history’ of the proceedings, to the point of rewriting the
record in his favour.
Baker claimed that an account in another newspaper, the
Nelson Examiner
stated that of the 16 JPs, only nine had voted for conviction, seven for
acquittal. In his letter, he listed the JPs he alleged
had voted, and claimed
that one of these, a Mr Hickson, had earlier voted against Baker being committed
He repeated his
allegation of political bias, claiming the majority were, with the exception of
the aberrant Hickson, were all his
political opponents. His letter went on, if
stirring periods to claim that there was not:
A single precedent in English jurisprudence where an accused party, pronounced
‘not guilty’ by six sitting magistrates
was summarily convicted,
when the conviction involved … a loss of £500 a year and the ruin of
his earthly prospects.
He then proceeded to argue that the evidence had never established his guilt,
and that those in favour of conviction would, in his
opinion, now accept that
they had been carried to a verdict not justified by the evidence by the
inevitable prejudice such charges
inevitably brought with them.
The editor of the
Independent
replied immediately to Baker’s
letter. His comments were trenchant – as might be expected from William
Fox who, as one
of the JPs involved in the hearing, might be expected to have
the facts clear in his mind. First to be challenged was Baker’s
of a 9-7 vote; the
Independent
repeating that on the question of guilt or
innocence, there had been a 10-6 vote; that only when the question was whether
be remitted to the Supreme Court for trial did the margin shift.
Further, Fox challenged Baker’s listing of the voting for
claiming that one of those listed by Baker (a Mr Carkeek) had voted guilty
– and stated that Baker must know
Because Baker’s letter had been published over two issues of
Independent
, the second part appeared alongside a fresh letter from Baker in
reply to the editorial rebuttal of the first part. Here Baker took
the allegation he was misrepresenting the voting; claiming that Carkeek himself
had assured Baker he voted to dismiss
the case, rather than entertain it. Baker
then attempted at length, but most unconvincingly, to argue that those voting
against him
being committed for trial could not, on a separate vote, have
properly voted he be convicted. For good measure he repeated his earlier
that Gresson had found the verdict ‘worthless and unjust’. The
Independent
again replied editorially to that letter, declining further
correspondence and urging Baker to await the decision of the Supreme
the civil suit to come before
XI The Civil Suit in the Supreme
The civil suit for assault which Baker had commenced was transferred,
apparently by mutual consent, to the Canterbury settlement on
the basis that no
unbiased jury could be empanelled in Wellington. Despite this change of venue,
the suit came to trial speedily.
An order was made on 26 October 1858 in the
Supreme Court in Lyttelton for a special jury to be
to try the case on 2
November, although that date could not be met as the parties and witnesses did
not arrive in time from Wellington.
The trial began on 19 November, with King
calling Baker to give evidence, which he did for only a part of the first day of
The Supreme Court Minute Book makes it clear that the jurors asked
questions of Baker, a fact not brought out in the newspaper
The defence sought to
call Elizabeth Burbridge first, Mary Schroder being ill, but Gresson J
considered Mary Schroder should go first.
The case was adjourned until the
following day, when Mary’s evidence and cross-examination took up not only
the whole of Saturday
20 November but also a portion of the following Monday,
during which time the jury requested Gresson J to ask questions of Mary
Elizabeth Burbridge
was then called and again was cross-examined at length, her evidence spanning
two hearing days (in which time
she was once more questioned as to her
correspondence with Baker, this time the questions coming from the
Late on this fourth day
of the trial GW Schroder was called. After a day’s delay occasioned by the
illness of a juror (who
was fined the very large sum of £20 for his
Travers then called
Mary’s sister Catherine, who again was extensively questioned by both
counsel and by the jury. On the sixth
day of the hearing, King called both Baker
and two fresh witnesses in rebuttal. Why one of them, his housekeeper, was not
as part of the original case is not clear.
Counsel then summed up their cases. The report in the
makes it clear that
King’s summing up for the plaintiff asserted that Mary Schroder had
suffered some ‘dream’ event
and confused this with reality. Given
the repeated attempts to characterize Mary Schroder as untruthful and
unreliable, this argument,
and the volte-face it involved, may not have drawn
sympathy from the jury. On the following day, the seventh of the
Gresson J summed up,
giving his view that Baker had appeared as a truthful witness, and embracing the
‘dream event’ theory.
Gresson specifically requested the jury to
come to a special verdict on whether or not the alleged assault had occurred,
and directed
them that as the fact of the assault had been proved – indeed
it never been denied – they must make an award of damages
such as would,
in Gresson’s phrase ‘vindicate the
There was then never
a dispute that there had, in law, been a serious assault. However, under the
Supreme Court Rules, Schroder could
seek to mitigate the damages for the
assault, apparently on the basis that Baker was not a deserving
The jury returned briefly to request they be given the judge’s notes of
evidence – a request refused because it was ‘not
jury resumed their deliberations. At 12.30 they reported they were deadlocked
and could not reach agreement, but
were nevertheless sent back for further
deliberation, and after a further 90 minutes returned the following ambiguous
Verdict for the plaintiff £50 in vindication of the law. They consider it
quite hopeless to arrive at a special verdict having
reference to the alleged
assault brought forward by the defendant in mitigation of
As the whole thrust of Baker’s case had been that substantial damages
were necessary to blot out the stain on his character
caused by Mary’s
allegation and her father’s assault, the verdict fell well short of a
resounding exoneration. Given
the apparent earlier deadlock, we may suspect it
was a compromise verdict. Indeed, Travers, Schroder’s lawyer, was to claim
in a letter to the
Independent
that despite Gresson’s strong
summing up in favour of Baker, Travers was informed
… that of the jury seven were in favour of one farthing damages, one would
express no opinion as to the charge against Mr Baker,
two were for some middle
ground, and two were for giving him the £500 claimed, believing Mr Baker to
be innocent of the charge
brought against
It should be noted that this letter drew trenchant editorial criticism from
Lyttelton Times
which characterised the letter as a ‘flagrant breach of propriety’
in that it criticised Gresson J’s conduct of
it is not becoming in an officer of the Supreme Court to attempt to bring odium
upon the conduct of the presiding judge even if that
odium were really deserved
and then went on to suggest that Travers must be speculating as to the basis
for the verdict because, the newspaper thought, none
of the jurors would have
disclosed the voting.
Independent
, not surprisingly, considered that Baker had clearly
failed to establish his innocence – despite the alleged advantage for
of trial in the ‘Anglican’ Canterbury
settlement.
The case then
largely drops from the pages of the Wellington newspapers. The
long Baker’s champion, appears to have weakened in its stance, as the last
mention of Baker’s case is a truncated report
of the proceedings in the
Supreme Court civil action.
Independent
effectively closed its discussion with a lengthy editorial,
discussed below, on the respective merits of jury trial or trial by Justices
XII Attitudes to Legal Institutions and
With the advantage of hindsight, we can identify four features of this case
which significantly enhance our understanding of law and
litigation in
nineteenth century New Zealand.
Firstly we can learn much about the dynamics of cases involving allegations
of sexual misconduct. For the most part nineteenth century
newspapers gave only
the very briefest discussion or report of any trial for an offence involving
sexual conduct. Thus in 1858, the
report of the trial of Mark Turner for
carnally abusing a girl under the age of twelve years took but a few words:
Mark Turner was placed at the bar changed with assault with intent &c on a
girl named Caroline Hancock of the age of ten years
and a half.
The evidence was unfit for publication in our columns. The case occupied the
whole of the day, and the prisoner was found
It is therefore most instructive to read both the accounts of the trial in
the Resident Magistrates Court and in the Supreme Court
– albeit somewhat
bowdlerised – and thus to get some impression of the manner in which such
cases might be conducted.
Both Mary Schroeder and her supporting witnesses were
cross-examined at inordinate length in an attempt to find the most minute of
discrepancies in the evidence which could then be advanced as a basis for
disbelieving the substance of the complaint. Such intrusive
cross-examination
was common then, and for a century to come, as lawyers and judges considered
that it an essential counter to an
allegedly substantial risk of false
accusations of sexual
Interesting though the reports of the trials are, the surrounding publicity
and the statements it provokes are even more informative.
It is clear from the
letter written by Abraham Hort and from the letter by ‘A Dissenter’
that in the minds of many Victorian
New Zealanders, a complainant’s
conduct would be scrutinized with extraordinary minuteness to see if there was
any basis on
which a complaint could be rejected as incredible or concocted. It
may be thought highly likely that many complainants did not bother
forward charges where there was no corroborating evidence for fear both of
disbelief by authorities and the prospect of
unpleasant and prolonged
questioning in court. However we must remember that this cannot have been a
universal attitude. A majority
of the Wellington Justices and at least some
members of the Christchurch jury were quite prepared to believe Mary
story. It may well have been that these persons convinced that
a middle-class girl such as Mary Schroder would only be prepared to
public of such intimate matters if her account was
It is therefore not
possible to make sweeping generalizations as to credibility or intolerance of
complainants.
Secondly we may note a brief but interesting discussion in the early stages
of the controversy as to the inability of a defendant
in criminal proceedings to
give evidence. One of the great curiosities of the ongoing public debate about
this case is the way in
which reference to the different rules of evidence in
civil and criminal cases, and the inability of a defendant in a criminal case
give evidence, disappears from the
The matter was
raised by Baker in a letter to the newspapers published, at his request, in the
same issue as reported the trial in
the Resident Magistrate’s Court. The
only other reference to the issue is in a Memorial to the Bishop of New Zealand
by Baker’s supporters shortly after the
in which the
memorialists advanced as an objection to the verdict:
Thirdly, that the charge was of so peculiar a nature as to render it next to
impossible to be disproved by the accused. A verdict
of condemnation ought not
therefore to have been given by such a tribunal as decided the case merely on
the assertion of the accuser.
Logically pursued, the argument of both Baker and the memorialists would mean
that sexual offences should not be tried in any proceeding
in which the
defendant could not give evidence. Perhaps the reason for the issue being
rapidly dropped form the debate is that, given
that at the time no criminal
defendant could give evidence, to insist on the unfairness of the procedure
would be to impugn the contemporary
conception of impartial British justice
– to which Baker and his supporters often later appealed. It is notable
was in effect later compelled to argue that investigation of the
matter by way of a criminal prosecution in the Supreme Court before
a jury would
have been proper (as Gresson J was later to suggest should have been the
procedure) – and of course in such a
trial he could not have given
evidence. He might therefore have been convicted for lack of the evidence which
evidently satisfied
some (if not all) of the Canterbury jurors of his
The third point of importance is the publicity surrounding the various
proceedings. It is notorious that nineteenth century newspapers
commented on
legal proceedings – and other matters – with more frankness than
would be acceptable in modern New Zealand.
Even so, the nature and extent of the
publicity given to this case seems to have been remarkable. It is also most
informative that
there was remarkably little negative comment about the airing
of such matters in public. The newspapers were prepared to print letters
traversing matters which still had to come before the court – including
many letters from Baker himself. Further, while Henry
St Hill declined to
publicly state his reasons for voting to acquit Baker, he appears to have at
least acquiesced in Baker approaching
other JPs to see if they would reveal
their views, and no one (at least in public) criticized Abraham Hort for doing
so. Only twice
does there appear to have been real criticism directed at the
fact of publicity – as opposed to the many negative comments
actors on each side. Baker was vigorously criticized by the
Independent
for putting into the public arena the letters written to him by Miss Burbridge,
Lyttelton Times
equally firmly reproved Travers for his criticism
of Gresson J’s conduct of the assault trial. It seems probable that in
case actors in the debate were perceived to have contravened social norms
seen by the community as more important, the confidentiality
correspondence and respect for the judiciary. There appears to have been public
tolerance (at the least) of vigorous debate
on legal proceedings, but that
tolerance was not unlimited.
Lastly, perhaps the most important feature of the Baker affair is the insight
it gives us into contemporary perceptions of the merits
of jury trial as opposed
to trial before a bench of magistrates. It is notable that in the early stages
of the affair Arthur Baker
regularly appealed to a public perception that
important matters should be determined by a jury rather than by magistrates.
was at least implied support for the primacy of the jury in an editorial
comment in the
criticised the Resident Magistrate’s Court verdict against Baker and drew
unfavourable comparisons with the trial of
fact by a jury. That view was quickly
by a Baker partisan
in that the editorial drew a considered
but firm response from St Hill, who noted that, while he did not wish to discuss
comparisons
which had been made between a Bench of JPs and a grand jury or a
petty (trial) jury, he thought a bench of magistrates ‘quite
balance evidence as a
The issue was ventilated again in almost the final exchange in the drama,
when Gresson J indicated in his summing up in the civil
trial that the Justices
should not have tried the criminal charge summarily, but rather committed Baker
for trial in the Supreme
Court so that the matter could be determined by a
This drew a strong
response from the
Independent
claimed Gresson J was in essence claiming that a jury was a better tribunal of
fact than the magistrates could be, The paper
First, who were the Magistrates? They were sixteen of the colonists of
Wellington, best esteemed for their position, character and
ability. Three at
least were members of the English Universities – two were English
barristers, members of the Inner and Middle
Temple. The rest were merchants,
flockowners, the Collector of Customs of the Port of Wellington, several members
of the General
Assembly, several of the Provincial Council, and so forth. Now a
special jury of the Supreme Court at Lyttelton is no doubt a very
respectable
body of men, but are they more so than 16 such persons as we have indicated
– are they more capable of coming to
a conclusion on a question of fact
such as this?
And, of course, as the
Independent
noted, both the Justices and the
jury had been divided in their
Independent
’s views were not necessarily shared by other
newspapers, but it is interesting that the
Canterbury Standard
result in the civil action as indicative of a need to alter the law to allow
majority verdicts, either to the nine jurors
of fifteen required in Scotland or,
if the assent of 12 jurors was seen as necessary, to allow a verdict by twelve
of twenty-three.
We can, to a limited extent, test the inferences we might draw from St
Hill’s views and those of the newspapers by considering
the behavior of
parliamentarians when dealing with matters relating to juries and magistrates
respectively. There were two statutes
affecting juries and jury trial passed by
the New Zealand parliament in the early 1860s. The Jury Ordinance Amendment Bill
1861 passed
through Parliament without apparent debate, and the Juries Act 1862
passed through both chambers in less than a month, with only
one speech being
recorded at any stage.
By contrast the operation of the Residence Magistrate’s Court appears
to have been viewed as a matter of much greater import.
While there was no
reported debate in Parliament on the District Courts Bill 1858, the operation of
that Act – and a downgrading
of the Resident Magistrates’ Courts -
were the subject of sustained debate in the latter part of
That debate also
reflected the factionalism apparent in
Baker v Schroder
participants were political supporters or opponents of Dudley Ward, who had not
been maintained in judicial office under
District Courts Act
decision which was allegedly a matter of partisan politics. Further, in the
following year several politicians argued for an extension
of the criminal
Magistrates.
The comparison
does perhaps indicate that jury issues simply did not attract the attention of
many influential colonials.
This article has set out to bring back to a public notice a fascinating case
from the early years of a Wellington settlement. As indicated
above, the case
tells us much about contemporary attitudes to law, but that should not entirely
distract us from the human story
revealed by the particular richness of the
contemporary record.
Associate Professor of Law,
University of Canterbury.
Lyttelton Times
November 1858 and
Canterbury Standard
25 November 1858, evidence of
Arthur Baker (SC). As is discussed below, there were two court proceedings in
which witnesses were
called; a criminal prosecution in the Resident
Magistrates’ Court, Wellington and a later civil action in the Supreme
Christchurch. In this and following notes where testimony is cited, the
proceedings are indicated by the annotations ‘(RMC)’
‘(SC)’ respectively. The assault on Baker does not appear to have
caused any permanent injury.
Evidence of W Schroder,
Canterbury Standard
25 November 1858 (SC). Ruth M Allan,
History of Early Settlement
(1965) 144 lists G W Schroder as one of 8 such
merchants in Nelson in 1842. Schroder also appears among the list of the persons
to a land grant in the Schedule to the New Zealand Company’s Land
Claimants Ordinance 1851.
The only document by Schroder
so far traced is a letter written in 1847 about such commodities, George
Schroder to T King 1847 in
King papers NZNL Ms 5641-26.
Lowther Broad,
The Jubilee
History of Nelson from 1842 to 1892
(1892) 104 lists G W Schroder as one of
the holders of a licensed run in the Awatere Valley in 1850.
NZ Spectator
September 1858, evidence of Elizabeth Burbridge (RMC).
This data is largely drawn
from an undated ‘fact sheet’ published by the Parish of St
Paul’s, held in the Wellington
Public Library.
There are few mentions of
Baker’s case in the histories of the Anglican church in New Zealand. Most
– including the
centenary history of the Diocese – make no mention
of the matter at all; the few that do either obscure the facts of the incident,
or put perhaps unwarranted interpretations on the facts. Thus George McMorran,
Some Schools and Schoolmasters of Early Wellington
(1900) 106, describes
Baker as a versatile man who ‘loved above all things a fight with pen or
tongue’, but whose influence
was crippled ‘through the formulating
of a serious charge against his personal character’; and while many
rejoiced at
his departure from the colony ‘there were those who believed
him to be – and still consider him – a martyr’.
That may be
true, but is less than informative. A more recent historian, Peter Butt suggests
The Cross and the Stars: An Historical Record of the Anglican Diocese of
(1993) 31 that Baker’s most serious problem was his
conviction by a majority of ‘assaulting a young girl who was a guest
the vicarage’ (no mention of ‘indecent’ assault!); Butt goes
on to say that Baker was ‘exonerated’
by Selwyn (which might be
thought to overstate the case) and then suggests Baker succeeded in an appeal
against conviction (which
is not technically correct), though pointing out this
was not necessarily a decision on the merits. Butt further asserts that a
further complication in the case was the suggestion that one of
the bench of magistrates had suborned one of the witnesses.’
discussed later, there was an issue as to a witness, but there is no established
basis for any suggestion of ‘subornation’.
Butt concludes by citing
an earlier ecclesiastic author, M R Pirani,
A Short History of the Cathedral
of St Paul’s the Apostle
(1958) 9 that Baker was innocent and that he
had been attacked because of his vocal support for the Government policy (which
policy is not explained) ‘which was not shared by most of the
population of Wellington’. There is an almost equally curious
treatment of
Baker by the most recent Anglican writer. Michael Blain,
Clergy in the
Diocese of Wellington 1839-1894: a directory
(1998) repeats the
quasi-exculpatory statements of Pirani and Butt, but in a more recent work
Wellington Cathedral of St Pauls
(2002) 26 Blain states: ‘The
previous priest, the erratic Ritualist Arthur Baker had just fled the country
after charges of
sexual assault against a schoolgirl from Nelson’ –
which might be thought to do less than justice to the historical record
indeed to Baker.
This can be seen both in the
litigation and publicity discussed in this paper and in an earlier episode where
Baker had accused
opponents of ‘gratuitous fabrication’, only later
to allege that in using that phrase he meant only ‘assertion
proof’; see
Wellington Independent
; Letter by Baker 6 January 1858;
Editorial, 13 January 1858; letter by Baker 20 January 1858.
NZ Spectator,
5. A later correspondent to the
Wellington Independent
alleged that Baker
had not merely had these letters produced in court, but had published before the
trial an exculpatory pamphlet
which included extracts from her letters to him
(but not vice versa):
Wellington Independent
, Letter from
‘Scrutator’ 2 October 1858. I have found no other mention of such a
pamphlet, let alone a copy, but it may
be significant that Baker, who challenged
many other allegations about him, did not challenge this one.
NZ Spectator
NZ Spectator,
‘Notices of intention
to marry’ Wellington NA BDM20/4, 101/24; 13 April 1859, advising of the
intention of Arthur Baker,
‘bachelor, Clerk in Holy Orders, of full age,
of Goddes Hill, Wellington and resident in Wellington 4-5 years’ to be
married to ‘Harriet Emma Lockhart Cox, spinster, of full age’. No
more is known of Miss Cox.
Alan Mulgan
The City of
the Strait: Wellington and its Province – A Centennial History
For comment on the
newspapers of the time, see ibid 200-201.
For the division as to
education see ibid 189.
NZ Spectator
September 1858, evidence of Dr Johnston (RMC).
Mrs Langley was
Baker’s housekeeper.
NZ Spectator
n 5. This is a somewhat fuller account than that in the
Independent
; the critical details of the alleged assault are omitted from
the latter’s report. The asterisks are in the original, and apparently
represent material the newspaper considered unfit for publication.
Canterbury Standard
Canterbury Standard
2 December 1858 (SC).
NZ Spectator
NZ Spectator
September 1858, letter by Baker. The nature and occasion of such allegations is
Canterbury Standard
25 November 1858; evidence of Arthur Baker (SC);
Canterbury Standard
December 1858; evidence of St Hill (SC).
Independent
NZ Spectator
, 8 September 1858, (identical) letters
Canterbury Standard
25 November 1858; evidence of GW Schroder (SC).
NZ Spectator
September 1858, letter by Travers; Blain,
Wellington Cathedral of St
(2002) 26 makes it clear Baker was St Hill’s parish priest, and
that St Hill had advanced his own money to keep the parish
See An Act to amend the
Law of Evidence
1851, 14 & 15 Vict c 99 (Imp) adopted by English Acts
Act 1854 (NZ) s 2. Section 3 of the British Act reiterated the common law
that a defendant in a criminal case was neither a competent nor a compellable
witness. The law was not changed in New Zealand
for some years, with a defendant
in summary cases being able to testify after 1875 (
Evidence Further Amendment
1875, amplified by the
Justices of the Peace Act
Defendants charged indictably (ie before a jury) were given the right to testify
Criminal Evidence Act
Independent
NZ Spectator
, 8 September 1858 (identical) letters
Baker’s lawyer, John
King, was later to create some ill-feeling by comments in a letter to the press
which implied that only
JPs known to be hostile to Baker had been summoned to
sit; an allegation which drew a formal resolution from the JPs concerned
King to withdraw an unfounded allegation. King did so, lamely claiming
that he had misconstrued a statement by Travers that a bench
of JPs would be
summoned as meaning an anti-Baker bench would be summoned. See
Independent
11 September 1858, letter by John King,
NZ Spectator
Wellington Independent
, 2 October 1858, letter by St Hill conveying
resolution of JPs and letter in response by King. It would appear characteristic
the Baker side in this affair that grave charges were made, on the flimsiest
of evidence, only to be retracted when challenged.
Jeremy Finn ‘Debt,
Drunkenness, Dishonesty and Desertion: The Resident Magistrate’s Court in
Early Canterbury: 1851-1861’
Sir Thomas Skryme,
History of the Justices of the Peace
(1991) vol 2, 177. See also W S
Holdsworth,
A History of English Law
ed, 1922) vol 1,
That status was confirmed
Resident Magistrates Court Act
Fines for Assaults
Ordinance 1845. To add to the potential confusion, various ordinances, national
or provincial, had conferred
including the power to commit serious offenders for trial in the Supreme Court,
though not to try the cases instead of committal, see Police Magistrates
Ordinance 1842. The Resident Magistrates Court Ordinance
1846 s 28 specifically
gave Resident Magistrates the jurisdiction of Police Magistrates, despite the
Police Magistrates Ordinance
1842 having been repealed a few days earlier.
That section provided for a
right of appeal only where a penalty of more than £5 or a term of
imprisonment exceeding one month
was imposed. No other ordinance imposed an
explicit limitation on appeals in those terms.
It may be that St Hill and
others among Baker’s supporters had no desire to see any challenge to the
manner in which the Court
operated. The uncertainty of the law would soon be
somewhat dispelled as the New Zealand parliament had in August 1858 by the
Justices of the Peace Act
1858 adopted three major reforming statutes
passed in England in 1848 (
Indictable Offences Act
1848 11 and 12 Vict c
Summary Convictions Act
1848 11 and 12 Vict c 43 (Imp) and
Justice Protection Act
1848 11 and 12 Vict c 44 (Imp)) which set out in
clear and consistent form the criminal jurisdiction of JPs, but these statutes
not to come into force in the colony until January 1859.
The newspaper reports of
the proceeding devote slightly more space to the cross-examination of Mary
Schroder than to her evidence
in chief; while the report of Mary
Burbridge’s cross-examination was more than half as long again as that of
her evidence in
It was in this regard that
she was cross-examined as to the contents of letters written by her to Baker
after the incident, see
part 1 above.
See above, n 36.
See for example the
Victorian lawyers noted in Alex Castles,
Ned Kelly’s Last Days
(2005) 145-146.
All the quotations in this
section, unless otherwise attributed, are drawn from
Independent
, above n 26.
Independent
, 11 September 1858, letter by King.
Independent
, above n 26.
NZ Spectator
Wellington Independent
, 11 September 1858 letter by King.
NZ Spectator
September 1858, letter by Travers.
NZ Spectator
September 1858, letter by ‘A Dissenter’.
For a brief discussion of
Toomath’s contribution to education in Wellington, see Mulgan, above n 13,
This and the quotations in
the preceding two paragraphs are from
NZ Spectator
, 18 September 1858,
letter by Baker.
Independent
, 22 and 26 September 1858, letter by ABC to Editor.
It is curious, given the
apparent consensus that the Justices were exercising jurisdiction under the
Summary Proceedings Ordinance
1842 (see Part 5 above) that no mention was made
of s 17 of that Ordinance, which purported to prevent review of the decisions of
the Justices by way of certiorari.
The grounds of challenge
included arguments that Mary Schroder, not her father should have laid the
information and that the conviction
was bad because the adjournment of the Court
to determine its reasons had taken it into the Tuesday morning but the document
forth the conviction did not reflect this.
Dudley Ward was a prominent
Wellington lawyer for many years, and served on several occasions as a temporary
Judge of the Supreme
Gresson J was not
sympathetic to the complaint that Dudley Ward should not have sat, on the basis
that the statute relied on by
King (Baker’s counsel) was limited to
England and Wales, and in any case would not be applicable where, as in New
that status as solicitor was conferred on a barrister by the NZ fused
profession rules (see
Wellington Independent
, 13 October 1858). Baker was
later to allege that Gresson had in passing remarked that he himself had
declined appointment as a JP
in conformity with the English practice (see
Wellington Independent
, 3 and 6 November, letter by Baker) but no
newspaper report of the Supreme Court proceedings includes any such remark.
Given Gresson’s
Irish, rather than English, background, Baker’s
allegation seems less than credible.
Pharazyn clearly was
opposed to Baker, but it must have been on personal or political grounds, not
religious ones. Pharazyn had
served on the original committee to raise funds for
Wellington Cathedral of St Pauls
(2002) 19. After Baker’s
departure Pharazyn served as Treasurer of the Parish Committee for the erection
of a new St Paul’s
Church; see Thatcher papers MS0265108 NLNZ.
NZ Spectator
October 6 1858;
Wellington Independent
13 October 1858.
Pharazyn was later to argue
in unrelated proceedings brought against him that, on the basis of the
‘doctrine of a political
bias ... laid down by the Rev Arthur Baker’
St Hill should not have sat alone to determine the case against Pharazyn; see
New Zealand Spectator
8 October 1858, letter by
Pharazyn to
editor. His conduct in interviewing Mrs Langley was the subject of vituperative
editorial comment in the
29 September 1858.
R v Hertfordshire
(1845) 6 QB Rep 753;
[1845] EngR 349
115 ER 284.
Hort to Baker, printed in
NZ Spectator
29 September 1858.
Independent
, 2 October 1858, letter by ‘Scrutator’.
The principal candidates
are Fitzherbert, or more likely, the two barristers William Fox and CDR Ward.
Both sat as JPs in Baker’s
trial. A collaborative effort should not be
ruled out. Fox, who perhaps not coincidentally was the publisher of the
Independent
may be the favoured candidate. As is mentioned below, n 61,
Fox was in a contemporary case to acknowledge authorship of material
without attribution in the
Independent
. JDS Mackenzie has made a cogent
case that Fox had on other occasions published his own opinions in without
attribution, see 1 (1967)
99. The Baker-ite forces later,
unavailingly took steps to try to discover the identity of
‘Scrutator’, both by visiting
the newspaper’s offices
and also specifically asking C D R Ward, during the hearing in the Supreme
Court, whether he was ‘Scrutator’. No response
was forthcoming. See
Wellington Independent
9 October 1858.
See part 1 above.
In evidence in the Supreme
Court action in Christchurch, Baker was to admit he had often kissed the eldest
Ms Schroder, a girl ‘in
her sixteenth year’, while denying any
indecent conduct toward Mary Schroder:
Canterbury Standard
25 November
1858. The newspaper reported this question as following a denial of indecent
conduct toward ‘any’ of the
Misses Schroder; Gresson J, while
admitting ‘any’ was in his notes, believed the plaintiff had merely
denied indecency
with Mary Schroder, and therefore considered the question of
kissing the eldest sister should not have been asked.
NZ Spectator
October 1858.
Bowler v McKenzie &
18 November 1858 NZNA CAHX CH 53/21 Minute Book Supreme Court
1852-1860, reported
Lyttelton Times
20 November 1858. Fox, as counsel for
the printers, informed the jury that he, as editor of the paper, had personally
written the
allegedly defamatory material.
Wellington Independent
6 October 1858.
Independent
9 October 1858.
Bunny v Judges of
Supreme Court of New Zealand
(1862) NZPCC 302, 303-304. Indeed the
allegations against Bunny included a claim that, having been adjudged bankrupt
in England he
had emigrated to New Zealand without the knowledge of his
creditors. Bunny had only been admitted to the New Zealand profession in
Arthur Baker having provided an affidavit that Bunny was a ‘proper person
to be admitted as an attorney’.
NZ Spectator
October 1858.
NZ Spectator
October 1858; letter by St Hill; the letter was re-published by the
Wellington Independent,
9 October 1858.
See the narrative included
in the witty, and very hostile, letter by ‘Scrutator
Independent
9 October 1858.
Independent
13 October 1858, ‘Local Intelligence’.
Independent
16 October 1858, letter by Baker.
The only relevant item
would appear to be in
Nelson Examiner
15 September 1858.
Hickson’s conduct
might simply mean he preferred the JPs did not investigate the matter but, once
it had been investigated,
he found the charge proved.
Independent
3 November 1858, letter by Baker.
Independent
16 November 1858. Fox’s comments might be thought
appropriate: ‘We really cannot indulge Mr Baker with any further
opportunities
for damaging his own cause. His letters are extremely well adapted
to show the public how smart an attorney he would have made if
circumstances had
placed him in that condition in life; but they certainly are by no means
calculated to impress anyone with an opinion
of his innocence.’
Minute Book Supreme Court
1852-1860, 26 October 1858 NZNA CAHX CH 53/21.
Ibid 19 November 1858, NZNA
CAHX CH 53/21.
Ibid 20 and 22 November
1858, NZNA CAHX CH 53/21.
Ibid 23 November 1858, NZNA
CAHX CH 53/21.
Ibid 24 November 1858,
NZNA CAHX CH 53/21. His absence from illness may have been connected with the
jurors’ request, recorded
in the Court minutes, on the following day that
they be permitted to sit on the opposite side of the courtroom, because of the
‘dilapidation
of the jury box and the gusts of wind’.
2 December 1858.
This seven day trial is
unprecedented in the period – even a full-blown trial for murder by
poisoning the following year took
only three days; see the trial of Christina
Gregg 5, 6 and 9 December 1859, reported
Lyttelton Times
December 1859.
The summing is extensively
reported in the
Lyttelton Times
1 November 1858 and
2 December 1858.
Gresson’s summing up
specifically referred to the social need for respect for, and adherence to, the
Lyttelton Times
1 November 1858. There is a significant legal
distinction between cases such as this where litigants accepted the paramountcy
the law but sought to minimise the severity of breaches of it and those where
litigants availed themselves of a legal right to ‘self-help’
remedies prior to seeking to bring a matter to court, and the even more defences
sought to claim conduct was lawful. The common law
allowed certain forms of
‘self-help’ remedies to parties wronged by others where the common
law allowed an ‘extra-judicial
or eccentrical’ remedy which was more
speedy than can be had in the ordinary forms of justice, see James Stephen,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
ed, 1868) vol 3, 353.
For more recent discussions see Douglas Ivor Brandon
‘Self-Help: Extra-Judicial Rights, Privileges and Remedies in
Contemporary American Society’ (1984) 37
Vanderbilt LR
Taylor, ‘Self-Help in Contract Law: An Exploration and Proposal’
Wake Forest L Rev
839, 844; Jon K Wactor, ‘Self-Help: a
Viable Remedy for Nuisance – A Guide for the Common Man’s
Lawyer’ (1982)
83, 87-89. On ‘self-help’
and the limits of use of the law in a more rural colonial setting see Susan
Lewthwaite, ‘Violence,
Law and Community in Rural Upper Canada’ in
David Philips, Tina Loo and Susan Lewthwaite (eds),
Essays in the History of
Canadian Law
(1994) vol 5, 333, 366-67. We must also distinguish mitigation
and legal self-help cases from those where an individual sought to
justify his
or her extra-legal actions as morally correct and proper. In New Zealand such
claims were sometimes met with scepticism,
see the apparently hostile reaction
to the claims of Sidney Stephen, the resident Supreme Court Judge in Dunedin
1850-52, that an
assault on a man who Stephen alleged had slandered him was
justified because Stephen could not ‘… wait for the slow and
processes of the law’, see A H McLintock,
A History of Otago
262. Earlier generations of colonial judges had gone further, to the point of
duelling, see J H Phillips, ‘Fetch Me
My Rapier, Boy’
, 224. Where the illegal conduct is undertaken by an organised
group, acting with societal approval to enforce social norms which
not seen as adequately safeguarding, we have vigilantism. There is an
interesting summary of the definitional argument
as to vigilantism in Kelly
Hine, ‘Vigilantism Revisited: An Economic Analysis of the Law of
Extra-Judicial Self-Help or Why
Can't Dick Shoot Henry for Stealing Jane’s
Truck’ (1998) 47
Rev 1221, 1223-1226.
Minute Book Supreme Court
1852-1860, 27 November 1858, NZNA CAHX CH 53/21.
Independent
1 December 1858, letter by Travers.
Lyttleton Times
December 1858.
Independent
1 December 1858.
NZ Spectator
December 1858.
Independent
11 December 1858. A last shot was fired by the
Independent
on 15 December 1858, noting there had been some criticism in
Canterbury of the degree to which Gresson J’s summing up had favoured
Lyttelton Times
March 1858. Compare also the equally brief reporting in the
2 December 1854 of the trial of William Dunford for assault with
intent to violate a girl of 6.
For an analysis of the
development of the myth of frequent false complaint and consequent judicial
approval of hostile cross examination
of the complainant in sexual assault cases
see Antony E Simpson ‘The “Blackmail Myth” and the Prosecution
and its Attempt in 18
Century London’ (1986) 77
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology
101. Most legal writing on
cross-examination of complainants in criminal cases focuses on the position in
century and the enactment of laws limiting (with very
mixed success) cross-examination of the complainant in a rape case as to her
prior sexual history. See for example Jocelyn Scutt, ‘Admissibility of
Sexual History Evidence and Allegations in Rape Cases’
; Aileen McColgan. ‘
Law and the Relevance of Sexual History Evidence
; Stephen Odgers. ‘Evidence
of Sexual History in Sexual Offence Trials’ (1986) 11
Harriett R Galvin, ‘Shielding Rape Victims in the State and Federal
Courts: A Proposal for the Second Decade’
T Brettel Dawson, ‘Sexual Assault Law and Past Sexual Conduct of the
Primary Witness: The Construction of Relevance’
Canadian J of
Women and the Law
310. Of more assistance are studies of the operation of
century rape law, although these rarely consider lesser offences
such as indecent assault. Valuable studies of the period include
Petticoats and Prejudice: Women and the Law in Nineteenth-Century
(1991) ch 3; Carolyn Conley, ‘Rape and Justice in Victorian
England’ (1986) 29
Victorian Studies
523; Anna Clark,
Women’s Silence, Men’s Violence: Sexual Assault in England
(1987); Constance Backhouse, ‘Nineteenth-century Canadian
Rape Law 1800-92’ in David H Flaherty (ed),
Essays in the History of
Canadian La
w (1983) vol 2, 200; Carolyn Strange, ‘Patriarchy Modified:
The Criminal Prosecution of Rape in York County, Ontario, 1880-1930’
David Philips, Tina Loo and Susan Lewthwaite (eds),
Essays in the History of
Law (1994) vol 5, 207 and Jim Phillips, ‘Women, Crime, and
Criminal Justice in Early Halifax, 1750 -1800’ in David Philips,
and Susan Lewthwaite (eds)
Essays in the History of Canadian Law
vol 5, 174.
It is interesting that
studies by Canadian authors indicate prosecutions for sexual offences were more
likely to be undertaken,
and prosecutions brought were more likely to succeed,
where the complainant fitted the paradigm of domesticity, as where she was
young unmarried woman living with her father or was married: Constance
Backhouse, ‘Nineteenth-century Canadian Rape Law
1800-92’ in David H
Flaherty (ed),
Essays in the History of Canadian Law
(1983) vol 2, 224;
Carolyn Strange, ‘Patriarchy Modified: The Criminal Prosecution of Rape in
York County, Ontario, 1880 -1930’
in David Philips, Tina Loo and Susan
Lewthwaite (eds),
Essays in the History of Canadian
Law (1994) vol 5,
For the law see above n
See part 6 above.
NZ Spectator
October 1858.
NZ Spectator
October 1858; letter by St Hill; the letter was re-published by the
Wellington Independent,
9 October 1858.
NZ Spectator
October 1858, letter by St Hill.
Independent
11 December 1858.
Ibid quoting at length
Lyttelton Times
1 December 1858.
2 December 1858.
The only recorded speech
is that Henry Sewell moving the introduction of the Bill in the Legislative
Council, see [1860] NZPD 557
15 August 1862.
See [1860] NZPD 435 ff 4
September 1860; [1860] NZPD 754 25 October 1860; [1860] NZPD 778 30 October
See [1861] NZPD 233.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (254 KB)
PDF format (961 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter