URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2016/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barrett, D; Tobin, J --- "Article 33: Protection from Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances" [2016] UMelbLRS 7
ARTICLE 33: PROTECTION FROM NARCOTIC DRUGS
AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
Damon Barrett & John Tobin
States Parties shall take all appropriate measures, including
legislative, administrative, social and educational measures, to protect
children from the illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances as
defined in the relevant international treaties, and
to prevent the use of
children in the illicit production and trafficking of such
substances.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I INTRODUCTION
A A Protective Agenda
text of article 33 indicates that its inclusion in the Convention was motivated
protective agenda
. Under such a model, contrary to widely adopted
approaches towards adults, children, especially younger children are to be seen
more as victims whose relative immaturity leaves them vulnerable not only to
using such substances but to being exploited by those
involved in their
production and trafficking. As such, central to the approach adopted by article
33 is that children require protection,
punishment. A degree of
caution is required with regard to this broad model, however. The balance
between when a child should be
considered deserving of protection rather than
punishment is often contested. Indeed, many states have adopted a criminal
model when it comes to the treatment of children associated with the use
and/or production and trafficking of drugs, especially older
Conversely, there are
strong calls for a public health response to inform
all efforts
address the issue of drug use and dependence, irrespective of whether the person
involved is a child or adult. These calls include
related criminal law
What is clear, however,
is that the Convention has adopted an explicit focus on the protection rather
than prosecution of children
in this context. Moreover, it stands alone among
international human rights treaties in containing a provision dealing explicitly
with children and
The novel and innovative inclusion of an article concerning drug use and
trafficking by children has not, however, attracted significant
attention or
commentary in academic
debates concerning the
response to the problem of drugs. This is despite the fact that this problem
has been described as a threat
to ‘the development of young people, the
world’s most valuable
and ‘a challenge
of global dimensions which constitutes a serious threat to the health, safety
and well-being of all mankind,
in particular young
This is not to
say that article 33 remains completely invisible within discussions about how to
address this problem, rather, that
its treatment has generally been
superficial.
This response is to some extent understandable, given that the Committee has yet
to issue a general comment on article 33 and that
the international legal and
policy response to drug-related matters has traditionally adopted a law and
order focus,
and remained largely
within the purview of bodies such as the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, UN
Office of Drugs and Crime and the
International Narcotics Control Board, rather
than human rights bodies.
B The Shift to a Rights-Based Approach
This narrow gaze has, if
not prevented, then at least hampered the development of an understanding of
what it means to adopt a human
rights-based approach to the issues of drug use
and trafficking among children as an alternative to the traditional law and
model. Under a rights-based approach, article 33 is not to be considered
in isolation. On the contrary, its content and implementation
understood in light of the other provisions under the Convention which provide
the context in which it must be interpreted.
central to any
reading of article 33 are the general principles of the Convention (articles 2,
3, 6, 12), alongside the ‘evolving
capacities of the child’ (article
5). In addition there are clear connections between article 33 and the
obligations of progressive
realisation and international assistance (article 4);
the right to receive and impart information (article 17); the right to health
(article 24); the right to education (article 28); appropriate assistance to
parents (articles 5 and 18); the right to social security
(article 26);
protection from neglect or violence (article 19); leisure and recreation
(article 31); the right to an adequate standard
of living (article 27); freedom
from economic exploitation (article 32); the rights of children deprived of
their liberty (article
37); and juvenile justice standards (article 40).
The cumulative impact of these provisions is that any ambiguity stemming from
the broad framing of article 33 can be reduced to the
extent that the other
provisions of the Convention provide additional normative guidance with respect
to the ‘appropriate measures’
required of states to protect children
from illicit use and to prevent their involvement in the drug trade. Thus, for
example, research
indicates that measures to protect a child from violence and
neglect (as required under article 19) may help reduce initiation into
as may school retention, a
positive, trusting school ethos and well-crafted school based programmes
(articles 17, 28).
structural factors such as poverty and a lack of economic opportunities (article
27) are important drivers of involvement
in the drug trade and addressing these
may be helpful in reducing the prospects of a child being used in the illicit
production and
trafficking of controlled
substances.
Moreover, a child
who uses drugs or becomes involved in production and trafficking in
contravention of a state’s criminal
law must be treated with dignity and
respect in accordance with article 40.
C Key Interpretative Issues
Despite the contextual
guidance offered by other articles under the Convention, these provisions only
inform rather than resolve the
interpretative issues that arise under article
33. In this respect there are at least four key issues that require closer
consideration.
First, from which substances must children be protected under
article 33? Second, what is the scope of the obligation to protect
from the illicit use of such substances? Is it merely a preventive obligation to
children using drugs or does it extend to a remedial obligation
requiring states to provide harm reduction, treatment and rehabilitative
services to children who suffer harm from their drug use? Third, what is the
nature of the obligation to prevent the use of children
in the illicit
production and trafficking of such substances? Finally, is it possible to
outline an understanding of the phrase
‘all appropriate measures’
which is capable of guiding states with respect to the practical steps required
pursuant to
article 33?
A consideration of these questions invites the following conclusions. First,
as the text of article 33 indicates, the substances
which are the subject of
concern under this provision are those defined in ‘the relevant
international treaties’. This
phrase was intended to capture those
substances controlled under the Single Convention on Narcotic
(‘Narcotics
Convention’
Convention on Psychotropic Substances (‘Psychotropic Substances
Convention’).
the list of relevant instruments under article 33 is not confined to these two
treaties and extends to others which were
not discussed during the drafting of
the Convention. This includes the 1988 Convention Against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances (‘Trafficking
Convention’),
include the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
requires states parties to prohibit sales to and by
and the FCTC Protocol
to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco
Thus it is arguable
that the use of tobacco products is now within the protective scope of article
33, although this is not entirely
clear and is discussed further below. Alcohol,
one of the most commonly used substances by children,
remains outside its scope,
since it is not subject to control under a relevant international
instrument.
Second, the scope of the obligation to protect children from the illicit use
of controlled substances should not be confined to a
preventive obligation. On
the contrary, if the interpretation is to take account of the Convention’s
other requirements, protection
should be seen to encompass an obligation to take
all reasonable measures within a state’s available resources both to
the illicit use of scheduled substances and to
appropriate treatment and harm reduction services where a child suffers harm
from the use of such substances. In this sense, protection
is best understood
as an obligation that endures for as long as a child is either exposed to or
actually experiences the harm associated
with drug use.
Finally, the phrase ‘all appropriate measures’ provides states
with a significant degree of discretion with respect to
the measures they adopt
to protect children from the illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
prevent their involvement in the illicit production and
trafficking of such substances. This discretion, however, remains subject
the caveat that whatever measures are adopted they must be consistent with the
Convention and international law more generally
must be effective.
This means, for example, that, where appropriate, states must actively engage
children in the process of developing
measures, in accordance with article 12 of
the Convention. As a consequence the protectionist concerns that underlie
are not to be understood through a traditional welfarist lens in
which children are to remain silent while adults save them from
the harms of
drugs. A rights-based approach still demands that adults protect children but
not in ways that deny children recognition
of their evolving capacities,
resilience and insights into the measures to protect them from the harms
associated with drug use or
involvement in the drug trade.
II THE OBLIGATION TO PROTECT CHILDREN FROM THE ILLICIT USE OF
NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
A Illicit Use
33 is concerned with protecting children from the
illicit use
substances ‘defined in the relevant international treaties’. This
acknowledges that there are licit, or lawful, uses
of certain substances
controlled under the relevant international instruments, where they are used for
legitimate medical and scientific
purposes. Indeed, states are obliged to
provide children with access to essential medicines controlled under the UN
drugs conventions
(such as morphine) for the purposes of ensuring their right to
health under article 24 of the
an obligation mirrored in States obligations under the Narcotics
Convention.
As such, while it
can be a convenient shorthand, it is not appropriate in a legal sense to refer
to ‘illicit drugs’ or
‘illicit substances’, but rather
of the substances under control.
The focus on the illicit use of controlled substances means that concerns
regarding children’s use of some medications prescribed
professionals will fall outside the scope of article 33.
This should
not be taken to mean, however, that the Convention is silent with respect to
this issue as matters concerning the suitability
and quality of drugs
administered to children fall within the purview of article 24
and a child’s right to the highest attainable standard of health.
B Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances as Defined in
International Treaties
1 The Core Instruments
33 is only concerned with ‘narcotic drugs’ and ‘psychotropic
substances’, as defined in the ‘relevant
international
treaties’. The reason for this reference to international treaties was not
to bind states to the measures required
under such instruments, but simply to
ensure that appropriate international definitions were used in determining what
constitutes
the relevant ‘narcotic drugs’ and ‘psychotropic
substances’ for the purposes of article 33. In this regard,
noted during the technical review of article
the principal treaties at the time were the Narcotics Convention (as amended by
its 1972 protocol)
and the Psychotropic Substances Convention.
The substances which are under international control are listed in the
schedules to these
instruments.
The Narcotics Convention primarily controls cannabis, opium poppy, coca and
their many derivatives (including heroin and cocaine),
but also covers a range
of synthetic substances such as methadone and other
The Psychotropic
Substances Convention deals with pharmaceutical products and synthetic drugs
such as LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide)
and ecstasy
(methylenedioxy-methylamphetamine or
The Trafficking
Convention schedules precursor chemicals necessary for the production of certain
The production, sale and use of controlled substances are to be confined
strictly to medical and scientific
The measures of
control set out under the conventions, involving four schedules of varying
levels of strictness, are intended to
vary according to the dependence producing
properties, therapeutic value and the risk of abuse associated with each
There are, however,
considerable discrepancies, in particular with relation to the control of the
coca leaf, the use of which is
not harmful of
and cannabis, which is
controlled alongside considerably more harmful
substances.
2 An Expanding List
The international drug
conventions empower the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs (‘CND’) to
bring new substances under international
control or to remove them. This does
not require a plenipotentiary conference. It is done by a vote among the
fifty-three members
of the CND.
Over the years, the number of substances under international control has grown
exponentially and no substances have, to date, ever
been removed from
international control. As these substances are added to the international
schedules, states parties to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
take all appropriate measures to protect children from using them, and prevent
their use in production and trade of those
substances. This means that the
scheduling decisions of the fifty-three members of the CND affect the legal
obligations of all states
parties of the Convention. Thus, there is a
compelling reason for states parties to the Convention to take extra care in
that scheduling decisions made in Vienna are themselves
‘appropriate’.
Importantly, the list of international instruments referred to in article 33
is not exhaustive. Thus, for example, the Trafficking
Convention was not
discussed during the drafting of the Convention even though it had been adopted
by the time of the second technical
review of article 33 in 1989. Nonetheless,
this instrument would likely be considered a relevant treaty under article 33
relationship to the other two drugs conventions and that the use of
children in the illicit production and trafficking of precursor
chemicals should
be prevented by virtue of article 33. Indeed, the Committee has recently
requested that states that have not done
so ratify or accede to this
As such, the list of
relevant international treaties of relevance to article 33 is open to expansion
(and in theory retraction).
3 The Status of Tobacco
Tobacco was not
originally included within the purview of article 33. However, a question
arises as to whether its status has changed
as a result of the adoption of the
FCTC and its protocol on the illicit tobacco trade. It flows from the
inter-related nature of
the three international drugs conventions that the
Trafficking Convention would be considered a relevant treaty under article 33.
Its focus is on precursor chemicals necessary for the production of the
substances scheduled in the earlier treaties. As such, States
parties have an
obligation to prevent the use of children in the illicit trade in these
substances.
The status of the FCTC is somewhat less clear. Two main questions arise.
First, article 33 is intended to protect children from the
illicit use of
controlled drugs. This begs the question of what would constitute an illicit use
of tobacco, which is intended for
recreational use. Article 16(1) of the FCTC
clearly prohibits the
of tobacco products to children under a set
age or eighteen.
This implies
that purchase and use beneath that age would be illicit. On the one hand this is
somewhat different from the drugs controlled
under the Narcotics and
Psychotropic Substances Conventions whereby all uses outside of medical and
scientific purposes are illicit.
On the other, the only difference is the nature
of the controls adopted - one framework rooted in criminal laws, the other in
regulation – but both have as an aim the protection of children
from the substances in question.
The second main question is whether the FCTC’s protocol on the illicit
tobacco trade could be considered a relevant international
treaty for the
purposes of article 33
independent of the above question
or must the FCTC
also be included?
The importance of this discussion extends beyond the FCTC itself to the
question of the characteristics required of a new treaty for
it to be considered
‘relevant’ for the purposes of article 33 and thus engage its
protections. Would an alcohol treaty,
if adopted, or one protecting children
from solvents, or a new protocol to address novel psychoactive
be captured? Do the
nature of the controls within any such treaties have a bearing?
In any event, states are still under an obligation to protect children from
the harmful effects tobacco as a component of the child’s
right to the
highest attainable standard of health under article 24 of the Convention.
Indeed, this article is cited in the FCTC’s
preamble (but not,
interestingly, article 33). Children’s involvement in the tobacco trade,
licit or illicit, is still addressed
by article 32.
4 The Exclusion of Substances Commonly used by
The nexus between
article 33 and international drug treaties has meant that some of the substances
most commonly used by children,
and inhalants such as
gas fuels, aerosols, glues and
remain excluded from
the scope of the provision. This was not due to a lack of understanding as to
the effects of these substances
or the prevalence of their use among young
people at the time of drafting.
Indeed, it was proposed during
drafting to extend the scope of the protection against drugs to all kinds of
drugs, including alcohol
but this was rejected for reasons that remain
For some commentators,
this ‘omission is significant in a Convention designed to address
international social problems of
children because alcohol is perhaps the most
serious substance abuse problem facing children
It is important
to note, however, that alongside substances that were known at the time article
33 also currently excludes novel
psychoactive substances that have emerged since
the Convention was drafted but are not under international
For its part, the Committee has routinely expressed concern at the incidence
of tobacco, alcohol
concluding observations on states’ reports. These concerns are often
raised, quite legitimately, within the broad context
of adolescent health, which
is covered under article 24 of the
Convention.
However, with
respect to those occasions where the Committee’s recommendations invoke
article 33,
it has no mandate
for doing so with regard to alcohol and solvents, and, as discussed above, an
unclear mandate with regard to tobacco.
C The Scope of the Obligation to Protect Children from the
Illicit Use of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
1 Understanding Protection as a Preventive and
Rehabilitative Obligation
obligation to protect children from the illicit use of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances requires appropriate measures
initiation of drug use among children under the age of 18. However, an
issue arises as to whether the obligation to protect is merely
preventive or
extends to a rehabilitative/remedial obligation that would require states to
take appropriate measures to address any
harm associated with a child’s
The original wording proposed by China, which focussed on ‘preventing
and prohibiting’ a child from using drugs, was
in favour of
‘protection’. In contrast, the language of prevention was retained
in relation to children’s involvement
in the production and trafficking of
drugs. Moreover, the use of ‘protection’ was proposed by the Ad Hoc
and measures of a ‘remedial and curative nature’ were
seen to be a component of
protection.
A later formulation
by the China delegation also stated that ‘competent national authorities
should investigate cases of drug
abuse by a child and
timely medical
should be provided for the child so that he or she may be assured
prompt rehabilitation and healthy growth’ (emphasis
Thus, such discussions
indicate that there was at least an understanding among some delegates that
protection should extend beyond
prevention.
For its part, the Committee appears to support this position and has
requested information in its guidelines for periodic reporting
‘assistance programmes’ for children and young people who use
Moreover, states parties have consistently reported on treatment and
rehabilitative interventions in their periodic reports to the
Committee in the
context of substance use.
cumulative impact of these factors tends to support a conception of protection
as both preventive and remedial. Indeed, it would
be incongruous to conceive of
protection as merely preventing a child from initiating drug use given the
prospect that a child may
often suffer harmful consequences to their health as a
result of such use or potentially develop a dependency. In circumstances
these risks materialise, there is a need to protect a child from the associated
harm to his or her health.
In any event, article 24 clearly imposes an obligation on states to implement
sufficient quality services for children whose health
is affected by drug use.
This connection between articles 24 and 33 was clearly stated by the Committee
in the context of injecting
drug use and HIV, where it explained that:
Consistent with the rights of children under articles 33 and 24 of the
Convention, States Parties are obligated to ensure the implementation
programmes which aim to reduce the factors that expose children to the use of
substances, as well as those that provide treatment
and support to children who
are abusing
substances”.
Thus, article 33 should not be read in isolation if it is to provide
effective protection for children from the potential harms associated
use of controlled substances. Instead, it provides a window or lens by which to
access and harness all the provisions under
the Convention when developing
strategies to address drug use among children.
2 The Meaning of the Obligation to Take ‘All
Appropriate Measures’ to Protect Children from the Illicit Use of Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic substances
(a) A Tripartite Obligation
33 demands that states ‘take all appropriate measures’ to protect
children from the illicit use of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances as
defined by the relevant international treaties
prevent their use in
the illicit production and trafficking of such substances. This is a mandatory
obligation which arguably imposes
a heavier burden on states relative to
alternative phrases used in the Convention such as ‘undertake to
ensure’ (in art
3(2)), ‘undertake to respect’ (art 8(1)) or
‘recognize’ (art 15(1)). At the same, article 33 remains subject
the overarching obligation under article 2, which demands that states
‘respect and ensure the rights set forth in the present
Convention to each
child within their jurisdiction without discrimination’. The meaning of
this obligation, which is discussed
in the commentary to article 2, is generally
accepted to impose an obligation on states to
respect, protect
For the purposes of
article 33, this translates into a requirement that states take all appropriate
measures in light of available
resources to:
ensure that
state actors do not encourage, expose or facilitate the illicit use of
controlled substances by children and do not block
or impede prevention, harm
reduction and treatment interventions for children who have used such substances
the obligation to respect);
ensure that
non-State actors do not encourage, expose or facilitate the illicit use of
controlled substances by children and do not
block or impede effective
prevention, harm reduction and treatment interventions (
the obligation to
effective enabling environment for the prevention of drug use by children and
the reduction of any health and social harms
associated with drug use (
obligation to fulfil
(b) The Question of Resources
The fulfilment of the obligations imposed on states
parties under article 33 clearly requires the allocation of adequate resources.
Article 4 of the Convention provides that the implementation of an economic,
social or cultural right remains subject to the availability
of such resources.
The status of article 33 is, however, unclear under international human rights
law as it has no equivalent in
the ICCPR or ICESCR that could indicate how it
ought to be classified. As discussed in the commentary to article 4, the
bifurcation
of human rights law into these two sets of rights is conceptually
incoherent, so rather than conceive of civil and political rights
as imposing
immediate obligations and economic and social rights as imposing progressive
obligations, a more appropriate approach
is to conceive of all rights as
consisting of both types of obligation.
In the context of article 33, this gives rise to the question of which
measures should be classified as immediate and which as progressive.
Committee’s work on article 33 is not particularly helpful in this regard
and the question is not easily answered. However,
as a general principle it
would be reasonable to expect that legislative and administrative measures, such
as establishing a national
plan of action or criminalising the exploitation of
children in the drug trade, would be seen as immediate, while health and
educational
measures would be more progressive in nature given the resources
involved. That said, as outlined in the commentary to article 4,
this does not
mean that states are entitled to do nothing with respect to such measures. They
still carry the onus of demonstrating
via relevant indicators and benchmarks
that progress is being made to secure progressively the full implementation of
article 33.
(c) The Meaning of ‘Appropriate Measures’
Article 33 requires that states take ‘all
appropriate measures, including legislative, administrative, social and
educational
measures’. The general meaning of this phrase, which appears
elsewhere in the Convention, is discussed in detail in the commentary
4. In summary, states enjoy a degree of discretion with respect to the nature
of the measures which they adopt to fulfil
their obligations under article 33.
While relatively broad, this margin is not without limits and remains subject to
two caveats.
First, the measures adopted must be consistent with other human
rights standards. Second, they must be effective in securing the
enjoyment of
children’s rights under article 33.
(i) Consistency with Human Rights Law
The Danger of Unintended Consequences and the Need for
Proportionality
There is a tendency for the
measures adopted by states to address the illicit use and production of drugs to
reflect a narrow law
and order response. Not only is this response often
ineffective
in achieving its
it often contributes to the violation of human rights for both children and
This occurs where the objective of such measures may be legitimate (namely to
prevent the illicit production and distribution of
drugs) but the measures
employed to achieve the aim are disproportionate or have unintended consequences
that violate human rights.
This is sometimes due to the actions of individuals
or certain agencies, but a systemic problem exists in that indicators of success
in relation to drug control regularly correlate with practices that
with human rights and thus are accompanied by the risk of
violating such rights (e.g. investigation, arrest, successful prosecution,
eradication of crops, seizure of property, extradition, control of individual
behaviours and cultural or indigenous
practices).
It is in this context that the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Health, in
a report to the UN General Assembly in 2010, recommended
that governments
‘[r]epeal or substantially reform laws and policies inhibiting the
delivery of essential health services to
drug users, and review law enforcement
initiatives around drug control to ensure compliance with human rights
obligations.’
to recommend the formulation of ‘guidelines that provide direction to
relevant actors on taking a human rights-based
approach to drug control, and
devise and promulgate rights-based indicators concerning drug control and the
right to health.’
In a similar vein, the Committee has requested a child rights impact
assessment of aerial fumigation of coca in
(a form of crop
eradication/drug supply reduction) due to its contribution to adverse health
consequences, human displacement, food
insecurity and
It has also raised
concerns about certain forms of drug treatment, including the arbitrary
detention and abuse of children in drug
and enforcement efforts,
such as the use of children in military operations against drug traffickers and
the application of criminal
laws to children who use
Thus states are obliged to ensure that any measures to address drug use and
involvement in illicit production and trade are consistent
with human rights
standards under both the Convention and other human rights
instruments.
This requires due
diligence, or a human rights impact assessment, on the part of regulators to
assess the human rights consequences
of any initiatives
This approach is a
component of moving beyond what a former UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to
Health to described as the ‘parallel
universes’ of human rights and
and an acknowledgement that, as the UN General Assembly has repeatedly stated,
‘countering the world drug problem’ must
be carried out in full
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and international human rights
However, a human rights-based approach
does not preclude
all measures
that interfere with rights. On the contrary, interference will be justified
where it is undertaken pursuant to a valid
law, pursues a legitimate aim and the
measures employed to achieve the aim are
proportionate.
With respect to
proportionality, states carry the burden of establishing a rational connection
(which is usually established by reference
to evidence) between the aim sought
and the measure adopted. A state must also establish that there are no
reasonably available alternative
measures that would achieve the aim being
sought with less interference with human rights (the minimal impairment
principle).
considerations are critical in any assessment of the legitimacy of drug control
measures that may interfere with the rights
of individuals.
Consistency within the Convention and respect for the views of
The requirement of internal system coherence demands
that article 33 be interpreted in light of the other articles under the
Convention.
States’ obligation under article 12 to assure that children’s views
are expressed and taken into account in all matters
that affect them anticipates
an active and dynamic role for children in the identification and development of
‘appropriate
measures’ under article
It is in this context that the Committee has called for the formulation of
‘a rights-based plan of action for the protection
of children and
adolescents from the dangers of drugs and harmful substances and involving
children in its formulation and implementation’.
Moreover, as recognised by the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, there is a need to encourage ‘States and
civil society to promote
the participation of young people, as agents of change,
in the design, development, implementation and evaluation of prevention
and activities targeting illicit drug use among young
children’s ‘evolving capacities’ must be fully taken into
account and due weight must be given to their age
and level of
This obligation to engage actively with and respect the views of children in
the development of measures to protect them from drug
use challenges traditional
welfarist models in which children are reduced to mere objects in need of adult
protection. Assuredly,
children of all ages remain vulnerable to the harms
associated with drug use, as do adults. However, under a rights-based approach,
children are not defined by their vulnerability. On the contrary, adults must
recognise and respect their evolving capacity to provide
critical insights into
the types of measures that will be effective for the purposes of protecting them
from the illicit use of drugs.
The other point to stress is that any measures to address the health
consequences associated with drug use must be undertaken in accordance
article 24. In this respect, what is required for the provision of available,
accessible, acceptable and sufficiently high
health services, such as
harm reduction and drug treatment, is far better understood in the context of
the right to health than in
relation to article
Indeed, it is often under
the wider banner of adolescent health that the Committee most often addresses
drug and alcohol
(ii) The Effectiveness Principle
The second caveat to the exercise of a state’s
discretion when determining appropriate measures for the purposes of article
is the requirement that such measures be effective. In terms of assessing the
potential effectiveness of any proposed measure,
states should be informed by
the evidence base, where available, for specific
interventions.
As such, relevant academic literature should be consulted alongside
international or regional best practice standards, as well as
guidance from
international expert bodies such as the
Periodic evaluation of legislative, administrative, social and educational
measures for effectiveness is also vital and especially
so when considered in
the light of progressive realisation under article 4. Indeed, the periodic
reporting process to the Committee
may serve as an appropriate time-bound
evaluation exercise.
Guidance as to effective measures may also be found in the resolutions and
declarations adopted at international forums such as the
World Health Assembly
and the CND. Although the content of these documents must be scrutinised for the
appropriateness of their recommendations
as they might relate to children, in
some cases political forums have endorsed international best practice standards.
For example,
at the CND in 2014, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(‘UNODC’) international standards on drug use prevention
endorsed in a resolution framed by article 33 of the
Convention.
(d) General Measures to Protect Children from the Illicit Use
of Proscribed Substances: Insights from the Committee
Beyond the general requirement that appropriate
measures be both effective and consistent with human rights standards, there is
need to identify some of the actual measures required of states under article
Although the Committee has tended to restate the general nature of
the obligation to take appropriate measures in its concluding
observations,
there are some
recurring themes in its work that offer insights into the type of measures that
can be expected of states.
(i) Collection of Adequate, Disaggregated Data and a Focus on
Patterns of Vulnerability
First, the Committee has frequently recommended that
states collect data and undertake research on drug use among
Such demands are
consistent with the 2009 UN Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
They are also practical,
since measures to address drug use among children will only be effective where
they are based on an understanding
of the complex factors that contribute to
these behaviours. The reality is that serious gaps exist in most states in
relation to
strategic information about use and drug-related harms among
children and young people. For example, there is limited surveillance
the world’s most populous nations. The best available data relates to
high-income countries, and even then, mostly
relates to readily accessible
children and young people who attend
In addition, the risk of initiating drug use and the health and social harms
associated with drug use are not equally distributed.
Thus, there is a need to
pay special attention to the most vulnerable children in this
These children have
been identified by the Committee to include street
victims of child
children in rural
communities,
and children who do not
attend school.
number of other groups could be added to this list due to a range of identified
risk factors
including children
whose parents are drug
Studies have further
shown increased risks among those with a history of sexual abuse, those in
conflict with the law, involved with
gangs, and with mental health
Age itself is an important factor when considering vulnerability. Children
and young people differ from adults in important ways,
including how they use
drugs, which drugs they use, their knowledge of risks and harms and their
knowledge of, and access to,
The 2009 Political Declaration and Plan of Action on Drug Control is clear on
the need for age appropriate services, a factor reaffirmed
by the General
Assembly in 2013.
The Committee
has also affirmed the need to ‘recognize the particular sensitivities and
lifestyles of children, including
adolescents’.
(ii) Adoption of a National Plan
A national drug
or national policy for
adolescent health
addresses drug use have also been endorsed and encouraged by the Committee as a
means of coordinating a state’s response
to this issue. Recently, such
plans have been recommended as a core obligation of the child’s right to
health under article
it is arguable that a national drug plan should also be considered a core
obligation under article 33. Importantly, such a
plan must be informed by the
best available data
be consistent with the Convention. It is
therefore of concern that the Committee has on occasion welcomed the adoption of
drug strategies
without any consideration of whether these strategies are
compliant with children’s
National plans must be developed in wide consultation with all relevant
parties, including civil society organisations, affected communities
children. This is consistent with the Guiding Principles on Drug Demand
Reduction which explain that ‘[a] community-wide participatory
partnership approach is crucial to the accurate assessment of the problem, the
identification of viable solutions and the formulation
and implementation of
appropriate policies and programmes. Collaboration among Governments,
non-governmental organisations, parents,
teachers, health professionals, youth
and community organisations, employers’ and workers’ organisations,
the private
sector and children themselves, in accordance with article 12, is
therefore important.
(iii) Allocation of Adequate and Appropriate Resources
To implement a national plan effectively and fulfil
their obligations under article 33, states must allocate adequate human and
principles to guide the allocation of scarce resources by states are discussed
above. However, it is relevant to make some observations
here with respect to
the effective use of limited resources by states when responding to issues
concerning illicit substance use
by children. Although evidence of the cost
effectiveness of various interventions has been demonstrated, some others have
shown to produce results. For example, spending on drug law enforcement
vastly outweighs drug-related health budgets in countries
yet drug enforcement
approaches have often failed to deliver sustainable
This indicates that
resources are arguably being invested in efforts that are, at best, of limited
effect, and also suggests that
where resources are constrained, questions should
be asked of national budgets as to where the most effective allocation should be
(iv) Collaboration and International Cooperation
To ensure effective implementation of measures to
protect children from the illicit use of drugs, the Committee has been clear
states should work with civil society and
and seek technical
assistance from international agencies such as UNICEF, WHO and the UN Office on
Drugs and Crime.
International co-operation is a frequent feature of UN agreements on drugs and
the General Assembly has affirmed that ‘the
fight against the world drug
problem is a common and shared responsibility which must be addressed in a
multilateral setting ...
[and that it requires] ... an integrated and balanced
Caution must be exercised, however, to ensure that programmes, even if
successful in one state, are ‘carefully adapted to the
specific social and
cultural conditions’ in
(e) Legislative and Administrative Measures
(i) The UN Drugs Conventions and the Dominant Criminal Law
There is a specific
obligation under article 33 to adopt all appropriate legislative and
administrative measures to protect children
from the illicit use of proscribed
substances. In this respect the ‘relevant international treaties’
provide some guidance
as to the types of measures that may be adopted by
The Narcotics
Convention, for example, requires that states adopt measures to ensure that the
cultivation, production, manufacture,
extraction, preparation, possession,
offering, for sale, distribution, purchase, sale, delivery, importation or
exportation of drugs
are punishable offences when committed intentionally
(article 36(1)). A similar requirement is imposed by article 22 of the
Psychotropic
Substances Convention and article 3 of the Trafficking Convention.
The criminalisation of cultivation and possession for personal
first arose in
international law in article 3(2) of this treaty.
In recognition of the role of children play in the drug industry, as both
potential consumers and suppliers, the Trafficking Convention
requires that
states classify certain offences as ‘particularly serious’ where
‘the victimization or use of minors’; or
are committed
‘in an educational institution or social service facility or in their
immediate vicinity or in other places to
which children and students resort for
educational, sports and social
activities.’
The objective of such measures is to deter and punish those persons
who might seek to sell drugs to children or involve them in their
production or
trafficking. Assuredly, such an objective is consistent with the objective
underlying article 33.
However, there is also a need to exercise caution when developing legislative
measures that criminalise involvement in the drug trade
to ensure that the
penalties imposed on adults are consistent with the principles of sentencing
under international human rights
law. The punitive tenor of these requirements
is also problematic
when applied to children
who are involved in any of
the proscribed activities. The Committee is consistent in its view that children
should not be criminalised
does not mean the criminal laws may never be employed with regard to
children’s involvement with drugs or the drug trade
(on children’s
culpability under criminal law see chapter 40). However, even where a state does
adopt criminal justice measures
with respect to children’s possession,
use, production or sale of drugs it must ensure that their treatment remains
with article 40 of the Convention, which focuses on rehabilitation
rather than punishment and general deterrence. Thus the critical
stress is that the adoption of any legislative measures by a state to protect
children from use of illicit use of drugs
must be consistent with international
human rights law.
(ii) Looking Beyond Criminalisation
Despite the fact that most states have criminalised
most activities associated with drugs, drug use, including among children,
Moreover, many commentators argue that criminalisation has generated more harm
than good in increasing prison populations, subjecting
people to unnecessary
criminal records and increasing the stigma and marginalisation associated with
drug use and dependence.
Importantly, article 33 does not demand that legislative measures must be
restricted to criminal laws. Moreover, there is a degree
of flexibility within
the international drug treaties, which allows for alternative measures. For
example, the requirement of article
3(2) of the Trafficking Convention, as with
other penal provisions within the treaties, is subject to the caveat that states
not criminalise such behaviours if to do so would run contrary to
‘constitutional principles’ or the ‘basic concepts
legal system’.
other words, states parties need not necessarily impose criminal laws if to do
so would be unconstitutional. Indeed, some have
now decriminalised personal
possession offences on these
There is also leeway within the drugs conventions in relation to health
interventions, in particular with regard to harm reduction.
Heroin prescription,
needle and syringe programmes and safe consumption rooms (where possession of
controlled substances on site
is for the purposes of public health goals via
safer consumption) do not run afoul of treaty
though they accept
some degree of ongoing drug use and adopt alternatives to criminal sanctions in
response. Caution is required,
however, as services designed for adult clients
may not be appropriate for children and young people’s needs.
From the perspective of article 33, the overriding consideration must always
be whether the legislative measures are effective in
protecting children from
the illicit use of controlled drugs, rather than a predetermined policy
approach. Importantly, further research
is required into the most effective
regulatory models to protect children from the illicit use of harmful
substances.
However, the
critical point for the purposes of this chapter is that ‘appropriate
legislative measures’ under article
33 of the Convention must not be
confined to criminalisation and prosecutorial models of regulation. The
appropriateness of such
measures, moreover, must be tested against the
realisation of Convention rights.
(f) Appropriate Social and Educational Measures
(i) Prevention Measures
Article 33 imposes an
obligation on states parties to undertake ‘appropriate
measures’ (emphasis added) to prevent initiation into drug use. Such
measures must be evidence-based and consistent with children’s
The concept of
prevention has been the subject of significant commentary and analysis within
drug policy. For example, according
to the EMCDDA:
[p]revention is evidence-based socialisation where the primary focus is
individual decision making with respect to socially appropriate
behaviours. Its
aim is not solely to prevent substance use, but also to delay initiation, reduce
its intensification or prevent escalation
into problem
Moreover, effective prevention can be understood as consisting of four
dimensions:
environmental
(working to change the factors that contribute to initiation);
(targeting the population at large, the most common approach);
(working with specific vulnerable groups);
(working with specific individuals displaying risk factors or who have already
begun using drug to help prevent such use
escalating).
Effective preventive
measures must also be holistic
As the EMCDDA has explained, ‘the
challenge of drug prevention lies in helping young people to adjust their
behaviour, capacities,
and well-being in fields of multiple influences such as
social norms, interaction with peers, living conditions, and their own
personality
Thus, although appropriate education measures are still important and indeed
required under article 33, effective prevention requires
far more than simply
telling young people not to use drugs or providing them with information about
the dangers associated with drug
use. Moreover, as will be discussed below, the
evidence supporting the effectiveness of education-based measures is patchy.
Thus, when developing preventive strategies, the following findings of the
UNODC are crucial:
More than a lack of knowledge about drugs and their consequences, the
evidence points to the following among the most powerful risk
biological processes, personality traits, mental health disorders, family
neglect and abuse, poor attachment to school and
the community, favourable
social norms and conducive environments, and, growing up in marginalized and
deprived communities. Conversely,
psychological and emotional well-being,
personal and social competence, a strong attachment to caring and effective
parents and to
schools and communities that are well resourced and organized are
all factors that contribute to individuals being less vulnerable
(protective
factors, recently also referred to as assets) to drug use and other negative
behaviours.
This indicates that a complex milieu of factors will contribute to an
environment in which a child will become vulnerable to drug
use. However, it
remains the obligation of states to take appropriate measures within the scope
of their available resources to address
these factors and work to reduce the
prospect of a child engaging in drug use. Although this remains a challenging
task, best practice
standards have been developed for prevention measures over
time, including detailed evidence reviews by both EMCDDA and the
(ii) Rehabilitation and drug treatment measures
The reality is that despite bona fide prevention
efforts being taken by a state, many children and young people will still
with drugs. Although drug use does not necessarily equate to drug
abuse and/or harm, some children will experience harmful adverse
reactions to
the substances they take and others may even develop a dependency. The
obligation to protect children under article
33 demands that States adopt
appropriate rehabilitative measures to address any harm experienced by children
who use drugs. Indeed,
a central concern of the Committee’s concluding
observations in relation to adolescent health and drug use has been the need
design and provide rehabilitation and treatment programs for children affected
by drug dependence.
consistent with article 38(1) of the Narcotics Convention, which provides that
states ‘shall give special attention
to take all practicable measures for
the prevention of abuse of drugs and for the early identification, treatment,
education, after-care,
rehabilitation and social integration of the persons
the Committee has provided little further guidance on what it considers to be
‘appropriate measures’ in terms
of drug treatment for children and
adolescents. The drugs conventions, moreover, are not prescriptive in this
regard. This is appropriate
as it allows for scientific evidence to develop.
What was understood in 1961 or 1988 when these agreements were adopted is not
same as our understanding today.
However, while states enjoy a significant level of discretion with respect to
the rehabilitative measures they adopt, there are some
key principles that must
guide the adoption of such measures. First, all treatment options must be
consistent with the rights to
which children are entitled under the
Convention.
Second, as with
measures to facilitate the enjoyment of the right to health, any drug treatment
services must be consistent with
the 3AQ model, that is, they must be
and of sufficient
The meaning
of these concepts is fully explored in the commentary to article 24 and need not
be repeated here. However, with respect
to the issue of quality, it is worth
noting that
there are varied drug treatment options available, ranging
from pharmacological treatments, such as opioid substitution therapy for
who use opiates,
behavioural therapies and family
counselling.
point to note is that while treatment protocols have been developed in many
countries, caution must always be exercised
when transferring best practice from
one social, economic or cultural context to another.
Third, the 2008 Principles of Drug Dependence Treatment developed by the
UNODC and WHO
provide states
with specific guidance when framing their treatment services. Importantly, these
principles conform closely with the
international standards on the right to
health set out above. They include respect for human rights and patient dignity,
a requirement
of evidence-based interventions and that such interventions be
available and accessible. The Principles contain specific discussions
treatment within the criminal justice system, and promote community involvement
and the active involvement of patients. Principle
5 calls for a focus on
specific groups, including
adolescents.
The principles also include the need for ‘informed consent from the
patient before initiating interventions, and guaranteeing
the option to withdraw
from treatment at any
Although this
presents a challenge with respect to younger children, article 12 demands that
children have the right to express
their views in relation to all matters
affecting them. The issue of consent to medical treatment is dealt with more
fully in the
commentary on article 24.
(iii) Harm Reduction Measures
Harm reduction measures are
focused on preventing the social and health harms associated with ongoing drug
use without necessarily
The aim is to minimise the harms associated with certain behaviours and prevent
progression to more harmful or dangerous drugs or
forms of drug use. Indeed,
while working specifically with young people who already use drugs, harm
reduction crosses over with prevention
efforts; for example, in relation to
efforts to prevent identified risk-taking behaviours from escalating (indicated
prevention)
and efforts to prevent transitions into more risky forms of drug use
(e.g. from smoking to injecting). An example of the latter is
cycle’, a programme working with people who inject drugs to encourage
efforts to discourage initiation of
young people into injecting
Harm reduction measures include overdose prevention and
advice on safer
drug use (for example, in the context of parties and nightclubs) and in relation
to specific substances (e.g. warning
on contamination and pill testing to inform
people of what they are consuming). Harm reduction principles have also been
to solvent use to prevent serious harm or even death to children and
young people.
The best known
harm reduction interventions relate to injecting drug use. While this is not
often associated with young people, significant
numbers of people who inject
drugs initiate in adolescence, and in some countries a large proportion of
people who inject drugs are
adolescents.
International
evidence shows that comprehensive harm reduction measures can drastically reduce
the transmission of HIV and other
blood-borne viruses, such as viral hepatitis,
which are related to unsafe
The Committee
addressed this situation in its general comment on HIV in 2003, raising its
concern that ‘[i]n most countries,
children have not benefited from
pragmatic HIV prevention programmes related to substance use, which even when
they do exist have
largely targeted
The focus on harm reduction as opposed to complete cessation of drug use has
meant that harm reduction measures have proven to be
controversial, particularly
at international level.
However, in recent years the Committee has become increasingly supportive of
harm reduction strategies after a long silence. So
too have the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural
specifically with regard to young
), and the UN Special
Rapporteur on the Right to
For its part, the
Committee has recommended in multiple concluding observations that appropriate
harm reduction programmes be put
in place for children who use drugs and, most
significantly, in its 2013 general comment on the child’s right to
The Committee has
not, however, gone further by outlining the key principles underpinning harm
reduction from a child rights perspective,
nor has it set out the specific
interventions required by states. Again, this is appropriate, leaving a wide
discretion to states
to respond to local situations. That said, it is still
possible and indeed appropriate to identify some of the core principles that
should guide states in the development of drug dependence treatment and harm
reduction measures.
First, as with drug treatment measures, harm
reduction interventions must be consistent with children’s rights under
the Convention
and conform to the 3AQ standard. Importantly, the core principles
of harm reduction as accepted within the sector, largely align
accessibility, acceptability and sufficient quality requirements of the 3AQ
model. They include a requirement of credible
evidence; cost-effectiveness;
targeting of specific risks and harms (rather than drug use per se); incremental
change (recognising
small positive steps in people’s lives); participation
and respect (working with people who use drugs); and a commitment to
rights and social justice.
(g) Appropriate Educational Measures
In addition to the obligation to adopt appropriate
legislative and social measures, states are also under an obligation to adopt
appropriate
educational
measures. The Committee’s work on this
aspect of article 33 tends to fall within four areas: general awareness raising;
education of parents and families; school based and community initiatives;
and the need for accurate and objective information.
Although such demands are
reasonable, there has been a general reluctance of the part of the Committee to
interrogate the effectiveness
of educational measures. Thus, it remains
critical when developing educational measures to protect children from using
these measures are subject to ongoing review and evaluation to
determine their effectiveness.
(i) Awareness-raising
The Committee has regularly stressed the need to
raise awareness about the nature and consequences of drug use among children
the broader community.
Such calls have an intuitive appeal but the evidence is less supportive of
general awareness-raising
campaigns targeting the population at large are known to be of little or any
while appeals to
children’s rational decision-making by simply explaining the risks have
also not proven effective, leading
researchers to call for broader approaches
that recognise social and other
Despite the lack of
evidence supporting their effectiveness, mass media and general anti-drug
campaigns are often the preferred response
to the threat posed to children by
drugs. As the EMCDDA has explained:
The common view of drug prevention, particularly in lay audiences, is that it
consists of informing (generally warning) young people
commonly the dangers) of drug use. Prevention is then often equated with (mass
media) campaigns. However,
there is currently no evidence to suggest that the
sole provision of information on drug effects has an impact on drug use
or that mass media campaigns are
cost-effective.’
Thus, greater consideration must be given about how to best allocate scarce
resources to those educational measures which will be
effective in preventing or
reducing the use of drugs by children.
(ii) Parents and Families
The Committee has also been clear on the need to
educate parents and guardians about the dangers of drug use by children but with
little detail about the form or content of such measures.
As with general
awareness-raising measures, parental education must not be limited to explaining
the dangers associated with drugs.
Family skills training, for example, is an
important and developing field. Although this approach encompasses a range of
and programmes, the UNODC has identified four key principles for good
programming. Such measures should: (i) be informed by a solid
theory as to the
causes of problem behaviour and how to change that behaviour; (ii) be based on
an appropriate needs assessment (which
should involve the participation of the
family, including children consistent with article 12); (iii) match the level of
the families involved (for example, families within which problems are
already evident require different approaches than those seeking
early assistance
to prevent initiation); and (iv) be matched to the age and level of development
of the child (consistent with the
concept of a child’s evolving capacities
under the Convention).
Bearing in mind the broader notion of protection set out above, educational
measures for parents should not be confined to information
drug use and must also extend to education about how best to respond to their
child’s drug use. Indeed,
a recent consultation with young people who
inject drugs across fourteen countries (funded by UNAIDS to inform WHO technical
on young people who inject drugs and HIV) illustrated clearly the
desire of young people to see this level of education for
(iii) Drugs Education in Schools and Community Settings
A third prominent recommendation from the Committee
is the need for prevention education to be targeted at children and young people
within schools
social settings such as clubs, family centres and institutions working with
prominent of such programmes, and those with the widest potential audience, are
school-based. However, some prevention
efforts in schools have had disappointing
results due to a range of
no’ techniques, for example, have proven to be
ineffective.
Thus, drugs
education must extend beyond simply restating the dangers of drugs to the health
of children. As the UNODC has explained
in its guidance on school-based
prevention:
Just as drug abuse does not exist in a vacuum but is part of the young
person’s whole life, education for prevention should
incorporate other
issues important to young people, including adolescent development, stress and
coping, sexuality, collaboration
between home and school and personal
relationships.
Education programmes must also avoid one-off seminars or classes, given that
evidence suggests the need for a series of regular structured
sessions over
multiple years.
Importantly, the international standards on drug use prevention developed in
2013 by UNODC outline a package of evidence-based interventions
relating to
school environment and culture which have been assessed for the strength of the
evidence underpinning them. Interventions
that have shown positive results
include, among others: retention in school (absence and exclusion are risk
factors for initiating
drug use); a positive school
; policies developed
with the participation of students, parents and teachers; reducing availability
of drugs on school grounds; and
positive reinforcement of policy compliance as
opposed to punishment.
Some school-based efforts, however, raise questions not just about
effectiveness but also about child rights compliance. Random school
testing, for example, has shown to have no deterrent effect in relation to
initiation of drug use.
intervention does, however, raise concerns about negative side-effects which
include truancy (where students wish to avoid being
detected), potential shifts
to more dangerous substances that leave the body more quickly (again to avoid
detection), and the erosion
of trust between students and
It also interferes
with children’s right to physical and bodily integrity, which is part of
their right to privacy,
in the absence of cogent and persuasive evidence that random school drug testing
works, this interference would not be justified.
Moreover, if such evidence
were to exist, testing would still not be justified if there were alternative
measure reasonably available
that would minimise interference with
children’s rights.
(iv) Accurate and Objective Information
The Committee has regularly recommended the need for
‘accurate and objective’ information on drugs,
as opposed to scare tactics and
exaggeration,
which only serve to reduce trust between children and
adults and may even encourage risky
behaviours.
Whether it is a
drugs awareness campaign, education with parents or education in schools, such
programs must be based on objective
information and remain relevant to
children’s own personal experiences of exposure to drugs. In this respect
it is worth noting
that the 2004 UNODC guidelines on school-based prevention
recommend against ‘[s]trategies that exaggerate and misrepresent
dangers of drug use; using graphic images that portray drug use as dangerous and
exciting; and presenting frightening case studies
that are too far removed from
the reality of young
reaffirmed in the 2013 international prevention
III THE OBLIGATION TO PREVENT THE USE OF CHILDREN IN THE
PRODUCTION AND TRAFFICKING OF PROSCRIBED SUBSTANCES
A Does the Focus on Prevention Prohibit Prosecution of
33 is not only concerned with children’s illicit use of proscribed
substances. It also requires states to take appropriate
measures to prevent
children’s involvement in the
trafficking
of such substances. It is complemented by ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms
of Child Labour,
identifies ‘the use, procuring or offering of a child for illicit
activities in particular for the production and trafficking
of drugs as defined
in the relevant international treaties’ as one on the worst forms of child
labour (article 3(c)). It further
requires states to take immediate and
effective measures to secure its prohibition and elimination (along with the
other forms of
worst labour) as a matter of urgency (article 1). Such an
approach reflects a protective rather than prosecutorial model with respect
children’s involvement in the drug industry. Children are presumed to be
victims rather than offenders and those adults
that facilitate their involvement
in this industry are to be prosecuted and punished.
This conceptualisation of children as ‘innocent victims’ is
motivated by an assumption that their experience in the drug
industry will be
the result of coercion and exploitation. However, there is the prospect that
children, especially older children,
may enter the drug industry for reasons
that are not necessarily the result of coercion or exploitation by adults.
Their decision
to do so may not be genuinely voluntary in that other factors
such as poverty may constrain the range of options open to them, however,
these circumstances, children will still exercise a degree of autonomy with
respect to their involvement in the drug trade. Thus
a question arises
regarding whether article 33 requires that children must always be seen as
victims or whether they could also be
subject to criminal sanction.
Article 33 is concerned with
a child’s involvement in
the drug trade. This presumes that where a child is involved in the drug trade,
there is likely to
have been a violation of his or her rights. However, it
would be problematic to conclude that a child in such circumstances must
necessarily
be immune from criminal prosecution. Children’s
criminal responsibility is a complex issue and the question of when a child
should be held accountable under criminal law for his or her behaviour is
discussed in detail in the commentary on article
It also arises in the
context of child soldiers under article
In summary, there are
three key points which are relevant to the current discussion. First, there is
a presumption that children’s
involvement in the drug trade will be
exploitative and harmful to their development. States are therefore obliged to
prevent such
involvement. However, the Convention also recognises the evolving
capacities of children. As such, it would be incongruous to recognise
children’s agency and evolving capacity in some instances but assume that
they must necessarily be victims of exploitation
and abuse if they become
involved in criminal activity. The principle of internal system
demands that,
absent coercion or exploitation, children with the requisite mental capacity
could potentially be held accountable
under domestic criminal law for their
involvement in the drug industry. Importantly, even where this is the case it
does not allow
for the adoption of an aggressive or punitive approach when
dealing with a child’s behaviour. On the contrary, article 40
that such a child be treated with dignity and respect and that the emphasis is
placed on their social reintegration. In addition,
detention should be a measure
of last resort.
Moreover, the question of whether children
be subject to
criminal sanction is not to be confused or conflated with the important question
of whether they
be, with due with regard to relative effectiveness
of criminal laws versus alternative legal and administrative frameworks that may
be considered to address specific phenomena.
B The Practices of Concern - Illicit Production and
Trafficking
As with the
of drugs by children, article 33 is only concerned with the ‘illicit
production and trafficking’ of proscribed substances.
The Narcotics
Convention (article 1(l)) and the Psychotropic Substances Convention (article
1(j)) both define ‘illicit traffic’
as the cultivation or
trafficking in drugs contrary to the provisions of the respective Conventions
(broadly, for other than medical
or scientific purposes). The Trafficking
Convention (article 1(m)) defines ‘illicit traffic’ as any of the
set forth in articles 3(1) and 3(2) of the Convention. As noted above,
a question arises as to whether under the Protocol to the
FCTC on illicit
tobacco trafficking qualifies as a ‘relevant international treaty’.
If so, the activities set out in
that instrument are also applicable.
Licit production, sales and transit, such as licit opium farming for the
production of medicines including morphine, or licit work
in transporting or
storing those medicines, are not captured by article 33. Similarly, licit
tobacco farming is also outside the
scope of article 33. However, if
children’s involvement in these licit activities is hazardous or harmful
to their health,
they would be prohibited under article 32 of the
Convention.
C The Scope of the Obligation to Prevent
It is clear from the
wording of article 33 that the provision focuses on preventing the use of
children in the illicit drug trade.
This does not mean that the obligation to
prevent should be read to exclude from its purview children who are
in illicit production or trafficking. This would lead to an absurd
result. An interpretation of article 33 that is consistent with
the object and
purpose of the Convention demands that the obligation to prevent requires all
reasonable measures of a State to prevent
children from their entry into
ongoing involvement in
the illicit drug trade.
1 The Nature of the Obligation Imposed on States
Article 33 requires
states to take ‘all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and
educational measures’ to prevent
the use of children in the illicit
production and trafficking of those drugs. As detailed above, states have
significant discretion
with respect to the measures they choose to adopt to
prevent children’s involvement in the drug trade, subject to two caveats.
First the measures must be effective and second, they must be consistent with
the remaining Convention rights and international
law more generally.
The general obligation in article 2 to respect and ensure all the rights
listed in the Convention also demands that states take all
reasonable measures
in light of available resources to:
ensure that
state actors do not encourage, expose or facilitate the use of children in the
illicit production and trafficking of the
substances controlled by the relevant
international instruments (
the obligation to respect
ensure that
non-state actors do not encourage, expose or facilitate the use of children in
the illicit production and trafficking
of the substances controlled by the
relevant international instruments (
the obligation to protect
ensure that the
underlying reasons for children’s involvement in the illicit drug trade
are addressed and that those children
involved in the drug trade are removed and
provided with appropriate measures to address any harm they may have suffered
the obligation to fulfil
2 The Measures Required of States
(a) The Committee’s Lack of Guidance
the Committee has expressed concern at the widespread use of children in the
production and trafficking of
beyond recommending
that states simply take all appropriate measures to prevent such activities, it
has offered little precise guidance
on how states might go about doing
For example, in relation
to Colombia, it expressed alarm ‘over the high number of children exposed
to dangerous and/or degrading
work such as agricultural labour in coca
plantations’ and concern ‘over the manufacture and the export of
Colombia, which affects children who are pickers of coca leaves
raspachines
), as well as children forced or lured into trafficking
drugs, including within their bodies
However, the
Committee made no recommendations in this regard, thus shedding little light on
the state party’s obligations
under article
Indeed, the
Committee’s recommendations on this aspect of article 33, where it has
commented on the provision at all, rarely,
if ever, have extended beyond a
restatement of the article
(b) Legislative and Administrative Measures
(i) Criminal Law Approaches
There are three main
elements to a discussion of criminal laws in this context. First is the
culpability of adults who exploit children
in the drug trade. As a minimum,
states must undertake legislative measures to criminalise the procurement,
enticement and use of
children in the illicit production and trafficking of
controlled drugs.
context it is worth noting that the Trafficking Convention actually requires
that states classify drug offences as ‘particularly
serious’ where
they involve the ‘victimisation or use of minors’ (article 3(5)(f)).
A degree of caution is required,
however. This is because in the rush to protect
children from those who may exploit them in this industry, there is a risk that
sanctions imposed may be disproportionate and therefore inconsistent with
the principles that guide sentencing under international
Moreover, there are
circumstances in which criminal sanctions could potentially be inappropriate.
For example, with so many families
involved in the drug trade due to
the imposition of
strict criminal sanctions against parents may be inconsistent with the right of
a child to have his or her best
interests taken into account in all matters
concerning him or her.
The second element is children’s own culpability. Aside from the many
different ways children can become involved in the drug
trade and the different
approaches required to meet these challenges, a key debate is whether children
can be subject to criminal
sanctions. As noted above, in certain circumstances,
children themselves
be held criminally responsible for their
involvement in the drug trade. However, article 33 is aimed at preventing the
use of children
in the drug trade. A particularly contentious issue is the role
of the juvenile justice system in achieving that aim. In theory criminal
and law enforcement could serve as a deterrent, but there has been very little
research into whether this happens in
As discussed
further below, young people’s involvement in the drug trade is driven by a
complex mix of social, economic and
other considerations that criminal laws
cannot address. Thus, while criminal sanctions may hold children accountable for
their actions,
this serves a different purpose than that of article 33.
With this in mind the third element is the debate around alternative
legislative models to address children’s involvement in
the drug trade. As
with children’s use of drugs, the criminal law is not the only legal
framework open to states. Further research
is required to investigate
alternative legal regulatory models in relation to preventing children’s
involvement in the illicit
drug trade. Questions should be asked, for example,
as to whether criminal laws increase or decrease risks and harms (due to their
effect on the nature of the drug trade) or whether a legally regulated market in
the same commodities could offer better protection;
and whether criminal
laws increase or decrease opportunities for recruitment in illicit production
and trafficking.
(c) Social and educational measures
(i) Adequate Data Collection and Targeted Measures
In developing a response to
the use of children in the illicit drug trade, states must first develop an
understanding of the nature
and extent of children’s involvement. In one
of its few pointed recommendations on this issue, the Committee recommended that
Belarus ‘[u]ndertake a study on the issue of trafficking and
trafficking-related problems, such as sexual exploitation,
drug abuse and the
involvement of children in the drug trade
, and economic exploitation, in
order to assess their scope and causes, and develop and implement effective
monitoring and other measures
to prevent them’ (emphasis
This is important
because there are many ways in which children can become involved in the drug
trade and preventive measures must
be sufficiently flexible to address these.
For example, measures to address children’s involvement in the drug trade
membership will differ from measures to address the recruitment of
child soldiers into organised criminal groups, the use of minors
as couriers, or
children’s involvement in rural farming of crops such as coca, opium poppy
and cannabis.
(ii) Attention to Social Determinants
The requirement that states take appropriate social
and educational measures implies a need to address the social determinants (that
is, the complex social, cultural, political and economic factors) of
children’s involvement in the drug trade. In Afghanistan
and Colombia,
for example, one of the most common ways in which children are involved in the
drug trade is through farming illicit
crops. Such practices are enabled via a
complex interplay of tradition, conflict and poverty and are almost always
linked to the
Similarly, in
Brazil, children’s involvement in the drug trade is often related to,
among other things, a lack of alternative
For its part, the Committee has only partially addressed this complexity by
recommending measures that ‘address the root causes
of gang violence and
crime related to drugs among adolescents, including policies for social
inclusion of marginalized
adolescents’.
as poverty and economic incentives are invariably contributing factors, measures
must also focus on poverty alleviation
and similar drivers of involvement in the
drug trade.
In practice such
measures are linked to the implementation of other provisions of the Convention,
including the provision of adequate
standard of living (article 27); the
availability of free and compulsory education (article 28) and the elimination
of exploitative
and harmful child labour (article 32).
(iii) Facilitating Exit from the Drug Trade and
Rehabilitation
Addressing the factors that contribute to
children’s involvement in the drug trade will be a long-term process. In
the interim,
states are obliged to take measures to facilitate the exit of
children involved in the drug trade. This presents various challenges
on the type of involvement in the drug trade and the various drivers of that
involvement. For example, although gang exit/disengagement
reintegration strategies have potentially important benefits for preventing
children’s use in the drug trade, results
In other contexts,
‘alternative development’ strategies aim to help families and
communities shift from illicit crop
production into licit alternatives. With
respect to these measures, the UN Guiding Principles on Alternative
Development
speak of the need
for consent among farming communities, the proper sequencing of alternatives
(i.e. that alternatives must be in
place before illicit crops are eradicated)
and the need for infrastructural support to ensure effectiveness and human
rights compliance.
these principles have been criticised on the basis that they treat
‘alternative development as “complementary”
enforcement and illicit crop elimination,” rather than as the primary
means of creating conditions that allow
for improved livelihoods and the
reduction of coca and poppy
Thus further
consideration is required as to the most effective strategies by which to
develop alternatives that would facilitate
children’s disengagement from
the production and trafficking of illicit substances.
IV EVALUATION: AN ALTERNATIVE LENS
Relative to adults,
children are more vulnerable to harm and exploitation arising from drug use and
their involvement in the drug
trade. It is this relative vulnerability that
provides the foundation for the inclusion of article 33 in the Convention.
criminal justice approaches are generally still the preferred model for
dealing with adults who use controlled drugs or are involved
in the production
and trafficking of such substances, article 33 prioritises the protection of
children. However, this emphasis
on protection is not be understood through a
welfarist lens in which children are defined by their vulnerability and denied
recognition
of their evolving capacities and their right to express their views
in any discussions about how to ensure their effective protection.
the protective obligation imposed on states under article 33 is not confined to
a preventive obligation and extends to
the provision of remedial measures that
seek to reduce any harm caused to a child as a result of illicit drug use.
While article 33 may represent an innovative addition to the corpus of
international human rights law, it is characterised by a level
ambiguity that is common to many of the rights under the Convention. The
obligation of states to adopt ‘all appropriate
measures’ to protect
children is hardly action guiding and risks being dismissed as a very loose
constraint on the actions
(or indeed omissions) of States. States do enjoy a
level of discretion in the adoption of the measures required to satisfy their
obligations under article 33, but as this chapter has shown, this discretion is
not without its limits. Indeed, the requirement
that all measures must be both
effective and consistent with other Convention rights and human rights more
generally, delivers a
level of rigour to an otherwise ambiguous phrase.
Thus far from being hopelessly indeterminate, this chapter has revealed that
it is possible to offer considerable guidance with respect
that motivate, guide, inform and constrain the efforts of states
to protect children from the illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances and to prevent their involvement in the production and trafficking of
such substances. Disagreements will no doubt linger
as to the nature of these
principles and opinions will continue to vary over the appropriateness of the
measures required to achieve
the twin aims of article 33. Such discussions are
to be welcomed because perhaps the greatest impact this provision can have is
reorient debates about drug policy away from a narrow focus on a law and order
paradigm to a broader rights based approach.
Article 33 does not exist in isolation. Indeed it provides a window by which
to access the collection of rights under the Convention,
which when taken
seriously, have the capacity to be transformative in the development of policies
to address the harm caused by use
of drugs and involvement in the drug trade.
Excessively punitive measures are clearly incompatible with the Convention,
that fail to address the social determinants of drug use by children
and their involvement in the drug trade are also inadequate,
whereas measures
that rely on assumption or speculation rather than evidence are also without
justification. Traditionally, the
discourses of drug control and human rights
have been ‘practically
and existed
in ‘parallel
universes’.
recently however there is evidence of a greater willingness for reflection on
drug policies.
may well provide the opportunity for the benefits of a rights based approach to
be truly understood and implemented.
V SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gruskin S, Plafker K and
Smith Estelle A, ‘Understanding and Responding to Youth Substance Use: The
Contribution of a Health
and Human Rights Framework’ (2001) 91 American
Journal of Public Health:1954
Strang J and others, ‘Drug Policy and the Public Good: Evidence for
Effective Interventions’ (2012) 379(9810)
Anand Grover,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to
the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental
, UN Doc No A/65/255 (6 August 2010)
Global Commission on Drug Policy,
War on Drugs: Report of the Global
Commission on Drug Policy
(Global Commission on Drug Policy, 2011)
Economic and Social Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
Report of the
Secretariat Youth and Drugs: A Global Overview
, UN Doc E/CN7/1999/8 (11
January 1999)
Johnston L and others,
Monitoring the Future National Survey Results on
Drug Use, 1975-2012. Volume I: Secondary School Students
(Institute for
Social Research, The University of Michigan 2013)
Barrett D, Hunt N and Stoicescu C,
Injecting Drug Use Among Under-18s: A
Snapshot of Available Data
(Harm Reduction International 2013)
Embleton L and others, ‘The Epidemiology of Substance Use Among Street
Children in Resource-Constrained Settings: A Systematic
Meta-Analysis’ (2013) 108 Addiction
Barrett D (ed),
Children of the Drug War: Perspectives on the Impact of
Drug Policies on Young People
(iDebate Press 2011)
See, e.g. Damon Barrett
‘Juvenile Justice and Drug Use’ in Simona Merkinaite and Jean Paul
Grund (Eds)
Young People and Injecting Drug Use in Selected Countries of
Central and Eastern Europe
(Eurasian Harm Reduction Network 2009) (Looking
at criminal justice approaches to drug use and possession among young people in
See, e.g.,Anand
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the
Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental
UN Doc No A/65/255 (6 August 2010); UNDP,
HIV and the Law: Risks, Rights and
Health, Report of the Global Commission on HIV and the Law
(UNDP 2012);
Global Commission on Drug Policy,
War on Drugs: Report of the Global
Commission on Drug Policy
(Global Commission on Drug Policy, 2011) (the
Commission includes the former Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi
the former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Louise Arbour, and
multiple former heads of state); Heather Haase and Coletta Youngers,
‘Latin American Leaders Bring Drug Policy Debate to the United
Nations’, (Washington Office on Latin America, 30 September
available at
<www.wola.org/commentary/latin_american_leaders_bring_drug_policy_debate_to_the_united_nations>
20 August 2014; John Collins (ed),
Ending the Drug Wars: Report of
the LSE Expert Group on the Economics of Drug Policy
(London School of
Economics 2014) (in which five Nobel prize winning economists called for reform
of the system).
Art 28 of the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child closely reflects article
33, but contains an interesting alteration:
‘States Parties to the present
Charter shall take all appropriate measures to protect the child from the use of
narcotics and
illicit use of psychotropic substances as defined in the relevant
international treaties, and to prevent the use of children in the
production and
trafficking of such substances’. Note that the word ‘illicit’
is only used for psychotropic substances
indicating some existing forms of licit
use, while this is not allowed for narcotics. This is strange given important
of narcotic drugs, such as morphine. African Charter on the Rights
and Welfare of the Child, OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/24.9/49 (1990),
entered into
Nov. 29, 1999..
See, Sharon Detrick,
A Commentary on the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child
(Martinus Nijhoff 1998) 580-587; Sofia Gruskin, Karen
Plafker and Allison Smith-Estelle, ‘Understanding and Responding to Youth
Substance Use: The Contribution of a Health and Human Rights Framework’
(2001) 91 American Journal of Public Health 1954; Damon
Barrett and Philip
Veerman, ‘Article 33: Protection from Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances’ in André
Alen and others (eds),
A Commentary on the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
( Martinus Nijhoff
See, e.g., United
Nations Economic and Social Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs, resolution
43/4, ‘International Cooperation
for the Prevention of Drug Abuse among
Children’ (2000) (‘CND Res 43/4’); resolution 53/10,
‘Measures to
Protect Children and Young People from Drug Abuse’
(2010) (‘CND Res 53/10); International Narcotics Control Board,
of the International Narcotics Control Board for 2009
(INCB 2009) ch I,
‘Primary Prevention of Drug
Assembly Resolution S-20/2 Annex
Political Declaration
adopted at the Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to Countering the
World Drug Problem Together’
(8-10 June 1998) (‘Special
Session’), preamble.
General Assembly Resolution 54/132, ‘International Cooperation against the
World Drug Problem’, UN Doc A/54/132 (2
February 2000), preamble,
See, e.g., CND Res 43/4 (n
5); CND Res 53/10 (n 5); and International Narcotics Control Board (n 5), ch I.
UN General Assembly Resolution
S-2-/3, ‘Declaration on the Guiding
Principles of Drug Demand Reduction’, UN Doc A/RES/S-20/3 (10 June 1998)
Drug Demand Reduction Principles’), [13] and Annex, [3]
(referring to art 33 of the CRC merely as ‘supplementary reference
material’, with no discussion of its content or significance); Economic
and Social Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
Report of the Secretariat
Youth and Drugs: A Global Overview
, UN Doc E/CN7/1999/8 (11 January 1999)
and ‘Measures to Protect Children and Young People from Drug Abuse: Report
of the Executive
Director’, UN Doc E/CN.7/2011/13 (11 January 2011)
(neither document mentions art 33).
Neil Boister, ‘The Interrelationship between the Development of Domestic and International Drug Control Law’
(1995) 7 African Journal of International and Comparative Law 906
See, e.g., Wan-Yi Chen and others, 'Child Neglect and its Association with
Subsequent Juvenile Drug and Alcohol Offense' (2011) 28
Child and Adolescent
Social Work Journal 273; Yoko Nomura, Yasmin L Hurd and Daniel J
Pilowsky, 'Life-Time Risk for Substance Use
Among Offspring of Abusive
Family Environment From the Community' (2012) 47 Substance Use and
Misuse 1281; Shanta R Dube and others,
'Childhood Abuse, Neglect, and Household
Dysfunction and the Risk of Illicit Drug Use: The Adverse Childhood
Experiences Study' (2003)
111 Pediatrics
See, e.g., Adam
Fletcher, Christopher Bonell and James Hargreaves ‘School Effects on Young
People's Drug Use: A Systematic
Review of Intervention and Observational
Studies’ (2008) 42 International Journal of Adolescent Health 3; David W
Soole, Lorraine
Mazerolle and Sacha Rombouts, 'School-Based Drug Prevention
Programs: A Review of What Works'
(2008) 41 Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Criminology 259
; Christopher M Seitz and others, 'Coverage of Adolescent
Substance Use Prevention in State Frameworks for Health Education: 10-Year
Follow-Up' (2013) 83 Journal of School Health 53; and Melodie D Fearnow-Kenney
and others, 'Initial Indicators of Effectiveness for
a High School Drug
Prevention Program' (2003) 34 American Journal of Health Education
On poverty, development
and the drug production see, Philip Keefer and Norman Loayza (eds)
Bystanders: Developing Countries and the War on Drugs
(2010) World Bank. For
discussions of a range of structural factors relating to children’s
involvement in the drug trade in
Brazil see,, Jailson de Souza e Silva
and André Urani,
Children in Drug Trafficking: A Rapid
(International Labour Organization 2002) 10-11; and Luke
, Children of the Drug Trade: A Case Study of Children in Organised
Armed Violence in Rio de Janeiro
(7 Letras 2003)
Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs (adopted 30 March 1961, entered into force 13 December
(‘Narcotics Convention’); Protocol Amending the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs (adopted 25 March 1972, entered
into force 8
1975), 976 UNTS 3.
While this abbreviation is used here for ease of distinction between the
treaties it is acknowledged that the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs is
misnamed. Many of the substances controlled by the Single Convention are not
narcotics, including cocaine and
Convention on
Psychotropic Substances (adopted 21 February 1971, entered into force 16 August
1976), 1019 UNTS 175
‘(‘Psychotropic Substances
Convention’),
Convention Against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances (adopted 20 December 1988, entered into force
11 November
(‘Trafficking
Convention’).
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (adopted 23 May 2003, entered into force
27 February
2005) 2302 UNTS 166
Protocol to
Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (adopted on 12 November 2012, not
yet in force force), adopted during the
fifth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (‘FCTC
Protocol’).
Worldwide, monthly heavy episodic drinking (HED) is slightly more prevalent
among young people aged 15–19 years (11.7%) than
among the total
population aged 15 years or older (7.5%): see, World Health Organization,
Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health
2014 (WHO 2014) 36-38.
On a possible future
framework convention on alcohol see Allyn Taylor & I. Dhillon, ‘An
international legal strategy for
alcohol control: not a framework
convention—at least not yet’ (2012) Addiction 108,
Committee on
the Rights of the Child,
General Comment No15: The Right of the Child to the
Highest Attainable Standard of Health
, UN Doc CRC/C/GC/15 (17 April 2013)
(‘GC 15’), [37].
Articles 19 and 20 of the Narcotics Convention establish an estimates and
statistical returns system administered by the International
Narcotics Control
Board to ensure availability of essential controlled medicines. The preamble
notes that ‘the medical use
of narcotic drugs continues to be
indispensable for the relief of pain and suffering and that adequate provision
must be made to
ensure the availability of narcotic drugs
Denmark, CRC/C/DNK/CO/4, [52] (recommending that Denmark
‘carefully monitor the prescription of psycho-stimulants to children
take initiatives to provide children diagnosed with ADHD and ADD, as well as
their parents and teachers, with access to a wider
range of psychological,
educational and social measures and treatments’). See also CO Australia,
CRC/C/15/Add.268, [49];
CO Finland, CRC/C/15/Add.272, [38]; CO Japan,
CRC/C/JPN/CO/3, [60]; CO Norway, CRC/C/NOR/CO/4, [42] and [43]; CO Belgium,
CRC/C/BEL/CO/3-4,
United Nations Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Legislative History of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child
(United Nations 2007) (‘Legislative
History’) 712.
of the substances scheduled are available at the website of the International
Narcotics Control Board (‘INCB’):
<www.incb.org
> accessed 20 August 2014.
The INCB is an
independent, quasi-judicial control organ for the implementation of the UN drug
conventions, established by the Narcotics
Convention.
See, International Narcotics Control Board, ‘List of Narcotic Drugs Under International Control: Yellow List’
http://www.incb.org/incb/en/narcotic-drugs/Yellowlist_Forms/yellow-list.html
accessed 8 October 2014.
See International Narcotics Control Board ‘List of Psychotropic Substances
Under International Control: Green List’
http://www.incb.org/incb/en/psychotropic-substances/green-lists.html
accessed 8 October 2014.
International Narcotics Control Board ‘List of Chemicals Under Frequently
Used in the Production of Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Under
International Control: Red List’
http://www.incb.org/incb/en/precursors/Red_Forms/red-list.html
8 October 2014.
Convention, art 4(c): Psychotropic Substances Convention, art
See Narcotics
Convention, arts 2 and 3.
See Anthony Henman and Pien Metaal,
Coca Myths’ Drugs and
Conflict Debate Papers No. 17, June 2009
(Transnational Institute
For a discussion of
the relative harms of drugs, including alcohol and tobacco, see David Nutt,
Leslie King and Lawrence Philips
, ‘Drug Harms in the UK: A Multicriteria
Decision Analysis’ (2010) 376 The Lancet 1558; see also Stephen Rolles and
Measham ‘Questioning the Method and Utility of Ranking Drug Harms in
Drug Policy’ (2011) 22 International Journal of
Drug Policy 4 (Arguing
that drug harms cannot be ranked in isolation form their legal status and a
range of other social and policy
See Narcotics
Convention, art 3; Psychotropic Substances Convention, art
The treatment of ketamine
is a case in point. Although it is a common party drug in some Western
countries, the WHO has recommended
against scheduling ketamine, as it is also
‘a widely used anesthetic and analgesic, especially in developing
countries because
it is easy to use and has a wide margin of safety when
compared with other anesthetic agents’: see, World Health Organization,
Ketamine: Expert Peer Review on Critical Review Report
Expert Committee on Drug Dependence, (Mammamet, Tunisia, 4-8 June
GC 15 (n 22)
FCTC, art 16(1):
‘[e]ach Party shall adopt and implement effective legislative, executive,
administrative or other measures
at the appropriate government level to prohibit
the sales of tobacco products to persons under the age set by domestic law,
Dargan and David Wood (eds)
Novel Psychoactive Substances: Classification,
Pharmacology and Toxicology
Björn Hibell and
The 2011 ESPAD Report: Substance Use Among Students in 36 European
(European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs, 2011)
The Swedish Council for Information on Alcohol and other Drugs
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA), Council of
Europe, Co-operation Group to Combat Drug
Abuse and Illicit Trafficking in Drugs
(Pompidou Group) (‘In all ESPAD countries but one, 70% or more of the
students have
drunk alcohol at least once during their lifetime. The ESPAD
average is 87% (range: 56–98%...On average, about a third have
alcohol only on 1–9 occasions while, on the other hand, 24% have done so
40 times or more’, at
European Monitoring
Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction,
Drug Use and Related Problems Among Very
Young People (Under 15 Years Old)
(EMCDDA 2007); Lonnie Embleton and others
l, ‘The Epidemiology of substance use among street children in
resource-constrained
settings: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis’
(2013) 108 Addiction 1722.
Legislative History
(n 25) 711. The US representative proposed
that the article should extend to protection against ‘other drugs, such as
but this suggestion failed to gain
Walter H Bennett,
‘A Critique of the Emerging Convention on the Rights of the Child’
(1987) 20 Cornell International Law Journal 1
Novel psychoactive
substances are a regular concern at the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs. See UN
Economic and Social Council, Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, Resolution 57/9
‘Enhancing international cooperation in the identification and reporting
of new psychoactive
substances and incidents involving such substances’
(2014) (CND Res 57/9).
e.g., CO Guyana, CRC/C/GUY/CO/2-4, [49]-[50]; CO Malta, CRC/C/MLT/CO/2,
[51]-[52]; CO Cyprus, CRC/C/CYP/CO/3-4, [40]-[41]; CO
Italy, CRC/C/ITA/CO/3-4,
[53]-[54]; CO Poland, CRC/C/15/Add194, [42]; CO Seychelles, CRC/C/15/Add189,
[46]; CO Latvia, CRC/C/15/Add142,
See, e.g., CO Lao
People's Democratic Republic, CRC/C/LAO/CO/2, [52]; CO Bangladesh,
CRC/C/BGD/CO/4, [65]; CO Mozambique, CRC/C/15/Add172,
[70]; CO Greece,
CRC/C/15/Add170, [74]; CO Dominican Republic, CRC/C/15/Add150, [37]; CO Central
African Republic, CRC/C/15/Add138,
See, e.g., GC 15 (n
) [65], [38] and [59].
For example in its report
on Palau it stated that ‘[i]n light of article 33 of the Convention the
Committee recommends that
the State party take all appropriate measures... to
protect children from the illicit use of alcohol, narcotic drugs and
psychotropic
substances’: see, CO Palau, CRC/C/15/Add149, [57]. See also,
CO Vietnam, CRC/C/VNM/CO/3-4, [62]-[63]; CO Cook Islands, CRC/C/COK/CO/1,
[51]-[52]-; CO Iceland, CRC/C/ISL/CO/3-4, [44]-[45]; CO Timor Leste,
CRC/C/TLS/CO/1, [80]; CO Suriname CRC/C/15/Add130 para 56;
CRC/C/15/Add124 para 65; CO Russian Federation CRC/C/15/Add110 para
Legislative History (n
The discussions
of the draft article 33 were swift and rather perfunctory. The final stages of
the debates on article 33 took place
in closed informal meetings to achieve a
consensus text for presentation to the Working Group which was adopted without
further discussion.
Relative to other articles within the Convention, the
adoption of a consensus happened in a short period of time, with very little
detailed debate. Cf, e.g., the lengthy discussions relating to art 31, 32 and
34; see Legislative History (n
683-708 and 713-721.
Committee on the Rights of the Child,
Treaty-Specific Guidelines Regarding
the Form and Content of Periodic Reports to be Submitted by States Parties under
Article 44,
Paragraph 1 (b), of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
UN Doc CRC/C/58/Rev.2 (25 November 2010)
See, e.g., (submitted
reports for future sessions of the Committee at the time of writing)
consolidated 3
periodic reports of the Republic
of Latvia, UN Doc CRC/C/LVA/3-4, (2013), [462]-[464]; 5
report of Pakistan, UN Doc CRC/C/PAK/5, (2013), [175] –[179];
periodic report of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, UN Doc CRC/C/GB/5 (2014), [30]-[
Committee on the Rights
of the Child, General Comment No. 3: HIV/AIDS and the Rights of the Child, UN
Doc CRC/GC/2003/3 (17 March
2003) (‘GC 3’), [39]. See also
(recommending treatment, counselling or reintegration relating to substance
use), CO Guyana,
CRC/C/GUY/CO/2-4, [50(d)]; CO Guinea, CO CRC/C/GIN/CO/2, [68];
CO Albania, CRC/C/ALB/CO/2-4, [63(b)]; CO Namibia, CRC/C/NAM/CO/2-3,
2012[58(e)]; CO Thailand, CRC/C/THA/CO/3-4, [65]; CO Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, CRC/C/15/ADD.184, [51]; CO: Papua
New Guinea, CRC/C/15/ADD.229,
[62]; and CO: Antigua and Barbuda, CRC/C/15/ADD.247,
[Cross reference to
See, Alex Stevens
Drugs, Crime and Public Health: The Political
Economy of Drug Policy
(Routledge-Cavendish 2011); Louise Degenhardt and
other ‘Toward a Global View of Alcohol, Tobacco, Cannabis, and Cocaine
Findings from the WHO World Mental Health Surveys’ (2008) PLoS
Med 5(7).(Showing that ‘Globally, drug use is not distributed
and is not simply related to drug policy, since countries with stringent
user-level illegal drug policies did not have lower
levels of use than countries
with liberal ones’).; UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an
Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World
Drug Problem
at the High Level Segment of the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 11-12 March
2009) (‘Noting UN member states’
concern about the ‘
posed by the world drug problem’ [emphasis added] and the
somewhat contradictory recognition that commitments made at the UN
session on drugs in 1998 both in relation to demand and supply reduction had
been ‘attained only to a limited extent’.
This language was agreed
by consensus after the initial text had stated that such commitments had not
been attained.)
overview, see UN Human Rights Council,
Statement of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms Navi Pillay, Side Event on the World Drug Problem and Human
sess (16 June 2014); Damon Barrett and Manfred
Nowak, ‘The United Nations and Drug Policy: Towards a Human Rights Based
in Aristotle Constantinides and Nikos Zaikos (eds),
Diversity Of International Law: Essays In Honour Of Professor Kalliopi K
(Martinus Nijhoff 2009) 449; Damon Barrett and Patrick Gallahue,
‘Harm Reduction and Human Rights’
Interights Bulletin
; Transform Drug Policy Foundation,
Count the Costs, 50 Years of the
War on Drugs: Undermining Human Rights
(Transform Drug Policy Foundation
2012). On specific issues see also,
(on torture and cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment) Human Rights Watch, ”
on the Cable”: The Illegal Arrest, Arbitrary Detention and Torture of
People Who Use Drugs in Cambodia
(Human Rights Watch 2010); Human Rights
Somsanga’s Secrets: Arbitrary Detention, Physical Abuse, and
Suicide inside a Lao Drug Detention Center
(Human Rights Watch 2011); (on
the death penalty) Patrick Gallahue and others,
The Death Penalty for Drug
Offences: Global Overview 2012, Tipping the Scales for Abolition
Reduction International 2012); Amnesty International,
Addicted to Death:
Execution for Drugs Offences in Iran
(Amnesty International 2011); (on
HIV/AIDS) Daniel Wolfe and Roxanne Saucier (eds),
At What Cost? HIV and Human
Rights Consequences of the Global War on Drugs
(Open Society Foundations
See Damon Barrett,
‘Reflections on Human Rights and International Drug Control’ in John
Collins (ed),
Governing The Global Drug Wars
(London School of Economics
2012); UN Office on Drugs and Crime,
Making Drug Control Fit for Purpose:
Building on the UNGASS Decade. A Report by the Executive Director
, UN Doc No
E/CN.7/2008/CRP.17 (7 May 2008) (identifying ‘unintended negative
consequences’ of the international drug
Gover (n 2),
CO Colombia,
CRC/C/COL/CO/3, [72].
UNDP ‘Taking Narcotics Out of the Conflict: The War on Drugs’ in
Human Development Report 2003
(UNDP 2003), ch 13; Witness for Peace,
Fundación Minga and Institute for Policy Studies,
An Exercise In
Futility: Nine years of Fumigation in Colombia
(Witness for Peace
E.g., CO Cambodia,
CRC/C/KHM/CO/2, [55] and [56]; CO Vietnam, CRC/C/VNM/CO/3-4, [43],
CRC/C/OPAC/MEX/CO/1, [29]; CO Ukraine, CRC/C/UKR/CO/4, [59] and
See also Trafficking
Convention, art 14(2) (requiring that appropriate measures to prevent illicit
cultivation of and to eradicate
plants containing narcotic or psychotropic
substances...shall respect fundamental human
Office on Drugs and Crime includes such impact assessments (referred to as a
‘planning tool’) in its internal
2012 human rights guidance
document. This emerged due to concerns about UN assistance for drug enforcement
in death penalty states
contributing to death sentences and executions. See, UN
Office on Drugs and Crime,
UNODC and the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights: Positions Paper
(UN Office on Drugs and Crime 2012); and Harm
Reduction International,
Partners in Crime: International Funding for Drug
Enforcement and Gross Violations of Human Rights
(Harm Reduction
International 2011).
Human Rights, Health and Harm Reduction: States’ Amnesia and
Parallel Universes
(International Harm Reduction Association 2008). The UN
human rights system has tended to overlook drug issues as a theme within its
work. Notable exceptions include Grover (n 2) and Manfred Nowak,
the Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment,
UN Doc A/HRC/10/44 (10 January 2009)
Assembly Resolution 68/197, UN Doc A/RES/68/197 (18 December 2013),
cross reference
to full discussion of this
reference to chapter on art 2
] See, however,
Prince v South Africa,
communication no 1474/2006 UN Doc CCPR/C/91/D/1474/2006 (31 October 2007),
(involving religious uses of cannabis in which the Human
avoided an in-depth analysis of proportionality or evidence to support the
Government’s claim).
dissenting views of Ngcobo J of the
Constitutional Court of South Africa
Prince v President of the Law
Society of the Cape of Good Hope
[2002] 2 SA 794 (Constitutional
Gover (n 2)[70] (calling for ‘[f]ormulation of international
guidelines concerning implementation of the international drug
control treaties
would address in detail the relationship between drug control efforts and human
rights’); Damon Barrett and
Recalibrating the Regime: The Need
for a Human Rights Based Approach to International Drug Policy
Foundation 2008); and Barrett (n
See, John Tobin,
‘Seeking to Persuade: A Constructive Approach to Human Rights Treaty
Interpretation’
(2010) 23 Harvard Human Rights Journal 201
(explaining the concept of internal system coherence, which requires that
‘the interpretive process should produce
a meaning for the right that is
informed by and consistent with the other provisions within the treaty’).
The right to be heard
‘applies to individual health-care decisions, as well as to
children’s involvement in the development
of health policy and
services’ Committee on the Rights of the Child,
General Comment No. 12:
The Right of the Child to be Heard
, UN Doc CRC/C/GC/12(20 July 2009)
(‘GC 12’), [98]. See also: See, e.g., Deborah Olszewski, Gregor
Burkhart and Alessandra
Children’s Voices: Experiences and
Perceptions of European Children on Drug and Alcohol Issues
2010); Anita Krug and others,
Experiences of Young People who Inject Drugs
and their Challenges in Accessing Harm Reduction: Report of Youth RISE Community
Consultations
(Youth RISE, UNAIDS
forthcoming).
CRC/C/MEX/CO/3, [67a]-[67(e)]. Note that the Committee has not defined a
“rights-based approach” but has generally
accepted a collaborative
and participatory approach: see generally, John Tobin, ‘Beyond the
Supermarket Shelf: Using a Rights
Based Approach to Address Children’s
Health Needs’
(2006) 14 International Journal of Children's Rights
UN Economic and Social
Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Resolution 44/5, ‘Prevention of
the Recreational and Leisure
Use of Drugs among Young People’ (2001) (CND
Res 44/5) [7].
12 (n 73) [91].
Cross reference to article
See generally,
Barrett and Gallahue (n 57).
See, e.g., Committee on the
Rights of the Child,
General Comment No.4: Adolescent Health and Development
in the Context of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child
, UN Doc No
CRC/GC/2003/4 (1 July 2003), [10], [23], [25], [26].; CO Guinea, CO
CRC/C/GIN/CO/2, [67]; CO Bosnia and Herzegovina, CRC/C/BIH//CO/2-4,
Cyprus, CRC/C/CYP/CO/3-4, [40]; CO Cambodia, CRC/C/KHM/CO/2-3, [55]; CO Belarus,
CRC/C/BLR/CO/3-4, [59].
UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter
Drug Problem
(adopted at the High Level Segment of the UN
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, 11-12 March 2009); UN Commission on Narcotic
Report of the 52
, UN Doc E/2009/28
- E/CN.7/2009/12 (1-2 December 2009) (‘2009 Political
Declaration’).
WHO online portal on drug dependence see
<www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/en/
>, accessed 21 August 2014
Importantly, the WHO has a treaty-mandated function under the Narcotics
Convention (art 3) and Psychotropic Substances Convention
(art 2) to assess
whether certain substances should be subject to international control. This
function is carried out by the WHO
Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (although
this in fact predates the Narcotics Convention) : see
<www.who.int/substance_abuse/right_committee/en/>
accessed 21 August
international drug control regime, progress on achieving agreed targets have
been regularly assessed, most prominently
with a high level review in 2009. In
the Political Declaration and Plan of Action that emerged from that process,
member states recognised
‘the need to increase investment in research and
evaluation in order to properly implement and assess, based on evidence,
policies and programmes for countering the world drug problem’:
see, 2009 Political Declaration (n 80) [37].
United Nations Economic and
Social Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Resolution 57/3, ‘Promoting
prevention of drug abuse
based on scientific evidence as an investment in the
well-being of children, adolescents, youth, families and communities’
(2014) (CND Res 57/3) [7] ‘
Member States, through
bilateral, regional and international cooperation, where appropriate, to
collaborate in the implementation
of the International Standards on Drug Use
Prevention, through the exchange of information and the provision of assistance,
technical assistance, upon request, with a view to enhancing their
ability to implement those Standards’; UN Office on Drugs
International Standards on Drug Use Prevention
(UN Office on Drugs and
Crime 2013).
See, e.g., CO
Cook Islands, CRC/C/COK/CO/1, [52(c)]; CO Thailand, CRC/C/THA/CO/3-4, [65]; CO
Iceland, CRC/C/ISL/CO/3-4, [45]; CO Seychelles,
CRC/C/SYC/CO/2-4, [57]; CO
Cameroon, CRC/C/CMR/CO/2, [58(e)];CO Guinea, CRC/C/15/Add100, [33]; CO Colombia,
CRC/C/15/Add137, [66].
e.g., CO Guinea, CO CRC/C/GIN/CO/2, [68]; CO Italy, CRC/C/ITA/CO/3-4, [54]; CO
Sweden, CRC/C/SWE/CO/4, [49(c)]; CO Belize, CRC/C/15/Add.252,
[55]; CO St
Vincent and Grenadines, CRC/C/15/Add184, [51(a)]; CO Mozambique,
CRC/C/15/Add172, [71(c)]; and CO Lithuania, CRC/C/15/Add146,
‘2009 Political
Declaration (n 80) , Plan of Action Part I.A.10 ‘Data collection
monitoring and evaluation’.
Catherine Cook and Adam Fletcher, ‘Youth Drug Use Research and the
Missing Pieces in the Puzzle: How can Researchers Support
the Next Generation of
Harm Reduction Approaches?’ in Damon Barrett (ed),
Children of the Drug
War: Perspectives on the Impact of Drug Policies on Young People
Press 2011).
See generally,
UN Drug Demand Reduction Principles (n 8) (’[d]emand reduction programmes
should be designed to address the needs
of the population in general as well as
those of specific population groups, special attention being paid to
youth’) [13];
Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction, UN Doc A/RES/54/132 (2
2000) [14] and [15]; 2009 Political Declaration (n 80) Plan of Action Part
A.I.7 ‘Targeting Vulnerable Groups and
Conditions’
See, e.g., CO Colombia,
CRC/C/COL/CO/3, [88] and CO Mozambique CRC/C/15/Add172, [71(a)].
See, e.g., CO Romania,
CRC/C/15/Add16, [9].
e.g., CO Greece, CRC/C/15/Add170,
See, e.g., CO Sierra
Leone, CRC/C/15/Add116, [83].
See, e.g., CO Djibouti, CRC/C/15/Add131, [56].
See generally American
Academy of Pediatrics Committeee on Substance Abuse, ‘Tobacco Alcohol and
Other Drugs: The Roles of
the Pediatrician in Prevention and Management of
Substance Abuse’ (1998) 101 Pediatrics
125 (providing list of 23
different risk factors).
Joseph Biederman and others, ‘Patterns of Alcohol and Drug Abuse in
Adolescents can be Predicted by Parental Substance Use
Disorders’ (2000)
106 Pediatrics
For example: Scott Hadland and others, ‘Childhood Sexual Abuse and Risk
for Initiating Injection Drug Use: A Prospective Cohort
Study’ (2012)55
Preventive Medicine 500; Cindy Feng and others, ‘Homelessness
Independently Predicts Injection Drug Use
Initiation Among Street-Involved Youth
in a Canadian Setting’ (2013) 52
Journal of Adolescent Health 499;
John Fagan and others, Opiate-dependent Adolescents in Ireland: A Descriptive
Study at Treatment
Entry’ (2008) 25 Irish Journal of Psychological
Medicine 46; Sudirman Nasir and Doreen Rosenthal, ‘The Social Context
Initiation into Injecting Drugs in The slums of Makassar’,
Indonesia’ (2009) 20 International Journal of Drug Policy
For a discussion see Damon
Barrett, Neil Hunt and Clauda Stoicescu,
Injecting Drug Use Among Under-18s:
A Snapshot Of Available Data
(Harm Reduction International
See 2009 Political
Declaration (n 80); and GA Res 68/197 ‘International co-operation against
the world drug problem’ UN
Doc No. A/RES/68/197,
GC 3 (n 54)
See, e.g., CO Togo,
CRC/C/TGO/CO/3-4, [55]-[56]; CO El Salvador, CRC/C/SLV/CO/3-4, [60]; CO Norway,
CRC/C/MNG/CO/3-4, [40]; CO Spain,
CRC/C/15/Add185, [39(a)]; CO Kyrgyzstan,
CRC/C/15/Add127, [58]; and CO South Africa, CRC/C/15/Add122,
See, e.g.,See,
e.g., CO Chile CRC/C/15/Add173 para
GC 15 (n 22)
In 2005, the
Committee recommended that the Philippines ‘[c]ombat drug and substance
abuse among children and adolescents,
for example by effectively implementing
the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002’ . The Act at that time
still included
the death penalty for drug offences: CO Philippines,
CRC/C/15/Add.25921, [81], [82(a)]. More recently, in its 2013 review of the
Russian Federation, the Committee welcomed the state party’s drugs
strategy, which has been widely criticised on public health
and human rights
grounds by HIV, drug policy and human rights groups due to its repressive nature
and denial of harm reduction interventions:
CO Russian Federation, UN Doc No
CRC/CO/RUS/4-5, [5(c)].
UN Drug Demand Reduction Principles (n 8) [11].
See, e.g. CO Togo,
CRC/C/TGO/CO/3-4, [56]; Co Croatia, CRC/C/15/Add.243,[54] CO Latvia,
CRC/C/15/Add142, [40]; and CO Palau, CRC/C/15/Add149,
It has been estimated
that it costs between €3.9 and €5.9 billion annually to keep people
in prison for drug offences
in the European Union: see, European Monitoring
Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction,
Estimating Expenditure on Drug Law
Offenders in Europe’ European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug
(EMCDDA 2014). In Australia, drug enforcement amounted to
almost two thirds of the national drug policy budget in 2009-2010, vastly
outweighing other components. Prevention received 9.5%. See, Alison Ritter, Ross
McLeod and Marian Shanahan,
Government Drug Policy Expenditure in Australia
2009/10: Drug Policy Modelling Program Monograph 24
(National Drug and
Alcohol Research Centre
above (n 56)
discussion, see, Aoife Nolan, ‘Economic and Social Rights, Budgets and the
Convention on the Rights of the Child’
(2013) 21 International Journal of
Children’s Rights 248. See also: European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and
Drug Addiction,
European Drug Report, 2014: Trends and Developments
(EMCDDA 2014) 70 (‘[m]any European countries continue to face the
consequences
of the recent economic downturn. The extent of fiscal consolidation
or austerity measures and their impact differs between European
countries. Among
the 18 countries with sufficient data to make a comparison, reductions were
reported in health and public order
and safety — the areas of government
spending where most drug-related public expenditure originates.
between 2009 and 2011, greater reductions in public expenditure were observed in
the health sector’
[Emphasis added]; ESC Committee CO Ukraine,
E/C.12/UKR/CO/6 [24] (Raising concerns about ‘the punitive approach taken
State party towards persons who use drugs, which results in high numbers
of such persons being imprisoned” and recommending
“Allocating
financial resources for the proper operation of opioid substitution therapy
(OST) and needle and syringe exchange
(NSE) programmes and increasing their
coverage, as well as ensuring better access to such programmes in prisons
programmes’).
e.g., CO Ukraine, CRC/C/UKR/CO/3-4, [61and CO Greece, CRC/C/15/Add170,
See, e.g., CO
Liberia, CRC/C/LBR/CO/2-4, [67(e)]; CO Togo, CRC/C/TGO/CO/3-4, [56]; CO Bahrain,
CRC/C/BHR/CO/2-3, [60]; CO Slovakia,
CRC/C/SVK/CO/2, [66]; CO Palau,
CRC/C/15/Add149, [57]; CO Benin, CRC/C/15/Add106, [31]; and CO Colombia,
CRC/C/15/Add137, [66].
This is standard wording for annual omnibus General Assembly resolutions
on drugs and in resolutions negotiated in Vienna. See, e.g.,
UN General Assembly
Resolution 67/193, ‘International Co-Operation against the World Drug
Problem’, UN Doc A/RES/67/193
(23 April 2013), [2]; UN Economic and Social
Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs, resolution 51/12, ‘Strengthening
Cooperation
between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
United Nations Entities for the Promotion of Human Rights in the Implementation
of the International Drug Control Treaties’ (March
UN Office for
Drug Control and Crime Prevention,
World Drug Report 2000
, (UNODCCP 2000)
See generally Neil
Penal Aspects of the UN Drug Conventions
(Kluwer Law
International, 2001).
criminalisation of personal use
is not included in any of the
treaties, though clearly criminalising possession for personal use leads to very
similar outcomes.
5(f) and (g).
See, e.g.,,
CO Armenia, CRC/C/15/ADD.225, [63]; CO Indonesia, CRC/C/15/ADD.223, [74];
CO Norway, CRC/C/15/Add.263, [44]; CO Denmark,
CRC/C/DNK/CO/3, [55]; CO Russian
Federation, CRC/C/RUS/CO/3, [77]; CO Maldives, CRC/C/MDV/CO/3, [88]; CO
Marshall Islands, CRC/C/MHL/CO/2,
[55]; CO Afghanistan, CRC/C/AFG/CO/1, [52(d)].
See in particular CO Ukraine, CRC/C/UKR/CO/4, [62(b)]: ‘[e]nsure that
laws do not impede access to such services, including by amending laws
that criminalise children for possession or use of
generally Hibell and others (n 39),; Lloyd Johnston and others,
the Future: National Survey Results on Drug Use 1975-2013
; (Institute for
Social Research, University of Michigan 2014); UN Office on Drugs and Crime,
World Drug Report 2014
(UN Office on Drugs and Crime
Jonathan Caulkins and Sara Chandler, ‘Long-Run Trends in Incarceration of
Drug Offenders in the United States’
(2006) 52 Crime and Delinquency 619
and Polly Radcliffe and Alex Stevens, ‘Are Drug Treatment Services only
for “Thieving Junkie Scumbags”? Drug Users
and the Management of
Stigmatised Identities’ (2008) 67 Social Science and Medicine
See, Trafficking
Convention, art 3(2).
See e.g., Arriola, Sebastián and others, case no 9080 (25 August 2009), A
891 XLIV (Argentina). See generally, Ari Rosmarin
and Niamh Eastwood,
Revolution: Drug Decriminalisation Policies in Practice across the Globe
(Release 2013).
International Narcotics Control Board,
Flexibility of Treaty Provisions as
Regards Harm Reduction Approaches: Decision 74/10
, prepared by the Legal
Affairs Section, UN Doc E/INCB/2002/W.13/SS.5 (30 September
See Stephen
After the War on Drugs: Blueprint for Regulation
(Transform Drug
Policy Foundation 2010).
United Nations Economic and Social Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
resolution 57/3, ‘Promoting prevention of drug abuse
based on scientific
evidence as an investment in the Well-Being of Children, Adolescents, Youth,
Families and Communities’
(March 2014) (stressing the importance of
‘taking into account human rights obligations in the implementation of
drug prevention
programmes’);
Stafford Unified School District#1 v
April Redding
(2009) 557 US 364 (US
Supreme Court) (relating to the strip
Review of the
Police Powers (Drug Detention Dogs) Act 2001, (June 2006) 146 (expressing
concern at searching of young people under 18 years of
age at railway
Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction,
Prevention of Drug Use
available at <www.emcdda.europa.eu/topics/prevention>, accessed 22 August
generally, European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction, Environmental
Strategies, available at
<www.emcdda.europa.eu/themes/prevention/environmental-strategies
>, accessed 22 August 2014.
See generally, European
Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction, ‘Universal
Prevention’, available at
h<www.emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index1578EN.html>,
accessed 22 August
See generally,
European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction ‘Selective
Prevention’, available at
<www.emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index1569EN.html
>, accessed 22 August 2014.
See generally, European
Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction,
Preventing Later Substance Use
Disorders in At-Risk Children and Adolescents: A Review of the Theory and
Evidence Base of Indicated
Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction, ‘European Drug Prevention
Quality Standards: A Manual for Prevention
Professionals’ (EMCDDA 2011)
UN Office on Drugs
and Crime (n ,83) 2.
‘European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction (n 129); UN
Office on Drugs and Crime (n ,83).
See, e.g., CO Guyana,
CRC/C/GUY/CO/2-4, [50(d)]; CO Guinea, CO CRC/C/GIN/CO/2, [65]; CO Albania,
CRC/C/ALB/CO/2-4, [63(b)]; CO Austria,
CRC/C/AUT/CO/3-4, [51]; CO Vietnam,
CRC/C/VNM/CO/3-4, [63(a)]; CO Benin, CRC/C/15/Add106, [31]; and CO Seychelles,
CRC/C/15/Add189,
A similar provision appears in art 20(1) of the Psychotropic Substances
Convention.
Rights Watch, “
Skin on the Cable”:
The Illegal Arrest,
Arbitrary Detention and Torture of People Who Use Drugs in Cambodia
Rights Watch 2010); CO Cambodia, CRC/C/KHM/CO/2, [55] and
cross-reference to full discussion in right to health
World Health
Organization,
Guidelines for the Psychosocially Assisted Pharmacological
Treatment of Opioid Dependence
(WHO 2009).
E.g., Howard Liddle,
Multidimensional Family Therapy for Adolescent Drug Abuse: Clinician’s
(Hazelden Publishing 2009); Howard Liddle, ‘Multidimensional
Family Therapy: A 12-Week Intensive Outpatient Treatment for Adolescent
Users’ (Center for Substance Abuse Treatment 2000).
UN Office on Drugs and
Crime and World Health Organization,
Principles of Drug Dependence Treatment:
Discussion Paper
(March 2008).
ibid 10, principle
See, Harm Reduction
International,
What is Harm Reduction? A Position Statement
Reduction International 2010).
See Neil Hunt and
others, ‘Evaluation of a Brief Intervention to Prevent Initiation into
Injecting’ (1998) 5 Drugs: Education,
Prevention and Policy 185; Jamie
Bridge, ‘Route Transition Interventions: Potential Public Health Gains
from Reducing or Preventing
Injecting’ (2010) 21 International Journal of
Drug Policy 125; Neil Hunt,
Break the Cycle Case Study: Albania
See UN Office on
Drugs and Crime and World Health Organization,
Opioid Overdose: Preventing
and Reducing Opioid Overdose Mortality
(2013); UN Economic and Social
Council, Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 55/7,‘Promoting Measures
to Prevent Drug Overdose,
in Particular Opioid Overdose’ (16 March
See, e.g., Peter
d’Abbs and Sarah Maclean,‘Volatile Substance Misuse: A Review of
Interventions’ (Commonwealth
of Australia 2008), 93-97.
Barrett, Hunt and
Stoicescu (n 97).
e.g., National Research Council,
Preventing HIV Infection among Injecting
Drug Users in High Risk Countries: An Assessment of the Evidence
Academic Press 2006); Neil Hunt,
A Review of the Evidence-Base for Harm
Reduction Approaches to Drug Use
(Forward Thinking on Drugs 2003); World
Health Organization,
Evidence for Action Technical Papers: Effectiveness of
Sterile Needle and Syringe Programming in Reducing HIV/AIDS among Injecting
(World Health Organization 2004); World Health Organization,
Evidence for Action Technical Papers: Effectiveness of Drug Dependence
Treatment in HIV Prevention
(World Health Organization
GC 3 (n 54),
The UN Commission on
Narcotic Drugs has never endorsed the term, with negotiations leading to lengthy
and often heated debates. In
2009 arguments over harm reduction led to a
breakdown in the traditional consensus in the Commission in Narcotic Drugs. See
Bewley-Taylor,
International Drug Control: Consensus Fractured
(Cambridge University Press 2012). The term “harm reduction” has
received the approval of the UN General Assembly in
the context of HIV: see, UN
General Assembly,
Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS
, UN Doc A/RES/60/262
(15 June 2006) [22]. This, however, was weakened in the 2011 political
declaration: cf UN Doc A/RES/65/277 (8
ESC Committee,
CO Tajikistan, E/C.12/TJK/CO/1, [70]; CO Ukraine, E/C.12/UKR/CO/5, [28]; CO
Poland, E/C.12/POL/CO/5, [26]; CO Kazakhstan,
E/C.12/KAZ/CO/1, [34]; CO
Mauritius, E/C.12/MUS/CO/4, [27]; CO Russian Federation, E/C.12/RUS/CO/5, [29]:
CO Ukraine, E/C.12/UKR/CO/6,
ESC Committee, CO
Mauritius, E/C.12/MUS/CO/4,
Paul Hunt, Special
Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the Highest Attainable Standard of
Physical and Mental Health,
Mission to Sweden
A/HRC/4/28/Add.2 (28 February 2007), [60]-[62]; Anand Grover, Special Rapporteur
on the Right of Everyone to the Highest
Attainable Standard of Physical and
Mental Health, ,
Mission to Poland
A/HRC/14/20/Add.3 (20 May 2010) [57]-[80] and (n
) [50]-[61]. In the context of prisons
and places of detention, the current and former special rapporteurs on torture
have also recommended
harm reduction interventions. See, Manfred Nowak, Special
Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment,
Mission to Kazakhstan
, UN Doc A/HRC/13/39/Add.3 (16 December
2009), [85(b)]; Manfred Nowak, Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel,
Degrading Treatment or Punishment
Promotion and
Protection of All Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, Including The Right To Development
, UN Doc A/HRC/10/44 (14 January
2009), [57]-[65]. Juan E. Méndez,
Report of the, Special Rapporteur
on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
UN Doc A/HRC/ 22/53 (1 February 2013),
Ukraine, CRC/C/UKR/CO/4, [59] and [60]; CO Austria,
CRC/C/AUT/CO/3-4,
[51]; CO Albania, CRC/C/ALB/CO/2-4, [63(b)]; CO Guinea, CRC/C/GIN/CO/2, [68]; CO
Guyana, CRC/C/GUY/CO/2-4, [50(d)];
GC 3 (n 54), [39]; Committee on the
Rights of the Child, GC 15 (n 22)
Harm Reduction
International (n 141)
See, e.g., CO Malta, CRC/C/MLT/CO/2 , [52]; CO Liberia, CRC/C/LBR/CO/2-4,
[67(d)]; CO Thailand, CRC/C/THA/CO/3-4, [65]; CO Australia,
CRC/C/15/Add.268,
[71]; CO St Vincent and Grenadines, CRC/C/15/Add184, [51(b)]; CO Spain,
CRC/C/15/Add185, [39(a)]. See also art
38(3) of the Narcotics Convention, which
requires states party to promote an understanding of the problems of drug abuse
general public if there is a risk that drug abuse will become
widespread.
overview of the evidence for various prevention measures see, European
Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction,
EMCDDA Insights: Prevention of
Substance Abuse
European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction,
Perspectives on
Drugs: Mass media Campaigns for The prevention of Drug Use in Young People
(EMCDDA 2013).
Spooner and Wayne Hall, ‘Preventing Drug Misuse by Young People: We Need
to Do More Than ‘Just Say No’’
(2002) Addiction 97,
Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction (n
See, e.g., CO Malta,
CRC/C/MLT/CO/2 , [52]; CO Liberia, CRC/C/LBR/CO/2-4, [56(d)]; CO Cook Islands,
CRC/C/COK/CO/1, [52(c)]; CO Iceland,
CRC/C/ISL/CO/3-4, [45], CO Central African
Republic, CRC/C/15/Add138,
UN Office on Drugs
and Crime, Guide to Implementing Family Skills Training for Drug Abuse
Prevention (UNODC 2009), 15-19.
See Krug (n 73).
See, e.g., CO Kazakhstan, CRC/C/KAZ/CO/3, [52]; CO Benin, CRC/C/15/Add106, [31];
CO Mozambique, CRC/C/15/Add172, [71(b)]; CO Switzerland,
CRC/C/15/Add182, [55].;
CO Lithuania, CRC/C/15/Add146, [50]; CO Monaco, CRC/C/15/Add158, [6]; CO
Finland, CRC/C/15/Add132, [56];
CO South Africa, CRC/C/15/Add122, [38]; and CO
Armenia, CRC/C/15/Add119, [53].
See, e.g., CO Poland,
CRC/C/15/Add194 , [43]; CO Togo, CRC/C/15/Add.83 [52].
See, e.g., Pim Cuijpers
‘Effective Ingredients of School-Based Drug Prevention Programs:. A
Systematic Review’ (2002)
27 Addictive Behaviours
Christopher Ringwalt and others, ‘An Outcome Evaluation of Project DARE
(Drug Abuse Resistance Education)’
(1991) 6 Health Education Research 327;
Marjorie Kanof letter to Senator Richard Durban of the United States Senate
dated 15 January
2003, entitled, ‘Youth Illicit Drug Use Prevention: DARE
Long-Term Evaluations and Federal Efforts to Identify Effective Programs’,
(US General Accounting Office 2003), available at <
www.gao.gov/new.items/d03172r.pdf>, accessed 22 August
UN Office on Drugs
School Based Education for Drug Abuse Prevention
(UN Office on
Drugs and Crime 2004) 16.
UN Office on Drugs and
Crime (n 83) 18.
Bonell and Adam Fletcher, ‘Improving School Ethos May Reduce Substance
Misuse and Teenage Pregnancy’
(2007) 334 British Medical Journal
ibid 24 and 25.
See Ryoko Yamaguchi,
Lloyd Johnston, and Patrick O’Malley, ‘Relationship between Student
Illicit Drug Use and School Drug-Testing
Policies’(2003) 73
of School Health 159 (large scale study in the US involving over 400 schools and
75,000 students showed no difference in rates
of use between schools that
employed such tests and those that did
Adam Fletcher
‘Drug Testing in Schools: A Case Study in Doing More Harm Than Good’
in Damon Barrett (ed)
Children of the Drug War: Perspectives on the Impact of
Drug Policies on Young People
(iDebate Press 2011)
e.g., CO Guyana, CRC/C/GUY/CO/2-4, [50(d)]; CO Albania, CRC/C/ALB/CO/2-4,
[64(b)]; CO Romania, CRC/C/ROM/CO/4, [71]; CO Sweden,
CRC/C/SWE/CO/4, [49(a)];
CO Bulgaria, CRC/C/BGR/CO/2,
Report of the
Secretariat Youth and Drugs: A Global Overview (n 8),
UN Office on
Drugs and Crime (n 83),
Worst Forms of Child
Labour Convention (adopted 17 June 1999, entered into force 19 November
(‘Worst forms of Child Labour Convention’).
cross reference
to commentary on art
reference to commentary on art
Tobin (n 72)
Human Rights Watch,
Hellish Work: Tobacco workers in Kazakhstan
Rights Watch 2010); Human Rights Watch,
Tobacco’s Hidden Children:
Hazardous child Labor in United States Tobacco Farming
(Human Rights Watch
See, e.g., CO
Antigua and Barbuda, CRC/C/15/Add.247, [62]; CO Colombia, CRC/C/COL/CO/3, [88];
CO Colombia, CRC/C/15/Add137, [65];
and CO Djbouti, CRC/C/15/Add131, [55].
See, e.g., CO Djibouti,
CRC/C/15/Add131, [56]; CO Colombia, CRC/C/15/Add137, [66]; and CO Russian
Federation, CRC/C/15/Add110, [62].
CO Colombia,
CRC/C/COL/CO/3, [82], [83], [88], and
E.g.,CO Saint
Lucia, CRC/C/15/Add.258, [68]; CO Netherlands (Netherlands Antilles),
CRC/C/15/ADD.186, [62] and [63]; CO Seychelles,
CRC/C/15/ADD.189; Costa
Rica,CRC/C/15/Add.266,.
See also, Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, art
See, Jessica Leinwand,
‘Punishing Horrific Crime: Reconciling International Prosecution with
National Sentencing Practices’
(2009) 40 Columbia Human Rights Law
Review799. 804 (‘retributive justice calls for rational and proportionate
sentences’),
citing Stuart Beresford, ‘Unshackling the Paper
Tiger—Sentencing Practices of the Ad Hoc International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda’
(2001) 1 International Criminal Law
, 41 (‘cardinal proportionality—which is concerned with the
magnitude of the penalty—requires that punishment is
not disproportional
to the gravity of the conduct’).
See, UN Women,
Progress of the World‘s Women, 2011-2012: In Pursuit of Justice
(UN Women 2011) 62-64 Eka Iakobishvili,
Cause for Alarm: The Incarceration
of Women for Drug Offences in Europe and Central Asia and the Need for
Legislative and Sentencing
(Harm Reduction International 2012); Pien
Metaal and Coletta Youngers (eds),
Systems Overload: Drug Laws and Prisons in
Latin America
(Washington Office on Latin America, Transnational Institute
For a discussion
of the principles to guide the sentencing of parents, see, John Tobin,
‘Courts and the Construction of Childhood:
A New Way of Thinking’ in
Michael Freeman (ed)
Childhood and the Law
(Oxford University Press 2012)
With regard to drug
use the evidence suggests no deterrent effect from criminal laws and
enforcement. See Samuel R. Friedman et al
‘Drug Arrests and Injection Drug
Deterrence’ 101
American Journal of Public Health
3 (2011) pp.
344-349; Louisa Degenhardt et al ‘Toward a Global View of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Cannabis, and Cocaine Use: Findings
from the WHO World Mental Health
Plos Medicine
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050141 (Published
1 July 2008); A 2014 multi-country study by the UK Home Office concluded that
is no apparent correlation between the ‘toughness’ of a
country’s approach and the prevalence of adult drug use.”
Drugs: International Comparators
See Fernando Henrique
Cardoso ‘Children and Drug Law Reform’ (2011) 23 International
Journal of Drug Policy 1, 1-2; Stephen
Rolles ‘How Legal Regulation of
Production and Trade Would Better Protect Children’ in Damon Barrett (ed)
Children of the Drug War: Perspectives on the Impact of Drug Policies on
Young People
(iDebate Press 2011)
CRC/C/15/Add.180, [51]. See also CO Guinea Bissau, CRC/C/15/Add.177, [54] and
[55]; CO Pakistan, CRC/C/PAK/CO/3-4, [90]
(‘conduct a survey to assess the
prevalence of child labour, including bonded and forced labour, and inform the
committee about
the findings in its next periodic report’); and CO
Romania, CRC/C/ROM/CO/4, [83(b)] (‘monitor the situation of children
involved in all forms of economic
exploitation’).
Jess Hunter Bowman, ‘Real Life on the Frontlines of Colombia’s Drug
War’ and Atal Ahmadzai and Christopher Konqui,‘In
the Shadows of the
Insurgency in Afghanistan: Child Bartering, Opium Debt and the War on
Drugs’, both in Damon Barrett (ed)
Children of the Drug War:
Perspectives on the Impact of Drug Policies on Young People
(iDebate Press
2011) 11 and 29, respectively.
Dowdney (n 12), 131 (referring to poverty and lack of access to the formal
work market).
Maldives, CRC/C/MDV/CO/3,
See for example
Dan Werb and others ‘Risks Surrounding Drug Trade Involvement Among
Street-Involved Youth’,
The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol
, 34: 810–820, 2008 (Discussing crack using homeless young
people’s involvement in selling
See, e.g.,,
Jennifer Wong and others,
Effectiveness of Street Gang Control Strategies: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Evaluation Studies
(Public Safety
Canada 2012); Adam Cooper and Catherine. L Ward,
Prevention, Disengagement
and Suppression: A Systematic Review of the Literature on Strategies for
Addressing Young People’s
Involvement in Gangs
, report to Resources
Aimed at Preventing Child Abuse and Neglect (RAPCAN) (Human Sciences Research
Council 2008).
Assembly Resolution 68/196, United Nations Guiding Principles on Alternative
Development, UN Doc A/RES/68/196 (11 February
ibid [p] and
See Coletta
UN Guiding Principles on Alternative Development: Opportunity
, Open Society Foundations (23 November 2012), available at
<www.opensocietyfoundations.org/voices/un-guiding-principles-alternative-development-opportunity-lost>
accessed 25 August 2014.
Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, Manfred Nowak
, UN Doc No A/HRC/10/44, 10
January 2009, para 51.
Paul Hunt, ‘Human Rights, Health and Harm Reduction: States’ Amnesia
and Parallel Universes’, Rolleston Oration,
19th International Harm
Reduction conference, Barcelona, 11 May
In 2013 the UN
General Assembly agreed to a special session on drugs, the first since 1998, due
to concerns raised primarily by Latin
American states about state security,
pubic health and the human costs associated with drug enforcement: GA RES 67/193
‘International
co-operation against the world drug problem’, UN Doc
No A/RES/67/193, 2013.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (779 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter