URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:52:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mathews, Ben --- "Duties To Report Child Sexual Offences: A New Era In Australian Criminal Law" [2021] CanLawRw 13; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 54
Duties To Report Child Sexual Offences: A New Era In
Australian Criminal Law
Ben Matthews
In July 2021, Queensland became the most recent Australian State to enact a
duty in criminal law requiring all adults in the community
to report child
sexual offences to police. These laws constitute significant public policy
interventions to better identify cases
of child sexual abuse, which also promote
both national and international policy imperatives to protect children. In
addition, by
creating a positive duty in the criminal law, the laws embody an
approach to responsible citizenship which extends the traditional
parameters of
criminal law liability, but is justified in doing so given the characteristics
and gravity of sexual offences against
children and their typical
non-disclosure. This article conducts a comprehensive doctrinal and comparative
analysis of these criminal
law duties to identify common elements, and
differences in nature and scope. Adopting a reform orientation, and using rule
principles of clarity and consistency as an evaluative lens, the article
will argue that there is a need for a uniform approach across
Territories, and will identify areas requiring reform in jurisdictions that have
already enacted legislation, and optimal
approaches for legislative design in
I Introduction
Child sexual abuse and the national and international policy agenda
Child sexual abuse is both a widespread problem, and one which resists ready
identification by social welfare and criminal justice
agencies. Both
internationally and within Australia, studies have found concerningly high
prevalence. A global meta-analysis found
approximately 12.7% of all children
experienced sexual abuse.
comprehensive Australian study to date found 33.6% of women and 15.9% of men
experienced non-penetrative CSA, and 12.2%
of women and 4.1% of men experienced
penetrative CSA.
Another Australian
study found 1.1 per cent of participants reported sexual abuse by a
A study in Victoria found
14.0% of girls and 4.6% of boys reported contact
Alongside its frequency, an
invidious problem is the secrecy and non-disclosure of child sexual abuse. Those
who inflict sexual abuse
rarely disclose their criminal conduct, and research
across cultures has found that nondisclosure and delayed disclosure of child
sexual abuse by survivors is
and is influenced by
multiple factors.
relation to sexual abuse inflicted in both non-institutional settings involving
family members or other known acquaintances,
and in institutional settings,
empirical evidence has conclusively shown delayed disclosure and non-disclosure
are common. For example,
Final Report
, Australia’s Royal
Commission Into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual
found that of those who
disclosed as adults, and it took
these individuals an average of 31.9 years to
, the Royal Commission found that out of 1677 people engaged in
private sessions, it took an average of 22 years for those who disclosed
institutional child sexual abuse to be able to do
Moreover, it is known that
where disclosures do occur, they are less often made to criminal justice
National and international policy agendas in recent years have witnessed
increased recognition of the importance of both sexual abuse
prevention and
early responses. Within Australia, multiple inquiries at State and Territory
level have considered these policy imperatives.
These have occurred in multiple
the Northern
Queensland,
and perhaps most
decisively for the purposes of this article, in
Nationally, over its
tenure from 2012-17, the Royal Commission considered child sexual abuse within a
range of organisational settings
spanning education, religion, sport, culture,
recreation and the arts, and considered multiple legal systems including
criminal law
and the various dimensions of its responsive
As will be discussed,
these inquiries have spurred new legal and policy initiatives, and supported the
development and ongoing expansion
of existing initiatives, to better prevent and
identify cases of child sexual abuse.
At the international level, the last three decades have seen sustained and
gradually intensifying policy recognition of the importance
of child abuse
prevention. In 1989, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
established clear imperatives to better
promote and protect children’s
safety and development, including through early detection of sexual
Article 19 requires
States parties to take all appropriate measures, including legislative measures,
to protect children from all
form of, including sexual abuse. Most relevantly
for this analysis, article 19(2) states that these protective measures should
procedures for the “identification, reporting, referral,
investigation, treatment and follow-up of instances of child
maltreatment”.
has further specific emphasis on the protection of children from sexual abuse,
and requires States parties to “protect
the child from all forms of sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse”. In 2011, the Committee on the Rights of
the Child provided
further guidance on
the nature and application of
article 19.
In 2015, the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (‘SDGs’) urged all nations to
eradicate child maltreatment,
and require governments to report on their
In particular, SDG
Target 16.2 aims to end abuse, exploitation, trafficking, and all forms of
violence against and torture of children;
Target 5.2 aims to eliminate all forms
of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres,
including trafficking
and sexual and other types of exploitation; and Target 5.3
aims to eliminate all harmful practices, including child marriage and
genital mutilation.
Ground-breaking developments are emerging in other legal and scholarly
settings. Other legal responses have continued to develop to
better respond to
cases of child sexual abuse. In the criminal law context, new offences have been
created by all States and Territories
to prohibit online child sexual abuse and
exploitation,
Safety Act 2021
(Cth) was recently enacted to better regulate online content
including by imposing obligations on both individuals and internet service
providers. In the civil law context, statutes of limitation have been abolished
for civil compensation claims.
Progress continues in developing agreement about the conceptual nature of child
sexual abuse.
philosophers such as Martha Nussbaum have turned their attention to this
problem, and have declared child sexual abuse is
a form of interpersonal
violence requiring strong policy
intervention.
Accordingly, the
new criminal law reporting duties can be understood as part of a wave of
regulatory responses to a major social
problem that for too long has lacked
adequate legal frameworks.
Legal innovations in Australian criminal law: ongoing
State and Territory inquiries have been accompanied by intensified public
discourse and deepened understanding of the scale and gravity
of child sexual
abuse, its harmful consequences, and its clandestine and undisclosed nature. As
a result of this new sensitisation
to the problem, several Australian State and
Territory governments have in recent years adopted a legal innovation,
introducing new
criminal law provisions which impose a positive obligation on
all adults to report to police their awareness of cases of child sexual
This expanding initiative is remarkable given the traditional scope of the
criminal law is to punish acts, rather than omissions,
and its reluctance to
impose positive duties on third parties.
Since States and Territories have the legislative power to create their own
criminal laws, and since this new context continues to
evolve, the legal context
across the nation raises important questions about the nature and application of
the criminal law duties,
and their consistency across jurisdictions. Within the
criminal law setting, citizens need to know what their duties are, and this
applies all the more to adults who commonly deal with children in various
professional contexts. In addition, well-established rule
of law tenets make it
clear that the law must be intelligible, clear and
predictable,
and unless there
are clear jurisdiction-specific reasons which justify different approaches, it
is desirable for State and Territory
laws about the same topic to be both
soundly framed, and consistent.
Scholarly research to date in this field has considered the application of
some of these duties in specific contexts. For example,
research has considered
the application of the Victoria and New South Wales provisions to religious
confession,
and other work has
considered its application in contexts of researchers conducting epidemiological
and medical
consultations with adolescents engaged in consensual peer sexual
Research has also
outlined the nature of duties to report child sexual abuse in different branches
of law, spanning criminal law,
child protection law, and tort
However, the literature to
date does not include a detailed analysis devoted to the nature and application
of these duties in the
Australian context, with coverage of all enactments
including the recently commenced Queensland law. In addition, no analysis to
date has adopted a reform orientation, employing analysis to inform future legal
development.
Accordingly, this analysis is significant for all Australian States and
Territories. The article extends previous scholarship to first
comprehensive doctrinal and comparative analysis of these criminal law duties to
identify both their common elements, and
differences in nature and
Then, informed by the
socio-legal context, and using principles of clarity and consistency as an
evaluative lens, the article argues
there is a need for a uniform approach
across States and Territories, and identifies areas requiring reform in those
that have already enacted legislation, and directions for
legislative drafting in those yet to do so. Findings and recommendations
relevant for all Australian States and Territories, and may be informative for
other common law jurisdictions.
II Legal duties in criminal law to report
designated criminal child sexual offences
Jurisprudential background and Victoria’s landmark
In criminal jurisprudence, law is generally concerned with prohibiting
specified acts rather than punishing omissions. However, it
is accepted that in
certain circumstances, the criminal law can justifiably impose duties and
criminalise omissions.
articulated by Ashworth, the normative argument for criminalising specified
omissions has three bases. First, based on the principle
of urgency, the law may
impose criminal liability in situations of sufficient individual or social
urgency involving fundamental
human interests or social values. Second, based on
the principle of the priority of life, the law recognises the importance of each
individual person and their right to life and survival. This right to survival
includes the right not to be subjected to degrading
treatment. This principle is
afforded such stature that the criminal law may legitimately criminalise an
individual’s omission
to take protective action on behalf of another, in
special circumstances where it is reasonable to require that individual to act
to preserve this right. Third, the principle of opportunity and capacity states
that where the first two conditions are met, it is
legitimate to impose a duty
on a person who has both the opportunity to give assistance to another –
here, for example, through
physical presence in witnessing the act, or
personally receiving a disclosure from the victim with sufficient details)
the capacity to give that assistance, such as by making a report to
In Australian law, concealment offences had existed before the recent
enactment of the duties to report child sexual abuse discussed
here. However,
they were not widely present, and were of narrow scope in that they required an
element of personal gain.
example, Victoria’s
Crimes Act 1958
s 326 contained an element of
personal benefit. Similarly, in Queensland, the offence of compounding an
indictable offence in the
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 133 epitomised
this conceptual approach:
Any person who asks for, receives, or obtains, or agrees or attempts to
receive or obtain, any property or benefit of any kind for
himself, herself or
any other person, upon any agreement or understanding that the person will
compound or conceal an indictable
offence, or will abstain from, discontinue, or
delay, a prosecution for an indictable offence, or will withhold any evidence
is guilty of an indictable offence.
The problem with this approach was that where there was no clear and
demonstrable personal benefit, the ambit of the duty was reduced.
This had the
effect that not only was it difficult to prosecute cases of institutional
concealment – which while often containing
intangible benefits, rarely if
ever contained concrete property or benefit such as financial gain – it
was also a narrowly
cast duty to report which did not have at its core a
fundamental obligation imposed on citizens to take positive action to assist
victim of crime. It did not respond to the fundamental human interests and
societal values at stake, and it did not recognise each
individual’s right
to freedom from degrading treatment.
In addition, a problem with the former conventional concealment offences was
that in order to secure a conviction, a high degree of
knowledge had to be
proved beyond reasonable doubt, and in the context of child sexual abuse this
was not appropriate. The unsuitability
of this level of knowledge would be
expressly noted in the New South Wales Parliament when its amending legislation
was introduced.
The difficulty
of securing a conviction under the old scheme became starkly evident in 2018
when a conviction was
overturned.
Victoria’s landmark change
The landmark legislative reform occurred as a result of a State government
inquiry into institutional child abuse. The key breakthrough
occurred in 2013,
when Victoria’s
Betrayal of Trust Inquiry
identified wide-scale
sexual abuse of children within non-government organisations, persisting over
decades and continuing to the
present era, and cover-ups of that abuse by people
who knew about it. The Inquiry acknowledged evidence of children’s highly
vulnerable position, the severe and lasting effects of sexual abuse, and the
clandestine nature of offending and susceptibility to
calculated concealment and
other lack of remedial action. These findings animated recommendations for the
creation of new reporting
duties in criminal law, applied to all adults in the
community, to bring cases of designated types of child abuse to the attention
police, even when such close and direct personal gain was not present. As a
result, the
Betrayal of Trust Inquiry
recommended amendments to the
Crimes Act 1958
, to remove the element of personal gain from
this prior version of the concealment
In making its
recommendation, the
Betrayal of Trust Inquiry
also recognised the
importance of reporting child sexual offences to the police, even in situations
where the victim does not wish
to pursue the matter through the criminal justice
system. The reason for this was because disclosing the information to police
corroborate the account of another victim, or encourage other victims to
come forward.
This recommendation would be substantially accepted by the Victorian
Government, which passed the
Crimes Amendment (Protection of Children) Act
(Vic) to create an entirely new offence provision in s 327. The second
reading of the amending legislation – the
Crimes Amendment (Protection of
Children) Bill 2014
(Vic) – clearly observed the influence of the
Inquiry’s recommendations and their context. The newly enacted s 327
was designed to create a broader safety net to detect cases of child
sexual abuse, by creating a community-wide obligation to bring
known cases to
The duty therefore
requires all adults who have knowledge or belief that child sexual abuse has
been committed to report this to
the police. The
Crimes Act 1958
requires an adult in Victoria or elsewhere ‘who has information
that leads the person to form a reasonable belief that a sexual
offence has been
in Victoria
against a child under the age of 16’
by an adult aged 18 or over to ‘disclose that information to a police
officer ...
unless the person has a reasonable excuse for not doing so’.
Failure to report constitutes an offence punishable by a maximum
imprisonment. Notably, and in contrast with the provisions that would be enacted
subsequently in other jurisdictions,
the duty in Victoria is expressed to apply
to adults both inside and outside
This provision
commenced on 27 October 2014.
Subsequent enactments in other Australian jurisdictions would take a broadly
similar approach, although as seen below there would
be some distinct variations
between the provisions. These developments were supported by the Victorian
breakthrough, but were also
a response to a similar duty recommended in 2017 by
the Royal Commission. Although its recommendation was restricted to persons in
institutional settings, as a result of terms of reference, the duty recommended
by the Royal Commission was of similar
It was underpinned by
the gravity of child sexual abuse, its susceptibility to active concealment and
turning a blind eye, and an
acknowledgment of children’s heightened
vulnerability and less capacity to take steps to protect themselves, leaving
them particularly
in need of active assistance and protection by adults. The
Royal Commission also recommended the duty to report should not be subject
any exemption for religious confession. In Queensland, where the new reporting
duty most recently commenced, the second reading
of the Criminal Code (Child
Sexual Offences Reform) and Other Legislation Amendment Bill (Qld) reflected the
powerful influence of
the Royal Commission’s
recommendations.
Concerns that the duty may be expressed too broadly may be assuaged by
pointing to the conventional features of the criminal justice
system that
protect the fair trial rights of the accused. A clear and strong body of
evidence would be required to underpin a viable
prosecution. In addition, such
concerns may be allayed by the conventional control on decisions to prosecute.
Official prosecution
guidelines in each State and Territory contain a
fundamental principle that a prosecution may only proceed if there is a
prospect of a conviction; and if a prosecution is in the public
Accordingly, the State and Territory amendments to criminal law reporting
duties have expanded those previously existing concealment
offences beyond their
original narrower scope – directed more towards preventing active
concealment of offences for personal
gain – to a broader application with
more prosocial motivation to assist detection of serious crimes, regardless of
any personal
gain or vested interest. In addition, in most but not all cases,
their temporal scope is wide, normally extending to knowledge or
belief about
cases of child abuse obtained after commencement of the legislation, but which
can relate to abuse occurring before
commencement.
Expansion to other States and Territories
After Victoria’s legislative expansion, other States and Territories
considered their own reforms and from 2014 to date have
continued a slow albeit
steady movement in which the laws have gradually spread to four other
As will be seen,
because the Northern Territory has a hybrid reporting duty (combining elements
of a child welfare and criminal
law model), it could be concluded that as of
September 2021, six of the eight States and Territories have some version of a
law reporting duty for child sexual offences, although five of these
have been designed intentionally to be tailored to this specific
criminal law
In chronological sequence, the commencement of these laws spread from
Victoria in 2014 to New South Wales (31 August 2018), the Australian
Territory (1 September 2019), Tasmania (2 October 2019), and Queensland (5 July
2021). Five of the eight States and Territories
have therefore now enacted a
duty in criminal law requiring reports to police of specified significant child
abuse offences, with
all of these including designated child sexual
In Victoria, New
South Wales, Tasmania, the Australian Capital Territory, and Queensland, the
duty requires all adults to report
knowledge or a reasonable belief about
specified sexual offences. It can be noted that the provisions in New South
Wales and Tasmania
also extend to specified physical assaults, although further
discussion of this is beyond the scope of this article and warrants
None of the duties
apply to other types of child maltreatment, namely emotional abuse, neglect, or
exposure to domestic violence.
To date, no legislation has been passed or
introduced in South Australia or Western Australia, and no specific criminal law
has been introduced in the Northern
Comparative analysis: Victoria, New South Wales, ACT, Tasmania,
Common elements
The essential nature of the duty is similar in each of the five jurisdictions
with dedicated criminal law provisions. The provisions
generally require an
adult who believes a sexual offence has been committed against a child to
disclose the information supporting
that belief to police. The key difference
between the jurisdictions is evident in the choice of whether or not to
incorporate an
objective element as well as a subjective approach. This was
consciously done in New South Wales, for example, to “ensure a
cannot use wilful blindness to escape the application of the
and Queensland
has also adopted this model in an indication that lessons have been learned from
the different approaches taken to
date in different States. Any possible doubt
that the duty in this form has this broad application would be resolved quite
through the application of settled principles of statutory
interpretation so that its broader ambit would remain
undisturbed.
The core nature of
the duty to report in each jurisdiction is set out in Table 1.
Table 1 Core nature of the criminal law duty to report child sexual
offences to police
State / Territory
Core nature of duty to report
An adult ‘who has information that leads the person to form a
reasonable belief that a sexual offence has been committed in
against a child under 16 by a person over 18 ... must disclose that information
to a police officer
An adult who knows, believes, or reasonably ought to know that a child
abuse offence has been committed ... and who knows, believes,
or reasonably
ought to know that he or she has information that might be of material
assistance in securing the apprehension of the
offender or the prosecution or
conviction of the offender [must] bring that information to the attention of a
member of the NSW Police
An adult must report ‘information that leads to the person reasonably
believing that a sexual offence has been committed against
a child’ to a
police officer
An adult must report ‘information that leads the person to form a
reasonable belief that an abuse offence has been committed
against another
person who was a child at the time of the alleged offence’ to a police
s 229BC(1)-(2)
An adult who ‘gains information that causes the adult to believe on
reasonable grounds, or ought reasonably to cause the adult
to believe, that a
child sexual offence is being or has been committed against a child [aged under
16]’ by an adult ... must
disclose the information to a police
There are other common elements. These include: the duty only applies to
adults, not to minors;
does not apply where it is known that the situation has already been reported to
the duty does not apply
where there otherwise is a lawful claim of right or
the duty does not
apply where the person reasonably fears that disclosing the information would
endanger the safety of another person
other than the alleged
and those who make
reports are afforded protections from liability in civil, criminal and
administrative processes.
In addition, the provisions include a number of exceptions to be able to
respond to exceptional circumstances and acknowledge that
in some circumstances
a higher ethical value may merit priority. There are two main exceptions, which
are present in some form in
each of the five legal models. First, the duty is
rendered inapplicable in situations where the person with the knowledge or
reasonably believes the survivor of the sexual offence does not wish it
to be reported to police. This exception serves the purpose
of privileging the
survivor’s autonomy and privacy over other values underpinning the
provisions, such as positive beneficence.
Second, the duty is expressed to be
inapplicable if the person with the knowledge or belief has a reasonable excuse
for not reporting
it. However, the scope of the exceptions is not consistent
between jurisdictions, and the nature of the reasonable excuse exception
it is of uncertain application; these variations will be considered below.
Dimensions of inconsistency
Despite these similar broad parameters, there are several dimensions of
inconsistency. Some of these are about potentially more minor
matters, but
others are more substantive. These key dimensions of inconsistency are
summarised in Table 2, and discussed in further
detail below.
Table 2 Key dimensions of inconsistency
State or Territory
Age of survivor / victim
Exclusion where reasonable belief survivor / victim does not wish report to
Exclusion by reasonable excuse
Expressly applies duty to religious confession
Applies only to victims born on or after 28 Oct 1998
Yes (if victim is 16 or over) + victim request
Yes – but not exhaustively defined
Applies to victims of all ages
Yes (if victim is 18 or over)
Yes – but not exhaustively defined
Applies to victims of all ages
Yes (if victim is 18 or over)
Yes – but not exhaustively defined
Applies to victims of all ages
Yes (if victim is 18 or over)
Yes – but not exhaustively defined
Applies to victims of all ages
Yes (if victim is 18 or over)
Yes – but not exhaustively defined
(a) Penalties and prosecution
The penalties for failure to report vary, ranging from 2 years in the ACT, 3
years in Queensland and Victoria, and 2 years or 5 years
in New South Wales
(depending on the penalty for the index
In addition, three of
the five jurisdictions – Victoria, New South Wales and Tasmania –
expressly enable prosecution
to be commenced only with the approval of the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
This suggests a perceived need for a control on inappropriate prosecutions, but
has the potential to create uncertainty and
inconsistency.
The ACT and
Queensland lack this mechanism, which may suggest a more liberal approach to
prosecution. The ACT and Queensland should
add this requirement for DPP
approval. Ideally, penalties should also be harmonised.
(b) Religious confession
A further area of inconsistency concerns the application of the duty to
knowledge or belief generated through religious confession.
Here, four of the
five jurisdictions expressly state the duty does
Victoria is alone in not
extending the duty this far, perhaps reflecting its earlier passage, uninformed
by the Royal Commission’s
recommendation in relation to this feature.
Victoria should amend its legislation to apply the duty to situations where the
or reasonable belief was gained during confession.
Application to different settings
Three jurisdictions apply the duty to report child sexual offences both to
situations involving two minors aged under 16, and to situations
involving a
minor and an adult. In contrast, Victoria only applies the duty to situations
involving a minor and an adult. Accordingly,
Victoria’s duty is narrower,
perhaps out of a concern that otherwise it may inappropriately embrace
consensual adolescents’
sexual activity. However, much child sexual abuse
does occur between adolescents, suggesting this limitation is undesirable.
should amend its legislation to apply the duty to situations involving
Age of the person who was the victim/survivor of the sexual
is alone in expressly limiting the duty to cases of child
sexual abuse that have occurred only after a recent point in time. A network
provisions determines the relevant
As a result,
Victoria’s duty applies only if the victim was born on or after 28 October
1998, dramatically confining its scope.
In contrast, the other jurisdictions do
not impose this restriction. The clear benefit of not applying a limit is so
that situations
of previously undisclosed serious criminal sexual offending can
be detected, which may not only enable prosecution of offences involving
immediate survivor, but also of other cases involving the same offender and
other victims. The disadvantage may be discerned
as potentially leading to a
large volume of reports to police, but to date this has not been the documented
experience in other States,
and in any event it is arguable that police are
equipped to make judgments about the appropriate management of any such calls.
Victoria should amend its legislation to apply the duty to situations
regardless of the victim’s age.
Exception based on reasonable belief the person does not wish the
information to be reported
An important exception exists where the person with the designated state of
mind reasonably believes the person does not want the
information reported to
police. This exception exists in all five States and Territories. In New South
Wales and Queensland, this
basis for not reporting is designated as a species of
a ‘reasonable
but elsewhere it
is a separate exception.
The exception is similar across jurisdictions, although there are two
important differences in scope. First, in Victoria, it applies
to all alleged
victims aged 16 or over, whereas elsewhere it applies only to those aged 18 and
over. This age difference creates
inequality in recognising adolescent capacity
and autonomy. Jurisdictions that have limited this exception to those aged 18
have seldom explained in detail the reason for justifying this narrower
However, Victoria
justified its preference for a broader model privileging 16 year olds’
expressed preference based on an acknowledgment
of developmental capacity and
the age at which adolescents are legally empowered to make other important
This aspect of the
law presents a significant policy choice. The Victorian position is justified by
developmental evidence about
the cognitive capacity of 16 year
and it is true that at
this age adolescents possess a number of other legal powers including the
capacity to consent to medical
On balance, it is
arguable that Victoria’s position is more consistent with both
developmental science, and creates more coherence
across legal domains.
Accordingly, the better view would seem to be that the application of this
exception to 16 year olds should
be adopted in other
Second, Victoria is alone in applying this exception only if the information
came from the victim of the offence
the victim requested the
information not be disclosed.
There are two additional differences here, related to the source of the
information, and the direct request. To consider the “direct
request” difference first: it can be seen that while Victoria applies this
exception more broadly based on the survivor’s
age – 16, rather than
18 – there is an additional control on this exception requiring the
survivor to make a direct request.
In Victoria, this exception would only apply
where a survivor of a child sexual offence aged at least 16 stated she or he did
want it reported to police. In contrast, in the other four jurisdictions,
this excuse is engaged if the person with the knowledge
or reasonable belief
simply has a reasonable belief that the person does not wish the information to
be reported,
without requiring a
victim’s direct request. Therefore, this exception could apply in the
other States and Territories in a
broader range of circumstances where the
person was aged 18 or over, and a reasonable belief was formed even without such
statement from the victim. This could occur, for example, if the victim
made indirect statements capable of supporting a reasonable
belief they did not
wish the information to be reported. Other examples include situations where it
is clear that the offender has
died, or has already been prosecuted, or where
the person otherwise makes it sufficiently clear they do not otherwise want to
the matter. It would also apply of course if the victim/survivor
expressly stated this preference.
The advantage of Victoria’s narrower approach is that it is clear and
avoids uncertainty of application. It also operates alongside
the general
provision which retains the openness of the reasonable excuse exception which
does not exhaustively confine its scope.
The disadvantage of Victoria’s
narrower approach is that for this exception to be engaged, it requires the
victim to make a
direct statement when she or he may not wish to do so, and it
may be otherwise clear that they do not wish it to be reported. The
approach in the other jurisdictions, where the victim’s direct request is
not required to engage this specific category
of exception, has the advantage of
not requiring the victim to make this statement or choice. However, the
disadvantage of the broader
approach is that it may create uncertainty about the
scope of this exception, since it is unclear when such a belief will be
reasonable.
This aspect of the law is not susceptible of a simple solution. It
is arguable that requiring the victim’s direct request is
preferable, in
that it avoids undesired dilution of the duty and even calculated attempts to
avoid its operation. However, what may
be a more desirable approach is to
clarify through the use of legislative textual examples the types of situation
in which such a
reasonable belief will exist, and to specify that where any
doubt exists about whether the exception operates, the duty applies.
Exception based on a ‘reasonable excuse’ for not
An important exception applies where the person with the designated state of
mind has a ‘reasonable excuse’ for not reporting
it to police. This
general exception acknowledges that there are some circumstances where it is
legitimate for the duty to be rendered
inapplicable for reasons that are either
normative (for example, where a competing ethical interest should take
priority), or simply
practical (for example, where the information has already
been reported and there is a need to avoid duplication and administrative
All five legislatures have incorporated the reasonable excuse core
but have adopted
different approaches to enumerate specific examples of when such a reasonable
excuse will exist. In all States and
Territories, the provisions clearly state
they do not exhaustively define the concept of a ‘reasonable
In Victoria, for
example, s 327(2) provides a non-exhaustive
definition,
and includes
specific situations where a reasonable excuse exists, including where the person
believes on reasonable grounds that
the information has already been disclosed
to police and the person has no further relevant
information.
Other States and
Territories adopt a similar approach, while not all provisions delineate these
same examples (Table 3).
Table 3 Reasonable excuse provisions
Core reasonable excuse
Belief on reasonable grounds the information is already known to
Belief on reasonable grounds the information has otherwise been
Reasonable grounds to believe reporting would endanger the safety of
another person (subjective)
this belief is reasonable in the
circumstances (objective)
s 327(3)(b)
s 327(3)(b)
s 327(3)(a)
Both subjective and objective
s 316A(2)(a)
s 316A(2)(b)–(c)
s 316A(2)(d)
Partial: subjective only
s 6AA(2)(g)
s 66AA(2)(c)
s 66AA(2)(d)
s 66AA(2)(b)
Partial: subjective only
s 105(4)(c)
s 105(4)(c)
s 105A(4)(a)
Partial: subjective only
s 229BC(4)(a)
s 229BC(4)(b)
s 229BC(4)(b)
Both subjective and objective
It can be observed that the concept of a ‘reasonable excuse’ is
used in a range of legislative settings. Its conceptual
breadth provides it with
an advantage of leaving open the categories of case where it can be applied;
however, this also has the
disadvantage of uncertainty.
The High Court of Australia has acknowledged that the term ‘reasonable
excuse’ is a common legislative
However, it is also
clear from High Court jurisprudence that in each legislative instance, its
proper construction depends on the
purpose of the provision and the
circumstances of the case. Accordingly, decisions concerning what constitutes a
reasonable excuse
in one setting do not provide guidance in other
The majority of the
High Court in
confirmed that when legislatures enact defences
such as ‘reasonable excuse’ they intend to give the courts the power
to determine their content.
residual flexibility is useful, although arguably wherever possible the
legislature should incorporate as much clear guidance
as possible and avoid
requiring recourse to judicial consideration.
(i) The enumerated category of reasonable exception based on
endangering a person’s safety
This enumerated category raises a particularly important issue. Here,
comparative analysis reveals that there is a key difference
in approach. In
three jurisdictions – New South Wales, the ACT, and Tasmania – a
subjective approach is employed, so
that the reasonable excuse exception can be
relied upon by the person based on a claim that subjectively, the person had
grounds to believe that reporting would endanger the safety of either
themselves or another person (other than the alleged offender).
This approach
gives broader scope to the application of the reasonable excuse concept in this
domain of personal endangerment since
it relies only on the person’s own
state of mind and claim that this belief was reasonable. In contrast, two
– Victoria and Queensland – adopt a two-limbed test
that combines a subjective and an objective element. This requires
that not only
does the person claim that subjectively, they had reasonable grounds to believe
that reporting would endanger the safety
of another person (other than the
alleged offender), but also that this belief is reasonable in the circumstances,
which imports
an objective test. This two-limbed test has the advantage of
avoiding unduly limiting the operation of the duty, and of ruling out
prospect that a person could calculatingly avoid compliance with the duty based
on a specious claim of potential danger to another
person. Because of the nature
of the duty and the problems it is designed to overcome, the two-limbed test is
preferable. It is potentially
arguable that even the one limbed test imports a
degree of objectivity simply by use of the concept of reasonable grounds.
a response to this may plausibly argue that it still provides too much
leeway for inappropriate failure to
Accordingly, the
two-limbed response is preferable, and New South Wales, the ACT, and Tasmania
should amend this enumerated category
of reasonable excuse to adopt the
two-limbed test.
(ii) A note on consensual adolescent sexual activity
One clear example of a situation common to all Australian jurisdictions where
a person may clearly have a reasonable excuse for not
reporting a child sexual
offence is where it is known that two adolescent peers in a genuinely consensual
romantic relationship are
engaging in developmentally normative sexual activity
without any element of coercion. In some jurisdictions, where the age of consent
is 16, sexual activity between two 15 year olds for example may technically
constitute an offence. However, such activity is clearly
not the object of the
criminal law reporting provisions, is not properly classed as sexual abuse, and
does not warrant intervention
by police or the criminal justice
The reasonable excuse
exception, properly applied, would serve to exclude this type of activity from
the duty to report. However,
its conceptual openness combined with the lack of
the acknowledgment of this type of activity as an enumerated category of a
that falls within the excuse, is a weakness and can particularly
present difficulties for adults who deal with adolescents and who
may develop
knowledge of such activity, such as medical practitioners and
Arguably, a useful
amendment would therefore be to add this activity as an enumerated example
falling within the reasonable excuse
E The Northern Territory
The preceding sections have detailed a comparative analysis of the nature of
the provisions in five jurisdictions that have enacted
duties to report child
sexual offences in their criminal law. It is necessary to make some observations
in the Northern Territory, which presents some
interesting and unique characteristics.
In the Northern Territory, the situation is substantially different to the
five jurisdictions analysed above, but there are some similarities.
The Northern
Territory has enacted a legislative duty, applied to all adults, to report
specified types of child sexual offences.
However, the duty is contained not
within the criminal law, but within child protection legislation. Because of its
location and
its nature, the reporting duty is a hybrid of a criminal law-based
reporting duty and a traditional child protection-based mandatory
reporting law.
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
, which in its
original form was first enacted in
predates Victoria’s
landmark criminal law provisions by three decades, and makes all adult persons
mandated reporters of a
range of situations of child
maltreatment.
In this sense, the Northern Territory’s approach to child
protection-based mandatory reporting duties differs from that of all
States and Territories, which instead designated members of specified
occupational groups as mandated reporters for situations
of specified child
abuse and neglect, which primarily (although not exclusively in the case of
sexual abuse) are aimed at circumstances
within the family home. Moreover, the
Northern Territory provisions possess other characteristics which mean they more
closely resemble
a criminal law-based reporting duty, rather than the child
protection-based duty more traditionally
In particular,
sets out one of the purposes of the Act as being
‘to oblige members of the public to report cases of children at risk of
or exploitation’. The concept of ‘harm’ is defined in s
15(1) as: ‘any significant detrimental effect caused
by any act, omission
or circumstance on: (a) the physical, psychological or emotional wellbeing of
the child; or (b) the physical,
psychological or emotional development of the
child’. Section 15(2) states that ‘Without limiting subsection (1),
can be caused by the following: (a) physical, psychological or emotional
abuse or neglect of the child; (b) sexual abuse or other
exploitation of the
child; (c) exposure of the child to physical violence’. The concept of
‘exploitation’ is defined
in s 16, and relates to a range of forms
of sexual exploitation. Section 26 then applies the duty to any
‘person’. Furthermore,
s 26(3) provides a defence to prosecution for
failure to comply with the reporting duty if the person has ‘a reasonable
The ‘reasonable excuse’ concept is not further
Accordingly, the Northern Territory context is primarily based on a child
protection model, but also combines elements of the criminal
law model. Yet,
this approach has not been designed specifically to implement a comprehensive
criminal model, and has not been specifically
informed by the concerns raised by
the Royal Commission. For these reasons, the current approach lacks several core
features of the
criminal model now being adopted elsewhere. It is arguably
desirable for reforms to occur in the Northern Territory to create a separate
criminal law reporting model, which can exist in parallel with the child
protection model, especially given the Royal Commission’s
recommendations
and the expanding adoption of a dedicated criminal law model by other Australian
States and Territories.
III Recommendations for reform
The comparative analysis conducted has revealed significant areas of
commonality in approach, but has also disclosed a number of important
in the legal models adopted by the five jurisdictions to date. Informed by the
socio-legal context and the intention
of these legal duties, and using
principles of consistency and clarity as an evaluative lens, this comparative
analysis leads to
a number of conclusions about recommended reforms.
As detailed in Part IID1, the common elements of the laws should serve as a
useful guide for
South Australia and Tasmania (and arguably the Northern Territory also) in
drafting their legislation. These include:
• the duty only applies to adults, not to minors;
• the duty does not apply where it is known that the situation has
already been reported to police;
• the duty does not apply where there otherwise is a lawful claim of
right or privilege;
• the duty does not apply where the person has a reasonable excuse;
• those who make reports are afforded protections from liability in
civil, criminal and administrative processes.
As detailed in Part IID2(a)-(f), key domains of inconsistency in the laws in
Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania and the
ACT should be the
subject of reforms. Furthermore, these issues need to be considered by the three
remaining jurisdictions in their
legislative drafting processes. The foregoing
analysis has identified which approach is more justified in relation to each of
matters. To achieve desirable uniformity and sound legislative design
across States and Territories, this article makes the following
recommendations about optimal approaches to these dimensions.
1. Core nature of the duty: The core nature of the duty in a form similar to
that as expressed by New South Wales and Queensland should
be preferred over its
expression elsewhere. This model includes an objective element which ensures a
person cannot evade operation
of the duty by unjustifiably pleading subjective
lack of knowledge or belief. Accordingly, the duty should apply so that an adult
bears the duty when she or he knows, believes, or reasonably ought to know or
believe that a child abuse has offence has been committed
against another
person. Therefore, Victoria, Tasmania and the ACT should make this amendment to
align with New South Wales and Queensland.
2. Penalties: Ideally, penalties should be harmonised (see Part IID2(a)).
3. Prosecution: The ACT and Queensland should add this requirement for DPP
approval (see Part IID2(a)).
4. Religious confession: Victoria should amend its legislation to apply the
duty to situations where the knowledge or reasonable belief
was gained during
confession (see Part IID2(b).
5. Application to different settings of child sexual abuse: Victoria should
amend its legislation to apply the duty to sexual offences
involving minors (see
Part IID2(c)).
6. Age of the person who was the victim/survivor of the sexual offence:
Victoria should amend its legislation to apply the duty to
all situations
regardless of the victim’s age (see Part IID2(d)).
7. Exception based on reasonable belief the person does not wish the
information to be reported. The first recommendation here is
that the Victorian
model should be adopted, enabling those aged 16 and over to express the wish
that the offence not be reported
(rather than being limited to those aged 18 and
over); accordingly, New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania and the ACT should
this amendment to align with Victoria (see Part IID2(e)).
8. Exception based on reasonable belief the person does not wish the
information to be reported. The second recommendation here is
that Victoria
should not limit this exception only to situations where the victim/survivor
expresses the wish for the offence not
to be disclosed. Rather, the model
elsewhere should be adopted, so that this exception applies if a reasonable
belief exists that
the victim/survivor does not wish the offence to be
disclosed, where this belief can be supported either by such a direct express
wish or by other sufficient grounds. The legislation should use textual examples
to delineate the types of situation in which such
a reasonable belief will
exist, and should also specify that where any doubt exists about whether the
exception operates, the duty
applies (see Part IID2(e)).
9. Exception based on a ‘reasonable excuse’ for not reporting:
enumerated category of reasonable exception based on endangering
person’s safety. The two-limbed approach preferred by Victoria and
Queensland combining a subjective and an objective element
is clearly preferable
to the alternative approach based only on subjectivity. Accordingly, New South
Wales, the ACT, and Tasmania
should amend this enumerated category of reasonable
excuse to adopt the two-limbed test (see Part IID2(f)(i)).
10. Exception based on a ‘reasonable excuse’ for not reporting:
To remove any doubt about whether adults should report
technical offences
involving genuinely consensual adolescent sexual activity, the reasonable excuse
provision should include an enumerated
example to this effect (see Part
IID2(f)(ii)).
IV Conclusion
Much has happened since Victoria passed the first criminal law reporting duty
in 2014. Other Australian States and Territories have
witnessed the strengths
and limitations of Victoria’s model, and significantly, they have had the
benefit of learning from
the experience of the Royal Commission. All Australian
States and Territories can draw from the insights gained from the Royal
Commission’s
unprecedented examination of child sexual abuse in
institutional settings. Moreover, they are obliged to respond to its
recommendations
for reform, and should now be well-positioned to deliberate on
how best those recommendations can be implemented.
These new criminal law duties are an important acknowledgment of
citizens’ duties to take positive action to protect the rights
of children
in circumstances of serious criminal offending.
It is important to note that the creation of these legal duties assists to
create a new social norm to encourage a certain type of
protective behaviour;
they are not simply provisions created to punish failure to comply. In addition,
now, more than ever, societal
conditions are under immense strain and new
challenges continue to emerge. The technological revolution, and the effects of
the COVID-19
pandemic, for example, may be associated with increases in some
forms of serious sexual offences against children, including through
sexual exploitation.
Australia is at the forefront of socio-legal responses to child sexual abuse,
and much of this progress has been catalysed by government
inquiries and the
Royal Commission’s sustained forensic analysis. The evolution and
geographical spread of criminal law duties
in this context constitute a further
important advance in protecting children from sexual abuse, although challenges
remain in ensuring
our legislative approaches are soundly designed. This article
has identified a range of reforms that can further strengthen and harmonise
Australia’s legislative framework. Other nations may also draw from the
Australian experience to better support children in
responding to sexual
Appendix 1: Criminal law duty to report child sexual offences, imposed on
all adults – full provisions
Crimes Act 1900
Inserted by
Royal Commission Criminal Justice Legislation Amendment Act 2019
s 66AA Failure to report child sexual offence
(1) A person commits an offence if the person—
(a) is an adult; and
(b) obtains information that leads to the person reasonably believing that
a sexual offence has been committed against a child; and
(c) does not, as soon as practicable after forming the belief, give the
information to a police officer.
Maximum penalty: imprisonment for 2 years.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if—
(a) the person—
(i) obtains the information when the alleged victim was no longer a child;
(ii) reasonably believes the alleged victim does not want a police officer
to be told about the person’s belief; or
(b) the person reasonably believes that giving the information to a police
officer would endanger the safety of a person (other than
a person reasonably
believed to have committed the sexual offence); or
(c) the person reasonably believes a police officer already has the
information; or
(d) the person—
(i) is a mandated reporter under the
Children and Young People Act 2008
section 356
(ii) has reported the information under that Act, division 11.1.2
(Reporting abuse and neglect of children and young people) or reasonably
believes someone else has done so; or
(e) subject to subsection (3), giving the information to a police officer
would disclose information in relation to which privilege
may be claimed under a
law in force in the Territory; or
(f) the information is generally available in the public domain; or
(g) the person has another reasonable excuse.
(3) A person who is or was a member of the clergy of a church or religious
denomination is not entitled to refuse to give information
under subsection (1)
because the information was communicated to the member during a religious
confession.
(4) The Criminal Code, chapter 2 (other than the applied provisions) does
not apply to an offence against this section.
(5) If a person gives information mentioned in subsection (1) to a police
officer honestly and without recklessness—
(a) giving the information is not a breach of—
(i) confidence; or
(ii) professional etiquette or ethics; or
(iii) a rule of professional conduct; and
(b) the person does not incur civil or criminal liability only because of
giving the information.
(6) Subsection (5) does not apply if giving the information would be a
breach of client legal privilege.
(7) This section applies to information obtained on or after the
commencement of this section, including information about a sexual
offence that
occurred before the commencement of this section.
(8) In this section:
applied provisions
—see the Criminal Code, section 10
religious confession
means a confession made by a person to a
member of the clergy in the member’s professional capacity according to
of the member’s church or religious denomination.
sexual offence
(a) an offence against—
(i) this part; or
(ii) any other provision prescribed by regulation; or
(b) an offence against a sexual offence provision of this Act previously in
Crimes Act 1900
Inserted by
Criminal Legislation Amendment (Child Sexual Abuse) Act 2018
commenced 31 August 2018.
316A Concealing child abuse offence
(1) An adult:
(a) who knows, believes or reasonably ought to know that a child abuse
offence has been committed against another person, and
(b) who knows, believes or reasonably ought to know that he or she has
information that might be of material assistance in securing
the apprehension of
the offender or the prosecution or conviction of the offender for that offence,
(c) who fails without reasonable excuse to bring that information to the
attention of a member of the NSW Police Force as soon as
it is practicable to do
so, is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for:
(a) 2 years--if the maximum penalty for the child abuse offence is less
than 5 years imprisonment, or
(b) 5 years--if the maximum penalty for the child abuse offence is 5 years
imprisonment or more.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), a person has a reasonable excuse
for failing to bring information to the attention of a member
of the NSW Police
(a) the person believes on reasonable grounds that the information is
already known to police, or
(b) the person has reported the information in accordance with the
applicable requirements under
of Chapter 3 of the
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection) Act 1998
of the Children’s
Guardian Act 2019 or believes on reasonable grounds that another person has done
(c) immediately before the repeal of Part 3A of the Ombudsman Act 1974by
the Children’s Guardian Act 2019, the person had reported
the information
to the Ombudsman under that Part, or believed on reasonable grounds that another
person had done so, or
(d) the person has reasonable grounds to fear for the safety of the person
or any other person (other than the offender) if the information
reported to police, or
(e) the information was obtained by the person when the person was under
the age of 18 years, or
(f) the alleged victim was an adult at the time that the information was
obtained by the person and the person believes on reasonable
grounds that the
alleged victim does not wish the information to be reported to police, or
(g) the information is about an offence under section 60E that did not
result in any injury other than a minor injury (for example,
minor bruising,
cuts or grazing of the skin) and the alleged offender and the alleged victim are
both school students who are under
the age of 18 years, but only if the person
is a member of staff of:
(i) a government school and the person has taken reasonable steps to ensure
that the incident reporting unit (however described) of
the Department of
Education is made aware of the alleged offence, or
(ii) a non-government school and the person has taken reasonable steps to
ensure that the principal or governing body of the school
is made aware of the
alleged offence.
(3) Subsection (2) does not limit the grounds on which it may be
established that a person has a reasonable excuse for failing to
information to the attention of a member of the NSW Police Force.
(4) A person who solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any benefit for the
person or any other person in consideration for doing anything
that would be an
offence under subsection (1) is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for:
(a) 5 years—if the maximum penalty for the child abuse offence is
less than 5 years imprisonment, or
(b) 7 years—if the maximum penalty for the child abuse offence is 5
years imprisonment or more.
(5) It is not an offence under subsection (4) merely to solicit, accept or
agree to accept the making good of loss or injury caused
by an offence or the
making of reasonable compensation for that loss or injury.
(6) A prosecution for an offence under subsection (1) is not to be
commenced against a person without the approval of the Director
Prosecutions in respect of information obtained by an adult in the course of
practising or following a profession, calling
or vocation prescribed by the
regulations for the purposes of this subsection.
(7) The regulations may prescribe a profession, calling or vocation as
referred to in subsection (6).
(8) The reporting of information by a person in good faith under this
(a) does not constitute unprofessional conduct or a breach of professional
ethics on the part of the person, and
(b) does not make the person subject to any civil liability in respect of
it (including liability for defamation).
(9) In this section:
means a person who is under the age of 18 years.
child abuse offence
(a) murder or manslaughter of a child (including under section 22A),
(b) an offence under section 27, 29, 33, 35, 37, 38, 38A, 39, 41, 41A, 44,
45, 45A, 46, 59, 60E, 86 or 91J or Division 10, 10A, 10B
or 15 of Part 3 where
the alleged victim is a child, or
(c) an offence under section 42, 43, 43A, 91G or 91H, or
(d) an offence under a provision of this Act set out in Column 1 of
Schedule 1A where the alleged victim was a child, or
(e) an offence of attempting to commit an offence referred to in paragraphs
(a)–(d), or
(f) an offence under a previous enactment that is substantially similar to
an offence referred to in paragraphs (a)–(e).
government school
non-government school
have the same meanings as in the
Education Act 1990
member of staff
have the same meanings as in Division 8B of
includes receive or become aware of.
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
substituted by the
Care and Protection of Children Amendment
, commenced 1 September 2009.
Original s 26 created a similar obligation, commenced 7 May 2008
15 Harm to child
(1) Harm to a child is any significant detrimental effect caused by any
act, omission or circumstance on:
(a) the physical, psychological or emotional wellbeing of the child;
(b) the physical, psychological or emotional development of the
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), harm can be caused by the
(a) physical, psychological or emotional abuse or neglect of the
(b) sexual abuse or other exploitation of the child;
(c) exposure of the child to physical violence.
Example - A child witnessing violence between the child's parents at
16 Exploitation of child
(1) Exploitation of a child includes sexual and any other forms of
exploitation of the child.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), sexual exploitation of a child
(a) sexual abuse of the child; and
(b) involving the child as a participant or spectator in any of the
(i) an act of a sexual nature;
(ii) prostitution;
(iii) a pornographic performance.
26 Reporting obligations
(1) A person is guilty of an offence if the person:
(a) believes, on reasonable grounds, any of the following:
(i) a child has suffered or is likely to suffer harm or exploitation;
(ii) a child aged less than 14 years has been or is likely to be a victim
of a sexual offence;
(iii) a child has been or is likely to be a victim of an offence against
section 128 of the Criminal Code; and
(b) does not, as soon as possible after forming that belief, report (orally
or in writing) to the CEO or a police officer:
(i) that belief; and
(ii) any knowledge of the person forming the grounds for that belief;
(iii) any factual circumstances on which that knowledge is based.
Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units.
(2) A person is guilty of an offence if the person:
(a) is a health practitioner or someone who performs work of a kind that is
prescribed by regulation; and
(b) believes, on reasonable grounds:
(i) that a child aged at least 14 years (but less than 16 years) has been
or is likely to be a victim of a sexual offence; and
(ii) that the difference in age between the child and alleged sexual
offender is more than 2 years; and
(c) does not, as soon as possible after forming that belief, report (orally
or in writing) to the CEO or a police officer:
(i) that belief; and
(ii) any knowledge of the person forming the grounds for that belief;
(iii) any factual circumstances on which that knowledge is based.
Maximum penalty: 200 penalty units.
Example for subsection (2)(b)(ii) - A health practitioner believes, on
reasonable grounds, that a child who has just turned 14 is
likely to be a victim
of a sexual offence committed by someone aged 16 and a half.
(3) It is a defence to a prosecution for an offence against subsection (1)
or (2) if the defendant has a reasonable excuse.
(4) This section has effect despite any other provision in this Act or
another law of the Territory.
Comm 5 July 2021
Inserted by Criminal Code (Child Sexual Offences Reform) and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2020
229BC Failure to report belief of child sexual offence committed in
relation to child
(1) This section applies to an adult if—
(a) the adult gains information that causes the adult to believe on
reasonable grounds, or ought reasonably to cause the adult to
believe, that a
child sexual offence is being or has been committed against a child by another
(b) at the relevant time, the child is or was—
(i) under 16 years; or
(ii) a person with an impairment of the mind.
(2) If, without reasonable excuse, the adult fails to disclose the
information to a police officer as soon as reasonably practicable
belief is, or ought reasonably to have been, formed, the adult commits a
misdemeanour.
Maximum penalty—3 years imprisonment.
(3) For subsection (1), it does not matter that the information was gained
by the adult during, or in connection with, a religious
confession.
(4) Without limiting what may be a reasonable excuse for subsection (2), an
adult has a reasonable excuse if—
(a) the adult believes on reasonable grounds that the information has
already been disclosed to a police officer; or
(b) the adult has already reported the information under any of the
provisions, or believes on reasonable grounds that another person has done
or will do so— (i) the
Child Protection Act 1999
, chapter 2,
Education (General Provisions) Act 2006
, chapter 12,
; (iii) the
Youth Justice Act 1992
(c) the adult gains the information after the child becomes an adult (the
alleged victim), and the adult reasonably believes the alleged
victim does not
want the information to be disclosed to a police officer; or
(d) both of the following apply—
(i) the adult reasonably believes disclosing the information to a police
officer would endanger the safety of the adult or another
person, other than
alleged offender, regardless of whether the belief arises because of the
fact of the disclosure or the information disclosed;
(ii) failure to disclose the information to a police officer is a
reasonable response in the circumstances.
(5) An adult who, in good faith, discloses information mentioned in
subsection (1)(a) to a police officer is not liable civilly, criminally
an administrative process for making the disclosure.
(6) In this section—
relevant time, in relation to the child sexual offence mentioned in
subsection (1)(a), means the time that the adult—
(a) believes to be the time of commission of the offence; or
(b) ought reasonably to believe to be the time of commission of the
No provision.
Criminal Code s 105A
Inserted by
Criminal Code and Related Legislation Amendment (Child Abuse) Bill 2018 s
105A Failing to report the abuse of a child
(1) In this section –
abuse offence
means the following:
(a) an offence against section 124, 125, 125A, 125B, 125C, 125D, 126, 127,
129, 130, 130A, 133, 157, 158, 159, 165A, 166, 170, 172,
175, 176, 177, 178,
178A or 178B;
(b) an offence under chapter XIX or XX;
(c) an offence of attempting to commit an offence referred to in paragraph
(a) or (b);
(d) an offence under a previous enactment that is substantially similar to
an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);
means a person under the age of 18 years;
proper authority
has the same meaning as in section
religious confession
has the same meaning as in
section 127
Evidence Act
(2) A person is guilty of a crime if the person –
(a) has information that leads the person to form a reasonable belief that
an abuse offence has been committed against another person
who was a child at
the time of the alleged offence; and
(b) fails without reasonable excuse to disclose that information to a
police officer as soon as practicable.
Charge: Failing to report the abuse of a child.
(3) A person is not guilty of an offence under subsection (2) if
(a) the information was obtained by that person when he or she was a child;
(b) the alleged victim of the offence to which the information relates had
attained the age of 18 years at the time the information
was obtained by the
person and the person believes on reasonable grounds that the alleged victim
does not wish the information to
be reported to a police officer.
(4) Without limiting the matters that may constitute a reasonable excuse
for the purposes of subsection (2), a person has a reasonable
excuse for failing
to comply with that subsection if –
(a) the person fears on reasonable grounds that disclosing the information
would endanger the safety of any person (other than the
person reasonably
believed to have committed, or to have been involved in, the child abuse
offence); or
(b) subject to subsection (5), reporting the information would disclose
information in respect of which there is a lawful claim or
right of privilege;
(c) the person believes on reasonable grounds that –
(i) another person has already reported the information to a proper
authority; or
(ii) a proper authority already has the information; or
(d) the information is generally available to members of the public.
(5) Despite
section 127
Evidence Act 2001
, a member of the clergy of
any church or religious denomination is not entitled to refuse to disclose
information under subsection
(2) on the grounds that the information was
communicated to that member of the clergy during a religious confession.
(6) A prosecution for an offence against subsection (2) is not to be
commenced without the written authority of the Director of Public
Prosecutions.
Crimes Act 1958
Inserted by
Crimes Amendment (Protection of Children) Act
(Vic), commenced 27 October 2014.
327 Failure to disclose sexual offence committed against child under the
age of 16 years
(1) In this section—
includes reputation, legal liability and financial
organisation
includes a body corporate or an unincorporated
body or association, whether the body or association—
(a) is based in or outside Australia; or
(b) is part of a larger organisation;
sexual offence
(a) an offence committed under Subdivision (8A), (8B), (8C), (8E), (8F) or
(8FA) of Division 1 of Part I on or after 1 July 2017;
(b) an offence committed under Subdivision (8D) of Division 1 of Part I on
or after 1 July 2017 other than an offence that only relates
to child abuse
material of a kind described in paragraph (a)(i)(A) of the definition of child
abuse material in section 51A(1), where
the torture, cruelty or abuse is not
An offence committed under Subdivision (8D) of Division 1 of Part I that
relates to child abuse material that depicts or describes
a child as a victim of
sexual abuse.
(c) an offence committed before 1 July 2017 under Subdivision (8A), (8B),
(8C), (8D), (8E) or (8EAA) as then in force; or
(d) an attempt to commit an offence referred to in paragraph (a), (b) or
(e) an assault with intent to commit an offence referred to in paragraph
(a), (b) or (c).
(2) Subject to subsections (5) and (7), a person of or over the age of 18
years (whether in Victoria or elsewhere) who has information
that leads the
person to form a reasonable belief that a sexual offence has been committed in
Victoria against a child under the
age of 16 years by another person of or over
the age of 18 years must disclose that information to a police officer as soon
is practicable to do so, unless the person has a reasonable excuse for not
Penalty: 3 years imprisonment.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2) and without limiting that
subsection, a person has a reasonable excuse for failing to comply
subsection if—
(a) the person fears on reasonable grounds for the safety of any person
(other than the person reasonably believed to have committed,
or to have been
involved in, the sexual offence) were the person to disclose the information to
police (irrespective of whether the
fear arises because of the fact of
disclosure or the information disclosed) and the failure to disclose the
information to police
is a reasonable response in the circumstances; or
(b) the person believes on reasonable grounds that the information has
already been disclosed to police by another person and the
firstmentioned person
has no further information.
A person may believe on reasonable grounds that the
information has already been disclosed to police by another person if the person
has made a report disclosing all of the information in his or her possession in
compliance with mandatory reporting obligations under
Children, Youth and
Families Act 2005
(4) For the purposes of subsection (2) and without limiting that
subsection, a person does not have a reasonable excuse for failing
with that subsection only because the person is concerned for the perceived
interests of—
(a) the person reasonably believed to have committed, or to have been
involved in, the sexual offence; or
(b) any organisation.
(5) A person does not contravene subsection (2) if—
(a) the information forming the basis of the person's belief that a sexual
offence has been committed came from the victim of the
alleged offence, whether
directly or indirectly; and
(b) the victim was of or over the age of 16 years at the time of providing
that information to any person; and
(c) the victim requested that the information not be disclosed.
(6) Subsection (5) does not apply if—
(a) at the time of providing the information, the victim of the alleged
sexual offence—
(i) has an intellectual disability (within the meaning of the
(ii) does not have the capacity to make an informed decision about whether
or not the information should be disclosed; and
(b) the person to whom the information is provided is aware, or ought
reasonably to have been aware, of those facts.
(7) A person does not contravene subsection (2) if—
(a) the person comes into possession of the information referred to in
subsection (2) when a child; or
(b) the information referred to in subsection (2) would be privileged under
of Chapter 3 of the
Evidence Act 2008
(c) the information referred to in subsection (2) is a confidential
communication within the meaning of
section 32B
Evidence (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1958
(d) the person comes into possession of the information referred to in
subsection (2) solely through the public domain or forms the
belief referred to
in subsection (2) solely from information in the public domain; or
(e) the person is a police officer acting in the course of his or her duty
in respect of the victim of the alleged sexual offence;
(f) the victim of the alleged sexual offence has attained the age of 16
years before the commencement of section 4 of the Crimes Amendment
(Protection
of Children) Act 2014.
(8) A prosecution for an offence under subsection (2) must not be commenced
without the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
(9) In determining whether to consent to a prosecution for an offence under
subsection (2), the Director of Public Prosecutions must
consider whether the
alleged offender has been subjected to family violence (within the meaning of
Family Violence Protection Act 2008
) that is relevant to the circumstances
in which the offence is alleged to have been committed.
No provision.
Ben Matthews is a Professor at
the School of Law, Queensland University of Technology, member of th Australian
Centre for Health
Research (QUT) and Adjunct Professor at Johns Hopkins
University.
Marije Stoltenborgh, Marinus H
van Ijzendoorn, Eveline M Euser and Marian J Bakermans-Kranenburg, ‘A
global perspective on
child sexual abuse: Meta-analysis of prevalence around the
world’ (2011) 16(2)
Child Maltreatment
79–101. This figure of
12.7% comprised 18.0% of girls and 7.6% of boys.
Michael Dunne, David Purdie,
Michelle Cook, Frances Boyle and Jake Najman, ‘Is child sexual abuse
declining? Evidence from
a population-based survey of men and women in
Australia’ (2003) 27
Child Abuse & Neglect
Stephen Rosenman and Bryan
Rodgers, ‘Childhood adversity in an Australian population’ (2004)
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology
Elya Moore, Helena Romaniuk,
Craig Olsson, Yasmin Jayasinghe, John Carlin and George Patton, ‘The
prevalence of childhood sexual
abuse and adolescent unwanted sexual contact
among boys and girls living in Victoria, Australia’ (2010) 34
Abuse & Neglect
A review of studies of
disclosure found that 60–70% of adult survivors of child sexual abuse said
they did not disclose their
abuse during childhood: Kamala London, Maggie Bruck,
Stephen Ceci and Daniel Shuman, ‘Disclosure of child sexual abuse: A
of the contemporary empirical literature’ in Margaret-Ellen Pipe,
Michael E Lamb, Yael Orbach and Ann-Christin Cederborg (eds),
Child sexual
abuse: Disclosure, delay, and denial
(Routledge, 2007) 11–39. See
also, eg, Scott D Easton, ‘Disclosure of Child Sexual Abuse Among Adult
Male Survivors’
(2013) 41(4)
Clinical Social Work Journal
344–55, who studied 487 men whose mean age of onset of child sexual abuse
was 10.3 years, and found that on average, it took
participants 21 years to tell
someone, and the mean age at the time of first disclosure was 32.
Ramona Alaggia, Delphine
Collin-Vézina and Rusan Lateef, ‘Facilitators and barriers to child
sexual abuse (CSA) disclosures:
A research update (2000-2016)’ (2017) 21
Trauma, Violence & Abuse
Hereafter referred to as the
Royal Commission.
Australian Government Royal
Commission Into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Final report,
(Sydney, 2017).
Australian Government Royal
Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse (2014).
report, Vol. 1
(Sydney, 2014).
Easton, ibid.
Report of the
Special Committee of Inquiry into Child Protection Services in New South
(Government of the State of New South Wales, 2008).
R Wild and P Anderson,
Ampe Akelyernemane Meke Mekarle (‘Little Children Are Sacred’):
Report of the Board of Inquiry into the Protection of
Aboriginal Children from
Sexual Abuse
(Darwin, 2007).
responsibility: A roadmap for Queensland child protection
See, eg, Victorian Family
and Community Development Committee,
Betrayal of Trust: Inquiry Into the
Handling of Child Abuse by Religious and Other Nongovernment Organisations
(Melbourne, 2013); see also P Cummins, D Scott and B Scales,
Report of the
Protecting Victoria’s Vulnerable Children Inquiry
(State of Victoria
Department of Premier and Cabinet, 2012). The significance of the Betrayal of
Trust Inquiry’s recommendation
is discussed below.
Royal Commission Into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
Criminal Justice Report
(Sydney, 2017).
Convention on the Rights
of the Child
, opened for signature 20 November
1989, 1577 UNTS 3
into force 2 September 1990).
Article 19 provides: 1.
States Parties shall take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social
and educational measures to
protect the child from all forms of physical or
mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment
exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal
guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the
child. 2. Such
protective measures should, as appropriate, include effective procedures for the
establishment of social programmes
to provide necessary support for the child
and for those who have the care of the child, as well as for other forms of
and for identification, reporting, referral, investigation, treatment
and follow-up of instances of child maltreatment described
heretofore, and, as
appropriate, for judicial involvement.
United Nations Committee on
the Rights of the Child,
General Comment No. 13 on the Right of the Child to
Freedom from All Forms of Violence (art. 19)
(2011). The General Comment
states (19–20):
The Committee strongly recommends that all States parties develop safe,
well-publicized, confidential and accessible support mechanisms
for children,
their representatives and others to report violence against children, including
through the use of 24-h toll-free hotlines
and other ICTs. The establishment of
reporting mechanisms includes: (a) providing appropriate information to
facilitate the making
of complaints; (b) participation in investigations and
court proceedings; (c) developing protocols which are appropriate for different
circumstances and made widely known to children and the general public; (d)
establishing related support services for children and
families; and (e)
training and providing ongoing support for personnel to receive and advance the
information received through reporting
systems. Reporting mechanisms must be
coupled with, and should present themselves as help-oriented services offering
public health
and social support, rather than as triggering responses which are
primarily punitive ... In every country, the reporting of instances,
or risk of violence should, at a minimum, be required by professionals working
directly with children. When reports are
made in good faith, processes must be
in place to ensure the protection of the professional making the report.
United Nations General
Sustainable Development Goals
(United Nations, 2015)
<https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/>.
Crimes Act 1900
(NT) s 125B;
Criminal Code 1899
(Qld) ss 228A-E;
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 1A; ss130-130G;
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code Act 1913
(WA) ss 217-221A; and see also
Criminal Code
(Cth) Chapter 10. See further Clare McGlynn and Erika Rackley,
‘Image-based sexual abuse’
(2017) 37(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal
; Anastasia Henry and Nicola Powell, ‘Sexual violence in
the digital age: The scope and limits of criminal law’
& Legal Studies
; Nicola Henry, Asher Flynn and Anastasia Powell,
‘Image-based sexual abuse: Victims and perpetrators’
Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
See Ben Mathews and
Elizabeth Dallaston, ‘Reform of Civil Statutes of Limitation for Child
Sexual Abuse Claims: Seismic change
and ongoing challenges’
[2020] UNSWLawJl 14
(2020) 43(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
See Ben Mathews and Delphine
Collin-Vézina, ‘Child Sexual Abuse: Toward a Conceptual Model and
Definition’ (2019)
Trauma, Violence, & Abuse
authors developed a model whereby child sexual abuse was understood as including
a range of contact and non-contact sexual
acts by any adult or child in a
position of power over the victim, done to obtain sexual gratification for the
person or another
person whether immediately or deferred in time and space, when
the child either does not have capacity to provide consent, or has
capacity but
does not provide consent.
Martha Nussbaum,
Capabilities
(Harvard University Press, 2011). Nussbaum declared (148):
‘Some issues are, or should be, easy: we should all agree that domestic
violence and child sexual abuse should be aggressively policed by the
Lord Thomas Bingham,
‘The rule of law’
(2007) 66(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
Anthony Gray, ‘Is the
Seal of the Confessional Protected by Constitutional or Common Law?’
[2018] MonashULawRw 4
(2018) 44(1)
Monash University Law Review
Ben Mathews, ‘Legal
Duties of Researchers to Protect Participants in Child Maltreatment Surveys:
Advancing Legal Epidemiology’
(2022) 45(2)
University of New South
Wales Law Journal
(in press).
Ben Mathews and Lena Sanci,
‘Doctors’ Criminal Law Duty to Report Consensual Sexual Activity
Between Adolescents: Legal
and Clinical Issues’
(2021) 215(3)
Journal of Australia
Ben Mathews, ‘A
Taxonomy of Duties to Report Child Sexual Abuse: Legal Developments Offer New
Ways to Facilitate Disclosure’
Child Abuse & Neglect
337–47; Ben Mathews,
New International Frontiers in Child Sexual Abuse:
Theory, Problems and Progress
(Springer, 2019).
The analysis presented here
covers the law as current to 28 September 2021.
In English law, for example,
the longstanding reluctance to impose positive duties on citizens has recently
witnessed some developments,
as exemplified by duties to report female genital
mutilation:
Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003
(UK) s 5B, inserted by the
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) s 74. However, even these duties are imposed
only on selected professionals rather than all members of the public, and there
remain no comparative criminal law duties to report child sexual offences more
Andrew Ashworth,
obligations in criminal law
(Hart, 2013), 41.
See further, eg, Andrew
Ashworth, ‘Positive duties, regulation and the criminal sanction’
Law Quarterly Review
–30; Andrew Ashworth, ‘A
new generation of omissions offences?’
Criminal Law Review
For example, this element of
personal benefit is also contained in the
Crimes Act 1958
Criminal Code 1924
(Tas) s 102.
See New South Wales,
, Legislative Assembly, 6 June 2018, 4 (Mr Speakman,
Attorney-General, Second reading), where the Attorney-General stated:
section 316 is not well adapted to this policy purpose. It
requires a high standard of knowledge before a person can be
prosecuted—the
prosecution must show that the person knows or believes
that an offence has been committed. This may not address the wilful blindness
those in authority uncovered by the royal commission.’
The case involved the
prosecution of Archbishop Philip Wilson for breaching the New South Wales
concealment offence in s 316 as it
stood at the time. In May 2018, Philip
Wilson, the Archbishop of Adelaide, was found guilty of concealing his knowledge
sexual abuse committed by a priest named James Fletcher against two
altar boys in the 1970s. Fletcher had earlier been found guilty
of nine counts
of child sexual abuse and died in prison in 2006. Wilson claimed he could not
remember either boy telling him they
were abused, and his counsel argued there
was no evidence to prove he was told about the abuse, believed it was true, or
being told about it. However, the Court believed the testimony of
Peter Creigh, one of the altar boys. Mr. Creigh testified he had
trusted that
Wilson, who at the time was an assistant priest, would take appropriate action
after he told him that Fletcher had abused
him repeatedly in 1971 when he was
10. He testified that Wilson had a “look of horror” on his face when
he heard this,
but took no action and did not tell police. The other former
altar boy said he went to confession in 1976 when he was aged 11, and
Wilson that Fletcher had abused him. He testified that Wilson refused to believe
him because Fletcher “was a good bloke”,
and ordered the boy out of
the confessional with a demand to say prayers as an act of contrition. On 12
February 2015, in the Local
Court, Stone LCM refused an application by
Archbishop Wilson to quash or permanently stay a court attendance notice. An
appeal against
this decision was dismissed in
Wilson v Department of Public
Prosecutions (NSW)
[2016] NSWSC 1458 (Schmidt
J). This decision by Schmidt J
was also then appealed, and dismissed, by the New South Wales Court of Appeal
Wilson v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2017] NSWCA 128).
issue before the Court was whether at the time Wilson was alleged to have
withheld information relevant to Father Fletcher’s
alleged offence, s 81
(indecent assault on male) was a “serious indictable offence” within
the meaning of the
s 4. The Court of Appeal dismissed the
appeal. However, in December 2018, Wilson’s conviction was overturned on
appeal in the
District Court by Ellis DCJ, with a core part of the Court’s
reasoning concluding there was not sufficient evidence of the
relevant state of
[2018] NSWDC 487
Victorian Family and
Community Development Committee,
Betrayal of Trust: Inquiry Into the Handling
of Child Abuse by Religious and Other Nongovernment Organisations
recommendation 23.1)
http://www.parliament.vic.gov.au/component/content/article/340-inquiry-into-the-handling-of-child-abuse-by-religious-and-other-organisations/1788-report
See, eg, Victoria,
, House of Assembly, 26 March 2014, 912–4 (Mr Clark,
Attorney-General, Second reading).
As do other States and
Territories, Victoria has the power to create legislation with extra-territorial
application for the peace,
order and good government of the state:
A law creating an offence of a failure to report
sexual offences against children is within those parameters, and the commission
of the sexual offence within Victoria provides the requisite real connection
with the jurisdiction. The terms of the provision expressly
contradict both the
common law presumption of territorial limitations and the provisions in the
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
(Vic) which stipulates that
‘locality, jurisdiction or other matter or thing shall be construed as a
reference to such locality,
Section 327 only requires the reporting of sexual
offences committed in Victoria, and creates no obligation to disclose beliefs
sexual offences committed outside Victoria.
Royal Commission,
Criminal Justice Report
, above n 15, recommendation 33. Recommendation 35
was that the duty to report should not be subject to any exemption for religious
confession.
Queensland,
13 August 2020, 2118-19 (Ms Dath, Attorney-General and Minister for Justice,
Second reading).
Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions for the Australian Capital Territory,
The Prosecution
Policy of the Australian Capital Territory
(13 April 2015) 3–5,
https://www.dpp.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/715506/PROSECUTION-POLICY-OF-THE-AUSTRALIAN-CAPITAL-TERRITORY.pdf;
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions for New South Wales,
Prosecution Guidelines of the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
for New South Wales
(2021) 8–10,
https://www.odpp.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/attachments/f-prosecution_guidelines.pdf
New South Wales Guidelines
’); Office of the Director of
Public Prosecutions for the Northern Territory,
Guidelines of the Director of
Public Prosecutions
https://dpp.nt.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/574124/DPP-Guidelines-Current-2016.pdf;
Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions Queensland,
(30 June 2016) 2–4,
https://www.justice.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0015/16701/directors-guidelines.pdf;
Director of
Public Prosecutions South Australia,
Statement of Prosecution
Policy & Guidelines
(October 2014) 5–8,
http://www.dpp.sa.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/DPP-Prosecution-and-Policy-Guidelines.pdf;
the Director of Public Prosecutions for Tasmania,
Prosecutions
Policy and Guidelines
(Updated 23 October 2019) 7–9,
https://www.dpp.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/570858/DPP-prosecution-guidelines6.pdf;
Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria,
Policy of the Director of Public
Prosecutions for Victoria
(17 September 2020) 2–4,
http://www.opp.vic.gov.au/Resources/Policies; Office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions for Western
Statement of Prosecution, Policy
6–9, (1 September 2018)
https://www.dpp.wa.gov.au/_files/publications/Statement-of-Prosecution-Policy-and-Guidelines.pdf.
But not always: see the
discussion of Victoria’s more limited approach below.
Amending legislation was
first introduced in 2014 in Victoria, and from 2018 onwards in other States and
Territories:
Crimes Amendment (Protection of Children) Bill 2014
Legislation Amendment (Child Sexual Abuse) Bill 2018
(NSW); Criminal Code and
Related Legislation Amendment (Child Abuse) Bill 2018 (Tas); Royal Commission
Criminal Justice Legislation
Amendment Bill 2019 (ACT); Criminal Code (Child
Sexual Offences Reform) and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2019 (Qld).
Crimes Act 1900
Failure to report child sexual offence (commenced 1 September 2019);
Crimes Act 1900
Concealing child abuse offence (commenced 31
August 2018);
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 229BC Failure to report
belief of child sexual offence committed in relation to child (commenced 5 July
Criminal Code 1924
(Tas) s 105A Failing to report the abuse of a
child (commenced 2 October 2019);
Crimes Act 1958
disclose sexual offence committed against child under the age of 16 years
(commenced 27 October 2014).
Note that to date there is
no judicial consideration of the new duty in relation to sexual offences. In New
South Wales, the duty
in s 316A was referred to obliquely in
Mallick and Anor
[2018] FamCA 603
, a case which turned on other issues.
However, the duty to report physical abuse was the subject of judicial
consideration in the
New South Wales case of
R v George (a pseudonym)
[2021] NSWDC 18
(16 February 2021), where the accused was convicted and
sentenced to imprisonment for 4 years. After discounts for a guilty plea
other factors including remorse, the term of imprisonment was 2 years 7 months
with a non-parole period of 1 year 8 months. The
case concerned the father of a
six week old infant who was aware that his partner, the infant’s mother,
had committed serious
life threatening physical assaults on the infant, yet
failed to notify the police. Colefax SC DCJ stated: “The abuse of children
– whether psychological or physical and whether sexual or non-sexual
– is abhorrent and the Courts must impose stern
sentences to protect
children from such abuse – especially where that abuse is inflicted by
their own parents and in their
own homes.”
But see the position in the
Northern Territory as outlined below.
New South Wales,
, above n 34, 6. This may have been influenced by the outcome in
the case of Wilson.
All States and
Territories’ interpretation legislation recognise that legislative
provisions must be interpreted to give effect
to the statute’s purpose:
Legislation Act 2001
Interpretation Act 1987
Interpretation Act 1978
Acts Interpretation Act
Acts Interpretation Act 1915
Interpretation Act 1931
Interpretation of Legislation Act
Interpretation
contemporary approach to statutory interpretation must consider the legislative
text, context and purpose, and in doing so, the
context of the provision must be
considered at the outset:
see SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
, where Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ stated
(368): “The starting point for the ascertainment of the meaning of a
provision is the text of the statute whilst, at the same time, regard
is had to its context and purpose. Context should be regarded
at this first
stage and not at some later stage and it should be regarded in its widest
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(1)(a)
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(Qld) s 229BC(1);
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(3)(a);
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(2)(c)
Crimes Act 1900
s 316A(2)(a)
Criminal Code Act
(Qld) s 229BC(4)(a);
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(4)(c);
Crimes Act 1958
s 327(3)(b).
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
-(7) (although not express);
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(4)(b);
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(2)(b)
Crimes Act 1900
s 316A(2)(d)
Criminal Code Act
(Qld) s 229BC(4)(d);
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(4)(a);
Crimes Act 1958
s 327(3)(a).
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 229BC(5);
Crimes Act 1958
provisions lack this component.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 229BC(2);
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(2);
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(6);
Crimes Act 1958
While Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory do not
have this express legislative provision, hence depriving this conclusion
same force, the prosecutorial guidelines would still need to be contemplated in
any potential prosecution.
Another notable difference
is that New South Wales is alone in apparently adding a layer of insulation from
the duty in relation
to several named professions. The
Crimes Act 1900
states that a prosecution for an offence under
to be commenced without approval of the Director of Public Prosecutions
regarding information obtained by an adult in the
course of practising a
profession prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of
states the regulations may prescribe a profession as referred to in
Crimes Regulation 2015
(NSW) r 4 prescribes a range of
professions for the purpose of s 316A(6). However, a complicating factor in
applying this exception
is the DPP’s residual discretion to prosecute.
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 229BC(3);
Criminal Code
(Tas) s 105A(5). In New South Wales, s 316A does not clearly state
this, but no exception is included in the provisions, and furthermore
second reading the Attorney-General stated that ‘The offence will apply to
members of the clergy, although prosecutions
against clergy and other prescribed
professionals must be approved by the Attorney General, as is the case with the
existing section
316’: New South Wales,
, above n 34, 5.
Section 327(7)(f) states
that a person does not contravene the duty in s 327(2) if the victim of the
alleged offence attained the
age of 16 before commencement of s 4 of the
Crimes Amendment (Protection of Children) Act 2014
Amendment (Protection of Children) Act 2014
inserted s 327, and commenced on
27 October 2014: Victoria,
Gazette: Special
, No 350, 7 October 2014.
Crimes Act 1900
s 316A(2)(f)
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 229BC(4)(c).
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(2)(a)
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(3)(b);
New South Wales,
, above n 34, 5. The Attorney-General stated: “A person also
will have a reasonable excuse if the victim of the offence is now
an adult, and
the person reasonably believes that the victim does not want the offence to be
reported to police. This strikes a balance
between the need for police to be
alerted to offences to protect other children and the importance of protecting
the privacy and
autonomy of adult survivors.”
above n 37, 914. The Attorney-General stated:
The bill also respects the position of a victim who does not want details of
the offending disclosed and who is sufficiently mature
to make that judgement.
Setting the age at which a victim is to be treated as having that maturity is a
matter of judgement. The
bill sets that age at 16, being the age at which the
law already recognises a capacity for certain judgements in relation to sexual
matters. The obligation to disclose therefore does not apply where the
information comes from a person aged 16 or over who requests
that the offence
not be reported to police.
However, the law will recognise that a child under 16 is not able to make
such a decision. The committee found that children felt
shame and embarrassment
from what had been done to them and lacked the knowledge and experience to
understand how this sexual abuse
would affect them. Further, child sexual
offending occurs in a context of secrecy in which the child is often told by the
perpetrator
to keep the offending secret. The committee’s report
identified the importance of reporting child abuse to the police, even
victim does not wish to pursue the matter through the justice system. This is
because disclosing the information to police
might corroborate the account of
another victim or encourage other victims to come forward.
See, eg, Laurence Steinberg
and Grace Icenogle, ‘Using developmental science to distinguish
adolescents and adults under the
law’ (2019) 1
Annual Review of
Developmental Psychology
See, eg, Ben Mathews and
Malcolm Smith, ‘Children and consent to medical treatment’ in Ben
White, Fiona McDonald and
Lindy Willmott (eds)
Health law in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 2018) 159–206.
It can be further noted that
in exceptional circumstances, another type of legal reporting duty may supersede
this outcome. So, for
example, in a situation in Victoria where this exception
may apply, but where the offender is known to be offending against other
children, the person with the knowledge may have a duty of care in negligence to
make a report.
Crimes Act 1958
states: ‘A person does not contravene subsection (2)
if—(a) the information forming the basis of the person’s belief
a sexual offence has been committed came from the victim of the alleged offence,
whether directly or indirectly; and (b) the
victim was of or over the age of 16
years at the time of providing that information to any person; and (c) the
victim requested that
the information not be disclosed’.
In New South Wales, for
example, the
Crimes Act 1900
s 316A(2)(f)
expressly includes
situations where the alleged victim was an adult at the time the information was
obtained by the person, and the
person believes on reasonable grounds that the
alleged victim ‘does not wish the information to be reported to
Similar wording is used in Queensland, the ACT and Tasmania: see
Criminal Code Act 1899
(Qld) s 229BC(4)(c);
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(2)(a)
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(3)(b).
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(2)(g)
Crimes Act 1900
ss 316A(1)(c)
Code Act 1899
(Qld) ss 229BC(2);
Criminal Code Act 1924
105A(2)(b);
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1900
s 66AA(2)(g)
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code Act
(Qld) s 229BC(4);
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 105A(4);
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
s 327(3)(b).
[1996] HCA 28
186 CLR 454
, 464 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ). Dawson J stated
(470): ‘A reasonable excuse is no more or less than an excuse
which would
be accepted by a reasonable person ... Reasonableness provides a test which is
well-known in both criminal and civil
law and, though it may involve a judgment
of degree, has a ready application in widely differing circumstances. The fact
test of reasonableness frequently involves a question of degree so that
minds may differ upon the answer ... does not justify confining
its scope for
the sake of greater precision or certainty.’
Ibid 464 (Brennan CJ,
Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ).
Ibid 466 (Brennan CJ,
Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ), stating: ‘Defences in this form are
categories of indeterminate reference
that have no content until a court makes
its decision. They effectively require the courts to prescribe the relevant rule
after the fact of its occurrence.’
For example, the person with
the knowledge may claim that if they report their knowledge, they are in danger
of some kind of reprisal.
Currently, the legal
‘age of consent’ prohibits intercourse with minors under a specified
age, presuming children under
this age lack capacity to provide true consent.
This age is 16 in six jurisdictions, and 17 in South Australia and Tasmania.
Acknowledging
that sexual activity between adolescents may be consensual and is
ethically permissible, criminal laws in five jurisdictions –
the ACT, New
South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, and Victoria – provide a
‘close in age’ defence to criminal
offences where the act involves
consenting persons who are both minors aged under 16, or similar in age
(normally not more than two
years apart):
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Criminal Code Act 1924
(Tas) s 124(3);
On the problems caused for
medical practitioners providing treatment to adolescents in consensual
relationships, see Mathews and
Sanci, above n 27.
Community Welfare Act
(No 76) commenced on 20 April 1984. The Act contained wide mandatory
reporting provisions which, uniquely for Australian jurisdictions,
all persons (s 14); a separate provision specifically applied to police officers
(s 13). Section 14 required a person
other than a member of the police force
‘who believes, on reasonable grounds, that a child has suffered or is
suffering maltreatment’
to report it. Section 4(3) provided that a child
will have suffered ‘maltreatment’ in situations including where: (d)
he has been sexually abused or exploited, or where there is substantial risk of
such abuse or exploitation occurring, and his parents,
guardians or persons
having the custody of him or her are unable or unwilling to protect him or her
from such abuse or exploitation’.
Care and Protection
of Children Act 2007
states: ‘(1) A person is guilty of an
offence if the person: (a) believes, on reasonable grounds, any of the
following: (i)
a child has suffered or is likely to suffer harm or exploitation;
(ii) a child aged less than 14 years has been or is likely to be
a victim of a
sexual offence; (iii) a child has been or is likely to be a victim of an offence
against section 128 of the Criminal
Code; and (b) does not, as soon as possible
after forming that belief, report (orally or in writing) to the CEO or a police
(i) that belief; and (ii) any knowledge of the person forming the
grounds for that belief; and (iii) any factual circumstances on
knowledge is based’.
Each State and Territory has
enacted legislation about child protection, which contain provisions commonly
called ‘mandatory
reporting laws’. These laws require designated
persons to report known and suspected cases of specified kinds of child
maltreatment
to child welfare agencies:
Children and Young People Act
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
Care and Protection of Children Act 2007
Child Protection Act 1999
Children and
Young People (Safety) Act 2017
Children, Young Persons and Their Families Act 1997
Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
ss 162(1)(c)
Children and Community Services Act 2004
(1)(b). The lists of designated persons are generally restricted to members
of specified occupations who typically deal with children
in the course of their
professional work, although each State and Territory has a different list of
such occupations. In all eight
States and Territories, child sexual abuse must
be reported; however, reflecting a narrower purpose in principle (namely, the
purpose of protecting children in the family context), even here, there are
limits: Victoria and Queensland, for example, require
reports of sexual abuse
only if the child does not or may not have a parent or caregiver who is able and
willing to protect the child
from the abuse and the harm caused:
Youth and Families Act 2005
ss 162(1)(d)
Child Protection Act
s 13E(2)(b).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (674 KB)
PDF format (600 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter