URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
George, AJ; Lowik, Vicki; Corbett-Jarvis, Nichola; Turley, Emma --- "Fields of Power in Rape Trial Reform: Hegemony, Habitus and Heretics" [2025] UNSWLawJl 15; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 431
FIELDS OF POWER IN RAPE TRIAL REFORM: HEGEMONY,
AND HERETICS
CORBETT-JARVIS
Despite incremental reforms over the past fifty years, transformative
change of sexual assault proceedings has not occurred. This
article uses
Bourdieu’s sociological concepts to explore why the legal field remains
resistant to substantial reform. It argues
that doxa, or deeply ingrained
beliefs, underpin both resistance to change and a tolerance of complainant harm,
while habitus ensures
the replication of established practices. This resistance
is evident in the notion of a ‘fair trial’, where the hegemony
defendant-centric doxa tends to minimise complainant interests and embed the
role of ‘rape myths’ in the courtroom.
Although reform advocates
– Bourdieu’s ‘heretics’ – have proposed solutions
such as juryless trials,
real change remains elusive. This article examines
recent proposals by the Australian Law Reform Commission and draws lessons from
Scotland’s failed attempt at a juryless trial pilot. Ultimately, a
Bourdieusian analysis suggests that policymakers may be
bound to a Sisyphean
path, pursuing incremental reform to address persistent issues.
I INTRODUCTION
Whether [rape] law reform is to be counted upon is one question; the second is
whether law reform will even be the beginning of the
Power is ... the prime mover in the social
Sexual violence can be experienced by anyone, but it is overwhelmingly
gendered: around 1 in 5 Australian women (22%) experience sexual
violence as
compared to 1 in 16 Australian men (6.1%) over 15 years of
However, women and girls
(‘complainants’)
choose to engage with the criminal justice system following sexual violence have
historically experienced little in the way of
‘justice’. More than
30 years ago, Judith Herman observed that the criminal justice system protects
from superior state
power but fails to protect
complainants.
Whilst the rights
of defendants are carefully guarded, there are ‘essentially no
guarantees’ for complainants; indeed,
if one were to design a system to
retraumatise, ‘one could not do better than a court of
complainant’s plight is clearly illustrated by the
Heroines of
study of court experiences in New South Wales
released almost 30 years ago. Two thirds (65%) of sexual assault trials were
stopped due to distress, as ‘complainants dry-retched,
claimed to feel
nauseous in the witness box, were unable to answer questions or had to take
regular breaks’.
Over the decades, advocates for law reform have worked tirelessly to improve
the complainant’s lot. Certainly, some significant
reform has been
achieved, but its impact on either deterrence or accountability can be
questioned: the prevalence rates for sexual
violence in Australia are lurching
toward ‘emergency’
with an 11% increase in
The structure of power in the adversarial criminal trial has prompted some to
question the value of further reform
or to declare that rape has effectively been
decriminalised.
Against this
background, it is timely to reflect on the power dynamics that impact on the
receptiveness or otherwise to current proposals
for reform of sexual assault
proceedings, and the prospects of substantial change. As Julia Quilter notes,
the work of Continental
theorists can offer
This article investigates the drivers of resistance to law reform in the
sexual violence space, adopting a socio-legal lens that draws
Bourdieu’s work on power relations and ‘fields’ of
This article examines the
recent Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’)
and compares Scottish reforms that have progressed beyond inquiry to the
Victims, Witnesses, and Justice Reform (Scotland) Bill (‘Justice
Bill’) which implements its
recommendations.
Both initiatives considered implementing a juryless trial. This is not a new
but it is important for
three reasons relevant to our investigation: (i) it presents one possible
pathway to reform on the significant
issue of misconceptions or ‘rape
myths’; (ii) it is an example of a more fundamental challenge to
established legal practice
and, as such; (iii) it is a fitting vehicle to test
whether Bourdieusian theory can help us understand resistance to sexual violence
law reform.
This article proceeds as follows. Part II outlines Bourdieu’s
‘thinking tools’ on power relations (
capital) as applied to the ‘field’ of law and sexual assault trials.
It discusses the notion of a ‘fair trial’
and the power imbalances
between defendants, complainants and the public interest. This article asks
whether a rebalancing is possible,
exploring Bourdieu’s concept of
and the potential for
meaningful law reform set against hegemonic legal interests. This leads to a
discussion in Part III of the
recent ALRC inquiry, its proposed
‘micro-strategies’, and a Bourdieusian analysis of the potential for
more fundamental
reform such as juryless trials. This analysis is supported by
early indications of resistance from legal agents.
Part IV then compares the Scottish reform effort, canvassing Lady
Dorrian’s 2021 Review and its associated Justice Reform Bill
legislative
After discussing the government ‘field’ of power, this article
examines the government’s incendiary clash with
agents in the legal field
). The ‘moon-sized meteor of a
proved too controversial, and the government has dropped the provisions on the
juryless pilot. The Scottish experience is particularly
instructive as a recent
example of the governmental challenges involved in trying to implement a
juryless pilot, demonstrating Bourdieu’s
power relations at work. For this
reason, interviews were conducted with Scottish stakeholders during October and
November 2024 (quotes
are incorporated where
appropriate).
Part V concludes that the difficult trajectory of law reform in the sexual
violence space can be better understood with the assistance
of Bourdieusian
theory. Currently, there is considerable symbolic power creating ‘room for
and a desire for law reform. However, the drivers that reproduce the already
entrenched legal field of power – Bourdieu’s
– are formidable. ‘Micro’ law reform that is
intelligible or ‘readable’ by dominant legal
may be successfully
introduced, but ‘clean
or ‘root and branch’
proposals for paradigm-shifting change, such as the juryless trial, are likely
to be staunchly resisted by the legal establishment.
II BOURDIEU’S POWER DYNAMICS IN SEXUAL ASSAULT LAW
A The ‘Field’ of Law and Its Capital,
To lay the foundation for subsequent analysis it is necessary to briefly
outline the main ‘thinking tools’ in Bourdieu’s
sociological
theory: fields of power, capital,
. These tools
can be applied to social contexts to identify the power dynamics that maintain
and reinforce structural
inequalities,
and to explain why
these inequalities can be accepted as natural and continue largely unchallenged.
is a durable configuration of
– essentially, a
playground of power within the wider social field, in which agents struggle for
recognition and dominance
in producing, circulating, and appropriating goods,
services, knowledge or
For Bourdieu, power is a macro-concept describing the way that dominant
institutions (such as law or government), as well as individuals,
relate to each
other and the entire social
Law may be conceptualised as a broad juridical
For Bourdieu, the force of the legal field of power is that it appears to be
founded on equitable principles, coherent formulations
and rigorous application.
Clothed in the ‘positive logic of science and the normative logic of
law compels
universal acceptance with its vision of an ordered
The rules and practices in a field are fashioned by powerful agents with
influence and access to
, to maintain their position and exclude
nonconforming agents or those without access to the capital valued in that
may be economic, cultural, social or symbolic. Economic capital is
self-explanatory, while cultural capital includes attributes
such as education
and verbal facility (‘linguistic
capital, like all capital, is not distributed evenly. Especially in the legal
field, the greater an agent’s linguistic
capital, the more they can
‘exploit the system of differences ... and thereby secure a profit of
distinction’.
capital operates at both individual and collective levels, and includes social
relationships (network ties) and resources
Symbolic capital is a
sort of reputational capital – an accumulation of other types of capital
‘as soon as they are known
recognized’.
Capital can
be harnessed as
symbolic power
and used to maintain and reinforce
structural inequality or, potentially, to generate change – challenging
the assumption that
symbolic power is
Agents in a field are socialised into its
dispositions, attitudes and practices unique to that field. Success in a field
depends on agents closely aligning
is both structured and structuring: the field structures the
in turn the
constructs the field as meaningful, ‘a world
endowed with sense and with value, in which it is worth investing one’s
almost subconsciously generates and organises
aligning the ‘sense of the game’ with ‘the
In the legal field,
emerges as practices ‘strongly patterned by tradition,
education, and the daily experience of legal custom and professional
They have a life, and a profound influence, of their own’ –
including the power to determine ‘
the law will
decide’ in any particular
Deeply entrenched within
, a kind of
self-evident set of values or conventional wisdom that shapes judgments about
the world. As such, it is rarely questioned,
prompting ‘unconscious
submission to conditions that are in fact quite arbitrary and
contingent’.
therefore cause social injustice to be ‘misrecognised’ as simply
part of the ‘social order that goes without
Its normalcy can
be so complete that the norm, as coercion, ceases to exist as
Thus the ‘paradox of doxa’ is that it is uniquely capable of
generating both suffering and
submission.
Bourdieu calls this
‘symbolic violence’:
the imposition of symbols and meaning (culture) so that they are experienced as
legitimate.
defended in a field’s orthodoxy, and attacked in
heterodoxy.
Importantly,
to continue or replicate the
legal field of power over time and, as a corollary, underpins resistance to law
reform by hegemonic
Yet Bourdieu’s theory is not simply about ‘pitiless social
reproduction’.
should not be considered ‘static’ or incapable of
dynamic relations of
material or symbolic domination cannot operate without implying or activating
resistance.
‘architectural drawing’ of a theory of
indicates a number of
ways that ‘room for manoeuvre’ around
can be achieved.
For example,
‘heretics’ may accumulate capital, increase symbolic power and
preach ‘the ministry of the
universal’,
purport to represent the universal ‘public interest’ to mobilise
While the prospects of
transformative heretical success may be
Bourdieu believes that the
process of sociological analysis itself can assist, by ‘transforming
metaphysical problems into
problems that can be treated scientifically and
therefore politically’.
B The Sub-field of Sexual Assault Proceedings
Having mapped out Bourdieu’s thinking tools on power relations, this
section applies them to the sub-field of sexual assault
proceedings, to better
understand the balancing of interests in a fair
Adversarial sexual assault proceedings are heard in a courtroom, which may be
conceptualised in Bourdieusian terms as a distinct
or sub-field of
The courtroom is a separate space where conflicts are transmuted into
‘specialist dialogues’ and a fair trial is viewed
as an ordered
progression towards the
stake is a symbolic act of naming (guilty/not guilty), consecrated by the
state’s vision of order.
The ‘triangulation’ of interests in a fair trial, namely the
interests of the accused, victim and the community, have
been explicitly
recognised in England and Wales. In
Attorney-General’s Reference (No 3
, Lord Steyn acknowledged that a ‘fair trial’ does not
focus predominantly on the defendant’s interests: ‘There
fairness to all sides. In a criminal case this requires the court to consider a
triangulation of interests. It involves taking
into account the position of the
accused, the victim and his or her family, and the
This principle has been accepted in NSW and Victoria at the Supreme Court
However, in England, courts have also acknowledged a (
) tendency to
focus on the defendant’s interests and minimise the complainant’s
interests in a sexual assault trial. In
, Lord Hope recognised that
this addresses
one side of the balance only. On the other side there is the public interest in
the rule of law. The law fails in its purpose if
those who commit sexual
offences are not brought to trial because the protection which it provides
against unnecessary distress and
humiliation of witnesses is inadequate. So too
if evidence or questions are permitted at the trial which lie so close to the
between what is relevant and permissible and what is irrelevant and
impermissible as to risk deflecting juries from the true issues
Construed as
, it is unsurprising that this imbalanced focus
– despite causing suffering for complainants – has not been
significantly
challenged in England or Australia. Cloaked by the ‘smooth
it is defended as orthodoxy. The following subsections therefore investigate the
surrounding the law’s approach to the
defendant’s interests, and the complainant’s challenges, in the
of the sexual assault trial. While
(given its field
reproductive function) resists reform, as Lord Hope points out, the third
interest in the balancing exercise –
the public interest in the rule of
law – indicates reform is necessary.
1 Defendant’s Rights/Fair Trial
The view that the right to a fair trial is ‘a defendant-centric
encapsulated in William Blackstone’s (in)famous ratio of 1765, that it is
‘better that ten guilty persons escape,
than that one innocent
The proposition
in this ratio that it is ‘
to convict an innocent than
mistakenly release the guilty’ is
but Blackstone did not explicate it further, presenting it casually, ‘with
no discussion as to whether or why it is
Blackstone’s
uncritically accepted in Australia for generations as part of the core legal
underpinning the vigorous safeguarding of a defendant’s rights
in a criminal trial. As noted in
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty
such orthodoxy is instilled in legal agents from the outset:
Most first-year law students are introduced to ... ‘Blackstone’s
ratio’ ... This moral choice accommodating the
possibility of error has
been reflected in fundamental aspects of our criminal justice system, including
the presumption of innocence
and the logically connected requirement the burden
of proof rests with the prosecution. It also finds reflection in the rigour of
the criminal law standard of proof [beyond reasonable
Apart from these defendant safeguards underpinned by Blackstone’s
ratio, Australia’s adversarial system ‘employs
numerous means to
prevent accused persons who are innocent from being
convicted’.
Indeed, there
are significant obligations on the prosecution and a lack of ‘obligation
of any kind upon the accused to prove,
or bring forward
However, the defendant’s ‘right’ to a fair trial is not a
positive right, but is ‘more accurately expressed
in negative terms as a
right not to be tried unfairly or as an immunity against conviction otherwise
than after a fair trial’.
This right is enshrined within the laws and procedural rules that govern the
trial process,
such that the
courts may consider the trial unfair and quash the resulting conviction if there
was a failure to comply with the
This ‘negative
right’ leads to a number of ‘minimum requirements’ that must
such as the presumption
of innocence as noted above,
defendant’s right to
representation,
an impartial
having adequate time
to prepare a defence,
to the assistance of an interpreter where
Beyond these basic parameters, the requirements of the ‘negative
right’ have not been exhaustively defined; they can evolve
and expand with
further judicial articulation.
Some argue that juries play a ‘critical role’ in ensuring a fair
– but while juries
are required for all indictable offences under section 80 of the
Constitution
there is no
such requirement in the state/territory laws that apply to almost all
prosecutions for sexual offences. Australia is
also a member of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
’), but article 14 only specifies ‘a fair and
public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial
does not stipulate a jury trial, and could not do so, given that
juryless models operate successfully in many signatories’
– including Australian states/territories (in a limited
As noted above, some Australian courts have acknowledged the need to balance
the triangulation of interests,
although the High Court has not yet done so. Often, only the defendant’s
and State interests as parties are
considered;
the complainant is
not a party, so their interests are easily overlooked. This deeply embedded
is not a uniquely Australian experience. As a Scottish Chief
Executive Officer of a sexual assault service observed, the criminal
system is ‘an adversarial system that’s been seen very much in terms
of the binary context between the state
– so the public interest –
and the accused person. What that’s meant is that the
is or can feel very, very peripheral to that
A Scottish defence counsel described the
in very different
the overriding thing is ‘where is the harm in the game?’ ... I
appreciate that there are complainers that come to court
and are retraumatised
... but at the end of the day it is ... the might of the state against the man.
... So it’s very challenging.
So we have the safeguards built in and the
checks and balances in the
The Bourdieusian tool of
is therefore useful to explain the
imbalanced ‘defendant-centric’ view of a fair trial, which drives
its corresponding
: resistance to complainant-focused reform, and
arguments that the pendulum of reform has already ‘swung too
2 Complainant’s Experience
Lord Hope’s balancing of competing interests is achieved (in typically
adversarial language) by respecting ‘the principle
of “equality of
arms”, which requires that all parties to a proceeding must have a
reasonable opportunity of presenting
their case under conditions that do not
disadvantage them as against other parties to the
proceedings’.
There is ample evidence indicating that the experiences of complainants do
not reflect this ‘equality of arms’ because,
as noted above, they
are not a party but merely a witness to their own sexual
Complainants have recounted finding ‘themselves in a “central yet
compromised position” in criminal justice proceedings’,
systemic barriers that prevent them from adequately participating in the justice
Complainants may wait months or even years for their case to be heard which, in
addition to their sexual assault, can leave them
in a prolonged state of
emotional turmoil.
anticipation of the trial, complainants know they will have to retell their
traumatic experience in front of a jury of strangers,
which can lead to chronic
stress, exacerbating the psychological toll of the initial
Delays also hamper recovery efforts, affecting a complainant’s sense of
self-worth.
A detailed discussion of the many retraumatising factors in the justice
system’s response to complainants of sexual violence
is beyond the scope
of this article;
however, the
persistent issue of ‘rape myths’ (or ‘misconceptions’)
is of particular interest, as it disadvantages
complainants at all stages of the
criminal justice process. Rape myths are ‘prejudicial, stereotyped or
false beliefs about
which question a complainant’s portrayal of an assault as being
Some of the more
common rape myths are that ‘real’ rape is stranger rape, that a
complainant will sustain injuries, that
they will fight back, report early, and
present as emotionally distressed. When a complainant’s sexual assault
experience or
behaviour does not align with such beliefs, they can be viewed as
less credible or actually responsible for the assault
(‘victim-blaming’).
Rape myths are often justified as ‘common
sense’; as such, they fit the description of collective
in the wider social
– unquestioned
attitudes, accepted as being the ‘way of things’.
The literature indicates that rape myths disadvantage complainants at both
the police reporting
prosecution stages.
during the trial, defence counsel can draw on rape myths to manipulate the jury
or reinforce the biases they may already
hold, undermine the complainant’s
credibility, and create doubts about whether consent was
Cross-examination
in the ‘theatre’ of the adversarial trial is a showcase for defence
counsel’s verbal acuity –
a paradigmatic example of Bourdieu’s
linguistic capital – and is set amongst the cultural and social capital in
the courtroom
sub-field of power which is alien to many complainants:
The myriad of symbolic devices – the robes, the wigs, the ritual
expressions ... are not irrelevant distractions: they are
the very mechanisms
through which those who speak attest to the authority of the institution which
endows them with the power to
Studies show that despite incremental reforms introducing a range of measures
which can alleviate some retraumatising aspects of
improper questioning
using rape myths remains relatively
unaffected.
As one defence
counsel recently observed, quoting Lord Brougham’s (
observation from 1821:
A criminal defense lawyer is obligated as a matter of ethics to zealously pursue
the client’s interest within the bounds of
law. ... To save that client by
all means and expedients, and at all hazards and costs to other persons, and ...
in performing this
duty [she] must not regard the alarm, the torments, the
destruction which [she] may bring upon
Defence counsel questioning based on rape myths is precisely the kind of
conduct that Lord Hope called ‘deflecting juries from
the true issues in
the defence’s utilisation of rape myths as
provides both a sound understanding of the nature of this conduct
(deploying ‘common sense’ arguments as to the ‘way
things’), as well as an insight into the misrecognised nature of the issue
and the ‘surprising’ absence of more
successful challenges to
In the face of such
displays of power – shaming and blaming – it is understandable how
at once the retraumatised complainant’s
ability to provide her best
evidence is prejudiced and the seeds of reasonable doubt are sowed for the jury.
Implementing Bourdieu’s
theory, the continued and normalised imposition of
suffering on complainants can be read as ‘symbolic violence’.
3 Public Interest
The historical failure to appropriately balance the defendant’s and
complainant’s interests in the sub-field of the adversarial
sexual assault
trial prejudices the third interest in Lord Hope’s balancing exercise: the
public interest. The concept of public
interest itself is notoriously
‘ambiguous and
but on a broad ideological level, it is one of those ‘juridical
norms’ that exemplifies the powerful language of ‘
justice, the public interest is taken to be an ideal worthy of pursuit; it is
something our laws and policies should
welfare of society.
In a sexual assault trial, the State brings the action, representing the
public interest. In this context, as Lord Hope notes, the
public interest is
served by achieving a fair trial and, more broadly, a properly functioning
criminal justice system which supports
the rule of law – and which is
to do so, providing appropriate accountability and deterrence such
that reporting a serious offence like rape is viewed as a viable
option. This is
also important to ensure peace and
However, as Lord Hope points out, the low reporting and conviction rates
indicate that the balance between the parties’ interests
is not being
achieved. Why is this so, given the need for change has been recognised for
decades? And where legislative reform occurs,
why is it resisted or misapplied
in practice?
Part II(B)(1)
examined one potential factor: legal
involving a defendant-centric
view of rights in a fair sexual assault trial, accompanied by its
-driven resistance. In addition,
can be seen working on a more basic level. As discussed in the next section,
legal agents are generally quite conservative about
whether or how the law or
legal practice should change.
C General Drivers of Resistance to Reform of Sexual Assault
Proceedings
Legal change proceeds at a laggard pace. This is necessary to maintain
consistency and public order, but when it comes to law reform,
laggard change
can be problematic. This is particularly so where the public interest shifts
with changes in social mores and
For example, Sir
Matthew Hale’s 1736 proposition that marital rape was not possible because
women irrevocably consented to
sex through
was only eradicated
in Australia over a 20-year period to
– although it was
still argued in the 2012 High Court case of
PGA v The Queen
The judgments in
capture precisely the range of conservative legal
attitudes to change. The majority countenanced slow, incremental change,
‘the tooth of time will eat away an ancient precedent’ and
‘gradually’ deprive it of
Yet Heydon J in
dissent flatly stated, ‘[t]he fact that a rule of law is disliked does not
mean that it has ceased to be the
law’; public opinion is relevant only to
the legislature, not the courts, because ‘those who seek to foster the
of law prize
certainty’.
where sexual assault law reform is legislatively introduced, it may not succeed
in its aims due to conservative interpretation
or failure to change prior
established practice: ‘The statute books are littered with [reform]
provisions that have never been
properly implemented because once the
legislation was adopted; nobody bothered to make the necessary adjustments at
the level of
organizational practice
A Bourdieusian analysis reveals that the sometimes lacklustre approach to
reform or its ineffective implementation (
) may be due to
conflicting values or conventional wisdom (
field-replicating nature of the dominant
results in legal agents
tending to comply with and continue established practices. In the sub-field of
the sexual assault trial,
the legal agents’ performances are grounded in
‘the often ‘“unwritten” methods for carrying out
(particular
resists change by defending cautiousness as the orthodoxy of the
legal field, as exemplified by Heydon J in
. When this is coupled with
driving prioritisation of a defendant’s
‘rights’ in a sexual assault trial, law reform to improve a
complainant’s
experience in the justice system may seem like a
‘Sisyphean task’.
However, the next section reveals there are some possibilities for
transformation.
D Possibilities for Transformation
1 Change Is Difficult, but Possible
discussed above can drive resistance to
reforms even if they would make for a more responsive legal system. ‘In
other words,
the way things are in practice is misrecognised as the natural way
they should be. Therefore, the ... legitimacy of the social order
questioned’
either the dominant or, mostly, the dominated. In addition, the legal
operates with rules and logic that are not found in any other
field; this professional autonomy can facilitate the prioritisation
traditional practices over public interest
Thus, the prospect
of success or failure in any law reform effort is directly related to its
alignment or otherwise with
, or the ‘readability’ of
those reforms in relation to the language, practices, and disciplining of those
in the legal
‘can only be “readable” to the extent that it cites and
repeats past practices. In this way new laws are
understood within their
historicity, being practiced and repeated in ways that conform to
Particularly in relation to rape myths, Quilter considers that ‘[t]he
possibilities for transformation, for change, are highly
limited where the
“schema” is so
The challenge
rests in ‘changing what legal practitioners, judicial officers and jurors
in particular know and how they perform
that embodied
knowledge’.
hegemonic legal agents possessing formidable linguistic capital and accumulated
symbolic power can commandingly influence public
opinion and policymakers, and
marshal resistance to reform in the name of the public interest: ‘even the
most virtuous man’s
imposition of his view on public interest should alarm
us. And perhaps we should be most on our guard when such an imposition is
disguised by the well-worded manner of its
Indeed, the legal field and its sub-fields exert ‘a force upon all
those who come within its range. But those who experience
“pulls” are generally not aware of their
comparison of fields of power with a magnet reflects a
‘remains essentially deterministic and circular’, where
‘objective structures produce culture, which determines
practice, which
reproduces those objective
structures’.
Nevertheless, there is some scope for change. It may be possible incrementally:
‘[a]lthough the structurally situated roots
stability over change in the long run,
is not static, not
categorically immutable; its properties can evolve by degree in response to
changing experiences and
circumstances’.
Alternately, change may occur by ‘symbolic
revolutions’.
following section discusses Bourdieu’s perspective on revolutionary
change, and the agents that might achieve it.
2 Law Reform, Heretics and Academics
When seeking to understand how reform in the sub-field of sexual assault
proceedings can occur given the powerful forces at play,
Bourdieu’s theory
suggests ‘room for manoeuvre’ can be identified and actioned through
‘symbolic revolutions’
that challenge
with new beliefs and values –
heterodoxy.
Revolutions can
be mobilised by
the ‘corporatism of the universal’, the latter referring to
professionals and academics in pursuit of social justice
and other universal or
public interest goals.
The current advocacy environment for sexual assault victims would suggest a
symbolic revolution has started and is underway. ‘Heretics’
actively engaged in providing new understandings about sexual assault and its
impacts. This is increasingly challenging assumptions
providing scope for new practices to be introduced that better reflect the
justice needs of
complainants.
Specialist practitioners and academics have also contributed to the promotion
of new understandings about sexual assault, in what
Bourdieu’s theory
might call a symbolic revolution. Their research and awareness campaigns have
detailed the enduring social,
mental health and physical impacts sexual assault
can have on victims.
projects have identified the wide-ranging influence of rape myths on the
under-reporting of sexual assault and the retraumatisation
of victims who enter
the court system.
of trauma-informed care, widely accessible a decade ago in the healthcare
is now migrating into
the legal field. These outcomes underpin the promotion of a ‘new’
way to engage with victims of
sexual assault – trauma-informed legal
This awareness about sexual assault and its impacts on victims has garnered
national and international attention from political and
legal agents with
significant symbolic power. Government reviews of the experiences of sexual
assault victims in the justice system
have occurred in Australia at state and
territory level,
and in many
common law countries including New
England and
and Northern
Multilateral
agreements like the
Istanbul Convention
European Directive
recognise that gendered violence constitutes discrimination and contravenes
human rights, creating ‘multiple protection and
support needs’ for
traumatised
victim-survivors.
The following sections discuss recent Australian and Scottish reform efforts
in more detail. But to recap the analysis thus far, Part
II outlined
Bourdieu’s ‘thinking tools’ and applied them to the sub-field
of sexual assault proceedings, to elucidate
the drivers of resistance to reform.
It showed that established
defendant-centric focus that minimises complainant interests, which works
against the public interest in an effective criminal
justice system. When
coupled with
driving resistance to reform generally – as seen
– the prospects of reform are slim, but not impossible. The
requisite ‘room for manoeuvre’ may be created by Bourdieu’s
heretics, professionals and academics; this is occurring nationally and
internationally. In Part III we apply this analysis to the
ALRC inquiry, its
‘micro-strategies’ and a more fundamental option: juryless trials.
Discussion of the Scottish reform
process, which is further advanced than
Australia, follows in Part IV.
III THE ALRC INQUIRY
A Further ‘Micro-Strategy’ Reform
As noted above, most Australian state and territory governments have reported
on, and introduced measures to reform, sexual offence
trials. However, many are
what Quilter describes as
‘micro-strategies’:
they do not unduly impact on the
of the courtroom and are easily
read by legal agents. As Quilter’s research suggests, they have not been
consistently implemented.
Many complainants have continued to voice concerns about their challenges in
seeking justice. The need for a consistent response
was subsequently
acknowledged by the joint Australian, state and territory governments in their
National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children
as by the Australian Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Reference Committee
in its 2023 inquiry and report on
Current and Proposed Sexual Consent Laws in
Bourdieusian terms, ‘room to manoeuvre’ was being etched through
acknowledgement of complainants’ need to improve
responses from these two
government sources with significant symbolic power, which built on the symbolic
capital accrued by ‘heretic’
advocates and corporatism of the
universal (contributions by practitioners, academics).
Subsequently, the Commonwealth Attorney-General referred an inquiry into the
criminal justice response to sexual offences to the ALRC,
an independent agency
advising government on law
recommendations are not automatically implemented, the ALRC’s website
states that its success rate makes it ‘one
of the most effective and
influential agents for legal reform in
Australia’.
was to ‘consider how to harmonise laws about sexual violence across
Australia and how to promote just outcomes for
people who have experienced
It was to examine the effectiveness of past reforms and how to increase their
effectiveness if necessary, but the focus was to be
on opportunities to explore
new ground rather than duplicating past
It was to take a
‘transformative’
Justice Responses to Sexual Violence
Issues Paper
Justice Responses Issues Paper
’) identified a range of
potential improvements, including:
• Audiovisual recordings of complainants’ evidence;
• Intermediaries to assist with communication;
• Expert evidence to explain complainants’ trauma responses;
• Jury directions to counter rape myths and misconceptions;
• Strengthening of legislative prohibitions on questions that reflect
myths and misconceptions;
• Judge-alone trials;
• Interpreters for culturally and linguistically diverse and First
Nations people;
• Independent legal representation to provide protection from the
disclosure and use of complainants’ personal information;
• Reforms relating to the admissibility and use of complainant
• Training of judges and counsel; and
• Reforms to prevent
The nature of most of the above reforms, with the exception of judge-alone
trials, could also be considered ‘micro-strategies’
that mirror many
reforms already implemented, to some degree, across various jurisdictions.
‘Transformative’ was mentioned
only once in the ALRC’s
discussion, in the context of restorative
The application of
Bourdieu’s theory would suggest that such an outcome should be expected
because of the nature of
. This inquiry was
undertaken by legal agents and in the language of law such that its narrative is
readable by agents in the legal
field with their settled (
readability of reforms is important; as discussed, Quilter’s study
indicates that even when reforms are legislated, the
is that they are often misapplied or attenuated due to problems of
readability.
B Efficacy of Micro-strategies to Bring about
Since most of these measures would be readable for legal agents, little
substantive change would be required in the legal
Quilter has reflected on ‘the inability of all of this law reform, all of
this work, to affect justice for victims
Some of the
ALRC’s proposed reforms, if implemented, may improve the complainant
experience and reduce retraumatisation. Yet
it is questionable whether they can
‘mitigate pervasive myths and misconceptions about rape, which have been
demonstrated to
impact the juror decision-making process’ – a major
stumbling block for meeting complainants’ justice needs, and
also for the
accountability and deterrence factors relating to the public
For example, studies show jury directions – a reform directly aimed at
countering rape myths – may be ineffective; jurors
‘unreceptive’ to directions designed to dispel the myth that a
‘real rape’ only occurs when a complainant
physically resists the
Julia Cooper
considers this finding to be ‘significant because it suggests that
directions are not a simple panacea for “correcting
misconceptions”’.
The timing of jury directions and the ability of jurors to comprehend the
directions are factors that ‘have the potential to
undermine or at least
temper the efficacy of any jury
direction’.
have shown that ‘jurors typically only comprehend between 50% and 70% of
instructions’,
study revealing that juror comprehension of directions could be as low as
Hence, Cooper reiterates
an important concern about relying on jury directions to counter rape myths
– ‘juror attitudes
and the decision-making process is largely
inscrutable because jury verdicts are provided without reason, and jury secrecy
prohibit deliberation
disclosures’.
In Bourdieusian terms, the jury in a sexual offence trial is placed into the
sub-field of the courtroom to make decisions based on
the ‘interaction
between the habitus and this environment, which is at once unfamiliar,
ritualised and emotionally
myths are raised by defence counsel they can hook into part of a juror’s
‘myths are not mere “misconceptions”, but rather they operate
as a type of “unconscious schemata” which
is cemented in history,
culture and ideology’.
The understandings garnered through this analysis and the previously mentioned
research cast doubt on the ability of jury directions
to counter rape myths,
suggesting further research is required. Independent evaluations would also be
required for the introduction
of expert evidence on complainants’
counter-intuitive trauma-based responses, any strengthening of legislative
provisions against
improper questioning and also juryless trials. The next
section outlines the various juryless models and, as a Bourdieusian analysis
would indicate, early resistance from legal agents.
C Reform or Transformation:
Juryless Trials
Rosa Luxemburg, a social reform theorist, suggested that ‘the struggle
for reform is its means; the social revolution, its
Therefore, while
reforms lay the foundation for change, they do not replace the need for
transformational social action. Such action
could be represented by the more
fundamental reform of juryless trials, which may improve a complainant’s
cross-examination
experience at court, address rape myths and provide the
benefit of transparency (written
Juryless trials can also reduce the potential risks that jurors might be
influenced by rape myths, ‘media coverage, conduct
their own research, or
be intimidated’, or be ‘unable to reach a unanimous verdict’;
there is at least some potential
for ‘greater flexibility, reduced cost,
and reduced delay’.
Thus the further consideration of juryless models has merit, along with a review
of the jury system
One juryless model cited in the
Justice Responses Issues Paper
judge-alone trials,
implemented in several jurisdictions (including Australia, in limited
circumstances) and proposed in others
(Scotland).
A hybrid model of
judge and two lay assessors has enjoyed long-term success in South
and has been
introduced in Norway.
contrast, the Dutch juryless system involves a panel of three
However, any juryless
model may have a low level of readability by legal agents as it conflicts with
in the courtroom sub-field; resistance would thus be
Indeed, suggestions that juryless trials could warrant further investigation
have raised objection from powerful agents in the legal
The Law Council of
Australia (‘LCA’) responded to the ALRC’s discussion of
judge-alone trials in their
Justice Responses Issues Paper
, stating that
the adversarial jury trial ‘enhance[s] community perceptions of the
transparency and legitimacy of the administration
because it:
• Involves community in the administration of justice;
• Safeguards against arbitrary exercise of state power;
• Facilitates impartiality and guards against bias; and
• Reinforces outcomes as ‘legitimate and impartial’.
The LCA’s response draws on its considerable symbolic capital as
Australia’s peak legal body, harnessing the usual legal
orthodoxy (the
stated public interest factors) in promoting its interest – which is to
maintain the status quo of the sexual
offence trial. The drive of the legal
prevents serious consideration of
an unreadable challenge like juryless sexual assault trials, and forecloses
discussions on how
to improve the intractable problem of rape myths.
Bourdieu’s theory would suggest this co-opting of these interest factors
is an example of the law’s unquestioned ability to preach to the
‘ministry of the universal’ (purporting to represent
interest) in a display of symbolic
Yet most of the LCA’s public interest factors are open to question.
While it is true that community involvement is removed with
judge-alone or
multi-judge panels, hybrid juryless models do not suffer the same issue. It is
also arguable whether a jury’s
group decision-making is superior to an
individual judicial decision-maker, multiple judges or hybrid panel: most jurors
are ‘unlikely
to have “worked with a group to reach a decision about
a complex problem” which involves high-stakes (freedom versus
and imprisonment)’.
Juries comprise twelve individuals who likely have no legal knowledge or
training, yet must navigate their way through evidence,
conflicting facts and
the application of legal rules to provide a
This is particularly
the case for sexual assault trials, where the law is extremely
Community involvement is also touted as injecting ‘a diversity of life
experience’
decision-making, but this cannot be an evidence-based assertion. The very
randomness of jury selection means there can be no
diversity, representativeness, or a panel of ‘peers’ that might be
better suited than a judge, panel of judges or
hybrid panel to understand the
perspectives.
Rather, there are concerns regarding the lack of diversity on
and that jury members mainly represent those who are available to participate
and do not have work
commitments.
As to juries protecting against state tyranny, sexual offences are typically
not ‘political crimes which any faction of the
state might seek to
prosecute for improper
potential judicial bias, the
Justice Responses Issues Paper
acknowledges
this concern regarding the judge-alone model, pointing out that the requirement
for judges to provide reasons could
also cause further delay or result in more
However, the other
juryless models go at least some way to addressing bias, and the value of
written reasons for both defendant and
complainant could potentially outweigh
associated inconvenience. In addition, when contemplating bias, the very real
presence of
rape myths and potential juror bias should not be dismissed.
Thus, the LCA’s reasons for resistance are not dispositive. However,
the resistant nature of the legal
is highlighted by the
LCA’s insistence that jury trials are ‘a fundamental part of the
system of criminal justice in
Australia’ and any reforms would require
‘extremely careful
consideration’.
course, any introduction of a juryless pilot would need to be done with care,
ensuring the defendant’s rights were not prejudiced;
but the ongoing
retraumatisation of complainants of sexual assault and the dearth of uniform
national law reform in Australia for
sexual offence trials have been recognised
as areas requiring urgent action.
This Part has noted that many of the proposed reforms by the ALRC appear to
be micro-strategies that are easily read by legal agents.
Legal agents have
resisted the idea of more radical reform, such as the juryless trial –
despite its potential to address rape
myths. A Bourdieusian analysis indicates
this is to be expected, given the formidable drivers of legal
to replicate the current legal field. Part IV discusses recent
Scottish reform efforts, which are instructive given that they have
beyond the inquiry process, to the Justice Reform Bill which legislatively
implements the reforms. The Scottish experience
neatly illustrates the
significant symbolic power inherent in the legal field with its entrenched
and may point to the challenges involved in
further consideration of juryless trials in Australia.
IV SCOTTISH REFORM OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE TRIALS
The Scottish legal system is in a process of ‘devolving’ whereby
the Parliament of the United Kingdom is gradually conferring
powers to Scottish
Parliament.
Scotland has its
own unique criminal justice system which diverges from that of England and
Like Australia,
Scotland has engaged in decades of incremental reform of the adversarial trial
system to improve the complainer (‘complainant’)
experience in
sexual offence proceedings.
Also like Australia, the law reform process has historically encountered
resistance driven by the deeply engrained
dominant agents in the legal
profession.
current round of reforms are further advanced than Australia, with a major
national review having been completed
in 2021 and the Justice Reform Bill which
implements its recommendations introduced in Holyrood (the metonym for the
Scottish Parliament)
Applying Bourdieusian thinking tools reveals the strategies of dominant agents
in the genesis, conduct, and recommendations of the
review – particularly
the proposed juryless pilot court – as well as resistance to the
initiative, media coverage, and
debates emerging from Holyrood.
A Room for Manoeuvre: Lady Dorrian’s Report
In 2019, the Scottish judiciary was becoming increasingly concerned at the
number and complexity of sexual offences cases coming to
court, which comprised
the ‘vast majority’ of High Court trials and a
‘significant’ number of cases in the
Sheriff Court solemn procedure
and Children’s Hearing
Such growth was anticipated to
‘become unsustainable as presently managed’ in the Scottish court
Lord Carloway, the
Lord President and Lord Justice General (most senior Scottish judge), held
discussions on the matter with two
senior legal and government ministers: the
Lord Advocate
and Cabinet
Secretary for Justice.
Carloway then commissioned a review of Scottish court procedure in serious
sexual offence cases to improve complainers’
experience ‘without
compromising the rights of the
Lady Dorrian, the Lord Justice Clerk (second most senior Scottish judge) was
appointed to chair a cross-sectoral review panel.
It is notable that Lady Dorrian’s review, which resulted in the
Improving the Management of Sexual Offence Cases: Final Report from the Lord
Justice Clerk’s Review Group
Dorrian Review
represented a convergence of reform-driven will at the highest levels: it was
commissioned and chaired by agents with enormously
powerful cultural and
symbolic capital in both the legal and government fields. This convergence
generated the requisite symbolic
power to spearhead a drive for substantial
reform, and to challenge the
acceptance of an imbalanced system. In
comparison to the ALRC’s relatively modest terms of reference, the
Dorrian Review
’s terms of reference required it to ‘take an
entirely fresh look at the way in which sexual offences are dealt with’
– a ‘“clean sheet”
because there were ‘many ways in which the current system could and should
fundamentally’.
Dorrian Review
acknowledged that it built on prior reforms
including the
Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2014
This legislation imposes an obligation on (among others) the Lord Advocate,
police and court service, to ‘a person who is or
appears to be a
victim’, to treat them in a ‘respectful, sensitive, tailored,
professional and non-discriminatory manner’,
consider their needs, and
protect them from secondary and repeat
victimisation.
This and other
reforms were ‘designed to reset the relationship the criminal justice
system has with
complainers’,
to implement Lord Hope’s rebalancing exercise. However, the legislation
was not as successful as was
The law was ‘out
of touch’, resulting in ‘unacceptable trauma and
and there was
a consensus
that ... more requires to be done, and specifically
with regard to practice and procedure relating to the way in which sexual
cases are processed and
Here, note Lady Dorrian’s (validating) articulation of a long-felt need
and invocation of a
consensus, harnessing its associated social
capital and concomitant symbolic power. As discussed, change is always more
and more likely when coming from a spokesperson with sufficient
symbolic power to speak for collective interests. As Bourdieu’s
suggests, when judges preach to the ‘ministry of the universal’
(public interest) like this, it is particularly
‘[J]urists are the driving force of the universal, of
universalization’, with their proclaimed independence and their
‘capital of words’ ... ‘[t]hey were the bearers of a rational
habitus ...’. And where legal opinion favours
change, their coveted
autonomy reinforced it
Dorrian Review
recommended many ‘micro-strategies’
similar to those considered by the ALRC in Australia, including specialist
and specialist courts. But in an audacious departure from orthodoxy, it
raised several heretical prospects, the most publicly controversial
pilot for judge-alone trials.
In a not-so-subtle nod to the comforts of legal
observed the profession’s ‘strong historical and
emotional attachment to trial by jury, and valid arguments in favour
democratic benefit of community
involvement’.
However, the
Dorrian Review
also noted there were strong arguments in
favour of ‘conducting these trials in other ways’ to address the
issues, including the low conviction rate, ‘appalling’
ordeal of cross examination for complainers, defence counsel deliberately
targeting jurors’ potential rape myths, evidence of inexplicable
acquittals, lack of written reasons, and anticipated cost
The principal disadvantages of judge-alone trials were removal of community
involvement, protection of the individual from State
oppression (noting that
sexual offences were not conventionally political crimes), judges taking on the
role of deciding facts (noting
they were trained to do so and there was a right
of appeal), and ‘case hardening’ giving judges a pro-complainer
perspective.
Dorrian Review
reiterated that ‘the accused’s right to
a fair trial must not be compromised, but the concept of a fair trial does not
hinge on involvement of a
reassurance in precedent, the
Dorrian Review
noted that judge-alone
trials exist in Scotland and comparable jurisdictions, and preferred this model
over either a multi-judge
panel or hybrid judge and lay panel
However, the group
conducting the
Dorrian Review
were ‘strongly divided’ and did
not recommend a move to judge-alone
It did agree there
was merit in a wider debate, and issued a recommendation that
[c]onsideration
should be given to developing a time-limited pilot
of single judge rape trials to ascertain their effectiveness ... and to enable
the issues to be assessed in a practical rather than a theoretical
Essentially, the
Dorrian Review
did not recommend change, but an evidence-gathering
exercise. Again, Bourdieu’s thinking tools are helpful, directing
to the powerful influence of the main change agents within the
government and legal fields, and understanding the drivers behind
’s narrative and its recommendations. The door was opened a
crack, providing room for manoeuvre.
B Literature Review and
Working Group Report
In response, the government commissioned an updated literature review titled
‘Alternatives to Jury Trials: An Evidence Briefing
for the Consideration
of a Time-Limited Pilot of Single Judge Rape Trials Working Group’
(‘Alternatives to Jury
although it
was not the bulwark for the judge-alone model that might have been anticipated.
There were mixed findings on international
developments; while some countries
had increased citizen participation, others had moved to a judge-alone model.
Still others –
notably Norway – had a panel of judge and lay
‘Alternatives to Jury Trials’ review also noted mixed English
(Cheryl Thomas) and Scottish (James Chalmers, Fiona
Leverick and Vanessa E
Munro) findings on rape myth
and the evidence was limited on judge-alone trials specifically. There were no
robust conclusions on the impact of changing
The ‘Alternatives
to Jury Trials’ review ultimately found a judge-alone pilot could gather
valuable evidence on changing
trial mode, but would ‘not likely be
sufficient’ to improve complainer experience – a holistic
consideration of
the system was
‘Alternatives to Jury Trials’ review was then considered by a
Working Group comprising 12 members representing the
diverse interests of the
justice system, which reported on the practicalities of a judge-alone model in
December 2022 in the
Lady Dorrian Review Governance Group: Consideration of a
Time-Limited Pilot of Single Judge Rape Trials Working Group Report
Working Group
Working Group Report
noted that the Working Group was divided on
introducing a judge-alone pilot, which would ultimately be decided by the
Scottish Parliament.
Group did not agree on a number of fundamental and seemingly uncontroversial
issues, including whether there was any issue of
potential judicial bias in the
judge-alone model, or whether measures would be required to control for
Working Group
concluded in reasonably spartan fashion that any judge-alone model
should minimise changes to practice, its objectives should be
clear, all cases
of rape should be included (with limited possibility for exclusion), and the
pilot should be in the High Court.
Written reasons should be published within
two weeks of the verdict, and the appeals process should remain
So, after an
ambitious call for change from the
Dorrian Review
, it was clear from the
tenor of the
Working Group Report
that implementation would be enormously
challenging. In a Bourdieusian sense, this is unsurprising, given the
triangulation of interests
in a sexual assault trial and the conflicting
inherent in the Working Group’s diverse
C Introduction of Legislation
1 The Government Field
The Justice Reform Bill to implement the
Dorrian Review
recommendations was introduced into Scottish Parliament in April
Before analysing its
passage through Parliament, a brief description of the government field is
required. Of all Bourdieusian fields,
this field represents an
‘extraordinary symbolic act of force, which consists in getting
universally accepted ... as the general
will ... “a site made by agents
commissioned to state the public good, to be the public good and to appropriate
A government’s success therefore lies in ensuring it is perceived as
the people’s voice,
marshalling a ‘
serving ‘the dominant more than the
dominated’).
the law – with its impersonal logic of science and normative power of
morality – the government comes to possess
a ‘monopoly of symbolic
power as well as
The inherent
weakness is that if the government blatantly ignores public need, it will no
longer be seen as the most effective way
to take care of the public’s
This is as it
should be in a democracy, but it means that policymaking and implementation is
often turbulent and reactive, an ‘unceasing’
task to generate credit
This task can require tough choices on whether or not to engage in policy
compromises to strengthen a party’s power. Strategically,
as noted through
the use of Bourdieu’s theory, compromises have the benefit of ‘the
Realpolitik
which is the condition of entry to political
government’s policymaking must also weather the challenges of collisions
with other fields. Where the government attempts
legislative reform of legal
institutions and processes, it can quickly become clear that the legal field
‘is not simply a cat’s
paw of State power ... [it] has its own
complex, specific, and often antagonistic relation to the exercise of such
Bourdieu’s thinking on relations of power thus elucidates both the
dynamic and somewhat reactive nature of the government field
and signals the
risk of its collision with the powerful legal field in an attempt to implement
reform of sexual assault trials. These
difficulties were played out in the
submissions and evidence before the Criminal Justice Committee of the Scottish
(‘Committee’),
which was tasked with reporting prior to a vote on whether the Justice Reform
Bill could proceed to Stage 2 of the parliamentary
2 Evidence and the Stage 1 Report
While many of the Justice Reform Bill’s reforms around sexual assault
proceedings were less controversial, the recommendation
of a time-limited
juryless pilot was an incendiary proposition for most of the Scottish legal
establishment,
particularly
defence counsel. The battle lines were drawn in submissions and evidence
provided to the Committee, most predominantly
around the conflicting Scottish
and English research on rape myths and their potential to influence jury
Other hotly debated
issues included the tone of sexual offence proceedings, conviction rates,
removal of public involvement, fairness
and bias. These debates nicely
illustrate: (i) the issues that may be raised against juryless trials; and (ii)
archetypal Bourdieusian
power dynamics, with government and legal agents arguing
vigorously to either advance reform or defend entrenched
(a) Rape Myths
The research divergence was exploited with tactical efficacy by witnesses on
opposing sides of the juryless debate, who invariably
hailed the most supportive
research and dismissed opposing research, sometimes with very public collateral
damage. The Faculty of
Advocates Criminal Bar Association (‘FACBA’)
stated that Thomas’ research in England and Wales showed that ‘rape
myths were themselves
the Scottish Solicitors Bar Association (‘SSBA’) claimed this meant
that the government was ‘trying to solve a
problem that does not, in fact,
Conversely, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice indicated that Chalmers, Leverick
and Munro’s Scottish research provided ‘overwhelming
evidence that
rape myths are a factor and that they influence
decision-making’.
intense questioning from another frontbencher eager to demonstrate Thomas’
research actually did reveal jurors held rape
myths, Thomas herself lamented
being caught in the crossfire: ‘I find it quite worrying that, for some
reason, my research
has to be knocked down in
Following extensive evidence, however, it became clear that the research was
not so far apart, so there was somewhat of a stalemate:
Thomas’ research
did indicate a number of prevalent rape
and Leverick, Chalmers
and Munro acknowledged that while their previous research found jurors
articulated rape myths in deliberations,
no direct line could be drawn to show
impact on either individual decision-making or overall verdicts of juries:
easy, or even perhaps possible, to do that in the context of
group deliberations’.
All researchers indicated the need for caution around jury research,
particularly before making ‘fundamental decisions based
on one piece of
(b) Improving the Tone of Court Proceedings
Working Group Report
stated that the first of the pilot’s
objectives was improving complainers’
experience,
that is, the tone
of court proceedings; it was anticipated a judge-alone model may assist. There
was some evidence to support this
as one King’s
Counsel indicated:
Lawyers approach a jury case in a way that is different from the way in which
they would approach a case with a single judge. It
is, if you like, the contrast
between an impressionistic approach taken with a jury – that is, they try
to create an impression
– and the more analytical approach that is taken
with a judge. There is a difference in
Yet the other King’s Counsel flatly refused to concede improper
questioning was occurring:
I think that there have been improvements year on year, with a particular
acceleration recently, in moving away from the approach
of the past when I, with
my finery in court, was entitled to be regarded as some sort of elevated being,
such that I could speak
to witnesses as I liked and expect the jury to weigh my
every word as gold ... I think that the theatre that went along with powerful
sarcasm or whatever as a tool of the trade should not be tolerated, and it
currently is
In response, a Committee member curtailed such attempts at evasion:
‘[A]ll that I am seeing are all the reasons for not doing
something. The
Committee must address the reforms, which, by necessity, are
significant.’
Nevertheless, like the ‘Alternatives to Jury Trials’ review,
further questions had been raised about another key plank
in the Dorrian
arguments for reform.
(c) Conviction Rates
Given that one of the pilot’s objectives was to gather evidence on
outcomes, another significant issue for the Committee was
the lack of data on
Scottish conviction rates for those cases eligible for the pilot: single
complainer/single defendant facing charges
of rape or attempted
The FACBA submitted
this was a considerable weakness, because the ‘irresistible conclusion is
sole purpose of the pilot scheme
’ was to increase
conviction rates.
that: ‘In trying to promote the interests of one side (complainer) above
the other (accused), it seems intended to
create an imbalance, rather than
balancing competing interests with the overall interests of
Polemically, this implies there is, presently, a ‘just’ balance
in sexual offence proceedings that would be upset by a
measure aiming to drive
up conviction rates. As noted, this singular aim for the juryless pilot was not
apparent from the
Dorrian Review
Working Group Report
submission is essentially a straw man argument. It would serve no-one’s
interests – complainer, defendant or public
(or indeed the government)
– to implement a reform purely to achieve greater conviction rates, as
this would rapidly undermine
the public’s interest in a properly
functioning criminal justice system. The perception of legitimacy would be lost.
In Bourdieusian
terms, this would endanger the incumbent government’s seat
of power and undermine the impartiality and equity that the legal
field needs in
order to maintain its symbolic power. The government later responded that the
conviction rate was concerning: for
all offences, 88%; for rape or attempted
rape, 48%; for single charge cases of rape or attempted rape,
However, the SSBA argued that other factors contributed to the low conviction
rate more than rape myths, including the ‘beyond
reasonable doubt’
standard of proof and the not uncommon lack of hard evidence such as CCTV
Similarly, the Law
Society’s submission noted:
Sexual offence cases are, by their very nature, often difficult cases to
prosecute. There are often no eye-witnesses. Proving the
allegation can be
technically complex. Juries can be presented with competing accounts which both
appear plausible. Not all allegations
are true. Complainers can, on occasion,
misremember events, or incorrectly identify perpetrators. The differences may be
in the detail;
but those differences can be hugely
The commanding linguistic capital should be noted here. Nestled in among the
indisputable factual difficulties (often no eye-witnesses)
and technical
difficulties (legal complexity) there is an almost imperceptible drawing on rape
myths (false allegations)
misconceptions (memory inconsistency, which can be
trauma-induced).
Ideological
seed-planting of this kind is common in courtroom cross-examination but is
perhaps more surprising – or telling
– in a submission on the
doubtful role of rape myths and misconceptions. But such is the power of
under the smooth workings of
(d) Removal of Public Involvement, Potential for Bias
A further SSBA concern echoed that of the ALRC discussed in Part III above: a
judge-alone model would remove the ‘public’s
closest involvement in
the legal system’ and means of securing diversity in
decision-making.
of the Scottish judiciary are aged 50–59 years and almost half (47%) are
aged 60+ years; most (71%) are
This lack of judicial
diversity led almost inevitably to the concern voiced by many Committee
witnesses and victims, that the judge-alone
model was susceptible to the
potential for judicial bias.
In a Realpolitik
move, the government responded that it was open to
considering both the multi-judge and judge plus lay panel
(e) Prejudicing the Right to a Fair Trial
The Cabinet Secretary was confident that ‘a pilot will be lawful, and
... as a Government, we will comply with [article 6 of]
Convention on Human
Senators of the Judicial College posited that a pilot, evaluated by the
government, may not constitute an ‘independent
tribunal’ for the
purposes of the Convention.
Lady Dorrian pointed out that many other pilots, such as drug courts, have been
successfully run without causing
However, the
Senators ultimately failed to support the pilot.
(f) Written Reasons
The main plank left in the
Dorrian Review
arguments for reform was the
‘great prize’
written reasons, which would counter the ‘deliberative “black
hole” at the centre of the trial
providing an
opportunity for scrutiny (and appeal, which was seen variously as a strength and
weakness given its potential for further
delays). Judges could use the writing
exercise as an opportunity to ‘check their own biases’ and ensure
their decision
was supported by the
This would benefit
both complainers and defendants, and as the Cabinet Secretary noted, would
provide an ‘unrivalled opportunity
to gather better evidence about what
the real issues, deliberations and challenges
(g) Committee Conclusions
Ultimately, the Committee was split three ways: first, those that supported
the Justice Reform Bill saw it as a valuable opportunity
to gather evidence on
rape myths, the experiences of stakeholders, written judgments, and to measure
outcomes such as early pleas
convictions.
The second group
argued the traditional merits of juries being the ‘cornerstone of the
justice system’, reflecting the
diversity of society and voicing concern
that the judge-alone model carried potential for
They believed time
should be provided to ascertain whether the Justice Reform Bill’s other
initiatives work.
group also believed the pilot should not proceed, for the traditional reasons
and, significantly, some very political ones:
they were concerned that
proceeding with the pilot despite ‘such polarisation of views’ would
undermine public
confidence.
Validating the latter concerns, in an extraordinary turn of events the SSBA
announced a planned boycott of the proposed pilot, which
was widely reported in
the media. While FACBA barristers could not engage in boycotts due to the cab
rank rule, the SSBA’s
solicitor advocates were not so
The SSBA argued the
boycott was justified, as the pilot would increase the risk of ‘a
miscarriage of justice, deliver no discernible
benefits ... and undermine the
public’s confidence in our criminal justice
More hyperbolically, the SSBA commented to the media: ‘The proposed
pilot is a clear attempt to interfere in the independence
of the judiciary and
the court process by the Scottish government. ... The motivation behind this
pilot is to increase the conviction
rate for rape at any
A former judge then entered the media fray, stating the pilot was
‘constitutionally repugnant’ and that the Ministers
‘treating the courts as forensic laboratories in which to experiment with
their policies’.
followed on from a comment by the Scotland Bar’s most senior female
practitioner, likening the removal of a jury to acts
of suppression in
Hitler’s Germany.
While the tenor of media reports was surprising, it is hard to overstate the
ideological magnitude of the SSBA’s political manoeuvre;
it effectively
prejudices an important requirement of a fair trial (legal representation),
purportedly in the name of securing a
A Committee member
questioned the ethics of such a move, asking why ‘lawyers would
“essentially say they are not going
to follow the rule of law” if
Parliament passes the
That the SSBA
would countenance this conduct illustrates the potent force of
driving attempts to maintain entrenched
3 Epilogue: The Scottish Sun Sets on a Juryless Pilot
Following the Committee’s report, SSBA campaign and media coverage, the
government indicated a start date of 2028 for the pilot,
which meant it was
effectively ‘kicked into the long
The Justice
Reform Bill’s Parliamentary debate in April 2024 was spirited, with a
Labour crossbencher objecting that its multiplicity
of reforms meant it was,
essentially, too threatening to current
this moon-sized meteor of a bill is ... too big and too broad, and professionals
believe that it may threaten an extinction-level
event for much of the principle
and practice of a system that remains in need of modernisation. It makes little
sense to undertake
the reforms all at once, and as yet we have insufficient
This echoes the sentiment of a senior prosecutor, who noted that Scotland was
‘suffering from an attempt to do too much in the
one bill ... it
like a multitude attack on the
significant majority of the Scottish National Party
successful with 60 votes for, the 62 abstentions included 6 SNP
The SSBA predicted
a near-unanimous boycott of a juryless
and media scrutiny
continued. Lady Dorrian’s ‘clean sheet’ initiative clearly
posed a threat to the Justice Reform
Bill. It seems that the symbolic power of
the Review’s champions was no match for the
driving the very public response from the wider legal field.
The political sun then set for the juryless initiative following the
announcement of a six-month 19.5% increase in rape
In a further
strategic Realpolitik
concession, the government announced it had dropped
the pilot for lack of cross-party support, ‘irrespective of the
to build consensus for the remaining
Responses were, predictably, split. The FACBA were ‘very pleased’,
the SSBA noted a ‘humiliating U-turn’,
while the Law Society noted
it was ‘unfortunate’ the move took so long; the specialist support
‘disappointed’.
The Justice Reform Bill is still being
considered;
meanwhile, the
government has returned to incremental and more readable reform, planning
legislative amendments to facilitate ‘further
research into jury
deliberations, including how rape myths may affect
modest approach may appeal to the legal hegemony; as one defence solicitor
If everything else has been tried, if a complainer’s experience is
still an awful, dramatic experience, and [her] position would
have been improved
if there was no jury there, and there’s ... research that supports that
across the board, then I suspect
it would be harder to argue against the removal
of the jury.
As a Senior Prosecutor put it, a simplified, single issue, evidence-backed
bill on juryless reform might allow policymakers to ‘step
gently through
the objections and try and bring people with [them]’. In Bourdieusian
terms, to collaborate on shifting
to make enough room for
contemplating new
This Part has traced the Scottish government’s attempt at a more
fundamental transformation of sexual assault proceedings with
a juryless pilot.
Bourdieu’s thinking tools highlight the nature of power relations inherent
in the reform process, and explain
how dominant legal agents can leverage
significant symbolic power, harnessing formidable capital – professional
networks – to shape public opinion, influence policymakers and
successfully marshal resistance to reform.
4 Post-epilogue: The ALRC Takes the Same Approach
The ALRC’s final report was handed down after this article was written
and is therefore beyond its scope. But as a Bourdieusian
analysis would suggest,
and much like the Scottish result, the ALRC cautiously concludes it is:
‘too early to say if juryless
trials would help achieve more just
outcomes. While this is an area worth exploring further, more research is needed
before this
reform idea can be properly
considered.’
V CONCLUSION
Over the last 50 years, both Scottish and Australian advocates have worked
tirelessly to improve a complainant’s experience
in the criminal justice
system. While incremental reforms have progressed the complainant’s lot,
they have not provided the
desired transformational change or real-world impact
on deterrence or accountability. This article has contributed a timely
socio-legal
reflection on the power dynamics inherent in the reform of sexual
assault proceedings, and how these dynamics can be better understood
assistance of Bourdieusian theory.
Applying Bourdieu’s thinking tools to the legal field and its sub-field
of sexual assault proceedings shows that the driving
force of law’s
symbolic power is
, which paradoxically generates both legal
resistance to change, and acceptance of harm caused by the status quo. This is
, in the form of the time-honoured practices of
the profession.
legal hegemony’s success depends on alignment with prevailing
, the motivation to stay aligned is formidable. Thus, the
legal field (and its sub-field) reveals itself as a largely autonomous,
self-replicating system.
In sexual assault proceedings, the hegemonic legal
focuses on a defendant’s rights to a fair trial, minimising
the complainant’s suffering under the weight of the status
quo. This is
accompanied by a
of cautiousness to legal change. However, the
retraumatisation of complainants at trial that is bound up with
cross-examination practice
and potential juror bias due to social misconceptions
or ‘rape myths’ has motivated calls for change in the form of
trials. As Bourdieu’s theory indicates
must be seen to respond; the legal field cannot close itself off from ‘the
social realities [it is] ... supposed
to express or
adapt to ensure continued legitimation of its established order of
In recent times, the advocacy of heretics and the corporatism of the
universal have created ‘room for manoeuvre’ and a
environment more receptive to reform in both Scotland and Australia. However,
the Scottish experience aptly illustrates
the government’s implementation
challenges and the power of pushback from the wider legal field on more
fundamental reforms
like juryless trials. Many of the ALRC’s proposed
‘micro’ reforms, similarly to Scotland, are both readable and
implementable; again, consistently with the Scottish experience, early
submissions to the Australian inquiry may indicate that powerful
legal agents
would oppose less readable reform such as a juryless model. Thus, further
research was cautiously suggested.
This dearth of prospect for more fundamental law reform to herald the
potential transformation of complainants’ experiences
in sexual assault
proceedings highlights the robust nature of the legal field and its ability to
self-replicate its practices, beliefs
and relationships of power – unless
perhaps hegemonic legal agents decide that the necessity of reform is based on
evidence. The proposed boycott effectively prevented the evidence
gathering that could support or negate juryless trials in Scotland.
future rounds of research and advocacy may result in the sufficient mobilisation
of symbolic power to achieve change –
transforming what, today, seems like
unreadable heresy into tomorrow’s more readable, plausible reform
Symbolic power, in its ... heretical, anti-institutional, subversive mode,
must also be realistically adapted to the objective structures
of the social
world. ... [T]he will to transform the world by ... a new vision of social
divisions and distributions, can only succeed
if the resulting ... evocations,
are also, at least in part, well-founded pre-visions, anticipatory
descriptions.
Ultimately, it seems, the key to policymaking success in reforming sexual
assault proceedings in both Scotland and Australia will
continue to lie in
solidly evidence-based proposals and playing that Sisyphean long game.
Amanda-Jane (AJ) George, LLB (Hons I) (Bond), LLM (London), PhD
(Queensland), Senior Lecturer, College of Law, School of Business
Central Queensland University. The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers
of this article for their generous time
in providing very useful feedback.
Vicki Lowik, B Soc Sci (Hons), PhD, Adjunct Research Fellow,
School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Science, Central Queensland
University.
Nichola Corbett-Jarvis, LLB (Hons), PhD, Barrister (England
& Wales), Senior Lecturer, College of Law, School of Business and
Central Queensland University.
Emma Turley, BSc (Hons), PhD, CPsychol, FHEA, PGC AP,
AFBPsS, College of Criminology and Justice, School of Business and Law, Central
Queensland University.
Jocelynne A Scutt,
‘Introduction’ in Jocelynne A Scutt (ed),
Rape Law Reform: A
Collection of Conference Papers
(Australian Institute of Criminology, 1980)
<https://www.aic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-07/rape-law-reform.pdf>.
Lars Bang, ‘Between the
Cat and the Principle: An Encounter between Foucault’s and
Bourdieu’s Conceptualisations
of Power’ (2014) 6(1)
18, 18 <https://doi.org/10.2304/power.2014.6.1.18>.
‘Personal Safety:
Australia’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 15 March
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/personal-safety-australia/latest-release>.
While the term
‘victim-survivor’ is generally accepted in the literature as the
preferred term for people who have experienced
sexual violence, this article
utilises the term ‘complainant’ as the technical legal terminology
for a victim-survivor
in the criminal justice system before a verdict is handed
This article uses the term
‘defendant’ for a person accused of using violence, although the
term ‘accused’
is often used in the literature. We have not changed
the terminology in quotes.
Judith Herman,
Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence
(Pandora, 1992) 72, cited in Louise
Ellison and Vanessa E Munro, ‘Taking Trauma Seriously: Critical
Reflections on the Criminal
Justice Process’
(2016) 21(3)
International
Journal of Evidence and Proof
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1365712716655168>.
Herman (n 6) 72.
New South Wales Department
Heroines of Fortitude: The Experiences of Women in Court as
Victims of Sexual Assault
(Report, November 1996) 101, cited in Julia A
Quilter, ‘Re-framing the Rape Trial: Insights from Critical Theory about
the Limitations
of Legislative Reform’
Australian Feminist
Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13200968.2011.10854458>.
Quilter (n 8) 54.
Elena Campbell et al,
Unlocking the Prevention Potential: Accelerating Action to End Domestic,
Family and Sexual Violence
(Report, 2024) 6
<https://www.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/resource/download/unlocking-prevention-potential.pdf>.
‘Recorded Crime:
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 27 June 2024)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/recorded-crime-victims/latest-release>.
Annie Cossins,
the Justice Gap for Adult and Child Sexual Assault: Rethinking the Adversarial
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2020) 76 (‘
Closing the Justice
’), citing Wendy Larcombe, ‘Falling Rape Conviction Rates:
(Some) Feminist Aims and Measures for Rape Law’
(2011) 19(1)
Legal Studies
Rachael Burgin, ‘Rape
Myths Make It Almost Impossible for Victim-Survivors of Sexual Assault to Find
Justice in Australia’s
Legal System’,
The Guardian
13 August 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/aug/12/myths-make-it-almost-impossible-for-victim-survivors-of-sexual-assault-to-find-justice-in-australias-legal-system>.
Quilter (n 8) 25.
Loic JD Wacquant,
‘Towards a Reflexive Sociology: A Workshop with Pierre Bourdieu’
(1989) 7(1)
Sociological Theory
Reference’,
Australian Law Reform Commission
(Web Page, 23 January
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/inquiry/justice-responses-to-sexual-violence/terms-of-reference/>
of Reference’); Australian Law Reform Commission,
Responses to Sexual Violence
(Issues Paper No 49, April 2024)
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publication/jrsv-issues-paper-2024/>
Justice Responses Issues Paper
See SP Bill 26A Victims,
Witnesses, and Justice Reform (Scotland) Bill [as amended at Stage 2] Session 6
(2025) (‘Justice
Reform Bill’).
There are various models of
juryless trial in common law courts, including judge-alone, multi-judge panel
and hybrid panel of judge
and lay assessors. Early examples of juryless trials
include South Africa (introduced via the
Abolition of Juries Act 1969
(South Africa)) and Northern Ireland (introduced via the
Northern Ireland
(Emergency Provisions) Act 1973
(NI) ‘to deal with juror intimidation
by paramilitary organisations and to address perverse acquittals along religious
or sectarian
lines’: Liz Campbell, ‘The Prosecution of Organised
Crime: Removing the Jury’
(2014) 18(2)
International Journal of
Evidence and Proof
<https://doi.org/10.1350/ijep.2014.18.2.445>).
Bridget Fowler,
‘Pierre Bourdieu on Social Transformation, with Particular Reference to
Political and Symbolic Revolutions’
(2020) 49(3)
Theory and Society
439, 459 <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-019-09375-z>.
Improving the Management
of Sexual Offence Cases: Final Report from the Lord Justice Clerk’s Review
(Report, March 2021)
<https://www.scotcourts.gov.uk/media/gmrbrw5p/improving-the-management-of-sexual-offence-cases-march-2021.pdf>
Dorrian Review
Parliamentary
23 April 2024, col 64 (Michael Marra).
The first author was
appointed to the Lived Experience Expert Advisory Group to the ALRC inquiry.
This provided insights into the
reform process, however, this article presents
the co-authors’ views and not those of the ALRC. On 16 September 2024, the
and second authors briefed the ALRC Commissioners on the Scottish reform
process. The authors obtained human ethics clearance for
interviews with
Scottish stakeholders (CQU25104) and the first author conducted interviews in
Edinburgh, Scotland, from 21–23
October 2024. The first and second authors
conducted virtual interviews on 4 and 13 November 2024. Further analysis of the
continuing.
Fowler (n 19) 457, quoting
Pierre Bourdieu,
Classification Struggles: General Sociology
2019) vol 1, 72.
Quilter (n 8) 26.
Dorrian Review
20) 3–4, 140.
Phoebe Bowden, Terese
Henning and David Plater, ‘Balancing Fairness to Victims, Society and
Defendants in the Cross-Examination
of Vulnerable Witnesses: An Impossible
Triangulation?’
[2014] MelbULawRw 1
(2014) 37(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
Wacquant (n 15) 50.
David L Swartz,
‘Bourdieu’s Concept of Field’,
Oxford Bibliographies
(Web Page, 28 April 2016)
<https://doi.org/10.1093/obo/9780199756384-0164>.
Jen Webb, Tony Schirato and
Geoff Danaher,
Understanding Bourdieu
(Allen & Unwin, 2002) xii.
Pierre Bourdieu, ‘The
Force of Law: Toward a Sociology of the Juridical Field’ (1987) 38(5)
Hastings Law Journal
814 (‘The Force of Law’).
‘Pierre Bourdieu:
Habitus, Capital, Fields, Doxa, and Reflexive Sociology’,
PHILO-NOTES
(Web Page, 31 March 2023)
<https://philonotes.com/2023/03/pierre-bourdieu-habitus-capital-fields-doxa-and-reflexive-sociology>
(‘Pierre Bourdieu: Habitus’).
David L Swartz,
‘Cultural Capital’,
Oxford Bibliographies
(Web Page, 11
January 2018) <https://doi.org/10.1093/obo/9780199756384-0209>.
John B Thompson,
‘Editor’s Introduction’ in
Pierre Bourdieu,
and Symbolic Power
, ed John B Thompson, tr Gino Raymond and Matthew Adamson
(Polity Press, 1991) 1, 18 (emphasis omitted).
Benjamin Cornwell and
Alicia Eads, ‘Social Capital’,
Oxford Bibliographies
Page, 29 October 2013)
<https://doi.org/10.1093/obo/9780199756384-0076>.
Lebaron, ‘Symbolic Capital’ in Alex C Michalos (ed),
Encyclopedia
of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research
(Springer, 2014) 6537, 6538,
citing Pierre Bourdieu,
Choses Dites
(Minuit, 1987).
‘Pierre Bourdieu:
Habitus’ (n 34).
Wacquant (n 15) 44.
Pierre Bourdieu,
Logic of Practice
, tr Richard Nice (Polity Press, 1990) 53; Gerd
Christensen, ‘Three Concepts of Power: Foucault, Bourdieu, and
(2024) 16(2)
Power and Education
<https://doi.org/10.1177/17577438231187129>.
Wacquant (n 15) 45.
Richard Terdiman,
‘The Force of Law: Towards a Sociology of the Juridical Field:
Translator’s Introduction’
(1987) 38(5)
Hastings Law Journal
, 807 (emphasis in original).
Webb, Schirato and Danaher
Fowler (n 19) 453.
Terdiman (n 44) 812.
Pierre Bourdieu,
Masculine Domination
tr Richard Nice (Polity Press, 2001), cited
in Webb, Schirato and Danaher (n 30) 96.
Terdiman (n 44)
Richard Jenkins,
(Routledge, 1992) 66.
Fowler (n 19) 457.
See generally Fowler (n 19)
and Wacquant (n 15) 36–7.
Wacquant (n 15) 36.
Fowler (n 19) 459.
Including heretical or
prophet-like leaders of symbolic revolutions (such as Manet in the French art
world), intelligentsia, and
exploited agents: see generally Fowler (n 19).
Wacquant (n 15) 37.
Fowler (n 19) 447.
Pierre Bourdieu,
Sociology in Question
, tr Richard Nice (Sage, 1993) 28, cited in Webb,
Schirato and Danaher (n 30) 66.
‘Fair Trial and Fair
Hearing Rights: Public Sector Guidance Sheet’,
Attorney-General’s
<https://www.ag.gov.au/rights-and-protections/human-rights-and-anti-discrimination/human-rights-scrutiny/public-sector-guidance-sheets/fair-trial-and-fair-hearing-rights?>
(‘Fair Trial Guidance Sheet’).
Quilter (n 8) 53.
Julia Cooper, ‘Judges
as Myth-Busters: A Re-examination of Jury Directions in Rape Trials’
(2022) 31(4)
Griffith Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10383441.2022.2143663>. Cooper notes that
Bourdieu is somewhat unclear as to the nature of the
courtroom: whether it is an
independent field, or a sub-field. The latter is preferred and adopted in this
Bourdieu, ‘The Force
of Law’ (n 31) 830.
[2000] UKHL 71
[2001] 1 All ER 577
[2006] NSWSC 587
199 FLR 250
, 263–4 [56] (Whealy J) (‘
Magistrates’ Court of Victoria
[2008] VSC 1
(2008) 18 VR 300
, 319 [77] (Bell J)
R v A (No 2)
[2001] UKHL 25
Pierre Bourdieu and Terry
Eagleton, ‘Doxa and Common Life: An Interview’ in Slavoj
Žižek (ed),
Mapping Ideology
(Verso, 1994) 265, 277, cited in
Webb, Schirato and Danaher (n 30) 96.
Bowden, Henning and Plater (n 26) 558.
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(Oxford University Press, 2016) bk 4,
Lewis Ross,
Philosophy of Legal Proof
(Cambridge University Press, 2024) 8 (emphasis in
original) <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009127745>.
Fritz Allhoff,
‘Wrongful Convictions, Wrongful Acquittals, and Blackstone’s
Ratio’ (2018) 43
Australasian Journal of Legal Philosophy
Ross (n 72) 8.
[2024] FCA 369
Ibid [106]–[107] (Lee
Eastman v DPP (ACT)
[2003] HCA 28
(2003) 214 CLR 318
, 358 [114] (Heydon J) (‘
Azzopardi v The Queen
[2001] HCA 25
(2001) 205 CLR 50.
Dyers v The Queen
[2002] HCA 45
(2002) 210 CLR 285
, 327 [119] (Callinan J).
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
, 299 (Mason CJ and McHugh J) (‘
See also at 326 (Deane J), 356 (Toohey J). As the concept is not articulated in
Constitution
or legislation, James Spigelman suggested it should be
referred to as the ‘principle of a fair trial’. See James Spigelman,
‘The Truth Can Cost Too Much: The Principle of a Fair Trial’
Australian Law Journal
(Mason CJ and McHugh J), 326 (Deane J).
Ibid 362 (Gaudron J). Each
case is considered on its particular facts: at 364.
Many of these rights are
also expressly identified in article 14 of the
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
opened for signature 19 December
999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976)
’), although Australia has failed to incorporate
fully into domestic legislation. See also the list of
requirements of a fair trial and relevant discussion in Anne Cossins,
‘Prosecuting
Child Sexual Assault Cases: To Specialise or Not, That Is the
(2006) 18(2)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
82) art 14(2).
See also ibid art
Although this does not
extend to legal representation at the public’s expense:
79) 317 (Brennan J), 349 (Dawson J). See also ibid art 14(3)(d).
77) 358 [114] (Heydon J). See also
(n 82) art 14(1).
(Mason CJ and McHugh J). See also
(n 82) art 14(3)(b).
(Mason CJ and McHugh J). See also
(n 82) art 14(3)(f).
[56] (Whealy J), citing
[2004] UKHL 3
[2004] 2 AC 134.
The appellate case law
provides guidance as to factors and requirements likely to be relevant when
determining whether the defendant
received a fair trial on the facts:
(n 79) 353 (Toohey J).
Queensland Law Reform
Commission,
A Review of Jury Selection
(Report No 68, February 2011)
It is for the federal
Parliament to determine what amounts to an indictable offence: see
Archdall and Roskruge; Ex parte Carrigan
[1928] HCA 18
(1928) 41 CLR 128
(Higgins J). In
Cheng v The Queen
[2000] HCA 53
(2000) 203 CLR 248
, 291, McHugh J
reiterated this view: ‘The literal meaning of
is very clear: trial by
jury is required only where the trial is on indictment.’ This therefore
diminishes the protection
offers from tyranny. See also Australian
Law Reform Commission,
Traditional Rights and Freedoms: Encroachments by
Commonwealth Laws
(Final Report No 129, December 2015) 228 [8.39].
(n 82) art 14.
Australia signed the
in 1972, and ratified in 1980, but the
has not been adopted formally into local law: Joint Standing
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade, Parliament of Australia,
Legal Foundations of Religious Freedom in Australia
(Interim Report,
November 2017)
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Foreign_Affairs_Defence_and_Trade/Freedomofreligion>.
Most states provide for
judge-alone trials although Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory
(‘ACT’) and Northern
Territory do not: see
Justice Responses
Issues Paper
(n 16) 9 [40] (the ACT allows them but excludes sexual
offences). Victoria provided for judge-alone trials during COVID-19 but then
removed this option; there is now a ‘push to get it back’: Andrew
Burke, ‘Please Explain: Trial by Judge or Jury?’,
The Lighthouse
(Blog Post, 22 August 2024)
<https://lighthouse.mq.edu.au/article/august-2024/please-explain-trial-by-judge-or-jury>.
Judge-alone
criminal trials increased in NSW from 6% to 18% of trials between
1999–2019: Jonathan Gu, ‘The Effect of Judge-Alone
Criminal Justice Outcomes’ (Crime and Justice Bulletin No 264, NSW Bureau
of Crime Statistics and Research, March
The High Court has stated
that courts must consider ‘the interests of the Crown acting on behalf of
the community as well
as to the interest of the accused’:
Barton v The
[1980] HCA 48
(1980) 147 CLR 75
, 101 (Gibbs ACJ and Mason J), cited in
(n 79) 335 (Deane J). See also
Jago v District Court (NSW)
[1989] HCA 46
, 33 (Mason CJ) (‘
McKinney v The Queen
[1991] HCA 6
(1991) 171 CLR 468
, 488 (Dawson J);
Phillips v The Queen
(1985) 159 CLR
, 62 (Deane J);
Matusevich v The Queen
[1977] HCA 30
(1977) 137 CLR 633
, 654 (Aickin
‘Complainer’
is the Scottish term for ‘complainant’.
Interview with Sandy
Brindley, Chief Executive Officer of Rape Crisis Scotland (AJ George, online, 4
November 2024) (‘Brindley
Interview’).
Focus group interview
with members of the Law Society of Scotland (AJ George, Law Society of Scotland,
22 October 2024).
See, eg, Cossins,
Closing the Justice Gap
341; Janet Albrechtsen,
‘Ideology Has No Place in Sexual Assault Law Reform’,
(online, 28 June 2024)
<https://www.theaustralian.com.au/inquirer/ideology-has-no-place-in-sexual-assault-law-reform/news-story/92d615013d6255b86b043557af70dbed>.
‘Fair Trial
Guidance Sheet’ (n 61).
See the various reports
and inquiries: National Summit on Women’s Safety, ‘Joint Statement
by the 2021 Women’s
Safety Summit Delegates Representing the Rights and
Interests of Migrant and Refugee Women’
(Joint Statement, 2021)
<https://www.ssi.org.au/images/Publications/Joint_Statement_by_the_2021_National_Womens_Safty_Summit.pdf>;
Kate Fitz-Gibbon et al, Monash Gender and Family Violence Prevention Centre,
National Plan Victim-Survivor Advocates Consultation Final Report
(Report, February 2022); National Office for Child Safety (Cth),
Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021–2030
(Report, 2021)
<https://www.childsafety.gov.au/resources/national-strategy-prevent-and-respond-child-sexual-abuse-2021-2030>;
Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Steering Committee, Parliament of
Australian Capital Territory,
Listen. Take Action to Prevent, Believe and
(Report, December 2021)
<https://www.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/2390204/Listen-Take-Action-to-Prevent-Believe-and-Heal.pdf>;
Women’s Safety and Justice Taskforce, Parliament of Queensland,
Her Voice: Women and Girls’ Experiences Across the Criminal Justice System
(Report No 2, 1 July 2022) vol 1
<https://www.publications.qld.gov.au/dataset/8a9488b5-65a3-4d8c-bea6-202bab63eb55/resource/5b70727a-cc0e-4e08-8eda-e1434e6e0814/download/wsjt-hear-her-voice-report-2-volume-1.pdf>;
New South Wales Law Reform Commission,
Consent in Relation to Sexual Offences
(Report No 148, September 2020); Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Improving the Justice System Response to Sexual Offences
September 2021) (‘
Improving Justice System Response
Western Australian Law Reform Commission,
Project 113: Sexual Offences
(Final Report, October 2023);
Justice Responses Issues Paper
Amanda-Jane George et
Specialist Approaches to Managing Sexual Assault Proceedings: An
Integrative Review
(Report, August 2023) 26 (‘
’), citing Haley Clark, ‘“What Is the Justice
System Willing to Offer?” Understanding Sexual Assault
Victim/Survivors’
Criminal Justice Needs’
[2010] (85)
Victims’ Commissioner Survey Looks at Impact of Court Delays on
Victims Commissioner
(online, 13 August 2024)
<https://victimscommissioner.org.uk/news/new-victims-commissioner-survey-looks-at-impact-of-court-delays-on-victims/>.
Miguel Clemente and
Dolores Padilla-Racero, ‘The Effects of the Justice System on Mental
(2020) 27(5)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13218719.2020.1751327>.
See the detailed
analysis in George et al,
Specialist Approaches
Martha R Burt,
‘Cultural Myths and Supports for Rape’ (1980) 38(2)
Personality and Social Psychology
<https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.38.2.217>; Kimberley A Lonsway and
Louise F Fitzgerald, ‘Rape Myths: In Review’
(1994) 18(2)
Psychology of Women Quarterly
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-6402.1994.tb00448.x>.
Full Stop Australia,
Submission to Women’s Safety and Justice Taskforce,
Discussion Paper No
3: Women and Girls’ Experiences across the Criminal Justice System as
Victim-Survivors of Sexual Violence
and Also as Accused Persons and Offenders
(April 2022) 10.
Andi Nirmalasari and
Billy Sarwono, ‘Symbolic Violence Manifestation behind Victim Blaming
Practices’ (2019) 558
Advances in Social Science, Education and
Humanities Research
<https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.210531.004>. See also the analyses based
on Roland Barthes’ notion of
: Tanya Serisier, ‘How Can a
Woman Who Has Been Raped Be Believed? Andrea Dworkin, Sexual Violence and the
Ethics of Belief’
(2015) 4(1)
68, 76; Tanya Serisier,
‘What Does It Mean to #BelieveWomen? Popular Feminism and Survivor
Narratives’ in P Dawson and
M Mäkelä (eds),
The Routledge
Companion to Narrative Theory
(Routledge, 2022) 342, 343. Barthes’
is ‘closely related’ to Bourdieu’s,
albeit more closely focused on the structure of language and the cultural myths
of mass culture: Erik Bengtson, ‘The Concept of
European Reinvention of Rhetoric’ in Norbert Gutenberg and Richard Fiordo
Rhetoric in Europe: Philosophical Issues
(Frank & Timme, 2017)
Particularly for
populations at greater risk of sexual violence: see Amanda-Jane George et al,
Towards a Culturally Safe and Trauma-Informed Court: A Scoping Review of
Populations That Experience Increased Susceptibility to Sexual
(Report, 2024)
<https://www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications/benchbks/sexual_assault/abstract_george-scoping_review_of_priority_populations.html>.
George et al,
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 188. See also Mary Iliadis and Kerstin
Braun, ‘Sexual Assault Victims Can Easily Be Re-traumatised Going to
Here’s One Way to Stop This’,
The Conversation
(online, 25 March 2021)
<https://theconversation.com/sexual-assault-victims-can-easily-be-re-traumatised-going-to-court-heres-one-way-to-stop-this-157428>.
Ania Moroz and Tamar
Dinisman, Victim Support,
Suffering for Justice: Sexual Violence
Victim-Survivors’ Experiences of Going to Court and Cross-Examination
(Report, October 2024) 37. At least one question using myths or stereotypes
was asked in 73% of the sexual violence cases analysed.
Of the cases included in
the analysis: 27% of victim-survivors were asked about what they did to prevent
the offence; one-third were
asked what they did to stop the offence while it was
happening; one-third were asked if pursuing justice was a way of seeking
and one-third were asked if they were under the influence of alcohol or
another substance. Victim-survivors were also asked about
their mental health
and the medication they use.
Thompson (n 36) 9.
Such as closed courts
for complainant evidence, alternative arrangements for complainants to give
evidence (typically CCTV), allowing
a support person for the complainant, and
other specific protections such as prohibitions on a defendant personally
cross-examining
a complainant, and the use of sexual reputation/experience
evidence: Julia Quilter and Luke McNamara, ‘Experience of Complainants
Adult Sexual Offences in the District Court of NSW: A Trial Transcript
(Crime and Justice Bulletin No 259, NSW Bureau of Crime
Statistics and Research, August 2023) 12, 34.
‘[C]omplainants are still routinely questioned in ways that place them at
the centre of intense scrutiny and judgment
that is underpinned by rape
Abbe Smith, ‘Can
You Be a Feminist and a Criminal Defense Lawyer?’
(2020) 57(4)
Criminal Law Review
, 1580, quoting
The Trial at Large of Her Majesty
Caroline Amelia Elizabeth, Queen of Great Britain, in the House of Lords, on
Charges of Adulterous
Intercourse
(J Gleave, 1821) vol 2, 2–3 (Lord
Brougham). Substitution of female gender in original.
Webb, Schirato and
Danaher (n 30) 96.
Jane Johnston,
‘Whose Interests? Why Defining the “Public Interest” Is Such a
Challenge’,
The Conversation
(online, 22 September 2017)
<https://theconversation.com/whose-interests-why-defining-the-public-interest-is-such-a-challenge-84278>.
Bourdieu, ‘The
Force of Law’ (n 31) 841 (emphasis added).
Eric R Boot, ‘The
Public Interest: Clarifying a Legal Concept’
(2024) 37(2)
, 112 <https://doi.org/10.1111/raju.12401>.
Here, the High
Court’s discussion was in the context of company fraud:
49–50 (Brennan J).
See Quilter (n 8).
Johnston (n 119).
Patricia Easteal and
Christine Feerick, ‘Sexual Assault by Male Partners: Is the Licence Still
[2005] FlinJlLawRfm 10
(2005) 8(2)
Flinders Journal of Law Reform
‘[F]or by their mutual matrimonial consent and contract the wife hath
given up herself in this kind unto her husband
which she cannot
Lisa Featherstone,
‘“That’s What Being a Woman Is For”: Opposition to
Marital Rape Law Reform in Late Twentieth-Century
Australia’ (2017) 29(1)
Gender and History
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0424.12281>.
[2012] HCA 21
(2012) 245 CLR 355
Ibid 371 [24] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ), citing John W Salmond, ‘The
Theory of Judicial Precedents’
(1900) 16(4)
Law Quarterly Review
(n 127) 400
[123], 401 [125].
Quilter (n 8), citing
Victorian Law Reform Commission,
Rape: Reform of Law and Procedure
(Interim Report No 42, July 1991) 16 (emphasis in original).
Quilter (n 8) 54.
Ibid 27, citing Clare
McGlynn, ‘Feminist Activism and Rape Law Reform in England and Wales: A
Sisyphean Struggle?’ in
Clare McGlynn and Vanessa E Munro (eds),
Rethinking Rape Law: International and Comparative Perspectives
(Routledge, 2010) 139, 150
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203852194>.
James J Nolan, Joshua C
Hinkle and Zsolt Molnar, ‘Changing the Game: A Sociological Perspective on
Police Reform’ in
James J Nolan, Frank Crispino and Timothy Parsons (eds),
Policing in an Age of Reform: An Agenda for Research and Practice
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2021) 17, 20.
Bourdieu, ‘The
Force of Law’ (n 31) 836–7.
Quilter (n 8) 55.
Ibid 53. Quilter’s
analysis at 51–5 draws on both Jacques Derrida’s notion of the
‘readability’ of
the mark (Jacques Derrida,
Limited Inc
(Northwestern University Press, 1993)), and Bourdieu’s
understand who is doing the reading, and where.
Quilter (n 8) 55. There,
‘rape schema’ or rape myths conflicted with the intentions of
legislative reform.
Christoph Bezemek and
Tomas Dumbrovsky, ‘The Concept of Public Interest’
Working Paper Series No 1, University of Graz, 2020) 1
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3701204>.
Terdiman (n 44) 806.
Cooper (n 63) 501.
Jason D Edgerton and
Lance W Roberts, ‘Cultural Capital or Habitus? Bourdieu and Beyond in the
Explanation of Enduring Educational
Inequality’ (2014) 12(2)
Research in Education
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1477878514530231>.
Fowler (n 19) 457.
Ibid 450–4. Fowler
discusses Bourdieu’s portrayal of Manet as a heretic and
‘prophet’ of change.
Ibid 454. Fowler notes
Bourdieu sees secular intellectuals as producing weapons for change that are
‘coherent and distinctive’,
deriving from membership of professional
associations and their championing of universalist rights.
George et al,
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 35.
There is a large and
growing literature in this space. See, eg, the literature reviewed in George et
Specialist Approaches
See, eg, Cooper (n 63)
485; Fiona Leverick, ‘What Do We Know about Rape Myths and Juror Decision
(2020) 24(3)
International Journal of Evidence and Proof
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1365712720923157>.
SAMHSA’s Trauma
and Justice Strategic Initiative, ‘SAMHSA’s Concept of Trauma and
Guidance for a Trauma-Informed
Approach’ (Paper, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, July 2014).
George et al,
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 204. See also Lucy Britt and Wilson H
Hammett, ‘Trauma as Cultural Capital: A Critical Feminist Theory of Trauma
(2024) 39(4)
<https://doi.org/10.1017/hyp.2024.22>.
See, eg, the various
reports and inquiries above at n 101.
New Zealand Law Reform
Commission,
The Justice Response to Victims of Sexual Violence: Criminal
Trials and Alternative Processes
(Report No 136, December 2015) 63–4
<https://www.lawcom.govt.nz/sites/default/files/projectAvailableFormats/NZLC-R136-The-Justice-Response-to-Victims-of-Sexual-Violence.pdf>.
Dorrian Review
United Kingdom,
End-to-End Rape Review Report on Findings and Actions
(Report No CP 437,
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1001417/end-to-end-rape-review-report-with-correction-slip.pdf>.
Sir John Gillen,
Gillen Review: Report into the Law and Procedures in Serious Sexual Offences
in Northern Ireland
(Report, 9 May 2019) pt 1.
George et al,
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 21.
Quilter (n 8) 50 nn
110–11, 55: discussing training of judges, legal professionals, police and
service providers, jury directions,
incorporation of objectives and guiding
principles, community and school education and awareness programs, and expert
evidence to
dispel rape myths.
Ibid. See also George et
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 210.
Department of Social
Services (Cth),
National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children
2022–2032: Ending Gender-Based Violence in One Generation
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
and Proposed Sexual Consent Laws in Australia
(Report, September 2023).
Australian Law Reform Commission
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/about/>.
Ibid. The ALRC’s
website states that ‘over 85 per cent of ALRC reports have been either
substantially or partially implemented’.
Reference’ (n 16);
Justice Responses Issues Paper
Reference’ (n 16);
Justice Responses Issues Paper
Reference’ (n 16).
Justice Responses
Issues Paper
Quilter (n 8) 55. We
note that the ALRC took advice from the Lived Experience Expert Advisory Group
during the inquiry, nevertheless
the Issues Paper was (and report and
recommendations will be) drafted solely by the ALRC.
Quilter’s analysis concludes that ‘reforms that might conflict with
... “truth” [are] (almost)
unreadable’.
Cooper (n 63) 485.
Louise Ellison and
Vanessa E Munro, ‘Turning Mirrors into Windows: Assessing the Impact of
(Mock) Juror Education in Rape
(2009) 49(3)
The British Journal
of Criminology
, 374 <https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azp013>.
Cooper (n 63) 497.
Chantelle M Baguley,
Blake M McKimmie and Barbara M Masser, ‘Re-evaluating How to Measure
Jurors’ Comprehension and
Application of Jury Instructions’
Psychology, Crime and Law
Cheryl Thomas,
Juries Fair?
(Ministry of Justice Research Series No 1/10, February 2010)
Cooper (n 63) 496.
Nirmalasari and Sarwono
Cooper (n 63) 501,
citing Webb, Schirato and Danaher (n 30).
Frank Jacob, ‘Rosa
Luxemburg: Revolution Theory and Revolutionary Practice’ in Frank Jacob,
Albert Scharenberg and Jörn
Schütrumpf (eds),
Rosa Luxemburg Volume
1: Life and Work
(Büchner-Verlag, 2021) 45, 59, citing Helen Scott,
The Essential Rosa Luxemburg: Reform or Revolution and the Mass Strike
(Chicago, 2007) 41.
For a discussion of the
benefits of juryless trials see generally Scottish Government,
‘Alternatives to Jury Trials: An Evidence
Briefing for the Consideration
of a Time-Limited Pilot of Single Judge Rape Trials Working Group’ (Paper,
Social Research,
December 2022) (‘Alternatives to Jury Trials’).
Australian Law Reform
Commission, New South Wales Law Reform Commission and Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
(ALRC Report No 102, NSWLRC Report No
112, VLRC Final Report, December 2005) 590–1 [18.5], 595;
Justice System Response
(n 101); Peter Lowe, ‘Problems Faced by Modern
Juries’ [2012] (Winter)
46; Crispin Hull, ‘The
Problem with the Jury System in Australia’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 9 March 2019)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/the-problem-with-the-jury-system-in-australia-20190307-p512iy.html>;
Richard Ackland, ‘Australia’s Legal System Leaves Juries Stranded in
a Time Warp: The World Has Moved On’,
The Guardian
(online, 29
October 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2022/oct/29/australias-legal-system-leaves-juries-stranded-in-a-time-warp-the-world-has-moved-on>.
Justice Responses
Issues Paper
George et al,
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 81.
‘Alternatives to
Jury Trials’ (n 183) 21.
See, eg, George et al,
Specialist Approaches
(n 102) 234; Ellie Dudley, ‘Jury-less Rape
Trials Could Compromise Fair Trials’,
The Australian
(online, 28
December 2023)
<https://www.theaustralian.com.au/nation/juryless-rape-cases-could-compromise-fair-trials-law-council-of-australia-says/news-story/6b10a3c2c04028eba1f08e4b071bc402>.
Law Council of
Australia, Submission No 215 to Australian Law Reform Commission,
Responses to Sexual Violence
(4 July 2024) 30 [101] (‘LCA
Submission’).
Wacquant (n 15) 37.
Closing the
Justice Gap
(n 12) 98, citing Sara Gordon, ‘All Together Now: Using
Principles of Group Dynamics to Train Better Jurors’
(2015) 48(2)
Indiana Law Review
http://dx.doi.org/10.18060/4806.0002
Closing the
Justice Gap
exemplifies this point, with successive judicial errors. At first instance the
trial judge misdirected the jury, even though
the content of the written
directions had been approved by both the Crown and senior counsel for the
Lazarus v The Queen
[2016] NSWCCA 52
, [147], [156] (Fullerton
J). The retrial was heard by a judge alone (Tupman DCJ), who on appeal failed to
have regard to the steps
taken by the defendant to ascertain consent:
[2017] NSWCCA 279
(2017) 270 A Crim R 378
, 406–7 [143]–[149] (Bellew J).
No further retrial was ordered because, among other things, it would have been
‘oppressive
to put the respondent [defendant] to the expense and worry of
a third trial’: at 410 [163].
LCA Submission (n 192)
This was also discussed
in the Scottish reform process: see Evidence to Criminal Justice Committee,
Scottish Parliament, Glasgow,
24 January 2024, col 64 (Simon Di Rollo)
(‘CJC 24 January 2024 Meeting’).
Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Inclusive Juries: Access for People Who Are Deaf, Hard of
Hearing, Blind or Have Low Vision
(Report, 16 May 2023) [4.1]–[4.37].
See also Jill Hunter and Sharleigh Crittenden, Australasian Institute of
Judicial Administration,
The Australian Jury in Black and White: Barriers to
Indigenous Representation on Juries
(Report, June 2023).
Potential jurors may be
excused on the basis of ‘[u]ndue hardship – work’: Federal
Court of Australia, ‘Information
Sheet 3: Requests to Be Excused’
(Information Sheet, July 2021)
<https://www.fedcourt.gov.au/going-to-court/jury/excused>. See also
Brindley Interview (n 97).
Dorrian Review
Justice Responses
Issues Paper
Dudley (n 191).
Since the passing of the
Scotland Act 1998
(UK), Parliament can make laws on a range of devolved
Sandy Brindley and
Michele Burman, ‘Meeting the Challenge? Responding to Rape in
Scotland’ in Nicole Westmarland and
Geetanjali Ganjoli (eds),
International Approaches to Rape
(Policy Press, 2011) 147, 150
<https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt9qgkd6>.
Parliament is located in
the Holyrood area of Edinburgh, Scotland.
Dorrian Review
The Lord Advocate is the
most senior law officer and Minister in the Scottish Government: the appointee
is head of the prosecution
system, principal legal adviser to the government,
and ‘represent[s] the public interest in a range of statutory and common
law’ functions. They do not have to be a Minister of the Scottish
Parliament; they can sit in the debating chamber and answer
questions but do not
have a vote (then Walter James Wolffe KC, currently the Right Honourable Dorothy
Bain). See generally ‘Lord
Advocate: Role and Functions’,
Scottish Government
(Web Page, 23 October 2024)
<https://www.gov.scot/publications/lord-advocate-role-and-functions/>;
‘What Is a Law Officer?’,
The Scottish Parliament
<https://www.parliament.scot/msps/ministers-and-law-officers/law-officers>.
The Cabinet Secretary
for Justice and Home Affairs is responsible for, among other things, courts,
sentencing, justice reform, justice
system and criminal law procedure, the
Scottish Courts and Tribunals Service, and violence against women and misogyny
(then Mr Humza
Yousaf, currently Ms Angela Constance): see ‘Cabinet
Secretary for Justice and Home Affairs’,
Scottish Government
Page, 2024)
<https://www.gov.scot/about/who-runs-government/cabinet-and-ministers/cabinet-secretary-for-justice-and-home-affairs/>.
Dorrian Review
20) 4 (emphasis omitted).
Victims and Witnesses
(Scotland) Act
(Scot) ss 1(1)–(2), 1A(1)–(2).
Dorrian Review
Ibid (emphasis
Wacquant (n 15) 37.
Fowler (n 19) 446,
quoting Pierre Bourdieu,
On the State: Lectures at the College de France
(1989–1992)
(Polity, 2014) 270, 331, 333.
The other controversial
reforms included abolishing the ‘not proven’ verdict and reducing
jury size from 15 to 12 plus
a move from simple to two-thirds majority
Dorrian Review
Ibid 89–105. See
also James Chalmers, Fiona Leverick and Vanessa E Munro, ‘The Provenance
of What Is Proven: Exploring
(Mock) Jury Deliberation in Scottish Rape
(2021) 48(2)
Journal of Law and Society
<https://doi.org/10.1111/jols.12287>.
Dorrian Review
Resourcing in particular was seen as an issue for multi-judge panels.
Ibid 16, 118 (emphasis
‘Alternatives to
Jury Trials’
Ibid 10. See Chalmers,
Leverick and Munro (n 227) (Scottish research); Cheryl Thomas, ‘The
Century Jury: Contempt, Bias and the Impact of Jury
[2020] (11)
Criminal Law Review
Century Jury’) (English research).
‘Alternatives to
Jury Trials’ (n 183) 11.
Scottish Government,
Lady Dorrian Review Governance Group: Consideration of a Time-Limited Pilot
of Single Judge Rape Trials Working Group Report
(Report, 12 December 2022)
<https://www.gov.scot/publications/lady-dorrian-review-governance-group-consideration-time-limited-pilot-single-judge-rape-trials-working-group-report/>
Working Group Report
Ibid 14–15.
Justice Reform Bill (n
Fowler (n 19) 445.
Webb, Schirato and
Danaher (n 30) 93.
Fowler (n 19) 446
(emphasis added). See also ibid.
Fowler (n 19) 446.
Webb, Schirato and
Danaher (n 30) 102.
Pierre Bourdieu,
Language and Symbolic Power
, ed John B Thompson, tr Gino Raymond and
Matthew Adamson (Polity Press, 1991) 193.
Ibid 190 (emphasis in
Terdiman (n 44)
Criminal Justice
Committee, Parliament of Scotland,
Victims, Witnesses, and Justice Reform
(Scotland) Bill Stage 1 Report
(Report, 29 March 2024)
<https://www.parliament.scot/-/media/files/committees/criminal-justice-committee/cjs062024r02.pdf>
Bill Report
Other controversial
reforms included the abolition of the ‘not proven’ verdict, and
reduction of the size of juries
from 15 to 12.
Chalmers, Leverick and
Munro’s research consisted of over 400 mock jurors (recruited so as to be
a representative sample of
the Scottish population) that watched a rape trial
reconstruction and engaged in recorded deliberations for 90 minutes. It found
range of rape myths were discussed in deliberations including querying the
complainant’s failure to resist, failure to sustain
injury, failure to
struggle, scream, or seek resistance. The complexity of Scottish law was also an
issue: see Chalmers, Leverick
and Munro (n 227) 240. In contrast, Thomas’
research involved interviews with former real-life jurors to determine the
of rape myths. The study found that jurors did not, by and large,
accept rape myths: see Thomas, ‘21
Century Jury’ (n
235). While Thomas lauded her own research as with ‘real juries’ and
critiqued mock trials (at
1001), Chalmers, Leverick and Munro and others
criticised a number of perceived methodological flaws in Thomas’ work, as
as the fact that Thomas’ research was with
juries, not
‘real juries’ deciding live cases – and so were essentially as
artificial as any mock trial research:
see Ellen Daly et al, ‘Myths about
Myths? A Commentary on Thomas (2020) and the Question of Jury Rape Myth
Acceptance’
(2023) 7(1)
Journal of Gender-Based Violence
192–3. See also Dominic Willmott and Lara Hudspith, ‘Jury Trials and
Rape Myth Bias: Exploring the Research Evidence,
Stakeholder Perspectives and
Effective Solutions’ in Nicola Monaghan (ed),
Contemporary Challenges
in the Jury System: A Comparative Perspective
(Routledge, 2025) 167.
Faculty of Advocates
Criminal Bar Association, Submission No 70855816 to Criminal Justice Committee,
Parliament of Scotland,
Victims, Witnesses, and Justice Reform (Scotland)
(26 September 2023) 11 (‘FACBA Submission’).
Scottish Solicitors Bar
Association, Submission No 973271972 to Criminal Justice Committee, Parliament
of Scotland,
Victims, Witnesses, and Justice Reform (Scotland) Bill
January 2024) 1 (‘SSBA Submission’).
Bill Report
252) 157 [1116].
CJC 24 January 2024
Meeting (n 199) col 15 (Cheryl Thomas).
Century Jury’ (n 235) 1002–4.
CJC 24 January 2024
Meeting (n 199) col 4 (James Chalmers).
Bill Report
252) 156 [1102].
Working Group
Bill Report
252) 167 [1189], quoting Vanessa Munro. See also Evidence to Criminal Justice
Committee, Parliament of Scotland, 6 December 2023,
cols 25–6 (Witness
CJC 24 January 2024
Meeting (n 199) col 39 (Simon Di Rollo).
Ibid col 38 (Tony
Ibid col 41 (John
It may indeed be that
the tone of cross-examination is so embedded in the adversarial system, with its
provision for difficult defence
‘testing’ of a complainer’s
evidence and credibility, that measures such as trauma-informed training and
complainer preparation achieve more traction: see generally ibid col 43
(Sheila Webster).
Bill Report
252) 151–5 [1063]–[1091].
FACBA Submission (n 255)
11 (emphasis added).
While the government
could not guarantee the conviction rates involved only single complainer/single
defendant cases given limitations
on the data collection, it was confident that
single charge cases were a ‘sensible’ proxy: Letter from Angela
Cabinet Secretary for Justice and Home Affairs, to Audrey Nicoll,
Convenor of the Criminal Justice Committee, 16 April 2024, 39–40
<https://www.parliament.scot/-/media/files/committees/criminal-justice-committee/correspondence/2024/vwjr-bill-scottish-government-response-to-stage-1-report-16-april-2024.pdf>
(‘Cabinet Secretary Letter’).
Stuart Waiton,
‘What Do We Know about “Rape Myth” Research and the Claim that
There Is “Overwhelming Evidence”
that Juries are Prejudiced in Rape
(2024) 28(2)
International Journal of Evidence and Proof
, 155 <https://doi.org/10.1177/13657127231217510>, citing
‘Lawyer Boycott of Juryless Rape Trials “To Be
Unanimous”’,
(online, 10 May 2023)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-65531380> (‘Lawyer
Boycott’), quoting Stuart Murray,
Vice President of the Scottish
Solicitors Bar Association.
Law Society of Scotland,
Submission No 393332425 to Criminal Justice Committee, Parliament of Scotland,
Victims, Witnesses, and Justice Reform (Scotland) Bill
(22 January 2024)
17 (emphasis omitted). See also Senators of the College of Justice, Submission
No 689599645 to Criminal Justice
Committee, Parliament of Scotland,
Witnesses, and Justice Reform (Scotland) Bill
(26 September 2023) 1,
As to the preponderance
of evidence, see Christine Coumarelos et al,
Attitudes Matter: The 2021
National Community Attitudes towards Violence against Women Survey (NCAS)
(Report, February 2023) 138. While Tom Nankivell and John Papadimitriou
dispute this and other research on false allegation rates,
their conclusion is
simply that, ‘it is doubtful that any study ... could tightly estimate the
prevalence rate’: Tom
Nankivell and John Papadimitriou, ‘True or
False, or Somewhere between? A Review of the High-Quality Studies on the
of False Sexual Assault Reports’
(Research Paper, Gander
Research, 4 April 2023) 16.
[117] (Lee J).
SSBA Submission (n
Bill Report
252) 161 [1146]. However, against this, it should be noted that jury selection
is random, so diversity is not guaranteed: see
CJC 24 January 2024 Meeting (n
199) col 64 (Simon Di Rollo).
Bill Report
252) 161 [1147], citing the evidence of Tony Lenehan KC.
Cabinet Secretary Letter
Bill Report
252) 164 [1170], quoting the Cabinet Secretary.
Ibid 164 [1167], quoting
the Senators of the Judicial College.
Ibid 165 [1178], quoting
Lady Dorrian.
Ibid 166 [1182], quoting
Simon Di Rollo KC.
Chalmers, Leverick and
Munro (n 227) 230.
Bill Report
252) 166 [1183].
Ibid 166 [1186], quoting
the Cabinet Secretary.
Ibid 178 [1268].
Ibid 178 [1269].
Ibid 179 [1270].
The cab rank rule in
Scotland, similarly to Australia, requires advocates to accept briefs to uphold
that principle that, no matter
‘how unpleasant the subject matter, [a
defendant] will be able to instruct an advocate’: CJC 24 January 2024
(n 199) col 50 (Tony Lenehan). In Scotland, a breach of the rule would
be disciplined by the Dean of the Faculty of Advocates.
Ibid 49 (Russell
Jenness Mitchell,
‘Scottish Government Accused of “Interfering in Independence of
Judiciary” as Lawyers Set to
Boycott Juryless Rape Trials Pilot’,
(online, 9 May 2023)
<https://news.sky.com/story/scottish-government-accused-of-interfering-in-independence-of-judiciary-as-lawyers-set-to-boycott-juryless-rape-trials-pilot-12877033>.
Lara Wildenberg,
‘Juryless Trials for Sex Crimes Likened to Hitler's Germany’,
Sunday Times
(online, 15 November 2022)
<https://www.thetimes.com/world/asia/article/juryless-trials-for-sex-crimes-likened-to-hitlers-germany-89nhdwk5t?region=global>.
However, boycotts are
not new to the SSBA – in June 2024, its members actually commenced a
boycott of summary domestic abuse
cases, to prompt the government to act on
increasing legal aid fees: PA Reporter, ‘Scottish Solicitors Take
Industrial Action
in Row over Legal Aid’,
The National
<https://www.thenational.scot/news/24365776.scottish-solicitors-take-industrial-action-row-legal-aid/>.
‘Juryless Trials
Pilot Unlikely to Get Off the Ground’,
Scottish Legal News
7 February 2024)
<https://www.scottishlegal.com/articles/juryless-trials-pilot-unlikely-to-get-off-the-ground>.
‘Juryless Trials
Kicked into Long Grass amid Fierce Opposition’,
Scottish Legal News
(online, 17 April 2024)
<https://www.scottishlegal.com/articles/juryless-trials-kicked-into-long-grass-amid-fierce-opposition>.
Parliamentary Debates,
23 April 2024, col 64 (Michael Marra).
Interview with Senior
Prosecutor of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service (AJ George,
Edinburgh, 24 October 2024) (emphasis
The Scottish National
Party has 61 sitting Members of Parliament, the Scottish Conservative and
Unionist Party has 30, Scottish
Labour has 22, Scottish Green Party has 7,
Scottish Liberal Democrats has 5 and the Alba, Independent and No Party
Affiliation have
1 Member each: ‘Members of the Scottish
Parliament’,
Scottish Parliament
<https://www.parliament.scot/msps/current-party-balance>.
Parliamentary Debates
23 April 2024, col 84 (Presiding
Boycott’ (n 272).
‘New THAT GUY
Sexual Crime Prevention Campaign Launches’,
Police Scotland
Page, 28 October 2024)
<https://www.scotland.police.uk/what-s-happening/news/2024/october/new-that-guy-sexual-crime-prevention-campaign/>.
The government also
dropped the proposed reduction of jury size, leaving only the abolition of the
‘not proven’ verdict
as the principal controversial measure:
Scottish Government, ‘Victims, Witnesses, and Justice Reform Bill
Update’ (Media
Release, 31 October 2024)
<https://www.gov.scot/news/victims-witnesses-and-justice-reform-bill-update/>
(‘Bill Update’).
See also the many other media reports, including
Kirsteen Paterson, ‘Scottish Government Scraps Pilot for Juryless Rape
(online, 31 October 2024)
<https://www.holyrood.com/news/view,scottish-government-scraps-pilot-for-juryless-rape-trials>.
David Cowan and Jonathan
Geddes, ‘Juryless Rape Trials Pilot Axed by Scottish Government’,
(online, 1 November 2024)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c20n3rjp7v9o>.
Consideration at Stage 2
of the Bill must be completed by 4 April 2025: ‘Victims, Witnesses and
Justice Reform (Scotland)
Scottish Parliament
<https://www.parliament.scot/bills-and-laws/bills/s6/victims-witnesses-and-justice-reform-scotland-bill>.
Ibid; ‘Bill
Update’ (n 305).
Interview with Simon
Brown, President of the Scottish Solicitors Bar Association (AJ George,
Edinburgh, 23 October 2024).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Safe, Informed, Supported: Reforming Justice Responses to Sexual
(Final Report No 143, January 2025) 592. A recommendation was made
for a research team to be established by the National Judicial
Australia, with members located in trial courts, to build the shared evidence
base by supporting evaluation of reform
measures, including elections for
juryless trials in sexual assault trials: at 17, 165 (recommendation
3(b)(vii)).
Bourdieu and Eagleton (n
Bourdieu, ‘The
Force of Law’ (n 31) 851–2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (312 KB)
PDF format (477 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter