URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Randazzo, Salvo --- "The Nature of Partnership in Roman Law" [2005] AUJlLegHist 5; (2005) 9(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 119
The Nature Of Partnership In Roman Law∗
The Nature of Partnership in Roman
In Europe, as in Australia, a company is a legal body in which individual
participants are not liable with their own assets for the
obligations assumed by
the company and vice versa. This conceptual pattern is regulated in the Codes as
società per azioni
società anonima
(joint-stock
company – similar to a public company), and
responsabilità limitata
(limited company). However in European Civil
Law there are also types of
società di persone
(partnership) in
which there is not a juridical ‘shield’ protecting the assets of the
business against a single partner’s
creditors’ attacks. In these
partnerships it is also the case that a partner’s private assets are
exposed to the company’s
creditors’ executions.
Enterprise concentration in large groups, in many cases listed on the Stock
Exchange and sometimes of transnational importance, occurs
as a result of a
preponderance of joint-stock companies. This often renders the Codes inadequate
and results in continual legislative
adaptation. In order to respond to this
need to adapt the EU countries are helped by the unitary normative policy
imposed by the
European Community.
What then is the position of the present European Law towards Roman
tradition? We live in a period of rapid transformation to which
Continental
jurists are exposed, and we are witness to the so-called ‘decline of
codification’. The adequacy of current
European company law to the
changeable economic events of the western society is at a crisis point.
Can we learn from the past? Can Roman Law help as a ‘compass’ to
orient the interpretation of commercial institutions
in the trend towards a
progressive legal standardization of the European Law? The regulation of
commercial institutions is confirmation
of the proposition that history is not a
geometrical figure. Leaving aside positive jurists’ conscious or
unconscious ‘
esprit de geometrie
’, I propose a short visit to
a ‘Romanist’s workshop’. By taking a small observation angle
at Roman private law
particularly at the relationships existing within models in the Roman legal
system I will let the sources speak, in order to
see what insights might be
gleaned of relevance to current developments.
Roman partnership was a contract based on the agreement of two or more
parties who cooperated to reach a common aim. Partners contributed
goods, money or labour to the company. They brought to the partnership single
goods or specific activities and they sought
a profit, in proportions which
could vary from one partner to another. According to Gaius:
Societatem coire solemus aut totorum bonorum aut unius negotii,
veluti mancipiorum emendorum aut vendendorum
. Partnership usually covers
either all the partners’ wordly wealth or else a single business, for
instance, buying and selling
The share of profits and losses among partners is ‘inside’ the
contract and it arises from the obligations among the partners
themselves,
regulated by the
actio pro socio
, a civil action based on
. However the partnership was ‘personale’, that is among
people. The personal nature of the partnership obligations are
evidenced by the
fact that a partner could not convey – either by a contract
(among living people) nor
mortis causa
(by hereditary
succession) – his membership to other people without all the
partners’ consent. In that case a ‘new’
partnership would
arise, both substantially and legally. Further, neither the partnership as a
whole nor any other partners are liable
for the obligations assumed by a single
D. 17.2.82 (Papinianus 9
quaestionum
Iure societatis per socium
aere alieno socius non obligatur, nisi in communem arcam pecuniae versae sunt.
By the law of partnership, a partner is not liable to incur debt through a
co-partner unless the money was paid into the common fund.
The above is exemplified in a principle which appears reflected in a
well-known Ulpian’s passage:
D. 17.2.20 (Ulpianus 31
Nam socii mei
socius meus socius non est.
For my partner’s partner is not my
This passage says in only eight words what entire treatises tried to say,
that a partner is never liable for obligations deriving
from the relations
between another partner and a third party. Such a pattern differed from English
partnership law in that Roman
partnership was not necessarily based on profit,
and still more to the fact that while in Common Law partners are, within limits,
agents for each other, and bind each other in dealings with third parties, this
relationship between the partners did not arise in
Roman Law in ordinary cases,
since one person could not in general contract act so as to affect another. Thus
the law dealt almost
entirely with the relations of the
The doctrine which fashioned the structure of Roman partnership is not
unequivocal, but oscillates between traditional theories and
trends resorting to
an actualised reconstruction of institutes. There is very often an attempt to
identify Roman commercial law as
independent from the general Civil
with an analysis extending from
partnership to enterprise and ‘entrepreneurs’. This type of analysis
seeks to coordinate
these different approaches but most of the time only
superimposes and confounds their nature and their legal foundations. Thus this
offer reconstructions which may be ‘academically
correct’ but often
run the risk of offering a low rate of scientific rigour and therefore of
‘truth’. To appropriately
analyse Roman partnership we need a
prudent approach which moves away from a
paleoromanistica di
(a return to an ancient way of
studying Roman Law) as Riccardo Orestano defines it, with the help of the other
social sciences including
the history of economics as first, in this delicate
matter. But this approach must consider the matter with the traditional
methodological
instruments, and must be free from every dangerous and limited
‘actualising’ tendency.
Roman Law, as said before, does not know joint stock companies and the
development of a doctrine that attributes such entities to
Roman law has been
reasoned in different ways based to a certain extent on undeveloped hypotheses
of liability limits. In the ‘scientific
psychology’ of these
attempts we can perhaps see modern Roman Law scholars’ trend of searching
in Roman Law legal ‘patterns’
to establish an historical premises of
modern institutes. In this context the research often worked, taking into
consideration the
tightly interdependent concepts (and institutes) that were
linked respectively to partnership and enterprise so that it was possible
assume a ‘limited liability enterprise’ whereas in fact we cannot
identify a ‘limited liability partnership’.
The structure was
non-existent as such in Roman Law.
If in modern codifications and in the analysis of the modern trade-law
doctrine itself companies and enterprises appear at least to
be studied in tight
connection,
this is due to the great number of
problems that the preponderance of joint stock companies, both national and
transnational, present.
These problems are essentially about the relationship
between the organizational structure of companies, the legal configuration
enterprise properties (reflected in shares whose value is determined by economic
variables and complex policies, which are reflected
in the movements of the
Stock Exchange markets) and management.
The interrelationships referred to in the preceding paragraph have lead to a
focus albeit erroneously on ‘enterprise’
phenomena as an essential
factor in understanding the structure and the history of the ancient Roman
. These partnership-like
were created in the
Roman system by the intervention of the praetor who saw fit to regulate certain
situations and in doing so gave
them a juridical character. For example this
happened when A, subjected to the paternal authority, conducted negotiations,
pater familias
was charged with the juridical effects,
especially for A’s liability – whether A is a
filius familias
or more often a slave − so that B could suffer (third party)
creditors’ executions. Scheme 1 illustrates the case.
As can be seen, an obligation is established between A (the slave or the
filius familias
subjected to paternal authority) and T, the third party.
pater familias
, is not involved in this relationship at all.
He entrusted A with the business and economically benefits from it. According to
in this situation the
pater familias
be liable, because he does not have direct relations with the third party. But
as the result of Roman magistrates’ decisions
and the elaboration of
particular actions over time, such as the so-called ‘
adiecticiae qualitatis
’, the third person was allowed to proceed
against the
pater familias
. In this way he obtained – pursuant to
the particular trial process of
a judgment against the
pater familias
himself, though it concerns a relation which was,
, not connected to him. So not only the benefits of the business fall
on him but also its debts.
Now even if in this hypothesis we could see a sort of split between A’s
management and the
’s liability, apparent in the law, and
strictly connected with Roman magistrates’ creative actions, it is still
to the structure and profile of the arrangement. In cases like these
misunderstanding of the effect of the Roman law occurs, and
not only in the
Continental doctrine. Even an eminent English Romanist like Buckland included
adiecticiae qualitatis
actions, in particular the
actio exercitoria
, respectively related to
slaves’ appointment in a trade activity and to the management of a
merchant ship, inside
The existence of managerial concepts in the praxis of Roman business
relations does not necessarily affect the essence of the partnership.
the enterprise phenomena seems cultivated by doctrine, which hypothesized an
alternative structure to
for the situations in which someone
made use of
servi communes
to analyse Roman partnership with a historical balance, we must keep absolutely
separate the problems of the juridical-economical
configuration of the
partnership agreement from those concerning the management. In other words, to
identify the first one we must
concentrate our attention not on the individuals
but on the ‘assets’, and then to understand the nature of
we must move from these common assets, from their historical
origin, their juridical features, to the relation between them and the
But let’s take a step backward, to the Archaic age and to the most
ancient hypothesis of partnership, the
consortium ercto non cito,
‘legitima simul et naturalis societas’
Roman partnership comes from the
most ancient civil institution of the
consortium ercto non cito
seems generally accepted in doctrine. This was an inseparable
partnership
which was created among brothers
when they inherited
mortis causa
a certain patrimony which they could not
‘divide’, originally and until the decemviral period (until the
fifth century
BC). They could but ‘share’ it, because they were
, (etymologically deriving from
bound, united, ‘
’, with the same
owners of a property which they had to maintain as a whole.
have a non-characterizing role in the institute, but the
goods, are the property in a
(dynamical community) which
has its own specifically ‘real’ normative characterization, given by
its intangibility
from the single co-owners. This is the
because after all this is the reality of Roman Law.
Ulpian − the great Roman jurist well-known to English scholars of Roman
Law thanks to Tony Honoré’s
excellent monograph on him − said that ‘a complete
(right) is either of acquiring or of keeping or of reducing; for the question is
either how something may come to be somebody’s
or how a person may keep a
thing or keep his
or how he may alienate or lose
This explains, as we will see
later, the ideological misalignment so to say, of Roman law – in its
strong inclination towards
the concept of ‘belonging’ − to
discipline, resulting in the synthesizing of the partnership agreement to
entrepreneurs’ advantage
and the surreptitious utilization of differently configured enterprise
mechanisms in the commercial praxis.
joins the ancient juridical stock of
, this juridical (and cultural) structure is in one sense
transmitted to the new institute. Accordingly it gives rise to the relationship
between the
affectio societatis
intuitus personae
with the consequent non-transferability of the
partner’s interest without other partners’ agreement from the
fraternitas
And in fact
though the patrimony is a fruit not of a succession but of free contributions
when it forms the basis of the real partnership
assets, it assumes the condition
comunione di diritti reali
(community of real rights) and is held together only by those persons,
, who build it up, but it can be attacked by third party
The partnership relationship can be explained in a similar fashion. In it the
existence of ‘correctives’ for the absence
of legal status does not
affect the ‘personal’ characterization of contract. A typical
example of a ‘corrective’
is the situation in which a partner
received a mandate in relation to a specific sector of the partnership business
from the other
partners and the third persons who stipulated contracts with him
could act to satisfy their credits against the other partners, but
only because
of the mandate and because of the institution. This is the case of the
exercitores
’ liability who appointed among them a
. This liability originates from the charge or mandate and not from the
partnership.
Picture 2 shows graphically the structure of the
consortium ercto non
As we can see it is an impermeable structure in which the connection between
assets and outside activities is highlighted by active
joint and several
liability. So in case of purchases from a single co-owner the effects increase
the common assets and for this reason,
pro rata, the individual partners
entitlement in the case of dissolution and distribution of them.
In figure 3 we can see the scheme of the first hypothesis of partnership
deriving from the
and with it probably
coexisting,
at least in the Republic
period: the
societas omnium bonorum
. It is a partnership having assets
’s properties:
The assets appear as independent in relation to the
activities with a strong ‘real’ connotation tightly linked to the
community of goods.
It is a consensual
partnership preceded by the admissibility of a
not only among
brothers but also among strangers in terms of a
societas re
Gaius himself points out
terminological and conceptual links between the ancient
brothers and the situation of those who ‘...
ad exemplum fratrum suorum
societatem coierint
the name of
societas omnium bonorum
itself points out the identifying
role of the contributed goods, compared with the importance of profits which is
evident in the
characteristics of
societas alicuius negotiationis
As we can see from the figure 3, the ‘internal’ contractual
relations among the
of the new partnership
not important externally. Only if a partner received a precise mandate from the
other partners to enter into a relationship with
third parties, whether to carry
out a specific agreement, or as permanently in charge of a financial activity,
was there a juridical
connection between the third party and the other partners,
the mandators, which made possible the third party’s attack on single
partners’ assets. This was alien to the contractual pattern of
partnership, but the insertion of a mandate made the personal
‘permeable’ and we can presume that third parties would be more
eager to allow credit to such institutions because
they felt more secure. The
consequence of these forms of mandate meant that the partnership effected only
the internal contractual
relations among partners and their obligatory ties, but
it did not have any independent legal status.
An ‘anomalous’ hypothesis of partnership from the point of view
of legal capacity would seem the so-called ‘
publicanorum
’, that is a partnership in taxfarming, a tax collectors
corporation.
Some scholars attempt to
assimilate this form of business to a partnership. The
publicanorum
existed within the public law system. The evidence of the
sources (only literary sources) which refer to them present serious
interpretative
problems however, as they involve questions concerning
associations in general, though there are some similarities with partnerships
Civil law. However, apart from whether such associations possess a real
‘legal status’ which is a problem we cannot
deal with here, their
specific outlines render it rather risky to extend their characteristics to
partnership in general.
The hypotheses mentioned constitute at the same time a justification and a
limit to some recent approaches to the reasoning which
lead to the connection
between partnership and enterprise structures. According to the approach that
supports a connection, partnership
evolves insofar as in it there is an
enterprise structure. This leads to an attempt to identify enterprise structures
ancient commercial experience of partnership
phenomenon.
This perspective falls within
the widespread trend of proposing a general, but hypothetical, ‘Roman
Commercial law’.
However, to understand this occurrence in terms which adhere to the sources,
we need to start from a clear vision: Roman partnership
is not based on
management but on contributed goods. Only starting from the goods relationship
we will be able to understand the
actual nature of Roman
above all its complex evolution in the juridical and normative configuration.
Straying from this path has lead to jurists’
extreme difficulty in
formulating the legal status of the partnership.
This difficulty experienced by jurists, persisted through the middle ages and
into the early modern period. An example would be the
jurisconsult Baldo degli
Ubaldi, certainly the great Bartolo da
Sassoferrato’s
most genial disciple,
who needed to refer to mandate to make out administrators’ powers and
immunity from prosecution, though
they were simple partners who carried out a
business or a function
In his distinction between
societates collegiatae
collegiales
there is surely the intent
of depicting the first as provided with legal status and of trying to consider
the second as independent
bodies acting under the insignia (
partnership. There is also the progression of partnership as predominantly a
relationship between natural persons to the inclusion
of a focus on capital, to
pecunia statuta
’ which is ‘
But Baldo’s attention concerns mainly the partnership activity carried
out by a single partner which can be considered no more
as performed
communi nomine
activities can be considered as performed ‘
. After Baldo the scientific analysis on these themes becomes
more and more modest and flat.
wait until Pothier’s
formulation who
at the end of seventeenth century systematically developed the partnership
concept and consigned to the Code Napoléon
an already mature discipline
for this institute.
Let us now return to the question with which we began, about the role of the
knowledge of Roman legal experience to jurists; indeed,
not only to Continental
jurists or jurists of Common Law, but to jurists ‘tout court’.
The analysis presented here on Roman partnership shows that the idea of the
Roman contract of
is embedded in Civil Law and in the discipline
of civil obligations. But it is not a ‘commercial’ Law and this fact
the difficulty of modern scholars to consider institutes such as the
enterprise and the entrepreneur in terms of the discipline of
the partnership
agreement. Roman jurists’ linearity of construction prevented medieval
annotators from giving shape to an independent
commercial Law but
‘forced’ the nature of Roman juridical relation. This historical
forcing explains also how at the
end of the nineteenth century in Europe the
attempts at creating independent trade Codes compared with Civil Codes failed
commercial matters were incorporated inside the Civil Codes
themselves.
I spoke before about Roman Law as a sort of compass for modern jurists. I
think that the evidence from Roman legal history clearly
shows how we cannot
succeed in understanding the history and the reality of commercial institutions
without the knowledge of Roman
legal experience. Without this understanding we
could be exposed to a threefold failure: as historians of Roman Law, because we
interpret Roman Law according to an non-existent Roman commercial law; as
historians of medieval law, because we would not understand
entirely the
difficulties of medieval jurists in giving shape to the company as a
‘person’ and also as historians of
modern law, because we would look
for the reasons for the failure of the commercial Codes in external facts of
current legislative
policy alone.
Overall it is civil and familial obligations, consortium, rather than
commercial objectives, that drove the development and diversification
partnership law. The nature and effect of contractual obligations gave rise to
the element of enterprise
relations and as such laid the foundations for the development of corporate
structures. However the essence of partnership
in Roman law was more pragmatic,
a means to order personal relations. That Roman partnerships evolved a need for
management does
not necessarily alter this fact.
I wish to thank the Australia and
New Zealand Law and History Society. I was particularly honoured by the
invitation to open its
21st Annual Conference (12th July 2002, Katoomba, NSW).
Here I am publishing the paper developed on that occasion, deliberately keeping
its conversational style and adding just some guideline notes. Some small
changes in the text are due to my colleague and friend
Andrew Buck’s
suggestions, and to some critical comments made by Richard Bauman and by the
other colleagues of the University
of New South Wales, who I met to discuss
these stimulating topics on 23rd July 2002. [Mr Michael Quilter, Department of
Law, Macquarie University also provided valuable editorial assistance
– Editor’s note.] My lecture was preceded by the
following words:
‘My daughter Giuliana, who shared the weariness of a long flight with me,
asked what I would “
” here in Australia and I tried to
explain her that I did not have to teach, but only to
Law, Università di
Catania, Italy.
On this perspective see Randazzo,
Roman Legal tradition and American Law. The Riccobono Seminar of Roman Law in
Roman Legal Tradition
1 (2002) 123 ff
Efforts (and failures) of such research,
both among Roman law scholars at least starting from Goldschmidt, (
des Handelsrechts
Universalgeschichte des Handelsrechts
and among modern Commercial law scholars are outlined by Filippo Gallo,
Negotiatio e mutamenti giuridici nel mondo romano
Imprenditorialità e diritto nell’esperienza storica. Atti del
Convegno di Erice, 1988
(1992) 133 ff. −
Opuscula selecta
(1999) 823 ff. The transitory autonomy itself of the Italian commercial Codes of
1865 and 1882 towards the Civil Code of 1865, which
resulted in the code
unification of 1942 is a faithful mirror of this fact. Finally Cerami e
Lezioni di diritto commerciale romano
(2002) 5 ff supported the
conservative opinion of Commercial law speciality; see: the cit. doctrine ib,
Idea di progresso,
esperienza giuridica romana e ‘paleoromanistica’
origini della sociologia del diritto
(1983) 15 ff.
Le radici di un’incomprensione: Emile Durkheim e gli storici
del diritto romano
28 (2000) 53 ff. and note 11.
Impresa e responsabilità
a Roma nell’età commerciale.
L’impresa in Roma
antica. Problemi e riflessioni
Though ‘impresa’ and
‘società’ appear as distinctly considered by doctrine and,
after all, by the
Italian Civil Code itself which regulates them separately.
A Text-Book of Roman Law
from Augustus to Justinian
(1950) 510.
Impresa collettiva e schiavo
‘manager’ in Roma antica (II sec. a.C. – II sec. d.C.)
(1984), on which see Talamanca,
Enciclopedia del
42 (1990) 814, note 8.
Gai 3.154a:
Est autem aliud genus
societatis proprium civium romanorum. Olim enim mortuo patre familias inter suos
heredes quaedam erat legitima
simul et naturalis societas quae appellabatur
ercto non cito, id est dominio non diviso: erctum enim dominium est, unde erus
dicitur: ciere autem dividere est: unde caedere et secare [et dividere]
There is, however, another kind of partnership peculiar to Roman
citizens. For in former times on the death of the head of a family
there arose
among his immediate heirs a kind of partnership which was at the same time
statutory and natural; it was called <ercto
non cito>, that is
<ownership undivided>; for <erctum> means ownership and hence
<erus> is a word for <owner>;
and <ciere> means <to
divide> so that <caedere>, to strike, and <secare> to cut, are
related words for division.
On this point see: Albanese,
successione ereditaria in diritto romano antico. Saggi
Seminario giuridico del’ Università di Palermo
20 (1949) 127
ff. and, finally, Aricò Anselmo,
‘Societas inseparabilis’
o dell’indissolubilità dell’antico consorzio fraterno
Iuris Vincula. Studi in onore di M. Talamanca
1 (2001) 149 ff. and ib.
spec. bibl. in note 2.
cui eadem contigit sors
’: Forcellini,
Lexicon totius
latinitatis
(Patavii 1940) 811. This etymological interpretation is normally
accepted by all the common dictionaries: see one for all, Georges-Calonghi,
Dizionario della lingua latina
(1942) 580 f.
Because, apart from the inherited
property, it is open to include, with real effects, also the purchases
afterwards carried out
: so Guarino,
Societas consensu
(1972) 12 and Talamanca,
D. 1.3.41 (Ulpianus 2
institutionum
Storia del diritto
commerciale
(1976) 40 f.
D. 17.2.63 pr. (Ulpianus 31 ad
Verum est quod Sabino videtur, etiamsi non universorum bonorum
socii sunt, sed unius rei, attamen in id quod facere possunt quodve
fecerint quo minus possint, condemnari oportere. hoc enim summam rationem habet,
cum societas ius quodammodo fraternitatis
in se habeat.
What Sabinus says is
correct, that even where a partnership is not in all goods but in one item of
property, the partners nonetheless
may be condemned for the amount that they can
pay or can by fraudulent means avoid paying. This is perfectly reasonable, since
partnership
implies, in a sense, a law of brotherhood.
A Text-Book
ff. D. 17.2.63 pr. insists on it.
Riccobono, jr.,
manageriale e partecipazione agli utili nella ‘societas’ romana (Gai
Atti del Seminario sulla problematica contrattuale in
diritto romano
I (1988) 230 note 12.
On the evolution of
, see Bretone, ‘
6 (1960) 163 ff, Talamanca’s
synthesis in
cit. 81 f. and Santucci,
d’opera in diritto romano. Conferimenti e responsabilità
As provided by the so-called
transitus legalis
: D. 17.2.1.1;
2 and 3 pr. For a synthesis
of the related problems see Talamanca,
cit. 824 f.
In relation to the
consensu contracta
see Drosdowsky,
Der Verhältnis von actio pro
socio und actio communi dividundo im klassische römischen Recht
Gai 3.154b, on which see Bianchini,
Studi sulla societas
(1967) 9 ff.
Another difficult question as regard
its solution is the configuration of
venaliciaria societates
problems are analogous to those of
partnerships, while the
problem concerning the so-called shipping company assumes its specificity.
Ulpian D. 14.1.4 pr. refers to
it. Sanfilippo’s sharp exegesis (
irrilevanza del rapporto sociale nei confronti dei terzi
2 [1951] 159 ff.) which – starting from a small breach of
Arangio-Ruiz (
La società in diritto romano
[1950] 90 notes 3 and
91) at the beginning also strongly supported by Arangio-Ruiz himself, as regards
the lack of effects on partners’
relationship towards the third persons
who enter into a contract with the single partners − denies Ulpian’s
exercitores navis
, both in the
passage at issue and in D. 14.1.1.25, was harshly contested by Serrao (
rilevanza esterna del rapporto di società in diritto romano
Impresa e responsabilità
, cit 79 ff). He considers it only
functional to
eliminare l’ostacolo
(remove the obstacle) which the
text would represent for the assertion of a
certa rilevanza esterna del
rapporto sociale
(certain outer relevance of partner relationship) (ib 79),
but in this case
exercitores
’ jointly and severally liability
‘dipende dalla
praepositio
, non dal rapporto sociale’: so
societates publicanorum
Ricerche sulle società di publicani
(1981), on which
cit 831 ff is rather critical and Bona,
‘societates publicanorum’ e le società questuarie nella tarda
Imprenditorialità e diritto
Impresa collettiva e
‘schiavo manager’ in Roma antica (II sec. a.C. − II sec.
In this sense, an articulate attempt
is recently offered by Pietro Cerami and Aldo Petrucci,
. See also Cerami,
‘Exercitio negotiationum’.
Tipologia storico-giuridica della disciplina dei rapporti commerciali
Iuris Vincula
II, 147 ff: the contribution, moreover, is
published in the first chapter of
Bartuls, the conflict of
Laws and the Roman law
Multum non Multa. Festschrift für Kurt
(1980) 254 ff offers an outline of Bartul’s contribution to a
‘ius commune’ which could face the imperial law.
(1575) CXX, n 3, f. 36
societas autem habet instar mandati: invicem enim sibi mandati
videntur quod ea, quae fiunt negotiative, communi nomine fiant
In tres priores libros Codicis Commentaria
In secundam Codicis partem
Commentaria
ad proemium C. pro socio
(C. 4.37), f. 104
In secundam Codicis
C. Elius l. de non numer. Pecunia
(C. 4.31.9, n 5) f. 86 verso:
compensatio non procedit quia corpus societatis agit, non ille tamquam
singularis persona, et ideo quod debetur societati, non compensatur
sociis. Item quia illa pecunia statuta est ad usus sociales.
On this point Diurni,
Società. Diritto intermedio
Novissimo Digesto Italiano
XVII (1976) 531.
Traité du contrat de
In 1881 as first Switzerland will
incorporate both civil and commercial rules in an only Code.
Regarding the changing concept of
enterprise see Ricciardi,
La natura contrattuale dell’impresa
Atti del Seminario sulla problematica contrattuale
cit. 333 ff. The
expression ‘natura contrattuale’ ‘contractual nature’ is
due to N S W Cheung,
The Contractual Nature of the Firm
Journal of Law and Economics
26 (1983) 1 ff. See also L R Cohen, ‘The
Firm: a Revised Definition’ (1979) 46
Southern Economic Journal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (390 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter