URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 12 - Substitute Consent to Medical and Dental Treatment" [2011] SydUPLawBk 14; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
12. 1. Introduction
12. 2. The common law and treating without consent
12. 2. 1. Emergence of the principle of necessity
12. 2. 2. The defence of justified intervention, detention and restraint
12. 3. The Australian legislative regimes for substitute decision-making in relation to medical and dental treatment for incapable
12. 4. The substitute consent regime in New South Wales and Tasmania
12. 4. 1. Objects of the legislation
12. 4. 2. The legal test for incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment
12. 4. 3. Medical and dental treatment defined
12. 4. 4. The types of medical treatment
12. 4. 5. Who is the substitute decision-maker for medical and dental treatment?
12. 4. 6. How the list or hierarchy operates.
12. 4. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to medical and dental treatment – from the person responsible
12. 4. 8. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to medical and dental treatment – from the tribunal
12. 4. 9. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to special medical treatment – from the tribunal
12. 4. 10. Objections to treatment
12. 4. 11. Discretion of the substitute decision-maker to consent or to refuse to consent to the proposed treatment
12. 4. 12. Special powers under the
Mental Health Act 1996
(Tas) of persons responsible and the Guardianship and Administration Board
12. 5. South Australia
12. 5. 1. The test for incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment
12. 5. 2. Medical and dental treatment defined
12. 5. 3 The types of medical treatment
12. 5. 4. Who is the “appropriate authority” to act as substitute decision-maker for medical and dental treatment?
12. 5. 5. How the list or hierarchy operates.
12. 5. 6. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to medical and dental treatment – from the appropriate authority other than
12. 5. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to medical and dental treatment – from the Guardianship Board
12. 5. 8. Objections to treatment
12. 6. Victoria
12. 6. 1. Objects of the legislation
12. 6. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment
12. 6. 3. Medical and dental treatment defined
12. 6. 4. The types of medical treatment
12. 6. 5. Who is the substitute decision-maker for medical and dental treatment?
12. 6. 6. How the list or hierarchy operates.
12. 6. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to medical and dental treatment – from the person responsible
12. 6. 8. Person responsible may seek advice.
12. 6. 9. The limited role of VCAT as a substitute decision-maker for medical and dental treatment
12. 6. 10. Can persons responsible refuse consent to medical and dental treatment?
12. 6. 11. Treating when the person responsible refuses consent
12. 6. 12. Treating without the consent of the person responsible
12. 6. 13. Applications to VCAT in relation to any matter, question or dispute concerning medical and dental treatment or the best
interests of a patient
12. 6. 14. Objections to treatment
12. 7. Queensland
12. 7. 1. Objects of the legislation
12. 7. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment
12. 7. 3. Health care defined
12. 7. 4. The types of health care
12. 7. 5. Who is the substitute decision-maker for health care?
12. 7. 6. Who is the substitute decision-maker for special health care?
12. 7. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute consent to health care – from the guardian, attorney or statutory health attorney
12. 7. 8. The role of QCAAT in relation to special health care and health care
12. 7. 9. Objections to health care
12. 8. Western Australia
12. 8. 1. Medical and dental treatment defined
12. 8. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment
12. 8. 3. The types of treatment
12. 8. 4. Who is the substitute decision-maker for medical and dental treatment?
12. 9. Australian Capital Territory
12. 9. 1. Medical and dental treatment defined
12. 9. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to treatment
12. 9. 3. What treatments need substitute consent when a person cannot give a valid consent to their own treatment?
12. 9. 4. Who is the substitute decision-maker for medical (and dental) treatment?
12. 9. 5. Objections to treatment
12. 10. Northern Territory
12. 10. 1. The limited legislative provisions
12. 10. 2. Emergency treatment.
12. 10. 3. Medical and dental treatment that is neither urgent nor covered by the legislation
12. 11. Common ground in the legislation and case law of the States
12. 11. 1. The test for incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment
12. 11. 2. Definitions of medical and dental treatment
12. 11. 3. Objections
12. 12. The medical approach to substitute consent to medical and dental treatment
12. 12. 1. What may affect capacity?
12. 12. 2. The medical assessment of capacity
12. 12. 3. General screening tools
12. 12. 4. Specific scales
12. 12. 5. The effect of the type of decision on capacity assessment
12. 12. 6. Information, education and facilitation
12. 13. Medical approach to blood transfusions and substitute consent to medical treatment
12. 13. 1. The medical approach to transfusion refusal
12. 14. Conclusion
Chapter 12 - Substitute Consent to Medical and Dental Treatment
12. 1. Introduction
The judges in the common law world have not developed a regime for substitute
decision-making for medical and dental treatment. Rather
they have asserted that
there are circumstances in which adults unable to give a valid consent to their
own treatment can be treated
without consent and the treating doctor is absolved
from liability for trespass to the person in the form of battery or false
imprisonment,
but not necessarily from negligence.
The lack of a sufficient answer in the common law has led to the development,
in the Australian States and the Australian Capital
Territory, of legislative
regimes for substitute decision-making in relation to the medical and dental
treatment of those unable
to give a valid consent to their own treatment.
These regimes are discussed in this chapter, but first it is useful to
consider the state of the common law as it applies to fill
in any gaps in these
regimes, some of which are more comprehensive than others.
The Northern Territory has not as yet developed such a legislative regime,
but it does have some legislative provisions that apply
to some limited
situations.
Consequently, the
common law, insofar as it has been stated by judges, applies in the Northern
Territory to a far greater extent
than it does elsewhere in Australia.
12. 2. The common law and treating without
As is apparent from Chapter 11, the starting point of the common law is that,
subject to some exceptions, adults cannot be given medical
treatment without
their consent. Mc Hugh J of the High Court of Australia pointed out in 1992 in
Marion’s Case
It is the central thesis of the common law doctrine of trespass to the person
that the voluntary choices and decisions of an adult
person of sound mind
concerning what is or is not done to his or her body must be respected and
accepted, irrespective of what others,
including doctors, may think is in the
best interests of that particular
In 1984, Goff LJ, as he then was, stated in the Divisional Court of
Queen’s Bench that there was a general exception to trespass
to the person
in the form of battery, and possibly also to assault and false imprisonment,
embracing all physical contact which is
generally acceptable in the ordinary
conduct of daily life. He said:
In each case, the test must be whether the physical contact so persisted in has
in the circumstances gone beyond generally acceptable
standards of conduct; and
the answer to that question will depend upon the facts of the particular
In a 1986 case the English Court of Appeal said of this
“rationalisation” by Goff LJ:
It provides a solution to the old problem of what legal rule allows a casualty
surgeon to perform an urgent operation on an unconscious
patient who is brought
into hospital. The patient cannot consent, and there may be no next of kin
available to do it for him. Hitherto
it has been customary to say in such cases
that consent is to be implied for what would otherwise be a battery on the
unconscious
body. It is better simply to say that the surgeon's action is
acceptable in the ordinary conduct of everyday life, and not a
12. 2. 1. Emergence of the principle of
By 1990 Goff LJ had become Lord Goff of Chieveley and in the House of Lords
in the case
, he made statements about how doctors could lawfully
treat those incapable of giving a valid consent to their own treatment. He
from the law of agency the principle of necessity which upholds the
actions of agents who are unable to get instructions from their
principals but
must act in an emergency provided they act in a way that in the judgment of a
wise and prudent person is in the best
interests of the principal. He indicated
that doctors dealing with patients who were likely to be incapable only for a
short period
because, for example, they were unconscious or delirious and, with
care and treatment, would soon regain capacity could treat such
patients by
doing no more than was reasonably required in their best
Lord Goff of Chieveley extended the principle of necessity to the effect
that, if a person’s incapacity was permanent or more
or less so, their
doctor could treat them by acting in their best interests and treating them in
accordance with a responsible and
competent body of relevant professional
opinion. He noted that it was good practice to consult relatives and others who
are concerned
with the care of the
It would be unwise to treat the principle of necessity, in either its adapted
or extended form, as enabling a doctor to give treatment
that is contrary to the
known wishes of the person.
It is unclear how far the extended principle of necessity articulated by Lord
Goff of Chieveley can be relied upon in Australia. In
Marion's Case
High Court did not accept that necessity extended to the sterilisation of a
The wider implications of
were not in issue in
Marion’s Case
Nevertheless, it would be safe to say that the general exception to actions for
trespass to the person and the adapted principle
of necessity would come the aid
of a doctor or other health professional who acted in an emergency to give
urgent treatment to an
adult unable to give a valid consent to their own
treatment, provided that such treatment was not negligently provided in the
circumstances.
In 2002, after considering this line of authority and other cases, a Full
Board of the then Guardianship and Administration Board
of Western Australia
noted, that under the doctrine of necessity where there was an urgent need for
medical treatment, the common
law allowed a doctor, as an agent of necessity, to
carry out such treatment as was necessary to meet the emergency without the need
to obtain the incapable person's
This view was supported
by a subsequent Full Board.
12. 2. 2. The defence of justified intervention,
detention and restraint
Another line of authority, arising from the 19
century law
relating to mentally ill people, and applied in the 20
Australia may be able to be called in aid in relation to keeping people
currently or permanently incapable of giving a
valid consent to their own
treatment, in order for them to be kept under observation after head injuries or
drug overuse, where harm
that will need medical treatment is strongly suspected
and where mental health legislation does not apply.
In an action for trespass to the person in the form of false imprisonment and
restraint as well as assault and battery brought, by
a man addicted to drinking
and subject to fits of delirium tremens, against the doctor who came to his
house at his wife’s
request and had another man attend the delirious man
over night, Bramwell B, using the language of 1862, stated that the doctor would
have a defence if the delirious man was:
[A]t the time of the original restraint a dangerous lunatic in such a state that
it was likely that he might do mischief to any one,
the [doctor] was justified
in putting a restraint on him, not merely at the moment of the original danger,
but until there was reasonable
grounds to believe that the danger was
1971 an action was taken in the High Court of Australia, in its original
by a man who was
admitted to a psychiatric hospital in Victoria and kept there for about a
Walsh J applied the
statement of Harvey J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales that whether
detention (of a mentally ill person)
was lawful or not depended on the extent to
which the person submitted to it or on the overriding necessity for the
protection of
himself or others.
Walsh J considered that the evidence in the case fell short of establishing that
there was a necessity to protect the man himself
or others such as would justify
the steps taken by the doctor. While the doctor thought it was right that the
man should be admitted
to a hospital, it was not shown that the doctor
apprehended an immediate danger of injury to the man himself or to others, if he
were not taken into custody
immediately.
12. 3. The Australian legislative regimes for
substitute decision-making in relation to medical and dental treatment for
The legislative regimes for substitute decision-making in relation to the
medical and dental treatment of those unable to give a valid
consent to their
own treatment of the States and the Australian Capital Territory have many
similarities, but the different drafting
of their provisions causes many
differences in the way they operate. Consequently, except for New South Wales
and Tasmania, it has
been necessary to describe them all separately.
Nevertheless, some of the common ground between them is discussed at the end of
chapter. The decided cases in the various States, with exceptions, can be
of assistance in elucidating the legislation in other States.
These are dealt
with at the end of the chapter.
12. 4. The substitute consent regime in New South
Wales and Tasmania
Guardianship Act
which came into force
in August 1989 established a regime for substitute decision-making in relation
to the medical and dental treatment
of people 16 years and above who are
incapable of giving a valid consent to their own
The regime operates
without the need for the intervention of the Guardianship Tribunal or the
Supreme Court.
Tasmania adopted essentially the same regime as
Guardianship
and Administration Act
which commenced in September 1997.
However, that Part applies to a person of any age, including minors, persons
less than 18 years,
whatever their
The legislation in both States sets down the test for incapacity to consent
to one’s own medical or dental treatment and nominates
who is an incapable
person’s substitute decision-maker for such treatment. The legislation
defines medical treatment and divides
it into five categories, treatment which
is outside the regime and doesn’t require consent, urgent treatment,
minor, major
(there is no distinction between major and minor treatments in
Tasmania) and special treatment. The legislation provides for the
arrangements in relation to those categories of treatment as well as setting out
a number of other related matters.
12. 4. 1. Objects of the legislation
The New South Wales
, but not the Tasmanian
the objects of this Part of the Act as being to ensure that:
1. people are not deprived of necessary medical or dental treatment merely
because they lack the capacity to consent to the carrying
out of such treatment,
2. any medical or dental treatment that is carried out on such people is
carried out for the purpose of promoting and maintaining
their health and
well-being.
The Tasmanian
states that one of its general objects is “to
make better provision for the authorization and approval of medical and dental
treatment for persons with a disability who are incapable of giving informed
consent to any such
treatment”.
12. 4. 2. The legal test for incapacity to
consent to medical or dental treatment
A person is incapable of giving a valid consent to their own medical or
dental treatment if:
1. they are incapable of understanding;
(a) the general nature of the treatment, or
(b) the effect of the treatment, or
2. they are incapable of indicating whether or not they consent to the
carrying out of the
If a person is incapable of understanding the general nature of a particular
treatment or the effect of that treatment, or they are
unable to communicate
their consent (which can be done by oral or other means) they are incapable of
giving consent to it. In particular,
a person must understand the nature and
effect of treatment not on patients in general, but on themselves.
Some people lack insight into their medical condition. This can result in
them being incapable of giving a valid consent, or refusal
of consent to their
own treatment on the ground that they are incapable of understanding the effect,
on them, of the proposed treatment.
This was demonstrated in a 2002 appeal
against a decision of the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board in
which Blow J
of the Supreme Court of Tasmania noted that the appellant was
capable of understanding the general nature of the proposed treatment.
recognised that schizophrenia was a disorder that he had suffered from in the
past and understood that the drugs that were proposed
for him were drugs for the
treatment of schizophrenia. However, he was firmly of the belief that he did not
suffer from schizophrenia
and therefore did not need that treatment. Blow J was
of the view that the legislative test was not about the effect of proposed
treatment on patients in general but referred to a person's understanding as to
the effect of the proposed treatment on
Consequently, where a person understood the nature and effect of treatment by
particular drugs in general terms in relation to patients
in general, but do not
have insight into their own condition and therefore opposed the use of such
treatment in relation to them,
they lacked the capacity to give a valid consent
to their own treatment.
A useful way of determining whether or not a person is capable of
understanding the general nature or effect of a particular treatment
indicating whether or not they consent to the carrying out of that treatment is
to apply the approach proposed by a Dr Eastman,
a forensic psychologist, and
adopted by Thorpe J of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal in
England and by the Guardianship
Tribunal of New South
Thorpe J stated the test twice in his judgment, in slightly different ways.
Put together, they clarify the meaning of the test. The
test has three elements.
To be capable of giving a valid consent to medical treatment, the person must be
1. take in (and comprehend) and retain the treatment information,
2. believe that information, and
3. weigh that information, balancing risks and needs. (weigh it in the
balance and arrive at a choice)
The person must not only be able to take in the information, they must be
able to understand it, to a reasonable degree. They must
not only believe that
information as true but also be able to hold it long enough in their memories to
weigh up the benefits and
risks and then make a choice as to whether to give or
refuse consent to the proposed treatment. A person is entitled to be ambivalent
vacillate on the subject.
However, if they are not able to come to a decision at all, that is likely to be
evidence of incapacity.
In practice, it falls to the doctors to assess whether the person they are
proposing the treatment for has the capacity to consent
to or refuse treatment
according to the test set out above. The starting point is that every adult is
assumed to have capacity.
legal presumption can be set aside by evidence to the contrary. Because of this
approach, it follows that the test is not to
be applied harshly so as to prevent
elderly, frail or ill people from making decisions about their own treatment
because they may
be slow to comprehend or may need time to come to terms with
new or unexpected developments. Similarly, those with whole of life
or acquired
disabilities are not to be prevented from making their own decisions. Incapacity
has to arise from the existence of evidence
showing it. Also, a refusal of
consent to proposed treatment is not necessarily evidence of incapacity to
consent to treatment.
while the matter has not been determined in Australia, Lord Donaldson MR has
noted in England that, in relation to the refusal
of treatment at least,
capacity to decide has to be commensurate with the gravity of the decision the
person made. The more serious
the decision, the greater the capacity
These issues and the process for assessing capacity to consent or refuse
treatment are discussed in detail at the end of this
12. 4. 3. Medical and dental
treatment defined
In New South Wales and Tasmania, medical and dental treatment are defined
together. They are medical treatment, including any medical
or surgical
procedure, operation or examination and any prophylactic, palliative or
rehabilitative care, normally carried out by,
or under, the supervision of a
registered practitioner as well as dental treatment (including any dental
procedure, operation or
examination) normally carried out by or under the
supervision of a registered practitioner. They can also include any other act
in the regulations to be “treatment” as just
12. 4. 4. The types of medical
12. 4. 4. 1. Excluded treatments
The first group in both New South Wales and Tasmania are treatments that are
excluded from the regime with the intention that they
do not need consent. They
are non-intrusive examinations made for diagnostic purposes including visual
examinations of the mouth,
throat, nasal cavity, eyes or ears. Also in the group
are first-aid medical or dental treatments, and drugs for which a prescription
is not required and which are normally self-administered when they are being
used for the purpose, and in accordance with the dosage
level, recommended in
the manufacturer's instructions. Other treatments can be included in this group
by being declared in the regulations,
but none have
These treatments have been excluded largely because they are of such a minor
nature or are so linked to day to day living and only
carried out when necessary
that it was inappropriate for consent to them to have to be sought through the
substitute decision-making
regime. However, this exclusion was not intended to
cut across, or in anyway downplay, the importance of hospitals, aged care
facilities,
group homes or other places where care or treatment is provided to
people who are incapable of giving a valid consent to their own
keeping accurate records of any form of medication or treatment given to a
patient or resident or having protocols as to
who may permit such treatments to
be carried out.
12. 4. 4. 2. Urgent treatments
These are treatments which the doctor or dentist carrying out or supervising
the treatment considers to be treatment that is necessary,
as a matter of
(a) to save the incapable person's life, or
(b) to prevent serious damage to the incapable person's health, or
(c) except in the case of special treatment, to prevent the incapable person
from suffering or continuing to suffer significant pain
These treatments may be carried out without consent when they are urgent.
When they are not urgent they will be categorized as major
or minor treatment
and consent for them to be carried out will be required according to the
category of treatment they fit, according
to the statutory definition.
12. 4. 4. 3. Special treatments
For New South Wales these are:
(a) any treatment that is intended, or is reasonably likely, to have the
effect of rendering permanently infertile the person on whom
it is carried out,
(b) any new treatment that has not yet gained the support of a substantial
number of medical practitioners or dentists specialising
in the area of practice
concerned (these are experimental treatments proposed to be given not within the
ambit of a clinical trial
and have a different test for consent from the other
forms of special treatment referred to in (a) and (c))
(c) any other kind of treatment declared by the regulations to be special
In New South Wales treatments declared by the regulations to be special
treatments are:
a) any treatment that involves the administration of a drug of addiction
(other than in association with the treatment of cancer or
palliative care of a
terminally ill patient) over a period or periods totaling more than 10 days in
any period of 30 days,
(b) any treatment that is carried out for the purpose of terminating
(c) any treatment in the nature of a vasectomy or tubal occlusion,
(d) any treatment that involves the use of an aversive stimulus, whether
mechanical, chemical, physical or
In New South Wales there are some “prescribed special treatments”
which are also found in the regulations. They are:
1. any treatment that involves
the administration to an incapable person of one or more restricted substances
for the purpose of affecting
the central nervous system of that person, but only
if the dosage levels, combinations or the numbers of restricted substances used
or the duration of the treatment are outside the accepted mode of treatment for
such a person, and
2. any treatment that involves the use of androgen reducing medication for
the purpose of behavioural
While Tasmania has not made the “prescribed special treatments”
just referred to special treatments, most of the other
treatments set out above
have been made special treatments in that State. However, they are distributed
differently between the
Regulations
In both New South Wales and Tasmania, only the Guardianship Tribunal or
Guardianship and Administration Board respectively may consent
However both
tribunals, when giving consent to special treatment, may give the person’s
guardian, if there is one, authority
to consent to the continuation of the
treatment or further special treatment of a similar
In New South Wales before the Guardianship Tribunal may give consent as to
the carrying out of special medical treatment, it must
be satisfied as to
certain matters. These matters are different depending on whether the treatment
is special medical treatment or
experimental medical
As already noted, the Tasmanian
provides that only the
Guardianship and Administration Board may consent to such treatment. However,
the test for all treatments
that the Board may be called upon to consent to is
that the Board is satisfied that the treatment is otherwise lawful and that it
would be in the best interests of the
12. 4. 4. 4. Major treatment
The Tasmanian
does not differentiate between major and minor
treatment, but the New South Wales
In New South Wales major
medical is described in the Regulation as:
(a) any treatment that involves the administration of a long-acting
injectable hormonal substance for the purpose of contraception
or menstrual
regulation,
(b) any treatment that involves the administration of a drug of addiction
(but which is not special treatment as described under “
(c) any treatment that involves the administration of a general anaesthetic
or other sedation, but not treatment involving:
(i) sedation used to facilitate the management of fractured or dislocated
(ii) sedation used to facilitate the insertion of an endoscope into a
patient's body for diagnostic purposes unless the endoscope
is inserted through
a breach or incision in the skin or a mucous membrane,
(d) any treatment used for the purpose of eliminating menstruation (as
different from any treatment which is intended to or is likely
to render a
person permanently infertile – which is special medical
(e) any treatment that involves the administration of a restricted substance
for the purpose of affecting the central nervous system,
but not a treatment:
(i) involving a substance that is intended to be used for analgesic,
antipyretic, antiparkinsonian, anticonvulsant, antiemetic, antinauseant
antihistaminic purposes, or
(ii) that is to be given only once, or
(iii) that is a PRN treatment (that is, given when required, according to the
patient's needs) that may be given not more than 3 times
a month, or
(iv) given for sedation in minor medical procedures,
(f) any treatment that involves a substantial risk to the patient (that is, a
risk that amounts to more than a mere possibility) of:
(i) death, or
(ii) brain damage, or
(iii) paralysis, or
(iv) permanent loss of function of any organ or limb, or
(v) permanent and disfiguring scarring, or
(vi) exacerbation of the condition being treated, or
(vii) an unusually prolonged period of recovery, or
(viii) a detrimental change of personality, or
(ix) a high level of pain or stress,
(g) any treatment involving testing for the human immuno-deficiency virus
It should be noted that this definition of major medical treatment
specifically excludes certain treatments which are clearly significant
procedures from a medical perspective. These are surgical procedures to treat
fractured or dislocated limbs, or the insertion
of an endoscope into a patient's
body for diagnostic purposes through an orifice and not involving the insertion
of the endoscope
through a breach or incision in the skin or a mucous
These treatments were
made minor medical treatments so that the question of consent for them could be
dealt with under the arrangements
Major dental treatment is described as:
(a) any treatment involving the administration of a general anaesthetic or
simple sedation,
(b) any treatment intended, or likely, to result in the removal of all
(c) any treatment likely to result in the patient's ability to chew food
being significantly impaired for an indefinite or prolonged
Note that most dental treatments are minor treatments and subject to the
arrangements for substitute consent to minor treatment.
The substitute decision-maker for these forms of major medical or dental
treatment is the incapable person’s “person responsible”.
However, as substitute consent must be obtained before such treatment may be
carried out, if the person responsible is not available,
any application for
substitute consent must be made to the Guardianship
12. 4. 4. 5. Minor treatment
Again in New South Wales, any medical or dental treatment that is not special
or major treatment, or treatment not excluded from the
substitute consent regime
by the legislation, is minor
Most non-surgical
medical treatments and some surgical treatments are in the category of minor
medical treatment.
12. 4. 5. Who is the substitute decision-maker
for medical and dental treatment?
As most medical and dental treatments fit into the categories of minor or
major treatment, the substitute decision-maker for an incapable
person in most
cases will be their “person responsible”.
It should be noted that while in most cases an incapable person’s
person responsible will also be their next of kin, being a
person’s next
of kin has never given, and does not now give, the next of kin the right to act
as substitute decision-maker
for an incapable
The authority of a
person responsible, or their equivalent in the other States and the Australian
Capital Territory, arises from
the legislation that empowers then, without
having to be appointed or approved by a tribunal, to act as the incapable
substitute decision-maker. A different approach is taken in the
Northern Territory. See 12. 10.
In both New South Wales and Tasmania you determine who is a person’s
person responsible by consulting the list or hierarchy
of persons responsible.
The list, in order of priority, is:
1. the person’s guardian, including enduring
2. the person’s her spouse, including their de facto partner and, in
New South Wales, their same sex
3. the person having the care of the incapable
4. a close friend or relative of the incapable
There are special provisions in both New South Wales and Tasmania in relation
to those who are in the care of a Minister or a Director-General
or are a ward
of the State.
In Tasmania if a
person is under the age of 18 years and they have no spouse, their parents take
the place of the spouse in the order
of priority for persons
responsible.
12. 4. 6. How the list or hierarchy operates.
If there is a guardian, with power to consent to medical and dental
treatment, then they are the person responsible and no one else
may act as the
person responsible. If there is no guardian, which is usually the case, the
incapable person’s spouse is their
person responsible, unless they too are
incapable: and so on down the list. If there is no one in any of the four stages
of the hierarchy,
then the incapable person has no person responsible. This
happens occasionally, particularly if the person is living alone and has
isolated from their family or the community. In that case in both New South
Wales and Tasmania, the Guardianship Tribunal
or the Guardianship and
Administration Board may act as the substitute decision-maker if an application
is made to them. This matter
is taken up again in 12. 4. 8.
In New South Wales, if a person who, in accordance with the hierarchy, is the
person responsible for an incapable person declines
in writing to act as person
responsible, or if a doctor or another person qualified to give an expert
opinion on their condition
certifies in writing that that person is not capable
of carrying out the functions of a person responsible, then the person next
the hierarchy becomes the person responsible for the incapable
Note that a person
responsible, for example an elderly spouse, wishes to abdicate their role as
person responsible, they cannot nominate
their replacement. The position of
person responsible is determined by operation of the hierarchy. However, any
adult with the capacity
to do so may appoint an enduring guardian and give them
the function of consenting to medical and dental treatment. That enduring
guardian will then become their person
responsible.
12. 4. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to medical and dental treatment – from the person
responsible
In both New South Wales and Tasmania requests to the person responsible for
substitute consent to treatment are to be in writing.
However if, because of the
need to provide the treatment quickly, it is not practicable to make the request
in writing, it may be
made orally. There are specific legislatively stipulated
arrangements in each State about when an oral request has to be confirmed
writing and when substitute consent must be given in writing or when it may be
given orally.
In New South Wales, while a doctor will be responsible for carrying out or
supervising the carrying out of any medical treatment and
a dentist will be
similarly responsible for dental treatment, any person may request the person
responsible for consent to the carrying
out of medical or dental treatment on
the incapable person. Even if it is not in writing, the request must
1. why the person cannot give a valid consent to their own treatment,
2. the particular condition they have that requires treatment,
3. alternative courses of treatment that are available in relation to that
4. the general nature and effect of each of those courses of treatment,
5. the nature and degree of the significant risks (if any) associated with
each of those courses of treatment, and
6. why the particular course of treatment is
The person responsible is required to have regard to the information supplied
and the views of the incapable person, if they have
any. It is suggested that if
the incapable person has made an advance directive that is relevant to their
current circumstances,
the person responsible must give effect to that advance
directive. The person responsible should consent only to medical or dental
treatment that will promote the health and well-being of the incapable
However, it should be
noted that any consent given by a person responsible has no effect if the
proposed treatment is to be carried
out for any purpose other than that of
promoting or maintaining the health and well-being of the incapable
The Tasmanian provisions are similar but not identical. While the person
responsible must take into account the wishes of the incapable
person, if these
can be ascertained, they are not bound by those wishes. Again, it is suggested
that if the incapable person has
made an advance directive that is relevant to
their current circumstances, the person responsible must give effect to that
directive. The person responsible must consider the nature and degree of
any significant risks associated with the proposed treatment
or any alternative
treatments and the consequences if treatment is not carried out. The person
responsible must also be satisfied
that the person is incapable of giving
consent, that the treatment is in the best interests of the incapable person and
to be carried out only to promote and maintain their health and
well-being.
It should be noted that in both New South Wales and Tasmania persons
responsible, including tribunal appointed and enduring guardians,
make their own
decisions as to the treatment they will consent to on behalf of the incapable
person according to the statutory criteria.
Except where they have a relevant
advance directive to give effect to, they do not make a substituted judgment as
to what the incapable
person would have consented to in the circumstances.
12. 4. 8. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to medical and dental treatment – from the tribunal
Both the Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales and the Guardianship and
Administration Board of Tasmania have the jurisdiction
to deal with applications
for substitute consent to medical and dental treatment. They both operate as the
default or “fall
back” substitute decision-maker when there is no
person responsible or they cannot be contacted. Where an application comes
the Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales and it becomes apparent that the
incapable person probably needs a guardian, the
Tribunal will request that an
application for guardianship be lodged with it. If it appears to the Tribunal
that the incapable person
will require on-going treatment and a series of
consents as the treatment is varied or changed, it may give its consent to the
treatment and request that an application for guardianship be lodged to
see if a guardian should be appointed as the on-going substitute
decision-maker
for incapable person.
As already noted, the Tasmanian legislation does not differentiate between
major and minor treatment, but it does set out a list of
treatments that may not
be carried out without consent. Consequently, if the incapable person does not
have a person responsible,
an application must be made to the Board by someone
with a proper interest in the matter for consent to carry out the treatment.
This applies to the following medical treatments:
1. treatment that is continuing or ongoing and involves the administration of
a restricted substance primarily to control the conduct
of the person to whom it
is given; or
2. treatment that involves the administration of a drug of addiction other
than in association with the treatment of cancer or palliative
terminally ill patient; or
3. electro convulsive therapy (ECT); or
4. treatment involving a substantial risk to the incapable person of -
(i) death; or
(ii) brain damage; or
(iii) paralysis; or
(iv) permanent loss of function of any organ or limb; or
(v) permanent and disfiguring scarring; or
(vi) extreme pain or
Also included is dental treatment that is intended, or likely, to result in
the removal of all or a substantial number of
The Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales is the default substitute
decision-maker for major medical and dental treatment. It
should not be applied
to if the person responsible is available. In exceptional circumstances where,
for example, the capacity or
general ability of the person responsible is in
real doubt or it is likely that decisions of the person responsible will be
by other family members or significant others, then it may be
appropriate to apply to the Tribunal in the first place.
The Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales can be the default substitute
decision-maker for minor medical and dental treatment,
if there is a particular
reason for applying to it. Normally this will not be required because the New
South Wales
provides that, minor treatment may be carried out on an
incapable person without consent if the incapable person has no person
responsible
or they cannot be contacted or are unable or unwilling to make a
decision concerning the request for their consent. However, before
treatment, the doctor or dentist carrying it out must certify in writing in the
incapable person’s clinical record
1. the treatment is necessary, and
2. is the form of treatment that will most successfully promote the incapable
person’s health and well-being, and the incapable
person does not object
to the carrying out of the
As will be dealt with in section 12. 4. 10, if the person responsible refuses
consent to the treatment and the treating doctor considers
that the treatment
will promote and maintain the incapable person’s health and well-being or
the incapable person objects to
the treatment, the Tribunal becomes the
substitute decision-maker. As has already been noted, in both New South Wales
and Tasmania,
only the Guardianship Tribunal or the Guardianship and
Administration Board respectively may consent to special
Applications to the Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales and the
Guardianship and Administration Board of Tasmania for substitute
medical and dental treatment must be in
In New South Wales, as
is the case with requests to persons responsible for substitute consent, while a
doctor will be responsible
for carrying out or supervising the carrying out of
any medical treatment and a dentist will be similarly responsible for dental
treatment, any person may apply to the Tribunal for consent to the carrying out
of medical or dental treatment on the incapable
The application must provide the Tribunal with information about the same six
matters a person responsible must be informed about.
1. why the person cannot give a valid consent to their own treatment,
2. the particular condition they have that requires treatment,
3. alternative courses of treatment that are available in relation to that
4. the general nature and effect of each of those courses of treatment,
5. the nature and degree of the significant risks (if any) associated with
each of those courses of treatment, and
6. why the particular course of treatment is
The Tribunal is required to conduct a hearing into the application. When
considering the application, the Tribunal must have regard
to the information
supplied in the application, the views of the incapable person, if they have
any, and the views of their person
responsible, if there is one, and the views
of the person proposing the
The Tribunal must
also consider the objects of Part 5 of the
. Before the Tribunal may
give its consent to the carrying out of the treatment, it must be satisfied
1. it is appropriate that the treatment be carried out, and
2. the treatment is the most appropriate form of treatment for promoting and
maintaining the patient's health and
well-being.
Similarly, the Tasmanian Board is required to conduct a hearing into the
application. As with persons responsible in Tasmania, the
Board must take into
account the wishes of the incapable person, if these can be ascertained.
However, it is not bound by those wishes.
The Board must consider the
consequences if the treatment is not carried out. The Board must also be
satisfied that the person is
incapable of giving consent, that the treatment is
otherwise lawful and that it is in the best interests of the incapable
Nevertheless,
acknowledging those provisions, it is again suggested that if the incapable
person has made an advance directive that
is relevant to their current
circumstances, the Board, as substitute decision-maker, must give effect to that
advance directive.
Unlike the person responsible, the Board must consider whether the proposed
treatment can be postponed on the ground that a better
treatment may become
available and whether the incapable person is likely to become capable of
consenting to the treatment.
However, where the Board considers the treatment urgent, it may dispense with
notice of the hearing and give its consent to the treatment
being carried out
immediately. This also dispenses with the usual requirement that the appeal
period expires before the order consenting
to the treatment comes into effect.
12. 4. 9. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to special medical treatment – from the tribunal
As has already been noted, in both New South Wales and Tasmania, only the
Guardianship Tribunal or Guardianship and Administration
Board respectively may
consent to special treatment.
Also, when giving consent to special treatment, both tribunals may give the
person’s guardian, if there is one, authority to
consent to the
continuation of the treatment or further special treatment of a similar
However, in Tasmania
the tests for consent to special medical treatments are the same as for any
other treatments, namely those
that have just been set out. The question of
treatment that will result in sterilization is dealt with in more detail in
In New South Wales, the same information as for any other treatment must be
provided to the Tribunal in the application, but the there
is an extra element
to the test that has to be satisfied before the Tribunal may give consent. The
Tribunal must be satisfied that
the treatment is not only the most appropriate
form of treatment to promote and maintain the incapable person’s health
well-being, but also that the treatment is necessary either to save the
incapable person’s life or to prevent serious damage
to the their
If the proposed treatment is experimental special medical treatment - no
dental treatment has been declared to be “special dental
– or is “prescribed special treatment”, then the test is
slightly different.
must the Tribunal be satisfied that the treatment is the most appropriate form
of treatment to promote and maintain the
incapable person’s health and
well-being, but also that the treatment is the only or most appropriate way of
treating the patient
and is manifestly in the best interests of the incapable
person. Also, if the National Health and Medical Research Council has prescribed
guidelines that are relevant to the carrying out of that treatment - those
guidelines have been or will be complied with as regards
the incapable
12. 4. 10. Objections to treatment
The New South Wales
has provisions dealing with objections to
treatment. The Tasmanian legislation does not deal with this matter.
In New South Wales, while an incapable person cannot consent to medical or
dental treatment, they can still “object” to
it. A person is to be
taken to object to the carrying out of treatment if they indicate, by whatever
means, that they do not want
the treatment or if they have previously indicated
in similar circumstances that they do not want the treatment and have not
subsequently
indicated to the
If they do object to
the treatment, any consent given by a person responsible, including a guardian,
is of no effect.
However, the
Tribunal may authorize a guardian of an incapable person to override their
objection to certain treatments, but only
if the Tribunal is satisfied that any
such objection will be made because of the incapable person’s lack of
understanding of
the nature of, or reason for, the
Also, an objection by an incapable person to the carrying out of proposed
medical or dental treatment can be disregarded if:
1. the incapable person has minimal or no understanding of what the treatment
entails, and
2. the treatment will cause them no distress or, if it will cause them some
distress, that distress is likely to be reasonably tolerable
transitory.
If the objection is one that the Tribunal must deal with, it accepts an
application for consent to the proposed treatment and deals
with it according to
the criteria set down in the
for consenting to treatment. The
Tribunal takes evidence about the objection and determines whether or not to
give consent to the
proposed treatment overriding the incapable person’s
objection. If the Tribunal gives consent to the treatment in these
circumstances,
its consent allows the treatment to be carried out. The
Tribunal’s consent does not require the treatment to be carried out.
The case of Mrs BB shows how the Tribunal deals with objections to treatment
by an incapable person. Mrs BB developed gangrene in
her right foot after
attempts to increase the blood flow there failed. Her treating doctors
recommended that her right leg be amputated
below the knee. The evidence showed
that she was unable to understand the nature and effect of the treatment.
Nevertheless, she indicated
that she didn’t want the treatment. Consent
was given by her person responsible, a family member and then withdrawn in the
light of her objection. Her treating doctors applied to the Tribunal for consent
to the amputation overriding Mrs BB’s objection.
The Tribunal took evidence from Mrs BB, the applicant and other doctors and
members of her family. After consideration of the evidence,
the Tribunal was
satisfied that Mrs BB could not give a valid consent to her own treatment, and
that the proposed treatment, while
not without its risks, was the most
appropriate form of treatment to promote and maintain her health and well-being.
The Tribunal,
without resistance from her family, gave its consent to the
carrying out of the proposed amputation, overriding Mrs BB’s
In 2001 the Tribunal refused to give consent to a blood transfusion for an 84
year old woman who was a Jehovah’s Witness, but
who was incapable of
consenting to or refusing consent to her own treatment because of dementia. One
reason was that she had refused
a transfusion seven years previously and had not
subsequently indicated to the contrary. Indeed she had maintained her objection
to receiving blood products because of her religious convictions. Other
considerations were that the proposed blood transfusion was
palliative in nature
and would have little effect on the progress of her underlying renal condition.
In addition there was an alternative
treatment, Erythropoietin, which was
acceptable to Jehovah’s Witnesses but which had not yet been
If the person responsible refuses consent to the treatment and the treating
doctor considers that the treatment should be given because
it will promote and
maintain the incapable person’s health and well-being and the failure to
receive the treatment will be
disadvantageous to the incapable person, the
treating doctor may make an application to the Tribunal for consent to the
out of the treatment. The Tribunal then becomes the substitute
decision-maker. It deals with the matter as it would any other application
consent to treatment except that it would ensure that it obtained and had
particular regard to the views of the person
responsible.
Guardianship and Administration Act
similar provision which has been interpreted in a different manner by the
Queensland Guardianship and Administration
However, the
Queensland tribunal does not have jurisdiction to deal directly with
applications for consent to medical and dental
treatment, except for forms of
special medical treatment, while the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal does
have such a role,
as has just been demonstrated. This absence of a for mechanism
for giving appropriate consideration to the person’s objection
being able to override it and give an effective consent to the proposed
treatment in appropriate cases, which can be done
in New South Wales, may have
contributed to the interpretation given to the relevant provision in
Queensland.
12. 4. 11. Discretion of the substitute
decision-maker to consent or to refuse to consent to the proposed
Substitute decision-makers, whether persons responsible or the Guardianship
Tribunal, have a discretion as to whether or not to consent
to what might appear
from a medical perspective to be the most appropriate treatment for promoting
and maintaining the health and
well-being of the incapable person. This is
because not only do they have to consider the information about the treatment,
they are required to have regard to the views of the incapable person
and the objects of
Guardianship Act 1987
As far back as 1994,
the Tribunal (still then called the Guardianship Board) noted, in an application
relating to a Christian Scientist,
that it was not required under
“to impose medication on a person contrary to religious beliefs that were
deeply held for a long time prior to the person acquiring
incapacity”.
As has already been suggested a number of times in this chapter, if the
incapable person has made an advance directive that is relevant
to their current
circumstances, and which has been put beyond doubt by McDougall J’s
decision in
Hunter and New England Area Health Service v
, the substitute
decision-maker must give effect to that advance directive. However, it is
conceded that considerable difficulties
arise in cases involving Jehovah’s
Witnesses where the Witness the subject of the application has not got a current
card” – a form of advance directive carried by many
Jehovah’s Witnesses setting out that they do not wish to receive
products and what substitute non-blood products they are willing to receive. The
Tribunal has stated that:
[W]hilst it has an obligation to have regard to the views of the patient and to
take them very seriously indeed, it was not bound
by those views and could make
a decision in relation to treatment which was contrary to the views of the
patient if the Tribunal
believed there were strong reasons for doing so.
The matter in which the Tribunal made that statement, and other cases
involving the Tribunal in either giving or refusing substitute
consent to blood
transfusions, are discussed at the end of this chapter at 12. 13.
12. 4. 12. Special powers under the Mental Health
Act 1996 (Tas) of persons responsible and the Guardianship and Administration
Mental Health Act 1996
, if a person has a mental
illness and meets certain other criteria, they may be admitted to an approved
hospital as an involuntary
Their person
responsible may apply to a doctor for an order for their
When in an approved
hospital, a mentally ill person may be given medical treatment, although certain
medical treatments are excluded,
either with their consent or if the treatment
has been authorised by or under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
mentally ill person is incapable of giving “informed consent” to
their medical treatment and they have a person
responsible, their person
responsible, to the extent of their powers and according to the requirements of
Guardianship and Administration Act
substitute consent to the proposed
However, if the
mentally ill person has refused or failed to undergo the treatment, or is likely
to refuse or fail to undergo it,
the Board may make an order authorizing the
giving of the medical treatment regardless of whether or not the mentally ill
has lost capacity to give a valid consent to their own treatment. The
Board has to be satisfied that:
1. the mentally ill person’s mental illness that is amenable to the
proposed medical treatment; and
2. a doctor has recommended medical treatment
for the illness but the person has refused or failed, or is likely to refuse or
to undergo the treatment; and
3. the mentally ill person should be given the
treatment in their own interests or for the protection of
12. 5. South Australia
Guardianship and Administration Act
came into force in March 1995. It provides most of the regime for substitute
decision-making in relation to the medical and dental
treatment of people 18
years and above who are incapable of giving a valid consent to their own
treatment. Most of the rest of the
regime is provided for in the
Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
. As in the other States,
the regime operates without the need for the intervention of the Guardianship
Board or the Supreme Court.
12. 5. 1. The test for incapacity to consent to
medical or dental treatment
applies in relation to a person who, because of their mental
incapacity, is incapable of giving effective consent to their own medical
dental treatment.
defines “mental incapacity” to mean the
inability of a person to look after their own health, safety or welfare or to
manage their own affairs, as a result of:
1. any damage to, or any illness, disorder, imperfect or delayed development,
impairment or deterioration, of the brain or mind; or
2. any physical illness or condition that renders the person unable to
communicate their intentions or wishes in any manner
whatsoever.
While no test determining whether a person has mental incapacity has been
adopted in South Australia, Thorpe J’s test, which
has been described
earlier in this chapter and which has been adopted in England and by the
Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales,
would be a useful tool to use in
deciding that matter.
12. 5. 2. Medical and dental treatment
Consistent with the trend in the other States, both medical and dental
are given broad definitions in South Australia. Medical
treatment is defined to mean treatment or procedures administered or carried
by a medical practitioner or other health professional in the course of
professional practice and includes the prescription or
Dental treatment means
treatment or procedures carried out by a dentist in the course of dental
12. 5. 3 The types of medical
12. 5. 3. 1
Emergency medical treatment
In South Australia urgent or emergency medical treatment is provided for in
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
, a doctor may, lawfully, administer medical treatment to mentally
incapacitated person if:
1. they are incapable of consenting to the treatment; and
2. the doctor who is to administer the treatment is of the opinion that the
treatment is necessary to meet an imminent risk to life
or health and
3. that opinion is supported by the written opinion of another doctor who has
personally examined the mentally incapacitated person;
4. if that person is 16 years of age or over and has not, to the best of the
doctor's knowledge, refused to consent to the
Fortunately, a supporting opinion is not necessary if, in the circumstances
of the case, it is not practicable to obtain such an
The administration of emergency medical treatment is further complicated if
the mentally incapacitated person has appointed a medical
agent, that is an
attorney appointed under a medical power of attorney made under the provisions
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
This is because, if the doctor proposing to administer the treatment is aware of
that appointment and of the conditions and directions
contained in that medical
power of attorney and the medical agent is available to decide whether the
medical treatment should be
administered, then the medical treatment may not be
administered without the agent's
A similar difficulty
arises if the mentally incapacitated person has a guardian whether an enduring
guardian appointed by the now
incapable person or a guardian appointed by the
Guardianship Board. If such a guardian is available, the medical treatment may
be administered without their
These limitations on the immediate provision of emergency treatment to the
mentally incapacitated person impose a duty on doctors
to make inquiries that
are reasonable in the circumstances, as to whether or not the person has a
medical agent or guardian and if
they have, to make reasonable efforts to obtain
their consent to the treatment.
12. 5. 3. 2.
Prescribed treatments
Termination of pregnancy and sterilisation are treatments prescribed in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
as treatments that
may not be carried out without the consent of the Guardianship Board and only in
accordance with the
regulations.
However, no
relevant regulations have been made, nor have any further medical treatments
been prescribed in the
regulations.
The Guardianship Board cannot consent to a termination of pregnancy unless it
is satisfied as to a number of matters. These are that:
1. the carrying out of the termination would not constitute an offence under
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
2. there is no likelihood of the woman acquiring the capacity to give an
effective consent within the period that is reasonably available
for the safe
carrying out of the termination, and
3. the Board has no knowledge of any refusal on the part of the woman to
consent to the termination, being a refusal that was made
while capable of
giving effective consent and that was communicated by her to a medical
practitioner.
Also, before consenting to the carrying out of a termination of pregnancy,
the Board must put its mind to whether or not it is appropriate
to allow such of
the woman’s parents whose whereabouts are reasonably ascertainable a
reasonable opportunity to make submissions
to the Board on the matter. However,
the Board is not required to allow this opportunity if it is of the opinion that
to do so would
not be in the best interests of the mentally incapacitated
Furthermore, the decision of the Board to give consent a termination of
pregnancy cannot be carried out until the period for appeal
against the decision
has expired or, if an appeal has been instituted, until the appeal has been
dismissed or withdrawn.
the period in which an appeal may be lodged is 28 days, the carrying out of the
procedure to terminate the incapable woman’s
pregnancy must be delayed for
at least that time. Because pregnancies in women with decision-making
disabilities are often not discovered
until they are well advanced, obtaining
consent under this provision must be a difficult matter raising serious medical
and ethical
questions at the time when the treatment can be carried out
There are also detailed limitations on the Board’s power to consent to
sterilisation. These are dealt with in Chapter 15 dealing
sterilisation.
12. 5. 3. 3. Treatments that are neither urgent nor prescribed
All medical treatments that are neither urgent nor prescribed and all dental
treatments, no matter how significant or how minor in
nature, require the
consent of the “appropriate authority”.
12. 5. 4. Who is the “appropriate
authority” to act as substitute decision-maker for medical and dental
If a person with a mental incapacity cannot consent to their own treatment,
consent must be sought from a substitute decision-maker,
who can be:
1. their medical agent appointed by them under a medical power of
2. their enduring guardian appointed by them under an enduring power of
guardianship under an appointment that does not exclude the
guardian from giving
consent to medical and dental
3. a guardian appointed for them by the Guardianship Board under an order
that does not exclude the guardian from giving consent to
medical and dental
4. if there is no medical agent, guardian or enduring guardian, then the
following specified relatives can provide consent to medical
or dental treatment
(i) a spouse, including a “putative”
(ii) a parent;
(iii) a brother or sister of or over 18 years;
(iv) a daughter or son of or over 18 years;
(v) a person who acts in loco parentis i.e. the person who provides the
main ongoing day to day care and supervision of the person
(not being the person
who is going to provide the
treatment).
5. Where no one is available in the above categories to provide substitute
consent, or where there is a dispute or conflict about
the treatment, the
Guardianship Board can provide consent to medical or dental treatment. This
involves an application being made
to, and a hearing conducted by, the Board.
The application to the Board has to be made by:
(i) a relative of the mentally incapacitated person; or
(ii) the doctor, dentist or other health professional proposing to give the
treatment; or
(iii) any other person who the Board is satisfied has a proper interest in
the matter.
12. 5. 5. How the list or hierarchy operates.
If a person has appointed a medical agent, they may or may not have been
given the authority to deal with the particular kind of treatment
consent is sought. If they have the authority, they will take precedence as the
appropriate authority. If they do not have
the authority, then if there is a
guardian, they will be the appropriate authority provided their appointment is
not limited so as
to exclude the guardian from giving consent to medical and
dental treatment. If not, then if there is an enduring guardian they will
appropriate authority unless their appointment excludes them from giving consent
to medical and dental treatment or the Guardianship
Board revokes their
appointment and appoints a guardian for the mentally incapacitated person under
an order that does not exclude
the guardian from giving consent to medical and
dental treatment.
If the mentally incapacitated person does not have either a medical agent or
a guardian, then either a relative of the mentally incapacitated
person or the
Guardianship Board is the appropriate authority. The list of relatives does not
operate as a hierarchy so that if there
is a spouse they are the appropriate
authority to the exclusion of other the other relatives. The practice in South
Australia is
for consent to be obtained from any relative in the list. However,
it should be noted that those in the list are either married to
or in a marriage
like relationship with the mentally incapacitated person or are closely related
by blood to them.
allows for a choice between seeking substitute consent from
the relatives or the Board. There will be situations in which it is more
appropriate to go to the Board. Two examples show situations in which applying
to the Board makes sense. The first is where the mentally
incapacitated person
or the substitute decision-maker is objecting to the treatment, and this puts
the mentally incapacitated person’s
health or safety at risk. The second
is where there is dispute or conflict about the treatment and all reasonable
attempts to resolve
the dispute have failed.
12. 5. 6. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to medical and dental treatment – from the appropriate authority
Guardianship and Administration Act
not provide any specific criteria for the “appropriate authority”
substitute decision-makers to consider and apply
when deciding whether or not to
consent to medical or dental treatment to be carried out on a mentally
incapacitated person, at least
two of the principles of the
relevant. The first principle requires them to consider what, in their opinion,
the wishes of the mentally incapacitated person
would be in relation to the
proposed treatment if they were able to make the
However, they are
required to do this only when there is reasonably ascertainable evidence upon
which to base their opinion. The
second principle requires them to seek the
present wishes of the mentally incapacitated person about the proposed treatment
give consideration to those wishes, unless it is not possible or
reasonably practicable to do
While there is an
obligation to give consideration to the wishes of the person while they were
competent and also now when they
are mentally incapacitated, the substitute
decision-maker is not bound by those wishes and so can make a decision that is
restrictive of the mentally incapacitated person’s rights and
personal autonomy as is consistent with their care and protection,
with the fourth principle of the
However, it is
suggested that if the mentally incapacitated person has made an advance
directive that is relevant to their current
circumstances, the
“appropriate authority” as substitute decision-maker, must give
effect to that advance directive.
Public Advocate of South Australia has also suggested that the substitute
decision-maker should ask the treating doctor to explain
the proposed treatment,
whether there are any risks with it, what the alternative treatments are, if
any, and what are the likely
outcomes of the treatment and what are the likely
consequences of not undertaking the treatment. The Public Advocate also notes
it is important to consider whether the treatment will be of benefit to the
mentally incapacitated person and how it will affect
their quality of
Advocate’s suggestions are consistent with the obligation imposed on any
substitute decision-maker operating under
to apply certain
principles.
12. 5. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to medical and dental treatment – from the Guardianship
As already noted, consent of the Board must be obtained before prescribed
medical treatment may be carried out on a mentally incapacitated
person. Consent
to other medical and all dental treatment may be sought from the Board either if
there is no other appropriate authority
to consider the matter or if there is no
medical agent or guardian to act as the appropriate authority and an application
to the Board rather than to the appropriate relative.
While there are no direct statutory criteria for the Board to apply in
dealing with an application made to it, the Board conducts
a hearing and applies
the principles of the
. These require it to consider what, in its
opinion, the wishes of the mentally incapacitated person would be if there was
ascertainable evidence upon which to base such an opinion. They also
require the Board to seek and consider the current wishes of
the mentally
incapacitated person unless it is not possible or reasonably practicable to do
so. The decision the Board made in relation
to the treatment must be the one
that is the least restrictive of the person’s rights and personal autonomy
that is consistent
with their proper care and
protection.
12. 5. 8. Objections to treatment
Guardianship and Administration Act
does not deal
with objections by the mentally incapacitated person to the proposed treatment
directly, but again, the principles
of the Act are relevant
As already noted, this
is a situation in which it is appropriate to make an application to the Board
for it, through its ability
to take evidence from all relevant sources, the
treating doctors, the mentally incapacitated person, their relatives and others,
to consider that evidence, is in the best position to make the decision as to
whether to consent to the proposed treatment or not.
In doing so, the Board must
give consideration to what the wishes of the mentally incapacitated person would
be if they were not
mentally incapacitated, and to their present wishes. The
Board’s decision in relation to the treatment must be the one that
least restrictive of the mentally incapacitated person’s rights and
personal autonomy that is consistent with their
proper care and
protection.
It is suggested
that the “appropriate authority” as substitute decision-maker, must
give effect to any advance directive
that is relevant to their current
circumstances made by the mentally incapacitated person when still capable.
12. 6. Victoria
The regime established in Victoria for substitute decision-making in relation
to medical and dental treatment on behalf of adults
incapable of giving a valid
consent to their own treatment commenced on New Years Day
It is based in the New
South Wales model and, while there are important similarities, there are
significant differences between the
two regimes. The definitions of medical and
dental treatment are the same as for New South Wales as is the statutory test
for incapacity
to consent to treatment. The differences include how the
“person responsible” hierarchy operates in Victoria and the
for treating without consent if no person responsible can be found. The
Victorian regime operates without the need for the
intervention of the
Guardianship List of the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) or
the Supreme Court and, as will
be seen, VCAT is called upon to give substitute
consent on many fewer occasions than the New South Wales tribunal. Another
is the role the
Medical Treatment Act 1988
relation to the refusal of treatment by the “agent” for a now
incapable person who has appointed an agent under
a power of attorney (medical
treatment) under the provisions of that Victorian
12. 6. 1. Objects of the legislation
The objects of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
not only refer to the regime for substitute consent to medical and
dental treatment on behalf of adults incapable of giving a valid
their own treatment established by the
but also require substitute
decision-makers to exercise their functions in a manner that is the least
restrictive of the incapable
person's freedom of decision and action as is
possible in the circumstances. They are also required to promote the best
of the incapable person and to give effect to their wishes wherever
12. 6. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to
medical or dental treatment
In Victoria, an adult is incapable of giving a valid consent to their own
medical or dental treatment if:
1 they are incapable of understanding;
(a) the general nature of the treatment, or
(b) the effect of the treatment, or
2 they are incapable of indicating whether or not they consent to the
carrying out of the
12. 6. 3. Medical and dental treatment
As in New South Wales, medical treatment is defined in Victoria to mean
medical treatment, including any medical or surgical procedure,
operation or
examination and any prophylactic, palliative or rehabilitative care, normally
carried out by, or under, the supervision
of a registered practitioner, while
dental treatment is defined as dental treatment (including any dental procedure,
operation or
examination) normally carried out by or under the supervision of a
registered practitioner.
12. 6. 4. The types of medical
12. 6. 4. 1. Excluded treatments
As in New South Wales and Tasmania certain treatments are excluded from the
regime in Victoria with the intention that they do not
have to be consented to
before they are given. They are non-intrusive examinations made for diagnostic
purposes including visual
examinations of the mouth, throat, nasal cavity, eyes
or ears. Also in this group are first-aid medical or dental treatments, and
drugs for which a prescription is not required and which is normally
self-administered when they are being used for the purpose,
and in accordance
with the dosage level, recommended in the manufacturer's instructions. Other
treatments can be included in this
group by being declared in the regulations,
but none have been.
These treatments have been excluded largely because they are of such a minor
nature or are so linked to day to day living and only
carried out when necessary
that it was inappropriate for consent to them to have to be sought through the
substitute decision-making
regime. However, their exclusion was not intended to
cut across, or in anyway downplay, the importance of hospitals, aged care
facilities,
supported residential units, community residential units or other
places where care or treatment is provided to people who are incapable
a valid consent to their own treatment keeping accurate records of any form of
medication or treatment given to a patient
or resident or having protocols as to
who may permit such treatments to be carried out.
12. 6. 4. 2. Emergency treatment
In New South Wales and Victoria, these treatments are described as urgent
treatments. They are treatments which the doctor or dentist
carrying out or
supervising the treatment considers to be treatment that is necessary, as a
matter of urgency:
(a) to save the incapable person's life, or
(b) to prevent serious damage to the incapable person's health, or
(c) except in the case of special treatment, to prevent the incapable person
from suffering or continuing to suffer significant pain
These treatments may be carried out without consent when they are urgent.
However when they are not urgent, the consent of the substitute
decision-maker
must be sought before they can be given.
12. 6. 4. 3. Special procedures
Since prior to, but confirmed by the High Court in
, it has been accepted that the carrying out of some treatments on
incapable people must be approved by a court or tribunal before
they may be
given. In Victoria there are a group of treatments that may be carried out only
after VCAT has given its consent. Persons
responsible and similar substitute
decision-makers cannot give consent to these treatments. These treatments,
called “special
procedures” in Victoria, are:
1 any procedure that is intended, or is reasonably likely, to have the effect
of rendering permanently infertile the person on whom
it is carried out;
2 termination of pregnancy;
3 any removal of tissue for the purposes of transplantation to another
4 any other medical or dental treatment that is prescribed by the regulations
to be a special procedure.
It is convenient to deal with these procedures here and the special
procedural and other requirements that must be complied with before
give its consent to the carrying out of a special procedure. First, applications
for such consent may be made to VCAT only
by the person responsible for the
incapable person or by a person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a
special interest in
the affairs of the
Who is “person
responsible” for an incapable person is described below at 12. 6. 5.
The incapable person the subject of the application is a party to the
proceedings.
Notice of the
application must be given to them or to others on their behalf.
must also give notice of the application and of the hearing to the Public
Advocate and any other person whom VCAT considers has
a special interest in the
affairs of the patient.
must commence to hear the application within 30 days after receiving the
application.
VCAT may consent to the carrying out of a special procedure only if it is
satisfied that:
1 the person the subject of the application is incapable of giving a valid
consent to the proposed treatment,
2 they are not likely to be capable, within a reasonable time, and
3 the special procedure would be in their best interests
When VCAT is determining whether or not any special procedure is in the best
interests of the person the subject of the application,
it must take the
following matters into account:
1. the wishes of the person the subject of the application, so far as they
can be ascertained; and
2. the wishes of any nearest relative or any other family members of the
person the subject of the application; and
3. the consequences to the person the subject of the application if the
treatment is not carried out; and
4. any alternative treatment available; and
5. the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
treatment or any alternative treatment; and
6. whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain
the health and well-being of the
The process VCAT must go through in order to determine the best interests of
the person the subject of the application is further
complicated by the fact
that if that person is likely to be capable, within a reasonable time, of giving
consent to the carrying
out of the special procedure, and, they object to the
relative or another family member (other than their spouse or domestic partner)
being involved in decisions concerning the special procedure proposed to be
carried out on them, then that relative or family member
is taken not to be the
nearest relative or a family member of the person the subject of the
application. The effect of this provision
appears to be that the views of the
relative or family member do not have to be considered.
Sterilising treatment for incapable persons is discussed further in Chapter
Applications to consent to special procedures are small in number. A more
significant group of treatments are those that are neither
excluded nor
emergency treatments nor special procedures. They are not given a generic name
in Victoria.
12. 6. 4. 4. Treatments other than excluded or emergency treatments or
special procedures
Where an adult cannot give a valid consent to the medical or dental treatment
proposed for them and that treatment is not one of the
excluded treatments or a
special procedure and is not a treatment that must be carried out in urgent
circumstances so that it becomes
an emergency treatment, consent must be sought
from a substitute decision-maker. However, as will be described below, it is not
required that substitute consent must be obtained. There are
circumstances in which the treatment can be given without consent first
been obtained. However, this matter is better explained after the term for the
usual substitute decision-maker the “person
responsible” is
12. 6. 5. Who is the substitute decision-maker
for medical and dental treatment?
In Victoria, as in New South Wales, the substitute decision-maker for medical
and dental treatment for a person who is incapable of
giving a valid consent to
their own treatment is called their “person responsible”. However,
as will be shown below,
there is a difference between the two States as to how
the doctors seeking substitute consent in order to treat an incapable person
determine who is person responsible.
In Victoria, the incapable person’s “person responsible” is
the first person listed who, in the circumstances, is
not only reasonably
available but also willing and able to make medical and dental treatment
decisions on behalf of the incapable
person. The list is as follows:
1. An agent - appointed by the patient under enduring power of attorney
(medical treatment)
2. A person - appointed by VCAT to make decisions about the proposed
3. A guardian - appointed by VCAT with health care
4. An enduring guardian - appointed by the incapable person with health care
5. A person - appointed by the incapable person in writing to make decisions
6. The incapable person's spouse or domestic
7. The incapable person's primary carer, including carers in receipt of a
Centrelink carer's payment but excluding paid carers or
service providers;
8. The incapable person 's nearest relative over the age of 18, meaning, in
order of preference:
(a) son or daughter;
(b) father or mother;
(c) brother or sister (including adopted siblings and 'step' siblings);
(d) grandfather or grandmother;
(e) grandson or granddaughter;
(f) uncle or aunt;
(g) nephew or niece.
12. 6. 6. How the list or hierarchy operates.
If there is an agent and, in the circumstances they are reasonably available
and willing and able to make decisions about the incapable
medical treatment, then they are the person responsible. If there is no agent or
in the circumstances they are not
reasonably available or are not willing and
able to make decisions about the incapable person’s medical treatment,
treating doctor must work their way down the list until they find a
person who in the circumstances is reasonably available and is
willing and able
to make decisions about the incapable person’s medical treatment. This
means that it is possible, at least
in theory, that an incapable person’s
agent may be called upon to give substitute consent to their medical treatment
and their niece or nephew may be called up on the next day for the same
If there is no one in any of the eight stages of the hierarchy, then the
incapable person has no person responsible. If this happens
and the person needs
medical or dental treatment, VCAT may appoint another person as their person
responsible or as their
VCAT may appoint a
person as guardian of the incapable person either generally or for matters
relating to their medical or dental
treatment. Also it may vary a guardianship
order “to make provision for matters relating to the medical or dental
of a patient”, including giving the guardian functions in
relation to medical and dental treatment that they did not have
VCAT has a limited
role as a substitute decision-maker itself. See 12. 6. 9 below.
12. 6. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to medical and dental treatment – from the person
responsible
In most cases the incapable person will have lost their capacity to give a
valid consent to all or at least most of the medical or
dental treatments
proposed for them. This will be because the effects of their dementia, brain
injury or whole of life intellectual
disability and, sometimes, because of their
psychiatric condition. In these cases their person responsible will proceed to
whether or not to consent to the medical or dental treatment proposed for
them on their behalf.
In doing so the person responsible must act in the best interests of the
incapable person.
However, in
determining what is in the best interests of the incapable person, the person
responsible must take the following matters
into account:
1. the wishes of the incapable person, so far as they can be ascertained; and
2. the wishes of any nearest relative or any other family members of the
incapable person; and
3. the consequences to the incapable person if the treatment is not carried
4. any alternative treatment available; and
5. the nature and degree of any significant risks associated with the
treatment or any alternative treatment; and
6. whether the treatment to be carried out is only to promote and maintain
the health and well-being of the incapable
The will be a number of situations in which the now incapable person is
likely to become capable again in a reasonable time. Examples
would include
where the person is incapable because they are unconscious as a result of an
accident or an anaesthetic and are likely
to recover consciousness soon. At
other times they may be delirious as a result of an infection or some other
cause which will resolve
as a result of treatment. They may have an episodic
mental illness which responds to medication. In these situations the person
responsible
may consent to the carrying out of the treatment only if:
1. the incapable person’s treating doctor reasonably believes, and
states in writing in the incapable person's clinical records,
that a further
delay in carrying out the treatment would result in a significant deterioration
of the incapable person's condition;
2. neither the incapable person’s treating doctor nor the person
responsible has any reason to believe that the carrying out
of the treatment
would be against the incapable person 's wishes, and
3. the proposed treatment is not against the wishes of the incapable
12. 6. 8. Person responsible may seek advice.
Persons responsible often face difficult decisions when being asked to
consent to medical treatment for an incapable person. In Victoria,
apply VCAT for directions or an advisory opinion on the scope of or the exercise
of their authority to consent to medical
or dental treatment for the incapable
Also VCAT may, on its
own initiative, direct, or give an advisory opinion to, a person
responsible.
After giving notice of the hearing to any person whom VCAT considers has a
special interest in the affairs of the person the subject
of the application,
and after conducting a hearing, VCAT may give any directions or advisory opinion
or make any order it considers
necessary and communicate that to anyone sent
notice of the
application.
12. 6. 9. The limited role of VCAT as a
substitute decision-maker for medical and dental treatment
As already noted at 12. 6. 4. 3, VCAT is the substitute decision-maker for
special procedures. It can become the substitute decision-maker
incapable person is likely to become capable again in a reasonable time and
either their treating doctor or person responsible
has reason to believe that
the carrying out of the treatment would be against the incapable person’s
wishes and either of them
makes an application to
VCAT may consent to
the carrying out of such treatment if it is satisfied that:
1. the person is incapable of giving consent,
2. further delay in the carrying out of such treatment would result in a
significant deterioration of their condition, and
3. the treatment would be in their best interests having regard to their view
VCAT may also become the substitute decision-maker for medical and dental
treatment where either the incapable person’s doctor
or their person
responsible had reason to believe that the proposed treatment would be against
the incapable person’s wishes
and either of them makes an application to
12. 6. 10. Can persons responsible refuse consent
to medical and dental treatment?
This question arises because, if a now incapable person has appointed an
agent (and an alternative agent) under the
Medical Treatment Act 1988
or has a guardian, appointed by VCAT, the
Medical Treatment Act
sets out a process to be complied with and limits on the power to
refuse if the agent or guardian wished to refuse consent to treatment
. The process is that both a doctor and another person have to be
satisfied that the agent or guardian has been informed of the nature
condition sufficiently to make that decision and that they appear to understand
that information.
of the agent or guardian to refuse medical treatment on behalf of the incapable
person is limited to where the medical
treatment would cause unreasonable
distress to the incapable person or where there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the
incapable person, if competent, and after giving serious
consideration to their health and well-being, would consider that the medical
treatment was unwarranted.
Guardianship and Administration Act
sets out a regime for dealing with circumstances in which people who
are incapable of giving a valid consent to their own treatment
may be given
access to medical and dental treatment. The
Medical Treatment Act 1988
states that it does not affect any right of a person under any other
law to refuse medical
There is no basis
for confining this right to adults exercising their common law right to refuse
treatment. It can apply to persons
responsible exercising their responsibilities
to deal with requests to consent to treatment on behalf of the person they are
responsible for. Also, the
Guardianship and Administration Act
states that, if the person responsible for an incapable person
is an agent appointed under the
Medical Treatment Act 1988
powers the agent may exercise under that
are in addition to the
powers they may exercise under the
Guardianship and Administration
While this provision does not apply to guardians appointed by VCAT under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, it would be
absurd, and against the purpose of that
to interpret it as operating
so that a guardian appointed under its provisions and authorised by VCAT to make
substitute decisions
in relation to the medical or dental treatment proposed for
the person under guardianship to take the view that such guardians could
consent to any treatment proposed by a doctor and never be able to refuse
consent to treatment no matter how inappropriate and
how unwanted by the person
under guardianship.
In any event, the section in
Guardianship and Administration Act
that empowers persons responsible to consent to medical
treatment states that in determining whether or not to consent to medical
dental treatment, the person responsible must act in the best interests of the
incapable person.
also be noted that VCAT when appointing either a person responsible or a
guardian authorised to made decisions about medical
or dental treatment is
appointed for “for matters relating to the medical or dental
treatment”, not just to consent to
Consequently,
persons responsible, no matter what category they are in, subject to acting in
the best interests of the incapable
person, may give or refuse consent to the
treatment proposed for the person they are person responsible for.
12. 6. 11. Treating when the person responsible
refuses consent
There will be cases where a person responsible refuses consent to treatment
proposed for the incapable person and the treating doctor
considers that the
treatment should still be carried out on the incapable person, despite the
refusal of their person responsible.
The treating doctor may still carry out the treatment if they believe, on
reasonable grounds, that the proposed treatment is in the
best interests of the
incapable person. However, they must follow a process. They must, within three
days after being advised by
the person responsible of their refusal, give the
person responsible and the Public Advocate a statement asserting that the doctor
has informed the person responsible of the nature of the incapable
person’s condition and believes on reasonable grounds that
the proposed
treatment is in the best interests of the incapable person. The statement must
also advise that the doctor intends carry
out the treatment after seven days
have elapsed and how the person responsible may make an application to
The effect of this
process is to put the onus on the person responsible to go to VCAT for an order
which has the effect of stopping
the treatment from being carried out. If the
person responsible does not make an application to VCAT within seven days, the
may carry out the treatment, but may do so only if the doctor states in
writing in the incapable person’s clinical record:
1. why the treatment is considered to be in the best interests of the
incapable person; and
2. how the treatment is considered to promote or maintain the health and
well-being of the incapable
If the Tribunal receives an application
it will deal with it in the
manner set out below, under the next heading 12. 6. 13.
12. 6. 12. Treating without the consent of the
person responsible
Some people will not have a person responsible and in some circumstances it
will not be possible to make contact with a person responsible
Guardianship and Administration Act
process which the treating doctor may use if they believe on reasonable grounds
that the proposed treatment is in the
best interests of the incapable
This process cannot
be used if either the incapable person or their agent appointed under an
enduring power of attorney (medical
treatment) has put a refusal of treatment
certificate in place in relation to that
In the majority of cases no such certificate will exist. In those cases the
treating doctor (or dentist) has to make reasonable efforts
to find out if there
is a person responsible and who they are. The treating doctor (or dentist) must
then make reasonable efforts
to contact them. If they are unable to do this and
believe on reasonable grounds that the proposed treatment is in the best
of the incapable person, they must give a notice to the Public
Advocate, called a “Section 42K
While the Public Advocate requires more information, that notice must include
the following:
1. the nature of the incapable person's condition;
2. the proposed medical or dental treatment;
3. that the treating doctor (or dentist) believes on reasonable grounds that
the proposed treatment is in the best interests of the
incapable person;
4. that despite reasonable efforts by the treating doctor (or dentist), they
have been unable to find out whether there is a person
responsible for the
incapable person or to contact that
The treating doctor (or dentist) must also state in writing in the incapable
person’s clinical records:
1. why the treatment is considered to be in the best interests of the
incapable person; and
2. how the treatment is considered to promote or maintain the health and
well-being of the incapable
Having given the notice, the treating doctor (or dentist) may then carry out
the treatment.
12. 6. 13. Applications to VCAT in relation to
any matter, question or dispute concerning medical and dental treatment or the
interests of a patient
As already noted, VCAT does not become the substitute decision-maker for
medical or dental treatment, except in a limited number of
circumstances which
are dealt with in 12. 6. 4. 3 and 12. 6. 9. Applications may be made to it in
relation to any matter, question
or dispute relating to medical or dental
treatment or to the best interests of an incapable person. However, such
applications may
be made only by a person responsible or a person who, in the
opinion of VCAT, has a special interest in the affairs of the incapable
VCAT must give notice of an application, when it is to be heard and of any
order of the Tribunal in relation to the application to
the Public Advocate and,
since the incapable person is a party, to the incapable person, insofar as that
is meaningful.
If a person
responsible makes an application after the treating doctor has given the
statement, which is the condition precedent
to giving the treatment to the
incapable person despite the refusal of the person responsible, VCAT must give
notice of an application,
when it is to be heard and of any order VCAT makes in
relation to it to the doctor who gave the statement; and any other person whom
VCAT considers has a special interest in the affairs of the
The person responsible must apply to VCAT within 7 days after receiving the
treating doctor’s statement and VCAT must hear and
determine that
application within 7 days after receiving
VCAT may make a range of orders. It can:
1. Make a person the person responsible of an incapable person for matters
relating to medical or dental treatment, either generally
or of a particular
2. appoint a person as guardian of the incapable person with a range of
powers or just for matters relating to the medical or dental
treatment of the
incapable person;
3. vary an existing guardianship order to make provision for matters relating
to the medical or dental treatment of the incapable
4. revoke, suspend or vary an instrument appointing a person as the enduring
guardian to the extent that the instrument relates to
medical or dental
treatment of the incapable person;
5. make a declaratory order that any proposed medical or dental treatment is
or is not in the best interests of the incapable person;
6. make any orders or give any directions it considers necessary to resolve
any conflict between persons relating to the best interests
of a patient;
7. make a declaration as to the validity or effect of any decision relating
to medical or dental treatment;
8. give an advisory opinion in relation to the best interests of the
incapable person;
9. make any other orders it considers to be in the best interests of the
incapable person.
12. 6. 14. Objections to
Guardianship and Administration Act
objections to the carrying out of treatment on the incapable person in a number
12. 6. 14. 1. Objection by the person responsible
The objection of the person responsible, manifested by their refusal to
consent to the treatment proposed for the incapable person,
is dealt with above
in 12. 6. 10 and 12. 6. 11. However, if the person responsible makes an
application to it, VCAT has a range of
options available to it, as set out above
in 12. 6. 13. These include VCAT making a declaratory order that the proposed
dental treatment is or is not in the best interests of the incapable
person, but also any orders or give any directions it considers
necessary to
resolve any conflict between persons relating to the best interests of a
12. 6. 14. 2. Anticipated objection by the incapable person
If either the treating doctor or the person responsible has reason to believe
that the carrying out of the proposed treatment would
be against the incapable
person’s wishes, the doctor or person responsible must apply to VCAT for
its consent if they want
the treatment carried
If either of them makes an application to VCAT, it must give notice of the
application to the the incapable person, if appropriate,
the Public Advocate,
the incapable person’s treating doctor, the incapable person’s
person responsible and any other
person whom VCAT considers has a special
interest in the incapable person's affairs. VCAT must start hearing the
application within
14 days after receiving it.
After hearing the application, VCAT may consent to the carrying out of the
proposed treatment, but only if it is satisfied that:
1. the person the application is about is incapable of giving consent; and
2. further delay in carrying out the treatment would result in a significant
deterioration of the incapable person's condition; and
3. the treatment would be in their best interests, having regard to the
evidence of the their views about such
In addition, VCAT may make any of the orders set out above in 12. 6.
Any orders VCAT makes
must be given to those given notice of the application. If VCAT gives any
direction or advisory opinion about
the application that too must be given to
the parties to the
application.
12. 7. Queensland
The Queensland regime for substitute decision-making in relation to medical
and dental treatment on behalf of adults incapable of
giving a valid consent to
their own treatment commenced on 1 July 2000 with the commencement of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
. Most aspects of
the regime are found in Chapter 5 of that
Attorney Act 1998
sets out the responsibilities of attorneys for
personal matters and its Chapter 4 deals with statutory health attorneys.
While substitute decision-makers for medical and dental treatment are called
persons responsible in New South Wales, Victoria and
Tasmania, in Queensland, if
the incapable person has no guardian or attorney for health matters, their
substitute decision-makers
for medical and dental treatment are called statutory
health attorneys. However, as will be seen, statutory health attorneys in
have more functions than persons responsible in the other
12. 7. 1. Objects of the legislation
Guardianship and Administration Act
strike an appropriate balance between the right of an incapable adult, called an
adult with impaired capacity in Queensland,
to have autonomy in decision making
the greatest possible degree and their right to adequate and appropriate support
for decision-making.
Chapter 6 seeks to strike a balance between ensuring that a person is not
deprived of necessary health care only because they are
an adult with impaired
capacity while ensuring that the health care that they are given is necessary
and appropriate to maintain
or promote their health or wellbeing or is, in all
the circumstances, health care that is in their best
12. 7. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to
medical or dental treatment
The Queensland legislation reflects strongly the common law presumption that
an adult has capacity to make their own decisions. It
requires treating doctors
and dentists to consider whether or not a person has capacity to make a
particular decision about a particular
health matter or special health
A person has impaired
capacity for such a matter if they are:
1. incapable of understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the
2. cannot freely and voluntarily make decisions about the matter; or
3. cannot communicate their decisions in some
12. 7. 3. Health care defined
In Queensland the description of matters covered by the regime designed
primarily to provide substitute decision-making for medical
and dental treatment
proposed for adults unable to give a valid consent to their own treatment is
broader than elsewhere in Australia.
The substitute decision-making relates to
“matters relating to health care”. Health care is described as,
care or treatment of, or a service or a procedure for an adult:
1. to diagnose, maintain, or treat the adult's physical or mental condition;
2. carried out by, or under the direction or supervision of, a health
Health care also includes withholding or withdrawal of a life-sustaining
measure if the commencement or continuation of the measure
would be inconsistent
with good medical
The term “health provider” is defined to mean a person who
provides health care, or special health care, in the practice
of a profession or
the ordinary course of
This definition
covers doctors and dentists and other recognised health professionals including,
psychologists, physiotherapists,
optometrists, speech therapists and
occupational therapists. While there has been no decided case on this as yet,
because the definition
of health provider includes those who provide health care
in the ordinary course of business the term may include herbalists, particularly
those qualified in Chinese medicine, counsellors and a range of others who run
businesses offering to diagnose, maintain or treat
physical or mental
conditions.
All treatments that are not categorised as excluded or special health care
are “health
12. 7. 4. The types of health care
12. 7. 4. 1. Excluded health care
As elsewhere in Australia, in Queensland a number of treatments are not
included in the definition of health care with the intention
that substitute
consent in relation to them is not required. These treatments are:
1. first aid treatment;
2. non-intrusive examinations made for diagnostic purposes. For example a
visual examination of an adult's mouth, throat, nasal cavity,
eyes or ears.; or
3. the administration of a pharmaceutical drug which is normally
self-administered and for which a prescription is not needed, provided
administration is for a recommended purpose and at a recommended dosage
These types of health care have been excluded largely because they are of
such a minor nature or are so linked to day to day living
that they are carried
out only when necessary that it is inappropriate for consent to them to have to
be sought through the substitute
decision-making regime. However, this exclusion
is not intended to cut across, or in anyway downplay, the importance of
aged care facilities or other places where personal care and health
care is provided to adults with impaired capacity, keeping accurate
any form of health care given to a patient or resident or having protocols as to
who may permit such treatments to be
carried out.
12. 7. 4. 2. Urgent health care – substitute consent usually not
Health care, but not special health care, may be carried out on an adult
without their consent if their health provider reasonably
considers they have
impaired capacity for the health matter concerned; and either:
1. the health care should be carried out urgently to meet imminent risk to
the adult's life or health; or
2. the health care should be carried out urgently to prevent significant
pain or distress to the adult
and it is not reasonably practicable to get consent from their attorney for
health matters or their guardian for health matters (if
they have one) or their
statutory health attorney.
However, health care to deal with imminent risk to the adult's life or health
may not be carried without consent if the health provider
knows that the adult
has objected to the health care proposed in an advance health
Health care to prevent significant pain or distress to the adult may not be
carried out without consent if the health provider knows
that the adult objects
to the health care. However, if the adult has minimal or no understanding of
what the health care involves
or why it is required, and the health care is
likely to cause either no distress to the adult or temporary distress that is
by the benefit of the health care to them, then the health care can
be carried out.
If the health care is carried out, the health provider must certify in the
adult's clinical records as to the various things enabling
it to be carried out
because of this section.
12. 7. 4. 3. Minor, uncontroversial health care – substitute consent
usually not required
Proposed health care, that is not special health care but which is minor and
uncontroversial, may be carried out without consent on
an adult with impaired
capacity if their health provider reasonably considers that:
1. the adult cannot make a valid decision about the health matter concerned;
2. the health care that is necessary and is of the type that will best
promote the adult's health and
Also, the health provider must certify in the adult's clinical records as to
the various things enabling the health care to be carried
Nevertheless, such treatment cannot be carried out if the health provider
knows (or could reasonably be expected to know) that the guardian or
attorney for health matters of the adult with impaired capacity
decision about the health care in question or knows that there is a dispute
among those who have a sufficient and continuing
interest in the adult about the
carrying out of the health care or about the capacity of the adult to make their
own decision about
Furthermore the health care cannot be carried out without consent if the
health provider knows (or could reasonably be expected to know) that the
objects to the health
12. 7. 4. 4. Special health care
Special health care has been defined as:
1. removal of tissue from the adult while alive for donation to someone else;
2. sterilisation of the adult;
3. termination of a pregnancy of the adult;
4. participation by the adult in special medical research or experimental
health care;
5. electroconvulsive therapy or psychosurgery for the adult;
6. prescribed special health care of the
12. 7. 5. Who is the substitute decision-maker
for health care?
The issue of consent to special health matters is dealt with below. For other
health matters there is an order of priority starting
with the any advance
health directive made by the adult with impaired capacity. If they have given a
direction that covers the particular
health matter in an advance directive then
the question of consent is decided according to the
Advance health
directives will become more common as time goes on, particularly for older
If the adult with impaired capacity has not made an advance health directive,
the substitute decision-maker for the adult will be
the first person who
qualifies in the following list:
1. any guardian for health matters appointed by the Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (QCAT);
2. any enduring attorney for health matters appointed by the adult;
3. the first available and culturally appropriate statutory health attorney
from the list below.
The list of statutory health attorneys is as follows:
1. a spouse of the adult if the relationship between the adult and the spouse
is close and continuing
2. an adult person who has the care of the adult and is not a paid carer for
3. an adult person is a close friend or relation of the adult and is not a
paid carer for the adult.
If no-one in this list is readily available and culturally appropriate, the
Adult Guardian becomes the adult's statutory health attorney
for the particular
health matter.
If there is a disagreement as to which of two or more people should be the
statutory health attorney or how that power should be exercised,
this can be
referred to the Adult Guardian for resolution by way of
Even though they come down the list, in most cases the substitute
decision-maker for the adult with impaired capacity will be their
spouse, their
unpaid carer or a close friend or relation. This responsibility comes to them
not because they have been appointed
the person’s guardian for health
matters by QCATor their attorney for health matters by the now incapacitated
person, but because
of the operation of both the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
Guardianship and Administration Act
which gives them the role of statutory health
They do not have to
be appointed or approved by QCAT or the Supreme Court.
Anyone authorised to be a substitute decision-maker for the health matters
Guardianship and Administration Act
substitute decisions in relation to health matters for an adult with impaired
capacity must do so in accordance with both
the general principles and the
health care principle set out in that
The health care
principle requires that substitute decision-makers make their decisions:
1. in the way least restrictive of the adult's rights; and
2. only if the decision is necessary and appropriate to maintain or promote
the adult's health or wellbeing; or is, in all the circumstances,
in the adult's
best interests.
When making a health care decision, the substitute decision-maker, namely
the guardian, the adult guardian, QCAT or, in relation
to special health care
only, another entity, must, to the greatest extent practicable:
1. seek the adult's views and wishes and take them into account; and
2. take into account the information given by the adult's health
The health care principle states that it does not affect any right an adult
has to refuse health
12. 7. 6. Who is the substitute decision-maker
for special health care?
As with other health matters, for special health matters there is an order of
priority. It too starts with the any advance health
directive made by the adult
with impaired capacity. If they have given a direction in their advance
directive that covers the particular
special health matter then the question of
consent is decided according to the
Because of the nature of the different kinds of special health care and the
adults with impaired capacity for whom special health
care is sought, it is
unlikely that an adult whose capacity becomes impaired will have made an advance
health directive which covers
special health care. Consequently, it is more
likely that a body authorised to act as the substitute decision-maker for
special health
care will be called upon to deal with the matter. Those bodies
are QCAT and the Supreme
12. 7. 7. Seeking and obtaining substitute
consent to health care – from the guardian, attorney or statutory health
No substitute consent is needed for either health care excluded from the
operation of Chapter 5 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
or for urgent health care, except under the limited circumstances set
out above at 12. 7. 4. 2.
Also, consent is not required for minor, uncontroversial health care, again
except under the limited circumstances set out above at
12. 7. 4. 3.
Nevertheless, it is both ethically appropriate and useful in building rapport
with the substitute decision-makers, family
members or significant others of an
adult with impaired capacity to seek consent for that health care from the
appropriate substitute
decision-maker whenever it is convenient to do so. If it
is not possible to seek consent in advance of the treatment, it is wise
advise the substitute decision-maker of the more significant of such minor
treatments that have been given, for example the administration
of prescription
antibiotics.
Guardianship and Administration Act
expectation on health providers to give to the guardian or attorney all the
information necessary for them to exercise
their power in relation to a health
imposes a duty on health providers to give that information to the guardian or
attorney unless the health provider has a reasonable
excuse for not doing
The definition of
“attorney” includes statutory health
The definition of
“guardian” includes the Adult
The information which the health provider who is treating or has treated the
adult with impaired capacity must give to the guardian
or attorney includes
information about the:
1. nature of the adult's condition at the time of the treatment; and
2. particular form of health care being, or that was, carried out; and
3. reasons why the particular form of health care is being, or was, carried
4. alternative forms of health care available for the condition at the time
of the treatment; and
5. general nature and effect of each form of health care at the time of the
treatment; and
6. nature and extent of short-term, or long-term, significant risks
associated with each form of health care; and
7. for a health provider who is treating the adult - the reasons why it is
proposed a particular form of health care should be carried
12. 7. 8. The role of QCAAT in relation to
special health care and health care
QCAT is substitute decision-maker in relation to:
1. special health care for adults with impaired capacity for the special
health matter, but not electroconvulsive therapy and
psychosurgery;
2. consenting to the sterilisation of a child with an
impairment.
If QCAT consents to a form of special health care that needs to be continued,
it may appoint a guardian for the adult and empower
them to consent for the
adult to continuation of the special health care or the carrying out on the
adult of similar special health
care. QCAT may also include in the appointment
order a declaration, order, direction, recommendation, or advice about how the
is to be used.
QCAT has other functions that can be useful in dealing with issues and
problems arising in relation to health matters. These include:
1. making declarations about the capacity of an adult, guardian or
2. making declarations, orders or recommendations, or giving directions or
advice, in relation to guardians and attorneys, enduring
documents and related
3. consenting to the withholding or withdrawal of a life-sustaining measure
for adults with impaired capacity for the health matter
QCAT’s role in relation to consenting to specific treatments is limited
to treatments categorised as special health care and
treatments involving the
consenting to the withholding or withdrawal of a life-sustaining measure for
adults with impaired capacity
for the health matter concerned.
12. 7. 9. Objections to health care
In Queensland objections to treatment by the adult with impaired capacity or
by their guardian, attorney or statutory health attorney
are dealt with in
different ways.
12. 7. 9. 1. Objections by the adult with impaired capacity
Guardianship and Administration Act
states that
generally substitute consent for a health matter or special health matter is
ineffective if the health provider knows,
or ought reasonably to know, the adult
with impaired capacity
objects to the health
However, the
goes on to provide that the consent is effective, despite the objection:
1. if the adult has minimal or no understanding of what the health care
involves and why it is required, and
2. the health care is likely to cause the adult either no distress or only
temporary distress that is outweighed by the benefit of
the proposed health
As the Queensland Law Reform Commission’s report upon which the
is based shows, this provision was based on the New South Wales
legislation which allows a person who cannot give a valid consent
(or refusal)
to their own medical or dental treatment to “object” nevertheless to
the treatment.
However, while
the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal deals with these
“objections” and decides whether or not to
give its consent to the
proposed treatment thereby overriding the objection of the incapable person, a
different approach has been
taken in Queensland.
, the then Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
held that what is required before a person may object validly to health
“is not simply an ability to technically know what the procedure involves
and what it is used for but an ability to understand
the true nature and effect
of a decision” in a health
In that case a person
with a more than 20 year history of paranoid schizophrenia was held to have no
understanding of the nature
and effect of the decisions she was making because
she consistently stated that she did not have a mental illness and that she did
not have a physical illness, namely diabetes. This satisfied the Tribunal that
she had no understanding of the proposed health care
or why it was required,
because she refused to accept the fact that she had any
The Tribunal was
also satisfied that the proposed health care would cause either no distress or
minimal distress because it involved
medication being supplied by a tablet form
and the monitoring of CJ’s diabetes via testing for her sugar levels. In
the medication and monitoring of her sugar diabetes would provide
benefits which far outweighed the minimal distress that the treatment
The way to deal with the objection in these circumstances is to make an
application to QCAT for a declaration about the capacity of
the adult and other
orders, including appointing guardians and obtaining directions or advice from
QCAT if appropriate.
As already noted, QCAT does not have jurisdiction to deal directly with
applications for consent to health care, except for forms
of special health
care, while the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal does have such a role and
can and does occasionally override
the objections to treatment of incapable
people. This absence of a formal mechanism for giving appropriate consideration
to the person’s
objection but yet being able to override it and give an
effective consent to the proposed health care in appropriate cases may have
contributed to the interpretation given to the relevant provision in
Queensland.
However, QCAT
may give directions to guardians and attorneys, including statutory health
There are specific provisions in the
Guardianship and Administration
dealing with the objections of an adult with impaired
capacity to urgent health care and minor, uncontroversial health care.
If the objection by the adult with impaired capacity is to urgent health care
that the adult’s health provider reasonably considers
should be carried
out urgently to meet imminent risk to the adult’s life, and the objection
to the treatment is in the adult’s
advance directive, then the treatment
may not be carried out without
However, as a
direction in an advance directive to withhold or withdraw a life-sustaining
measure applies only in certain circumstances,
despite the maker’s wishes,
it may still be legal for the treatment to be carried
Nevertheless the
adult’s health provider may withhold or withdraw a life-sustaining measure
if that is consistent with good
medical practice, the decision must be taken
immediately and the adult does not object to the withholding or
withdrawal.
circumstances, the treating doctors should only give the treatment if it is
consistent with good medical practice to do so
and the treatment is not
excessively burdensome, intrusive or futile.
If the adult’s health provider reasonably considers that certain health
care should be carried out urgently to prevent significant
pain or distress to
the adult, but the adult objects to that treatment and it is not reasonably
practicable to get consent from their
guardian, attorney or statutory health
attorney, then the treatment may be carried out if the adult has minimal or no
understanding
of what the health care involves or why it is required, and the
health care is likely to cause either no distress to the adult or
distress that is outweighed by the benefit of the health care to
It should be noted that when an adult makes an advance health directive, they
can anticipate the possibility of them objecting to
future health care and give
a direction consenting to particular future health care being given in specified
circumstances despite
their objection at that future
As already noted, minor, uncontroversial health care cannot be carried out
without consent if the health provider knows (or could
reasonably be expected to
know) that the adult objects to the health
Substitute consent for
the health care must be obtained.
Finally in relation to a person objecting to being given particular medical
or dental treatment, the
Guardianship and Administration Act
specifically provides that a health provider or any person acting
under their direction or supervision may use the minimum force
that is both
necessary and reasonable to carry out health care authorised under the
The predecessor
Queensland Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal has interpreted this provision to mean that only health providers or
those acting
under their direction or supervision may use force to carry out
health care and that guardians, including the Adult Guardian, or
others acting
under their direction or supervision cannot use force for this
12. 7. 9. 2. Objections in the form of disagreements between guardians or
Guardianship and Administration Act
specifically
addresses disagreements between guardians or attorneys, where more than one has
been appointed, or between two or more
eligible statutory health attorneys about
health matters for an adult with impaired capacity. The
provides for
the Adult Guardian to attempt mediation. If the disagreement cannot be resolved
by mediation, the Adult Guardian can
make the decision about the health matter
and then advise QCAT.
If the guardian, appointed attorney or statutory health attorney either makes
or refuses to make a decision about a health matter,
and their action is
contrary to the health care principle, the Adult Guardian make the decision in
relation to the health matter,
in accordance with the health care
12. 8. Western Australia
As from 15 February 2010, Western Australia has had comprehensive regime for
substitute decision-making in relation to the medical
and dental treatment of
those unable to give a valid consent to their own
That regime
imported the concept of “person responsible” from New South Wales
and Tasmania and the hierarchy of persons
responsible, called the “order
of priority” in Western Australia, is similar to, but not identical with,
the hierarchy
in New South Wales. This matter is dealt with in 12. 8. 4
However, the first question that arises when a person cannot give a valid
consent to their own treatment is, do they have an advance
health directive? If
so the next question is whether that advance health directive, on a sensible
reading of it, contains a treatment
decision relevant to the treatment proposed
for that person. If so, the treatment provided to that person must be decided
to that treatment
If the person needs
treatment urgently, it may not be practical to check on whether the person has
an advance health directive.
However, this new regime does not replace the parens patriae jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court of WA as the
Guardianship and Administration Act
makes clear.
12. 8. 1. Medical and dental treatment
The term “treatment” is defined as medical or surgical treatment,
including both a life sustaining measure and palliative
care. Treatment is also
defined to mean dental treatment or other health
A treatment decision
is defined to mean a decision to give or to refuse consent to the commencement
or continuation of any
It is suggested that this definition of treatment is consistent with the
broad view of what is included in medical treatment taken
by WASAT and its
predecessor, the Guardianship and Administration Board. In the
a Full Board of the Guardianship and Administration Board stated that it
considered that the concept of treatment included not only
medical or surgical
procedures designed actively to treat a person's illness or condition, but also
the provision of care in the
form of oversight of a person's condition and
medical advice as to by what measures it may best be managed, the prescription
of medication and the like.
, the Full Board then went on to include decisions
treatment in the following terms:
Medical care, flowing from such oversight and medical advice, may also involve
advice concerning the appropriateness of withdrawal
of particular measures of
treatment or care or the effect of not providing certain forms of treatment or
care that may be available,
including those by which a person is non-naturally
hydrated or nourished, as well as the act of withdrawing such forms of medical
treatment or
Those matters are now covered by the term “palliative care” in
the definition of treatment, as other aspects of palliative
care also are.
The Full Board’s broad view of the concept of treatment led it to
suggest that whether certain actions or acts were “treatments”
depended on the circumstances of each case and must be decided on a case by case
In this regard the
Full Board considered whether the use of physical and chemical restraints in a
nursing home could constitute treatment
under the section. The Full Board took
the view that whether or not a particular form of physical or chemical restraint
within the definition of treatment would depend on the reasons for
its use, the purposes to which it might be put and who prescribed
, WASAT saw the use of olanzapine in the circumstances of that
case as both a chemical restraint and a treatment and appointed a guardian
authority to give consent to both treatment and the use of chemical and physical
, WASAT had to deal with a situation in which it was
proposed that treatment to achieve "massive weight loss either through wiring
her jaws or stomach stapling and feeding a liquid diet under medical
supervision" on a woman with an intellectual impairment and
behavioural
problems. There were doubts about whether this treatment should be carried out
on her and a “palliative care program”
was suggested as an
alternative treatment.
made a distinction between those actions relating to the proposed treatment that
were physical and chemical restraints and
those that were treatment. Its reasons
for decision state:
While we accept that restraint of [MET] to facilitate her treatment may be in
her best interests, given the evidence before us, we
do not see it forming part
of the treatment provided. The use of a 24 hour guard, the suggested use
of restraints on the hands of
the represented person, and medication to manage
her behaviour used in the past are or would be attempts to control the voluntary
movements of the represented person, albeit for the purposes of delivering
health care which she needs and are therefore in our view
restraints. It is not
appropriate that such restraints be seen as an incident of treatment itself. In
the case of the guard placed
on the room of the represented person we conclude
that this is clearly a restraint on her movement and not part of treatment.
The distinction between treatment and restraint to facilitate the delivery of
that treatment is an important safeguard for [MET].
There is an obligation on
the guardians, and those treating [her], to use the least restrictive possible
means by which treatment
may be delivered to her. Strategies to facilitate
treatment may include the use of behaviour management programs, while she
in hospital, or …the use of medication to manage her distress and
appointed MET’s parents as her joint, limited guardians in order for the
treatment restraining her and restricting her
diet to be carried
While WASAT considered that psychiatric treatment was treatment for the
purposes of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, it was aware of the policy concerns about the appropriate
relationship between that
Mental Health Act
WASAT was also aware that it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the
medications being administered to an incapable person
constitute an attempt to
modify their behaviour or whether they are treatments for a psychiatric
In relation
to contraceptive treatment, the Full Board noted that an
earlier Full Board:
had no hesitation in saying the definition of treatment in the
"broad enough to encompass" the proposed administration of contraception to a
female person who did not have the capacity herself
to consent to
It may be implied from the
Guardianship and Administration Act
that sterilsation of a person is treatment for the
purposes of the
, but that a “person responsible” may not
consent to that treatment.
Sterilisation is dealt with under
, Division 3 of the
also dealt with in Chapter 15.
12. 8. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to
medical or dental treatment
If a patient, that is a person who needs treatment, is unable to make
reasonable judgments relating to any treatment proposed for
them, their
“person responsible” may make the treatment decision for them,
subject to certain exceptions as to the nature
of the treatment and other
matters discussed below.
12. 8. 3. The types of treatment
Guardianship and Administration Act
(WA) does not
differentiate between major and minor medical treatment for the purposes of
substitute consent by a person responsible
as the NSW legislation does. However,
it provides specifically for urgently needed treatment and sterilisation
12. 8. 3. 1. Urgent treatment
Urgent treatment includes both medical and dental treatment as well as any
other treatment as defined in
. It also includes those
treatments described as medical treatments in 12.8. 1 above that is urgently
needed by a patient to:
1. save their life;
2. prevent serious damage to their health; or
3. prevent them from suffering or continuing to suffer significant pain or
However, urgent treatment does not include sterilisation of the
If a patient, unable to make reasonable judgments about that treatment, needs
urgent treatment and:
1. it is not practicable for the health
professional
who proposes to
provide the treatment to determine whether the patient has an advance care
directive containing a treatment decision
inconsistent with providing the
treatment, and
2. it is not possible for them to obtain a treatment decision from the
patient’s tribunal appointed guardian, enduring guardian
responsible,
the health professional may provide the treatment without first obtaining
consent to do so from a substitute
decision-maker.
specific provisions relating to the provision of urgent treatment after an
apparent attempted suicide by a
12. 8. 3. 2. Sterilisation
The term “sterilisation” is not defined in the
Guardianship
and Administration Act
. However, that
excludes sterilisation from the definition of urgent treatment, states that
persons responsible cannot consent to sterilsation and
contains specific
provisions about the sterilisation of people under
guardianship.
In relation to
a person under guardianship, a guardian may consent to sterilsation only if a
Full Tribunal of WASAT has first given
its consent to the proposed procedure for
sterilisation.
This matter is
taken up in more detail in Chapter 15. 6. 4.
12. 8. 3. 3. Treatment that is not urgent medical or dental treatment
If the proposed medical, dental or other treatment is not urgent or does not
involve sterilisation of a person under guardianship,
and the patient is unable
to make reasonable judgments about that treatment, the treating doctor, dentist
or other health professional
must deal with the question of consent as set out
in 12. 8. 4.
12. 8. 4. Who is the substitute decision-maker
for medical and dental treatment?
As already noted at 12.8, the first question that arises when a person cannot
give a valid consent to their own treatment is, do they
have an advance health
directive? If so the next question is whether that advance health directive, on
a sensible reading of it,
contains a treatment decision relevant to the
treatment proposed for that person. If so, the treatment provided to that person
be decided according to that treatment
If there is no relevant advance health directive, and the treatment is not
urgent as described above at 12. 8. 3. 1, the person who
may consent to the
proposed treatment as the substitute decision-maker
is the first in order
of priority of the following:
1. an enduring guardian of the person needing the treatment who is authorised
to make treatment decisions about the treatment, is
reasonably available and is
willing to make a decision to consent or to refuse consent to the treatment
2. a guardian of the person needing the treatment, appointed by WASAT, and
who is authorised to make treatment decisions about the
treatment, is reasonably
available and is willing to make a decision to consent or to refuse consent to
the treatment;
3. the person’s spouse or de facto partner who is of full legal
capacity, has reached 18 years and is living with the person,
who is also
reasonably available and is willing to make a decision to consent or to refuse
consent to the treatment;
4. the person’s nearest relative who maintains a close personal
relationship with the person, has frequent personal contact
with them and a
genuine interest in their welfare, who is of full legal capacity, who has
reached 18 years of age and who is also
reasonably available and is willing to
make a decision to consent or to refuse consent to the treatment and who is
first in the following
order of priority of relatives,
(a) their spouse or de facto partner who is not living at home with them,
(b) the person’s child,
(c) the person’s parent,
(d) a sibling of the person;
5. the person’s primary provider of care and support, but who is not
remunerated for providing that support and who also maintains
a close personal
relationship with the person, has frequent personal contact with them and a
genuine interest in their welfare, who
is of full legal capacity, who has
reached 18 years of age and who is also reasonably available and is willing to
make a decision
to consent or to refuse consent to the treatment; and
6. finally, a person who maintains a close personal relationship with the
person, has frequent personal contact with them and a genuine
interest in their
welfare, who is of full legal capacity, who has reached 18 years of age and who
is also reasonably available and
is willing to make a decision to consent or to
refuse consent to the
Because of the reasonable availability requirement in particular, it is
possible that different people will be the person responsible
for an incapable
person on different occasions when that person needs
obligation of every person when acting as person responsible and making a
treatment to act according to their opinion of
the best interests of the person
needing the treatment.
12. 9. Australian Capital Territory
The Australian Capital Territory’s comprehensive regime for substitute
decision-making in relation to the medical and dental
treatment of those unable
to give a valid consent to their own treatment came into operation 2 February
12. 9. 1. Medical and dental treatment
In the Australian Capital Territory medical treatment is defined to include
dental treatment and to include any medical procedure
or treatment as well a
series of procedures or a course of
It does not
include prescribed medical
procedures.
Consent to the
carrying out of these procedures cannot be given under the substitute consent
regime. This matter will be returned
to in 12. 9. 3. 2.
12. 9. 2. The test for incapacity to consent to
A person cannot give a valid consent to their own medical (or dental)
treatment if they have impaired decision making ability for
giving consent to
medical treatment.
impaired ability is defined as: a person’s decision-making ability that is
impaired because of a physical, mental, psychological
or intellectual condition
or state, whether or not the condition or state is a diagnosable
12. 9. 3. What treatments need substitute
consent when a person cannot give a valid consent to their own
In the Australian Capital Territory substitute consent must be obtained for
all treatments under the new legislative regime unless
the treatment can be
given in accordance with the
Medical Treatment Act
urgent or is a prescribed medical procedure. The latter two forms of treatment
will be returned to below at 12. 9. 3. 1 and 12.
9. 3. 2 respectively. The
Medical Treatment Act
is discussed further in 12. 9. 5.
1 and in Chapter 13 at 13. 4. 4 and 13. 5. 4.
12. 9. 3. 1. Urgent medical treatment
Urgent medical treatment is not defined in the
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act
(ACT), but the substitute consent regime contained in
it is stated not to affect “any common law right of a health professional
to provide urgent medical treatment without
The ACT Public
Advocate suggests that treatment that is necessary to preserve the life of the
patient or to prevent “serious
morbidity” would be urgent medical
In New South
Wales, as well as Victoria and Tasmania, the statutory definition of urgent
treatment is treatment that is necessary,
as a matter of urgency to save the
incapable person's life, or prevent serious damage to their health, or to
prevent them from suffering
or continuing to suffer significant pain or
It is suggested
that this broader definition could be adopted into the Australian Capital
Territory and exercised in accordance with
the experience of the ethical
practices developed in those States as an appropriate way for doctors to decide
whether treatment is
urgent or not. It is also suggested that consideration be
given to the concept of
12. 9. 3. 2. Prescribed treatments
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
prescribed a number of medical treatments and provided the process for obtaining
consent to the carrying out of those treatments.
The prescribed medical
treatments are:
1. abortion
2. reproductive sterilisation
3. hysterectomy
4. medical procedures concerned with contraception
5. removal of non-regenerative tissue for transplantation to the body of
another living person
6. treatment for mental illness, electroconvulsive therapy or psychiatric
However, treatment for mental illness, including electroconvulsive therapy
and psychiatric surgery, is dealt with under the
Mental Health (Treatment and
Care) Act 1994
The process requires that first the Australian Capital Territory Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (ACAT) appoints a guardian for
the person unable to give
a valid consent to their own treatment and then make a declaration that the
person the subject of the guardianship
order is “not competent to give a
consent required for a prescribed medical
procedure”.
The ACAT appointed guardian then applies to ACAT for an order consenting to
the prescribed medical procedure proposed for the person
under their
guardianship. The guardian, the person under guardianship and any other person
whom ACAT considers should have notice
the hearing of an application are given
notice of, and may attend, the hearing. After hearing the evidence, ACAT
considers whether
or not it should consent to a prescribed medical procedure for
the person under guardianship if it is satisfied that:
1. the procedure is otherwise lawful; and
2. the person is not competent to give consent and is not likely to become
competent in the foreseeable future; and
3. the procedure would be in the person’s best
12. 9. 4. Who is the substitute decision-maker
for medical (and dental) treatment?
In most cases since 2 February 2009 the automatic substitute decision-maker
for an adult person unable to give a valid consent to
their own medical or
dental treatment is, in order of precedence:
1. the person’s guardian appointed by the ACAT with authority to give
consent to medical treatment,
2. the person’s enduring attorney with authority to give consent to
medical treatment appointed either under the
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
or a law of a State or the Northern Territory that substantially
corresponds with that
3. a health attorney for the
The term health attorney is further defined in a “priority order”
to mean a capable adult who is:
1. the person’s domestic partner who is in a close and continuing
partnership with the person,
2. the person’s
3. a close relative or friend of the incapable
Treating doctors and dentists are given a discretion to seek consent from the
health attorney they believe is best able to represent
the views of the now
incapable person.
they must consider the health attorneys in priority order but may take into
account any circumstance they believe, on reasonable
grounds, is relevant,
particularly how readily available a particular health attorney is. They need
not consider a health attorney
if they believe, on reasonable grounds, that that
health attorney is not a suitable person to consent to medical treatment for the
now incapable person. But they must make a record of the reasons for their
Another approach to the problem of unavailable or unsuitable health attorneys
or where the person does not have a health attorney,
is for the treating doctor
to apply to the ACAT to appoint the Public Advocate as an emergency guardian for
10 days with authority
to give consent to medical treatment on behalf of the
now incapable person.
12. 9. 4. 1. Information that must be given to the health attorney
requested to consent to treatment
If a doctor or dentist asks a health attorney to consent to medical treatment
for a person, they must give the health attorney information
1. the reasons why the person has impaired capacity for giving consent to
2. their condition,
3. the treatment for which consent is sought,
4. any alternative treatment that is available,
5. the nature and likely effect of the treatment for which consent is sought
and any alternative treatment,
6. the nature and degree of any significant risks involved with the treatment
for which consent is sought and any alternative treatment,
7. the likely effect of not providing the treatment,
8. the decision-making
principles,
9. any other matter that the doctor or dentist believes, on reasonable
grounds, is relevant to the provision of consent for the
12. 9. 5. Objections to treatment
12. 9. 5. 1. Objections by the incapable person
Objection to the proposed treatment by the incapable person is not addressed
by the legislation. If the objection is in the form of
a common law advance
directive that is relevant to the person’s current situation, it should be
followed. If the now incapable
person has made a health direction under the
Medical Treatment (Health Directions) Act 2006
that is relevant to their
current situation, it should be followed the extent possible under that
. If their objection to the proposed treatment is known, but is not
one of these, it must, nevertheless, be given effect to under
the principles to
be followed by (substitute) decision-makers under the
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
unless, making the decision in
accordance with those wishes is likely to significantly adversely affect the now
incapable person’s
12. 9. 5. 2. Objections by health attorneys
Such objections may delay but not necessarily preclude the treatment from
being given. If a doctor or dentist requests a health attorney
to give consent
to treatment and the health attorney refuses to give the consent, the doctor or
dentist must refer the matter to
the Public Advocate. If the Public Advocate
considers the refusal reasonable, she must take no further action. Otherwise she
apply to the ACAT to be appointed as the guardian for the incapable
12. 9. 5. 2. Objections in the form of disagreements between health
If a doctor or dentist seeks substitute consent to treatment from the health
attorney they believe is best able to represent the views
of the incapable
person, but they become aware that one or more of the other health attorneys for
the person objects to the giving
of consent, the doctor or dentist must refer
the matter to the Public Advocate. The Public Advocate may then either:
1. try to help the available health attorneys reach agreement about consent,
2. apply to the ACAT to be appointed as guardian for the incapable person,
3. do both.
As already noted a doctor or dentist is not required to seek the views of
other health attorneys for an incapable person before obtaining
the consent of
the health attorney that they believe, on reasonable grounds, is best able to
represent the views of the incapable
Consequently,
while they may avoid becoming aware of the objections of other health attorneys,
they must refer the matter to the Public
12. 10. Northern Territory
The Northern Territory does not have a comprehensive scheme for substitute
decision-making in relation to the medical and dental treatment
of those unable
to give a valid consent to their own treatment set out in legislation. There are
some legislative provisions that
apply to some very limited situations.
Consequently, the common law, insofar as it exists, applies to those situations
not covered
by the legislation.
12. 10. 1. The limited legislative
12. 10. 1. 1. Emergency Medical Operations Act 1973 (NT)
Emergency Medical Operations Act
deals only with
surgical operations and the administration of anaesthesia and blood
transfusions.
It provides
that where a doctor is of the opinion that an adult (or a child) is in danger of
dying or suffering a serious, permanent
disability and the performance of the
surgical operation or blood transfusion is desirable in order to prevent the
death of the person
or the disability occurring, then the doctor may perform the
operation. However, the doctor must be of the opinion that the person
reason of their medical condition, unable to give their consent to the operation
and that it is not practicable to delay the
operation until the consent of the
patient or their next of kin or the person having authority to give substitute
consent can be
Where an operation is carried out in these circumstances the operation is
deemed to have been carried out with the consent of the
person authorized by law
to give consent.
The doctors
carrying out the operation are protected against liability arising from the lack
of consent but not from liability arising
from performance of the
12. 10. 1. 2. Adult Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
Section 21 of the Adult
Guardianship Act
1988 (NT) deals with medical
and dental procedures, terms which are not defined in the
it applies only to those adults the subject of either full guardianship orders
or conditional orders in which the guardian
has the power “to consent to
health care that is in the best interests of the represented
The section
does not apply to any medical or dental procedure which is carried out in an
emergency and appears necessary to save
the life of the
That matter is dealt
with under emergency treatment below 12. 10. 2.
It is unlawful for a doctor or dentist to carry out a “major medical
procedure” on a person under guardianship without
the consent of the
Magistrates Court.
“major medical procedure” is defined to mean:
1. a medical or dental procedure that is generally accepted by the medical or
dental profession as being of a major nature, but which
does not remove an
immediate threat to the person’s
2. a medical procedure relating to contraception or the termination of
The Court is required to commence to hear the application within 14 days of
receiving it.
The Court is
required to ascertain the wishes of the person, presumably about the proposed
procedure, as far as that is reasonably
possible, a requirement that is already
implied by section 4 of the
Even when the
guardian has been given the power to determine health care matters, which at
least implies that the person under guardianship
is incompetent of
decision-making in this regard, the Court is required to inquire into whether
the person understands the nature
of the proposed procedure and is capable of
giving or refusing consent. If the person is capable of giving consent, the
give effect to the person’s
That requirement is
consistent with the provision that the wishes of the person under guardianship
are to be given effect to wherever
possible. However the requirement is made
subject to the power of the Court where satisfied that the procedure was in the
best interests
of the person, to give its consent to the proposed procedure even
if the Court finds the person understands the procedure and is
capable of giving
and refusing consent to it and refuses consent to
12. 10. 1. 3. The Natural Death Act 1988 (NT) and advance
Natural Death Act 1988 (NT)
is also dealt with in Chapters 13. 1,
13. 4, 13. 4. 2 and 13. 5. 2. and Chapter 14. 4. 4. It provides that capable
adults who desire
not to be subjected medical or surgical measures that prolong
or are intended to prolong life in the event of them suffering from
illness may make a direction in a formal
However, the
specifically states that it does not affect the rights of a capable
person to refuse medical or surgical
12. 10. 2. Emergency treatment.
Where there is an urgent need for medical or dental treatment, the common law
as set out in 12. 2 above applies. In New South Wales,
as well as Victoria and
Tasmania, the statutory definition of urgent treatment is treatment that is
necessary, as a matter of urgency
to save the incapable person's life, or
prevent serious damage to their health, or to prevent them from suffering or
continuing to
suffer significant pain or
definition could be adopted by judicial decision in the Northern Territory and
exercised in accordance with the experience
of the ethical practices developed
in those States that have them in their legislation.
Another approach that has some currency in the Northern Territory is to carry
out treatment that is urgent and necessary to save life
or prevent serious
damage to health on a person incapable of giving a valid consent to their own
treatment under the extended principle
of necessity referred to at the
commencement of this chapter at 12. 2.
12. 10. 3. Medical and dental treatment that is
neither urgent nor covered by the legislation
There is no legislation in the Northern Territory setting out who can give
substitute consent to medical or dental treatment proposed
for an incapable
adult if that treatment is not urgent or not a surgical procedure or not a major
medical procedure to be given to
an adult under guardianship. In these
circumstances, treating doctors should follow the best practice approaches
developed in medical
and dental practice in the Northern Territory and elsewhere
and attempt to discover what the incapable person’s view of the
was likely to be, based on their previous use of medical and dental services, if
they had access to them, and the opinions
they expressed about particular
treatments or treatments in general when they had capacity. If that information
can be provided,
it should be considered along with the best interests of the
person. The views of relatives, especially those who have responsibilities
customary law for the well-being of the incapable person, should also be
considered, but not so as to override the views or
the best interests of the
incapable person.
12. 11. Common ground in the legislation and case
law of the States
The greatest amount of common ground between the States in relation to
substitute consent to medical treatment is found in relation
to the test for
incapacity to consent to medical or dental treatment and the definitions of
medical and dental treatment. By contrast,
in relation to objections to
treatment, there is a marked contrast between the approach in New South Wales
and the approach in Queensland
12. 11. 1. The test for incapacity to consent to
medical or dental treatment
This test is the same in New South Wales, Tasmania and Victoria. In those
States a person is incapable of giving a valid consent to
their own medical or
dental treatment if:
1. they are incapable of understanding;
(a) the general nature of the treatment, or
(b) the effect of the treatment, or
2. they are incapable of indicating whether or not they consent to the
carrying out of the
The Queensland definition is very similar and there are decided cases giving
examples of the test for capacity in action in that State.
The approaches taken in both
South Australia and Western Australia are different, but the effect of the tests
in those States is
similar to the tests on the other States.
The Australian Capital Territory
test is impaired decision-making ability for the giving of consent to medical
The three part common law test developed by Thorpe J in England which has
been adopted in New South Wales is an effective way to assess
whether or not a
person has capacity to consent to their own treatment. For a person to be
capable of giving a valid consent to their
own treatment, they must be able
1. take in (and comprehend) and retain the treatment information,
2. believe that information, and
3. weigh that information, balancing risks and needs. (weigh it in the
balance and arrive at a choice)
12. 11. 2. Definitions of medical and dental
In New South Wales and Tasmania, medical and dental treatment are defined
together. They are medical treatment, including any medical
or surgical
procedure, operation or examination and any prophylactic, palliative or
rehabilitative care, normally carried out by,
or under, the supervision of a
registered practitioner as well as dental treatment (including any dental
procedure, operation or
examination) normally carried out by or under the
supervision of a registered practitioner. They can also include any other act
in the regulations to be “treatment” as just
In Victoria medical treatment is defined in the same way as in New South
Wales and Tasmania while dental treatment is defined as dental
(including any dental procedure, operation or examination) normally carried out
by or under the supervision of a registered
practitioner.
Australia medical and dental treatment are defined in ways that are very similar
to the definitions in the States already
In Queensland the role of the substitute decision-maker is broader than
elsewhere in Australia. They make decisions relating to “matters
to health care”. Health care is described as, care or treatment of, or a
service or a procedure for an adult:
1. to diagnose, maintain, or treat the adult's physical or mental condition,
2. carried out by, or under the direction or supervision of, a health
Health care also includes withholding or withdrawal of a life-sustaining
measure if the commencement or continuation of the measure
would be inconsistent
with good medical practice.
While this definition is very similar to the definition of medical and dental
treatment in the other States, it applies to the health
care provided by a much
wider range of health care professional than just doctors and
In 2005, the then Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal relied
on the England and Wales Court of Appeal’s broad
view of the definition of
medical treatment in the
Mental Health Act
its view that seclusion could be a medical
judgment of the Court of Appeal, Hale LJ noted that the House of Lords had held
Reid v Secretary of State for Scotland
medical treatment could include treatment which alleviated or prevented a
deterioration of the symptoms of the disorder, even
if the treatment would have
no effect on the disorder itself and that similarly, in
B v Croydon Health
, in the context of the force-feeding an anorexic woman, the Court
of Appeal held that doing so was treatment for the mental disorder
even if the
treatment addressed only the symptoms of anorexia or was ancillary to trying to
address the underlying
She then went on
to point out that:
[S]ome psychotic patients deteriorate when over stimulated
and when interaction with others becomes too intense. Seclusion can reduce
psychotic symptoms by reducing social stimulation. Some patients with
persecutory delusions report feeling safer in seclusion….
It can also be
said that, in a wider sense, seclusion aimed at addressing the risks to others
presented by the behaviour of a patient
in the manic phase of a bipolar
affective disorder when the behaviour is itself the result of that disorder is
treatment 'for' the
disorder in the same way that force-feeding the anorexic
patient was treatment for her disorder. While her behaviour was purely self
destructive, the consequences of allowing Mr S to persist in behaviour which was
damaging to others would also have been damaging
We take the view, therefore, that
seclusion is certainly capable of being medical
Court of Appeal’s decision was overturned by the House of Lords after the
Queensland Tribunal had given its
LJ’s statement just quoted was not disapproved of by the House of Lords,
it is respectfully suggested that, outside
Queensland at least, seclusion may
not be within the definition of medical treatment. As Lord Steyn pointed out in
the House of Lords,
the case concerned the use of seclusion in hospitals where
mentally disordered patients were
Lord Bingham was of
the opinion the description of medical treatment in the
Mental Health Act
was wide enough “to cover the nursing and caring for a
patient in seclusion, even though seclusion cannot properly form part
treatment programme”.
Lord Hope stated that seclusion was not part of a patient's treatment. Its aim
was to contain severely disturbed behaviour and the
decision to resort to it was
made by a nurse or a doctor and it is supervised by medical staff in the
hospital. For that reason it
fell well within the scope of the phrase "the
medical treatment of patients suffering from mental
Lord Scott reaffirmed the concerns of the other law lords when he stated:
It is accepted that the only legitimate purpose of placing
an inmate in seclusion is the protection of others. Seclusion cannot be
a punishment nor can it constitute medical treatment, at least in the narrow
sense of that
expression.
Whether or not it is legitimate to use seclusion in a mental health facility
is not the issue here. However, what is clear from the
speeches (judgments) of
all of the law lords in the case is that they did not consider seclusion to be
medical treatment.
In Western Australia treatment is defined widely to mean any medical,
surgical, dental or related treatment or care that may lawfully
be provided to a
patient with the patient's consent or the consent of any person authorised by
law to consent on their
In the Australian Capital Territory dental treatment is included in the
definition of medical
The broad view of what is included in medical and dental treatment, leaves
open the question of whether or not particular treatments
or aspects of
treatment including oversight of the person’s condition, medical advice
be managed and the prescription of
courses of medication are included. A group of Western Australian decisions show
why those aspects
of treatment are included in the
definition.
The Victorian
Gardner; re BWV
touches upon the criteria for determining whether or
not an action or activity is medical treatment and explains why the provision
nutrition and hydration through artificial means is medical
The Western
Australian case
includes the withdrawal of nutrition and hydration
through artificial means in medical
Psychiatric
treatment and contraceptive treatment have both been held to be included in
medical treatment in Western
Some Western Australian cases address the question of whether the giving of
medications or the use of physical means to stop a person
moving or walking is
medical treatment or chemical or physical
12. 11. 3. Objections
In New South Wales the cases involving proposals to treat Jehovah’s
Witnesses with blood products, and a case involving a Christian
Scientist, show
how the objection to treatment of the incapable person is dealt
This approach
contrasts with the approach taken in Queensland where the legislative provision
has been interpreted by the predecessor
of QCAT, the Queensland Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal.
12. 12. The medical approach to substitute consent
to medical and dental treatment
12. 12. 1. What may affect capacity?
12. 12. 1. 1. General medical conditions
A number of medical conditions may render a person unable to understand
either the general nature or the effect of a particular treatment.
Any chronic
or acute perturbation of mental state may affect such understanding. Delirium,
an impairment in attention and cognition
caused by an underlying physical
illness such as chest or urinary tract infection or drug toxicity, is frequently
seen in the acute
medical setting and it often impairs a person’s capacity
to consent to medical treatment. Because delirium is a transient
disorder it is
important that the person’s capacity to consent to their own treatment is
reassessed after the resolution of
the delirium, if the proposed treatment can
wait until that occurs.
Although executive impairment (i.e. impairment in frontal lobe functions)
causing deficits in reasoning is generally associated with
dementia, recent
studies have suggested that patients with chronic diseases, such as
hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and diabetes, may also have
executive deficits independent of any co-occurring dementia or psychiatric
A range of medical conditions may also affect a person’s ability to
indicate whether or not they consent to the carrying out
of treatment. A person
may be unable to communicate whether or not they consent to the proposed
treatment because they are unconscious,
sedated, intubated, suffering the
effects of a stroke or are otherwise either temporarily or permanently unable to
communicate. It
is important to appreciate that those suffering from strokes or
other paralysing conditions may be able to communicate by means other
communication and where possible the consent process should be facilitated. For
example, Stein and Wagner found that using
a process of enhancing informed
consent with a patient-selected "helper" during the informed consent process for
persons with aphasia
can improve the quality of the informed consent, while
reserving final decision-making authority for the patient.
12. 12. 1. 2. Psychiatric conditions
Psychiatric disorders such as depression, schizophrenia, bipolar affective
disorder (manic-depressive disorder) and schizoaffective
disorder (a hybrid of
schizophrenia and mood disorder) may be associated with cognitive dysfunction,
poor insight or psychotic symptoms
which interfere with medical decision-making
In the case of schizophrenia, the strongest correlate or indicator of
capacity, particularly understanding and appreciation of disclosed
information,
is performance on cognitive
Specific psychotic
symptoms may also impact on a person’s capacity but only if they relate to
the decision at hand. In the
previously mentioned case of
with paranoid schizophrenia was held to meet the test for capacity to make a
decision about whether or not to consent to the
amputation of one of his legs
because of gangrene, because his symptoms did not interfere with the decision at
Depression may affect capacity by virtue of either a passive or an active
wish to die, or anergia (lack of energy) and amotivation
(lack of motivation)
with regards to decision making. Low self esteem or apathy may render depressed
patients at particular risk
of “going along with” treatment
suggestions regardless of their own views.
Some people with depression
have psychotic symptoms such as delusions regarding their bodies. Severe
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
may cause an indecisiveness that paralyses
decision-making.
12. 12. 1. 3. Dementia
Misunderstanding and faulty assumptions about the relationship between
dementia and medical incapacity have led to poor practice in
many health
settings. Commonly, a diagnosis of dementia is equated with loss of capacity.
A diagnosis of dementia does not preclude
capacity to give consent to medical
treatment. There are different causes of and different stages of dementia each
with different
effects on cognition. Furthermore, some decisions are simpler
than others.
Notwithstanding this caution, there is increasing evidence to suggest that
even patients with early dementia may have impairment of
capacity to give
medical consent. However, this depends on the type of dementia and associated
cognitive deficits, and the complexity
of the decision to be made. Moye and
others found that some patients with mild-to-moderate dementia develop a
clinically relevant
impairment of their consent capacity within a year,
particularly those who had initial problems with naming, logical memory and
flexibility.
Similarly, in
a two-year longitudinal study comparing healthy older adult subjects and mild
Alzheimer's Disease patients, Huthwaite
and others found that even at baseline,
mild Alzheimer's Disease patients performed equivalently compared with controls
standards of evidencing a choice and making the reasonable choice, but
significantly below controls on complex standards of appreciation,
and understanding. While the mild Alzheimer's Disease group did not show
significant decline from baseline on any capacity
standard at one year
follow-up, at two-year follow-up the mild Alzheimer's Disease group showed
significant declines from baseline
on the complex consent abilities of
appreciation, reasoning, and understanding.
In the early stages of the disease the difficulties in understanding a
treatment situation and choices probably relate to deficits
conceptualization and memory (e.g. semantic memory and verbal recall), while in
the middle stages, declining capacity to identify
the consequences of a
treatment choice probably relates to executive dysfunction (loss of decision
making and reasoning). In the
advanced stages of the disease, receptive and
expressive language deficits (aphasia and severe dysnomia) hamper ability to
communicate
simple treatment choices.
These studies suggest the value of early assessment and regular monitoring of
medical consent capacity even in patients with mild
Alzheimer's Disease to
ensure that it is adequate for each specific situation in which consent to
treatment is sought.
12. 12. 1. 4. Intellectual disability
Intellectual disability is low general intellectual functioning as measured
by IQ score associated with difficulties in adaptive behaviour
(or handicap)
manifesting before the age of 18.
There are many causes of
intellectual disability including abnormalities of chromosomes or genes (e.g.
Down syndrome, Fragile X syndrome),
nutritional problems, problems with the
pregnancy or birth, prematurity, exposure to infection (e.g. rubella) or drugs
during pregnancy
and developmental abnormalities such as autism. As with
dementia, the extent to which intellectual disability hinders capacity
medical and dental consent depends on the nature and severity of the
intellectual disability and the complexity of the consent
situation. This may
vary within the same individual. For example, a person with an intellectual
disability may be able to understand
the nature and the effect of some
treatments, because those matters are easy to understand or the treatment and
its effect are familiar
to the person. They may also be able to communicate
clearly that they consent to or refuse to consent to the treatment. In relation
to other treatments they may not be able to understand the treatment or its
effects or they may not be able to come to a decision
situations, they will not be able to give a valid consent to the treatment.
Not surprisingly, performance of intellectually disabled people decreases
with increasingly rigorous definitions of understanding
nature and effect. Cea
and Fisher found that most adults with mild intellectual disability and almost
half with moderate disability
were able to make and justify treatment choices
and fully or partially understand treatment information while 50% with mild and
with moderate intellectual disability were able to appreciate partially the
relevance of treatment choices to their situation and
weigh the treatment risks
against the benefits.
Looking at the comparative difficulty of different elements of the capacity task
for 20 subjects with learning disability, Wong
and others found that the risks
of saying “no” were the most difficult to understand followed by the
risks of the procedure,
the voluntariness of the consent, the purpose of the
procedure and the procedure
As mentioned previously with regards to people with communication
difficulties (and indeed this applies also to people with mental
illness), steps
can be taken to facilitate decision-making with people with intellectual
disability. For example, the decision-making
task can be simplified by
presenting the information about the decision in an uninterrupted form and then
as constituent elements,
and by limiting the verbal demands of the response by
including recognition and non-verbal
demonstration.
12. 12. 1. 5. Acquired brain injury
Acquired brain injury is damage to the brain after birth. It usually affects
cognitive, physical, emotional, or independent functioning
and can result from
traumatic brain injury (i.e. accidents, falls, assaults etc) and non-traumatic
injury (i.e. poisoning, infection,
brain tumours).
Again, the impact on capacity depends on the nature and severity of the
person’s deficit and the decision to be made. However,
the nature of
acquired brain injury is such that, unlike dementia which is a degenerative
cognition, or intellectual disability which
is usually a stable condition, there
is potential for recovery in acquired brain injury. For example, in a six month
longitudinal
study of change in medical decision-making capacity in 24 subjects
with moderate to severe traumatic brain injury, Marson and others
patients showed substantial recovery of reasoning and partial recovery of
appreciation and understanding consent
12. 12. 2. The medical assessment of capacity
12. 12. 2. 1. General assessment of capacity: myths and faulty
assumptions
The assessment of capacity in clinical settings is often characterised by
inconsistency, inaccuracy and subjective
impressions.
Ganzini and
others identified ten common myths clinicians hold about decision-making
1. decision-making capacity and competency are the same;
2. lack of decision-making capacity can be presumed when patients go against
medical advice;
3. there is no need to assess decision-making capacity unless patients go
against medical advice;
4. decision-making capacity is an "all or nothing" phenomenon;
5. cognitive impairment equals lack of decision-making capacity;
6. lack of decision-making capacity is a permanent condition;
7. patients who have not been given relevant and consistent information about
their treatment lack decision-making capacity;
8. all patients with certain psychiatric disorders lack decision-making
9. patients who are involuntarily committed lack decision-making capacity;
10. only mental health experts can assess decision-making capacity.
A “functional” approach to capacity assessment which takes into
account the individual’s relevant abilities and
the demands of the
particular decision-making task is far preferable to the commonly used
“status” approach which relies
on the patient’s diagnosis, age
or legal status to make assumptions about
The functional
approach invalidates the faulty assumption that all patients with dementia,
schizophrenia or intellectual disability
lack decision-making capacity.
Obtaining a valid consent from a patient is more than just signing a form or
reading out a consent form and asking a patient if they
understand what was read
out to them. Even when they give some thought to the issue of capacity, health
care professionals often
make inaccurate and inconsistent determinations about a
person’s capacity to give a valid consent to their own treatment.
Practices that have been
identified as problematic include capacity assessment based on bedside cognitive
assessment at best or subjective
impressions about capacity at worst. In a study
of subjective estimates of cognitive impairment in older surgical patients,
and others have demonstrated that guessing at a patient's cognitive
function commonly leads to error, resulting in procedures being
without a valid consent having been obtained. Although staff found it easier to
recognize extremes of cognitive functioning,
when a patient's degree of
cognitive impairment was intermediate, estimates were only slightly better than
that expected by chance,
resulting in patients undergoing procedures without
their capacity to consent being properly
The assumption that a patient with dementia still has capacity is often based
on their acquiescence to treatment, while conversely,
refusal of treatment is
often equated with incapacity. A study of Massachusetts nursing homes showed
that informed consent was not
considered an issue and decision making capacity
was not being tested. The usual practice was for capacity to be presumed until
a patient failed to acquiesce to treatment, and only at that point would the
issue of capacity be fully addressed.
12. 12. 3. General screening tools
There is widespread agreement among doctors that while general screening
tools such as the Mini Mental State Examination or the Abbreviated
Mental Test
provide a guide to the severity of cognitive impairment or dementia, and thus a
context for the capacity assessment,
they are inadequate to assess capacity to
consent to medical treatment. Neither of them deals with the specific
requirements for
a valid consent. Nor does either of them test the crucial
frontal lobe functions of judgment and reasoning upon which the task of
decision-making relies. A patient may have intact language, memory, praxis
(ability to perform coordinated movements or
motor activities) and perceptual
skills but still have impairment of capacity due to executive dysfunction.
Ideally, a two-stage
capacity assessment involving an assessment of global
functioning first followed by an assessment of the specific medical decision
making task is advised.
12. 12. 4. Specific scales
The development of clinical assessment tools has been driven by the legal
developments in this area, particularly in the Unites States.
According to
Appelbaum and Grisso
article that awakened modern interest in legal standards of competence to
consent to treatment was by Roth and others, who despaired
in attempting to
identify a single operative legal standard and referred to this as the
‘search for the holy
Over the last
30 years experts in the field have sought to develop clinically applicable tools
incorporating various identified
legal standards for defining capacity.
Some of the earlier instruments focused on assessing comprehension of
presented information. Fitten and others used three written
“vignettes” of increasingly complex hypothetical treatment
situations followed by a structured interview to assess understanding
treatment decision-making in elderly nursing home
Similarly, the
Hopkins Competency Assessment Test is a brief instrument for evaluating
competency to give consent to medical treatment
or to write advance directives
based on the patient’s comprehension of a short essay outlining a
doctor’s assessment
of medical decision making capacity and the rights of
patients to make durable powers of attorney regarding future medical care.
12. 12. 4. 1. The four-abilities model
In a more inclusive approach, Grisso and others identified all four of the
commonly applied legal standards in the USA courts for
determining
decision-making competence (the ‘four-abilities model’) vis:
1. Ability to communicate a choice
2. Ability to understand relevant information
3. Ability to appreciate the situation and its likely consequences
4. Ability to manipulate information rationally (or reason about it) in a
manner that allows one to make comparison and weigh options.
Using three instruments to measure these abilities they found that different
groups of patients were identified as impaired depending
on the measure used.
The proportion of patients identified as impaired increased when compound
standards were used, i.e. when impairment
was defined as poor performance on any
of two or three measures.
What emerged from this work was the MacArthur Competence Assessment
Tool-Treatment. This instrument assesses patients' competence
to make treatment
decisions by examining their capacities in four areas - understanding
information relevant to their condition and
the recommended treatment, reasoning
of their situation
and the consequences of their choices, and expressing a
choice. A high degree of ease of use and inter-rater reliability (i.e. agreement
between different raters) in both hospitalized, medically ill patients and
patients with psychiatric disorders has been identified
with this tool.
12. 12. 4. 2. Aid to Capacity Evaluation
In the attempt to create the “gold standard” of capacity
assessment tools, a plethora of other instruments have been developed,
which are based on the assessment of a composite of legal standards. The
‘Aid to Capacity Evaluation’ is a face
to face semi-structured
interview which has a high probablility of identifying those incapable of giving
The Aid to Capacity
Evaluation categorises patients into ‘definitely incapable’,
‘probably incapable’, ‘probably
capable’ and
‘definitely capable’. The clinical standards of the Aid to Capacity
Evaluation include:
1. able to understand medical problem
2. able to understand proposed treatment
3. able to understand alternative to proposed treatment
4. able to understand option of refusing proposed treatment
5. able to appreciate reasonably forseeable consequences of accepting
proposed treatment
6. able to appreciate reasonably forseeable consequences of refusing proposed
7. is the person’s decision affecting by a) depression or b)
delusion/psychosis
12. 12. 4. 3. Capacity to Consent to Treatment Instrument
The Capacity to Consent to Treatment Instrument is a psychometric measure
that tests capacity to consent to medical treatment using
a series of four core
capacity standards: S1 (evidencing/communicating choice), S3 (appreciating
consequences), S4 (providing rational
reasons), and S5 (understanding treatment
situation), and one experimental standard [S2] (making the reasonable treatment
12. 12. 4. 4. Health Care Capacity Decisional Aid
The Health Care Capacity Decisional Aid rates patient responses to a capacity
assessment interview on a likert-like scale (from definitely
able to definitely
unable) in the following
1. Ability to understand relevant information or health problem
2. Ability to understand the various choices (one to four)
3. Ability to appreciate consequences
12. 12. 4. 5. Stewart and Biegler’s specific questions
In a very practical way, Stewart and Biegler have suggested specific
questions clinicians might ask patients to test comprehension,
appreciation and
reasoning, namely:
1. Understanding/comprehension : Ask patient to recall and paraphrase
information related to proposed treatment including risks and
treatment, alternative treatment and no treatment at all. (Retest later to check
for stability.)
2. Believing /appreciating : Tell me what you really believe is wrong with
your health now? Do you believe that you need some kind
of treatment? What is
the treatment likely to do for you? Why do you think it will have that effect?
What do you believe will happen
if you are not treated? Why do you think the
doctor has recommended this treatment for you?
3. Weighing/reasoning: Tell me how you reached the decision to accept/reject
treatment? What things were important to you in reaching
the decision? How do
you balance those things?
4. Choice: Have you decided whether to go along with your doctor’s
suggestion for treatment?
While the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool-Treatment has been found to
have the most empirical support, none of these tools or
question sets provides
the “gold standard” for capacity assessment. Although superior to a
clinician’s subjective
rating of capacity, all instruments have
limitations, ranging from lack of inter-rater reliability and lack of supporting
psychometric
data to lack of generalisability across contexts or ecological
validity i.e. the difficulty extrapolating understanding of a hypothetical
situation to the specific decision to be made.
Given these limitations, the best
use of such instruments is to standardize or structure capacity assessments so
that the same questions
are asked of all patients. This is particularly useful
in research settings, but it is also useful for clinicians when making
assessments
as it ensures that they assess all the elements of decision-making
and base their conclusions on comprehensive assessments rather
subjective impressions.
12. 12. 5. The effect of the type of decision on
capacity assessment
Two issues need to be taken into account in the assessment of medical
decision-making. These are the risk of the procedure and complexity
decision-making required. The assessment of capacity should be made with
reference to the type of decision to be made. There
is a spectrum or hierarchy
of decisions from simple (e.g. having a blood test) to complex (e.g. carotid
artery surgery) and accordingly,
people may be capable of making simple
decisions but not more complex ones. Freedom is maximized when a person is
allowed to make
the decisions they are capable of
Further, when the risks are high, it is important that the criterion of
competence is applied
assiduously.
previously, the courts have acknowledged that the more serious the decision, the
greater the capacity
This is known as a
“risk related standard” according to which the level of capacity to
refuse a treatment may differ
from that needed to consent to it. Frequently, the
benefits of treatment are high and the risks low while the risks of refusal are
high and the benefits low, suggesting that the level of capacity to refuse might
This notion of
“asymmetry” means that just because patient is competent to consent
to treatment, it doesn’t necessarily
follow that he is also competent to
refuse it. Consent to medical treatment requires a relatively lower level of
capacity than the
refusal of that same
This is extremely
relevant to the area of end-of life decisions, which will be discussed in a
later chapter.
12. 12. 6. Information, education and
facilitation
One of the crucial elements of the health care capacity assessment is the
presentation of the information about the health problems,
treatments and
choices available to the patient i.e. “the education
To be capable
of making a decision people must be adequately informed. People can easily be
mistaken to be incapable if education
or information is not provided to them or
it is given in such a way that it is incomprehensible. In order to maximize
patient autonomy,
barriers to communication (e.g. hearing and visual impairment,
literacy or language differences) must be addressed if possible and
communication facilitated by establishing rapport, tailoring and personalising
information, giving sufficient time for assimilation
of information and using
visual aids which are
Similarly, in
patients with dementia, interventions aimed at maximising their understanding
and reasoning by supporting naming, memory,
and flexibility may help to optimise
Such efforts can be fruitful even in patients who might otherwise be deemed
incapable. For example, Palmer and Jeste found that an
interactive dialogue
between patient and investigator with repeated presentation of information is
likely to aid understanding of
disclosed information among patients with
schizophrenia
12. 13. Medical approach to blood transfusions and
substitute consent to medical treatment
Whether and how to treat now incapable people who for religious, cultural or
ethical reasons either have refused to be or are known
to oppose being given
either certain medical treatments or any medical treatments are extremely
difficult matters for treating doctors
and other health professionals. This is
because of the well established common law right of capable people to refuse
medical treatment,
for any reason or no reason, and for their stated views,
particularly those set out in advance directives, to be complied with if
lose capacity.
Doctors and other health professionals are faced with this difficulty most
often with Jehovah’s Witnesses and blood transfusions.
However, it must be
appreciated that while blood transfusions do save lives and assist in the
recovery process in a number of situations,
the giving of blood does involve
risks and blood transfusions do not bring about miracle cures.
12. 13. 1. The medical approach to transfusion
The right of competent adults to refuse blood transfusion is well respected.
Fortunately, blood is not always needed and patients
in relatively good health
can tolerate a fair degree of aneamia. Transfusions carry risks, for example,
transmission of viruses,
prior disease and transfusion–associated
immunosuppression. They also have benefits. There are alternatives to blood
transfusions
and the concept of “bloodless medicine” has been
developed to deal with these very circumstances.
Bloodless medicine involves blood conservation approaches (i.e. in phlebotomy
or taking blood) and the use of adjunctive (i.e. extra,
or alternative) such as
antifibrinolytics (stops clots breaking up), procoagulants (reduces
haemeorrhage) or erythropoietin (increases
red blood cell blood production) and
blood substitutes.
been written about pharmacological and surgical options to treat patients who
refuse blood and studies have compared outcomes
of open heart surgery and major,
intermediate and minor gynaecological procedures in Jehovah's Witnesses compared
with patients who
accept the transfusion of blood products and found them
comparable.
Rogers and Crookston have suggested the following guidelines on how to deal
with the patient who refuses transfusion:
1. Seek to understand the patient and develop good rapport, explore treatment
possibilities, decide together on the course of action
to be taken and also make
contingency plans in advance
2. Respect confidentiality
3. Document carefully
4. Access available resources to support the decision-making process
including other professionals who have had experience in similar
situations,
ethics committees, risk management groups, or transfusion medicine specialists.
In 2009, the decision of the Supreme Court of New South Wales in
and New England Area Health Service v A
made it clear that if an adult when
capable had made an advance directive in an appointment of enduring guardianship
directing the
enduring guardian to refuse medical treatment, the person’s
treating doctors, and by implication the enduring guardian, are
bound by that
advance directive.
Nevertheless, considerable difficulties arise in cases involving Jehovah’s
Witnesses where the Witness the subject of the
application has not got a current
“blood card” – a form of advance directive carried by many
Jehovah’s Witnesses
setting out that they do not wish to receive blood
products and what substitute non-blood products they are willing to receive. The
New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal has the power to give direct consent to
proposed medical treatments. This is different from
appointing a guardian to
give such consent. It has said in relation to dealing with applications, usually
by treating doctors, to
consent to giving blood transfusions to Jehovah’s
Witnesses that:
[W]hilst it (the Tribunal) has an obligation to have regards to the views of the
patient and to take (those views) very seriously
indeed, it was not bound by
those views and could make a decision in relation to treatment which was
contrary to the views of the
patient if the Tribunal believed there were strong
reasons for doing
In the matter in which the Tribunal made that statement, the Tribunal refused
to consent to a blood transfusion for a 19 year old
woman who had toxic shock
syndrome with multi-organ failure even though it was satisfied, from a medical
treatment perspective, that
the proposed blood transfusion was the most
appropriate form of treatment for promoting and maintaining her health and
well-being.
The Tribunal took a number of things into account. The young woman
had recently professed commitment to the key tenets of her religion
the obligation to abstain from blood transfusions, although she did not have a
current blood card. Her parents, who were
her persons responsible, wanted
everything possible done for her medically and gave their consent to all
proposed treatments except
for blood transfusion. The Tribunal also considered
the consequences of her having a blood transfusion. While it was unlikely that
she would not be rejected by her church if she had a blood transfusion consented
to on her behalf by others, this fact could lie
heavily on her conscience and
affect both her recovery and later health. Another factor was that the giving of
a blood transfusion
would not necessarily restore her
She was not given
the blood transfusion for which consent was sought, but she recovered without it
– probably as a result
of the high quality of the other medical care
provided to her.
There have been other applications in which the Tribunal has followed the
approach set out in this case, but in which the Tribunal
has given consent to
the proposed blood transfusion. In a 2004 case, the Tribunal decided to consent
to an application for a blood
transfusion to be given to AF, who was the only
member of his family who was a Jehovah’s Witness. The Tribunal accepted
he had signed an advance directive in the form of a “no transfusion
card” or “blood card” in 2003 and may
have signed others as
well. However, there was no current card signed by him. Also, there was evidence
that recently, when he had
been asked, he had indicated that he wanted a blood
transfusion. In addition, there was conflicting evidence about how closely he
adhered to other tenets of the Jehovah’s Witnesses and, evidence that he
had already been given transfusion in the emergency
Stewart has
criticised the Tribunal’s
There have been other cases in which the Guardianship Tribunal has either
consented to or refused consent to blood
transfusions.
Some of these
are discussed earlier in this chapter under objections to medical treatment in
New South Wales at 12. 4. 10. The question
of advance directives and blood
transfusions is discussed again in Chapter 13. 6. 4. 4.
12. 14. Conclusion
Capacity reflects an interaction between the decision-maker and the demands
of the decision-making task.
The legal definition of capacity to give consent to treatment is a broad one and
usually encompasses an understanding of the nature
and effect of the particular
treatment and an ability to indicate consent. However, understanding the nature
and effect of a treatment
requires more than just parroting a description of
treatment. The commonly adopted English common law test, Thorpe J’s test,
which is supported by current scientific literature in this area, suggests that
capacity to give treatment consent is more complex
and involves an ability to
retain information about the treatment and appreciate or manipulate it, weighing
up risks and alternatives.
This higher order, medical conceptualization of capacity has been developed
to ensure that false positive assessments of capacity
do not occur and that we
protect people from making decisions of which they are incapable. This of course
creates a tension between
the principles of beneficence and autonomy, the latter
being the fundamental principle upon which much of the law is based. Setting
high a threshold for capacity will tend to offend against the principle of
self-determination, while setting the standard too
low potentially places people
at risk of self harm.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Chs 3 and 4;
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Management of Property Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Emergency Medical Operations
Act 1973 (NT)
Natural Death Act 1988 (NT)
generally and
Adult Guardianship Act
1988 (NT) s 21.
Secretary, Department of
Health and Community Services v. JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
, McHugh [3]
[1992] HCA 15
175 CLR 218
Collins v Wilcock
3 All ER 374
Wilson v Pringle
[1991] UKHL 1
(1990) 2 AC 1
77. See also
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95
, 117 (Butler-Sloss LJ) and 117 (Staughton
Ibid. 76. See also,
(1990) 67 DLR (4
Secretary, Department of
Health and Community Services v. JWB and SMB
[1992] HCA 15
[2002] WAGAB 1
Re BCB, Application for
Guardianship Order
[2002] SR (NSW) 338.
[2002] WAGAB 1
[2002] SR (WA) 338.
[2004] WAGAB 2
Scott v Wakem
[1862] EngR 200
Watson v Marshall
[1971] HCA 33
, (1971) CLR 621.
In re Hawke
WN (NSW) 58
Watson v Marshall
[1971] HCA 33
[1971] HCA 33
(1971) 124 CLR 621.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
s 33(2) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
C v Guardianship and
Administration Board
[2002] TASSC 29.
[1994] 1 All
, 822 and 824;
[1997] EWCA Civ 1361
(Fam) [33];
(unreported Guardianship Tribunal NSW, C/28379, Matter
Nos 2004/1672 and 2004/1673, 3 June 2004), 12. At the time of writing, Thorpe
J’s test had not been considered by either the Guardianship and
Administration Board or the Supreme Court of Tasmania.
[1994] 1 All
, 822 and 824.
[2002] EWHC 429
[34] and [35].
[1997] 2 FCR
[2002] EWHC 429 (Fam)
[28] and [100].
Lane v Candura
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95
[1997] EWCA Civ 1361
[2002] EWHC 429 (Fam)
See 12. 11 and 12. 12.
Guardianship Act
s 33(1) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
The Victorian definition is almost identical. See,
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
s 33(1) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
s 37(1) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Regulation
reg 9. Note that palliative care and terminally ill were
interpreted by the NSW Guardianship Tribunal in
[2007] NSWGT 13.
Tribunal noted, at [15], that palliative care “is generally understood to
be provided to people of all ages who have a
life limiting illness, with little
or no prospect of a cure, for whom the primary treatment goal is quality of
life”. It also
noted that the common medical understanding of a terminal
illness involved end stage illness when death was imminent or reasonably
foreseeable and there was no cure or (realistic) possibility of remission,
[19]-[20]. As FAM had advanced dementia which would inevitably
lead to her death
in the reasonably foreseeable future and there was no cure for dementia or
possibility of recovery or remission,
the Tribunal was satisfied that she was a
terminally ill patient, [21].
Ibid. reg 10.
In Tasmania, new
(experimental) treatments are not defined as special treatment, but termination
of pregnancy and removal of non-regenerative
tissue for the purposes of
transplantation have been made special treatment the Act. See,
Guardianship
and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations
reg 6 includes aversive
treatments as they are defined in New South Wales as special treatment, but not
termination of pregnancy which
is in the Tasmanian
. While vasectomy
or tubal occlusion are not specifically referred to in the legislation in
Tasmania, they are considered special
treatments as such treatments are usually
intended to and, in any event, are reasonably likely to render a the person they
are carried
out on permanently infertile. Psychosurgery, including any
neurological procedure carried out for the relief of the symptoms of
Parkinson’s
disease, is included as special treatment via the
Guardianship and Administration Regulations 2007
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
For special medical
treatment see,
Guardianship Act
ss 33(1) and 45(1) and
(2). For experimental medical treatment see, ss 33(1) and 45(1) and (3) of the
Guardianship Regulation
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
s 33(1) and
Guardianship Regulation
Guardianship Act
Guardianship
(NSW) reg 10.
Ibid. reg 10(c)(i) or
See the next heading
Minor treatment
” and the footnote under it.
Ibid. reg 11.
This follows from the fact
that the doctors proposing to carryout major medical treatment are not absolved
from obtaining substitute
consent as they are for urgent treatment or absolved
from obtaining substitute consent in certain circumstances as they are for minor
treatment and the fact that applications for any kind of treatment may be made
to the Guardianship Tribunal. See,
Guardianship Act
Guardianship Act
s 33A(4)(a) empowers the guardian to act only if they have
been given the function of consenting to medical and dental treatment
of the person under their guardianship. See also s 3(1) of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
does not deal
with this matter specifically, it may be implied into the
guardians (including enduring guardians) with the function of giving or refusing
consent to medical treatment may act as
persons responsible.
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
Guardianship Act
ss 3(1) and 33A(4)(a) and
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship Act
ss 3(1) and 33A(4)(b) and
Guardianship and Administration
(1)(c)(ii) and
Guardianship Act
s 3D which sets out the circumstances in which the person has
the care of the incapable person and s 33A(4)(c) and
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 4(1)(c)(iii)
and (3) and (4). Brain
damaged adults will sometimes be looked after by their parents, and if those
adults receive substantial as
a result of their injuries, their parents may
receive money for looking after them. In
[2000] NSWSC 1052
suggested that s 3D of the NSW
not be narrowly construed.
Consequently, in that State parent carers in that situation are considered not
precluded from being persons
responsible.
Guardianship Act
s 3E which sets out the meaning of “close friend or
relative” and s 33A(4)(d) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 4(1)(c)(iv)
(b) to (d).
Guardianship Act
s 33A(2) and (3) and
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
For NSW see,
Guardianship
ss 3(1) and 33A(4)(a) and Part 2 of the
to how to appoint an enduring guardian. For Tasmania see,
Guardianship and
Administration Act
and Part 5 of the Act as to
how to appoint an enduring guardian.
Guardianship Regulation
regs 13 and 14 and
Guardianship and Administration Regulations
Guardianship Act
Ibid. s 40(3).
Ibid. s 46(2)(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Regulations 2007
Guardianship Act
s 37(2) and (3).
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
In NSW the legislation does not
require this, but the Tribunal does. However, it provides an application form
which is available
on its website
www.gt.nsw.gov.au/applications/medical-dental-consent-cfm. Also, if an
application needs to be made urgently out of
hours, the tribunal member on call
will fill out the form as part of the information collecting process before the
Guardianship Act
s 42(1). However, s 44(3) of the
provides that the
Tribunal is not required to consider an application if it is not satisfied that
the applicant has sufficient interest
in the health and well-being of the
incapable person.
Ibid. s 42(2).
Ibid. s 44(2).
Ibid. ss 44(1) and
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 45(2)(e).
(4). For an example of an application to the Guardianship and Administration
Board of Tasmania for consent to medical treatment,
E.Q., on the
application of Professor K Kirby
(16 January 2006),
www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
s 45(1) and (2).
Prescribed special treatment
is set out in
Guardianship Regulation 2010
Guardianship Act
Ibid. s 46(2).
Ibid. s 46A. However, this
authority will not always be given. See,
(unreported, Guardianship
Tribunal Matter Nos: 2004/1672, 2004/1673, 3 June 2004).
Ibid. s 46(4).
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 2000/3642, 18 July 2000). Sometimes an
application is made for a guardianship order
and consent to medical treatment.
The Tribunal can the either make the medical treatment decision itself or
appoint a guardian to
do so. For an example see,
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter Nos: 2000/5289, 2000/5326, 2000/5343, 26 September
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 2001/1482, 27 March 2001).
Guardianship Act
ss 42, 44 and 45(1).
[2006] QGAAT
Ibid. ss 40(3) and
(unreported,
Guardianship Board, C/5887, Matter No. 94/1858, 22 June 1994).
[2009] NSWSC 761.
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 1999/3501, 18 August 1999), 9. The Tribunal
might well take a different view in cases
where either the patient has a current
and relevant “blood card” or other advance directive, or where the
views have been clearly stated and proved to the
Tribunal’s comfortable satisfaction.
Mental Health Act
Mental illness is defined in s 4 of the Act.
Ibid. s 25. The term
“person responsible” is defined in
Mental Health
in the same terms as in
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(except for minor differences that are
not relevant here).
Mental Health Act
and 72G. The term “medical treatment” is
not defined in the Act except to exclude certain treatments from the term.
The term “informed
consent” in defined in s 5AA of the
Mental Health Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[1994] 1 All
, 822 and 824;
[1997] EWCA Civ 1361
(Fam) [33];
(unreported Guardianship Tribunal NSW, C/28379, Matter
Nos 2004/1672 and 2004/1673, 3 June 2004), 12.
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act
Ibid. s 61 and
Guardianship and Administration Regulation
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act
ss 8(7) and (8) and
Guardianship and
Administration Act
and s 59(2)(a).
Ibid. s 59(2)(a).
59(2)(b)(i). A “putative” spouse is a person who has been cohabiting
as a husband or wife of a member of the opposite
sex currently for a continuous
period of five years, or for periods amounting to at least five years in the
last six years or has
been cohabiting with a member of the opposite sex and they
are the parents of a child who has been born. See,
Family Relationships Act 1975
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 59(2)(b)(ii).
Ibid. s 26.
The website for the
Office of the Public Advocate in South Australia is:
www.opa.sa.gov.au
, then go to Consent.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration (Amendment) Act
1999 (Vic).
Medical Treatment
(Vic) s 5A and Schedule 2.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 36(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 42A.
Ibid. s 3. Note, no
treatments have been prescribed as special treatments in regulations.
Ibid. s 42B(1). Compare
Guardianship Act
which provides that any
person may make an application to the Guardianship Tribunal for consent to any
category of medical treatment.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 42B(3).
Ibid. s 42D.
Ibid. s 42E.
Ibid. s 38(1). Other
matters to be taken into account may be prescribed in the regulations, but none
Ibid. s 37(1)(a) and
Medical Treatment Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 37(1)(b).
Ibid. s 37(1)(c).
Ibid. s 37(1)(d).
Ibid. s 37(1)(e).
Ibid. s 37(1)(f).
“Spouse” means the person to whom the incapable person is married.
“Domestic partner” means
an adult person to whom the incapable
person is not married but with whom the incapable person is in a relationship as
a couple where
one or each of them provides personal or financial commitment and
support of a domestic nature for the material benefit of the other,
irrespective
of their genders and whether or not they are living under the same roof. But a
“domestic partner” does not
include a person who provides domestic
support and personal care to the person for fee or reward or on behalf of
another person or
an organisation (including a government or government agency,
a body corporate or a charitable or benevolent organisation). See s
3. Both the
spouse and the domestic partner must not themselves be under guardianship and
must have a close and continuing relationship
with the incapable person. See s
Ibid. s 37(1)(g). The
circumstances in which a person is to be regarded as the carer of the incapable
person include, but are not
limited to, the case where the carer regularly
provides domestic services and support to the incapable person or arranges for
to be provided with domestic services and support, other than wholly or
substantially on a commercial basis. Where the incapable
person is cared for in
an institution (such as a hospital, community residential unit, residential care
service, supported residential
service or State funded residential care
service), they are not to be regarded as being in the care of that institution
remain in the care of the person in whose care they were immediately
before being cared for in that institution. See s 37(2) and
Ibid. s 37(1)(h).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 42N(6) (a)-(c).
Ibid. s 42H(1).
Ibid. s 42H(2).
Ibid. s 38(1). Other
matters to be taken into account may be prescribed in the regulations, but none
Ibid. s 42HA(2) and
Ibid. s 42I(1).
Ibid. s 42I(4).
Ibid. s 42I(2) and
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 42HA(6).
Medical Treatment Act
Ibid. s 5B(2).
Ibid. s 4(1).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Interpretation of
Legislation Act
. For a case in which VCAT appointed joint
guardians knowing that they might refuse medical treatment see,
Advocate v RCS
[2004] VCAT 1880.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Ibid. s 42A(6)(a) to
Ibid. s 42M. Section 42M
forms may be obtained from the Office of the Public Advocate and downloaded from
that Office’s website,
www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au.
Ibid. s 42L(3).
Ibid. s 42M.
Ibid. ss 41 and
Ibid. s 42K(1). For the
Section 42K Notice see, www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au.
Ibid. s 42K(2).
Ibid. s 42K(3).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 42N(1) and (2).
Ibid. s 42N(3).
Ibid. s 42N(4).
Ibid. s 42N(5).
Ibid. s 42N(6).
Ibid. s 42HA(3)-(6).
Ibid. s 42HA(4).
Ibid. s 42N.
Ibid. ss 42HA(4) and
See 12. 6. 5 and 12. 6.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
The term “health
matter” is described in Schedule 2
and “special health
matter” in Schedule 2
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Schedule 4. For examples the test for
capacity in action see,
[2003] QGAAT 16
[2005] QGAAT
[2006] QGAAT 9.
Ibid. Schedule 2,
The Queensland law relating to care and treatment at the end of life is
discussed in Chapter 14.
Ibid. Schedule 4.
Ibid. Schedule 2,
Ibid. Schedule 2,
s 64(1)(c).
Ibid. Schedule 2,
. There has been no special health care prescribed under Schedule 2,
Acts Interpretation
define “spouse” to include
a “de facto partner”. De facto partners can be of the opposite or
the same sex.
The criteria for determining whether or not people are de facto
partners are set out in
Powers of Attorney
s 63(1)(b).
A person has the care of an adult
if they provide domestic services and support to the adult or arrange for the
adult to be provided
with domestic services and support. Note also that where an
adult resides in an institution (for example, a hospital, aged care facility
to be regarded as being in the care of that institution
but remain in the care
of the person in whose care they were immediately before residing in the
institution. See,
Powers of Attorney Act
s 64(3) and
(4). See also
[2005] QGAAT 9
in which the then Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal held that the Director of Mental Health could not be
recognised as a carer
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
A close friend, of an adult with impaired
capacity, means another person who has a close personal relationship with the
impaired capacity and a personal interest in their welfare. See,
Guardianship and Administration Act
, Schedule 4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
and Schedule 3 and
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Schedule 1.
Ibid. Schedule
The adult's views and wishes may be expressed orally or in writing, in
an advance health directive or in another way, including,
by conduct.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
The Tribunal’s
authority comes from the
Guardianship and Administration Act
The Supreme Court’s authority arises from its parens
patriae jurisdiction and the operation of
of the same
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
provides that that
Guardianship
and Administration Act
are to be read together. The
definition of “attorney” in the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
includes statutory health attorneys, see Schedule 3. Consequently,
they are attorneys for the purposes the
Guardianship and Administration
“guardian” means a guardian appointed under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
. The Adult Guardian is appointed under
s 199 of that
Guardianship and Administration Act
, Schedule 4.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
specifically provides that in this section “attorney”
includes both attorneys under enduring documents and statutory
matter is dealt with in more detail in Chapter 16. 4. 3.
this provision does not apply to special health care involving removal of tissue
for donation and participation in special
medical research or experimental
health care or approved clinical research. See
Queensland Law Reform
Commission, Report No 49, June 1996, 361-362.
Guardianship Act
(1)(a). See 12. 3. 1. 10.
[2006] QGAAT 11
Ibid. [38].
Ibid. [42].
So might the impact of
the common law. See
[2000] QSC 188
[2001] Qd R 574
[2006] QGAAT 11.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 82(1)(d).
The complexity of this matter is further discussed in Chapter 14. 4. 3.
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
The question of the
adult’s understanding of the proposed health care or why it was required
would be determined according
to the principles in
[2006] QGAAT 11.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[2006] QGAAT
Guardianship and
Administration Act
care principle is set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, Schedule 1,
It is outlined at above at
Guardianship and Administration Act
s 110ZJ(1).
This and other matters
are taken up in 12. 8. 3. 1 below.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
This was an issue before
was added to the
[2002] WAGAB 1
BCB, Application for Guardianship Order
[2002] SR (NSW) 338.
parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of WA see,
Minister for
Health V AS
[2004] WASC 286.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[2004] WAGAB 2
[39]. WASAT continued in that view, see
[2005] WASAT 131
[2005] WASAT 303
[2004] WAGAB 2
Ibid. [36].
[2002] WAGAB
Re BCB; Application for a Guardianship Order
[2002] SR (WA) 338.
[2005] WASAT
Ibid. [36] and [37].
Ibid. [39] and [40].
[2005] WASAT
[55]. See also
[2005] WASAT 303
[ 54]-[55].
Ibid. [56].
[2004] WAGAB 2
[37] referring to
Re MC; Review of Guardianship
(unreported
Full Board, 7 May 2004 (Mrs P Eldred, Deputy President, Dr A McCutcheon and Ms F
Child, Members)) 7.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
While the relevant
health professional will usually be a doctor, the term “health
professional” is very widely defined
and includes, chiropractors,
dentists, dental therapists or dental hygienists, dental prosthetists , medical
radiation technologist,
midwifes, nurses, occupational therapists
optometrists, osteopaths, pharmaceutical chemists, physiotherapists,
podiatrists, psychologists and any other person who practises
a discipline or
profession in the health area that involves the application of a body of
learning. See
Civil Liability Act 2002
Guardianship and
Administration Act
The term “Full Tribunal” is defined in s 3 of the
Ibid. s 110ZJ.
Ibid. s 110ZJ(1).
Ibid. s 110ZD. For a
consideration of “close personal relationship” see,
Advocate and F
[2007] WASAT 14
[2008] WASAT 14.
For a case in which WASAT
considered there was not need to appoint a guardian because there were persons
around capable of acting
as “persons responsible” for the person
the subject of the application see,
CGH and NVF
[2010] WASAT 76
Ibid. s 110ZD(7).
Guardianship and
Administration of Property Amendment Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
See Office of Public
Advocate website, www.publicadvocate.act.gov.au.
Guardianship Act
s 37(1). The same test exists in Victoria see,
Guardianship
and Administration Act
(Vic) s 42A(1) and in Tasmania see,
Guardianship and Administration Act
, 76. See also
Northridge v Central Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
, Dictionary. At the time of
writing no other medical procedure had been prescribed in the Act or the
Guardianship and Management of Property Regulation
Ibid. s 70(1) note.
Ibid. ss 7 and 69.
Ibid. s 70. Other aspects
of the procedure that has to be followed, the matters the Tribunal has to take
into account when determining
whether the proposed procedure is in the
person’s best interests and the special requirements about
non-regenerative tissue
are set out in s 70.
Ibid. ss 32A and
Legislation
describes the term “domestic partner” as a
reference to someone who lives with the person in a domestic partnership,
includes a reference to a spouse or civil partner of the person. As to who is a
“civil partner”, see the
Civil Partnerships Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
(1)(b) and 23C.
Consistent with the approach in NSW, a carer is a person who gives, or arranges
for the giving of, care and support
to the incapable person in a domestic
context but does not receive remuneration or reward, but may receive the
care’s pension,
for giving, or arranging for the giving of, the care and
support. However, if the protected person lives in a hospital, nursing home,
group home, boarding-house, hostel or similar place, a person giving, or
arranging for the giving of, care and assistance to the
protected person at that
place is not, only because of that fact, a carer for the protected person.
The term “close
relative or friend “ is defined in
to mean the same as it means in
NSW namely, a relative or someone else in a close personal relationship with the
person who has frequent
person’s welfare but does not receive remuneration or reward for the
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Emergency Medical
Operations Act
Ibid. s 3(1), (2), (3)
and (5). Section 2 of the
Emergency Medical Operations Act
defines “next of kin” as the spouse, de facto partner or
blood relative of the incapable person.
Ibid. s 3(6).
Adult Guardianship
1988 (NT) s 21(1).
Adult Guardianship
1988 (NT) s 21(2).
Ibid. s 21(4)(a).
Treatment that removes an immediate treat to a person’s health is
emergency treatment and can be carried
out under the
Emergency Medical
Operations Act
1973 (NT), if applicable, or the common law.
Ibid. s 21(4)(b).
Ibid. s 21(5).
Ibid. ss 21(6) and
Ibid. s 21(7).
Ibid. s 21(8).
Natural Death Act 1988
Ibid. s 5(1).
Guardianship Act
1989 (NSW) s 37(1). The same test exists in Victoria see,
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Vic) s 42A(1) and in Tasmania see,
Guardianship
and Administration Act
[1991] UKHL 1
[1990] 2 AC 1
v Bournemouth Community Area and Mental
Health NHS Trust, Ex parte L
[1998] 2 FLR 550, 557-558 and
Northridge v
Central Sydney Area Health Service
[2000] NSWSC 1241.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Schedule 4. For examples the test for
capacity in action see,
[2003] QGAAT 16
[2005] QGAAT
[2006] QGAAT 9.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
, (2) and (4) and
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
, 822 and 824.
Guardianship Act
1989 (NSW) s 33(1) and
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Qld) Schedule 2,
Ibid. Schedule 4.
Munjaz v Mersey Care
National Health Service Trust
[2003] EWCA Civ 10.
Reid v Secretary of
State for Scotland
[1998] UKHL 43
[1999] 2 AC 512
B v Croydon Health Authority
[1995] Fam 133.
Munjaz v Mersey Care
National Health Service Trust
[2003] EWCA Civ 10
, [42]-[45].
Regina (Munjaz) v
Mersey Care National Health Service Trust
[2005] UKHL 58
[2006] 2 AC
Ibid. [39].
Ibid. [19].
Ibid. [67].
Ibid. [103].
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
[2004] WAGAB 2
[39]. See also,
[2005 WASAT 131
[2005] WASAT 303
[50]. See 12. 7. 2
[2003] VSC 173
[75] – [78] and also [90] – [91].
[2004] WAGAB 2
[39]. See 12. 7. 2.
[2005] WASAT
[55]. See also
[2005] WASAT 303
[2004] WAGAB
[37] referring to
Re MC; Review of Guardianship
(unreported Full Board, 7 May 2004 (Mrs P Eldred, Deputy President, Dr A
McCutcheon and Ms F Child, Members)) 7. See 12. 7. 2.
[2002] WAGAB
Re BCB; Application for a Guardianship Order
[2002] SR (WA) 338.
[2006] WASAT 210.
See 12. 7. 2.
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 2000/3642, 18 July 2004);
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 2001/1482, 27 March 2001);
(unreported, Guardianship Board, C/5887, Matter No. 94/1858, 22 June
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 1999/3501, 18
August 1999), 9;
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal Matter No.
2004/1867, 6 April 2004). See also
(unreported, Guardianship
Tribunal Matter No. 1999/3642, 20 October 1999) and
(unreported,
Guardianship Board, C/8433 Matter No. 94/2383, 19 July 1994). See 12. 3. 1. 10
and 12. 12. 1.
[2006] QGAAT
See 12. 3. 1. 10.
Schillerstrom JE
“The impact of medical illness on executive function”,
Psychosomatics
(2005) 46(6):508-16.
Brady Wagner LC
“Is informed consent a ‘yes or no’ response? Enhancing the
shared decision-making process for persons with aphasia”.
Stroke Rehabil.
(2006)13(4):42-6
Richardson G
“Reliability of mental capacity assessments in psychiatric
in-patients.”
Br J Psychiatry
. 2005 Oct;187:372-8.
Palmer BW Jeste DV
“Relationship of individual cognitive abilities to specific components of
decisional capacity among middle-aged
and older patients with
schizophrenia.”
2006 Jan;32(1):98-106
BMA, op cit, (footnote
“Neuropsychological predictors of decision-making capacity over 9 months
in mild-to-moderate dementia”,
Gen Intern Med
2006 21(1):78-83.
Huthwaite JS
Griffith HR
“Declining medical decision-making capacity in mild Alzheimer's
Disease: a two-year longitudinal study”, Behav Sci Law.
2006;24(4):453-63..
Chatterjee A
“Toward a neurologic model of competency: Cognitive predictors of capacity
to consent in Alzheimer's disease using three different
legal standards”,
1996; 46(3):666-72
“Neuropsychological predictors of decision-making capacity over 9 months
in mild-to-moderate dementia”,
J Gen Intern Med
21(1):78-83.
http://www.aihw.gov.au/publications/welfare/dpida/dpida-c00.html
Cea CD, Fisher C.B.
“Health care decision-making by adults with mental retardation.”
Mental Retardation
2003; 41(2): 78-87.
Wong J.G. Clare ICH,
Holland A.J., Watson P.C., Gunn M. “The capacity of people with a
“mental disability” to make
a health care decision.”
Psychological Medicine
2000, 30(2); 295-306.
Marson D.C., Dreer L.E.,
Krzywanski S., Huthwaite J.S., Devivo M.J., Novack TA. (2005) “Impairment
and partial recovery of
medical decision-making capacity in traumatic brain
injury: a 6 month longitudinal study”
Arch Phys Med Rehabi
86(5) :889-95.
Sullivan K.
“Neuropsychological assessment of mental capacity.”
Neuropsychology Review
2004; 14(3):131-142.
myths about decision-making capacity.”
Am Med Dir Assoc
2005 6(3 Suppl):S100-4.
Wong J.G. Clare ICH,
Holland A.J., Watson P.C., Gunn M. “The capacity of people with a
‘mental disability’ to make
a health care decision.”
Psychological Medicine
2000, 30(2); 295-306.
Sullivan K Mental
Capacity. Powers of Attorney and advance health directives (2005) Collier B,
Coyne, Sullivan K. Leichardt :The
Federation Press
“Subjective estimates of cognitive impairment in older surgical patients.
Implications for giving informed consent”
Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society
(2005), 53(10) 1842 -1843.
Gurian, Baker, Jacobson,
Lagerbom and Watts (1990)
Sullivan K In Mental
Capacity. Powers of Attorney and advance health directives Collier B, Coyne,
Sullivan K. (2005) Leichardt :The
Federation Press
Appelbaum PS
“Comparison of standards for assessing patients' capacities to make
treatment decisions”
Psychiatry.
152, 1033-1037.
Roth LH, Meisel A, Lidz
CW. “Tests of competency to consent to treatment”
Journal of Psychiatry
(1977) 134: 279-284.
Fitten LJ, Lusky R,
Hamann C. “Assessing treatment decision making in elderly nursing home
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society
Janofsky JS, McCarthy RJ,
Folstein MF “The Hopkins Competency Assessment Test: A brief method for
evaluating patients capacity
to give informed consent”
Hospital and
Community Psychiatry
(1992) 43(2): 132-136.
Appelbaum PS
“Comparison of standards for assessing patients' capacities to make
treatment decisions”
Psychiatry.
152, 1033-1037.
Grisso T, and Applebaum PS
“The MacArthur Treatment Competence Study. I: Mental illness and
competence to consent to treatment”
Law Hum Behav
19(2):105-26.
Grisso T, and Applebaum
PS “The MacArthur Treatment Competence Study. II: Measures of abilities
related to competence to consent
to treatment”
Law Hum Behav
(1995) 19(2):127-48.
Grisso T, and Applebaum
PS (1995) “The MacArthur Treatment Competence Study. III: Abilities of
patients to consent to psychiatric
and medical treatments”
. (1995) 19(2):149-74.
Appelbaum PS
Hill-Fotouhi C
« The MacCAT-T: a clinical tool to assess patients' capacities to make
treatment decisions”
Psychiatr Serv
. 1997 Nov;48(11):1415-9.
Silberfeld M
“Assessment of patient capacity to consent to treatment”
Gen Intern Med.
(1999) 14 (1):27-34
Marson DC, Ingram KK,
Cody HA, Harrell LE. “Assessing the competency of patients with
Alzheimer’s disease under different
legal standards”
1995; 52: 949–954
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed)
Who can decide? The six step capacity assessment process
(2000) Memory Australia Press, Adelaide, 58-71.
Stewart C, Biegler P A
“Primer on the law of competence to refuse medical treatment”
Australian Law Journal
(2004) 78: 325-342.
Sullivan K In Mental
Capacity. Powers of Attorney and advance health directives Collier B, Coyne,
Sullivan K. Leichardt :The Federation
Press, p128.
Nowrangi MA
“Assessing decisional capacity for clinical research or treatment: a
review of instruments”
Psychiatry.
2006 Aug;163(8):1323-34
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed) op. cit.(footnote 377), p 6.
Parker M, Cartright M,
In: Mental capacity in medical practice and advance care planning : clinical
ethical and legal issues In
Collier B, Coyne C, Sullivan Mental Capacity
Federation Press: Annandale 2005 p74.
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95
[1997] EWCA Civ 1361
[2002] EWHC 429 (Fam)
Parker M, Cartright M,
In: Mental capacity in medical practice and advance care planning : clinical
ethical and legal issues In
Collier B, Coyne C, Sullivan Mental Capacity
Federation Press: Annandale 2005 p74.
Hertogh CMPM Autonomy,
competence and advance directives. In: Jones GGM, Miesen BML. (eds) Caregiving
in dementia. Research and applications.
(Vol 3) New York London, Brunner
Routledge, 2004, p391-403.a
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed) op. cit.(footnote 379) p64-67.
Parker M., and Cartright
C: Mental capacity in medical practice and advance care planning : clinical
ethical and legal issues In
Collier B, Coyne C, Sullivan Mental Capacity
Federation Press: Annandale 2005 p74.
“Neuropsychological predictors of decision-making capacity over 9 months
in mild-to-moderate dementia”
J Gen Intern Med
21(1):78-83.
Palmer BW Jeste DV
“Relationship of individual cognitive abilities to specific components of
decisional capacity among middle-aged
and older patients with
schizophrenia”
2006 32(1):98-106
Rogers DM. Crookston KP
“The approach to the patient who refuses blood transfusion”
Transfusion
(2006) 46: 1471-1477
“Comparisons of Cardiac Surgery Outcomes in Jehovah's Versus Non-Jehovah's
2006; 98(9):1223-5.
Abdelmagied A
audit of gynaecological procedures in Jehovah's Witnesses in an inner city
Obstet Gynaecol.
2006 26(2):149-51
Rogers DM. Crookston KP
“The approach to the patient who refuses blood transfusion”
Transfusion
(2006) 46: 1471-1477
[2009] NSWSC 761.
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 1999/3501, 18 August 1999), 9. The Tribunal
might well take a different view in cases
where either the patient has a current
and relevant “blood card” or other advance directive, or where the
views have been clearly stated and proved to the
Tribunal’s comfortable satisfaction.
(unreported,
NSW Guardianship Tribunal, matter no 2004/1867, 6 April 2004).
Stewart, C “Advance
directives: Disputes and dilemmas” in Freckelton, I and Petersen, K, op
cit (footnote 159) pp 49-50.
For a case in which the former Guardianship and
Administration Board of Victoria did not, in an emergency situation, pursue the
that a person refusing a blood transfusion may have been a
Jehovah’s Witness and may have had an advance directive in the form
“blood card” see,
Qumsieh v Guardianship and Administration
(1998) 14 VAR 46.
See also Stewart’s discussion of that case,
and related matters, in Stewart, C, “Qumsieh’s Case, Civil Liability
and the Right to Refuse Medical Treatment”,
For a case in which the
Tribunal refused consent to a blood transfusion see,
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 2001/1482, 27 March 2001). For cases in which
the Tribunal gave consent to blood transfusions
(unreported,
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 1999/5085, 20 October 1999),
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal Matter No. 1994/2383, 18 July 1994) and
[2008] NSWGT 21
Wong J.G. Clare ICH,
Holland A.J., Watson P.C., Gunn M. “The capacity of people with a
“mental disability” to make
a health care decision”
Psychological Medicine
2000, 30(2); 295-306.
, 822 and 824;
[1997] EWCA Civ 1361
429 (Fam) [33];
(unreported Guardianship Tribunal NSW, C/28379,
Matter Nos 2004/1672 and 2004/1673, 3 June 2004).
Parker M., and Cartright
C: Mental capacity in medical practice and advance care planning : clinical
ethical and legal issues In
Collier B, Coyne C, Sullivan Mental Capacity
Federation Press: Annandale 2005 p67
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.38 MB)
PDF format (451 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter