URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sourdin, Tania; Li, Bin; Burke, Tony --- "Just, Quick and Cheap? Civil Dispute Resolution and Technology" [2019] MqLawJl 3; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 17
I INTRODUCTION
II TECHNOLOGY AND ‘JUSTICE’
III CONCERNS ABOUT TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
IV INNOVATION READINESS
A The Profession
B The Judges
C The Consumers
JUST, QUICK AND
CIVIL DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND TECHNOLOGY
SOURDIN,* BIN LI,** TONY
Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard wrote ‘Life can only be
understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards’. The
pace of life of
the mid-19th century when this was written and the (comparatively) modest rate
of technological change possibly allowed
for a more considered reflection of
past events towards moving ahead. However, the increasing rate of technological
change over the
past two decades and the predicted pace of technological change
into the future have established ‘disruption’ as a catchword.
pace of justice reform is (generally) faster, the price is (often) less
expensive, and society seeks unhindered access to justice
— on a cheap and
quick basis.
In the context of the legal landscape, this article begins by examining
three levels of technological change that have impacted and
will continue to
impact on the operation of the civil justice system within a framework of
objectives relating to expense, speed
and justice. The authors argue that there
appears to be a general consensus that the ‘quick and cheap’
resolution of
civil disputes will be supported through technological
developments, although whether this will meet objectives in respect of
results and processes remains uncertain. The authors then
explore the meaning of ‘justice’ and how technological innovation
can bring advantages and pose challenges in terms of access to justice. This
article also addresses concerns about technological
change in the context of
civil dispute resolution, focusing on the relationship between disruptive
technologies and ‘just’
resolution. The readiness of the community
for technological innovation is explored from the perspectives of the tech-savvy
to the top tier firm utilising the latest artificial intelligent
machinery, through to the courts striving towards satisfying ‘overriding
objectives’ in terms of a ‘Just, Quick and Cheap’ civil
justice system.
I INTRODUCTION
Clearly, newer technologies, mainly linked to
computing developments, have impacted and will continue to impact on the way in
human society operates and people
As a component of human
society, the justice system and associated court processes have also inevitably
undergone a range of changes
made possible by recently developed
technologies.
One hope is that the
use of technology will promote better access to justice, partly because it may
reduce cost and delay. On the
other hand, whilst the concept of justice and
perceptions of justice can be linked to time and cost — ‘justice
is justice denied’,
there is a critical question as to whether some technologies may result in the
system becoming less ‘just’ and more focused
on objectives related
to the speed of disposition of disputes and cost reduction. In this regard,
there may be a range of issues
that arise where justice processes are
‘dehumanised’ or where the speed of processing disputes impacts on
to which justice is perceived to have been achieved. In particular,
the following three questions are relevant: how technology should
influence the
justice system; how ‘justice’ should be conceptualised; and how the
budgetary issue in the civil justice
system with even sophisticated technology
could undermine a ‘just’ resolution of disputes.
First, at present, technology has the potential to better support the ways in
which people experience and access the court system.
For example, in Australia,
courts such as the Supreme Court of New South Wales have created a social media
presence to disseminate
matters of public
This type of combination
of information and internet technology and legal knowledge helps laypersons
understand how law works in
their country and increases their possibilities to
turn to law for help when they face a similar situation. The facilitation of
in their trial work is another important advantage brought by technology
to judicial processes. In some courts, these developments
are more advanced than
in others. For example, in 2018, the Hangzhou Internet Court became the first
court in China to recognise
blockchain technology as a means of storing evidence
to assist in dealing with copyright infringement
However, views may differ in terms of how and to what extent technology
should (or could) influence the justice system. Richard Susskind
has suggested
that technology in the justice sector can be perceived and categorised as either
sustaining or disruptive.
suggested that the former supports and enhances the way that a business or a
market currently operates, while the latter fundamentally
challenges and changes
the functioning of a firm or a
In this article, the
authors suggest technologies influence justice in additional ways and that
concerns relating to justice can
also be linked to ‘replacement’
technologies that are directed at the replacement of humans. In this regard, it
is suggested
that there are three levels in which technology is already
reshaping the justice system.
First, and at the most basic level, technology is assisting to inform,
support and advise people involved in the justice system (supportive
technology,
such as online legal services in the form of legal applications
(‘apps’)). Second, technology can replace
functions and activities
that were previously carried out by humans (replacement technologies, such as
online mediation processes).
Finally, at a third level, technology can change
the way that judges and legal professionals work and provide for very different
forms of justice (disruptive technology, such as artificial intelligence
judges), particularly where processes change significantly,
and predictive
analytics may reshape the adjudicative
In this regard, more concerns
relating to technology may also be linked to the capacity that it has to disrupt
the justice sector
and the extent to which justice values may not be aligned
with disruptive approaches. For example, justice concerns have been linked
issues relating to the transparency of decision making, algorithmic bias, and
enforceability.
In relation to the second relevant question – how ‘justice’
should be conceptualised – the poorly defined
objectives of the civil
justice system complicate the assessment of technological impacts on the system.
Although draft objectives
have been promulgated at a federal level within
and include a focus
on wellbeing,
in many courts
there is little to indicate what is meant by justice. The legislation also
provides limited guidance. For example,
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) suggests that the objectives in NSW are that the system is ‘just,
quick and cheap’, but there is little guidance
in terms of evaluating
whether such objectives have been met (and to what extent) and how
‘justice’ can be defined. Efforts
to clarify this blurry definition
of ‘justice’ have been demonstrated by the third wave of the access
to justice movement,
as the concept of justice has been linked to the
exploration of access to justice
In this regard, as
indicated by the former Chief Justice Murray Gleeson, access to justice has a
much wider meaning than access to
litigation.
Therefore, it is
suggested that justice can be achieved not only through litigation and the court
system but with the facilitation
of other additional approaches. Naturally, in
some respects, the large volume of civil cases that have been shifted towards
of Alternative Dispute Resolution (‘ADR’), has been partly
driven by cost pressures. That is, the civil court system
has been unable to
cope with increased litigation loads without extensive additional funding and,
as a result, forms of ADR and the
bodies that may administer the systems that
surround such processes, have been introduced to increasingly divert disputes
the court system. It is, however, worth mentioning some of the
concerns that ADR may not contribute to access to justice, as its
outcome is not
based on legal rights but rather on the problem-solving approach. According to
The mediator does not make a judgement about the quality of the settlement.
Success in mediation is defined in the mediation literature
and by mediators
themselves as a settlement that parties ‘can live with’. The outcome
of mediation, therefore, is not
settlement.
There are of course many other reasons that support the use of ADR that
include supporting relationships, reducing adversarialism
and promoting more
effective outcomes. However, there is no doubt that one reason for adopting ADR
has been to reduce the public
cost of civil
In the context of
technological change, which can be perceived as heralding a new wave in the
access to justice movement, it seems
probable that similar cost concerns will
result in the adoption of technological changes if they are ‘cheap’
at least from a public cost perspective. Under such circumstances,
there are dangers that such changes will be adopted without regard
quality of justice.
The third relevant question relates to budgetary aspects. In respect of all
three levels of technological change as noted above (some
of which are
intertwined), there is potential for the limited funding arrangements that exist
with the civil justice system to drive
change (or the lack of change) in ways
that may result in a less just
In the context of
Australia, as Morry Bailes, the past President of the Law Council of Australia,
noted in May 2018, there is a ‘funding
crisis’ in respect of the
civil justice sector.
also been observed that addressing the crisis requires the government to
specifically deliver long-term investment in the
legal assistance sector, as
well as a long-term investment in the
Despite such calls for
more financial resources, Australian governments appear to be relying on court
system structural changes to
reduce both waiting times and costs for
Under these
circumstances, there are concerns that technological supports will only be
available if they are accessible at the lowest
public cost. Further, although
the original intention of introducing technology to the court system may be to
facilitate the parties
to settle disputes in a speedier manner, limited court
funding could lead to court staff reductions as the price for adopting online
pleas and remote video hearings.
This could cause the problem of a lack of technical support to users, leading to
disputes with less ‘just’ outcomes.
Unfortunately, the experience of
the UK has suggested that this outcome is
Centring around the theme of the ‘just’, ‘quick’ and
‘cheap’ resolution of civil disputes, this
article explores the
meaning of ‘justice’ and what advantages newer technologies have
brought to the civil justice system.
The authors also examine the possible
challenges that technology has presented to civil justice processes. Further,
the authors explore
the status quo of acceptance of technology by using the
legal profession, judges, and consumers as examples. The article concludes
although there are various issues that technology has caused to the civil
justice landscape, and therefore more work needs to
be done across the sector to
address those challenges, it is undeniable that technology has facilitated the
resolution of civil disputes
in ways that can be just, quick and cheap.
II TECHNOLOGY AND
It has been noted that justice is an ‘elusive concept upon which it is
possible for rational and informed observers to
even though it
is ‘one of the core principles of every national legal
‘access to justice’ is nebulous and ‘survive[s] in political
and legal discourse because it is capable
of meaning different things to
different people’.
differences have meant that there is continuing disagreement amongst those who
locate justice only in the court system and
those who consider justice exists
throughout the dispute resolution
It might therefore be
inferred that technological impacts on justice may be assessed in the same way
in terms of where technological
innovations take place. For example, innovation
that occurs outside the court system (or the litigation system) may not be
as justice-related technological innovation.
The differences in terms of the ‘location’ of the justice system
can be partly attributed to different philosophical understandings
‘justice’ means. Put simply, more traditional and perhaps litigation
supporters may consider that justice can
only take place within courts as it is
only through the articulation by a judge of understandings about the rule of law
that justice
can be done.
contrast, those that inhabit the ADR landscape may consider that
while there is an important, significant and essential role played by the
judiciary in the public adjudication of civil disputes,
justice is also present
in the relationships that exist between people and in their ethical values and
that ADR supports this broader
formulation of
The ‘broader’ view of justice that is articulated in respect of
the civil justice system in Australia supports this definition
as it is assumed
that justice may involve invoking a corrective principle. However, a corrective
principle may also be supported
by forms of ADR, that is by agreement and
recognition, as well as through court-based decision making. Justice in this
context can,
therefore, be described as incorporating a ‘characteristic
set of principles for assigning basic rights and duties and for
determining what
[is] the proper distribution of the benefits and burdens of social
cooperation’.
This view of justice is relevant in relation to how technology can support
justice and the extent to which it is related to the support
that technology can
provide, not only in the context of defining the ‘corrective
principle’ but also in terms of how
relationships and ethical
understandings are supported. Considering how technology has impacted on justice
in terms of a broader
civil dispute resolution perspective enables a more
systemic consideration of technology within the justice sector. For example,
significance of pre-action arrangements, whereby disputants seek to finalise a
dispute prior to filing with the court (see Figure
1), can be considered in this
context. Newer technologies have already had a significant impact in this area,
and ‘boosted
by online resources, these options are providing many
disputants with accessible dispute resolution outside
Such reforms are
largely separated from courts and may function with the assistance of more
advanced technologies that can be applied
to processes such as internal review
of disputes (eg complaints handling), and schemes that incorporate requirements
to arbitrate,
conciliate, mediate, or use ADR or external dispute resolution
Other notions of justice are linked to perceptions of fairness. In this
regard, perceptions of fairness can be linked to procedural
fairness (ie whether
procedures, participation, and the timeliness and cost of arrangements are
viewed as ‘fair’), as
well as the quality of the outcome, whether or
not this is assessed by reference to objective or other
In the context of
technological innovation, there may be particular concerns relating to
participation as well as procedural understandings.
At the same time, there are
clearly opportunities to enhance participatory justice, partly because
technologies can support the exchange
of, and access to, information.
In terms of justice engagement, technology is already changing the way in
which disputes progress through the justice system. For
‘cloud’ technology can enable all participants in a dispute to have
instant access to all of the information
relevant to a dispute. Disputants can
provide instant links to websites where documents may be held via clusters of
interested parties
in secured groups on the internet. Newer technologies have
the capacity to improve the time taken to deal with disputes by supporting
exchange of material, enabling prompt exchanges to take place, ensuring that
data is relevant and produced in a way that encourages
sophisticated planning
responses, and by creating more innovative processes that enable people to
access justice processes with greater
However, a related fairness concept may be more relevant in some
the outcomes
are perceived to be the result of an ‘even-handed’ process. This has
been discussed in a number of
in the context of
pre-action requirements,
restricting access to justice,
and in more detail in the literature particularly when considering ADR
In this regard,
‘even-handedness’ and related notions of transparency and natural
justice may raise particular issues
in online dispute resolution (ODR) processes
where technological innovations may reduce face to face contact and where the
used to reach an outcome may be less visible.
This pursuit of justice utilising new technologies has been examined in the
context of self-represented litigants (SRLs), being parties
that are susceptible
to not achieving a fair/just result, and intelligent negotiation support
Zeleznikow has
[W]e have examined the issue as to whether potential litigants can receive
useful support from intelligent online dispute resolutions.
We have seen that
such systems can be particularly useful for self-represented litigants. The SRLs
benefit not only from obtaining
useful advice, but also becoming better educated
most ODR systems provide exactly one of either
] [Best Alternative to
Negotiated Advice] advice, support for trade-offs and facilitated communication.
A truly useful Online Dispute
Resolution system should be a hybrid of all three
approaches.
In addition to the possibilities provided by a technology-assisted ADR
system, British Columbia in 2016 established its Civil Resolution
— being the first full integration of ODR into a formal tribunal system.
With numerous other jurisdictions (such as
the European Union) incorporating ODR
as a fundamental component of their dispute resolution processes, ODR may indeed
be the most
visible face of new technology in the civil justice sector:
‘Online dispute resolution could, therefore, be the future of ADR.
goes on, the public will increasingly discover the benefits of alternative
methods of dispute resolution when they encounter
dispute resolution, for the
first time, in online
In relation to satisfying the overriding purpose of just, cheap and quick
justice, many commentators suggest that ODR has the potential
to reduce delay
and broaden the range and reach of existing dispute resolution services:
‘Compared to the costs of litigation
or even prolonged alternative dispute
resolution, the investment in online technologies is potentially both value
adding and cost
In Australia, the area of family law has seen widespread growth in the
application of ODR in the telephone and internet-based conferencing
technologies. In discussing the statistical trends of this growth, Bilinsky
most family/divorce/access/support issues take place in families where the
age of the parties are often under 35. This demographic
group is familiar with
technology as well as having access to technology. Given the large geographic
challenges faced in Australia,
this factor alone is driving the use of this
In the family area, many disputes are now dealt with through very simple
technologically supported processes such as the Family Relationship
Line (FRAL), Telephone and Online Dispute Resolution Service (TDRS) and,
increasingly across Australia, through video conferencing
(Zoom, Skype or
purpose-built). These options are particularly suited to disputants who may be
geographically isolated from services
or one another and also in circumstances
where family violence may be an issue. Some issues about the increased use of
include concerns about factors that may impact on the
‘just’ result, such as privacy and confidentiality. In this regard,
the Relationships Australia report actually found that there were very high
rates of satisfaction with the Online Family Dispute
Resolution (OFDR) services
that were set up as part of the project in Queensland. Their research,
therefore, suggests that online
family dispute resolution processes meet
objectives in terms of justice in addition to objectives relating to
and ‘cheap’ processes. Many factors support the
continuing use of effective OFDR. The factors include:
i. the type of technology — ease of use, reliability, accessibility and
staff assistance (help desk and like supports)
ii. the skills and experience of staff
iii. the training given to
Other technology that supports disputants in this area includes
‘supportive service technology’, such as that offered
by Anglicare
in Tasmania where e-counselling is provided to clients in the remote north-west
of that state.
counselling is provided online using software developed by that organisation.
Partnerships have been developed with local
community organisations that allow
clients to use their computer facilities for counselling
In consideration of the above, it is pertinent to recognise that both the
location of technological innovations in the justice sector
and the type of
innovations may impact upon considerations relating to whether they meet justice
objectives. For example, supportive
technologies may not raise concerns across
the justice sector. Replacement technologies may also be supported in the ADR
in respect of the management of disputes as discussed above in
relation to OFDR. However, more disruptive technologies that may involve
developed artificial intelligence (AI) may raise quite different and additional
issues in terms of ‘justice’, particularly
if they impact on
perceptions relating to procedural justice as well as substantive justice, in
part because both participation and
transparency in terms of decision making may
be reduced, which may be more relevant where evaluative and judicial
adjudication processes
are involved. In addition, it is also worth mentioning
that no matter what types of technologies are discussed, there could be work
across the justice sector that is not appropriate for technology to play a part,
such as the work of the oral
III CONCERNS ABOUT
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
As noted above, technological innovations have resulted in a number of
positive changes to the landscape of justice system. For example,
in terms of
supportive technologies, access to justice can be made much easier with the
application of online free legal services
such as apps, including
which have been
developed to empower victims of family violence with access to legal, financial
and safety information, and to provide
online training and resources to assist
community support workers assisting women experiencing family and domestic
As to replacement technologies, as noted above, online dispute resolution
(which includes video conferencing) has at least saved travel
disbursements whilst contributing to a faster finalisation of disputes compared
with both traditional litigation processes
and traditional forms of ADR that
require face to face contact. Similarly, case management has been aided by
replacement technologies
that enable the easier exchange of material,
timetabling and the insertion of advisory
In terms of the more disruptive technologies, the benefits are less clear
although it has been suggested that where computerised sentencing
introduced into some criminal determinations, computers can make sentencing
determinations more effectively and fairly than
judges, and that there could be
considerable fiscal savings flowing from reductions in the amount of time
currently spent by judges
in determining appropriate
There are, of course,
strong arguments to the contrary
where the use of AI has generated concerns that arise from algorithmic bias
issues to a lack of transparency, and even the encroachment
by the executive
upon the judicial function.
As noted above, there are, however, an additional range of concerns about
technological change in the judicial sector. These may include
scepticism about
the extent to which technology can assist in dealing with the
‘current’ problems of the justice
There are also responses
to the possible ‘new’ problems caused by the use of technology in
the sector, including how
courts can preserve open justice in a technological
Another issue relates to
how newer technologies may be ‘taken up’ in the sector and the
unevenness of any take-up. The
challenge of ensuring that legal technical
systems are kept up to date as technology develops quickly means that
technological improvements
are unlikely to occur in an ‘even’
manner. For example, ‘private’ parts of the system, which includes
law firms and funded ADR organisations (such as the Australian Financial
Complaints Authority) are more likely to be able to afford
investment than some
parts of the court’s
In this regard, current
developments already suggest that there is a lack of evenness in terms of
developments. Through mining litigation
data and applying big data analytical
tools, Lex Machina, a company owned by legal publisher LexisNexis, is able to
provide law firms
and corporate clients with quantified insights into judicial
behaviour, venues, opposing parties and opposing counsel to assist them
better decisions about claim construction and case
Thus, instead of
seeking advice from a law firm regarding the costs and benefits of initiating or
defending litigation, businesses
can obtain that advice more quickly,
inexpensively and, in some cases, more accurately from legal analytics firms
like Lex Machina.
However, access to such systems can be costly and therefore
uneven, which raises questions about fairness (in terms of smaller law
legal aid, and courts) as well as whether an investment in technology could, to
some extent, undermine the potential for the
‘cheap’ resolution of
disputes. In this context, the question arises: is it possible that the legal
landscape is on the
cusp of a technology-driven paradigm shift of a quantum
nature whereby ‘Just, Cheap and Quick’ are capable of truly
coexisting?
In this regard, it seems likely that many technological changes will promote
the just resolution of civil disputes, particularly in
terms of diverse online
free legal services supported by the relevant ‘supportive’
technologies, since the ‘weaker’
party with disadvantaged status in
a dispute may now be able to receive appropriate legal information and advice,
and power imbalances
can be, at least, somehow addressed — thus increasing
the possibility of obtaining a ‘just’ settlement (see further
discussion below). There are, however, some additional challenges to the use of
disruptive technologies in justice that may impact
on the ‘just’
resolution of civil disputes, although some commentators suggest that such
challenges can be dealt with
appropriately and ‘justice’ can be
Another potential benefit concerns the extent to which technology can assist
with the long-term operation of the justice system. Innovation
in the use of
technology across society and to a limited extent in the justice system has
recently focused on finding ways of accessing
what is known as ‘big
data’. The inferential techniques being used on big data can offer great
insight into many complicated
issues, in many instances with remarkable accuracy
and timeliness. The quality of business decision-making, government
administration,
scientific research and much else can potentially be improved by
analysing data in better ways. These developments, in turn, have
the potential
to improve the quality of
Researchers at the Hague Institute for the Internationalisation of Law,
studying big data’s impact on the justice environment,
have noted that
these benefits are generally not being realised:
For most justice systems, the goal of court information systems is to get
accurate statistics about workloads, disposition times,
sentence rates, appeal
and reversal rates, etc. However, our research indicates that existing court IT
and organisational tools and
mechanisms have limited capacity to extract
valuable knowledge and insights from massive data
Ingo Keilitz, an expert consulting with justice institutions throughout the
world on measuring and improving their performance, offers
the following example
of how big data could affect court administration issues such as court
consolidation:
For example, court location data could be compared against a number of public
justice system including
Zip codes, populations, demographics of the population (race, age, disability),
travel times between locations,
numbers and types of cases heard by different
courts, levels of courts, and availability of public
transportation.
The result of this analysis would allow advocates and opponents of various
court consolidation models to consider the effect on distance
and timeliness:
Results may allow advocates and opponents to compare various court
consolidation models and say, for example, that the consolidation
of courts from
ten locations to three would increase the average distance and driving
time to the nearest court from 3.1 miles and
a ten minute commute to 4.5 miles
and a fourteen minutes, where the overall average can be disaggregated by age of
citizens, income
levels, case type and so
However, whilst big data may assist in terms of making the
‘system’ work more effectively partly because it may enable
data to be gathered about the system, there are also concerns that the capacity
to collect and explore data may have unforeseeable
risks and issues. For
example, in an effort to promote quick and cheap justice by way an alternative
‘naming and shaming’
strategy, a Chinese Court has mandated the use
of a mini-program nicknamed ‘Deadbeat Map’ which allows users to
the location of those who have failed to pay their debts within a
500-metre radius.
There are other concerns about the capacity to meet justice objectives that
are linked to the potential for a large-scale job loss
that may occur across the
legal sector partly because similar systems that involve predictive and related
technologies to work effectively
will lead to significant job sector changes.
For example, according to a 2018 report from British accounting firm
PricewaterhouseCoopers
(‘PwC’), the most affected employment segment
by automation over the next 5 to 8 years will be administrative and white-collar
office jobs.
However, a study
into the impact of AI on daily commoditised legal tasks recently conducted by
American academics showed that AI
can already work not only faster than lawyers
on certain non-core legal tasks such as reviewing legal contracts, but also in a
accurate way.
Despite this
finding, one of the academics involved in the study insisted that automation was
not synonymous with job losses, but
rather AI could end up being a
‘lawyer’s best
In this regard, a
number of reports and commentators have stressed that technological innovation
can provide more opportunities for
including completing
some of the groundwork and then improving lawyers’ work
efficiency.
At the same time, despite cost-saving benefits, technological developments
have also led to new issues and increased costs in respect
of some parts of the
justice sector. For example, according to the Report of
Discovery in Federal
released by Australian Law Reform Commission, many commentators,
including Acting Justice Ronald Sackville of the New South Wales
Supreme Court,
have noted the distorting effect that technology has had on discovery costs
associated with court proceedings. It
was observed that it was here that
extraordinary and disproportionate costs were frequently incurred by parties to
the litigation.
Again, this
echoes the question above as to whether such new costs on discovery will still
be in line with the ‘cheap’
resolution of disputes for parties.
Concerns about the judicial role in the context of more disruptive
technological innovation have so far been the subject of limited
commentary;
however, there are also justice concerns in this
Some have suggested that
in the judicial decision-making process, artificial intelligence cannot take
over entirely because of the
biases possessed by the automation systems,
particularly when it comes to the sentencing outcome in a criminal
Others have noted that in
the civil justice arena there is potential, in the longer term, for Judge AI to
replace lower level tribunal
and lower tier judicial decision making, and it
seems likely that Judge AI will develop in a range of other
In some jurisdictions,
such as China, Judge AI may play a more prominent
In relation to the civil
system, however, and as noted previously, in the absence of a clear focus on
‘justice’ and related
objectives (including well-being), there is a
risk that a focus on cost and delay will mean that there is a temptation to
more decision making particularly at lower levels of the court system.
In terms of the ADR system, a focus on ‘quick and cheap’
expense of a justice objective may result in automated non-human decision making
which may not be perceived to be ‘just’.
Given the issues noted above, it is not surprising that the introduction of
technology in the justice system has generated much discussion
within the many
different interest groups involved in the system about the capacity of
technological reforms to meet justice objectives.
An additional issue in this
area relates to technological readiness which partly explains the variation in
views above but also partly
explains why there may be an ‘uneven’
capacity to meet justice objectives. Prior to considering whether effective
can sustain the advantages while curbing the disadvantages of
technological innovation, it is useful to consider how technological
may be received by end-users in the justice sector.
IV INNOVATION READINESS
Historically, the justice system has been slow to adjust to change. As the
new millennium approached, the then Justice Kirby wrote
change within the sector:
A lawyer from Dickens’ time, walking out of Bleak House into a modern
Australian court on an ordinary day, would see relatively
few changes. Same wigs
and robes. Same elevated Bench and sitting times. Very similar basic procedures
of calling evidence and presenting
argument. Longer judgments: but still the
same structure of facts, law and conclusion. Contrast, if you will, the
astonishment of
a physician from Guy’s Hospital in London, from the middle
of the last century, wandering into the electronic world of bleepers
monitors, of CAT scans, genomic tests and automated diagnosis of a modern
Australian hospital. We have made progress in the law
and in the courts,
including the past twenty-five years. But not as much as other professions. Will
it stay this way?
Recently, Chief Justice James Allsop upheld the courts’ role in the
adoption of technology in the law and in legal practice:
As core public institutions, courts need to take a leading role in the
responsible implementation of technology in the law and in
legal practice, with
a specific emphasis on problem solving and the facilitation of the just
resolution of disputes in a quick and
inexpensive manner, while still
maintaining the fundamentally human character of the
This observation raises a question about whether the justice sector is
‘ready’ for technological innovation. The concept
of readiness can
be in itself a self-delusionary enthusiastic willingness to participate. Many
parents will attest that childhood
races commencing with words of ‘Ready,
Set, Go’ generally have the attention of most of the participants at
though at that critical ‘Go’ moment, many more
find themselves still on the back foot. The level of readiness is perhaps
something that can only truly be measured post the event — failure at
‘Go’ suggests (irrespective of the efforts
‘ready’) that the readiness factor has shortcomings. Accordingly,
legal innovation readiness is difficult to achieve
and measure, particularly
when the task is to prepare and adapt to technological innovations that are
developing more rapidly than
at any other time. The timeframe whereby the music
marketplace prepared and adopted CD’s in place of Vinyl records, only to
itself be replaced by online music, was for most involved an extremely fast
transition — a disruption to the generally accepted
rate of change
accommodated by the market.
Much has been made of the concept of ‘disruption’ since its
critique in ‘The Innovators
and recently
Richard Susskind provided a succinct summation:
What Christensen highlights is that by the time market leaders react to the
change, it’s often too late. A popular example of
such a phenomenon is
Kodak. They invented much of digital camera technology. Yet they didn’t
themselves embrace it and by the
time they recognized the market had shifted,
other players had rapidly come to dominate. The point is that because the market
move quickly, leaders can find it very hard to adapt in
Newer technology is sweeping forward with a groundswell of new opportunities
towards improving legal efficiencies — new processes
whereby the
‘quick’ and ‘cheap’ resolution of civil disputes could
indeed become the norm as opposed to the
exception. However, there is also a
risk that a lack of readiness will mean that technological reform will be led by
tech giants
and major commercial interests who may be less concerned with
meeting ‘justice’ objectives (from a societal perspective).
Readiness for disruption is perhaps a contradiction, however the ‘cart
before the horse’ analogy would appear to apply
for civil dispute
resolution. The clients (and potential clients) are increasingly tech-savvy
— their readiness to adapt to
online legal services, the latest phone app,
and online video communication is unquestionable — particularly in the
to obtain quick and cheap justice. Arguably, the cart is full and eager
for the horse to come to the fore.
The Profession
Considering the readiness of the legal profession in relation to
technological advances is difficult (in accordance with the above
critique of
readiness), particularly given the significant differences that apply across the
sector (for example, Judge v Tribunal
Member, large firm v small, government
lawyer v in-house). It appears clear, however, that technological advances have
somewhat reluctant acceptance that the pyramid business model
sustained by significant billable hours, which served to provide healthy
remuneration packages for a select number of partners, is on its last legs.
This, of course, applies mostly to the larger firm which,
while being in the
minority as to the number of firms, provide significant influence that trickles
down through the mid and small
Adopting new strategies
and models so as to survive/accommodate the significant changes that the new
technologies will bring is perhaps
the only option towards a state of
The 2016 profile of solicitors in NSW highlights the significance of the sole
practitioner, accounting for the second highest percentage
of practising lawyers
at 18.6% — second only to single principal firms (employing on average 2.2
Solicitors) at 26%. In light
of the above, the readiness of the legal profession
in relation to innovation (at least in NSW) would appear to have three discrete
and markedly different journeys. Top tier and large firms with enviable
budgetary resources are able to invest into incorporating
and developing the
latest technologies;
mediums firms are attempting to keep up as best they can but generally with only
administrative preparedness;
while the new breed of sole practitioner is using technology towards what has
been described as Uberisation within the legal
profession.
Fortunately, it would seem reasonable to infer that ‘quicker and
cheaper’ legal services will be the by-product of innovation
as adopted by
all levels of the legal profession. Large firms are already making significant
cost and time improvements by way of
implementation of new
technologies
(although passing
on cost savings will be potentially dictated by market forces), while sole
practitioners are now providing ‘partner-level
expertise at almost half
the hourly rate’ with the additional benefit of a direct line of contact
between solicitor and client
ensuring time efficiencies in relation to
correspondence.
Exploring the topic of technological readiness and Judges (including
Magistrates and Tribunal Members/Commissioners) is an area of
unparalleled complexity and uncertainty. The overriding purpose to deliver a
just outcome quickly and cheaply promotes a
stressful work setting for the
judiciary, and recent commentary about judicial
procrastination,
and the notion
that judges are existing in a bubble highlights the current problematic
environment.
Furthermore, perhaps no other area of the legal profession is more
susceptible to the concept of inertia, as referenced earlier by
Michael Kirby.
In relation to the United Kingdom and internationally in general, it has been
Although it is
sine qua non
that courts ought to reflect advances in
society, historically in the United Kingdom and elsewhere, the courts and to a
lesser extent,
the legal profession, have been amongst the most conservative
professional domains in terms of technology adoption and in harnessing
in technology to improve
Offering further Judicial commentary in the area, the Hon T F Bathurst AC
provided the following:
Nevertheless, the influence of technology on dispute resolution has already
been significant. Those disappointed with the slow uptake,
particularly in the
Courts, should take heed of Amara’s law — that we tend to
overestimate the effect of technology in
the short run and underestimate its
effect in the long run. In any event, supportive technology is used in the
Courts as a matter
of course — we now have e-filing, e-discovery, real
time transcription services, electronic courtrooms, the use of video links
‘safe rooms’ for vulnerable witnesses and the use of devices on the
bench and at the bar table. In NCAT, some hearings
are conducted via telephone
where it is the most timely and effective way to hear the
Noteworthy in the above extract is the reference to numerous supportive
technologies, yet replacement and disruptive technologies
remain elusive in
terms of judicial input, as perhaps does the ‘readiness’
Independent of perceptions of inherent reluctance on the part of (some)
judges to disrupt ‘their’ well-established procedures
facilitation of quick and cheap justice, even the most innovation-ready judge
remains reliant on the Executive to provide
the funding package sufficient for
the implementation of the latest
technologies.
As legal minds (on
the shop floor) within the legal profession are supplemented with ‘big
data AI sourced answers’ to
intricate legal questions, the position
whereby ‘your Honour’ is considered the brightest legal mind in the
turn on not only the innovative readiness of the judge, but access (by
way of sufficient funding) to the latest technologies.
There are also other issues about how technology can be integrated and used
effectively in courts and tribunals, which often operate
systems with content management features that make it difficult to add and
support more sophisticated systems.
Court filing systems remain paper based in
many areas, and there are cultures operating within the litigation system that
it difficult to adapt to newer technologies.
Conceivably no other area of the legal profession has a greater need to
strive towards a sophisticated understanding that will in
turn support readiness
to embrace many of the new technologies available. Considerations of Judge AI,
whereby there will be ‘an
increasing emphasis on artificial intelligence
to deal with smaller civil disputes and the more routine use of related
technologies
in more complex disputes’, highlight that the process of
change is indeed underway
– so far, however, with little judicial input as changes take place in the
External Dispute Resolution (‘EDR’)
and tribunal area. The ethical
issues that emerge in terms of the judicial role and Judge AI, and developments
in this area so far,
assume that the ‘human touch’ will remain
central to the judicial role. Incorporating technology will not remove
importance of responsive judging and a need to better understand and
explore the impact that people experience when a human judge
deals with their
The Consumers
The consumers (the clients and the litigants) are arguably more ready to
adopt new technologies in the interests of just, quick and
cheap dispute
finalisation. However, again there is an ‘uneven’ readiness that can
be linked to geographical location,
age, economic circumstances as well as other
factors that can be linked to vulnerability. The challenge likely to emerge will
‘how consumers will be able to discriminate effectively between the
plethora of different service providers that are likely
This has prompted
the development of websites such as Law Choice
and the inference may
be that modes of advertising (and strategies to receive high priorities in the
Google searches) will be key
determiners as to the services being used.
In addition, consumers are always ready (with perhaps some sceptical caution)
for ‘free’ services. Apart from the introduction
of free online
legal consultation by many law
the Legal Services
Commission of South Australia
well as some apps supported by the public sector that provide free legal
services to clients, there is little available to those
with complex problems.
In this regard some issues that people face may even be linked to confusion or
even technological uncertainty
However, such services
may enable people with legal problems to have access to a legal chat line and
obtain information and/or links
to relevant sources of law without having to
wait on a telephone line to talk with a lawyer. Not only is such a process
quicker and
more effective, but it may promote greater accessibility and
confidentiality.
The ‘tech-savvy’ consumer (as referred to previously) is already
armed (and proficient) with the latest smartphone capable
of providing
‘24 hours a day, 7 days a week’ access to whatever can be downloaded
or linked to. In conjunction with
the widespread community rhetoric (and general
reality) that dispute resolution by way of the legal process is currently too
and too slow, this innovative readiness of the consumer is perhaps the
latent driving force that will catalyse the legal disruption.
Many clients will
no longer tolerate expensive slowness — particularly where aspects such as
the ‘billable hour’
has hindered the motivation of legal
representatives towards a timely resolution. To this end, those companies,
including the United
Kingdom’s Robot
— whereby costs are
upfront and the matter is essentially conducted (as far as possible) utilising
Chatbot technology without
the intervention of a legal practitioner, could
become the legal service provider model of an innovative ready consumer. The
to which this unbundling of legal services may become available in the
Australian jurisdiction may (at least in the short term) be
more limited than
the UK on account of legal regulatory differences. However, as recently
highlighted by Michael Legg: ‘The
confluence of concerns about the
affordability of legal services and the greater use of technology to provide
legal information and
related services means that more potential clients are
likely to seek limited scope
V CONCLUSION
This article has focused on the relationship between civil dispute resolution
and technology, and the ever-increasing complexities
that are being realised by
way of supportive, replacement and disruptive technologies. In this regard, no
matter how technology has
impacted on justice, it is undeniable that there are
many tangible advantages that technology has brought and will bring to the
system. The authors argue that in the context of Australian civil
justice, technology will often assist to achieve the objectives
of the civil
justice sector in terms of the quick and cheap resolution of civil
In terms of objectives relating to justice, there are many considerable
advantages that the technological revolution can provide.
Given the geographical
limitations and remote access issues that can arise in a vast and relatively
sparsely populated country such
as Australia, and the reality that disputes can
include international, national and local interaction, supported technological
are likely to exert a significant influence on the justice system into
the future. In addition, the ‘digital divide’
issues that existed in
the past are decreasing because simpler technologies have evolved and internet
access has increased across
communities. Each of these factors, coupled with
growing technological competencies and preferences, means that technological
are likely to be extended into the future.
Those within the litigation system have noted that technology changes have
the potential to dramatically transform the way in which
dispute resolution is
carried out.
Within the court
system, e-callovers,
video conferencing
and applications
commonplace in many jurisdictions. Technology courts, virtual courts or cyber
courts now exist in many
presence of such initiatives may produce more participatory court processes, and
enhance ‘participatory’ justice
as well as better communication and
document management. Other changes have occurred in the handling, collation, and
storage of information
and in the way that research occurs. The information
available online increases access to court systems and can assist parties to
better observe and understand what takes place within the court system.
Newer communication approaches have the potential to overtake the limitations
of e-mail and offer new collaborative styles and processes.
Together with online
meeting facilities, the interactions that have traditionally slowed down
capacity to respond ‘on time’
can now be instantaneous. In addition,
parties constantly communicating in groups can develop more sophisticated and
timely solutions
to process issues as well as the final outcome of the case.
Creating rules around these interactions to ensure that due process is
will be the new challenge for justice agencies. Many Australian ADR environments
now use Facebook, Twitter and YouTube to
engage with business, consumers, and
stakeholders about dispute resolution and to support dispute avoidance and
self-managed negotiation
strategies.
Newer technologies present a range of challenges for court legislators and
are giving rise to new litigation industries that provide
forensic oversight of
data analysis processes, encryption and ‘cloud’ collaborative
processes between litigation participants.
All of these technologies might
support timeliness. In light of this, there may be a challenge posed by this new
technology and industry
— that of ensuring that courts and tribunals adapt
in order to remain relevant and that courts and tribunals have additional
in respect of justice objectives.
The potential for technological innovations to pave a supportive, replacement
and disruptive path to facilitate a tripartite union
of the overriding
principles as defined under the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
similar legislation is
unquestionable.
And yet the
difficulty of certainty arises on account of the complex diversity of the legal
landscape which requires consideration
of almost polar opposite extremes, such
i. bush courts (run over two days incorporating 44 matters and utilising two
lawyers) to Supreme Court matters that may involve teams
of lawyers and a senior
ii. top tier firms with multi-million-dollar budgets to office-less sole
practitioners
iii. litigants represented by teams of lawyers and senior counsel, through to
self-represented litigants.
All sectors will be impacted by the latest technologies. To the extent that
‘cheaper’ and ‘quicker’ justice
will be obtained (albeit
with challenges) appears likely, perhaps certain. And yet the illusiveness of
truly satisfying the ‘just’
component remains the most significant
challenge. Greater awareness and access to information of the consumer is
significant in this
disruptive environment, and while measurements of speed and
expense may be noteworthy, it will perhaps be the consumer’s critique
process to deliver a ‘just’ outcome that may be of ultimate
importance. As established at a time not conflicted
by today’s complex
technological challenges — ‘Not only must justice be done; it must
also be seen to be
Justice may also
require some component of human creativity that cannot, for example, be readily
replicated by AI which may, in any
event, fail to provide litigants with
experience.
In addition, the
clear articulation of what is meant by ‘justice’ is critical in
ensuring that future developments are
measured and considered in terms of clear
benchmarks.
There is, however, undeniably a strong relationship between
‘quick’ and cheap’ objectives and the attainment of
Although the complexities that have been outlined in this article cannot be
condensed to a single sentence, NSW Barrister
Philippe Doyle Gray provided a
brief summation (albeit in relation to costs, but applicable to the three
overriding purpose elements
of just, quick and cheap justice) ‘You can
repeat slogans, like just, quick and cheap, which is
Procedure Act 2005
, but the only way that $11,000 became $990 [for my
client] is because somebody embraced
technology’.
* Professor and Dean, Newcastle Law School, the University of Newcastle.
** Lecturer, University of Newcastle.
*** Solicitor and PhD scholar, Newcastle.
Referring to the overriding purpose as defined at
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) which states that ‘the
overriding purpose of this Act and of rules of court, in their application to
civil proceedings,
is to facilitate the just, quick and cheap resolution of the
real issues in the proceedings’. The authors note that some authors
explored these objectives in the context of experts and other justice reforms:
see, eg, Gary Edmond and Mehera San Roque, ‘Just(,)
Quick and Cheap?
Contemporary Approaches to the Management of Expert Evidence’ in Michael
The Future of Dispute Resolution
(LexisNexis Butterworths
Australia, 2016); See Michael Legg, ‘Reconciling the Goals of Minimising
Cost and Delay with the Principle
of a Fair Trial in the Australian Civil
Justice System’
(2014) 33(2)
Civil Justice Quarterly
As early as in 1996, Lord
Woolf suggested, in the
Access to Justice — Final Report,
information technology should be appropriately introduced to the courts,
particularly for the case management purpose: Sir
Harry Woolf,
Justice: Final Report to the Lord Chancellor on the Civil Justice System in
England and Wales
(Final Report, 1996) ch 21.
See Tania Sourdin,
‘Justice and Technological Innovation’
Judicial Administration
(‘Justice and Technological
Innovation’).
See Tania Sourdin and Naomi
Burstyner, ‘Justice Delayed is Justice Denied’ (2014) 4
University Law and Justice Journal
See Michael Douglas,
‘How Technological Change is Expanding Open Justice’,
Lawyers Alliance
(Blog Post, 26 April 2018)
<https://www.lawyersalliance.com.au/opinion/how-technological-change-is-expanding-open-justice
Jimmy Aki, ‘Chinese
Internet Court Uses Blockchain To Combat Online Plagiarism’
(Web Page, 19 December 2018)
https://www.ccn.com/chinese-internet-court-to-use-blockchain-to-combat-online-plagiarism
See Richard Susskind,
s Lawyers: An Introduction to Your Future
University Press, 2013) 39.
See generally Sourdin,
‘Justice and Technological Innovation’ (n 3) 103.
See Tania Sourdin,
‘Judge v Robot? Artificial Intelligence and Judicial
Decision-Making’ (2018) 41(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
(‘Judge v Robot’).
See ‘Building an
Evidence Base for the Civil Justice System: Draft Objectives’, (Web Page,
30 May 2012)
<https://www.ag.gov.au/LegalSystem/Documents/Draft%20objectives%20for%20the%20civil%20justice%20system.pdf>.
Ibid. The Overarching
Objective is stated to be ‘The Australian civil justice system contributes
to the well-being of the
Australian community by fostering social stability and
economic growth and contributing to the maintenance of the rule of
See Tania Sourdin, ‘A
Broader View of Justice?’ in Michael Legg (ed),
The Future of Dispute
(LexisNexis Butterworths Australia, 2016) 23.
See Murray Gleeson,
‘National Access to Justice and Pro Bono Conference’ (Speech,
Australian Pro Bono Centre, 11 August
Hazel Genn, ‘What Is
Civil Justice For? Reform, ADR, and Access to Justice’ (2012) 24
Journal of Law & the Humanities
See Nick Hilborne,
‘Court Modernisation “Undermining Access to Justice”, Lawyers
legalfutures
(22 May 2019) <
https://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/court-modernisation-undermining-access-to-justice-lawyers-tell-mps>.
Another factor that may impact on the achievement of just, cheap and quick
resolution of civil disputes could be less effective case
management: see David
Hammerschlag, ‘Dealing with Cost and Delay’ in Michael Legg (ed),
Resolving Civil Disputes
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2016).
See Melissa Coade, Jerome
Doraisamy and Emma Ryan, ‘#Auslaw and the 2018 Budget Reveal’
Lawyers Weekly
(Web Page, 9 May 2018)
https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/politics/23192-auslaw-and-the-2018-budget-reveal>.
Michael Pelly,
‘Courts Merger to Put More Pressure on ‘Workhorse’, says Law
Financial Review
(23 August 2018)
<https://www.afr.com/business/legal/courts-merger-to-put-more-pressure-on-workhorse-says-law-council-20180823-h14dfy>.
See Owen Bowcott,
‘6,500 Jobs to be Lost in Modernisation of Courts’,
The Guardian
(2 May 2018)
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2018/may/02/6500-jobs-to-be-lost-in-modernisation-of-uk-courts>.
See Hilborne (n 17)..
Michael Kirby,
‘Attaining Universal Justice: Realities Beyond Dreams’ (2011) 1
Dictum — Victoria Law School Journal
Justice Ronald Sackville,
‘Access to Justice: Assumptions and Reality Checks’ (Speech, Access
to Justice Roundtable
Workshop, 10 July 2002) 19.
Ibid 19–20.
Tania Sourdin, ‘The
Role of the Courts in the New Justice System’ (2015) 7
Yearbook on
Arbitration and Mediation
John Rawls,
A Theory of
(Harvard University Press, reprinted 2005) 5. Rawls conceives
justice as fairness.
Tania Sourdin and Naomi
Burstyner, ‘Australia’s Civil Justice System: Developing a
Multi-Option Response’ (National
Center for State Courts,
Tania Sourdin,
Civil Pre-Action Requirements Resolving Disputes Outside Courts
See Rae Kaspiew et al,
‘The AIFS Evaluation of the 2006 Family Law Reforms: A Summary’
Family Matters
National Alternative
Dispute Resolution Advisory Council,
Maintaining and Enhancing the Integrity
of ADR Processes: From Principles to Practice through People
February 2011) 13–14. One salient feature of this recommendation is that
it is proposed in relation to ‘mandatory’
ADR, which is an
increasing feature of the Australian dispute resolution landscape (both within
courts and tribunals and as a precondition
to commencing litigation). It is
possible that disputants who are required to attend an ADR process (rather than
choosing to attend)
may be less likely to attend and participate in good faith:
See Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Discovery in Federal Courts
(Consultation Paper No 2,
November 2010) 286 (‘
Discovery in Federal Courts
Australian Law Reform Commission referred to the Victorian Law Reform
Commission,
Civil Justice Review
(Report No 14, 2008) 109–110, and
The VLRC Report identified that the implementation of pre-action protocols
may be challenged on the basis that such protocols are
a barrier to accessing
the courts, and therefore incompatible with the right to ‘have the charge
heard or proceeding decided
... after a fair trial’ pursuant to
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
(Vic). However,
this concern was dismissed by the VLRC on the grounds that pre-action protocols:
would not bar the commencement of
proceedings; are triggered before the
commencement of proceedings; and support the facilitation of a fair hearing.
See, for example, Tania
Alternative Dispute Resolution
(Thomson Reuters, 4
ed, 2012) 20. Sourdin, at Appendix G and referring to MacCoun R, Lind E and
Alternative Dispute Resolution in Trial and Appellate Courts
(RAND, Santa Monica, 1992) 100 for reference to the extensive Thibaut and Walker
John Zeleznikow, ‘Can
Artificial Intelligence and Online Dispute Resolution Enhance Efficiency and
Effectiveness in Courts’
(2017) 8(2)
International Journal for Court
Administration
Roger Fisher and William
Getting to YES: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In
Mifflin Harcourt, 1981) 104. Fisher and Ury introduced the idea of a BATNA as
one’s best alternative to a negotiated
agreement. The reason you negotiate
with someone is to produce better results than would otherwise occur. If you are
unaware of what
results you could obtain if the negotiations are unsuccessful,
you run the risk of entering into an agreement that you would be better
rejecting; or rejecting an agreement you would be better off entering into.
Zeleznikow (n 36) 43.
Noam Ebner and John
Zeleznikow, ‘No Sheriff in Town: Governance for Online Dispute
Resolution’ (2016) 32(4)
Negotiation Journal
Emilia Bellucci, Deborah
Macfarlane and John Zeleznikow, ‘How Information Technology Can Support
Family Law and Mediation’
in Witold Abramowicz, Robert Tolksdorf and
Krzysztof Węcel (eds),
Business Information Systems Workshops
(Springer International Publishing, 2010) 243, 252.
David Bilinsky,
‘Report From the ODR Conference in Buenos Aires’,
Page, 3 June 2010)
http://www.slaw.ca/2010/06/03/report-from-the-odr-conference-in-buenos-aires/
Relationships Australia,
Development and Evaluation of Online Family Dispute Resolution Capabilities
(Report, 2011) 14–15.
See Heather Brookes and
Tony Smith, ‘Servicing Rural and Remote Communities through
E-Counselling’ (2010) 16
Family Relationships Quarterly
Chief Justice Thomas F
Bathurst, ‘The Role of the Commercial Bar in the Mid-21st Century’
(Speech, Australian Bar Associate
Conference, 16 November 2018) 7.
<https://penda-app.com>.
Women’s Legal
Service NSW
<https://www.wlsnsw.org.au/training/ask-lois-website/>.
‘Apps and Access to
Justice: How Technology Can Make a Difference’,
(Blog Post,
9 May 2018)
<https://lawcpd.com.au/blog/apps-and-access-justice-how-technology-can-make-difference/>.
See Sourdin, ‘Justice
and Technological Innovation’ (n 3) 99.
Mirko Bagaric and Gabrielle
Wolf, ‘Sentencing by Computer: Enhancing Sentencing Transparency and
Predictability, and (Possibly)
Bridging the Gap between Sentencing Knowledge and
Practice’ (2018) 25(4)
George Mason Law Review
(forthcoming).
Although looking at the criminal jurisdiction, the principles stated in this
article would apply equally to judgments
in the civil jurisdiction: Sourdin,
‘Judge v Robot?’ (n 10) 1132–1133.
Bagaric and Wolf (n 50)
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot?’ (n 10) 1126.
See Chief Justice Thomas F
Bathurst, ‘ADR, ODR and AI-DR, or Do We Even Need Courts Anymore?’
(Speech, Australian Disputes
Centre, Supreme Court of New South Wales, 20
September 2018) (‘ADR, ODR and AI-DR’).
See The Hon Chief Justice
Marylin Warren, ‘Open Justice in the Technological Age’, (2014) 40
Monash University Law Review
Robert Thomas and Joe
Tomlinson, ‘The Digitalisation of Tribunals: What We Know and What We Need
Public Law Project
(Web Page, 5 April 2018)
https://publiclawproject.org.uk/resources/the-digitalisation-of-tribunals-what-we-know-and-what-we-need-to-know/>.
Vicki Waye, Martie-Louise
Verreynne and Jane Knowler, ‘Innovation in the Australian legal
profession’ (2018) 25(2)
International Journal of the Legal
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot?’ (n 10) 1126–1130.
David Bollier,
Promise and Peril of Big Data
(Report, 2010) 2.
Greemn Lim, ‘Courts
and Big Data’
(Web Page, 3 September
, cited in Naomi
Burstyner et al, ‘Using Technology to
Discover More About the Justice System’
Rutgers Computer and
Technology Law Journal
Ingo Keilitz, ‘The
Courts’ Big Data: What If Only?’ (2013), cited
Burstyner (n 59).
Ingo Keilitz, ‘Big
Data, Data Analytics, and the Access to Justice “Card”’,
Made2Measure
(Blog Post, 2012)
http://made2measure.blogspot.nl/2012/11/big-data-data-analytics-and-access-to.html
Erin Handley and Bang Xiao,
‘China Tests Opening Up Social Credit Scores to Social Media Platform
WeChat with Debt Map’
(online, 24 January 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-01-24/new-wechat-app-maps-deadbeat-debtors-in-china/10739016>.
‘How will Automation
Impact Jobs?’
(Web Page, 6 February 2018)
<https://www.pwc.co.uk/services/economics-policy/insights/the-impact-of-automation-on-jobs.html>.
Nirit Abermann, ‘AI
vs Lawyers: The Ultimate Showdown’,
Wall Street Pit
(Web Page, 7
March 2018)
<https://wallstreetpit.com/114557-ai-lawyers-ultimate-showdown/>.
See, eg, Roger Smith,
‘Ten Ways in which Technology can Expand Access to Justice’,
Technology and Access to Justice
(Web Page, 12 February 2018)
<https://law-tech-a2j.org/digital-information/ten-ways-in-which-technology-can-expand-access-to-justice/>;
John Zeleznikow, ‘
Don’t Fear Robo-Justice. Algorithms Could Help
More People Access Legal Advice
The Conversation
Page, 23 October 2017)
http://theconversation.com/dont-fear-robo-justice-algorithms-could-help-more-people-access-legal-advice-85395
Michele M Leering, ‘Enhancing the Legal Profession’s Capacity for
Innovation: The Promise of Reflective Practice
and Action Research for
Increasing Access to Justice’ (2017) 34(1)
Windsor Yearbook of Access
See Stephanie
Palmer-Derrien, ‘New Technologies are Throwing Out the Book on Law
Procedures, and Aussie Legaltech Startups
are Helping Them Do It’,
smartcompany
(Web Page, 16 January 2019)
<https://www.smartcompany.com.au/startupsmart/news/legaltech-startups-ai-blockchain/
Discovery in Federal
(n 34) 160.
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot?’ (n 10) 1133.
See Beverley Head,
‘Law is Falling Far Behind the Tech’,
InnovationAus.com
Page, 27 November 2017)
<https://www.innovationaus.com/2017/11/Law-is-falling-far-behind-the-tech>.
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot?’ (n 10) 1118. Other developments could include the creation of
template decisions to assist
judges in civil matters.
See, eg, Cao Yin,
‘Courts Embrace AI to Improve Efficiency’,
China Daily
(online, 16 November 2017)
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2017-11/16/content_34595221.htm
the end of 2017, over 100 courts in China have used robots to improve
efficiency, although at this stage those robots seem to be
only helpful in terms
of answering disputing parties’ questions regarding the legal procedure
and the simple substantive legal
inquiries, rather than making decisions in
place of human judges.
Michael Kirby, ‘The
Future of Courts — Do They Have One?’ (1998) 9(2)
Journal of Law,
Information and Science
141, 143–44.
Chief Justice James Allsop,
‘Technology and the Future of the Courts’ (TC Beirne School of Law,
University of Queensland,
26 March 2019) 1.
See Clayton M Christensen,
The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to
(Harvard Business School Press, 1997).
Oliver Duchesne,
‘Threats to Traditional Legal Practice: An Interview with Richard Susskind
(Blog Post, 31 October 2018)
<https://www.priorilegal.com/blog/threats-to-traditional-legal-practice-an-interview-with-richard-susskind-part-2
Law Society of New South
NSW Profile Of Solicitors
Report, 2016)
Sarah Smith,
‘Allens Hub for Technology, Law & Innovation Launches to Confront
the Future of Law’,
Allens><Linklaters
(Web Page, 24 November
2017) <https://www.allens.com.au/med/pressreleases/pr24nov17.htm>.
According to the Allens media release:
‘The Allens Hub will see 22 UNSW
academics work closely with staff from Allens to explore disruptions to the law,
lawyers and
the legal system such as reliance on data-driven decision-making and
new kinds of biological, artificial and legal ‘persons’’.
‘An Industry in
Transition 2017: Legal Benchmarking Results’,
Macquarie Bank
Page, 2017)
<https://www.macquarie.com/dafiles/Internet/mgl/au/docs/noindex/macquarie-2017-legal-benchmarking-full-results.pdf>
(‘An Industry in Transition’). The Macquarie Bank benchmarking
report stated:
A survey of legal practitioners in Australia conducted by Macquarie Bank and
released earlier this month uncovered a digital divide
already existing in law
firms; smaller firms invested in back office efficiency tools such as accounts
automation, and only the larger
firms spent up on data mining, predictive
analytics and artificial intelligence. Almost a quarter of small law firms have
no technology
beyond the very basic administrative tools.
Charmaine Kane, ‘Law
Council of Australia Raises Concerns about Uberisation of Profession by
Technology’
(online, 28 Septemer 2018)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-09-28/law-council-of-australia-raises-concerns-about-uberisation/10306298>.
In 2018, Law Council of Australia raised concerns about Uberisation of
profession by technology. Professor Margaret Thornton from
the Australian
National University (ANU) described the growing practice of lawyers doing piece
work for firms or individual clients
as the ‘Uberisation’ of law.
An Industry in Transition
(n 79) 31. See the case study ‘Transforming legal practice with artificial
intelligence (AI) —
we’ve got happier real estate lawyers, the work
product is much more consistent ... [and] we’ve achieved time and cost
savings of around 30%’.
Anna Patty, ‘Digital
Disruption Expected to Make Legal Services Cheaper’,
Sydney Morning
(online, 29 March 2017)
<https://www.smh.com.au/business/workplace/digital-disruption-expected-to-make-legal-services-cheaper-20170327-gv7fhd.html>.
Georgina Mitchell, ‘I
Knew I Must be Making Mistakes’: Magistrate’s Tears in Court’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 22 November 2018)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/i-knew-i-must-be-making-mistakes-magistrate-s-tears-in-court-20181122-p50hkt.html>.
Jerome Doraisamy,
‘Are Judges Succumbing to the ‘Seductive Power of
Procrastination’ with Writing Judgments?’,
Lawyers Weekly
(Web Page, 26 November 2018)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/wig-chamber/24523-are-judges-succumbing-to-the-seductive-power-of-procrastination-with-writing-judgments>.
Jane Donoghue, ‘The
Rise of Digital Justice: Courtroom Technology, Public Participation and Access
to Justice’
(2017) 80(6)
The Modern Law Review
Bathurst, ‘ADR, ODR
and AI-DR’ (n 52) 4.
NSW Budget Estimates
(Budget Paper No 3, 2018) ch 6.
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot?’ (n 10) 1114.
Waye (n 56) 222.
Lawchoice Australia
http://www.lawchoice.com.au
Waye (n 56) 230.
Legal Services
Commission of South Australia
<https://lsc.sa.gov.au
Heidi Pett and Colin
Cosier, ‘We’re all talking about the Centrelink debt controversy,
but what is ‘robodebt’
March 2017)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-03-03/centrelink-debt-controversy-what-is-robodebt/8317764>.
Robot Lawyer LISA
http://robotlawyerlisa.com/
is an acronym for Legal Intelligence Support Assistant. The company’s
website provides the following as their mission:
Focus on making access to legal
services cost effective, time saving, insightful and transparent for consumers
and businesses to
acquire their legal needs by using technology wherever
possible in the first instance before moving on to garner human lawyer support,
if at all necessary or desired.
Michael Legg,
‘Recognising a New Form of Legal Practice: Limited Scope Services’
Law Society of NSW Journal
Civil Procedure Act
See Bathurst, ‘ADR,
ODR and AI-DR’ (n 52).
For example,
South Wales Land and Environment Court.
For example, Federal
Court of Australia.
Bail applications are
commonly carried out by video in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
See ‘Technology
http://www.judiciary.gov.hk/en/crt_services/tech_crt.htm
‘The Victorian
Department of Justice and Web 2.0’, (Web Page, 31 December 2009) cited in
Tania Sourdin and Chinthaka
Liyanage, The Promise and Reality of Online Dispute
Resolution, in Australia, available at
<https://www.mediate.com/pdf/sourdin_liyanage.pdf>
483, (accessed 08 March
Procedure Act 2010
David Lewis and Allan
Clarke, ‘Two Lawyers, Three Days, and 44 Cases: Is Bush Court in the NT
the Fast Food of Justice?’,
(online, 16 February 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-02-16/background-briefing-northern-territory-bush-court/10817642>.
R v Sussex Justices;
Ex parte McCarthy
[1923] All ER Rep 233
[1924] 1 KB 256.
Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot?’ (n 10) 1124.
Law Society of New South
The Future of Law and Innovation in the
Profession: Commission of Inquiry
(at 28 March 2017) 37.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.7 MB)
PDF format (906 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter