URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2021/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vines, Prue --- "Review: Scholars Of Tort Law (Hart Publishing, 2019)" [2021] UNSWLawJlF 1; (2021) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 1
SCHOLARS OF TORT LAW
(HART PUBLISHING,
PRUE VINES*
Scholars of Tort Law
(James Goudkamp and
Donal Nolan (eds), Hart Publishing, 2019,‎ ISBN 978-1-50991-057-1)
This volume brings together some accounts of significant tort scholars. It is
an intriguing collection in that it does what I consider
to be the best form of
intellectual biography, including elements of the life that contributed to the
intellectual context of the
scholar while focusing on the impact and structure
of their work. This is a transatlantic common law volume focusing on United
(‘US’) and United Kingdom (‘UK’) scholars, but
Sir John Salmond and John Fleming introduce some (slightly)
antipodean flavour.
As Chapter One, written by the editors, recognises, it is extremely difficult
to measure the scholarly impact of any one scholar in
tort law. Are we to
measure the number of books sold? The number of citations by courts? The
influence on students? This latter seems
to be out. So a judgment has to be made
by taking into account a whole range of factors and coming to judgment. Goudkamp
suggest that their collection includes pioneers, consolidators and
iconoclasts, and also that it shows the ebb and flow of connection
between the
common law countries.
Benjamin Zipursky and John Goldberg discuss Thomas Cooley and Oliver Wendell
Holmes in Chapter Two. Cooley is less well known to those
outside the US than
Holmes, and it is interesting to see that Cooley was a proponent of the
‘wrongs-and-redress’ view
of torts which seems an early progenitor
of Zipursky and Goldberg’s civil recourse
This contrasts with
Holmes’ loss-based account. Both seem to have had a strong positivist view
that law and morals had to be
separated. Why Holmes is so much better known,
when he actually does not reflect the law of the time as well as Cooley is an
interesting
As is usual for Robert Stevens, he takes us on a hilarious romp through his
views. In this chapter, his subject is Sir Frederick Pollock.
entertaining read. It begins, ‘Nobody reads Pollock anymore. Nor should
There is less of the
scholar’s life in this chapter than in other chapters, although Stevens
describes it as ‘a great
life well lived in the law’ as an editor,
writer, and academic who spent little time actually in
Stevens’ focus is on
what Pollock got wrong – he was merely ‘descriptive’, he was
‘a truly terrible
It is hard to see
from Stevens’ account why Pollock would ever have been seen to be
influential, and yet Stevens argues that
his influence has been both
‘profound and ...
Pollock emphasised
negligence and Stevens refers to
as ‘that most
trivial of famous cases’
calls the development of negligence as the dominant tort ‘a
Pollock differed
from Holmes and Cooley in that he saw torts as a form of enforced morality and
from Salmond in that he attempted
to put all tort law under one principle, and,
according to Stevens, if this meant he had to ignore authority, he
There is not room in this
review to discuss the chapter further, but suffice it to say that it is very
much about Stevens’
Mark Lunney’s chapter on Sir John Salmond is next, which is fitting, as
Pollock and Salmond opposed each other as to whether
we should talk about tort
or torts. Salmond is unique, I think, as a real ‘colonial’ who, as a
New Zealander –
although he was British born and moved to New Zealand at
the age of 13 – had to (or felt he had to) convince the British that
was to be taken seriously as a legal scholar. Salmond’s influence was
largely through his text
Law of Torts
which came out first in New Zealand
in 1907, but under the imprint of a London
It was ‘effectively
self-published’.
wrote the first six editions, but it continued to be published for 70 years
after he died. Lunney writes that ‘Salmond’s
ability to capture the
law in a series of relatively short paragraphs was masterly’ and Lunney
notes that no less than 150
passages had been judicially
The success of the
book in the courts was significant, with American courts being the first non-New
Zealand courts to cite him in
Salmond’s career was as an academic for a while, but he became
Solicitor-General of New Zealand in 1910 and judge of the Supreme
Court of New
Zealand in 1920. He died in 1924.
Lunney discusses some of his doctrinal views. One of the most influential has
been his test for scope of employment in vicarious liability:
was within the course of employment if (apart from express authorisation) it was
a wrongful and unauthorised
of doing some act authorised by the
This is a very
characteristic example of Salmond’s ability ‘to capture an essence
from a morass of single examples’
which also partly accounts for his
text’s popularity with students and the
To me, the most
interesting part of the chapter is the section on the fact that Salmond was not
in England when he wrote his text.
Lunney argues that Salmond showed less
awareness of the issues raised by the need to apply common law throughout the
Empire than
Pollock did in developing an Indian Civil Code. Salmond’s text
did not cite New Zealand decisions. Lunney argues that Salmond
was in a cleft
stick in respect of this – if the private law was supposed to be the same
all over the Empire then citing New
Zealand examples would just be adding them
gratuitously to the propositions already stated. There may be an element of
cultural cringe
in this, but, as Lunney has noted in his
History of Tort Law
in Australia
antipodean common lawyers were more likely to see the common law as a
project shared across the Empire than a project in which British
lawyers ruled
and antipodean lawyers followed.
Chapter Five concerns Francis Bohlen, the Reporter for the first
Restatement of Torts
Restatement
’), so we are
returning to the US. Much of this chapter is taken up by the discussion of the
tests for breach and causation
in negligence and Bohlen’s role in their
development. Michael Green gives him credit for playing a critical role in
Hand’s test for the standard of care in
United States v Carroll
so beloved of law
and economics scholars in the US. Bohlen used ‘legal cause’ rather
than ‘proximate
In his work on
intentional torts, this included both factual cause and scope of liability. In
Restatement
in negligence his legal cause included the conduct being
a substantial factor in bringing about the harm, and he did not use scope
liability, but a test that there was ‘no rule of law relieving the actor
from liability because of the manner in which his
negligence has resulted in the
Green argues
that this was a mistake which led to continuing confusion in tort law, because
it was allowed to continue by Prosser
Restatement (Second) of Torts
Restatement (Second)
Donal Nolan’s excellent chapter on Sir Percy Winfield follows. As Nolan
says, he was arguably the most influential English tort
He continues to be
regularly cited by courts, read by students and legal practitioners. Winfield
was a career academic with a broad
reach, but his torts scholarship is the focus
of the chapter. Nolan divides it into three parts – articles on tort and
history, the monograph on
The Province of the Law of
Text-Book of the Law of
There is more
but these are the most significant. Winfield’s scholarly career began with
work on abuse of process but moved
to negligence and other torts quickly. His
historical articles are still well known and used. Nolan’s chapter shows
that Winfield’s
achievements as a scholar and researcher were largely made
against a deeply conservative background of scholars who did not share
breadth of engagement, and many of whom did no research. He argued for change in
the law, including for a tort of privacy, and
constantly strove to put the law
on a more rational footing. He was also unusual in the fact that as a UK scholar
many of his articles
were published in US and Canadian law journals and he
engaged in comparative law writing. Nolan reminds us of his engaging style
examples from his textbook which was written when he was a mature scholar and
therefore had a standing which allowed him to
be pithy, for example, ‘[it]
is the ill fate of public policy that, like a football, everybody kicks it
although it is essential
to the game’ and ‘[common] employment, that
galling pack upon the back of our
writings were often prescient, with reforms he advocated coming to pass many
years later, and Nolan attributes his
extraordinary success as a scholar partly
to the ‘basic foundation for his scholarly achievements, namely a profound
broad knowledge of the common law and its
Leon Green’s work is of great interest to contemporary tort scholars,
partly because of his passion for empowering the courts.
His fame as a realist,
who saw law as a practical, useful discipline, still resonates. Jenny Steele
sees his vision as ‘close
apocalyptic’.
Her view of
his prolific work highlights his objections to the
Restatement
based on specific groups of factually related cases. Steele is not convinced
that he was the duty-sceptic he is sometimes
painted as. He certainly objected
to the collapse of duty into breach. His pragmatism caused him to require that
there be limits
to duty, and his interest in processes meant that he sometimes
expressed his views about duty (or other matters) differently from
doctrinally-focused scholars. In fact he seems to have regarded duty as
fundamental to all torts, and that duty had a bigger
job to do than limit
liability. The breadth of factors he considers brings to mind the Australian
‘salient factors’ test
for duty of care in
negligence,
although that is
much more limited and opaque. She counters a number of charges against Green,
for example rejecting Goldberg’s
view of Green as a ‘cynical
instrumentalist’.
‘Rather, he thought tort law had emerged as a socially useful means of
protecting interests of individuals against the hurts
created by everyday
It could not
protect against all accidental harm and therefore whether the law would protect
in a particular situation always had
to be decided. Steele’s chapter is a
subtly argued, deeply scholarly one which is impossible to capture adequately in
a paragraph.
It is a masterly discussion of Green’s work.
William Prosser is one of the best known names in international tort law.
Prosser on Torts
Restatement (Second)
are the best known parts of his legacy, but there is
much more to him than that. In his chapter, Christopher Robinette reminds us
the number of times Prosser legitimated or introduced a new tort. His influence
on US tort law has obviously been profound. In
particular he strongly emphasised
social policy of a utilitarian form, but Robinette notes that Prosser did not
really see duty as
the engine of this in negligence, although he certainly saw
policy as one of the factors contributing to a final outcome of duty
Robinette says this
approach continues to be the majority rule in duty cases in the US. Bohlen
picked up the ‘utility of the
act’ factor in breach in the
Restatement
from Prosser,
and Prosser’s view of proximate cause has continued to be influential. He
was not a theoretician: ‘William Prosser hated
theory”’ and preferred to simplify the law by creating general
principles which could be applied by a
Robinette argues that
overall the results have been
disappointing.
By contrast, Guido Calabresi’s chapter on Fleming James Jr
(‘Jimmy’) is a very personal account of a fascinating
scholar who
was his teacher and friend. From a missionary background, Calabresi says James
was ‘brought up to believe that
a mission in life was essential to being a
decent person, and that furthering that mission was what life was all
although James was
secular in his orientation. His missions concerned the poor, the workers, and as
Calabresi says, this should have
led him to seek totally centralised social
insurance, but he also had a strong streak of concern about government control
that appears
to have held this
and he constantly focused
on ‘adequate care of the basic human needs of all our people’ by the
wide distribution of loss.
Calabresi suggests that he wrote articles ‘reading the cases to move their
meanings’ and that this contributed to James’
Calabresi also
acknowledges James’ influence on himself, particularly in relation to the
public nature of some tort law, deterrence
and the whole notion of bearing the
costs of accidents. Calabresi, of course, is deserving of a chapter himself.
And now we come to John Fleming, to whose work I have a connection as editor
and co-writer of the more current versions of his textbook.
Paul Mitchell
contributes this chapter and notes that ‘his work as a whole ... is
essentially agonistic’.
Fleming’s major work, his treatise on torts, is different from many others
in that it covers a wide range of jurisdictions,
while ostensibly from an
Australian perspective. His particular skill, somewhat like Salmond, was the
ability to write a pithy and
succinct account which is memorable and
distinctive. Mitchell suggests that Fleming’s German background may have
affected his
view of the doctrine of precedent, noting that he invoked a grand
historical narrative of torts, which could sometimes be used to
marginalise
precedents he didn’t like.
It is certainly true that Fleming would argue for ‘the better view’
quite forcefully; however, it is also notable how
rarely Fleming referred to
German law.
Patrick Atiyah also had an Australian connection, having a connection to the
Australian National University similar to Fleming’s.
Goudkamp’s chapter on Atiyah notes that his writings on tort took him up
to the 1990s. It is ironic to me that Atiyah’s
work on tort law, which was
notably socio-legal, is given a chapter when women whose work on tort law in the
same period was socio-legal
in the feminist form, is not. Here I am thinking of
scholars such Lucinda Finley, Joanne Conaghan, and Lesley Bender who wrote
extensively
on torts from a feminist perspective before the 1990s. It is true
that Atiyah’s work was groundbreaking, of course, and his
three major
works in tort law –
Vicarious Liability in the Law of
Compensation and the Law,
The Damages
significant things to say about the operation of the law of torts and its impact
on people and society.
The Damages Lottery
sought to change how tort law
operated by directing its argument at lay people. Although Goudkamp notes that
today’s tort theorists
take less note of Atiyah than they ought
it may be that the modern
theorists will realise their mistake shortly.
Paula Giliker provides the chapter on Tony Weir. She observes his powerful
work as tort lawyer, comparativist and translator, whose
‘pointed remarks
were fun to read’ as Lord Rodger
This ability to express
himself and provoke reactions in the reader was part of the charm of his work,
but as Weir said, it aimed
to ‘[dispel] the aura of inevitability which
the judgments themselves properly
This trait was of
fundamental importance in allowing him to critique longstanding rules, sometimes
from a comparative standpoint.
Giliker notes how good he was at case notes, an
art sometimes despised today, but which in his hands allowed pointed, compelling
arguments about the fundamental principles at issue. His translations were great
because he was a comparativist, so did not fall
into the trap of failing to
understand the lawyer’s need for context. His work as a translator alone
would have merited a chapter
in this book. Giliker does him justice, I think, in
recognising the comparativist who was a Eurosceptic, the wit with the
‘idiosyncratic
response to
He is sadly
The final chapter in the book, by Peter Cane, brings us up to date by
constructing a common law model and a civil law model of legal
scholarship. He
argues that the difference between them lies in their way of constructing the
relationship between law and fact.
He briefly brings us the history of the
common law from ‘irrational’ decision-making to jury trial to judge
decision-making,
a process of
keeping ‘“special facts” ... out of the black box’ to
allow outcomes and procedure to be addressed
separately.
The civil law from
the revival of Roman law in the 11
was a scholarly process done by academics, rather than a decision-making process
done by judges. These models affected
how legal scholarship was approached in
both systems. In the common law system, which abolished the writs in the
century and most civil juries in the 20
the textbook or treatise system developed with, in torts, the work of Pollock
and Salmond leading the way.
was now possible to ignore procedure and write of substantive law with a great
deal of freedom, before the hardening of the doctrine
of precedent made it more
difficult. Cane notes that in the late 20
century we saw the rise
of the new area of law, restitution, which did not fall neatly into the
contract/tort divide.
that the difference in freedom of analysis in the common law as opposed to civil
law scholarship is exemplified by this
development. The rise of interest in
‘coherence’ in common law doctrine mirrors an older focus on
coherence in civil
law scholars. Cane’s discussion reminds us that the
taxonomic debates in tort law are not new, and that sometimes the
position has been avoidance (for example, Holmes and Posner)
rather than engagement, because engagement is left to judges. He argues
this continues to be true for the corrective justice and rights theorists who
have no compunction in declaring a particular
decision to be
He suggests that they are
leaning towards a civil law model which gives scholars special prominence, but
most of all, that what we
see in our theorists is the revolving door of
‘generality and particularity, stability and change ... [they] can and
managed but can never be finally
This is a valuable book which, in using the lives of torts scholars and their
work, allows us to see the development of not only these
scholars, but torts
scholars and scholarship in general since the 19
century. All the
scholars are male. This is striking, even if one takes into account the
century and early 20
century’s almost
exclusively male population of scholars. In their introduction, the editors
acknowledge this and regret the
absence of female scholars in the selection.
Initially I was comfortable enough with that, with Winfield, Pollock, Salmond
on being clearly from the period when almost no women scholars were
working in tort law; but that is not true of Atiyah or even John
Significant women scholars of tort law who might fruitfully have been included
include Carol Harlow who was Atiyah’s
and Weir’s slightly younger
contemporary and did significant work on the crossover between administrative
law and tort law,
rather than tort law alone – which might be why she was
excluded. It might be that other women scholars of the 1960s and 1970s
scholars rather than torts scholars (for example,
Martha Chamallas, Lucinda
Finley etc) writing at the same time as Atiyah, Fleming and Weir. But I am fully
aware that choosing the
subject-scholars would always have been difficult.
Goudkamp and Nolan have pulled together an engaging set of chapters which
take us deep into not only the scholarship involved, but
also its evaluative
criteria. The editors’ characterisation of these scholars as a mixture of
pioneers, consolidators and iconoclasts
is accurate as well as enjoyable, and
points to the variation in these personal approaches to scholarship and the
extent to which
each of these approaches, or indeed personality types, offers
riches to tort scholarship that can continue to be mined by the current
future crop of torts students and scholars.
* Professor and Associate Dean (Education), Co-director Private Law Research
and Policy Group, UNSW.
1 John CP Goldberg and Benjamin C Zipursky, ‘Thomas McIntyre Cooley
(1824–1898) and Oliver Wendell Holmes (1841–1935):
American Tort Theory’ in James Goudkamp and Donal Nolan (eds),
of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 43, 44.
Robert Stevens, ‘Professor Sir
Frederick Pollock (1845–1937): Jurist as Mayfly’ in James Goudkamp
and Donal Nolan
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 75,
[1932] AC 562.
Goldberg and Zipursky (n 1) 85.
Ibid 82, 84.
See John Salmond,
The Law of Torts
(Stevens and Haynes, 1907).
Mark Lunney, ‘Professor Sir John
Salmond (1862–1924): An Englishman Abroad’ in James Goudkamp and
Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 103,
See Mark Lunney,
History of Tort Law
in Australia 1901–1945
(Cambridge University Press, 2017)
159 F 2d 169
Michael D Green, ‘Professor
Francis Hermann Bohlen (1868–1942)’ in James Goudkamp and Donal
Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 133, 152.
Ibid 153, quoting American Law
Restatement of Torts
(1934) § 431.
Donal Nolan, ‘Professor Sir Percy
Winfield (1878–1953)’ in James Goudkamp and Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 165, 165.
(Cambridge University Press, 1931).
(Sweet & Maxwell, 5
Nolan (n 20) 199.
Jenny Steele, ‘Professor Leon
Green (1888–1979): Word Magic and the Regenerative Power of Law’ in
James Goudkamp
and Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
Publishing, 2019) 203, 207.
Sullivan v Moody; Thompson v
(2001) 207 CLR 562
, 579 [49].
Steele (n 25) 223.
William L Prosser,
Handbook of the
Law of Torts
(West Publishing, 1941).
Christopher J Robinette,
‘Professor William Lloyd Prosser (1898–1972)’ in James
Goudkamp and Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing,
2019) 229, 234.
Guido Calabresi, ‘Professor
Fleming James Jr (1904–1981)’ in James Goudkamp and Donal Nolan
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 259, 260.
Paul Mitchell, ‘Professor John G
Fleming (1919–1997): “A Sense of Fluidity”’ in James
Goudkamp and
Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing,
2019) 289, 289.
(Butterworths, 1967).
(Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1980).
(Hart Publishing, 1997).
James Goudkamp, ‘Professor
Patrick Atiyah (1931–2018)’ in James Goudkamp and Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 309, 334.
Paula Giliker, ‘Mr Tony Weir
(1936–2011)’ in James Goudkamp and Donal Nolan (eds),
Scholars of
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 337, 339.
Peter Cane, ‘Law, Fact and
Process in Common Law Tort Scholarship’ in James Goudkamp and Donal Nolan
Scholars of Tort Law
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 359, 364–5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (68.4 KB)
PDF format (283 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter