URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2008/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Finn, Jeremy --- "Innovation and Continuity: Statute Law of the Saorstat Eireann/Irish Free State 1922-1948" [2008] AULegHist 5; (2008) 12(1) Legal History 51
Innovation and Continuity: Statute Law of the Saorstat Eireann / Irish Free State 1922-1948
I Introduction
II A Sketch of the Historical Context
III The Lawmaking Process
IV The Use of Overseas Precedents for Legislation
V Drawing on British Legislation
A Northern Ireland
VI IFS Legislation and a Dominions Influence
Constitution
B Electoral Law for the New State
D Privy Council
E Government Structure
VII Mixed British Dominions and Others
VIII Other External Influences
IX Some Legislative Examples
X Continuity of Nationalist Legislation after 1932
XI Law Reform
A Private Member’s Bills and Law Reform
B Fianna Fail and Law Reform
C Costello and the 1941 Bill
XII Conclusion
Innovation and Continuity: Statute Law of the Saorstat
Eireann / Irish Free State 1922-1948
JEREMY FINN
I Introduction
Modern Irish legal history is a largely unstudied field. This paper explores
aspects of the legislation of the Saorstat Eireann /
Irish Free State
(“IFS”) from its creation in 1922 to its departure from the
Commonwealth in 1948, particularly the patterns
of Irish use of precedents from
Britain and the other Dominions (especially Canada and Australia) in the initial
period of the setting
up of the IFS, in later legislation affecting appeals to
the Privy Council
and in the area of social legislation and law reform.
It is based on study of government files in the National Archives of Ireland,
particularly the records of the Justice Department, Attorney-General’s
Office and Parliamentary Draftsman’s Office, and
the reports of the
debates in the Oireachtas, the bicameral legislature composed of the Dail
Eireann and the Seanad Eireann
contends that although nationalist thinking, and political rivalry, affected the
pattern of legislation and law reform in the
Irish Free State, there is
nevertheless an underlying continuity in the drafting of legislation which
reflected a very substantial,
if frequently understated, use of English
precedents.
II A Sketch of the Historical
From 1922 to 1927 the Cumann na nGaedheal party, under WT Cosgrove, which had
accepted the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921, formed the
Government, though its Sinn
Fein opponents refused to attend the Oireachtas because they could only take
their seats by swearing
an oath which promised fidelity to the
In the absence of Sinn Fein
TDs the Labour party led the opposition. After the 1927 election, won by the
incumbent government, de
Valera’s Fianna Fail party, the successor to Sinn
Fein, returned to the Oireachtas. The Cumann na nGaedheal party was defeated
1932, and Fianna Fail ruled from then until 1948, though requiring minor party
support for most of that period.
Despite the vituperative tone of most Irish political debate, the policies of
the major parties were often quite similar. They disagreed
dominant issue of IFS political life - but the
disagreements were more about the tactics for obtaining a truly independent and
Ireland than about the goal itself. Other political differences did
exist – Fianna Fail was more committed to economic self-sufficiency
a more interventionist economic role for Government than were their main
opponents. It was also more directly influenced by
Roman Catholic religious and
social doctrine. Yet the overall tone of both major parties was strongly
nationalist but socially
conservative.
One measure of this
was the fairly consistent pattern of deliberate sexual discrimination by
officials and legislators over such
matters as jury service and
citizenship,
reflecting an
apparently widespread flouting of the constitutional equality of citizens:
“A few words in a
Constitution
do not wipe out the difference between the
sexes, either physical or mental or temperamental or
emotional.”
III The Lawmaking Process
The formal process of enacting legislation in the Oireachtas required a Bill
to go through five stages in the Dail, then four in the
Seanad. In the Dail, the
five stages were an introduction, the second stage where the principle of the
Bill could be debated, a third
or committee stage, followed by a fourth stage
where the report of the Committee was taken and further amendment was possible,
a final fifth stage where minor verbal amendment only could occur. In the
Seanad the later four steps were
Over the 26 years of its existence, the Irish legislature passed 1057
statutes, or around 40 a year. The largest number in any one
year was 62 in
1924, at a time when the machinery of the IFS was being created, and the
smallest 22 in 1944. McCracken suggests that
almost half of these were aimed at
economic issues or public finances; and about a third of these statutes dealt
with public and
constitutional affairs. The remainder dealt with social issues
or miscellanea.
Most government legislation was drafted by the Parliamentary Draftsman, whose
office came within the purview of the Attorney-General,
in the light of
departmental papers setting out what was wanted. In rare cases the Parliamentary
Draftsman was given, or took, a
freer hand. The Statutory Declarations Act 1938
resulted from a request from the Department of Industries and Commerce for new
legislation,
as false declarations in relation to unemployment assistance not
covered by the previous legislation which dated from 1835. However
its form was,
as the Parliamentary Draftsman stated, “his personal conception” of
the necessary Bill.
However not all Bills came from the Parliamentary Draftsman. A number of
important statutes dealing with the IFS’s external
–including those with Britain – were prepared by the Ministry of
External Affairs. In 1933, a very atypical
year, that Ministry was responsible
not only for “constitutional” bills relating to appeals to the Privy
Council and
the reservation of Bills by the Governor-General, but for seven
general bills, dealing with, amongst others, extradition, immunities
visiting members of foreign armed forces, the taking of evidence in the IFS for
use in foreign courts, the enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards and diplomatic
immunities.
The later two were
considered not to be urgent and could safely be delayed. However the Ministry
also pointed to the need to legislate
in compliance with international
conventions, instancing the 1931 Dangerous Drugs Convention, which would require
the current Dangerous
Drugs Bill to be amended “along the lines of the
Dangerous Drugs Act 1932 passed by the British Parliament”, and the
Merchant Shipping (International Labour Convention) Bill – in draft, and
two Merchant Shipping conventions. Both the later
were enacted in
IV The Use of Overseas Precedents for
Legislation
Under article 73 of the 1922 IFS constitution, all prior statute law which
was not inconsistent with the
Constitution
continued in force. Thus the vast
bulk of Irish law was, and for years continued to be, found in the British
statute book. While
most members of the Dail were undoubtedly eager to
distinguish the new state from the predecessor regime by re-writing the statute
book, pragmatism and circumstances dictated reliance on that inherited law.
These constraints affected the proponents, and the draftsmen, of legislation
in the new state. To copy, with minor amendments, British
legislation took
little in the way of resources, but to write legislation could be a major
undertaking. The result was, perhaps inevitably,
somewhat of a compromise, with
a number of statutes being essentially copied from British precedents, and
others independently drafted.
There was also a small number of important acts
which showed evidence of copying from the legislation of other Dominions, and a
where the drafting may have been influenced by the laws of other states.
It is with the interplay of these different elements that this paper is
primarily concerned. It has, of course, long been known that
the IFS government
drew on English statutes for some of its legislation. As long ago J L McCracken
could refer to the process thus:
“But in many instances the Oireachtas has adopted in whole or in part
enactments which the British parliament had already passed.
In some cases the
Irish acts follow quickly on the British, in others only after an interval of
years. Examples of this legislative
plagiarism occur all through the period
1922-1948.”
However no-one has yet considered either the full extent of the legislative
borrowing from Britain, nor to any great extent the use
of other overseas
precedents. Nor, most importantly, has there been discussion of the frequently
ambivalent or equivocal terms in
which resort to the use of British precedents
was described, justified or resisted. We may conveniently approach the issue by
at IFS legislation which was based in whole or part on overseas
precedents by looking in turn at the different sources.
V Drawing on British Legislation
A number of early IFS statutes were quite avowedly copied from comparable
British legislation. In many cases it is evident this was
done so that the Bills
could be prepared quickly. Thus when the Trade Loans (Guarantee) Bill 1924 was
largely copied from the Trade
Facilities Act 1921(Imp), the Parliamentary
Draftsman prepared the Bill in less than 24 hours
and the Bill was before the Dail
only a day later.
A similar departmental recommendation for use of a British precedent can be
found with the Oil in Navigable Waters Act 1925. In April
1924 the Department of
Industries and Commerce instructed the Parliamentary Draftsman that the Ministry
of Fisheries, the Dublin
Port and Docks Board and the Cork Harbour Commissioners
wanted a statute to prohibit ships discharging oil in navigable waters. The
Ministry requested the Draftsman prepare a Bill on the lines of the Oil in
Navigable Waters Act 1922 (Imp), which was considered
to be working
That request was
apparently never received by the Draftsman, but a repetition of the request on 8
November 1924 saw a Bill prepared
by 23 December, though not entirely following
the British precedent. It was rapidly passed by the Oireachtas.
We can contrast this with the extraordinarily sluggish pace of proceedings in
some cases where the use of derivative legislation was
rejected, as with
proposals for merchant shipping
legislation.
In 1924 it was
thought that probably the relevant British Acts remained in force, and that
provided time for preparation of new legislation.
Questions of legislative
competence were discussed for some years, and resolved by 1930. Still no Bill
eventuated – though
the Department of Industries and Commerce sought funds
to appoint a new legal adviser to prepare a Bill since the Parliamentary
was overcommitted. In 1939 leave was given to introduce a
comprehensive Merchant Shipping
but none was forthcoming.
As late as 1947 the Minister could argue that there had not yet been time to
prepare a comprehensive measure.
From the earliest years however political imperatives could affect the use,
or proposed use, of British precedents. The Interpretation
Bill 1923 was
promoted by the Parliamentary Draftsman (even though Hugh Kennedy, the then
Attorney-General, would have preferred
delay) on the twin bases that the
Interpretation Act 1889 (Imp) which the IFS had inherited was not up to date,
and that many officials
and members of the Oireachtas were not content with
definitions which depended on a British statute. The form of the Bill reflects
in one important respect the political controversy, since the Parliamentary
Draftsman’s draft included a definition of “Dominion”
included the IFS.
later deleted, though it is not clear at what point.
The Interpretation Act may also serve as an example of IFS legislation which
took the simplest form – that of simply re-defining
terms in British
statutes to fit the structure of the new state. Such legislation is not common,
something which may well have been
due to the influence of Hugh Kennedy, in his
brief term as Attorney-General, since it appears he was “always very
adoption of Acts, and insisted on complete re-enactment in every
The utility argument was still being made in the 1930s, though not always
successfully. When the issue of reciprocal enforcement
of maintenance orders
was raised in 1937 the Secretary of the Ministry for Justice suggested that
legislation copying the British
statute be prepared:
“I wonder whether it would be possible to arrange to have the Maintenance
Orders (Facilities for Enforcement Act) 1920 rewritten
in the P.D.s office, for
re-enactment as one of our own Acts. It would not take very long to do that, and
it would be a much neater
job that trying to adapt it by means of orders. I
imagine the Executive Council and the Dail would pass it without any comment as
a routine “reconstruction”
However such a solution was not adopted
“I am rather inclined to think that it would be better either to fit these
Maintenance Orders into a comprehensive scheme
of legislation for the
reciprocal enforcement of judgments, or, if it is decided to treat it
separately, to follow the scheme of
the Extradition Bill rather than the form of
It appears nothing was done toward either option.
A Northern Ireland
There is little indication of direct copying from Northern Ireland
legislation – not even when this might have been
appropriate.
However there is
archival evidence that a provision of the
Juries Act 1927
preventing a potential
juror to escape liability to serve by placing property in the name of his wife
was drawn from Northern Irish
The Juries Bill in draft
stage also proposed to modify the civil jury provisions, providing for civil
juries of seven, with a 5-2
verdict sufficing. This was seen as a compromise
between the earlier IFS law (which had 12 jurors, with a 9-3 majority verdict)
“the recommendation on page 46 of the Northern Report [for a civil
jury of six] ...The object of the change is simply to relieve
the public as far
as possible.”
However this
proposal was apparently later dropped from the Bill, for reasons unknown.
In at least one instance the influence of Northern Ireland legislation may
have been overstated. Norma Dawson has noted the similarities
of the National
Monuments Act 1926 (NI) and the National Monuments Act 1930, and the fact each
protected objects of archaeological
interest, and implies the 1930 IFS statute
was largely modelled on that of Northern
It is true there was
some borrowing of provisions from the 1926 Northern Ireland Act, and from
earlier British law, but there was
also a limitation on the export of artworks
(apparently taken from Italian
More importantly, the
Irish Bill, which began as a draft Bill prepared in the Department of Finance
based on existing legislation
in Great Britain and in Northern Ireland, was
substantially re-written by the Parliamentary Draftsman because he considered
the Ancient
Monuments Protection Act 1882 (Imp), on which the Northern Ireland
Act had been modelled, had been very poorly
Only a single example of IFS law adopting Scots law was found, in the Juries
Protection Act 1929. This was designed in large part
to limit the opportunities
for republican sympathisers to put pressure on jurors, by reducing the extent of
disclosure of jury panels
and of juror’s names, and to reduce the
likelihood of jury disagreements by bringing in 9-3 majority
and passed only after
prolonged and bitter debate. The bill’s promoters within the Ministry of
Justice advanced a range of
precedents as part of the case for majority
“It is perhaps of interest here to note that under the Scotch system
– and it will be remembered that Scots law has been
greatly admired
– the jury consists of fifteen persons. The prosecutor and the accused
have each five peremptory challenges.
The verdict is by their majority returned
viva voce by the foreman. It is understood that in France the jury consists of
A majority carries the verdict. In American states the practice varies:
in some a unanimous verdict is required and not in
When the Bill was introduced in the Dail, James Fitzgerald-Kenney, the
Minister for Justice, claimed that the limitation on publication
of jury panels
simply returned to the position of the 17
century and brought Irish
law back into line with existing English
He went on to argue
that, except in the countries with an English-style jury system, majority
verdicts were standard.
The Bill was vehemently attacked by Eamonn de Valera, on the grounds both
that it was coercive legislation of a kind regularly passed
for Ireland by the
British Parliament, and on the basis that the unanimity of jury verdicts was an
essential element of the liberty
of the subject. He did not, however, point to
the English origins of that
though Government
speakers did not hesitate to call attention to the reliance of opposition
arguments on “British
tradition”.
The Act was
passed, initially for two years only, but was continued in 1931.
VI IFS Legislation and a Dominions
The basic, if much resented, constitutional reality of the IFS was the
acceptance in the Treaty that the IFS was to be a Dominion,
on the same basis as
Canada. Given that, it was inevitable that drafters of the constitution and of
legislation to create the structure
of the new state should have studied, and
drawn from, Dominion models – as did their critics.
A The 1922 Constitution
There were lengthy, and at times bitter, debates on the
Constitution
IFS. The development of that
Constitution
has been recounted at length by other
but little attention has
been paid to the diversity of sources of information drawn on by the framers of
Constitution
and, to a much lesser extent, by their critics. Canadian law
and practice was inevitably most commonly discussed, though references
African and Australian precedents and history were
Although the debates on the
Constitution
Bill only rarely ranged outside
Dominions and American practice, the drafters of the
Constitution
investigated the law of a much wider range of nations, and indeed collected 18
constitutions which were later printed for the
However that document
appears to have been rarely used in the debates on the draft
Constitution
references to specific overseas provisions were generally to those appearing in
a shorter document containing copies of the
Canadian, South African and
Australian constitutions.
Constitution
adopted did have a number of novel features which clearly
marked it out from the other
although some such as
extern ministers were little used in
The Labour members of
the Dail had sought the inclusion of articles stating socialist economic
principles, but did not press these
in the face of Government reluctance to
include any unnecessary matters which might be
The result was an
underlying continuation of much English constitutional practice. The Government
had frequently to defend itself
against allegations it proposed too great a
degree of continuing subjection to Britain, and could on occasions challenge
the basis the Canadian equivalence would give, in practice, a high
degree of autonomy to mould institutions as it might
However the Government
was not ready to concede it should be bound by the views of the other Dominions.
When Gavan Duffy opposed
fixity of constitutional provisions relating to
Dominion status on the grounds that a future Imperial Conference would bring to
end any possibility of a British veto of Dominion legislation, President
Cosgrave rejoined tartly:
“Now, I do not want any Dominion Statesman to tell me what this Nation
requires. And I think the majority of this Dáil
do not require any
education from Dominion Ministers as to what their duties and responsibilities
are in this Dáil.”
One feature of the new
Constitution
was the inclusion of provision for
binding referenda on Bills passed by the Oireachtas. This was explained as
derived from overseas
use and particularly suited to IFS conditions:
“The referendum is a feature of the Constitutions of Australia, America
and Switzerland. It is, we consider, particularly suited
to this country, in the
circumstances of the time. It will impress on the people more forcibly perhaps
than would otherwise be the
case that henceforth the law of this country is
their law, is the creature of their will, is something which they can make,
or repeal, as it seems best to
B Electoral Law for the New State
The settling of the constitution left the method of voting to be determined
by a separate Electoral Act, which was passed in 1923.
That Act adopted a form
of so-called proportional representation – in fact the use of the single
transferable vote and multi-member
constituencies – which had earlier been
proposed in the 1914 Home Rule Bill (in the belief it would lessen Sinn
electoral success)
and then included in the Government of Ireland Act
The lack of originality was commented on by Edward Darrel Figgis who
suggested that the Government should have enquired into practices
overseas and
selected the best precedents:
“This Bill... is practically neglectful of very considerable advances that
have been made in many parts of the world, and it
is practically a gathering
together, a mere codification of the existing English law, with some slight
changes, none of which are
of a very material
This was disingenuous. Considerable attention had been paid to possible
overseas models – including some European precedents.
Indeed the overseas
examples had been canvassed by Figgis himself in a seven page memorandum which
set out the franchise rules (under
headings of age, sex, citizenship, education,
residence and property) for Britain, Canada and Australia (including their
constituent
states or provinces) and New Zealand, as well as for the USA, a wide
range of European countries, some Latin American states, Turkey
It is curious that
despite the relatively frequent references in constitutional debates to South
African experience, neither Figgis
nor any other would-be draftsman mentioned
the law of South Africa or its constituent elements.
Figgis’s electoral memorandum was not the only document indicating
possible overseas models. The Judiciary Committee which considered
the new Court
system was presented with a document on the courts systems of Australasia
prepared by a local barrister, A F Blood,
at the request of the Bar
which set out in
summary fashion the position in New South Wales with accompanying notes on the
other Australasian jurisdiction.
Blood appended a briefer and very general
statement of the American system. No specific use was made of this material has
been traced.
Equally unsuccessful, if more persistent, were calls for the creation of
“courts of arbitration and conciliation”, with
a motion in favour of
them being passed by the Seanad in 1924. The debates on that motion indicate
that most Senators had some idea
of the nature and operation of the courts in
Australia and New Zealand,
indeed Senator O’Farrell cited at great length the views of Sir John
Findlay, former Attorney-General of New Zealand, on
the operation of the Court
of Arbitration in that country.
However the government did not create any such permanent courts, although it did
at times create an ad hoc court to deal with particular
disputes. Renewed calls
for such a system were made in the war years, when trade unions were
significantly more active. These were
rejected, on the less than convincing
ground that such an institution could work only when submission to arbitration
was compulsory,
and that system had been tried and found a failure in Australia
and New Zealand.
The Government
did give ground some years later, with promises of a Labour Court with
arbitration and conciliation
D Privy Council
The question of possible appeals from the IFS courts to the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council was hotly debated in the 1922
Constitution
debate. It had not been expressly provided for in the Treaty. The Government
took the position, challenged by a range of deputies,
that Article 66 of the
Constitution
, which purported to make the decisions of the Supreme Court final
and conclusive, was still consistent with a proviso allowing appeals
leave to the Privy Council on the basis this was effectively the Canadian
This pragmatic
approach, appears at least in part, to have been influenced by a lengthy
memorandum prepared for the
Constitution
Committee by one of its secretaries,
Ronald Mortished, on appeals to the Privy Council, and Dominion concerns about
the quality of
Judicial Committee decisions, in which Mortished emphasised the
fact that South Africa had “practically abolished” appeals
Privy Council and urged that the IFS insist from the outset that the Irish
Supreme Court’s decisions be
It was later said that
the IFS representatives had accepted the proviso on the basis that they would
have the ability to do as South
Africa had done and effectively choke off
Appeals to the Privy Council were finally abolished by the
Constitution
(Amendment No
22) Act 1933
, passed after the Statute of Westminster gave the
Dominions adopting it control of their own legislation. Both in the Oireachtas
and in the Department of External Affairs the advocates of termination of
appeals paid considerable attention to the examples of
Canada and South Africa.
The Irish archives contain various materials from the 1920s, including press
cuttings from Canadian papers,
though only extreme partisans could have
concluded that the
Manitoba Free Press
(a proponent of Dominion
self-determination) was “the most influential paper in
legislation to formally abolish the proviso and terminate appeals completely was
first mooted in 1930, the draft Bill prepared,
and the memoranda on which it was
based, have not a single reference to the Dominion
equivalents.
E Government Structure
One of the debates which produced the most frequent, and most informed,
references to Dominion law and practice was that on the Ministers
Secretaries Bill 1923 which, in the words of the President, set forth the
Departments of Government and allocated the various
services under the control
of each Minister, placed those Departments on a statutory basis and indicated
the distribution of State
An opposition member,
Major Cooper, was quick to suggest that the new IFS government was more
elaborate, and expensive, than its
Dominion counterparts. In a lengthy speech he
argued the IFS executive was unduly large and expensive, illustrating his
with data as to the size of Cabinets in Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa and – in comparisons not often made in
the Dail - Germany,
Denmark, Sweden and Norway and
Switzerland.
Cooper’s references to the Dominions and their number of Ministers drew
a vigorous response from Hugh Kennedy, the Attorney-General,
who quite correctly
pointed out that in Australia and Canada a proper comparison of the scale of
executive government would require
the state or provincial governments to be
taken into account.
The Minister
of External Affairs was also quick to suggest the IFS was spending
proportionately far less than the other
VII Mixed British Dominions and
There were some Deputies who looked to Dominion precedents for administrative
or governmental models, as with a suggestion that the
Commonwealth Bank in
Australia might be copied in the
and that that the IFS
should extend its territorial limit for fisheries, following extensions by the
United States of America and
More serious references
to overseas law come in the debates over the Agricultural Credit Bill 1927,
where two Senators referred
to the existence of chattel mortgages in Australia,
New Zealand and America, while suggesting the differences in farming practice
were such that they would not necessarily be effective in Irish
conditions.
One of the relatively few pieces of legislation to attract widespread
reference to the law and practice of a number of overseas jurisdictions
Children’s Allowances Act 1944, where both in the Dail and the Seanad
speakers adverted to the way similar schemes
operated in New Zealand, Australia
and various European states.
Senator O’Sullivan even drew on his personal experiences of visiting New
Zealand in 1938, though his claim to personal friendship
with the Prime Minister
of New Zealand may be suspect given his identification of him as
“Martin” (rather than Michael)
An even broader range of comparators featured in the debate on the
Electricity Supply Bill 1927. As Minister McGilligan informed the
Dail, he had
toured USA and Canada recently and had there had the opportunity to learn about
different models of organising large-scale
schemes of supply of electricity to
large areas. That had focussed attention on the need to look at the best models
to use for control
and supervision of large state-owned services, with the
Government looking at German, Swedish and South African
The Swedish comparison
was examined, not entirely cogently, by other
In addition the
Minister indicated in the Committee stage of provisions for auditing of the new
Board’s accounts that he had
contemplated using a Canadian statute as a
A feature of the Bill not emphasised by the Minister in the legislative
debates was that an important provision of the Bill, the composition
governing Board, was deliberately copied from a British
Oddly enough an
opposition Deputy urged the Minister to look more closely at the British
provision as a model;
unaware how close in nature were the two provisions.
VIII Other External Influences
In many ways the most interesting feature of the 1937
Constitution
extent to which de Valera had attempted to marry the republican and nationalist
elements of his ideology with elements of
Roman Catholic doctrine. The
Constitution
contained elaborate provisions concerning personal and family
rights and duties, education, private property and social policy which
derived from a series of papal encyclicals of 1929 to 1931 and followed:
“...closely, in form and content, a synthesis of Catholic social
principles known as The Social Code, prepared by the International
Social Studies, Malines,
The Seanad re-established under that
Constitution
was also intended to
provide for “vocational” representation, another idea derived
substantially from Catholic thinking.
As critics of the draft
Constitution
prophesied, the concept of vocational representation proved a failure, with the
Seanad becoming largely the preserve of less
successful members of the principal
political parties.
It has been said, misleadingly, that the Censorship of Publications Act 1929
was inspired by the Catholic
but in fact the statute
reflected a wide religious and social
It appears that the
same is true of the earlier Censorship of Films Act 1923, as that statute was
prompted by a joint delegation
of representatives from the Irish Vigilance
Association, the Catholic Church in Ireland, the Episcopalian Church in Ireland
and Presbyterian
It is notable that
proponents of censorship of films had looked widely for precedents, as in the
second stage debate Gavan Duffy
referred to a Bavarian law barring children
under 18 from all but approved
IX Some Legislative Examples
As some of the examples above would indicate, some IFS legislation had a
rather syncretistic
character, drawing on a range of sources. The
remarkably complete archival record for the drafting of one statute - the
and Commercial Property (Protection) Bill 1923 - demonstrates this in
detail. While discussion on legislation to protect intellectual
property had
apparently begun in 1922, the drafting of a bill began only in late 1923. The
Attorney-General, Hugh Kennedy asked the
Parliamentary Draftsman, Arthur
Matheson, to prepare a Bill to cover patents, trade marks and designs, with
instructions to prepare
legislation drawn on the lines of existing British and
Canadian law:
“I send you also herewith a copy of the Canadian Consolidation Act passed
this year which contains some useful suggestions.
I have already handed you two
copies of the British Consolidation Acts 1907 and
He then went on to ask Matheson to consider a more ambitious project - a
single statute covering “the whole subject of the protection
of Industrial
and Commercial Property, including Patents, Copyright, Trade Marks and Designs
(each dealt with in a separate chapter)”
with a single Registrar or
Controller of Industrial and Commercial Property.
The trade marks provisions were to be prepared by adapting the British Trade
Mark Acts 1905 and 1919, with the addition of stringent
rules to prevent the
registration or use of marks of an Irish character for use on goods not produced
in Ireland.
Matheson responded four weeks later by sending a draft Bill covering, as
suggested, all areas of intellectual property. He drew particular
attention to
certain clauses, saying that “section 43 relating to inventions affecting
instruments of war... is copied from
the corresponding British section”
while the designs section “contains all the provisions of the Patents and
Acts 1905 and 1919 which relate exclusively to designs” .
Similarly, the trade marks section replicated the British Acts 1905
with amendments such as “section” 116 which related to the misuse of
trade marks indicative of Irish origin.
The British provisions for state use of
patents or designs, and those relating to “Colonial and International
arrangements”
had also been copied. The copyright sections were largely
the British Act of 1911, with some amendments to fit the new IFS governmental
structure. Matheson concluded his commentary by noting that Part VIII of the
draft Bill:
“...is a re-enactment of two sections of the Fine Arts Copyright Act 1862,
the Musical (Summary Proceedings) Act 1902, and
the Musical Copyright Act
1906...; “...the only object of including those provisions in this Bill is
to get the whole law of
lying around in old British
The following year the Bill, though still evidently largely derived from the
British statutes, underwent some drafting changes, notably
‘self-governing dominions” rather than British dominions:
“I have however thought it well to insert a statement that the last
mentioned expression includes Great Britain. I should add
that Saorstat Eireann
is necessarily not included in the expression ‘British Dominions’,
because the application of the
Bill to Saorstat Eireann is quite distinct from
its application to any other country whether British or
It was in this form that the Bill was introduced, as the Industrial and
Commercial Property (Protection) Bill 1925, with Patrick McGilligan,
Minister for Industries and Commerce downplaying the extent of the repetition of
British law somewhat by describing the new systems
as “leaning on”
the British law or practice but making much of the new matters such as the
protection of “Irish”
The Bill was not
extensively debated at the conclusion of the second stage three days later, when
it was referred to a select committee
of the Dail, a motion later reversed in
favour of the Bill being referred to a joint committee of both
That Joint Committee
proposed a large number of amendments – many apparently of limited impact
– but the Minister made
the tactical decision to withdraw the Bill so that
a fresh bill incorporating most of these proposals could be introduced later in
The Minister incorporated these into a ministry draft which was sent to the
Parliamentary Draftsman with the optimistic suggestion
that the matter had now
been so simplified that a Bill could be prepared in a few days. The Draftsman
produced a Bill in three weeks,
and it was this version, still in substance essentially the 1923 Bill, which was
enacted a few months later, after some debate, in
both Dail and Seanad of both
the proposed 16 year term of patent protection, and of unsuccessful moves to
modify the Bill to promote
printing of works in Ireland, an amendment rejected
because the Bill would not then comply with the Berne
Convention.
This mixture of British and Dominion precedent and Kennedy’s own vision
of a single statute thus created an unusual and distinctive
statute. We may note
that the drafting was not entirely successful, as the Oireachtas was required to
pass in haste the Copyright
Preservation Act 1929 to preserve the interests of
authors after the Privy Council ruled that once the IFS became a dominion the
X Continuity of Nationalist Legislation after
While in many cases the advent of the Fianna Fail government in 1932 marked
an increase in nationalist symbolism – such as the
increased use of Irish
in official documents – and much more overt governmental attacks on
“British” law and institutions,
this was certainly far from
In some minor matters IFS legislators continued to copy British laws when
convenient. In others, the Fianna Fail government did no
more than bring to
fruition legislative projects which had been under lengthy consideration and
development in official circles for
The prime example of this
is a trilogy of 1935 statutes affecting nationality and citizenship issues, the
Aliens Act 1935, the Citizenship
Act 1935 and the Nationality
It would appear that official consideration of the need for, and possible
shape of, citizenship legislation began at the latest in
November 1924, as the
Secretary for Justice then noted in a Minute to the Secretary for External
Affairs that a Citizenship Bill
would be needed, and it was expected that
information would be required as to the law and practice of the other Dominions,
New Zealand and South Africa which had not then adopted Part II of
the (British) Citizenship and Status of Alien Act 1914. The Secretary
requested a copy of the Canadian House of Commons debates of 19 January 1913 on
the Canadian law.
Australian and other Dominion legislation was acquired from the respective High
Commissioners in London over the next few
months – including a copy of a
proposed South African Bill on the status of
The issue then apparently was placed in the “too hard” basket for
some years, with enquiries from the Department of Finance
(which was concerned
to be able to determine entitlements to old age pensions) drawing the response
that “the citizenship business
bristles with difficulties and it is not
particularly urgent” and no progress could be expected for some
Paralleling this issue was the related question of control of immigration and
“aliens”. For some years the only basis
for governmental control of
inward migration was the Aliens Restriction Act 1914 (Imp), a very early wartime
measure, and the Aliens
Order 1925 made pursuant to it. Under that order an
alien could not enter IFS for employment purposes unless the prospective
had a licence from Department of Industry and
By 1930, officials had
determined there was a need for a brief statute to complement the intended
legislation on nationality and
citizenship.
At some point there
was some official research into the British, Canadian and American
naturalization laws, with the view being taken
that the IFS should follow the
British system where there remained a discretion to refuse
citizenship.
A Bill was finally
prepared in 1934, and enacted the following year. The statute was more elaborate
than had been proposed in 1930,
with some limited resort to the British law. The
Parliamentary Draftsman noted that the provisions relating:
“...to change of names by aliens will require further consideration. The
British enactments on which the instructions for those
provisions were based
appear to me to be quite unworkable”.
He had drafted his own version of the desired clauses – essentially
concerned with aliens trading under assumed names without
permission to do so
– but was not sure the result was
satisfactory.
However, perhaps
predictably, the focus of the debate in the Dail was on the very pointed
definition of “alien” as being
someone other than a citizen of the
IFS – and thus according British or Dominion citizens the same legal
status as those from
outside the Commonwealth. This was strongly criticised by a
range of opposition deputies, but the Fianna Fail majority ensured the
Bill’s passage.
As noted, the Aliens Act was seen as a complement to the Citizenship Act
1935. The problem for the Fianna Fail government was that
it desired a very
restrictive definition of citizenship distinguishing the citizens of the IFS
from other British subjects, but at
the 1930 Imperial Conference the preceding
Government had effectively conceded, after strongly arguing the contrary, that
abide by the Conference decisions that citizenship laws be broadly
similar throughout the Commonwealth, and that no Dominion had
the right to
legislate separately as it saw
The Dail had then accepted
the Conference report.
Eventually the IFS government accepted that it could not argue that the 1934
Bill was consistent with the decisions of the 1930 conference,
and that it would
be impossible to maintain that the IFS had indicated a reservation to those
conclusions given the absence of any
documentary record of such
reservations.
It then argued,
unconvincingly, that the 1930 conference had nevertheless recognised that
Dominions were free to legislate as they
pleased without regard to the law of
other parts of the
Commonwealth.
Predictably the
Citizenship Bill 1934 drew concerned comment from the British Government on the
basis of its inconsistency with the
decisions of the 1930
conference.
Although there was considerable political discussion of the apparent change
of stance by the Government in 1934-1935, some of the
criticism was more than a
little disingenuous. The archival record makes it clear that prior to the 1930
Conference the Government
was planning a citizenship bill which would later make
it possible to discriminate against British subjects in the same way as it
discriminate against the nationals of a non-Commonwealth country, although at
least in part the aim was to be able to discriminate
against businesses not
controlled by Irish citizens.
The Secretary for Justice took the view that an overt provision allowing
discrimination might backfire, given the number of Irish
men and women who lived
and worked in Britain, but was confident a similar result could be achieved less
openly by use of suitable
requirements.
XI Law Reform
The story of law reform in the IFS is largely of delay and frustration. Many
reforms were suggested – almost entirely for legislation
based on overseas
initiatives. However Governmental backing was essential – and rare. It was
particularly hard to come by after
1932, since the Fianna Fail government
resisted most proposals for a range of reasons, ideological, political and
Even where official support was strong reform could take decades. Few areas
of law reform seem to have generated such universal support
as the need for
modification of the criminal law in relation to infanticide. Britain had acted
in 1922 to provide a limited defence
to murder, and reform had been suggested by
Irish officials as early as 1928 and again in
The Chief State
Solicitor repeatedly asked, following cases in 1944, 1945 and 1947 where women
had been charged with murder for killing
recently-born children, whether, and
when, adoption of the British Act would occur. He was informed in 1944 that a
Bill was being
prepared. That occurred in 1947, only for the bill to be delayed
briefly pending proposed broader legislation on mental
before passage in
Ministerial disinterest, fear of political disadvantage or reluctance to
offend the Catholic church blocked other changes. The outstanding
example of the
latter ground is with the stonewalling of repeated calls for a statute dealing
with adoption of children.
at least five occasions between 1939 and 1948 members of the legislature asked
whether the Minister for Justice would bring in
an Adoption Act, with the
English Act of 1926 twice being suggested as a suitable model, and North
American precedents suggested
An Adoption Act was
finally passed in 1952.
Even those delays seem minor compared to the glacial pace of action on
proposals to create a Public Trustee Office which could deal
with wills and
Proposals for such
an Office had been made at least in 1913 when the Dublin Chamber of Commerce
passed a Resolution in favour of
the creation of a Public Trustee on the English
model, after hearing an address by the Public Trustee for England. Further calls
for such an institution were made in the 1920s and 1930s, invoking the success
of the institution in New Zealand, Australia and England.
Only in 1944 did it
gain the formal backing of the Ministry for Justice, and in 1945 there was
Government decision that the Minister
for Justice examine the case for the
establishment of a Public Trustee on the “English or Dominion
model”. Opponents
in the banking community, and within the Government,
managed to prevent any legislation at that time, and indeed the issue appears
have receded until the 1960s.
These were not the only occasions in which Dominions models influenced the
debate. John Costello had in 1938 suggested the creation
of an Arbitration Board
for determining issues as to salaries and conditions for the civil service,
based on the position in England.
As might be thought politically necessary for
an opposition MP, Costello was quick to say that he did not “advocate a
imitation of the British model”, but given the closely analogous
positions of the British and the Irish civil services, it
was only sensible to
look to the British model.
The Minister of Finance, Sean MacEntee, was predictably hostile to the proposal,
but he founded much of his criticism on a study
by the International Labour
Organisation which had considered arbitration systems in Europe and in Britain
and the Dominions. He
then noted that since the ILO study New Zealand had
abandoned the system of compulsory
arbitration;
unaware that it had been subsequently reinstated.
A Private Member’s Bills and Law
In some other jurisdictions private member’s bills could be an
effective source of law
This was not so in
the IFS, perhaps in part due to the limited amount of legislative time for
private members’ bills.
It may also have been that there was no culture of striving for law reform (as
opposed to the more common political manoeuvring)
by such means in a Dail where
many TDs rarely spoke.
the few significant private members Bills to reach the statute book was the
Moneylenders Act 1933, a bill unusual as having
been supported by the Dail under
both the Cosgrove government and its Fianna Fail
A second and important private member’s bill was the Legitimacy Act
1931, a success the more significant because of the unusual
connection between
its passage and that of the Illegitimate Children (Affiliation Orders) Act 1930.
Both statutes largely followed
English legislation. The affiliation orders
measure was introduced and passed as a Government measure, having as its
principal feature
the institution of a process whereby the father of an
illegitimate child could be made liable to pay money for the support of the
The Legitimacy Act, by
contrast, was introduced as a private deputy’s bill, and had as its
principal feature the legitimation
of children whose parents married subsequent
to its birth. The divergence of parliamentary history is curious, since for
years proponents of reform and officials alike saw the two measures as
largely complementary ways to reduce the incidence of neglected
children and, at
one remove, diminish the apparent social evil of
prostitution.
Thus in 1924 the Rev Richard Devane SJ had sent to the Ministry for Justice a
memorandum on law “dealing with social moral problems”,
in which he
advocated the raising of the age of consent, the introduction of affiliation
orders for mothers of illegitimate children
and the adoption in the IFS of the
Legitimacy Bill then before the British parliament. Contemporary official
documents indicate that
both affiliation orders and the copying of the
Legitimacy Bill were desirable and planned
and later in 1924
the Secretary for Justice could assure a senator that measures to deal with
prostitution would be introduced including,
along with raising the age of
consent for sexual activity and increasing the penalties for brothel keeping,
both an Affiliation Orders
Bill and legislation for legitimation of children by
the subsequent marriage of the
For the next two years reformers continued to pressure the Minister for
Justice on the issue, with enquiries about the likely date
on which an
Affiliation Orders Bill and a “Legitimacy” Bill would be introduced
being followed, once a commitment to
the former (if not the latter) had been
made by the Minister in 1925, by reproachful reminders about the failure to act
on the earlier
For reasons unknown any progress on the Bills stalled, and nothing of
significance occurred until 1929. In that year the Affiliation
Orders Bill 1929
(enacted as the Illegitimate Children (Maintenance Orders) Act 1930) was
introduced as a Government measure and
received broad support from all parties,
although opposition members readily indicated they thought it long
By contrast the government showed no signs of action on the Legitimacy Bill,
and in December an opposition Deputy, Patrick Little,
sought leave to introduce
a Bill on the subject.
second stage was not reached until March 1930, and the Minister for Justice,
James FitzGerald-Kenney gave the Bill a hostile
reception, focussing on a number
of drafting errors created by it largely replicating the British Act of 1926
without regard to the
somewhat different Irish statutory
However the
principle of legitimation by subsequent marriage (founded as it was on canon
law) was widely supported by speakers in
the Dail, and even the Minister was
forced to accept that the Bill should proceed, although he maintained that
Little had forestalled
a better-drafted Government Bill. The Bill then proceeded
slowly through the Dail and the Seanad, although a number of amendments
had been prepared by the Parliamentary Draftsman’s office were made at
Committee stage.
A further curiosity is the
Trustee Act 1931
, which allowed the replacement of
trustees where the nominated trustee was the office-holder of an office not
persisting in the IFS.
This appears on the surface to have been an example of
back-bench law reform, as the Bill was introduced into the Seanad by Senator
Brown, and apparently adopted in the Dail as a Government
However the text of the
1931 Bill is very close indeed, though in re-ordered form, to that of a draft
Bill prepared for the Attorney-General
by the Parliamentary Draftsman in January
1931, a fact which suggests the Senator may have had some degree of official
in the preparation of his
B Fianna Fail and Law Reform
The languid pace of law reform slowed drastically under the Fianna Fail
government. There is an interesting, if self-serving, comment
on the lack of
success of law reform in the IFS, and some of its causes, in a letter written in
1940 by the then Minister for Justice
Attorney-General
, which was
prompted by a speech advocating law reform by Justice
The Minister
indicated that a committee of four judges had been asked a year earlier to
prepare an informal report on murder trials,
but no report had been received.
Similarly a Committee on rent restriction had been set up several years earlier,
with a request
it report as a matter of urgency. Mr Justice Black, appointed
when a barrister as chair of the Committee, had admitted he was the
cause of the
delay since he had not found the time to do the work.
More generally, the Minister was of the view that bills which should have
enjoyed wide support could get caught up in unrelated controversies,
therefore reluctant to introduce any technical law reform bills unless certain
that the opposition would support them.
This may explain lack of action on
proposals which had been made by governmental Commissions for reform of both
bankruptcy law and
the law governing care in public institutions of the mentally
The timing of the Minister’s letter is also significant, as the advent
of the Second World War was seen as justifying inaction
on all but the most
politically neutral matters. A rare exception was the Registration of Title Bill
1941, based on the report of
a committee comprising the President of the High
Court, a barrister, a solicitor and the Registrar of Titles. The Minister for
suggested to the Dail that:
“... Deputies will not, in the circumstances, complain that consideration
of the reforms proposed by the committee has not
been postponed until the end of
the present emergency”.
However there was also, very clearly, a partisan aspect to the lack of
progress with law reform. The arguments as to lack of resources
could be, and
were, countered by pointing to the ready availability of bills drafted by the
English Law Reform Committee which could
be readily adapted for Ireland. Use of
these models was often advocated, most notably by John Costello, the leading
opposition spokesman
on legal matters during Fianna Fail’s period in
office, and later himself Taoiseach.
C Costello and the 1941 Bill
The politics of law reform, and the mindsets of those involved, are revealed
by the protracted discussion, in the legislature and
outside it, on John
Costello’s Law of Torts (Miscellaneous Reforms) Bill 1941, introduced into
the Dail as a private member’s
Bill. The Bill was very much modelled on
the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935 (Imp), which allowed
apportionment
of damages between tortfeasors – a change which Costello
wished to extend to defamation cases - and also exempted a husband
liability for both pre-marriage debts of the wife and post-marriage torts by
wife. The Bill passed its second stage in the Dail
and was later reported back
without amendment by a Select Committee.
Costello’s speech at the second stage was in significant part devoted
not to this Bill alone but to encouraging the creation
of a permanent law reform
committee and to other desirable amendments included in the English legislation
but not in his Bill. He
also referred to other areas where law reform was
overdue, including infanticide, adoption, the law of arbitration,
family maintenance, modernisation of both bankruptcy law and
the Companies Act, making provision for the estate of a person dying
negligence of another to recover funeral
amendments to the
Workmen’s Compensation Act to increase the amounts recoverable by infant
dependants of the deceased, and
the need to address the unsatisfactory position
of a childless widow whose husband had died
Costello then came to the politically vital question of the degree to which
law reform in the IFS might draw on British proposals
for reform as outlined in
the Reports of the Law Reform Committee – something he saw as both
necessary and efficient:
I do not advocate here or elsewhere that we should slavishly follow British
legislation in everything they pass—far from it—but
I do say that
where there are matters which are common to this country and England, it is
desirable that our procedure in law should,
so far as our own requirements
permit, be much the same and that even the very wording of the statutes which
deal with situations
common to this country and England should be as closely
To this he added the classic “textbook” argument that it was to
the advantage of Irish litigants and lawyers alike that
the legislation of the
IFS be kept sufficiently similar to that of England that English textbooks and
decisions could be relied on
Costello acknowledged that the Minister for Justice and his Ministry had been
preoccupied with other matters and law reform had had
a low priority. The
Minister, Gerry Boland, was quick to claim that the Ministry had been busy with
other matters, that there had
been no clear calls for reform from other
agencies, and that it had been his understanding that no Bills of this type
would be introduced
during “this present emergency” (that is, for
the duration of the War).
was however ready to see the Bill go to a Select Committee for further
consideration. Boland’s support for the Bill would
appear to have been
genuine, insofar as contemporary departmental correspondence indicated he was
concerned the Bill might draw opposition
as not being part of an orderly process
of law reform.
Certainly the
officials had little concerns with Costello’s Bill as it stood. A
memorandum prepared for the Minister in November
was quite supportive of the
Bill’s passage:
“...[E]xcept for one Section, the Bill is copied word for word from an
English “Law Reform” Act of 1935 ...the
Parliamentary Draftsman says
that the drafting, being for the most part a copy of the English statute, is
satisfactory subject to
some minor amendments which could be inserted at the
Committee stage.”
Costello was later to acknowledge that the relevant provisions of the English
Act were not ideal, but he had thought adoption of it
would be politically
advantageous:
“Had I been left to myself I would have endeavoured to draft a Bill making
the Bill clearer than it is in the British Bill.
I felt however that when I
introduced the Bill into the Dail that I would have a better chance of getting a
hearing if I could point
to the fact that it was merely a copy of an English
Bill which had carried out similar Reforms[sic] some years before than if I
endeavoured
to draft a Bill in accordance with my own
Costello’s Bill was reported on, apparently favourably, by the
Committee to which it was referred but, in view of the Committee’s
the Bill was withdrawn, a move apparently having the general agreement of the
However, progress on
the Bill was limited. Costello and government officials corresponded, in
desultory fashion, over the bill in
1943 and 1944, and progress went as far as
the preparation of a draft Bill in
The issue was raised
again in 1947, when the Minister for Justice was asked replied that the reform
was of the kind that would be
best examined by a Law Reform Committee, and as
the establishment of such a body was “under active consideration”,
Bill had been deferred.
In the result the core of Costello’s original Bill does not appear to have
come back before the Dail until 1950, by which time
Costello was Taoiseach.
Costello was not alone in recommending adoption of English reforms. In 1948
George Gavan Duffy, then President of the High Court,
could suggest to Costello
that nine-tenths of the English Law Reform Committee proposals could be adopted
en bloc, although Gavan
Duffy was apparently at least equally interested in a
re-statement of case law on the lines of the American
Restatement
of the same changes were recommended in a public speech by Justice
and by Irish legal
XII Conclusion
The Irish Free State was to some extent a paradoxical state. The elements of
revolutionary nationalism – and its highly divisive
political effects -
were largely balanced by the unifying elements of social conservatism, itself
largely due to the influence of
the Catholic and other churches. There was, in
counterpoint to the nationalist element, a great continuity of economic, social
cultural links with Britain. The IFS was also not a rich state, and
resources for governmental action were limited – both materially
terms of governmental willingness to push controversial policies through the
Oireachtas. The legislation of the IFS reflects
these contrary elements. There
were some statutes which show a high degree of local initiative –
particularly de Valera’s
1937 constitution – and others which show a
careful selection from arrange of overseas precedents, such as the 1922
Constitution
and electoral law. Dominion precedents were, perhaps naturally,
important here. Nationalist policies inspired other important legislation,
with the citizenship and immigration provisions of the 1930s, legislation which
is important for showing a continuity of policy
under governments of different
However to focus on these landmark statutes is to understate the continuing
and most important stream of statutes which were modelled
on contemporary
British legislation. Reliance on these precedents – however ironic such
reliance by nationalist politicians
may appear to the outside observer –
was sensible both in terms of consistency with the inherited law of the IFS and
the resources
that would have been required if all statutes had been
independently drafted. Yet, as evident in the discussion of law reform, there
was considerable resistance to many reform proposals based on British, or
occasionally other Dominion, law. Political factors explain
some of the lack of
action – particularly where Fianna Fail was less than eager to countenance
controversial Bills and the
leading proponents of reform were its political
opponents. In other cases where there was a greater consensus on the need for
reform or amendment of the law, there might still be very considerable
delay in the preparation of the necessary legislation. Any
appraisal of law
reform in the IFS must consider the extent to which these factors affected
developments – or their absence.
It is possible a similar enquiry might
shed light on legal change in other jurisdictions.
If we focus on the narrower question of the statute law actually enacted by
the IFS, we must consider both the occasional radical
legal changes –
usually inspired in some fashion by nationalist aims – which might
nevertheless draw on Dominion precedents
and the more numerous statutes which in
form and substance continued to draw on British law. This latter has perhaps
been understated
or imperfectly understood by other writers. Both aspects are
important and require study. To appreciate the nature and content of
legislation, we must look the interplay of continuity and change, not at either
in isolation.
Professor of Law, University
of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Except for a brief period
1936-1937, between the abolition of the original Seanad and the creation of a
somewhat different version
under the 1937
Constitution
An oath “...which the
anti-Treatyites untruthfully labelled the ‘Oath of Allegiance’ in a
marvellous lie of silence
that has become institutionalized in Irish popular
culture”: Tom Garvin,
1922: The Birth of Irish Democracy
Gill and MacMillan, 1996), p17.
Maurice Manning
(U Toronto Press 1971), pp 8-9. Eunan O’Halpin
“Politics and the State”, in J R Hill (ed)
A New History of
(OUP, 2003) vol 7, p116 points to the laying of foundations for
later social welfare reforms by the Cumann na nGaedhael party in
the 1920s, but
also to its “equanimity” in the face of social problems it believed
it had no resources to address. Compare
Brian Girvin “The
Republicanization of Irish Society 1932-1948”, in J R Hill (ed), op cit,
vol 7, pp137-38.
For an overview see Mary
Cullen, “Women, emancipation and politics 1860-1984”, in J R Hill
(ed), op cit n3, vol 7, pp868-877.
Brian Girvin’s essay in the same
volume has pointed to the feminist criticism of the 1937
Constitution
“The Republicanization of Irish Society 1932-1948” in J R Hill,
Dail Debates
column 489, 15 February 1927. The speaker was Kevin O’Higgins, then
Minister for Justice!
See J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP 1958), p124.
McCracken, op cit n 5,
See documents in A-Gs Office
files AGO/2000/10 1784 SR 032/38 Statutory Declarations Legislation, National
Archives of Ireland (hereafter
A-G’s Office file
SR4/128 17/33 Bills to be promoted by Dept of External Affairs, NAI.
There were other cases
where the government was required to legislate to ensure compliance with
international obligations, see A
G Donaldson
Some Comparative Aspects of
(Durham NC, Duke University Press, 1957) p 103.
J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP, 1958), p176.
Matheson to John
O’Byrne (A-G), 19 June 1924 in File 2000/22/0094 - 41/1924 Trade Loans,
It was introduced on 20
June 1924; for its antecedents see
Debates, volume 7, column 3006,
25 June 1924.
See correspondence in File
2000/22/00217 5/1926 Oil in Navigable Waters, NAI. The Parliamentary
Draftsman’s official diary
for 1924 records that he “Received
instructions to draft British Oil in Navigable Waters” on 8 November 1924,
on that bill for parts of six days over the next six weeks. See
Parliamentary Draftsman’s Office Diary 1924, File 2001/49/69,
This account is principally
based on the documents in file 2001/49/05 1931 Merchant Shipping Bill, NAI.
Debates volume
75, 26 April 1939.
Debates, Volume
108, column2192, 20 November, 1947.
See documents in NAI file
2002/22/0050/46 Interpretation Bill 1923.
Matheson to John
O’Byrne (Attorney-General) 17 July 1924 in file 2001/49/05 1931 Merchant
Shipping Bill, NAI.
S A Roche to P P
O’Donoghue, 20 July 1937, in file AGO/2000/10 0119 SR 193/25 (193/25A)
Maintenance Orders (Facilities for
Enforcement) Act 1920, NAI.
O’Donoghue to Roche,
21 August 1937, in file AGO/2000/10 0119 SR 193/25 (193/25A) Maintenance Orders
(Facilities for Enforcement)
Act 1920, NAI.
See the discussion of the
Legitimacy Act below, part 11(a) and fn 122 below.
“Memorandum to
accompany Departmental Rough Draft of the Juries Bill 1925”, in File
AGO/2000/10 0477 SR 001/31 1927
, NAI; compare
Juries Act 1927
“Memorandum to
accompany Departmental Rough Draft of the Juries Bill 1925”, in File
AGO/2000/10 0477 SR 001/31 1927
Norma Dawson “The
Giant’s Causeway case: property law in Ireland 1845-1995” in Norma
Dawson, Desmond Greer and
Peter Ingram (eds)
“One Hundred and Fifty
Years of Irish Law
(SLS Legal Publications (NI) and Round Hall Sweet &
Maxwell, Dublin, 1996), p255.
Dail Debates
volume 32, column 247 (24 October 1929).
See Matheson to Costello 22
November 1928, in File 2000/22/0350-2/1930 National Monuments Bill, NAI.
A majority of a 15-juror
panel (in line with Scots practice in criminal cases) had been suggested
earlier, but the proposal for
15-juror panels was dropped because they could not
be accommodated in the existing courthouses: see correspondence in file
AGO/2000/10-0477-0475
SR001/31 Juries Protection Bill, NAI.
See memorandum for
Executive Council, 23 April 1929, in file AGO/2000/10-0477-0475 SR001/31 Juries
Protection Bill, NAI.
Dail Debates
29, column 1553, 8 May 1929.
Dail Debates
29, column 1557, 8 May 1929.
Dail Debates
29, columns 1562-63, 8 May 1929.
Dail Debates
30, column 1018, 6 June 1929.
See for example JGS
MacNeill “Thoughts on the
Constitution
of the IFS” (1923) 5
series) 52; Brian Farrell “The Drafting of the
Constitution
” (1970) 5 Irish Jurist (NS) 115, 343 and
(1971) 6 Irish
Jurist (NS) 111
, 345; Brian Farrell “The Drafting of the IFS
Constitution
”; Thomas Towey “Hugh Kennedy and the Constitutional
Development of the Irish Free State” (1977) 12 Irish Jurist
For example, Mr R Wilson,
Debates, volume 1, column 563, 21 September 1922; Professor Magennis
Debates, volume 1, column 767, 26 September 1922 and George Gavan
Debates volume 1 columns 1417-1418, 10 October 1922.
Constitution
of the Irish Free State
(London, George Allen & Unwin,
1932), p 78.
For example, Kevin
Debates, volume 1, column 759, 26 September 1922.
John M Regan
The Irish Counter-revolution 1922-1936
(Gill & McMillan,
Dublin 1999) suggests at p139 that this was originally prepared by pro-Treaty
politicians in anticipation of
the Dail being convoked.
A G Donaldson
Comparative Aspects of Irish Law
(Durham NC, Duke University Press, 1957),
Basil Chubb
The Politics
of the Irish
Constitution
(Institute of Public Administration, Dublin,
1991), p12.
volume 1, columns 753-755,
26 September 1922.
This was clearly the view
of a leading figure, Hugh Kennedy, see Thomas Towey “Hugh Kennedy and the
Constitutional Development
of the Irish Free State” (1977) 12 Irish Jurist
(NS) 355. This analysis is, I suggest, more convincing than the suggestion
John M Regan
The Irish Counter-revolution 1922-1936
(Gill & McMillan,
Dublin 1999), p311 that “...overt co-operation with Britain and the other
Commonwealth dominions, though
electorally unremunerative and even on occasion
damaging, was for them [Cosgrove’s government] part of the process of
establishing
national respectability after the fall from grace in 1922.”
Debates, volume
1, column 545, 21 September 1922.
Kevin O’Higgins,
Debates, vol 1 columns 1210-1211, 5 October 1922. This view of the
sources of the referendum provisions is adopted by Alfred Donaldson
Comparative Aspects of Irish Law
(Durham NC, Duke University Press, 1957),
p145. Other writers have suggested that that the IFS model drew more on European
see J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of
Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(London, OUP, 1958) p 9 (noting that referenda had
been advocated by a Sinn Fein newspaper in 1919) and Leo Kohn,
Constitution
of the Irish Free State
(London, George Allen & Unwin,
1932), p238.
Michael Laffan
Resurrection of Ireland: The Sinn Fein Party 1916-1923
(Cambridge UP, 1999),
J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP, 1958) p67. It is however doubtful that the choice of this model was made
without real debate, as is alleged by Nicholas Mansergh
The Irish Free State:
its Government and Politic
” (London, George Allen & Unwin, 1934),
Debates, volume
2, column 436, 3 January 1923.
See documents in file
2002/22/0016 - 12 Electoral Bill 1923, NAI. These include a letter from F
McCarthy to the Minister of Local
Government, 13 September 1922 to which a
memorandum from Figgis was stated to be attached. The attachment has not
survived, but another
archival collection, file 2002/14/1022 The Electoral Bill
1923 contains an unsigned and unattributed carbon copy of a “Memorandum
matters affecting the preparation of the present Franchise Bill” which
would appear to be Figgis’s 1922 memorandum.
See also Department of
Constitution
Committee 1922 file
Correspondence and memorandum
concerning the Franchise in other countries, NAI. Various correspondents
supplied a very eclectic range
of material for consideration by the
Constitution
Committee, see Department of Taioseach
Constitution
Committee 1922, file
“Memorandum on the
Constitution
of the Courts and Judiciary etc of the
Australian Commonwealth and of New Zealand” 7 December 1922, in File
SR4/128 11/28 Judiciary
Committee, NAI.
volume 2 column 355ff, 20 December 1923, and volume 2, column 341ff, 15 January
volume 2, columns 347-49, 15 January 1924.
See Sean MacEntee,
Debates, volume 25, column 2286-92, 7 August 1941.
Debates, volume
101, columns 2292-3, 25 June 1946.
Debates, volume
1, columns 1401-1416, 10 October 1922.
See Department of Taioseach
Constitution
Committee 1922, file
Appeals to Privy Council, NAI.
Kevin Higgins,
Debates, volume 6, column 399, 24 February 1926.
Secretary Dept of External
Affairs to A-G, 29 March 1926, in file SR4/128 214/25 Canadian Courts and
Appeals to PC, NAI. The Canadian
parallel was the subject of remark by other
obervers, too, see for example CGM, Jr "Abolition of Appeal to the Judicial
of the Privy Council by Canada and the Irish Free State" Virginia Law
Review, Vol 22, No 3 (Jan 1936),pp 342-349. I am indebted to
the (anonymous)
referee for drawing this note to my attention.
Matheson to McDumphy, 12
November 1930, in file 2000/22/0542 45/1933
Constitution
Amendment (PC) Bill
1933, NAI. Unfortunately there is no such complete archival record for the
Constitution
(Amendment No
22) Act 1933
which was prepared by the Parliamentary
Draftsman for the Department of External Affairs. See memoranda Matheson to
A-G, 6 July
1932 and Matheson to A-G 26 October 1933 and draft Bill in file
2000/22/0542 45/1933
Constitution
Amendment (PC) Bill 1933, NAI.
Debates, volume
5, column 916, 16 November 1923. It has been described as the “...most
important piece of public service legislation
passed in independent
Ireland” Eunan O’Halpin “Politics and the State”, in J R
A New History of Ireland
(OUP, 2003) vol 7, p111.
Major Cooper,
Debates, volume 5, column 943-45, 16 November 1923.
Debates, volume
5, column 1399, 5 December 1923.
Debates, volume
5, column 916, 16 November 1923.
Debates, volume 2, column 486, 4 January 1923.
Debates, volume
36 columns 857-858 (Mr Wolfe TD) 3 December 1930; other speakers pointed out
that international law did not then
recognise such unilateral extensions.
Senate Debates
8, column 1478 and column 1495, 18 May 1927.
See for example in the
introductory speech at the second stage by Sean Lemass (curiously since he was
Minister of Industry and Commerce,
the Minister in charge of the Bill)
, vol 92, columns 24-27 (23 November 1943); James Larkin, junior,
Dail Debates
, vol 92, columns 123-124 (23 November 1943);
Dail Debates
, vol 92, columns 172-173 (24 November 1943);
Roderick Connolly
Dail Debates
, vol 92, columns 184-186 (24 November
Seanad Debates, Vol 25,
columns 505-506 (14 January 1944). Curiously, a modern author attributes the
legislation solely to European
models, without acknowledging the Australasian
precedent: M Cousins
The Birth of Social Welfare
(Dublin, Four Courts Press, 2003), pp6-7. There were other
occasions, though not many, where legislators referred to their own experience
of other jurisdictions. We find, for example, in the debates on the Betting Bill
1926 Senator Parkinson and Senator Sir Bryan Mahon
drawing on their personal
experience of the organisation and regulation (or otherwise) of gambling in New
York and in India, respectively.
Seanad Debates
, volume 7 column 897 (9
July 1926) and volume 7 column 937 (7 July 1926), respectively. Mahon went on to
refer to information he
had received second hand about the position in New
Zealand (see column 938).
Debates, volume
18, columns 1894-1908, 15 March 1927.
See for example Mr Hewat,
Debates, volume 18, column 1992, 16 March 1927.
Debates, volume 19, column 643, 31 March 1927.
See memorandum of drafting
instructions by Minister of Industries and Commerce in file 2000/22/0240 27/1927
Electricity (Supply)
Bill 1927, NAI. The British model was the Electricity
(Supply) Act 1926 (Imp), s1.
volume 18, columns 1994-95, 16 March 1927.
Vincent Grogan
“Toward the New
Constitution
”, in Francis McManus (ed)
of the Great Test 1926-1939
(Dublin, Mercier Press, 1967), p171. For the
nationalist and republican ideology, see Ronan Fanning “Mr De Valera
constitution” in B Farrell (ed)
De Valera’s Constitution
(Dublin, Gill and MacMillan 1988). The opposition parties were also
influenced by Catholic thinking, see David Thornley “The
Shirts” in Francis McManus, op cit, p49.
For the extent to which the
new Seanad was dominated by traditional politics, see J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP, 1958), pp149-151.
See J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP, 1958), p177.
Eunan O’Halpin
“Politics and the State”, in J R Hill (ed)
A New History of
(OUP, 2003) vol 7, p119.
See Memorandum “E
O’F” to “The Law Officer”, 13 February 1923 in File
2000/22/0027-23 Censorship of
Films Act, NAI.
Dail Debates
3 column 587, 3 May 1923.
This and succeeding
quotations are from a letter, Kennedy to Matheson 8 October 1923, in File
2000/22/0068-16/1924 Industrial and
Commercial Property Bill 1923, NAI.
This account, and all
quotations, are derived from memoranda in file 2000/22/0068-16/1924 Industrial
and Commercial Property Bill
See Matheson to John
O’Byrne (A-G) 28 October 1924, in file 2000/22/0068-16/1924 Industrial and
Commercial Property Bill 1923,
NAI. It is notable that much of the 1924 draft
Bill accompanying this letter was, quite literally, a “cut and
compilation of sections from the British Acts with at most minor
hand-written amendments.
Dail Debates
11, column 2307 ff (26 May 1925). For “leans on” see columns 2308
and 2310; for the Irish trade marks see columns
Dail Debates
12, column 847 (12 June 1925).
Dail Debates
16, column 1909 (1 July 1926).
See memorandum Matheson to
John Costello (A-G) 21 September 1926, File 2000/22/0068-16/1924 Industrial and
Commercial Property Bill
Dail Debates
vol 17, columns514 ff (7 December 1926) and volume 17 column 589 ff (8 December
1926). For the Berne convention discussions see
especially columns 554-568. For
the Seanad debates
Senate Debates
, volume 8, columns 540ff (11 March
1927). For the patent term discussion see columns 557-562; for the trade mark
issue see column
575 ff; for the copyright point see column 590ff and also
Senate Debates
, volume 8, columns 1107 ff (23 March 1927).
Alfred Gaston Donaldson
Some Comparative Aspects of Irish Law
(Durham NC, Duke University Press,
1957), p86. The Privy Council decision was
Performing Rights Society Ltd v
[1930] AC 377.
I differ here from the
views of J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail
Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP, 1958), pp197, who sees the 1935 legislation as a
specifically Fianna Fail measure.
As noted earlier, proposals
to abolish appeals to the Privy Council furnish a second example. See part 6(d)
Minute 10 November 1924, in
Department for Justice file H171/32 Citizenship Bill, NAI. Copies of some
Canadian legislation had been
procured the previous year, see Secretary External
Affairs to Secretary Home Affairs 2 May 1923 in the same file, but the reasons
for, and process of, the acquisition is not clear.
Secretary External Affairs
to Secretary of Justice 24 November 1924, in Department for Justice file H171/32
Citizenship Bill, NAI.
New Zealand and Newfoundland legislation was also
forwarded later in 1925.
Roche to Codling, 17
December 1926, in Department for Justice file H171/32 Citizenship Bill, NAI.
See Memorandum by Secretary
for Justice 24 June 1931, in file H266/93 Department of Justice Immigration Act
James Roche, Secretary for
Justice, to JJ Hearne (External Affairs), 11 September 1930, in File H266/93
Department of Justice Immigration
Act 1931, NAI. It must be said the problem was
not pressing. In 1937 it was said in the Dail that there were 7,990 registered
in the IFS, of whom 6,342 were American citizens. However many of these,
and many of the aliens from other countries, had been in
Ireland prior to 1922,
and thus had a claim to citizenship under the 1935 legislation or under
Constitution
. See statement by Patrick Ruttledge, Minister for Justice,
Debates, volume 66, columns 719-720, 14 April 1937.
See the (unfortunately not
dated) memorandum on Irish Citizenship and amendments in Department for Justice
file H171/32 Citizenship
Memo by Matheson 24 January
1935, in file 2000/22/0644 14/1935 Aliens Bill 1934.
Debates, volume 54, column 2520 ff, 14 February 1935.
For the IFS role in the
1930 Imperial Conference and the 1929 Committee on the Operation of Dominion
Legislation see D W Harkness
The Restless Dominion: The Irish Free State and
the British Commonwealth of Nations 1921-1931
(Macmillan, London, 1969) at
pp146-148 and 135 respectively.
Conor Maguire,
Attorney-General to Minister for External Affairs 18 August 1934, in file
AGO/2000/10 1721 SR 025/37 Citizenship
For example, de Valera,
Debates, volume 54, column 410, 28 November 1934.
J H Thomas, Secretary of
State for the Dominions 9 July 1934 IFS no 22; copy in file AGO/2000/10 1721 SR
025/37 Citizenship Bill
Hearne (External
Affairs) to Roche (Secretary for Justice), 9 September 1930, in Department for
Justice file H266/91 Irish Nationality
Act, NAI. It would appear that Germany,
at least, was concerned about the possibility of such discrimination. See the
the Aliens Restriction (Amendment) Bill 1931,
volume 14, column 509, 12 March 1931.
Roche (Secretary for
Justice) to Hearne (External Affairs) 11 September 1930, in Department for
Justice file H266/91 Irish Nationality
S A Roche to (Secretary
for Justice, 31 July 1928; in S A Roche to Minister for Justice 13 December
1932, in Department for Justice
file H266/61 Infanticide Bill. In addition, John
Costello advocated change in the Dail in 1941,
Dail Debates
column 1148, 3 December 1941, and see n130 below.
See documents in
Department for Justice file H266/61 Infanticide Bill, NAI.
See J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
(OUP, 1958), pp177.
Dail Debates
volume 75, column 329 (30 March 1939) and
Dail Debates
, volume 98, column
529 (2 December 1943) (both referring to the British Act of 1926);
, volume 100, column 2029 (30 April 1946);
Dail Debates
volume 101, column 2584 (27 June 1946) (referring to the law of Quebec and
California) and
Dail Debates
, volume 110, columns 640-641 (14 April
This account is based on
the documents in A-Gs Office files AGO/2000/10 3018 SR 011/44 Public Trustee,
NAI. For the establishment
of the Public Trustee in England see Polden
‘The Public Trustee in England 1906-1986’ 10
Journal of Legal
(1988) 228. There was in the IFS a Public Trustee who dealt with
certain forms of government property only. Its operation was apparently
controlled by the Public Trustee Rules 1927, SI No 14/1927.
An acerbic anonymous
memorandum prepared in the Ministry for Justice in 1947 (in A-Gs Office files
AGO/2000/10 3018 SR 011/44 Public
Trustee, NAI) stated that “...the
arguments against the proposal have been well summarized in the Memorandum that
was circulated
by the Minister of Finance dated 26 March 1945. They include,
with one omission, every argument that was used to obstruct the passage
Trustee Act
through the British Parliament. It is worth recording that
the argument that has been omitted is the appeal that was made to the
members by the Hon. Member for the Look Division of Staffordshire, who seconded
the motion for the rejection of the Second
reading of the Bill in the House of
Commons: ‘How could they expect the Irish language to be revived’ he
money was to be frittered away in the appointment of Public
Trustees’.”
volume 70, columns 1199, 30 March 1938.
volume 70, columns 1831-33, 8 April 1938.
See Jeremy Finn
“‘Should we not profit from such experiments when we could?’:
appeals to and use of Australasian
legislative precedents in debates in the
British Parliament 1858-1940”
(2007) 28 JLH 31
J L McCracken
Representative Government in Ireland: A study of Dail Eireann 1919-1948
OUP, 1958), pp 124-5.
McCracken, op cit n111,
volume 33, columns 679ff, 20 February 1930 and
Debates, volume 44,
columns 335ff, 21 October 1932.
Previous to this, a
father was of an illegitimate child could only be required to contribute to its
support where the child was
supported by the poor rate of a local body, and an
action for support was the appropriate officials, see Fitzgerald-Kenney,
Debates, volume 32, column 520, 30 October 1929.
See correspondence in
Ministry for Justice file H266/40 legislation Department of Justice File H213/2
Legitimacy Act for social
moral problems, NAI (reformers) and Department of
Justice File H213/2 Legitimacy Act (officials), NAI. A further indication is
that the latter file was apparently listed in the departmental index
under the heading “Immorality”.
See memoranda and
correspondence in Department of Justice File H213/2 Legitimacy Act, NAI.
Secretary for Justice to
Senator (Mrs) Wyse Power 15 October 1924, in Ministry for Justice file H266/40
legislation Department of
Justice File H213/2 Legitimacy Act for social moral
problems, NAI.
See correspondence in
file MoJ H266/40 Legislation for social moral problems, NAI.
volume 32, columns 520ff, 30 October 1929.
volume 32, column 2279, 6 December 1929.
volume 34, column 244, 27 March 1931.
See Memorandum Matheson
to Costello, 27 November 1930, file 2002/22/0397 13/1931 Legitimacy Bill 1929,
The second reading in
the Dail was moved by Fitzgerald-Kenney, the Minister for Justice, see
Debates, volume 39, 18 June 1931.See also memorandum by S A Roche, in
Department of Justice file H266/99
Trustee Act 1931
A copy of the January
1931 Bill is in Department of Justice file H266/99
Trustee Act 1931
H Boland to Kevin Haugh,
undated but April 1940, in A-Gs Office file AGO2000/10/1167 7/35 Justice
Meredith “Desirable Amelioration
of the Law”, NAI.
The speech, delivered on
18 April 1940 to the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland was
published later, see (1940)
74 ILT 108-09. A copy of the speech is in A-Gs
Office file AGO2000/10/1167 7/35 Justice Meredith “Desirable Amelioration
(1940) 6 Irish Jurist
volume 85, columns 1340, 10 December 1941.
Dail Debates
85, column 1140-1152, 3 December 1941.
Dail Debates
85, column 1139, 3 December 1941.
Dail Debates
85, column 1146, 3 December 1941.
Dail Debates
85, column 1146, 3 December 1941.
Dail Debates
85, columns 1150-52, 3 December 1941.
Memorandum for
Attorney-General, 26 November 1941, in A-Gs Office file AGO/2000/10 2935 SR
012/41 2221/53 Civil Liabilities Bill:
Proposal to amend the Law relating to
Torts, NAI.
Memorandum for
Attorney-General, 26 November 1941, in A-Gs Office file AGO/2000/10 2935 SR
012/41 2221/53 Civil Liabilities Bill:
Proposal to amend the Law relating to
Torts, NAI.
Costello to Dixon, 5
October 943, in A-Gs Office file AGO/2000/10 2935 SR 012/41 2221/53 Civil
Liabilities Bill: Proposal to amend
the Law relating to Torts, NAI.
Dail Debates
85, 4 February 1942.
See correspondence in
A-Gs Office file AGO/2000/10 2935 SR 012/41 2221/53 Civil Liabilities Bill:
Proposal to amend the Law relating
to Torts, NAI. The file contains a printed
version of the Tortfeasors Bill, with a printed date of “1944”
hand to “1945” and bearing the pencilled annotation
“ “borrowed from P.D[Parliamentary Draftsman]’s
volume 104, column 1207, 25 February 1947.
Gavan Duffy to Costello,
28 February 1948, in A-Gs Office file AGO/2000/10 2935 SR 012/41 2221/53 Civil
Liabilities Bill: Proposal
to amend the Law relating to Torts, NAI.
The speech, delivered on
18 April 1940 to the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland was
published later, see (1940)
74 ILT 108-09. A copy of the speech is in A-Gs
Office file AGO2000/10/1167 7/35 Justice Meredith “Desirable Amelioration
See (1937) 71 ILT 25;
(1935) 69 ILT 357, (1942) 76 ILT 1 and (1940) 6 Irish Jurist 17.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (355 KB)
PDF format (1.02 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter