URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2007/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thornton, Margaret --- "Otherness' on the Bench: How Merit Is Gendered" [2007] SydLawRw 16; (2007) 29(3) Sydney Law Review 391
‘Otherness’ on the Bench: How Merit is Gendered ♦
1. Introduction
2. Three Sites of Contest
A. ‘Woman “of merit” joins High Court’25
B. Lacking Testosterone
C. Gaoling of Chief Magistrate
3. The Masculinity of Merit
A. The Definitional Conundrum
B. Searching for Criteria
C. The Rhetoric of AA
4. The Fictive Feminine
5. Conclusion
‘Otherness’ on the Bench: How Merit is
MARGARET THORNTON
This paper will focus on the construction of merit as the key selection
criterion for judging. It will show how merit has been masculinised
social script so as to militate against the acceptance of women as judges. The
social construction of the feminine in
terms of disorder in the public sphere
fans doubts that women are appointable — certainly not in significant
numbers to the
most senior levels of the bench. It will be argued that merit,
far from being an objective criterion, operates as a rhetorical device
power. The paper will draw on media representations of women judges in three
recent Australian scenarios: an appointment
to the High Court; the appointment
of almost 50 percent women to Victorian benches; and the scapegoating of a
female chief magistrate
(resulting in imprisonment) in
Queensland.
1. Introduction
Despite the fact that the image of justice is feminised, the judge is
invariably masculinised. He, not she, is the paradigmatic embodiment
and rationality in the Western legal tradition. This idealised figure is
miraculously able to leave the particularity of
his sex and other
characteristics of identity, together with his life experiences, at the
courtroom door in order to carry out the
adjudicative role with impartiality. So
complete is the bifurcation between the objectivity of the judicial role and the
persona of the judge that legal positivism avers that [he] does not
make law but merely interprets it.
Depersonalisation and erasure of the self, construct the judge as little more
than a conduit for ‘right’ answers within
the adjudicative process.
While the objective-subjective split represents the nub of the existential
dilemma at the heart of adjudication,
concern tends to be raised only when the
judge is a woman, although it may also emerge when the judge is
In such cases, the
subjectivity of the embodied persona of the judge cannot be sloughed off. He or
she is then indelibly marked
as ‘Other’, an otherness that
necessarily taints the adjudicative role and renders the delivery of justice
problematic.
The appointment of women as judges, on which I focus, is a significant site
of contestation in the narrative regarding the entry of
women into the public
sphere. After more than a century of struggle to be ‘let in’ to the
legal profession, women now
represent more than 55 percent of law graduates and
30 percent of the legal profession in Australia, figures that are mirrored in
other parts of the Western world.
Nevertheless, once we peer behind the ostensibly progressivist veneer of
numerosity, a more complex story unfolds. The unruliness
of the feminine, it
would seem, can be kept at bay if women are retained in subordinate, managed or
‘manned’ positions.
Indeed, women lawyers are welcome when their
services can be effectively deployed to satisfy the needs of the global
‘new knowledge
economy’ by facilitating capital accumulation.
Employed lawyers, of whom a disproportionate 48 percent are
comport with the
proletarianisation theory of legal practice, which has been a corollary of the
corporatisation of law firms.
Lawyers are not identical to factory workers on a process line, but the practice
of assigning discrete segments of a case to clusters
of employed solicitors with
limited autonomy under the control of a senior partner underscores the aptness
of the analogy.
The percentage of women exercising autonomy and independent judgment in law
remains disproportionately low. The equation is a familiar
one throughout the
public sphere: the more authoritative the position, the more men and the fewer
women there are; the less authoritative
the position, the more women and the
fewer men. Sole practitioners and partners in law
barristers,
are notable examples of
the more authoritative positions. Judging is seen as the apex of the
professional legal practice pyramid
and it is the domain that has attracted the
most critical commentary because of the conventionally problematic relationship
authority and the feminine on which I elaborate.
The relationship between the legal profession and women as agents of legality
has been historically fraught with difficulty. In the
late 19th and early 20th
centuries, women struggled to enter the legal profession but met with resistance
everywhere.
Reasoned argument,
intellectual superiority and demonstrated ability on the part of women counted
for little within a supposed sphere
of rationality where masculinity had become
the primary indicium of worth.
The modern liberal story of linear progress for women lawyers continues to
stumble over positions involving the twin variables of
authority and
It is only in the last
few years that the inequitable profile of women in the judiciary has prompted
progressive governments to respond,
somewhat shame-facedly, to criticism and
appoint more women to the bench. The liberal state requires the most egregious
of discrimination to be addressed in order to maintain an appearance
of fairness and legitimacy.
In Australia, the primary catalyst for state intervention was the issue of
‘gender bias in the judiciary’, which received
intense scrutiny when
it was ‘discovered’ by the media in
Although well known to
feminist legal scholars, the phenomenon briefly became a matter of national
interest, featuring in major newspaper
stories across the
The most notorious
instance involved a remark in the course of a marital rape trial by Justice
Bollen, then a judge of the South
Australian Supreme Court, who expressed the
view that ‘a measure of rougher than usual handling’ was acceptable
part of a husband towards a wife who was less than willing to engage in
sexual intercourse.
The ensuing
furore compelled governments to review and justify their practices in making
judicial appointments. The Commonwealth
Parliament conducted an inquiry which
highlighted the lack of transparency in the
Some felt that
appointment to the judiciary was too late to effect remediation and the focus
should be directed to legal
Nevertheless, a
practice of appointing more women to State and federal courts was one strategy
that was initiated. What was not anticipated
by the reformers was the
significant backlash that the appointments would generate, particularly in
Victoria and Queensland where
the changes were most
Conservative governments favour affirmative action (‘AA’)
policies for ‘Benchmark
heterosexual, able-bodied, middle class men who espouse mainstream Christian
religious beliefs (if any) and right-of-centre
political views against whom
women and ‘Others’ are measured and invariably found wanting, for
Benchmark Men are the
normative agents of legality. Of course, such appointment
practices are not termed ‘AA’ as that term, with its pejorative
gloss, is reserved for the appointment of women and Others. They are assumed to
have been appointed by virtue of their sex or other
characteristic of identity
without regard to merit. It was the monopoly of Benchmark Men on the courts a
century ago that enabled
them to pronounce seriously and authoritatively that
only men were persons for the purpose of legal
Their social power
today permits them to continue to pronounce similarly that male judges are the
‘best people’ for the
job, despite both the empirical evidence
relating to women’s achievements within the legal profession and the
scientific evidence
demonstrating that ‘the mind has no
Nevertheless, a norm
has no meaning without an Other.
Thus years of diligent effort by feminist activists and their supporters to
change the gendered constitution of the judge has been
countered by the
perennial need to reinscribe the normativity of benchmark masculinity and the
otherness of the feminine within the
social script.
Drawing on the Australian experiences of change, I consider three recent
sites of contestation, all of which underscore the masculinity
of merit within
the adjudicative discourse. First, I consider the way the concept of merit
assumes centre-stage in the case of the
appointment of a woman judge,
particularly at the most authoritative level; the second site of contestation
relates to the assumption
that merit has been subverted when a critical mass of
women is appointed; the third scenario involves the resentment arising from
supposed disregard of the merit principle when a women was appointed chief
magistrate, which culminated in her being (wrongfully)
convicted and gaoled.
These examples all received extensive attention in the Australian print media
and show how negative representations of women judges
circulate within popular
discourse — both mirroring and constituting the woman judge in ways that
entrench social stereotypes.
These negative representations challenge not only
the liberal accounts of progress and equal treatment, but also the feminist
in gender justice. Such representations may also backlight the
contentious view held by some feminists that women judges speak in
‘different voice’,
complex issue that I do not propose to explore in this paper.
2. Three Sites of Contest
A. ‘Woman “of merit” joins High
Mary Gaudron was the first woman to be appointed to the High Court, a
position she occupied from 1987 until 2003. When she resigned,
anticipated that she would be replaced by another woman, but this was not to be.
At the time of the appointment of conservative
male judge, Dyson Heydon from New
South Wales, as her replacement, the media debate was more concerned with the
question of equitable
State representation than the under-representation of
women on the bench. However, Susan Crennan was appointed to the High Court
2005, also by the Liberal government of John Howard.
Justice Crennan had been appointed to the Federal Court 18 months before,
having practised as a barrister for 26 years, mainly in
the areas of commercial
and civil law, and having played a role in a number of high-profile fraud cases.
In addition, she was the
first woman to be appointed Chairman (her choice of
title) of the Victorian Bar Council, and the first woman to be appointed
of the male-dominated Australian Bar Association (not Women Lawyers,
Women Barristers or Feminist Lawyers). A prominent role in professional
associations assisted Justice Crennan in satisfying the informal criterion of
‘being known’.
Justice Crennan’s claim to merit was enhanced by being described as having
a brilliant legal mind and a capacity for hard work,
as well as being
temperamentally suited to the task. In addition, these criteria were
supplemented by descriptions of her as ‘black
‘balanced’, ‘without baggage’, ‘fiercely
independent’ and ‘not a
While Justice Crennan served as a Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commissioner in the early 1990s and was personally described
as supportive of
individual women, the dominant media representation was of a woman who distanced
herself from the feminine —
and feminism — and positioned herself
close to the masculinist norm, the power of which has enabled it to claim
for itself. Indeed, the Attorney-General, Philip Ruddock, went so far
as to deny that gender had been a factor in Cabinet’s
‘I’m pleased to be able to appoint the best person for the
job’, he said.
Eve Mahlab,
a retired feminist lawyer, commented on the need for a woman judge to neutralise
If, as a woman, you want to get on, you devote yourself to the goals of your
male colleagues and you don’t rock the boat by
asking, “Is this fair
to women?” ... What I think Susan Crennan always did, to her credit, was
that she devoted herself
to the goals of the male society that makes up the
profession of the bar. She really contributed there and
Kissane elaborates on Crennan’s stance which, if not exactly anti-feminist
(despite one newspaper headline)
could not be described as supportive of those women who had experienced
discrimination at the hands of the legal profession:
She has certainly rejected feminist rhetoric; she says there is no evidence of
gender bias in the law and that she has never suffered
discrimination at the
bar, and she does not believe in affirmative
her best endeavours, however, Justice Crennan could not neutralise herself
entirely. Not only did the media pay disproportionate
attention to her gender,
but allusions to her age, and possibly even her
were also made by
referring to her status as a
grandmother.
The connotations of
this grandmotherly image are that of a woman of mature years who is safe and
unthreatening because her ‘manned’
state is likely to mitigate the
dangerousness of the feminine in an unrestrained position of authority.
While a judge appointed to a superior court may feel that he or she is free
to exercise autonomy in a way that is impossible for an
appointee to a lower
court, there is little in Justice Crennan’s history to suggest that she is
likely to start speaking in
‘a different
Crennan’s appointment seeks to guarantee, as far as possible, that there
will be no possibility of disorder emanating
from an unleashing of the unruly
feminine. This is not to suggest that Justice Crennan lacks a sense of justice,
but the media representations
of her convey the impression that she will be
joining the ranks of those women who have never encountered sex discrimination
themselves;
it is always something that happens to someone
These representations
clearly place pressure on her to maintain this stance.
B. Lacking Testosterone
In contrast to the cautious approach of his federal counterpart, the
Victorian Attorney-General, Rob Hulls, espoused a deliberate
appointing more women to the bench to ‘obliterate the so-called blokey
culture of the courts’.
seven years, he has dramatically changed the gender profile of the Victorian
justice system. Out of a total of 80 appointees to
the various State courts, 37,
or nearly half, have been women. Hulls has appointed 16 female magistrates, from
a total of 94 (includes
16 new male magistrates)
15 of the 20
female County Court judges, from a total of 57 (includes 13 new male judges);
and five of the six female Supreme Court
judges, out of a total of 34, while the
sixth he has promoted to Chief Justice (the court also includes 11 new male
judges). While
well short of a majority, these numbers appear dramatic because
of the very low base from which the appointments began.
The appointment of ‘so many’ women has resulted in an
undercurrent of disaffection and resentment on the part of male
lawyers. One
former member of the Bar Council is quoted as saying, ‘there is scope for
criticism of the way in which some senior
and eminently qualified people [read
“men”] have been
overlooked’.
notorious comment is attributed to Robert Richter QC, who is reported to have
said that it was an advantage for an appointee
Other male lawyers
described the appointments as ‘queue jumping’ and a divergence
‘too far from
‘undermining the intellectual rigour of the state
judiciary’.
The controversy surrounding the appointment of Justice Neave is illustrative.
When Marcia Neave, a law professor and Chair of the
Victorian Law Reform
Commission was appointed to the Victorian Court of Appeal in 2006, she was
criticised for never having practised
law: ‘You have to have trial
experience to understand if a trial has miscarried’, said one exasperated
commercial QC.
This is despite
the fact that an appellate court operates quite differently from a trial court
and Neave had many years of experience
teaching and writing about property,
equity and family law, as well as having taken responsibility for a vast array
of references
on the Law Reform Commission, including defences to homicide,
sexual assault, intellectual disability and reproductive
technologies.
But then, Justice
Neave was also attacked because of her law reform experience:
Capable though she is, she has devoted much of her life to changing laws, not
impartially administering them. To me, she seems more
qualified as an activist
than a judge.
determining Justice Neave to be insufficiently respectful of the law
, we see not only the repetition of the idea of the disorderly woman, but
a repetition of the positivist myth that the good judge
does not make law, but
merely interprets it.
As the percentage of women appointed creeps towards 50 percent and
approximates the proportion of women law graduates, complaints
sacrifice of merit and the evil of affirmative action have become more
vociferous. Not only is there a concern on the part
of male barristers that
their settled expectations have been overturned, there is a more insidious
sub-text, which relates to the
feminisation of the judiciary and the possibility
of disorder within the state.
C. Gaoling of Chief Magistrate
Queensland Chief Magistrate, Diane Fingleton, was gaoled in 2003 for having
sent an email to a subordinate magistrate, Basil Gribbin,
in which she was found
to have threatened him, as she required him to show cause as to why he should
stay in his position despite
disloyalty.
Gribbin had provided
another magistrate, Anne Thacker, with an affidavit and lawfully given evidence
in judicial proceedings when
Thacker sought review of a decision that she be
transferred. Fingleton was convicted of an offence under the Queensland Criminal
and sentenced to 12 months
imprisonment, reduced to six months on
After serving her term,
the High Court unanimously overturned the conviction, finding that she was
immune from prosecution when performing
Fingleton received
backpay and was restored to the magistracy (but not to the position of chief
magistrate).
Fingleton had been appointed to her position by a Labor Attorney-General who,
like his Victorian counterpart, felt that talented women
had been overlooked for
too long and something should be done about
In Fingleton’s case,
it was her commitment to social justice and reform that were the key reasons for
her appointment, not
her gender.
Gender, however, undoubtedly played a role in her
Unlike her male
predecessor, whose career was similarly terminated by a revolt over a transfer,
Fingleton ended up in prison while
he was rewarded with a carefree life of
Fingleton’s promotion to chief magistrate angered some of her
colleagues who considered themselves to be more experienced, although
spent four years as a magistrate. Fingleton felt that the antipathy towards her
was exacerbated by her push for reform and
her forthright
In other words, she
espoused a style that is regarded as forceful and authoritative in a male chief
magistrate but unacceptable in
a female chief. Ironically, however, had
Fingleton occupied the docile and deferential subject position conventionally
with the feminine, it is unlikely that she would have been appointed
to a position involving the management of more than 70 magistrates
spread over a
large geographical area with a brief to put the magistracy in order. She would
probably then have been found to lack
forcefulness and authority.
An assertive woman (a
chief magistrate) who has offended the
old guard can expect to be sanctioned more heavily than the comparable
Nevertheless, such a savage
attack on a woman occupying judicial office may be unprecedented, although there
are instances of the
scapegoating of women lawyers leading to the demise of
their careers.
Hunter refers to
the ‘terrorising effect’ of the scapegoating of Fingleton, in that
no other senior woman dared to speak
out lest she become the next
‘sacrificial
3. The Masculinity of Merit
A. The Definitional Conundrum
Women figure prominently among the top students in law schools, and have done
for several decades.
this is the case, why is it that these women when now being considered for
senior positions are repeatedly found to be lacking
in merit? There is something
suspect about the concept since it is rarely defined. Indeed, merit seems to
have entered political
discourse only comparatively recently, ‘its advent
apparently coinciding with women’s increasing pursuit of positions
influence within the public
Merit is an abstract term involving a claim to excellence, commendation or
worth, but it has no meaning without reference to the social
context in which it
appears. Aristotle evinced a clear understanding of this issue two and a half
thousand years ago,
rarely subjected to scrutiny by modern decision-makers operating within a
liberal meritocracy. It is assumed to be unproblematic
that the ‘best
person’ will be instantly discernible to all, as if by magic. In the case
of judges, this process of instantaneous
recognition is also deemed to occur
even though, out of a pool of hundreds or even thousands, ‘there is no way
at the end of
the day there is just one who is the best ... There will always be
five or six names who are good enough to be
appointed.’
The ‘best person for the job’ is the person who, on the basis of
past performance, displays the greatest promise or potential.
Hence, far from
merit being an objective variable, there is always an element of uncertainty
associated with it, because it involves
making predictions about the future:
if candidate A were to be appointed to a position she has never occupied
before, how will she perform?
Furthermore, there is an undeniable element of
subjectivity in determining what factors are taken into account and how they are
Despite this element
of subjectivity, liberal individualism assumes that merit involves rational
Merit also encompasses the idea of desert, in the sense of entitlement:
after twenty years at the bar, he deserved to be appointed to the bench.
The two meanings of merit — excellence and desert — have become
conflated, so that ‘the best person for the job’
is deemed to be the
most deserving, as well as the most outstanding.
While there may be objective criteria enumerated for a position, such as
certain qualifications, skills and experience, they mean
little without the
evaluative element.
Qualifications and abilities have to be weighted in relation to other criteria,
and their relevance and standing compared with those
of other candidates.
Applying the merit principle to a selection process without any articulated
criteria clearly presents something
of a challenge, although this has
historically been the method used in the selection of many prestigious
positions, despite the insistent
myth of objectivity. We are all caught up in
the discourse of the ‘best person’ and want to believe in merit
objective criteria, rather than extraneous factors, as the basis of
appointment, but are at a loss to know how best to conduct the
identification and evaluation.
It is a feminist truism that for a woman to succeed she has to be better than
her male counterparts.
this is why the merit of a particular judge is expressly raised only when the
appointee is a woman: ‘Every time a woman
gets appointed there is noisy
talk about the “merit” of the appointment, but whenever a man is
appointed there is silence
on the question of
Try substituting
‘Man “of merit” joins High Court’ for ‘Woman
“of merit” joins High Court’
in the case of the headline
referred to above. It is virtually
unimaginable.
Indeed, it would
be tautologous because masculinity is already a tacit criterion of judicial
When Queensland Attorney-General, Matt Foley, appointed six women judges out
of seven to the Supreme Court of that State in the late
1990s, like Mr Hulls, he
was accused of making appointments on the basis of gender rather than
Indeed, he was officially
asked under the protection of parliamentary privilege whether he would continue
‘making appointments
to judicial office on grounds other than judicial
Such asseverations
do have an effect on public policy and it is notable that the appointment of
women judges in Queensland slowed
down following the imbroglio involving Diane
A graphic example of the way women and merit are treated as disjunctive
within popular culture is encapsulated in a web-based poll
at the time a
replacement was being mooted for Mary Gaudron on the High Court, which asked
participants ‘[s]hould there be
more women judges on the High
Court?’ and offered a choice of one of three answers: ‘Yes’,
‘Should Be Decided on
Deconstruction of the objectivity of merit in the context of judging, perhaps
unsurprisingly, soon reveals it to be a masquerade as
the process is
characterised by an extraordinary opacity. When we look at the outcome for the
Australian High Court, for example
one openly gay male judge
and no Indigenous judges out of 45 appointments in over a century — the
myth of the objectivity of
Nevertheless,
decision-makers and commentators endlessly reiterate reliance on the
‘essential criterion of merit’ as
though it were
unproblematic.
B. Searching for Criteria
Conventionally, an Attorney-General makes a recommendation to Cabinet and the
names are announced in due course. Even though the position
advertised in some jurisdictions, consultations with key individuals and
professional bodies remain confidential. Governments
in Australia retain an
exclusive right to identify candidates for the
and there is resistance
towards transferring this power to an unelected body, despite the benefits of
independence.
While one can be
critical of the highly politicised nature of the nomination hearings held for
selection of US Supreme Court judges,
the public process assists in making
women’s voices
The long history of appointing only Benchmark Men as judges has made it
difficult to re-imagine judicial merit in a non-gendered way.
In other words,
the fundamental or objective criterion associated with
hoi aristoi
best people) has informally come to include masculinity, because Benchmark Men
were the only appointees for so long. Rosabeth
Moss Kanter’s description
of the way social conformity is maintained within corporations can also
illuminate our understanding
of the constitution of judicial merit:
The more closed the circle, the more difficult it is for ‘outsiders’
to break in. Their very difficulty in entering may
be taken as a sign of
incompetence, a sign that the insiders were right to close their ranks. The more
closed the circle, the more
difficult it is to share power when the time comes,
as it inevitably must, that others challenge the control by just one kind. And
the greater the tendency for a group of people to try to reproduce themselves,
the more constraining becomes the emphasis on
conformity.
is at work here is the phenomenon of homosocial reproduction whereby like
favours like.
That is, Benchmark
Men tend to appoint those who look most like themselves as a testament to their
own worth and desert. Potential
candidates may be inducted into the
‘club’ at an early stage of their careers. By means of what Dermot
Feenan terms an
‘epistemology of ignorance’, lack of knowledge about
criteria for appointment and networking operates to preserve privilege
ensures that women are excluded.
He argues that ignorance is therefore a constitutive aspect of existing power
relations. The lack of transparency surrounding the
selection process can only
serve to augment those power relations.
Some prominent men are nevertheless beginning to question conventional wisdom
as a result of their experience with talented women
lawyers. For example,
Justice McHugh, in a speech he gave shortly before his retirement from the High
Court, expressly adverted to
the masculinity of merit: ‘[Women] are at a
disadvantage in competing on merit, as that term has been defined and understood
in a male-dominated
profession’.
malleability of merit, the conservatism of the legal professional milieu and the
virtually infinite criteria it embraces nevertheless
authorises attacks on women
judges for random deficiencies within legal and popular discourses as I have
It is noteworthy that the higher one ascends in a hierarchy of prestigious
positions in the public sphere, the greater is the emphasis
on merit but,
paradoxically, the more elusive and the less transparent the criteria. As the
descriptive variables become more slippery,
the assertion of Benchmark Men to
to occupy the most authoritative positions becomes more
insistent. I argued two decades ago that merit served an ideological role
assuaging concerns about the basis of societal allocations in the context of
Merit provides a
distributive mechanism within liberalism that compels individuals to take
responsibility for their success and non-success
in life, regardless of
countervailing realities such as the homosociality of the senior ranks of the
bar, from where judges are generally
drawn. The discourse of merit has thereby
been able to sustain traditional power relations and conventional iterations of
masculinity
and femininity. In this way, merit operates as a central
legitimating principle of the masculinist state.
While the transparency of selection criteria is clearly
there is unlikely to
be unanimity as to what they should be, as Chief Justice Gleeson of the
Australian High Court points out:
There is plenty of room for argument about what constitutes merit in judicial
selection. But, if it means nothing else, it must at
least include the capacity
to preside over adversarial litigation, conduct the proceedings with reasonable
efficiency, and produce
a well-reasoned judgment at the
How does one
to preside, conduct and produce? Surely, one can have
to perform a task without actually having done it before.
Would Justice Marcia Neave, who was attacked for not having conducted trials,
satisfy the capacity requirement? ‘Capacity’ and
‘merit’, like ‘integrity’, ‘skill’
‘experience’, are constructed in such a way that the terms
themselves have become gendered.
In 1993, the federal Attorney-General, Michael Lavarch, in a discussion paper
on judicial appointments, produced a longer list of
criteria. He proposed a
range of skills: legal, advocacy, administrative, oral and written
communication, together with efficiency,
as well as a range of personal
qualities: practicality and commonsense, vision, a capability to uphold the rule
of law and act in
an independent manner. Finally, the appointee should
contribute to the institution’s fair reflection of society (consistent
with merit).
Again, while most
of the skills can probably be demonstrated, the personal criteria make little
sense without explication, evaluation
and reference to a particular context.
Furthermore, one could always include a range of other desirable traits, such as
of and sensitivity to diversity, contributions to the community, and
evidence of understanding and commitment to social justice.
The point is that
there can never be closure in the constitution of merit because of the essential
permeability and subjectivity
of the evaluative element, which is going to
differ in every context according to the candidate
C. The Rhetoric of AA
A further means of denigrating women judges that enhances the construction of
merit in conventional masculinist terms is to suggest
that they have been
appointed as a result of affirmative action. AA is an open-ended concept that
encompasses a range of pro-active
strategies designed to promote institutional
diversity. These strategies might best be thought of as positions on a
continuum. At
one end are clustered minimalist strategies, or weak forms of AA,
which might include encouraging women and minorities to apply or
ensuring that
the names of women and Others are included among the short-listed candidates. At
the other end of the continuum are
stronger forms of AA, such as quotas and
preferences, interventions designed to overcome the under-representation problem
rather than later. Quotas have been ordered by United States courts from
time to time to remedy instances of egregious racial discrimination
but they have never
been ordered in Australia. In any case, it does not follow that quotas or
preferences displace the merit principle,
as the best qualified candidates will
be chosen when a choice has to be
Despite this commonsense
view of the operation of quotas, the conservative swing engendered by
neoliberalism has denounced anything
other than a strict application of the
equal treatment standard, which usually means retention of the status quo. The
attack on an
outcome-oriented approach led even to the excision of the phrase
‘affirmative action’ from the official lexicon in the
While it would be absurd
to suggest that sex-based quotas were being used to appoint judges without
regard to individual merit, this
is the asseveration being made by those
opposing the appointment of women judges in Victoria and Queensland.
By a certain sleight of hand, AA is construed by its detractors as being
concerned with biology, not merit, thereby amounting to a
form of reverse
discrimination. AA, like merit, is another discourse in which gendered dualisms
involving normativity and otherness
circulate. The false antinomy between AA and
merit is an insidious way of entrenching the idea that the beneficiaries of AA
are unmeritorious,
but it is one that is repeated endlessly within popular
discourse, sometimes by women judges
— the ultimate
testament to its ideological force.
I C F Spry depicts AA as a misguided policy of the left, spurred on by
sectional interests:
The matter of political appointments is now exacerbated by the current tendency
of Labor governments to appoint unsuitable female
judges, often at the instance
of feminists...Accordingly many of the female judges —
there are some few exceptions — who sit in various Australian courts
there by reason of gender and lack the necessary
a familiar tactic for conservatives to tag as ‘political’ all
progressive judicial appointments in order to denigrate
them, whereas they extol
conservative appointments by the use of descriptors such as
‘meritorious’. A similar tactic
is employed to denigrate women
regardless of political persuasion. Spry would like the legal profession to
adopt a stronger critical
stance towards AA in light of what he claims to be the
‘poorer quality of justice that is, with few exceptions, dispensed by
female judges and law
He does not
hesitate to attack the Victorian Attorney-General for appointing a woman,
Marilyn Warren, to the position of Chief Justice:
[Mr Hulls] claimed publicly that she was the most appropriate person to be
appointed, a foolish claim because in fact there are various
other available
persons who are regarded as substantially more
being played out here is the rhetoric of merit, which reveals itself to be a
concept shaped by power. This power has traditionally
been wielded by Benchmark
Men and has largely gone unchallenged. Progressives generally, not just feminist
legal scholars, are questioning
the power of Benchmark Men to determine behind
closed doors what constitutes merit in judicial appointments. This has compelled
gatekeepers
to defend a position that has become increasingly untenable, or to
specify criteria, when formerly there were none — other
than benchmark
masculinity and ‘being known’.
These established characteristics of the judiciary and the clandestine nature
of the appointments process have meant that women and
Others have had no
opportunity to contest and contribute to the construction of merit. I suggest
that the disparagement of the feminine,
which has been counterpoised with the
masculinity of merit, is another rhetorical device that has served to sustain
judging as a
profoundly gendered activity. AA is one element of the arsenal of
attack that has been useful to detractors in the case of the appointment
than the single token woman, for it is assumed (or feared) that a critical mass
of women will have some devastating (albeit
unspecified) effect. A more open
process may well mean more contestation but the popular (mis)representations of
women judicial candidates
can then be publicly countered rather than being
insidiously perpetuated.
4. The Fictive Feminine
Once women were ‘let in’ to the public sphere, it was assumed
that it would only be a matter of time before an egalitarian
end state was
reached in which equality between the sexes existed. When anomalies were pointed
out, the rationality of liberalism
would triumph and sex would have as much
relevance as eye colour in appointment to public
As we know only too
well, the liberal story does not comport with the gendered
Liberalism glosses over
the animus towards the feminine because it encapsulates a pre-modern,
non-rational element that sits uncomfortably
with the rational humanism of
liberal individualism. Nevertheless, misogyny remains a key sub-text of the
Western religious and cultural
tradition, which constitutes women as
‘others’ to the masculinist norm. For almost three millennia, the
influential theorists
and jurisprudes were all men, as were virtually the entire
dramatis personae
of the public sphere. These figures have possessed the
power to write about the feminine in such a way that women were always the
objects, never the subjects of the authoritative social narratives. This lack of
voice has allowed the category ‘woman’
and the concept of the
feminine to be subjugated by power.
According to Aristotle, women were possessed of an imperfect deliberative
The view that the
difference and inferiority of women is grounded
is entrenched
within the Western intellectual tradition, an idea that has not evaporated with
the cautious letting in of women associated
with Second Wave feminism.
Women’s assignation to the private sphere, sexuality, affectivity,
reproduction and care came to
be associated with the essentialised feminine
— or the fictive feminine as I term it — denying all vestiges of
subjectivity. This is in contrast to the imagined masculine that
dominates the public sphere, encompassing the qualities of reason,
impartiality,
authoritativeness and decisiveness which, coincidentally, go to make up merit in
the constitution of the judge. The
most pernicious strand of this mythical
binarism is that the feminine has been constructed as a force that is dangerous
While caring for others would seem to be a positive characteristic for
participation in public life, as it is closely connected to
justice and mercy,
it has also been constructed as the basis of the disorder of women. This thesis,
which is elaborated upon by Carole
is based on the work of
a number of canonical theorists, such as Rousseau and Freud, and avers that
women are incapable of developing
Their reasoning is that
because women are preoccupied with the love and care of intimates, they can
never transcend the particularity
of the family in favour of the claimed
universality associated with public sphere activity. Rousseau’s idealised
women, such
as Sophy in
are confined
to motherhood and subordination in the private sphere, the realm of the
particular. The disability of particularity meant
that they could never be full
citizens, let alone assume responsibility for judging or the running of the
state. The fictional binary
plays down the inevitable role of particularity in
the public sphere, such as the movement between the universal and the particular
in the adjudicative process.
women sought to think beyond the needs of their families as male judges do,
disorder would result:
Love and justice are antagonistic virtues; the demands of love and of family
bonds are particularistic and so in direct conflict
with justice which demands
that private interest is subordinated to the public (universal)
liberalism was able to deal with the tensions between love and justice, as well
as corporeality and reason, provided that
the feminised side of the set of
dualisms associated with the public/private dichotomy were quarantined within
the private sphere.
This legitimated the domination of the public sphere by
Benchmark Men, allowing them to mark as masculine, under the guise of
universality,
the values of reason, autonomy, authority and merit.
The disorder generated by female sexuality is a recurring leitmotif of the
Western tradition. Female sexuality and eroticism were
frequently adduced as a
justification for refusing to admit women to the legal
profession.
Nonsensical though
this gendered binary is, since it denies the sexuality, corporeality and
affectivity of men — at least in
the public domain — it continues to
have currency in the rhetorical construction of
Although there is a growing literature on women and judging, it has tended to
steer away from engagement with the psychoanalytic effects
of the dark and
primordial facets of the feminine. The focus has been largely directed to
overcoming structural hurdles that are
perceived to be tractable to remediation,
rather than addressing the discomfiting but pervasive fiction of the feminine as
a disorderly
force in the public realm, which transcends any simple blueprint
for reform. This thesis possesses significant explanatory potential
in light of
the latent hostility towards women judges that continues to
The detractors of
the appointment of women judges rarely go beyond endlessly repeating that the
appointees are unmeritorious, as
I have shown; they do not articulate just how
disorder will manifest itself in the public sphere, but we are assured that it
More insidious is the fear that a feminised judiciary will not be a fit and
proper institution for men. Once the tipping point is
reached, feminised
occupations encourage male
as with white flight
(a phenomenon associated with the entry of Blacks and Hispanics into white,
middle class neighbourhoods in the
United States). If an influx of women judges
takes place, the crucial boundary between the masculinist norm and the feminised
could similarly dissolve. Both the masculinity and the elitism of judging
as an occupation would then be in jeopardy. Feminisation
and male flight must
therefore be resisted at all costs. Race, sexuality and religion also worry
Benchmark Men, but a critical mass
of women, including one that is on course to
reach the tipping point, as with the Victorian judicial appointments, is deeply
destabilising
because it hints at the real possibility of feminisation.
5. Conclusion
This paper has sought to focus on the perception of women as judges rather
than analyse modes of adjudication. The representational
cameos I have presented
challenge the objectivity of merit in both the selection process and the
evaluation of judging. To allay
any suspicion of disorder, the woman judge must
suppress the feminine and assume the masquerade of
She must position
herself close to the masculine norm in order to ensure a semblance of authority.
I have shown that the animus towards
the feminine has not evaporated with the
‘letting in’ of women and the effluxion of time. A mere belief in
liberal individualism
cannot instantaneously erase the centuries of distrust
that underpins liberal theory and is kept alive by public policy, legal
and popular culture. Faith in the idea that a critical mass will
dilute the animus towards the feminine has not been borne out by
the evidence.
The attacks on women judges appointed in Queensland and Victoria attest to this.
Once the FW2 (‘first woman
phenomenon lost its novelty, it was hoped that a critical mass would allay the
fear of the feminine and pave the way for acceptance.
While there is some
evidence of tolerance of diversity, numerosity has simultaneously revived the
fear of disorder and feminisation.
I suggest that the current political climate in which there has been a
notable swing away from social liberalism has accentuated the
resiling from
progressive initiatives, such as the acknowledgement of group harms, whether on
the basis of gender, race, sexuality
or other characteristic of identity. The
turning away from the systemic character of sex discrimination towards an
exclusive focus
on the individual is one such example. The antinomy between AA
and merit is a product of conservative discourse, underpinned by sexism,
and a latent homophobia. Neoconservatism goes hand-in-glove with neoliberalism,
giving rise to a revival of the discourse
of ‘the family’, which has
encouraged a move away from the subjectivity of the feminised self in favour of
the objectified
(masculinist) position. The feminised Other thereby becomes
ineffable once more, which is why we see a marked tendency by women appointees
to ‘mainstream’ and neutralise the feminine.
Aliotta suggests that it might take several cohorts of women moving through
law school before the impact is felt in the
While I would like
to believe in this progressivist thesis, I reiterate the scepticism articulated
at the outset. Rather than acceptance
of increasing numbers of women in
authoritative positions, the incidence of backlash may invite a more pronounced
imperative on the
part of women judges to govern the self and render mute what
might be construed as a different voice. Nevertheless, the philosophical
devaluation of the feminine underlines the quicksand nature of difference
theory. It can be employed strategically, as Kate Malleson
suggests, but it is a
double-edged sword.
more comfortable with sameness, but there is also a danger that a focus on
difference may entrench essentialism.
Undoubtedly, there is increased scope for diversity and dissent as the
numbers of women on courts increase, but the unevenness of
social change is
apparent with a move towards a more conservative political milieu. Inevitably,
the contemporary political imperatives
will exert an impact on judging,
rendering the process both more and less feminised. Some women judges will
continue to perceive
themselves as honorary men while there will be some at the
other end of the spectrum who will perceive themselves to be feminist
between, there will be a range of perspectives. What we want is an
acknowledgement of the subjectivity of women judges
and a movement away from the
notion that women are a homogeneous and undifferentiated mass, an assumption
with which male judges
rarely have to deal.
If we come back to Richter’s comment about women being appointed
because they do not have testicles, we see something of the
deep atavistic fear
at the prospect of women, understood in biologistic and abject, as well as
unmeritorious, terms, constituting
not just a critical mass on the bench, but
dominating it. The objectified projection of corporeality carries the seeds of
invidiousness
with it, which inhibits the construction of individual
subjectivity. One or two ‘women of merit’ can be tolerated when
position themselves close to the masculinist norm and suppress all vestiges of
the feminine. They do not then threaten the crucial
line of demarcation between
the norm and the Other. Indeed, their very presence as exceptions to the rule
serves to uphold it. To
this end, individual women trail blazers in
authoritative positions are frequently reminded of their outsider
A predominantly masculinised institution that has historically sustained male
power and privilege is not going to change overnight
into a humane and caring
one by a few women when the feminine continues to be associated with disorder in
public sphere decision-making.
Indeed, in my study of women and the legal
profession, I argued that legal institutions were more likely to change women
attention has been paid to the deeply gendered institutions that women are
The constraining
factors that delimit autonomy, including public scrutiny and the possibility of
being overruled, are undoubtedly
stronger for women judges than for
Most significantly,
Benchmark Men, who remain the primary decision makers, prefer to appoint women
who espouse values most like their
That is, they should be
white, able-bodied, heterosexual, middle class and politically right of
Gilligan’s theory, or at least the way it has been represented, in
associating a different morality with women, triggered a
major debate around
women and judging.
agree with Kathy Davis that insufficient attention has been paid to the rhetoric
at the heart of the Gilligan
which helps to
understand its contradictions and its circularity. That is, no definitive
resolution is possible with different voice
theory because the aim is to
persuade as to a particular way of thinking rather than make a truth claim.
The concept of merit exercises a similarly rhetorical role, as illuminated by
Maria Drakopoulou who explains how a particular
conceptualisation of knowledge, emerges during a given historical period which,
rather than being seen as ‘a progressive
unfolding of truth’, is
‘an integral part of a genealogy of feminist legal
knowledge’.
Through the
querelle des femmes
of early seventeenth-century England, Drakopoulou
suggests that women were able to create a discursive space in which to contest
contemporary
essentialised representations of female nature. Invoking this idea
, we can see how the ‘different voice’ struck
a chord with feminist legal scholars, for it enabled the negative views
female nature within the Western intellectual tradition to be discursively
In the end, what constitutes merit is determined in a context of power, which
means that it is necessarily always going to be contested.
Its claim to produce
an objective ‘best person’ is a rhetorical claim designed to
maintain the judiciary as a gendered
regime. If we conceptualise merit as a
technology of disciplinary power that takes its colouration from the prevailing
climate, we can take advantage of its performative character. It can
be unsettled by interrogation and exposure of its ambiguities
contradictions, as I have sought to do, and then re-imagined. However, closure
can never be attained, for the meaning of merit
will always be contested. While
both authoritative legal and popular discourses suggest that the meaning of
merit is fixed, such
a claim is based on no more than the rhetoricity of
An earlier version of
this paper was presented at the International Research Collaborative on Gender
and Judging, American Law
& Society Annual Meeting, Baltimore, USA,
6–9 July 2006. I thank Judith Resnik, the commentator on the paper, and
the participants
for their helpful comments. Thanks also to Chris Atmore for
research assistance.
Professor of Law &
ARC Professorial Fellow, Australian National University, Canberra.
As expounded by, for example,
H L A Hart,
The Concept of Law
(1961); Hans Kelsen,
The Pure Theory of
(1961); Joseph Raz,
The Authority of Law
(1979); Tom D Campbell,
The Legal Theory of Ethical Positivism
Feminist Aboriginal
magistrate, Pat O’Shane, has had a turbulent time since her appointment in
1986 and her dismissal has
been contemplated because of complaints about her
conduct on the bench, particularly with regard to police. O’Shane has
that the attempts to remove her arise from her ‘ideology’ and
her ‘philosophies’. See Imre Salusinszky, ‘Fighting
The Australian
(31 January 2007) at 11; Chris Merritt,
‘Government and Judges clash over Pat O’Shane’
(31 January 2007) at 11. An earlier notorious incident involved
her quashing a charge of malicious damage against four women who
billboard in which a woman was being sawn in half. See Pat O’Shane,
‘Launch of the Australian Feminist Law
Journal: 29 August 1993’
Australian Feminist Law Journal
For an insightful analysis of
sexual diversity and the judiciary, an area in respect of which little empirical
data exists, see
Leslie J Moran, ‘Judicial Diversity and the Challenge of
Sexuality: Some Preliminary Findings’
[2006] SydLawRw 26
Sydney Law Review
Ulrike Schultz,
‘Introduction: Women in the World’s Legal Professions: Overview and
Synthesis’ in Ulrike Schultz
& Gisela Shaw (eds),
Women in the
World’s Legal Professions
(2003) at xxxvi, xl.
The census figures of
2001–02 revealed that women comprised 31 percent of all practitioners. See
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Legal Practices: Australia
, Cat no 8667.0 (2003).
Charles Derber,
‘Managing Professionals: Ideological Proletarianization and Mental
Labour’ in Charles Derber (ed),
Professionals as Workers: Mental Labour
in Advanced Capitalism
(1982). See also Margaret Thornton,
Dissonance and
Distrust: Women in the Legal Profession
(1996) at 273.
The 2001–02 census data
indicates that approximately 18 percent of sole practitioners and partners were
women. See Australian
Bureau of Statistics, above n5.
Approximately 15 percent of
Australian barristers are women. See ibid. A minuscule percentage of women
barristers appear before
the most senior courts. Justice Kirby has computed that
only about 13 percent of those who appear before the High Court are women,
even then not all of them have ‘speaking parts’. See Michael Kirby,
‘Appellate Advocacy – New Challenges’,
(Dame Ann Ebsworth
Memorial Lecture, London, 21 February 2006). See also, Michael Kirby,
‘Women in the Law – What Next?’
Feminist Law Journal
; Margaret Thornton, ‘Women
Practitioners’ in Tony Blackshield, Michael Coper & George Williams
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
Women now comprise 26
percent of all judges and magistrates in Australia. See
Magistrates by State (Including Women)
(2006) Australian Institute of
Judicial Administration
http://www.aija.org.au/JudgesMagistrates.htm
accessed 10 February 2007. There is only one woman judge on the High Court and
only one Chief Justice of a Supreme Court (Victoria).
Canada seems to be
performing somewhat better with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court a woman,
together with three other justices.
For an analysis of the appointment of women
to the federal and provincial courts in Canada, see Joan Brockman,
‘Aspirations
and Appointments to the Judiciary’
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law
See for example, Mary Jane
The First Women Lawyers: A Comparative Study of Gender, Law and the
Legal Professions
(2006); Thornton,
Dissonance and Distrust
For an elegant essay
addressing the way a homologous relationship developed between reason and the
masculine in Western thought,
see Genevieve Lloyd,
The Man of Reason:
‘Male’ and ‘Female’ in Western Philosophy
Backhouse compares the
‘chilly climate’ experiences of women professors with those of women
judges, noting four patterns
of experience that apply to both: exclusion,
resistance, the denial of difference, and intimidation. See Constance Backhouse,
Chilly Climate for Women Judges: Reflections on the Backlash from the
Canadian Journal of Women and the
See, for example, E P
Whigs and Hunters: The Origin of the Black Acts
It is notable that the
exposé coincided with initiatives in other parts of the world, such as
the publication of the Canadian
Bar Association Task Force on Gender Equality in
the Legal Profession,
Touchstones for Change: Equality, Diversity and
Accountability
See, for example, Liz
Porter, ‘Who Judges our Judges?’
(17 January 1993)
at 15; Karen Middleton, ‘Some Judges are Women Haters, says Cook’
(13 May 1993) at 5; Keith Gosman, ‘Judges on Trial’
Sydney Morning Herald
(14 May 1993) at 9.
(Unreported, Supreme Court of South Australia, Bollen J, 26 August
See, for example,
Australia, Parliament, Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Gender Bias and the Judiciary
Attorney-General’s Department,
Judicial Appointments: Procedure and
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Equality Before
the Law: Women’s Equality
, Report No 69, Part II (1994).
A further government
initiative involved the preparation of gender-sensitive teaching materials on
citizenship, work, and violence.
The citizenship materials were prepared by
Professor Sandra Berns, Paula Baron and Professor Marcia Neave, and the work and
materials by Professor Regina Graycar and Associate Professor Jenny
Morgan: see Regina Graycar & Jenny Morgan, ‘Legal Categories,
Women’s Lives and the Law Curriculum OR: Making Gender Examinable’
[1996] SydLawRw 26
Sydney Law Review
The writer chaired the overseeing
In 1995, women comprised
6.9 percent of all judges and magistrates in Victoria, compared with 26 percent
in 2006. In Queensland,
the 1995 figure was 5.3 percent, compare with the 2006
figure of 29 percent. The Australia-wide figure for the decade changed from
to 26 percent. For 1995, see Australian Institute for Judicial Administration
figures reproduced in Thornton,
Dissonance and Distrust
, above n6 at
figures, see the Australian Institute of Judicial Administration, above
Men’ is the shorthand term I coined to apply to comparators in
discrimination complaints rather than enumerate
a long list of characteristics
of identity.
See, for example, Mossman,
above n10; Albie Sachs & John Hoff Wilson,
Sexism and the Law: A Study of
Male Beliefs and Judicial Bias in Britain and the United States
Londa Schiebinger,
Mind Has No Sex? Women in the Origins of Modern Science
Jean-Francois Lyotard,
The PostModern Condition: A Report on Knowledge
Carol Gilligan,
Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development
Gilligan argues that men and women have been acculturated to speak in different
voices that influence their approach to moral
reasoning. Gilligan analogises
male reasoning to that of a ladder of abstract rights in which a clear sense of
hierarchy is discernible.
Feminised reasoning, in contrast, is more akin to a
web, arising from a sense of interconnection and concern for others. While
contentious because of the potential for gender essentialism,
Gilligan’s work has struck a chord with some feminist legal scholars
reacting against the aggressive adversarialism of legal practice. The question
of whether women judges, in particular, employ a ‘different
has given rise to an extensive literature. See, for example, Jennifer L Peresie,
‘Female Judges Matter: Gender
and Collegial Decisionmaking in the Federal
Appellate Courts’
[2005] YaleLawJl 34
Yale Law Journal
; Elaine Martin,
‘Women on the Bench: A Different Voice?’
; Sue Davis, ‘Do Women Judges Speak “In A Different
Voice?”: Carol Gilligan, Feminist Legal Theory, and the Ninth
Circuit’ (1992–1993) 8
Wisconsin Women’s Law Journal
143; Joan Brockman, ‘A Difference without a Distinction?’
Canadian Journal of Law and Society
; Bertha Wilson, ‘Will
Women Judges really make a Difference?’
Osgoode Hall Law
; Carrie Menkel-Meadow, ‘Portia in a Different Voice:
Speculations on a Woman’s Lawyering Process’ (1985) 1
Women’s Law Journal
Front page story in
national newspaper announcing appointment of woman judge to High Court. See
Elizabeth Colman & Natasha Robinson,
‘Woman “of Merit”
Joins High Court’
The Australian
(21 September 2005) at 1.
Brenda Hale,
‘Equality and the Judiciary: Why Should We Want More Women Judges?’
Colman & Robinson,
Editorial, ‘Caught in
a Time Warp on Judicial Appointments’
(22 September 2005)
Karen Kissane,
‘Welcome to the Club’
(5 November 2005) Insight at
Marcus Priest, ‘Meet
the High Court’s Anti-feminist’
Australian Financial Review
(21 September 2005) at 1.
Kissane, above n29.
Crennan’s views on AA for women lawyers were reported as a reason for her
having missed out on appointment
to the position of Victorian Chief Justice. See
Priest, above n30.
Moran (above n3 at
580–81) points out that the married (male) norm was actually UK policy
under Lord Chancellor Lord Hailsham
in the 1970s and 1980s, supposedly because
of the dangers of blackmail. In light of the secrecy surrounding the
appointments process
in Australia, it is an unknown whether a comparable policy
Michael Pelly,
‘Ex-teacher, Legal Dynamo and, Oh Yes, a Woman: Welcome to the High
Sydney Morning Herald
(21 September 2005) at 1; Michael
Pelly, ‘High Achiever: Court’s Female Justice’
Morning Herald
(9 November 2005) at 10.
See Gilligan, above
See, for example, Rosemary
Balmford, ‘Gender Equality in Courts and Tribunals’
Victorian Bar News
at 39–40. Rosemary Hunter, in her study of
Victorian barristers, analysed the responses of women who denied the existence
discrimination. This included those who denied outright that there was any
inequality of opportunity and the ‘no-yes-but’
group who endeavoured
to suppress the notion of discrimination by rationalising their experiences in
other ways. See Rosemary Hunter,
‘Talking Up Equality: Women Barristers
and the Denial of Discrimination’
Feminist Legal Studies
Katherine Towers,
‘Hulls takes on the Law’s Old Guard’
Australian Financial
(6 April 2006) at 1.
Ian Munro & Fergus
Shiel, ‘The Two Sides of Rob’
(3 June 2006) Insight
Richter later apologised to
a senior woman barrister who walked out of the gathering. See Steve Butcher,
‘Women and the Law:
Top Silk Apologises Over Bias Comment’
(27 November 2003) at 1.
Munro & Shiel, above
Towers, above n36.
Ibid. In part, the
antipathy displayed towards Justice Neave’s appointment reflects the
resistance towards the appointment
of academics as judges. It was only in the
1990s that a number of law professors were appointed to both the Federal Court
New South Wales District Court. The Australian convention was formerly
to restrict the appointment of judges to the senior bar.
Justice Neave’s
averred lack of experience can be contrasted with the contemporaneous
appointment of two men to prominent
positions in the media, whose lack of
experience was deemed not to constitute a drawback to their appointment:
‘Garry Linnell,
the new head of news and current affairs at the Nine
Network, has no experience in broadcast news but his boss, Eddie McGuire,
it did not matter. “You don’t have to be an
astronaut,” McGuire said this week, “to know the moon isn’t
made of cheese.”’ See Caroline Overington & John Lehmann,
‘News Sense Wins Over Experience’
The Australian
2006) at 14. Mr Linnell was reported to be paid $500,000. A new Managing
Director of the Australian Broadcasting Commission
was also reported at the same
time to have been appointed without broadcast experience. See Helen Westerman,
Kirsty Simpson, Debi
Enker & Amy Marshall, ‘Memo: ABC Chief’
e (23 May 2006) at 11.
Andrew Bolt, ‘Law
Wears a Dress’
(1 March 2006) at 21.
A detailed analysis of this
case is found in Rosemary Hunter, ‘Fear and Loathing in the Sunshine
(2004) 19(44)
Australian Feminist Studies
Criminal Code
(Qld), s 119B was a new section designed to protect witnesses
from retaliation in judicial proceedings and Diane Fingleton was the
person to be charged under it. The precise wording of the section is as
‘A person who, without reasonable cause, causes, or threatens to
cause, any injury or detriment to a judicial officer, juror,
witness or a member
of the family of a judicial officer, juror or witness in retaliation because of
— (a) anything lawfully
done by the judicial officer as a judicial
officer; or (b) anything lawfully done by the juror or witness in any judicial
proceeding;
is guilty of a crime. Maximum penalty — 7 years
imprisonment.’
R v Fingleton
[2003] QCA 266
140 A Crim R 216.
Fingleton v The Queen
[2005] HCA 34
(2005) 216 ALR 474.
Although a number of women
were appointed to the Queensland judiciary in the late 1990s, Roslyn Atkinson
was singled out for particular
attack by the Queensland Bar Association because
she did not come from the senior ranks of the bar but had rather more diverse
professional
and life experiences. See Barbara Hamilton, ‘Criteria for
Judicial Appointment and “Merit”’
[1999] QUTLawJl 2
University of Technology Law Journal
Hunter, ‘Fear and
Loathing in the Sunshine State’, above n44 at 146.
Peter Wilmoth, ‘A
Life at Law turned Inside Out’
(25 September 2005) at
Leisa Scott & David
Nason, ‘Frying Fingleton’
The Australian
(7 June 2003) at
Wilmoth, above n50.
The vicious attack on
Claire L’Heureux-Dubé when she was a member of the Supreme Court of
Canada, which included one
of her brother judges on the bench writing a furious
letter to the press, comes closest to the Fingleton case. Justice
L’Heureux-Dubé’s
sin was to have taken a feminist stance in a
sexual assault case. Indeed, she is described as the first Supreme Court of
Canada jurist
to have proudly accepted the label ‘feminist’. See
Backhouse, above n12 at 187. Although the attack on L’Heureux-Dubé
was relentless and personal, it did not result in a comparable attempt to remove
her from the bench.
See Ann Daniel,
Scapegoats for a Profession: Uncovering Procedural Justice
(1998), where
the author documents the case of Carol Foreman, a prominent divorce lawyer in
Sydney of ‘enviable repute’.
However, her brilliance, aggression and
determination, all characteristics that would have been extolled in a man,
underpinned her
demise. Her success in demolishing wealthy husbands on behalf of
her clients saw her ‘driven out of the profession with great
fanfare’ when she was found guilty of professional misconduct.
Hunter, ‘Fear and
Loathing in the Sunshine State’, above n44 at 153.
Jane H Mathews, ‘The
Changing Profile of Women in the Law’
Australian Law Journal
Judicial associateships (or clerkships) are a popular destination for
top graduates. A study of High Court associates 1993–2000
revealed that
approximately 47% were female. See Andrew Leigh, ‘Behind the Bench:
Associates in the High Court of Australia’
Alternative Law
at 297. In the UK, women secure more first and upper-second
class degrees. See Erika Rackley, ‘Representations of the (Woman)
Hercules, the little Mermaid, and the Vain and Naked Emperor’
Legal Studies
Rosemary Whip,
‘“Merit” and the Political Representation of Women’
(2001) 20(2)
Social Alternatives
(John Warrington trans, 1959 ed) at §1283a.
Michael Lavarch, former
federal Attorney-General, now Dean of Law at Queensland University of
Technology, quoted in Marcus Priest,
‘Ruddock Appointee joins Court
Australian Financial Review
(15 November 2004) at 3.
Clare Burton,
, Affirmative Action Agency Monograph No 2 (1988); Margaret Thornton,
‘Affirmative Action, Merit and the Liberal State’
Australian Journal of Law & Society
Richard H Fallon, ‘To
Each According to his Ability, from None According to his Race: The Concept of
Merit in the Law of Antidiscrimination’
Boston University Law
See, for example, Mary
Gaudron, ‘Speech to launch Australian Women Lawyers’, (Speech
presented in Melbourne, 19 September
Kim Pettigrew, barrister,
quoted in Fergus Shiel, ‘Engendering a Legal Minefield’
(6 December 2003) at 8.
This could well change if
the focus shifted to sexuality, or some other suspect characteristic of
identity. For example, Justice
Kirby speculates as to whether he would have been
appointed to the Australian High Court had he ‘come out’ as a gay
prior to his appointment. See Moran, above n3 at 586, 596.
See, for example, Hedley
Thomas, ‘Selection Process is Judicious: Welford’
(2 September 2004) at 2; Terry Sweetman, ‘Misjudged, Misguided
Courier Mail
(15 February 2000) at 15; Scott Emerson
& Geoffrey Newman, ‘Forget Judges’ Gender: Gibbs / New Women on
The Australian
(12 February 2000) at 3; Sue Monk,
‘Judge Blasts “Political” Appointees’
(15 November 1999) at 1.
Hunter, ‘Fear and
Loathing in the Sunshine State’, above n44 at 153.
Ibid. It may also signal
the ebbing of a feminist influence within the judiciary before it has barely
begun, as noted by Backhouse
in the Canadian context, following the concerted
attack on Justice L’Heureux-Dubé. See Backhouse, above n53 at
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
Public Record
(2003) (no longer on website), quoted in
Rachel Davis & George Williams, ‘Reform of the Judicial Appointments
Process: Gender
and the Bench of the High Court of Australia’
[2003] MelbULawRw 32
Melbourne University Law Review
, 833. Davis and Williams record the
outcome: ‘Out of 983 votes, 56 percent voted ‘Yes’; 4 percent
voted ‘No’;
and 40 percent voted ‘Should Be Decided on
The appointment of Justice
Susan Kiefel was announced at the time of going to press (13 August 2007). As
with the announcement of
Justice Crennan’s appointment, Attorney-General
Ruddock stressed the merit of the appointee, while seeking to dispel any doubt
that gender may have been an issue. He nevertheless acknowledged that he turned
his mind to the fact that she was from Queensland.
‘What bollocks’,
says commentator Ross Buckley in disputing the fact that one issue could be
legitimately addressed but
not the other. (Ross Buckley, ‘Gender was a
Factor in the latest Court Appointment
Courier Mail
(15 August 2007) at
15). The defensiveness of the Attorney-General in endeavouring to present women
judges as gender-neutral highlights
the continuing ambivalence around their
appointment.
A similarly skewed
composition in the case of federal and State courts has been confirmed by
reports into the judiciary. See, for
example, Australia, Parliament, Senate
Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, above n17
Australia, Attorney-General’s Department, above n17
See, for example, Davis
& Williams, above n68 at 823; Samantha Maiden, ‘High Court Decision
only on Merit, says PM’
Adelaide Advertiser
(19 December 2002) at
3; Paul de Jersey, ‘Equal Justice for All’
Courier Mail
February 2000) at 17; ‘Merit the Key to choosing Judges’
(18 November 1999) at 20.
Canada, Britain and some US
allow greater transparency.
For a thoroughgoing analysis and critique of the US
judicial selection process, see Judith Resnik, ‘Judicial Selection and
Democratic Theory: Demand, Supply, and Life Tenure’
The creation of an
independent commission has been mooted since at least the 1970s. For a
comprehensive analysis of the process,
see Davis & Williams, above n68. The
American White House has similarly objected to a transfer of the nomination
power from the
President to ‘a group of unelected and unaccountable
citizens’. See Resnik, above n72 at 638.
Resnik, above n72 at
Rosabeth Moss Kanter,
Men and Women of the Corporation
(1977) at 68.
The ‘homo’ in
homosocial is from the Greek
(like), not from the Latin
Dermot Feenan,
‘Understanding Disadvantage partly through an Epistemology of
Ignorance’, (Paper presented at the International
Research Collaborative
on Gender and Judging, American Law & Society Annual Meeting, Baltimore,
USA, 6–9 July 2006).
Michael McHugh,
Justices for the High Court: Speech at High Court Dinner hosted by WA Law
Society, Perth, 27 October 2004
(2004) High Court of Australia
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/mchughj/mchughj_27oct04.html
26 June 2006
‘Affirmative Action, Merit and the Liberal State’, above n60.
Malleson has recently written on the relationship
between merit and AA with
particular regard to judicial selection in the UK. See Kate Malleson,
‘Rethinking the Merit Principle
in Judicial Selection’
Journal of Law and Society
Davis & Williams, above
n68 at 835ff.
Murray Gleeson,
‘Judicial Selection and Training: Two Sides of the One Coin’
Australian Law Journal
Lavarch, above
Malleson, ‘Rethinking
the Merit Principle’, above n79 at 137.
See, for example,
Enterprise Association Steamfitters Local 638
[1974] USCA2 498
501 F 2d 622
(2nd Cir, 1974);
United Steelworkers of America v Weber
[1979] USSC 144
See, for example, Case
Marschall v Land Nordrhein-Westfalen
[1997] EUECJ C-409/95
[1997] All ER (EC) 865
Re Badeck and others (Landesanwalt beim Staatsgerichtshof des Landes Hessen
and Hessischer
[2000] EUECJ C-158/97
[2000] All ER (EC) 289.
The removal of the phrase
Affirmative Action (Equal Opportunity for Women in the Workplace)
(Cth) was the most notable example. This was a weak piece of
legislation that encouraged self-regulation; it certainly did not mandate
quotas. It was replaced with the even weaker
Equal Opportunity for Women in
the Workplace Act
Margaret Thornton,
‘EEO in a Neo-Liberal Climate’ (2001) 6(1)
Interdisciplinary Gender Studies
77. Quotas are similarly seen as a
fundamental erosion of the merit principle in the UK. See Malleson,
‘Rethinking the Merit
Principle’, above n79 at 129.
See, for example, Balmford,
above n35 at 36–37.
I C F Spry,
‘Affirmative Action for Judges’
National Observer
2004) at 67.
Id at 69. Two years before,
Spry did not demur in publicly denigrating Mary Gaudron when she announced her
retirement from the High
Court. See I C F Spry, ‘The Unlamented Departure
of Justice Gaudron’
National Observer: Australia and World Affairs
(Spring 2002) at 68.
Richard A Wasserstrom,
‘On Racism and Sexism’ in Richard A Wasserstrom (ed),
Today’s Moral Problems
(3rd ed, 1985) at 20–21.
See, for example, Deborah L
Rhode, ‘Gender and the Profession: An American Perspective’ in
Schultz & Shaw, above
n4 at 10; Fiona M Kay & Joan Brockman,
‘Barriers to Gender Equality in the Canadian Legal Establishment’ in
& Shaw, above n4 at 59; Kate Malleson, ‘Prospects for Parity:
the Position of Women in the Judiciary in England and Wales’
& Shaw, above n4 at 178–79.
Aristotle, above n58 at
Carole Pateman,
Disorder of Women: Democracy, Feminism and Political Theory
See, for example, Sigmund
Freud, ‘Some Psychical Consequences of the Anatomical Distinction between
the Sexes’ in James
Strachey (ed),
The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud
(1960) Vol XIX at 257–58.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
(Barbara Foxley trans, 1993 ed).
Sandra Berns,
as a Judge: Difference, Voice and Power
(1999) at 193–94.
Pateman, above n94 at
and Distrust
above n6 at 45; Margaret Thornton, ‘Authority and
Corporeality: The Conundrum for Women in Law’
(1998) 6(2)
Legal Studies
Richard Collier has deliberately set out to challenge the
‘disavowal of men’s corporeality’ and the ‘asexual
professionalism’ associated with law. See Richard Collier,
‘“Nutty Professors”, “Men in Suits”
Entrepreneurs”: Corporeality, Subjectivity and Change in the Law School
and Legal Practice’
(1998) 7(1)
Social & Legal Studies
I have argued elsewhere
that the insidiousness of fraternity in legal discourse should be exposed as it
is a powerful means through
which the imagined masculine claims reason to
itself. See Margaret Thornton, ‘“Liberty, Equality and ?”:
Fraternity with Voice’
[1996] SydLawRw 31
Sydney Law Review
For numerous examples of the gratuitous inclusion of the affective in the
decisions of male judges, see Regina Graycar, ‘The
Gender of Judgments: An
Introduction’ in Margaret Thornton (ed),
Public and Private: Feminist
Legal Debates
(1995); Regina Graycar & Jenny Morgan,
Gender of Law
(2nd ed 2002).
The hostility is by no
means always latent, as seen in the case of Justice L’Heureux-Dubé
(see Backhouse, above n12)
and Diane Fingleton (see Hunter, above n44).
See, for example, Ann
Game & Rosemary Pringle,
Gender at Work
‘Representations of the (Woman) Judge’, above n56.
Cheris Kramarae &
Paula A Treichler,
A Feminist Dictionary
Jilda M Aliotta,
‘Gender and Judging: Some Thoughts toward a Theory’ (Paper presented
at Annual Meeting of Midwest Political
Science Association, Chicago, 3–6
April 2003) at 10.
Kate Malleson,
‘Justifying Gender Equality on the Bench: Why Difference Won’t
Feminist Legal Studies
Madame Justice
L’Heureux-Dube of the Supreme Court of Canada considers the phenomenon in
the context of the struggle for equality.
See Claire L’Heureux-Dube,
‘Outsiders on the Bench: The continuing Struggle for Equality’
Wisconsin Women’s Law Journal
15. A telling anecdote she
relates in the context of her initial appointment in 1973 involved a young
neighbour rushing up to her
with the ‘news’, ‘They have
and my father says she’s a
and Distrust
, above n6.
Aliotta, above n105 at
Heather Elliott,
‘The Difference Women Judges make: Stare Decisis, Norms of Collegiality,
and “Feminine Jurisprudence”:
A Research Proposal’ (2001) 16
Wisconsin Women’s Law Journal
Patricia Yancey Martin,
John R Reynolds & Shelley Keith, ‘Gender Bias and Feminist
Consciousness among Judges and Attorneys:
A Standpoint Theory Analysis’
(2002) 27(3)
Gilligan, above n24.
Kathy Davis,
‘Toward a Feminist Rhetoric: The Gilligan Debate Revisited’ (1992)
Women’s Studies International Forum
Maria Drakopoulou,
‘Women’s Resolutions of Lawes Reconsidered: Epistemic Shifts and the
Emergence of the Feminist Legal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (205 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter