URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adams, Michael --- "Latest developments in SMEs officers' duties" [2011] ALRS 1
Latest Developments in SMEs Officers’ Duties
Professor Michael
Law, University of Western Sydney
This paper examines the balance between officers’ and directors’
duties in the context of modern regulatory reform. The
onus that falls on all
directors from a legal point of view is irrespective of the size and complexity
of the corporation. Thus,
a small (micro-business) with a single director has
the same legal obligation under the common law, the equitable fiduciary duties
and the statutory obligations under the
Corporations Act
. The current
Federal Government is attempting to reduce the burden of red tape on business
and the regulators, in particular ASIC,
are pursuing cases to enforce the law.
There has been recent cases law which helps explain the key statutory provisions
of the complexity
of the law. The major defence and protection for
officers’ duties, the so called “business judgement rule” does
not seem very effective and quality insurance cover is probably much more useful
in the commercial world.
Introduction
The last twenty years has seen the rise of a new Federal regulator, the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) to
promote and enforce
the major legislation – the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). In that
period, 1991 until 2011, the regulator, ASIC, has had a mixed level of success
in the area of enforcement, both against
corporate bodies and the individual
directors and
examines the impact of the regulator on officers’ (directors’)
duties as applied across all companies (including
small to medium size
enterprises). In particular, ASIC and the the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions (CDPP) have always
claimed a high success rate in litigation.
However, where the litigation, whether civil, civil penalty or criminal has been
the results have not been so positive, In fact, ASIC has in the last
12 months lost three very high profile cases, which has undermined
confidence of the regulator. It is worth noting that officers’ duties are
the same laws for all companies, irrespective
of the size and complexity of the
company. Obviously, if a corporation is also listed on a securities exchange,
such as the Australian
Securities Exchange (ASX), there are additional legal
responsibilities for officers.
It is worth noting that legal term “officer” is defined in
(Dictionary)
Corporations Act
(a) a director or secretary of the corporation; or
(b) a person:
(i) who makes, or participates in making, decisions that affect the whole,
or a substantial part, of
the business of the corporation; or
(ii) who has the capacity to affect significantly the corporation's
financial standing;
In most cases the majority of officers of a corporation are the directors,
but it does include the chief executive officer (CEO) and
possibly the chief
financial officer (CFO) and other senior executives, depending upon the size and
structure of the corporation.
In a small corporation it is likely to only be the
director(s) and CEO. The Royal Commission into the collapse of HIH Insurance
recommended
the change of definition of officer from “executives” to
this more functional approach to an officer.
Corporations Act
also has a definition of “director”,
which is also found in
(Dictionary) as:
(a) a person who:
(i) is appointed to the position of a director; or
(ii) is appointed to the position of an alternate director and is acting
in that capacity;
regardless of the name that is given to their position; and
(b) unless the contrary intention appears, a person who is not validly
appointed as a director if:
(i) they act in the position of a director; or
(ii) the directors of the company or body are accustomed to act in
accordance with the person's instructions
In 99% of cases, it is very clear who is an officer of a company, as it
includes all the directors and the company secretary (if appointed).
corporations, the CEO or managing director is nearly always a registered
director, but even if he or she is not, they would
be deemed to be an officer of
the company and thus bound by the same laws.
The officers of the company have very well defined legal obligations and
there is a clear link to the role of corporate governance
in al entities. Over
the last decade corporate governance and in particular the role of
officers’ duties has closely come under
the microscope of the courts in
all jurisdictions. No director, company secretary, general counsel or chief
financial officer could
argue they did not know what is expected of them in
terms of the basic legal duties owed to the company. The HIH Insurance Royal
Commissioner, the Hon Justice Neville Owen, in May 2008, re-stated the need for
a commitment to education on the fiduciary principle
and for greater
professionalism in governance.
This paper builds on some earlier published work on directors and
officers’ duties in the journal of Chartered Secretaries Australia,
Keeping Good Companies
The Federal
Minister responsible for developments in this area of law has noted that a
review into the Safe Harbour Rule (known as
the Business Judgment
Review of Sanctions in Corporate Law
(2007) paper, did not expect any
quick changes at the moment. This is very true statement, as there has been no
change to this officers’
defence and few directors have ever been able to
successfully rely upon it as a defence. The details of the business judgment
are discussed below.
It is fair to say that any lay person might feel confused over the state of
Australian corporate law. This is sharply brought into
focus for directors and
company officers that have an increasingly high expectations imposed upon them
by a number of stakeholders.
As the author has previously identified the following statement by Sir
Anthony Mason CJ wrote in 1992 that “Oscar Wilde described
fox-hunting as
“the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable”. Oscar Wilde, the
supreme stylist, would have regarded
Corporations Law
as uneatable but also as indigestible and
incomprehensible.”
has been the
primary regulator for corporations since the inception of the national
legislation in 1991. The ASIC
Annual Reports
provide some useful data for
comparative purposes and to set a back ground to the discussion on
officers’ duties.
New incorps.
Private (Pty)
Fundraising prospectuses
This table shows there has been a steady increase in the number of companies
registered each year and that the total number of proprietary
companies (which
are mostly classified as small to medium enterprises) make up over 98% of all
companies incorporated. It is interesting
to note the annual number of companies
incorporated has increased dramatically over the 20 years, whereas the
registered auditors,
prospectuses and takeovers have remained relatively stable.
Small corporations are not required to have auditors, are prohibited
issuing fundraising documents (prospectuses) and are not involved in takeovers
Corporations Act
The next table looks at the regulator and how it has changed over the two
Operating rev
Fees to Cth
Total equity
Staff (FTE)
One of the key areas of note is the enforcement aspect of ASIC, both directly
and in conjunction with the Commonwealth DPP. The table
below gives a useful
Reports of misconduct
Dollars recovered
In the last decade, sending corporate officers to jail has been a steady
stream averaging 22 directors and officers per year. The
ten years from 2000
until 2010 shows 220 officers were sent to jail in Australia. The highest year
was in 2000 with 25 jailings and
the lowest was in 2004 with 27 jailings. The
successful litigation percentage includes contested and uncontested cases, in
and criminal cases.
Focus on small corporations
Over the 20 years of ASIC regulation,
the Federal Minister who has been responsible has changed from government to
government. Currently,
the Hon Wayne Swan MP as Commonwealth Treasurer
has responsibility for “corporate and securities law”. Whereas,
within the Department of Treasury, the Hon David Bradbury
MP, as Parliamentary
Secretary to the Treasurer, is actually responsible for ASIC and corporate
governance. Then, the Hon Bill Shorten
MP, as Assistant Treasurer and Minister
for Financial Services and Superannuation, also has some corporate law
responsibilities.
However, it is the Hon Nick Sherry, who is the Minister for
Small Business and has been recently making a number of announcements.
Senator Sherry
noted that the Department of Finance has been conducting a review to reduce red
tape across the business sector. The review has found
that 11,444 regulations
have come under scrutiny and 4,214 are in fact redundant! This means 499
regulations can be repealed by
government departments and agencies. A further
ten statutes can be removed and 3,715 provisions by way of Parliament passing
necessary amendments.
There has been a particular focus on 27 priority areas, which focus on
harmonisation between state and federal jurisdictions, which
businesses. It is believed that cutting ten of the 27 areas will result in
savings of $3.5 billion across the economy,
with $1.8 billion benefiting
business. The key success to such reform is the role of the Council of
Australian Governments (COAG),
which has historically had a mixed result in
making such changes. The Federal government has provided up to $550 million to
the 27 priority areas including national reform of occupational health
and safety (OHS), consumer credit, consumer protection, environmental
assessment, rail safety, energy market regulation, national transport and
infrastructure reform.
The Small Business website
(www.business.gov.au)
has been seen as a great success and after 12 months has clocked up over 250,000
downloads of its business guides and templates.
This is a useful resource, but
does not cover any legal aspects relating to officers’ duties (although
other laws are generally
covered, including OHS and intellectual property).
The Minister for Small Business has noted that Australia has been ranked in
the top ten out of 183 economies for starting a business
by the World
The report,
Doing Business
placed Australia second in the world to start a business due to the short time,
low cost and few administrative procedures
required. Australia also ranked
highly in getting credit and the ease of doing business. But Senator Nick Sherry
has noted that the
two million small businesses could be helped even more and he
sees the COAG National Partnership to deliver a “Seamless National
Economy” as a crucial aspect. One practical way has been the
government’s provision of $42.5 million to 37 Business Enterprise
to help over 182,000 businesses. The tax benefits for small companies from July
2012 and the instant write-off of assets
under $5,000 will be a great help.
The cutting of red tape will always be easy to say but harder to deliver, but
the focus on simpler national business name registration
(with the three year
fee moving from $1,000 to just $70) and improved trademark searching. The
biggest help is probably the developments
in “standard business
reporting” (SBR) which has involved the governments with 30 software
developers and the acceptance
of Auskey for time-saving new digital security
certification to transmit data from business to the Government online. It is
that the full implementation of SBR could save businesses $800 million
annually. Other areas of reform for small business are loan
and credit reform to
cut the cost of capital/finance and the introduction of the
Personal Property
Security Act 2009
(Cth) from October 2011. This will make it much easier for
businesses to take secured loans and guarantee the repossession of goods
customer fails to pay. Deloitte Access Economics have predicted that these
reforms could cut the cost of small business borrowing
in Australia by 3%.
Australian Officers Duties Guides
Corporations Act 2001
contains a “
Business Guide
” which outlines in plain English the various legal
obligations of setting up and running a company. In
Small Business Guide
it informs about the appointment of directors
and their basic legal duties. For convenience this is reproduced:
1 What registration means
1.8 Directors
The directors of a company are responsible for managing the company's business.
It is a replaceable rule (see 1.6)
that generally the directors may exercise all
the powers of the company except a power that the
Corporations Act
replaceable rule or a provision of the company's constitution (if any) requires
the company to exercise in general meeting.
The only director of a company who is also the only shareholder is responsible
for managing the company's business
and may exercise all of the company's
Corporations Act
sets out rules dealing with the calling and conduct of
directors' meetings. Directors must keep a written record (minutes) of their
resolutions and meetings.
There are 2 ways that directors may pass resolutions:
• at a meeting; or
• by having all of the directors record and sign
their decision.
If a company has only 1 director, the sole director may also pass a resolution
by recording and signing their decision.
[sections 198A, 198E, 202C, subsection 202F(1),
sections 248A
5 Company directors and company
secretaries
5.1 Who can be a director
Only an individual who is at least 18 years old can be a director. If a company
has only 1 director, they must
ordinarily reside in Australia. If a company has
more than 1 director, at least 1 of the directors must ordinarily reside in
A director must consent in writing to holding the position of director. The
company must keep the consent and must
notify ASIC of the appointment.
In some circumstances, the
Corporations Act
imposes the duties and obligations
of a director on a person who, although not formally appointed as a director of
a company, nevertheless
acts as a director or gives instructions to the formally
appointed directors as to how they should act.
The Court or ASIC may prohibit a person from being a director or from otherwise
being involved in the management
of a company if, for example, the person has
breached the
Corporations Act
A person needs the Court's permission to be a director if the person has been
convicted of certain offences or
is, in some circumstances, unable to pay their
debts as they fall due.
Generally, a director may resign by giving notice of the resignation to the
company. A director who resigns may
notify ASIC of the resignation. If the
director does not do so, the company must notify ASIC of the director's
resignation.
[sections 9, 201A, 201B, 201D, 205A, 205B and 206A-206G, 228-230 and
242 and subsection 1317EA(3)]
5.2 Appointment of new directors
It is a replaceable rule (see 1.6) that shareholders may appoint directors by
resolution at a general meeting.
[section 201G ]
5.3 Duties and liabilities of directors
In managing the business of a company (see 1.7), each of its directors is
subject to a wide range of duties under
Corporations Act
and other laws.
Some of the more important duties are:
• to act in good faith
• to act in the best interests of the company
• to avoid conflicts between the interests of the
company and the director's interests
• to act honestly
• to exercise care and diligence
• to prevent the company trading while it is unable
to pay its debts
• if the company is being wound up--to report to the
liquidator on the affairs of the company
• if the company is being wound up--to help the
liquidator (by, for example, giving to the liquidator any records of the
that the director has).
A director who fails to perform their duties:
• may be guilty of a criminal offence with a penalty
of $200,000 or imprisonment for up to 5 years, or both; and
• may contravene a civil penalty provision (and the
Court may order the person to pay to the Commonwealth an amount of up
$200,000); and
• may be personally liable to compensate the company
or others for any loss or damage they suffer; and
• may be prohibited from managing a company.
A director's obligations may continue even after the company has been
deregistered.
[Sections 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 475, 530A, 588G, 596, 601AE,
601AH, 1317H]
The Australian Government’s reform body for corporate law, the
Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee (CAMAC) in April
2010 published a
more detailed guide to
report outlines in detail the challenges for directors and the various guidance
to be drawn from legislation, the case law,
the regulators and the ASX Corporate
Governance Council. It also provides an international comparison with the United
Kingdom and
North America. The report is a useful resource for public companies
and those listed on the ASX rather than smaller entities.
Before examining the recent developments in Australian case law of officers
and in particular director’s duties, it is valuable
to review the existing
laws. There is a natural overlap between the legislation imposed by Parliament
and the case law developed
over the last couple of centuries. Companies have
existed since 1600
but the modern incorporated (registered) company can be identified since
has mostly followed the corporate laws of the United Kingdom and moved to
registered corporations as part of the move in
1991 to a national system, under
what is now the
Corporations Act 2001
Overview of Officers
and Directors’ Duties in Australia
In Australia, the law relating to officers and directors can be divided into
• Statutory duties
• Common law duties (such as the duties of care, skill and
• Equitable fiduciary duties.
The fundamental duties that are imposed on all officers of all companies can
be illustrated in a Venn diagram. The overlapping areas
represent how the
Corporations Act 2001
reflects parts of the common law and
equitable principle.
: Overview of officers’
1992 - updated)
Some duties are specifically laid out in statute, such as insider trading in
Other duties, such as when directors have interests in company
contracts, are both statutory
and fiduciary duties.
Directors must not trade while insolvent by
and have a common law duty to
consider creditors in times of financial trouble, as in the High Court of
Australia case of
[2000] HCA 43.
Where the three circles intersect represents s
provides that the duties imposed by legislation are additional to the duties
imposed at common law and in equity, rather than
exclusive of them. Thus a
director could be sued for all three actions rather than just the
Corporations Act
or the common law/equity principles. An example of a
director being held liable for all three types of actions occurred in
Australia State Bank v Clark
(1996) 16 ACSR 606.
A breach of
may result in a civil penalty order under
but this is not applied under the common law or equity. However, further
criminal liability may also arise under
in relation to the types of
breaches found in
However, it is worth noting that at common law officers are expected to be
honest and to take reasonable care in exercising their
duties. At the same time,
provides that officers are required to discharge their duties in good
faith and for a proper purpose, whilst
provides that they must do so
with reasonable care and diligence. Also, the equitable principles of avoiding
conflicts of interest
and not taking advantage of confidential information are
reflected in both
Working professional directors and officers (as well as the many
non-executive and part-time directors) have difficulty with keeping
with the many cases surrounding the same factual circumstances, but deal with
different aspects of the law. For example
the OneTel litigation, which is often
cited as the
ASIC v Rich
[2003] NSWSC 85
involves many different
sub-cases. Obviously, the HIH litigation and the GIO litigation, all produced
many cases surrounding the
directors’ duties. In the future, the 2007-2008
collapses of Opes Prime brokers’ litigation and Centro shopping centres,
will produce multiple cases to confuse directors and company secretaries.
One of the most significant decisions was the
ASIC v Rich
the “Greaves One.Tel” case) which occurred in 2003, as it examined
the precise role of a chairman of the collapsed
tele-communications company,
One.Tel. Mr Greaves was held to have been a paid non-executive director with
finance experience and
thus owed a higher duty of care under the common law and
statute than other directors by Justice Austin. This original case was a
procedural action which was to be struck out, went on to an out-of-court
settlement for $20 million, which was paid to the liquidator.
This settlement
plus an agreed banning order had to be formally certified by Justice White and
thus gives legal status to the earlier
decision of Justice Austin in the NSW
Supreme Court. Unfortunately, the final case of Jodee Rich did not work out
positively for
ASIC in 2009. Before detailing the failed litigation of ASIC, it
is important to note the limited success in the James Hardie litigation
other major cases.
The High Court of Australia does not often examine corporate law cases, but
one of the many One.Tel cases,
Rich v ASIC
examined the
importance of procedures in the area of civil penalties. The HIH Insurance
cases around
ASIC v Adler, Williams & Fodera
[2002] NSWSC 171
examines in depth the civil penalty standards of directors’ duties. In
particular whether Mr Rodney Adler acted honestly (a
reasonable care and diligence (a breach of
by Mr Ray Williams and Mr
Adler. Unusually, was a separate criminal prosecution was launched against Mr
, resulting
in a conviction and jail sentence. This was followed by the high profile case of
Steve Vizard for using confidential information
from the boardroom of Telstra
for personal gain.
This case could have been brought under the insider trading laws, but was in
fact brought under the directors’ duties provision
for misusing
confidential information.
Hot on the heels of the HIH Insurance cases was the GIO cases (the hostile
takeover by AMP of GIO) which resulted in
ASIC v Vines, Robertson &
[2005] NSWSC 738 (22
held the three CFOs of the various GIO companies liable for a breach of their
duties as officers of the target company.
A higher duty of care had been
expected of a chair of a company or even a board audit committee following
Hall v Poolman
[2007] NSWSC 1330.
Thus, after a number of successes against directors in the civil and criminal
courts, ASIC potentially hit a wall. The initial highs
of the successful 2009
James Hardie
resulted in an appellant court over-ruling Justice Gzell in a number of ways and
exonerating most of the directors held liable.
The case of
Morley v ASIC
[2010] NSWCA 331
(17 December) and
James Hardie Industries NV v ASIC
[2010] NSWCA 332
(17 December) was a huge step backwards for the regulator.
The outcome of the appeal was that mixed in that the company (JHL) did
misleading statements to the ASX in June 2002 and failed to comply with
continuous disclosure. The CFO at the time, Mr Morley,
was in breach of his duty
in advising the board and limited nature of the predicted analysis of
compensation. Similarly, the company
secretary and general counsel, Mr Shafron,
had part of his appeal upheld, but still in breach of his duty to advise the
other non-executive directors, including the chair, Ms Hellicar, were
successful with their appeals and breaches of the officers’
were removed, in respect of the approved minutes of the board meeting (which
became the ASX announcement on asbestos compensation).
ASIC was criticised for
not calling a particular witness (an external lawyer) who was present at the
relevant board meeting of
This case is
not yet over as on 14 January 2011, ASIC applied to the High Court of Australia
for special leave to appeal the decision
of the NSW Court of
Losing High Profile Cases
In the last twelve months ASIC has lost a number of high profile cases,
including the One.Tel (Jodee Rich case), the AWB case (against
Lindberg) and the Fortescue Metals case (against the CEO Andrew Forrest). As
with any paper, it must be noted that the
law does not stand still and there are
various levels of appeal occurring for all these cases.
The One.Tel case resulted from the collapse of the tele-communication company
in 2004. The final decision was handed down by Justice
Austin in the NSW Supreme
Court in late 2009 in
ASIC v Rich
[2009] NSWSC 1229
(18 November). The
two managing-directors, Mr Jodee Rich and Mr Mark Silberman were found not to
have breached their officers’
duties. The cost of the defence was $15
million, which must be paid by ASIC. Two other former directors of One.Tel, Mr
Bradley Keeling
and Mr John Greaves, settled out of court and thus have bans
imposed upon them for ten years and four years respectively.
Probably one of the most important current cases involved the entrepreneur
and miner, Mr Andrew Forrest and his listed company, Fortescue
Metals Group Ltd
(FMG). Mr Forrest, on behalf of FMG announced through media releases and ASX
announcements a “binding agreement”
with Chinese state-owned
corporations to develop the Pilbara region of Western Australia for iron ore
exploration. From August 2004
until November the share price rose from 59 cents
to $1.93 and by March 2005 a high of $5.05 per share. The
Financial Review
newspaper investigated the claims of the binding agreement
and the price started to drop (once the agreements were disclosed to the
ASIC started proceedings against the company, FMG, for misleading statements and
failing to properly comply with continuous
disclosure. In addition, Mr Forrest
was alleged to have breached his officers’ duty of reasonable care under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth). The Federal Court found that there was
no breach of the Act in
[2009] FCA 1586
(23 December).
ASIC decided to appeal the decision of the trial judge, Justice Gilmour and
were successful on all counts in
ASIC v Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
(18 February). The actual penalty imposed on FMG for the breach of
misleading conduct (s 1041H) or the continuous disclosure (s 674(2))
personally for Mr Forrest for the officers’ duty of reasonable care (s
180(1)) and involvement with a breach of continuous
disclosure (under s 674(2A))
has not yet been
determined.
Business Judgement Rule
The American developments of corporate law have finally refined what is known
as the “safe harbour rule” for directors.
This means that if a
director makes an honest decision, which with the benefit of hindsight appears
to be negligent, then the director
is protected from legal action by the company
or its shareholders (a class action). In Australia this common law
deemed to be too vague and a statutory formulation was created in what is now s
180(2) and re-named the “business judgment
Section 180 states:
(2) A director or other officer of a corporation who makes a
business judgment is taken to meet the requirements of subsection (1),
their equivalent duties at common law and in equity, in respect of the judgment
(a) make the judgment in good faith for a proper purpose; and
(b) do not have a material personal interest in the subject matter of
the judgment; and
(c) inform themselves about the subject matter of
the judgment to the extent they reasonably believe to be appropriate; and
(d) rationally believe that the judgment is in the best interests of
the corporation.
The director's or officer's belief that the judgment is in the best interests
of the corporation is a rational one unless the belief
is one that no reasonable
person in their position would hold.
Although this looks like a useful and
practical protection for officers and directors, in reality it has been rarely
successfully
used in any case! The few cases it has been applied, the directors
in question have failed the “material personal interest”
It is important to note that many of the principles of
law discussed above can be derived from the general or basic law duties which
were borrowed by way of an analogy of the trustees’ duties owed to the
beneficiaries, from 1853 in
Re German Mining Co; ex parte
Chippendale
Although the
Corporations Act
in many ways codifies the common law and
equitable duties, there is still an overlap and have different outcomes in terms
of remedies
or sanctions.
ASIC must take risks with litigation, as it is the only way to really test
the statutory provisions of the complex
Corporations Act
. However, there
is a publicity risk when the regulators lose a major case, but proper case
preparation is crucial.
Although many of the cases mentioned in this paper focus on the large ASX
listed companies and their officers and directors, the principles
are applied to
all corporations. The burden of regulation on a director of a small company is
huge as they do not normally have the
financial resources to fight a big complex
case against ASIC or any of the other regulators, such as the Australian
Taxation Office
or the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. Good
corporate governance principles are valuable for all
It is essential that all officers, in respect of all size of corporations
understand the role of insurance (particular the specialist
policies for
directors and officers insurance known as “D&O” policies). It is
D&O insurance that plays a significant
role in how directors’ cases
are run out in the courts. It is critical to remember that insurance does not
cover the outcome
of a criminal prosecution nor civil penalties, as a matter of
public policy and statutory intervention. It may help towards the legal
costs, but not a penalty for an adverse finding in a case. All officers and
directors are advised to keep a careful watching
brief on the ever changes
currents of litigation. The general duties of honesty and diligence will never
change for professional
officers for every company in Australia.
Michael Adams is the Head of School of Law at the University of Western Sydney
and any comments may be emailed to: Michael.Adams@uws.edu.au
For a detailed
discussion of the regulation of small corporations, see Michael Adams “20
year snap-shot of the developments
in the regulation of small
corporations” (2009) 4(4)
Journal of Business Systems, Governance and
Michael Adams
“Are all directors created equal? Reassessing the role of the chair in the
light of ASIC v Rich”
Keeping Good Companies
Adams “Officers’ duties under the microscope”
Keeping Good Companies
and Michael Adams “Officers’
duties –are we keeping up with the changes?”
Good Companies
Corporations Act
Anthony Mason
“Corporate law: The challenge of complexity”
(1992) 2(1)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Originally the
regulator was the Australian Securities Commission (ASC) until its jurisdiction
for financial services was increased
in July 1998 and the name changed to
Senator Nick
Sherry in his capacity as Minister Assisting on Deregulation announced in a
Media Release “Repeal of redundant
regulations dating back to Treaty of
Versailles” on 30 March 2011.
Senator Nick
Sherry in his capacity as Minister for Small Business in the Media Release
“business.gov.au reaches downloads
milestone” on 5 April 2011.
Nick Sherry
“Repeal Address to Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry General
Council” Hotel Intercontinental,
Sydney on 31 March 2011.
& International Finance Corporation
Doing Business 2011: Making a
difference for entrepreneurs
World Bank, 4 November
Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee,
Guidance for Directors
Honourable East India Company, 1600
Joint Stock Companies Act
Jason Harris,
Anil Hargovan, Michael Adams,
Australian Corporate Law
edition 2009, LexisNexis:Butterworths 439.
detailed discussion on this case, see Michael Adams “Whether to protect or
punish: legal consequences of contravening
Corporations Act
Keeping Good Companies
[2005] NSWSC 315
[2005] NSWSC 274
[2005[ FCA 1037
detailed discussion of this case, see: Michael Adams “Officers’
duties under the microscope”
Keeping Good Companies
MacDonald (No 11)
[2009] NSWSC 287
(23 April) and penalties imposed at
ASIC v MacDonald (No 12)
[2009] NSWSC 714
(20 August)
More detailed
discussions at Anil Hargovan “Directors’ and officers’ duty of
care following James Hardie”
Keeping Good Companies
Richard Head “Directors and officers still in the firing line – a
guide to managing risk”
Keeping Good Companies
“ASIC applies for special leave to appeal James Hardie decision”
ASIC Media Release
11-07MR (14 January 2011)
Bench of the Federal Court has sent the matter of penalties to a single judge of
the Federal Court for determination. There
is a possibility that Mr Forrest and
FMG may appeal the decision to the High
Harlowe’s Nominees PL v Woodside (Lakes Entrance) Oil NL
Briggs and Evan Richards “Time for a new business judgment rule?”
Keeping Good Companies
[2002] NSWSC 171
Gold Ribbon (Accountants) PL v Sheers
ASIC v Rich
[2009] NSWSC
3 De GM & G 19
Michael Adams
“The three pillars of good corporate governance” (2004)
http://www.riskmanagementmagazine.com.au/articles/d3/0c03c8d3.asp
8 April 2011.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (4.1 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter