URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 9 - Enduring Guardianship" [2011] SydUPLawBk 11; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
9. 1. Introduction
9. 2. What is enduring guardianship?
9. 3. Capacity to appoint an enduring guardian or an attorney under an enduring power of attorney for personal matters
9. 3. 1. The relevant legislation
9. 3. 2. The common law tests for capacity
9. 3. 3 The clinician’s assessment of capacity to appoint or revoke an enduring guardian - New South Wales, South Australia,
Tasmania and Victoria
9. 3. 4. The clinician’s assessment of capacity to appoint or revoke the appointment of attorneys under enduring powers of attorney
- Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory
9. 4. Appointing enduring guardians
9. 4. 1. Who may be appointed?
9. 4. 2. Appointment procedures
9. 4. 3. When do appointments of enduring guardians or their equivalents commence?
9. 4. 4. Powers of enduring guardians and their equivalents
9. 4. 5. Directions to enduring guardians (attorneys for personal matters)
9. 4. 6. Principles enduring guardians (attorneys for personal matters) are required to or should apply
9. 4. 7. Consideration of the views of the maker of the power of attorney/appointor of the enduring guardian
9. 4. 8. Assistance for enduring guardians and attorneys for personal matters
9. 5. Ending appointments of enduring guardians (attorneys for personal matters)
9. 5. 1. Revocation by appointor
9. 5. 2. Resignation of enduring guardian (attorney for personal matters)
9. 5. 3. Suspension when guardianship order made
9. 5. 4. Reviewing appointments of enduring guardians (attorneys for personal matters)
Chapter 9 – Enduring Guardianship
9. 1. Introduction
This chapter describes key aspects of the power of a person to make
arrangements for the possibility that they lose their decision-making
by appointing an enduring guardian. Loss of decision-making capacity will become
a reality if, for example, they already
have, or subsequently develop dementia.
The concept of enduring guardianship was first introduced, in Australia, by
Guardianship and Administration Act
which came into
force in 1995. Since then enduring guardianship has been introduced by
legislation in all the other States and in
the Australian Capital Territory.
9. 2. What is enduring guardianship?
In all the States and the Australian Capital Territory, adults with the
mental capacity to do so may appoint other adults they trust
to become their
guardians and make personal decisions for them when they lose the capacity to
make those decisions for themselves.
The guardians so appointed are called
enduring guardians in South Australia, New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria and
Western Australia.
They are appointed under legislation that sets out the
arrangements for their appointment and associated
In Queensland, and the
Australian Capital Territory where the powers of attorney legislation has been
extended, attorneys may be
appointed under enduring powers of attorney to
exercise not only financial management and other similar functions as agent on
of the person appointing them, but also personal decision-making
functions on behalf of their
appointors.
They are known as
attorneys for personal matters in Queensland and attorneys for personal care
matters in the Australian Capital
9. 3. Capacity to appoint an enduring guardian or an
attorney under an enduring power of attorney for personal matters
9. 3. 1. The relevant legislation
In South Australia, New South Wales, Tasmania and Victoria the legislation,
which is in identical terms, does not refer to a test
for capacity to appoint an
enduring guardian.
statutory requirement is that the person be 18 years or older. In Western
Australia the person must be 18 years or older
and have “full legal
capacity” which itself is not
Consequently, the test for
capacity to appoint an enduring guardian is to be found in the common law set
out in 9. 3. 2.
In Queensland under the general principles of the
Powers of Attorney
, a person is presumed to have
Nevertheless the
states that a person may make an enduring power of attorney only if
they understand the nature and effect of the enduring power of
Furthermore, the
states that understanding the nature and effect of
the enduring power of attorney includes understanding the following matters:
1. that they may, in the power of attorney, specify or limit the power to be
given to an attorney and instruct an attorney about the
exercise of the
2. when the power begins,
3. that once the power has begun, the attorney has power to make, and will
have full control over, the matters covered by the power
subject to terms or
information about exercising the power included in the enduring power of
4. that they may revoke the enduring power of attorney at any time when they
are capable of making an enduring power of attorney giving
the same power to an
5. that the power of attorney continues even if they lose capacity and become
“a person who has impaired capacity”, and
6. that at any time they are not capable of revoking the enduring power of
attorney, because they have become “a person who
has impaired
capacity”, while they may still be able to express their views, they will
be unable to effectively oversee the
The Australian Capital Territory legislation is similar to the Queensland
Powers of Attorney Act
states that, in
the absence of evidence to the contrary, a person who makes a power of attorney
matters is taken to understand the nature and
effect of making the power of
notes that the term “understanding the nature and effect of making a power
of attorney” includes understanding the
same matters as are set out in the
It should be noted that for the purposes of the ACT
, a person has
impaired decision-making capacity
if they cannot make decisions in
relation to their affairs or do not understand the nature or effect of the
decisions they make in
relation to those
A person does not have
impaired decision-making capacity only because they have certain attributes or
behaviours set out in section
9. 3. 2. The common law tests for capacity
The initial test for capacity to make documents with legal effect, often
called instruments, is long established in Australian common
law. It was laid
down in 1954 by Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ of the High Court of Australia as
The mental capacity required by law in respect of any instrument is relative to
the particular transaction which is being effected
by means of the instrument,
and may be described as the capacity to understand the nature of the transaction
In 1988 Young J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales noted that when
considering whether a person is capable of giving that an
enduring power of
attorney, which is not unlike an appointment of an enduring guardian:
[O]ne would have to be sure not only that she understood that she was
authorising someone to look after her affairs but also what
sort of things the
Attorney could do without further reference to
In England the accepted view appears to be that to have the capacity to make
an enduring power of attorney the principal (the giver
of the power) must
understand nature and effect of their appointment is that:
1. the attorney can take complete control of their financial affairs (unless
the terms of the power of attorney limit this),
2. the attorney can do anything principal can do,
3. the attorney’s authority will continue after principal loses
capacity, and that,
4. the enduring power of attorney effectively becomes irrevocable if
principal loses capacity (because the principal can no longer
revoke the power
of attorney).
This approach was followed in Queensland before the enactment of the
Powers of Attorney Act
subject to the caveat noted by
Cullinane J that it is “not necessary for a person to have capacity to
understand all of the
implications or legal consequences of the grant of the
power of attorney”.
Nevertheless, in Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory, appointors
(the makers of enduring powers of attorney) must understand
each matter set out
in the statutory test for capacity.
At the time of writing, no test had been laid down for capacity to make an
appointment of an enduring guardian in the other States.
However, it is safe to
assume that the
Gibbons v Wright
approach is the starting point and that
an appointor will be treated as having capacity if they are able to understand
of the appointment they are making when it is explained to
While it would not be
necessary for them to understand all the implications or legal consequences of
the appointment, it is suggested
that they would need to understand that
1. are appointing someone to make all the personal decisions for them that a
guardian is authorised by legislation or the common law
to make or, if the
appointment is limited, just those decisions set out in appointment of enduring
guardianship, during any period
in which they have lost their capacity, even if
they subsequently regain their capacity,
2. are able to instruct the enduring guardian about the making of those
decisions in the appointment document,
3. will not be able to revoke the appointment if they lose capacity, and
4. while they could, if they were still physically able to do so, communicate
their views to their enduring guardian during any periods
in which they have
lost their capacity, their enduring guardian would not be bound by those views
but would be obliged to make decisions
for them in their best interests.
It is suggested that it is good practice for any lawyer assisting a client to
make an appointment of an enduring guardian in any of
the States other than
Queensland to advise their clients of the matters set out in the last paragraph.
Lawyers in Queensland and
the Australian Capital Territory should advise their
clients of the matters set out above and contained in their powers of attorney
legislation.
If a client is
unable to understand any of those matters when explained, it is suggested that
they will lack the capacity to appoint
an enduring guardian.
Collier and others have noted at least anecdotal evidence the failure by
lawyers when taking instructions for the making of enduring
documents from those
whose symptoms of declining capacity would have been apparent at the time the
instructions were taken to consider
the elements of capacity and ask probing
questions. Instead, they have been prepared to rely on questions which require a
or “no” answer for their assessment of their
client’s capacity. Adopting the approach recommended by Collier and
to lawyers when obtaining instructions for the drafting of enduring powers of
attorney for financial and personal matters
and similar documents in Queensland,
it is suggested that it is pertinent when obtaining instructions for the
drafting of appointments
of enduring guardians and similar enduring powers of
attorney elsewhere in Australia that lawyers to inquire, “at least in
general way”, into:
1. the person’s account of their family and other background,
2. their health and personal circumstances,
3. the type of decisions that are likely to be needed in relation to their
welfare in the future,
4. what the person’s wishes are in these respects,
5. why the prospective guardian or attorney has been selected, and
6. whether there has been any consideration of that person’s skills to
undertake the personal decisions required of
It is also suggested that if a lawyer is unclear whether their client has the
capacity to appoint an enduring guardian they should
seek the opinion of a
health professional qualified to assess mental capacity and advise them of the
matters that their client must
be capable of understanding before they can make
an appointment. They should not assist their client to complete the appointment
process until they have received a report from the capacity assessor advising
that their client has
9. 3. 3 The clinician’s assessment of
capacity to appoint or revoke an enduring guardian - New South Wales, South
Tasmania and Victoria
When health care professionals are asked to perform such assessments, as with
other capacity assessments, it is important to place
the specific assessment of
capacity in the context of an estimation of the person’s overall mental
functioning and health status.
A global assessment of the person’s mental
state and cognitive function should be made as well as an assessment of the
executive and functions of judgment, reasoning and planning which are
relevant to decision-making. Similar to the type of enquiry
recommended for
lawyers, the health care professional should consider the following:
1. does the person understand that if disability renders them unable to
manage their affairs and make decisions for themselves, their
guardian may make decisions on their behalf about accommodation, health care,
personal services, and medical treatment?
2. do they understand that the guardian can decide the actual place in which
they are to live and the actual health care and personal
services they are to
Additionally, an essential requirement when assessing capacity to make the
kinds of enduring document being considered in this chapter,
is to ensure
whether the person is doing so freely and voluntarily and is not being unduly
influenced or “schooled” to
make an appointment.
As has been noted elsewhere,
dementia may affect a person’s appraisal of
Therefore, when
undertaking assessments of people who wish to appoint an enduring guardian, it
is important to undertake the interview
in private. Further, the rationale for
appointing a particular person as enduring guardian should be assessed. In doing
so, the health
care professional might ascertain the following:
1. has the person appointed any enduring guardians previously?
2. if so, how frequently have there been changes (i.e. revocations and new
appointments)?
3. is this appointment in keeping with previous appointments (e.g. has
someone else been consistently appointed as enduring guardian
in the past)?
4. what is the history of the relationship between the person and the
appointee and has there been any radical change in that relationship
with the onset or course of dementia?
5. why has the person been selected for appointment as enduring guardian?
9. 3. 4. The clinician’s assessment of
capacity to appoint or revoke the appointment of attorneys under enduring powers
of attorney
- Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory
When assessing a person’s capacity to appoint an attorney under an
enduring power of attorney
in Queensland and the Australian
Capital Territory, the clinician must put their mind to whether the person is
appointing an attorney
for personal or financial matters or both. Consequently,
the lawyer drafting the power of attorney document should advise the clinician
of the terms of the draft document. The clinician’s assessment must be
directed to the type of appointment being made, but
made in terms of the
Queensland (and Australian Capital Territory) statutory criteria set out above
at 9. 3. 1.
If the person is appointing an attorney for personal matters, the principles
outlined above in 9.3.3 for assessment of capacity to
appoint an enduring
guardian with regards to global assessment, assessment of executive function,
ascertainment of previous patterns
of trust and relationships and ensuring that
the person isn’t being schooled apply here equally.
If the person is appointing an attorney for financial matters, the same
principles of assessment apply, but additionally the person
needs to be assessed
for their understanding of issues specific to appointing a financial
decision-maker. Using the tests outlined
above, laid down by Dixon CJ, Kitto and
Taylor JJ of the High Court of
and Young J of the
Supreme Court of New South
, the person needs to
understand the nature and effect of the document and specifically, they need to
understand both that they are
authorising someone to look after their financial
affairs as well as understanding the sort of things the attorney can do without
reference to them, such as sell their house or write cheques on their
9. 4. Appointing enduring guardians
9. 4. 1. Who may be appointed?
A person has to be an adult, 18 years or older, to be appointed as an
enduring guardian. It is wise to appoint one or more members
family or one or more long term friends who can be trusted to carry out their
functions as enduring guardians in the
best interests of the person appointing
them and to follow any instructions or directions given to the guardians in the
appointing them.
Certain people cannot be appointed as enduring guardians. In South Australia
and Tasmania those prohibited are those who are, in either
a professional or an
administrative capacity, directly or indirectly responsible for or involved in
the medical care or treatment
of the appointor. Whether only medical care and
medical treatment are covered or the prohibition on appointment applies to the
and staff of aged care facilities or other service provider agencies is
an open question. However, the appointment of an enduring
guardian lapses if the
enduring guardian joins a prohibited
In Victoria the prohibition applies to those who are, either directly or
indirectly, responsible for or involved in the care, treatment
or accommodation
of the appointor.
In New South
Wales the prohibition extends even further and to include any of those already
mentioned together with anyone involved
in the provision of support services to
the appointor and anyone who is the spouse, parent, child, brother or sister of
any of those
already mentioned.
However, if a person who is an enduring guardian enters a prohibited category in
relation to a person they are the enduring guardian
of their appointment does
The only requirements in Western Australia are that the enduring guardian is
18 years or older and has full legal
In Queensland the equivalent of enduring guardians are those attorneys
appointed under enduring powers of attorney in which they are
given powers for
personal and health care matters. The Adult Guardian may be appointed. So may
the Public Trustee or a trustee company.
Private persons must be at least 18
years and they cannot be a paid carer, health provider or service provider for
any residential
service where the maker of the appointment is
In the Australian Capital Territory, an enduring guardian, called an attorney
for a personal care or health care matter, must be an
adult and a person.
Neither a corporation nor the Public Advocate may be
9. 4. 2. Appointment procedures
The legislation of each State and the Australian Capital Territory sets out
procedures for a capable adult to appoint an enduring
guardian or make an
enduring power of attorney for personal
It is not intended to
discuss those procedures here as helpful information is available on the
websites of guardianship tribunal
or public guardians or advocates of State and
the Australian Capital Territory. Nevertheless, it should be noted that in
an appointment of an enduring guardian is not effective until it is
registered with the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration
9. 4. 3. When do appointments of enduring
guardians or their equivalents commence?
In all the States and the Australian Capital Territory and enduring guardian
or attorney for personal matters may carry out their
powers or functions at any
time that the person who has appointed them does not have the capacity to make
personal decisions for
themselves.
Appointors may lack
capacity for a period and regain it subsequently or they may lose their capacity
permanently. In either case
their enduring guardian or attorney for personal
matters may carry out their powers or functions. In Queensland and Victoria the
legislation makes it clear that the powers or functions given are exercisable
only in relation to those personal matters for which
the appointor has lost
Sometimes it will not be clear whether a person has lost capacity so that the
enduring guardian or attorney for personal matters can
commence to act under
their appointment. At other times there will be controversy about this matter
between family members or between
family members and service providers. In these
situations in New South Wales, the enduring guardian may apply to the
Guardianship
Tribunal for an order declaring that the appointment is in
operation. Before the Tribunal may make such an order, it must be satisfied
the appointor did indeed appoint the person as their enduring guardian and now
the appointor is a person who, on the evidence
placed before it, is in need of a
On that question, the
certificate of a doctor to the effect that the appointor was, on a particular
day or during a particular period,
totally or partially incapable of managing
their person because of a disability is evidence that the appointor was a person
The Tribunal may also revoke such a declaratory order either by deciding to
do so itself (on its own motion) or on the application
of a person the Tribunal
considers has a genuine concern for the welfare of the
In Queensland, QCAT may make a declaration about the capacity of the maker of
an enduring power of attorney for personal matters in
relation to one or more
personal matters. If the maker is found to have impaired capacity for matters
covered by the enduring power
of attorney, then the declaration will show that
that power of attorney is in effect in relation to those
The South Australian Guardianship Board does not have power to make such
declarations. The Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration
Board however can,
through the application of the enduring guardian, give advice or direction on
any matter relating to the scope
of the enduring guardian’s appointment or
the exercise of any powers given them in the
appointment.
If that provision
is seen as not allowing for advice that the enduring guardian’s
appointment is or is not in effect, a second
provision would almost certainly
provide The Boar with the necessary power. This is because the Tasmanian
allows the Board, of its own motion, give advice to the enduring
guardian ‘in respect of any
provision in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Vic) is not in
the same terms as the Tasmanian provision, it is suggested that it is capable of
being used as a means of obtaining
advice from VCAT that an appointment of
enduring guardianship is in
In Western Australia, WASAT may make a declaration that an appointor is
unable to make reasonable judgments about matters relating
Such a declaration
effectively means that the enduring guardian can exercise the functions given
them under their appointment.
The Tribunal may revoke such a declaration thus stopping the operation of the
appointment of enduring
guardianship.
In the Australian Capital Territory ACAT may make a declaration as to whether
or not a person who has made an enduring power of attorney
for personal or
health care matters has decision-making capacity or has impaired decision-making
capacity. ACAT may also make a declaration
of attorney.
It is suggested
that these provisions allow ACAT to make it clear, after the appropriate
hearing, that an enduring power of attorney
is in operation.
9. 4. 4. Powers of enduring guardians and their
equivalents
In South Australia an enduring guardian has all the powers in law and equity
of an enduring guardian unless named powers are excluded
in the document
appointing them. Their powers are subject to any conditions or limitations set
out in that document.
addition, the powers conferred by the document appointing them must be exercised
in accordance with any lawful directions contained
in that document, unless the
Guardianship Board approves
An appointor may not
direct an enduring guardian to do anything unlawful and an enduring guardian
should disregard any such direction.
In Tasmania, like in South Australia, enduring guardians are full or plenary
guardians with all the powers and duties a guardian would
have if they were a
parent and the appointor was their
In Victoria, unless the document appointing an enduring guardian limits the
powers they may exercise to those set out in it, the enduring
guardian will be a
plenary guardian with all the powers and duties a guardian would have if they
were a parent and the appointor
In Western Australia the
provisions are differently stated but have the same effect. An enduring guardian
will be a plenary guardian
unless their functions are limited to specific
functions set out in the document appointing
In Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory, as the legislation refers
to the enduring attorney appointed for one or more matters,
it is wise to list
the personal matters in relation to which the attorney for personal matters is
to be appointed.
In New South Wales, an enduring guardian will have the following functions
unless the document appointing them excludes any of those
1. deciding the place (such as a specific nursing
2. deciding the health care that the appointor is to receive,
3. deciding the other kinds of personal services that the appointor is to
receive, and
4. giving consent to the carrying out of medical or dental treatment on the
In addition, the appointor could include any other function of a guardian in
the appointment document.
9. 4. 5. Directions to enduring guardians
(attorneys for personal matters)
In New South Wales and Tasmania there are similar provisions to South
Australia in relation to conditions, limitations and lawful
directions.
The Queensland
legislation allows the appointer to provide ‘terms or information about
exercising the power’.
Victoria appointors may require their enduring guardians to take into account
the wishes they include in their appointment
In Western Australia
the appointor may limit the circumstances in which the enduring guardian may
Power of Attorney
Act 2006 (ACT)
does not address these matters.
In 2009 McDougall J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales held that a
direction to a guardian in an appointment of enduring guardianship
certain specified medical treatment was a valid “Advance Care
Directive” and that the person’s treating
doctors were justified in
complying with the directive. McDougall J made a declaration to that
It is suggested that
this decision applies to directions given in appointments of enduring
guardianship or their equivalents in the
other States and in the Australian
Capital Territory, unless their legislation specifically, or by necessary
implication, precludes
the giving of such
directions.
9. 4. 6. Principles enduring guardians (attorneys
for personal matters) are required to or should apply
In Queensland enduring guardians (attorneys for personal matters) are
required by the
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) to exercise the power
given them in the document appointing them according to its terms and honestly
and with reasonable diligence
to protect the interests of the person who has
appointed them as their attorney for personal
Such attorneys may also
sign any document, as attorney, where it is necessary or convenient to do so in
order exercise a power given
to them in the power of attorney appointing
They must take the right
to confidentiality of the maker of the power of attorney into account and if
they obtain any confidential
information about the maker of the power of
attorney, they are obliged to keep that information confidential and not to
it except as provided for under the
Powers of Attorney Act
appoints a guardian for the person who appointed them, the attorney will be able
to exercise their powers only to the extent
authorised by the
Attorneys for personal matters are required to comply with the general
principles set out in Schedule 1 of the
Powers of Attorney Act
. If they are appointed for health care matters, they must also comply
with the health care principle also set out in that Schedule.
The same approach
applies in the Australian Capital Territory. Those appointed as enduring
attorneys for personal care and health
care matters are bound by similar general
principles.
While attorneys for personal matters are bound by those principles in
Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory, it is suggested
that enduring
guardians in other States should use those principles, with the exception of the
substituted judgment principle, unless
required to apply it under their
legislation, to guide how they carry out their powers and functions. These
principles are:
1. Powers of attorney for personal matters should be exercised in a way that
is appropriate to the characteristics and needs of the
maker of the power of
2. While powers of attorney for personal matters are exercisable during every
period the maker of the power of attorney has impaired
capacity for the matter
or matters covered by it, the starting point is that the maker is presumed to
have capacity to deal with
the matter or matters
The principles require that attorneys for personal matters recognise the
following matters and take them into account when exercising
their powers under
the power of attorney:
1. The maker of the power of attorney’s right to participate, to the
greatest extent practicable, in decisions affecting their
life, including the
development of policies, programs and services for
2. The importance of preserving, to the greatest extent practicable, the
maker of the power of attorney’s right to make his
3. All adults have the same basic human rights regardless of their capacity.
It is important to empower them to exercise those
4. The maker of the power of attorney’s right to respect for their
human worth and dignity as an
individual.
5. The maker of the power of attorney’s right to be a valued member of
society together with the importance of encouraging and
supporting them to
perform social roles valued in
6. The importance of encouraging and supporting the maker of the power of
attorney to live a life in the general community and to
take part in activities
enjoyed by the general
7. The importance of encouraging and supporting the maker of the power of
attorney to achieve their maximum physical, social, emotional
and intellectual
potential, and to become as self-reliant as
practicable.
8. The importance of maintaining the maker of the power of attorney’s
existing supportive
relationships.
9. The importance of maintaining the maker of the power of attorney’s
cultural and linguistic environment, and set of values,
including any religious
This is particularly
the case for Aborigines and Torres Strait
As already noted, in the Australian Capital Territory most of these
principles are set out, and in similar terms, in Schedule 1 of
Attorney Act
There is also a
requirement that the enduring attorney for personal care or health care matters
must recognise and take into account
the wish and need of the maker of the power
of attorney to have access to the family members and relatives and they to him
The enduring attorney must also take into account any expressed wish of
the maker of the power of attorney to involve family members
and relatives in
decisions affecting the maker’s life and
Also in Queensland, if the attorney for personal matters has health matters
to deal with they must deal with those matters only when
it is necessary and
appropriate to maintain or promote the maker of the power of attorney’s
health or wellbeing and is in the
way that is least restrictive of those rights.
In all the circumstances the exercise of power must be in the best interests of
maker of the power of
When deciding whether
the exercise of a power is appropriate, the attorney for personal matters
1. to the greatest extent practicable seek the adult’s views and wishes
and take them into account, and
2. take into account the information given by the maker of the power of
attorney’s health
Powers of Attorney Act
is to the same
9. 4. 7. Consideration of the views of the maker
of the power of attorney/appointor of the enduring guardian
In Queensland, the
Powers of Attorney Act
states that the
principle of substituted judgment must be used in such a way that if it is
reasonably practicable to work out what
the maker of the power of
attorney’s views and wishes would be, the attorney for personal matters
must take into account what
they consider those views and wishes
Those views and wishes are
to be worked out from the maker’s previous actions. They may have been
expressed orally, in writing,
by conduct or in some other
Nevertheless, despite the
fact that the words “the principle of substituted judgment must be
used”, the attorney for
personal matters must exercise their powers and
functions in a way that is consistent with the proper care and protection of the
maker of the power of attorney.
Consequently, it would appear that attorneys for personal matters are not
required to apply the principle of substituted judgment
in the strict sense and
that the proper care and protection of the maker of the power of attorney is the
paramount consideration.
Elsewhere in Australia where enduring guardians or their equivalents may be
appointed, the principle of substituted judgment does
not have to be applied.
Nevertheless, in South Australia when they are making any decision under their
appointment, enduring guardians
must, as the paramount of their considerations,
give consideration to what would, in their opinion, be the wishes of the person
are the enduring guardian for in relation to the particular matter. This
obligation applies only if there is reasonably ascertainable
evidence on which
to base such an opinion. However, they are also required to seek the present
wishes of the person they are the
enduring guardian for about the matter, unless
it is not possible or reasonably practicable to do so, and must give
consideration
to those wishes.
Similarly in Victoria, enduring guardians are not required to apply
substituted judgment; however they must exercise their powers
so as to give
effect to the wishes of the person they are enduring guardian for wherever
possible. In exercising their powers they
must promote that person’s best
interests but also adopt means that are the least restrictive of the person's
freedom of decision
and action as is possible in the
circumstances.
The Tasmanian provisions are the same, and have the same effect as the
Victorian ones.
In a 2006 case
the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board revoked an appointment of
enduring guardianship because it was
not satisfied that the enduring guardian
was able to balance the responsibilities of a guardian as set out the
Guardianship and Administration Act
This was because the
enduring guardian gave far greater weight to the appointor’s wishes than
to her best interests. The Board
noted that the primary responsibility of an
enduring guardian was to act in the best interests of the
Enduring guardians are not required to exercise substituted judgment in New
South Wales, but they are required to observe the general
principles of the
Guardianship Act
when exercising their functions. These
principles are similar to those set out above and require the enduring guardian
to take into
account the views of the person who appointed
In Western Australia, as in New South Wales, enduring guardians are not
required to exercise substituted judgment but they must act
according to their
opinion of the best interests of the person they are enduring guardian for. They
act in this way if they act in
the same way as required of a guardian appointed
by WASAT. That matter is dealt with in Chapter 9. 3. 3. In particular, enduring
guardians are required to consult with and to take into account the views of the
person who appointed them.
In the Australian Capital Territory, attorneys for personal care matters must
comply, to the maximum extent possible, with the general
principles set out in
Powers of Attorney Act
These principles are
both explicit and detailed about the right of a maker of an enduring power of
attorney for personal care matters
to take part in decisions affecting their
life to the greatest extent practicable and that it must be preserved. They must
treated as unable to take part in making a decision only because the
individual makes unwise decisions.
The maker’s views and wishes may be expressed orally, in writing or in
another way, including, for example, by conduct. If they
cannot express their
wishes or needs, the attorney must try to work out, as far as possible, from the
maker’s past actions,
what their wishes and needs would be if they could
express them. The attorney must then and take those wishes and needs into
Despite this requirement, the attorney exercising a function must do so in a
way that is consistent with the maker’s proper
protection.
9. 4. 8. Assistance for enduring guardians and
attorneys for personal matters
To assist enduring guardians and their equivalents deal with difficult
matters in carrying out their roles, the public guardians and
advocates can and
do give advice. Also, in all the States and the Australian Capital Territory,
the guardianship tribunal can give
advice and directions to assist enduring
guardians. In New South Wales the role of the Guardianship Tribunal is limited
directions on application by the enduring
In Queensland both
QCAT and the Supreme Court may give direction or advice or make recommendations
terms of or other issues involving an enduring
power of attorney or the exercise of the attorney’s
In South Australia,
Tasmania and Victoria an enduring guardian may apply to their State’s
guardianship tribunal for advice
or direction as to the scope or the exercise of
their powers.
Australia they may apply to WASAT for directions as to the scope or the exercise
of their powers.
Australian Capital Territory the role of ACAT is limited to giving a direction
to an attorney to do or not do an
9. 5. Ending appointments of enduring guardians
(attorneys for personal matters)
9. 5. 1. Revocation by appointor
In each State, except Western Australia, and in the Australian Capital
Territory, there are provisions for appointors and makers of
enduring powers of
attorney to revoke appointments of enduring guardians. These will only be
footnoted here.
Nevertheless, in
Western Australia, appointors who still have the capacity to do so may revoke
their appointments of enduring
9. 5. 2. Resignation of enduring guardian
(attorney for personal matters)
In New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria and Western
Australia, enduring guardians and in Queensland and the Australian
Territory attorneys, may resign their office. There is a procedure for them to
follow to do this.
South Wales enduring guardians, and in Queensland and the Australian Capital
Territory attorneys, may resign their office
directly to the appointor or maker
by giving them written notice. However, if the appointor or maker has lost
capacity the enduring
guardian or attorney may resign only with the leave of the
guardianship tribunal in that State or
9. 5. 3. Suspension when guardianship order
In New South Wales the effect of making a guardianship order is to suspend
any appointment of an enduring guardian made by the person
under guardianship
for the duration of the order in relation to
If the person under
guardianship purports to appoint an enduring guardian, that appointment has no
effect at any time.
In Queensland, if QCAT makes a guardianship order in relation to a person who
has an attorney for personal matters, QCAT may also
authorise the attorney to
exercise the powers in the power of attorney that it
designates.
If QCAT does not
authorise the attorney to exercise power, then the power of attorney is
effectively suspended during the currency
of the guardianship order.
The Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration Board and WASAT in Western
Australia may either amend or revoke an appointment of an
Consequently if
either tribunal makes a guardianship order in relation to a person who has
appointed an enduring guardian, it may,
on application, either revoke the
appointment or amend it so that it can operate in conjunction with the
guardianship order. The
matters each tribunal has to consider before it may
revoke or amend an appointment of enduring guardian are set out at 9. 5. 4.
In the Australian Capital Territory, ACAT may revoke powers of attorney for
personal care in whole or in
It is assumed that
where the Tribunal makes a guardianship order but revokes only part of such a
power of attorney then the Tribunal
intends the unrevoked part of the power of
attorney to continue to operate concurrently with the guardianship order it has
There are specific provisions about guardianship orders and enduring
powers of attorney in relation to health
In South Australia and Victoria, the relevant guardianship tribunal may only
revoke an appointment of an enduring guardian. While
this has to be done as a
result of an application, such an application could be dealt with at the hearing
at which the tribunal appointed
a guardian. Revoking the appointment of the
enduring guardian clears the way for the tribunal appointed guardian to be given
functions they would need to be an effective guardian for the now incapable
person. The matters each tribunal has to apply before
it may revoke the enduring
guardian’s appointment are set out below in 9. 5. 4.
9. 5. 4. Reviewing appointments of enduring
guardians (attorneys for personal matters)
In each State and in the Australian Capital Territory the tribunal which has
the jurisdiction to deal with applications for guardianship,
may also review the
appointments of enduring guardians.
In New South Wales the Guardianship Tribunal may, on its own motion or must
on the request of any person who, in the Tribunal’s
opinion, has a genuine
concern for the welfare of the appointor, review the appointment of the enduring
After conducting
the review, the Tribunal may:
1. revoke the appointment,
2. confirm it, or
3. confirm it but vary the functions of the enduring
However, the Tribunal must not revoke the enduring guardian’s
appointment unless the enduring guardian requests this or the
Tribunal is
satisfied that it is in the best interests of the appointor that the appointment
be revoked.
If the Tribunal
decides to revoke the appointment of the enduring guardian, it may proceed as if
it had an application for a guardianship
or administration order, or both,
before it and make either or both
In addition, the Guardianship Tribunal has an added role. It may confirm the
appointment even if:
1. it discovers that the document appointing the enduring guardian was not
executed in accordance with the requirements of the
Guardianship Act 1987
2. the person purporting to make the appointment announced their intention to
do so but became incapacitated before a document making
the appointment could be
executed in accordance with the requirements of the
and the Tribunal
was satisfied that the confirmation of the appointment reflected the appointment
that the person intended to make
at the time it was purportedly
This last power of the Tribunal is aimed at formalising an intended
appointment of an enduring guardian where the appointor’s
intentions as to
who they intended to appoint and what functions they were to be given were clear
from the draft but not formalised
in document of appointment or, possibly, were
clear from the instructions given to the solicitor or other person drafting the
appointment
In Western Australia, WASAT, on the application of any person who, in its
opinion, has a proper interest in the matter, has the power
to revoke an
enduring power of guardianship, revoke or vary any of its terms or revoke the
appointment of one or more of the enduring
When dealing with
an application to revoke an enduring power of guardianship or revoke or vary any
of its terms, the Tribunal is
not required to apply any specific statutory
criteria, but its primary concern must be the best interests of the appointor
must, as far as possible seek to ascertain the views and wishes of that
However, when dealing
with an application to revoke the appointment of one or more of the enduring
guardians, the Tribunal should
revoke the appointment of the enduring guardian
or of those enduring guardians who:
1. wish to be discharged, or
2. have been guilty of such neglect or misconduct or of such default as, in
the opinion of the Tribunal, renders them unfit to continue
as an enduring
guardian; or
3. appear to the Tribunal to be incapable, by reason of mental or physical
incapacity, of carrying out their duties as an enduring
In Tasmania, the Guardianship and Administration Board may, on an application
by the appointor, the enduring guardian, the administrator
of the appointor's
estate, the Public Guardian; or any other person who, the Board is satisfied,
has a proper interest in the matter,
and after a hearing, revoke or amend an
appointment of an enduring guardian, but only if:
1. the enduring guardian seeks revocation of
their appointment, or
2. the Board is satisfied that the enduring
a. is not willing or able to act in that
capacity, or
b. has not acted in the best interests of
the appointor or has acted in an incompetent or negligent manner or contrary to
the provisions
Guardianship and Administration Act
In South Australia, the same people as in Tasmania together with a relative
or medical agent of the appointor may apply to the Guardianship
Board to revoke
the appointment of an enduring guardian. The South Australian Board applies the
same criteria as the Tasmanian Board
when making its decision except that it may
revoke an appointment if it is satisfied that the enduring guardian acted
contrary to
the principles stated in, rather than more broadly, the provisions
Guardianship and Administration Act
already noted, its jurisdiction is limited to revoking the appointment or
dismissing the application. It cannot vary the
powers given to the enduring
In Victoria, VCAT’s powers are limited, like those of the South
Australian Guardianship Board, to revoking the appointment of
the enduring
guardian. Application may be made to it by:
1. the enduring guardian,
2. the administrator of the appointor's estate,
3. the Public Advocate; or
4. any other person VCAT is satisfied has an interest in the person of the
appointor or their estate.
VCAT may revoke the appointment if it is satisfied that the enduring guardian
is either not able or not willing to act as enduring
guardian or if, as enduring
guardian, they have acted in an incompetent or negligent
In Queensland both QCAT and the Supreme Court have the same powers in
relation to enduring powers of attorney for personal
Any of the following
may apply to QCAT or the Court for an order in relation to such powers of
1. the person who made the power of attorney,
2. a member of their
3. an attorney appointed by the maker of the enduring power of attorney for
personal matters,
4. the Adult Guardian or Public Trustee,
5. the maker’s health provider, or
6. an interested
In addition, any person QCAT or the Court joins as a party or considers is an
interested person may participate in the
proceeding.
QCAT or the Court has power to decide whether an enduring power of attorney
for personal matters is valid or not and may declare such
a power of attorney
invalid if it is satisfied that:
1. the maker did not have the capacity necessary to make the power of
2. the power of attorney did not comply with the other requirements of the
Powers of Attorney Act
3. the power of attorney was invalid for another reason, for example, the
maker was induced to make it by dishonesty or undue
However, if QCAT or the Court declares the power of attorney to be invalid,
it may, at the same time, appoint one or more attorneys
This means that QCAT
or the Court can appoint attorneys to operate under orders made by those bodies
rather than under the invalid
power of attorney.
If QCAT or the Court declares an enduring power of attorney to be invalid, it
is void and of no effect from the time it was
In a 2005 case in which
it was confronted with a situation in which a person under guardianship and
administration made an enduring
power of attorney for personal matters, then
Queensland Guardianship and Administration Tribunal decided to use its power to
its own application in relation to a declaration of capacity, and,
after considering the evidence, found that the person did not
have the capacity
to make the enduring power of attorney and then went on to declare the power of
attorney invalid.
After conducting a hearing to review the enduring power of attorney, QCAT or
the Court may:
1. remove an attorney and appoint a new attorney to replace them,
2. remove a power from an attorney and give the removed power to another
attorney or to a new attorney,
3. change the terms of an enduring power of attorney, or
4. revoke all or part of the enduring power of
Like their counterparts elsewhere in Australia, QCAT and the Court may revoke
the enduring power of attorney for personal matters.
In addition, they have the
power to vary the terms of an enduring power of attorney for personal matters.
However, their power to
do this may be exercised only where they consider that
the maker’s circumstances or other circumstances have changed to the
extent that one or more terms of the enduring power of attorney are
inappropriate.
There is another way in which QCAT and the Court may reduce the scope of an
enduring power of attorney for personal matters. This
is by making a
guardianship order which gives a guardian some of the powers the attorney had
under an enduring power of attorney
made by the person now under guardianship or
by extending the powers of the guardian further after a review of the
guardianship order.
This was done by QCAT’s predecessor tribunal in a 2006
In the Australian Capital Territory, ACAT has the main role in relation to
the removal and replacement of attorneys under enduring
powers of attorney for
personal care and for dealing with applications to revoke such powers of
attorney in whole or in part. ACAT
may do this on an application from an
interested person or from someone else it has given leave to apply, or on its
own initiative.
ACAT may exercise its jurisdiction only if the maker of the power of attorney
has impaired decision-making capacity. If this is proved
to it, ACAT may revoke
the power of attorney or part of it. ACAT may also refer the matter to the
Supreme Court.
If it revokes
the power of attorney, ACAT may appoint a guardian or a manager of the estate of
the maker of the power of
Also, instead of revoking the enduring power of attorney, ACAT may remove an
attorney, but only if it is satisfied that it is in the
interests of the maker
of the power of attorney to do
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
ss 35A-35E and
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Chapters 3 and 5 and Schedule 1 and 2,
in particular
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
(Qld) Schedule 1
Powers of Attorney Act
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
[1954] HCA 17
(1954) 91 CLR 423
Ranclaud v Cabban
[1988] ANZ ConvR 134
136, (1988) NSW Conv R 55-385
, BC8802222,12.
[1988] 1 Ch 310.
In 2000 the Court of Appeal described this list as a “sound indication of
what must be understood if a power is to be valid”.
[19] and [20].
Smith v Public Trustee of
[1995] ANZ ConvR 415
Collier, B, Coyne, C,
Sullivan, K,
Mental Capacity
, Sydney, The Federation Press, 2005, 44,
note that American authority supports the proposition that capacity relates to
the maker’s
ability to accomplish the transactions they empower the
enduring guardian or enduring attorney to carry out rather than the
understanding of what they are handing over to the the enduring
guardian or enduring attorney.
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Collier, B and others op cit
(footnote 14), 50-51.
For assistance see,
“Client Capacity Guidelines: Civil and Family Law Matters”
Law Society Journal
Collier, B and others, op
cit (footnote 14), 52.
Peisah C. Brodaty H, Quadrio
C, “Family conflict in dementia: prodigal sons & black sheep”
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
(2006) 21(5):485-492.
Gibbons v Wright
[1954] HCA 17
(1954) 91 CLR 423
[1954] HCA 17
Ranclaud v Cabban
[1988] ANZ ConvR 134
136, (1988) NSW Conv R 55-385
, BC8802222,12.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
s 35A(4) and (5).
Guardianship Act 1987
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Powers of Attorney
ss 13(3) and 14(2) and (3).
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship
and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and Administration Act
(the enduring power of guardianship form is found in
Guardianship and Administration Regulations 2005
Sch 1), and
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Schedule 3 Form 1),
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 25(5). The enduring guardian’s
powers are also limited by a special provision that operates where the person
who appointed
them has refused medical or dental treatment but has also
appointed a medical agent who is available and willing to act in the matter.
medical agent is authorised to make those decisions. See,
Consent to Medical
Treatment and Palliative Care Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
ss 35B and 24.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
32(1)(a) and
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship Act
s 6E(1)(e).
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Schedule 4, Form 1.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761.
This case is discussed further in
Chapter 13. 5, 14. 3. 1. 11 and 15.6.
Powers of Attorney
may limit the kind of advance directive
concerning the refusal of treatment that may be given effect to in Queensland.
See also 9.
Powers of Attorney
and Schedule 1
Powers of Attorney
Schedule 1.
Powers of Attorney
Schedule 1 item 11.
and Schedule 1
Ibid. item 7(1).
Ibid. item 7(2).
Ibid. item 2.
Ibid. item 3.
Ibid. item 4.
Ibid. item 5.
Ibid. item 6.
Ibid. item 8.
Ibid. item 9.
Ibid. item 9 and also
Acts Interpretation Act
In the ACT the heath care
principle is set out in
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Ibid. Schedule 1.1.
Powers of Attorney
Schedule 1 item 12(1).
and Schedule 1
item 12(2).
Powers of Attorney
Schedule 1.11.
Powers of Attorney
Schedule 1 item 7(4).
Ibid. item 7(6).
Ibid. item 7(5).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 5(a)and(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
MKC (Review EG)
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
in particular.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
Schedule 1.
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and Administration
(Vic) s 35E. For an example of advice and directions being
requested from and then given be the Tasmanian Guardianship and Administration
TN (Advice and Direction to EG)
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
s 62(2)(a).
Guardianship Act
Powers of Attorney Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
(Vic) s 35C and
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Guardianship
and Administration Act
does not provide for the revocation
of an appointment of enduring guardianship by the appointor, the
Interpretation Act 1984
provides that, where a person may
appoint another to an office – here the office of enduring guardian
– they may also
remove that person from that office.
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act 2006
Guardianship Act
s 6HB(1)(b)
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney Act
53. In both
New South Wales and Queensland, the Supreme Court has jurisdiction to deal with
this matter, but it is usually dealt
with by the State’s guardianship
tribunal. See
Guardianship Act
Attorney Act
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
appointments of guardians without knowledge of the enduring power of attorney
and the attorney acting without knowledge
of the appointment of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
ss 62(2)(c)
Guardianship Act
example of a review of an appointment of an appointment of an enduring guardian
Matter No. 2002/4385
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 6 December
examples of appointments of enduring guardianship being revoked in the best
interests of the appointor see,
[2008] NSWGT 17
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Powers of Attorney
The maker’s family
members are defined in
Powers of Attorney Act
as follows: the maker’s spouse, each of the maker’s
children who is 18 years or more (including a stepchild, an adopted
child, and a
person for whom the maker was foster-parent or guardian when the person was a
child) and each of the maker’s parents
(including a step-parent, adoptive
parent, foster-parent and guardian). If none of these is reasonably available,
then each of the
maker’s siblings who is 18 years or more (including a
step-sibling, adopted sibling, and foster-sibling).
It would appear that any
attorney appointed by the maker, whether in relation to the enduring power of
attorney for personal matters
or otherwise could apply to the Tribunal or Court.
The attorney would have to be an attorney under a current power of attorney.
Powers of Attorney
[2005] QGAAT
Powers of Attorney
[2006] QGAAT
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
s 62(2)and(3).
As to who are
interested persons see Chapter 10. 11. 7. 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (405 KB)
PDF format (120 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter