URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2018/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stone, A --- "Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments: Between Contradiction and Necessity" [2018] UMelbLRS 9
The idea of an unconstitutional constitutional amendment is apt to puzzle
some constitutionalists. It is thought to involve an inherent
paradox or at
least to be deeply undemocratic, denying to the people control of their own
constitutional future. This idea that,
which I will call the
‘contradiction thesis’, is taken to task
Unconstitutional
Constitutional Amendments
Yaniv Roznai seeks to unscramble these apparent contradictions, to provide a
secure theoretical foundation for the idea constitutional
unamendability and to
resolve its tensions with democracy. This argument is ambitious in its scope and
its global comparative reach.
Roznai does not limit himself to justifying
explicit limitations placed on the power of amendment nor to limitations that go
to process. Rather, Roznai argues that amendment powers are always subject
to limitations of
substance and procedure
and that these limitations may
implicit as well as explicit
In this short essay argues the Roznai successfully unscrambles the apparent
conceptual confusion in the idea of an unconstitutional
constitutional
amendment. It does not, however, successfully show that the recognition of a
doctrine of unamendability, at least
in its substantive and implicit forms, is a
necessary consequence of constitutionalism. A full justification for a doctrine
of unamendability
depends, more than Roznai recognises, on the nature of a given
constitutional order.
Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments: Between
Contradiction and Necessity
INTRODUCTION
The idea of an unconstitutional constitutional amendment is apt to puzzle
some constitutionalists. It is thought to involve an inherent
paradox or at
least to be deeply undemocratic, denying to the people control of their own
constitutional future. This idea that,
which I will call the
‘contradiction thesis’, is taken to task
Unconstitutional
Constitutional
Yaniv Roznai seeks to unscramble these apparent contradictions, to provide a
secure theoretical foundation for the idea constitutional
unamendability and to
resolve its tensions with democracy. This argument is ambitious in its scope and
its global comparative reach.
Roznai does not limit himself to justifying
explicit limitations placed on the power of amendment nor to limitations that go
to process. Rather, Roznai argues that amendment powers are always subject
to limitations of
substance and procedure
and that these limitations may
implicit as well as explicit
Any response to this book should acknowledge the depth of its scholarship,
the clarity of its analysis and the elegance of its proposed
solution. Moreover,
the argument successfully unscrambles the apparent conceptual confusion in the
idea of an unconstitutional constitutional
amendment. It does not, however,
successfully show that the recognition of a doctrine of unamendability, at least
in its substantive
and implicit forms, is a necessary consequence of
constitutionalism. A full justification for a doctrine of unamendability
more than Roznai recognises, on the nature of a given constitutional
In this short essay, I will first revisit the basic elements of
Roznai’s argument before turning to consider the role played
in it of the
idea of ‘constituent power’. I will argue that ‘constituent
power’ is deployed conceptually
and that the argument proceeds by way of
deduction from the concept of constituent power. With this in mind, I will argue
form of argument cannot fully justify the doctrine of unamendability
as Roznai elaborates upon it. It allows Roznai to establish
that unamendability
is a conceptual
possibility
but it does not follow, as he seeks to argue,
that unamendability is a necessary consequence of constitutionalism.
The analysis, though richly detailed, is made with
admirable clarity. With some inevitable simplification, its essential elements
can be stated as follows. First, Roznai turns to the concept of
‘constituent power’ to explain constitutionalism. Constitutions
created by a constituent act which is ‘free and independent from any
formal bonds of positive law created by the
constitution’.
In this last
respect, constituent power is to be contrasted with constituted power, that is
the power established by the constitution,
exercised under it and which are
therefore subject to constitutional
Second, Roznai characterises the amendment power as ‘secondary’
constituent power. In doing so, he casts the amendment
, sitting between constituent power on the one hand and constituted
power on the other.
constituent power is a
form of power, granted to the amending
institutions by the people. This characterisation is crucial for the analysis.
It is precisely
because the power to amend the constitution is delegated by
those who exercise primary constituent power, that the exercise of the
power is limited.
Third, from this foundation, Roznai argues for the recognition of both
explicit and implicit limitations on the amendment power. Self-evidently,
a constitution provides for an explicit limitation, the constituent power has
made clear the nature of the delegation clear.
But there is no reason, the
argument runs, to suppose that all limitations will be made explicit. On the
contrary, it follows from
of the amendment power as delegated
power that the amendment power can be limited implicitly.
Fourth, the constituent act creates a constitution that has core set of
principles that in turn form the ‘identity’. Those
elements cannot be undone without undoing the constituent act. Therefore
whether explicitly provided for or not, a power
of amendment is limited so that
it cannot be used to undermine or alter that basic identity. Thus, Roznai brings
us to a justification
for basic structure doctrine which, as he shows, can be
identified in early American thought, finds its fullest judicial expression
the opinions of Supreme Court of India and which has since migrated through much
of the globe.
CONSTITUENT POWER AND THE CONCEPT OF UNAMENDABILITY
The structure of
Roznai’s argument is such that much hinges on the concept of
‘constituent power’, a foundation
stone of constitutional thought
At its most basic, constituent power is simply ‘the power to establish the
constitutional order of a
From this it follows
that the constituent power is free from legal constraint. Because, the
constituent power arises outside of the
constitutional order and gives rise to
the constitutional order (and to the consequent generation of laws) the
constituent power
is not itself subject to law.
Roznai explains these concepts with a rich and interesting discussion of
their intellectual history. But much remains elusive about
the concept of
constituent power and the role it plays in his argument. An assessment of
Roznai’s argument requires a careful
consideration of the nature of the
concept as he relies upon it and of the role that it plays in his argument.
Descriptive or Normative?
To begin with it is fairly clear that Roznai does not use ‘constituent
power’ to describe the actual founding of any particular
constitutional
On the contrary, Roznai
joins other theorists of constituent power in admitting the short comings when
compared with the messy realities
of constitution making. For one thing, the
constituent power – even its most basic form - presupposes a break with
legal order. But, as Roznai concedes while ‘some constitutions
were formed in revolutionary circumstances, breaking the previous
constitutional
order, or during state-building. Others were constituted through international
efforts or imposed by foreign and external
forces’. Moreover ‘the
constitution making process is often exercise in continuity with historic or
existing laws or
in accordance with pre-determined rules.’ For this reason
Roznai concedes that the exercise constituent power is may not be
original’ but ‘original only in the sense that, by is nature, it
does not necessarily derive from nor is
bound to prior or existing
constitutional rules.’
To elaborate on this argument for a moment, a second set of descriptive
inaccuracies are readily evident if one considers its modern
conceptualisation
as an exercise of the constituent power
It is very easy to
point to ways in which constitution making processes regularly not meet his
description. Some follow directly
from the circumstances just discussed. For
instance, an imposed constitution will inevitably fail the test given the
absence or rather
limited nature of popular participation. And even popular
participation
, without conditions for deep deliberation, may be
inadequate to meet the demands of this
If constituent power is not intended to describe the creation of a
constitution, it might be invoked as a normative baseline. That
is, it provides
a measure of legitimacy a measure of legitimacy against which a constitution or
constitutional practice can be
Conceived in this way,
the concept of constituent power has a clear role to play in constitutional
theory. As Roznai explains:
In the modern era, the nation’s constitution receives its normative
status from the political will of the ‘people’
to act as a
constitutional authority. The ‘people are the subject and the holder of
the constituent power’.
However, the idea of constituent power invoked in this last passage involves
assumptions made about the circumstances of the exercise
of constituent power:
that it was exercised by the people of at least in a manner that represented the
authentic will of the people.
Although he acknowledges this
‘thicker’ idea of constituent power, it is not the foundation of his
analysis. Roznai’s
task is not to assess particular constitutional orders
for their consistency with a requirement that they are founded in the authentic
expression of the people’s will. His work, for all the richness of its
intellectual history and conceptual clarity does not
engage in the fine-grained
case by case analysis of particular constitutions and their making that would be
necessary to make out
this kind claim. Rather he seeks to advance a general
justification for the idea of unamendability founded in the idea of constituent
For this reason, I take Roznai to be relying on a ‘bare concept’
of constituent power rather than a thicker modern version
that is more
normatively attractive but which also involves a set of presuppositions about
the nature of the exercise of constituent
power in a given case.
Conceptual?
With all this in mind, it appears that the reliance on constituent power in
Roznai’s work can be describes as ‘conceptual’
rather than
either normative or descriptive. As Martin Loughlin describes this kind of
argument, constituent power can be deployed
of as ‘a formal concept’
or ‘presupposition’ ... ‘postulated to make sense of an
authority of an agent
to alter the terms of the
constitution’.
words, the argument presupposes that order to make sense of a constitutional
order we need a concept of constituent power
and the idea of a constituent act
– much like the idea of a ‘social contract’ – as way of
testing and elaborating
our intuitions about constitutionalism.
This conceptual use of ‘constituent power’ is perhaps best
understood by recalling that Roznai seeks to rebut the contradiction
to resolve the apparent contradiction between idea of an unconstitutional
constitutional amendment and the unconstrained
nature of constituent power. The
success of the argument lies in his separation of the power of amendment from
the original constituent
power and recharacterization of it as an exercise of
secondary constituent power. This move in turn allows him to argue that the
amendment power is limited and that those limits (whether explicit or implicit)
are derived from the constitutional order established
by the exercise of
original constituent power.
The Amendment Power as Necessarily Limited
Roznai has succeeded in rebutting the contradiction thesis and identifying a
coherent way in which a power to amend can be understood
be limited consistently
with the unlimited nature of the constituent power.
But the argument seeks to do more than offer a doctrine of unconstitutional
constitutional amendment as a conceptual possibility.
Unamendability is said to
follow as a conceptual
from the idea of a constitution.
Moreover, it extends to both implicit and procedural limits. To put it another
way, Roznai’s
argument is that it follows from the very nature of a
constitution that the power to amend it is limited in substance and whether
not those limitations are made explicit.
To make his case for the recognition of implicit and
substantive limits, Roznai elaborates his characterisation of relationship
the amendment power and the original constituent power by reference to
the ideas of delegation and trust that are traced to the political
Thomas Paine, and John Locke and which also find expression in other aspects of
public and private law.
‘[M]odern studies of delegation now adopt the model of
‘principal-agent’ in order to define the act of delegation.
who delegates authority, and has the original constituent power, is the
principal, while the one to whom the authority is
delegated is the amendment
authority and represents the agent.’
Moreover, quoting Thomas Paine, he maintains that ‘all delegated power
is trust’. That is, delegated power is necessarily
power conferred for a
certain purpose and the holder of that power has an obligation to act for those
This brings Roznai to the conclusion that ‘the delegation of the
amendment power inherently entails certain
limitations’
namely to act
in accordance with the purposes for which the delegation is made.
Substantive
The nature of those purposes then becomes the critical
question. Roznai’s argument is that these must be taken to be substantive
as well as procedural. To make this point, Roznai relies on the idea of
constitutional identity. Constitutions have a core set of
features or principles
that are essential to their identity and it is these are the features that
cannot be amended for a delegated
power of amendment held on trust by the
amending institution cannot be used to change the identity of the constitution,
would go against the purpose for which the amending power was
conferred. Matters of constitutional identity – whether express
– are therefore beyond the power of amendment and are subject only to
replacement by exercise of the original constituent
Understanding that Roznai proceeds by deduction from a concept of
constitutionalism is critical to understanding his argument. As
acknowledged, the argument provides a convincing rebuttal of the contradiction
thesis and in doing so shown there is a coherent
understanding of amendment
power pursuant to which the amendment power is limited.
However, demonstrating this conceptual
possibility
does not show its
and it is at this point that Roznai’s argument begins to
falter a little.
Inherent Limits Arising From a concept of ‘Trust’
First, there is room to question whether his reliance on the notions of
‘principal-agent’ and of ‘trust’ will
be appropriate in
all cases. After all, these are ideas drawn from the private law that regulate
delegations of power in private
relations within a given constitutional order.
No doubt the precise content of the law of agency and trusts varies from place
place. But the legal relationship is recognised or imposed by the law in
response to some aspect of the relationship between the
parties either on the
basis that the parties have (implicitly or explicitly) agreed to such a
relationship or in response to the
nature of their relationship.
I do not think that Roznai means to argue that constitutions are to be
understood as agreements. His is not a theory of constitutional
but a theory of what constitutionalism entails. The argument that the
‘delegation’ of an amendment power by its nature
understood as necessarily entailing a limit that the delegated amendment power
not be used in way that ‘undoes’
the constituent act. If this is not
a theory of agreement, there must be something about the constituent act that
justifies its continuing
control. However, the bare concept of a constitution
(as the creation of a ‘constituent act’) seems too thin to justify
the proposition. Rather, the argument seems to accord normative weight to the
constitutional order arising out of a constituent act
and in doing so
presupposes that initial exercise of constituent power occurred in circumstances
which justify this weight. However,
as we have seen, Roznai does not engage in
the kind of analysis that would establish the normative weight of any particular
constitutional
In making this point, I am not denying the ways in which amendment powers
are, as Roznai has shown, partly constituted powers. That
gives rise to the
possibility
of a limited amendment power. Nor am I not
reasserting the contradiction thesis. There is nothing that precludes a
limitation on
the amendment power in a given
If the original exercise
of constituent power has moral authority (arising, say, from its character as
the expression of the authentic
will of the people), then the replacement of the
Constitution
through an ordinary amendment can be seen endangering or even
eradicating the constitution’s legitimacy. But if this is the
the idea of constituent power is wielded in quite a different way. It involves a
claim about an actual exercise of constituent
power – which Roznai does
not make - rather than the invocation of the bare concept on which Roznai
The Nature of the Limitation: Constitutional Identity
In any event, without more, what follows from the recognition of limits is
unclear. In Roznai’s argument the content of limitations
on amendment is
determined by a constitution’s ‘identity’. Thus, the amendment
power is limited so as to ensure
the maintenance of the essential identity of
the constitutional order. But once again reliance on the concept of
does not take the argument as far as Roznai claims.
The idea that a constitution has some kind of a core identity seems
unassailable. If the idea of a ‘constitution’ is to
mean anything,
there must be some arrangements that are not worthy of the name. However, it is
worth distinguishing between two versions
of this idea. First, there are some
core features that are core features of constitutions as such. A
‘constitution’ that,
for instance, exhibited no commitment to the
rule of law would seem, by that very fact, not to qualify as a constitution.
there are some features that makes a constitution, a particular
constitution. So for instance, the secular character of the
Constitution
India might be core to the identity of that
Constitution
but, given the general
acceptance of religious establishment, it can hardly be taken to be core to the
concept of a constitution.
If we accept that there are some limits on the amending power arising either
out of a notion of trust, the conceptual case for unamendability
is stronger in
relation to the first type of change. Assuming that identity imposes some limits
surely an amendment power is subject
at least to a limitation curtailing an
amendment that alters a constitution in such a way that what remains cannot be
categorised
as a ‘constitution’.
However, it is harder to see the necessity of that conclusion in relation to
the second type of amendment. It can be accepted that
if a core feature of this
kind (whether securalism in the case of India or any other core feature of any
constitution) is amended,
the constitution has been replaced rather than
revised. But why does it follow simply from the idea of a constitution and from
bare concept of constituent power that replacement of this kind through
amendment impossible? Why could not it be contemplated by,
and therefore
entirely consistent with, the original constituent power that the amendment
power enables identity change of this kind,
especially since what has emerged is
nonetheless a ‘constitution’? Such a commitment to the
permissibility of radical
change might even reflect a certain view of
constitutionalism and indeed be part of
constitution’s
. Alternatively, it might be that there is a tradition of
formalism within a given constitutional order that precludes an implicit
doctrine of unamendability
in turn might also be an element of constitutional identity.
The case for recognising radical amendments of this kind might be especially
strong where the moral authority of a constitution is
somewhat weak because of
deficiencies in the exercise of the constituent power. It would be strengthened
further if there were reasons
to regard the amendment power as better
representing the authentic will of the people. The history of the Australian
Constitution
demonstrates how this dynamic might arise. The Australian
constitution-making process conducted during the 1890s through a series
elected constitutional conventions was, for its time, highly participatory and
deeply deliberative. But the exclusion First Peoples
(among others) from the
process and the failure to recognise their prior sovereignty call that
conclusion into question.
Indeed, it seems highly implausible that the idea of a constituent act that
authentically represents the people would aptly describe
constitution making in
any of the ‘settler-states’ given the ongoing process of
contestation and reconciliation that
continues to characterise relations between
those states and their Indigenous
By contrast, given
modern understandings of voting rights in the Australian
Constitution
Indigenous Peoples (as well as women others excluded at the time)
now be excluded from the amendment process which involves both a
Parliamentary vote and a
referendum.
The excise of power
under the amendment process therefore has a
claim to represent the
authentic will of the people than the apparent exercise of the constituent power
at the time of the framing.
In one sense Roznai anticipates part of this argument. He is rightly
sensitive to variations among amendment clauses. His ‘spectrum
unamendability’ responds to this by persuasively arguing that ‘the
more an amendment process contains inclusive and
deliberative mechanisms, the
more closely it resembles the people’s primary constituent power’
the more scope it should
be given. Conversely governmental amendment powers
(though ordinary or special majorities in a legislature for instance) should be
given less scope.
My argument reveals the other side of this coin. The case for a doctrine of
unconstitutional constitutional amendments waxes and wanes
according to the
nature of the exercise of constituent power as well. We need to be as attentive
to the ‘polymorphic’
nature of constitution making as to the
variability among powers of amendment. Moreover, the case for unconstitutional
constitutional
amendments may depend on a careful comparison on the particulars
Conclusion and a Methodological Point.
My central claim then is that Roznai’s argument is partially
successful. He defeats the contradiction thesis but does not establish
necessity of his conclusions. The case for unconstitutional constitutional
amendments remains between contradiction and necessity.
This contribution is
important but the complete case for recognising a doctrine of unconstitutional
constitutional amendments requires
more by way of careful, contextual study of
particular constitutions.
Let me conclude with a methodological point. Roznai’s careful
intellectual history and conceptual argument is accompanied by
comparative study against which his ideas are tested and which provide a rich
set of illustrations of his arguments. But
it is notable that the comparative
work is not deployed in concept
. On the contrary, the argument
is formed deductively and thus the remains divorced from realities of
constitution making and amendment.
This feature of the argument points to a methodological question that deserve
more attention from comparative constitutional scholars.
As Rosalind Dixon and
I have argued elsewhere, constitutional theorists often make claims that are
purportedly universal but which
turn out to embed assumptions that are
particular to one (or a set of)
At a minimum
there is a need for constitutional theorists be much clearer about the
assumptions embedded in their work. But in addition,
addressing this gap between
comparative constitutional law and theory offers the exciting possibility of
more comparatively informed
and consequently more powerful constitutional
Yaniv Roznai,
Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments
(Oxford University Press,
Redmond Barry Distinguished
Professor, Kathleen Fitzpatrick Australian Laureate Fellow, Melbourne Law
School. Support for this research
was provided by the Australian Research
Council through my Kathleen Fitzpatrick Australian Laureate Fellowship. Thanks
Rosalind Dixon, Cheryl Saunders and Lael K. Weis for their extremely
insightful comments on a draft. It benefitted also from discussion
ideas with the Reading Group of the Laureate Program in Comparative
Constitutional Law at Melbourne Law
Yaniv Roznai,
Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments
(Oxford University Press,
It is not as prominent
in contemporary Anglo-American constitutional thought as in some other
traditions. However, on a distinctive
tradition of constituent power in American
constitutional thought see, William Partlett, ‘The American Tradition of
Constituent
International Journal of Constitutional
and for an argument for an ‘unamendable core’ of the US
Constitution
, see Richard Albert ‘The Unamendable Core of the United
Constitution
’ in Andras Koltay (ed.)
Comparative Perspectives on
the Fundamental Freedom of Expression
(Budapest, Hungary: Wolters Kluwer,
2015) . For a history of the concept in Britain, see Martin Loughlin,
‘Constituent Power
Subverted: From English Constitutional Argument to
British Constitutional Practice’, in Martin Loughlin and Neil Walker
The Paradox of Constitutionalism: Constituent Power and Constitutional Form
(Oxford: Oxford University Press 2008)
A slightly less demanding
version of the argument would have it that constituent power might not actually
characterise the founding
moment but rather is part of the founding myth of a
constitution and which as a sociological matter justifies the constitutional
order to its citizens. But once again, this is clearly not Roznai’s point
since he seeks to justify unamendability as a general
matter and not by
reference to the founding story of any particular constitution.
Ibid at 121-22.
Wake Forest Law Review 859.
See also David Landau and Rosalind Dixon ‘Constraining Constitutional
Change’ Chaihard Hahm and Sung Ho Kim, ‘To
Make “ We the
People” Constitutional Founding in Post War Japan and South Korea (12010)
International Journal of Constitutional Law
Especially given the
role of elites
it has its competitors. Thus, there is debate between theorists of constituent
power like Martin Loughlin and those who,
like David Dyzenhaus, locate the
legitimacy of a legal order in the intrinsic morality of law and for whom the
idea of a founding
moment at which the constituent power is exercised holds
little descriptive or normative appeal. David Dyzenhaus, ‘The Politics
the Question of Constituent Power’ in Walker and Louglin above n
Ibid, at 105-06.
Martin Louglin, ‘On
Constituent Power’ in Michael W. Dowdle and Michael A. Wilkinson (eds)
Constitutionalism Beyond Liberalism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Moreover, whether or not
this is a wise to create an amendment power of this nature is not the question
here. The question is whether
is conceptually possible to think of an amendment
power as unconstrained.
Richard Albert, Malkhaz Nakashidze and Tarik Olcay, ‘The Formalist
Resistance to Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments’
forthcoming
Hastings Law Journal
Dylan Lino,
Constitutional Recognition of Australia’s Indigenous Peoples
Law History Politics
(PhD Thesis 2017, University of Melbourne) held at
University Library, University of Melbourne. Further, given changing ideas of
equality and civic participation, it seems likely that any reasonably old
constitution would fail to meet what are now understood
as the normative
prescriptions for a true exercise of the constituent power of the
Rowe v Electoral
Commissioner
[2016] FCA 1081
(2010) 243 CLR
For a longer form of this
argument made in relation to Jeremy Waldron’s
rights-based
objection to judicial review, see Rosalind Dixon and Adrienne Stone
‘Constitutional Amendment: A Comparative and
Philosophical
Reflection’ in David Dyzenhaus and Malcolm Thorburn (eds)
Philosophical
Foundations of Constitutionalism
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (211 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter