URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Keon-Cohen, Bryan --- "Mabo's Unfinished Business: the Crown's Fiduciary Duty to Traditional Owners" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 11; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 71
MABO’S UNFINISHED BUSINESS:
THE CROWN’S FIDUCIARY DUTY TO
TRADITIONAL OWNERS
Bryan Keon-Cohen AM KC
This article briefly reviews some leading Australian decisions concerning
whether fiduciary duties apply to governments when dealing
with traditional
owners and their land. Reference is made to relevant decisions in Canada, the
USA, and New Zealand, and to the impact,
if any, of constitutional and treaty
recognition of Indigenous land rights.
I Mabo V Queensland (No
litigation, five plaintiffs from Murray Island in the
Torres Straits issued proceedings in the original jurisdiction of the High Court
in May 1982. Amongst other relief, they sought declarations that Australian
common law, upon and since colonization in 1879, recognised
their traditional
rights and interests in specified areas of land and surrounding reefs and
They claimed that these
traditional rights and interests had not been extinguished upon colonization and
the introduction of British
common law, nor by government conduct through to
1982. The plaintiffs sought declarations about the existence and nature of their
traditional rights to the claimed areas, and injunctions to restrain Queensland
from unlawfully impairing or extinguishing those
rights, or their exercise, by
the traditional owners. Damages arising from infringement of the claimed rights
were sought against
Queensland, and an injunction to restrain the Queensland
government from issuing DOGITs over the Murray
Fiduciary Pleaded
In 1984, with pleading squabbles still underway, three judicial initiatives
triggered amendments to the claim to include a new cause
of action seeking
declarations of a fiduciary duty owed by the Crown to the plaintiffs as
traditional owners of land on Mer. First,
the Canadian Supreme Court handed down
Guerin v The Queen
— a landmark decision that governments, when dealing with native title
land, owed Indian tribes fiduciary duties. In
[W]here by statute, agreement, or perhaps by unilateral undertaking, one
party has an obligation to act for the benefit of another,
and that obligation
carries with it a discretionary power, the party thus empowered becomes a
fiduciary. Equity will then supervise
the relationship by holding him to the
fiduciary’s strict standard of
also in 1984, the Australian High Court decided
Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical
Corporation,
where Mason
J (in dissent) also issued a ruling on fiduciary duty considered to be very
significant in Australian law. His Honour
stated, ‘the critical feature of
[fiduciary] relationships is that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act for
or on behalf
of or in the interests of another person in the exercise of a power
or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person
in a legal or
practical sense’.
According to Mason J, such a relationship thereby gives ‘the fiduciary
a special opportunity to exercise the power or discretion
to the detriment of
that other person who is accordingly vulnerable to abuse by the fiduciary of his
[or her] position’.
A third factor were observations by Deane J in 1988 in
Mabo (No 1)
where His Honour suggested that when the Queensland Governor set aside land on
Murray Island as an Islander reserve in 1912, that
development was unlikely to
‘defeat specific traditional proprietary rights and interests’ and
might amount to ‘the
recognition of a fiduciary relationship’
between Islanders and Queensland.
Thus, the plaintiffs’ legal team, led by Ron Castan AM QC, in February
1989, amended the statement of claim to plead a new cause
of action: breach of
fiduciary duty owed to the plaintiffs and their family groups, by the relevant
Crown, the Queensland
government.
The plaintiffs
sought a declaration that the Crown was under a fiduciary obligation with
respect to their traditional land rights
and that impairment of those rights
would constitute a breach of that
obligation.
Equitable damages
and restraining orders were also sought but not pursued before the High Court
since no evidence going to damages
was presented at the trial of
Final Argument: High Court
On this basis, the final argument occurred before the full High Court in May
1991. As to the issue of fiduciary duty, Ron Castan referred
‘landmark description of the general characterisation of fiduciary
obligation’
by Mason J,
mentioned above. Castan submitted that a fiduciary obligation arose with respect
to the plaintiffs’ areas from
the ‘Crown’s interest in the
islands and its capacity to act in ways which would affect the interests of the
in the land’ and that the ‘fiduciary obligations do not
fetter the legislative power’ but that ‘they do limit
which the power otherwise granted, for example under Crown land legislation, can
be exercised’.
submitted, unsurprisingly, that no such obligation
Mabo (No 2) Judgments on Fiduciary
In brief, save for substantial approval from Toohey
and brief support from Deane
and Gaudron JJ,
this claim was
rejected by a majority of 4/3. Mason CJ and McHugh J in a joint judgment
rejected, on their own, and Brennan J’s behalf, any such fiduciary
accountability, and claimed the support of Dawson
Toohey J alone considered this issue in detail. His Honour found the
existence of an enforceable fiduciary or trust relationship between
people and the Queensland government on two bases. First:
If the Crown in right of Queensland has the power to alienate ... the Meriam
people’s ... traditional title and if ... their
title ... is inalienable
except to the Crown, then this power and corresponding vulnerability give rise
to a fiduciary obligation
on ... the Crown. ... The fiduciary obligation arises
... out of the
of the Crown to extinguish traditional title ... it
does not depend on an exercise of that
Second, His Honour continued, if, contrary to the above view, the
Crown-Meriam relationship:
[W]ith respect to traditional title alone were insufficient ... both the
course of dealings by the Queensland Government with respect
to the islands
since annexation
... and the
exercise of control over or regulation of the Islanders themselves by welfare
legislation
... would certainly
create such an obligation...
The Crown’s fiduciary obligation, Toohey J continued, was ‘in the
nature of ... a constructive
obligation on the Crown in the present case is to ensure that traditional title
is not impaired or destroyed without
the consent of or otherwise contrary to the
interests of the
titleholders’.
These statements represented important new developments in Australian law,
aimed at providing some legal protection to vulnerable
communities against
oppressive governments.
Extinguishment and Fiduciary Duty
Brief reference only is made here to some further aspects of this
ruling. Deane and Gaudron JJ, in a joint judgment, concluded that
extinguishment by exercise of the Crown’s power to alienate
traditional
lands would attract equitable protection. They considered that such infringement
or extinguishment would be ‘wrongful’
because the Crown’s
power entailed a deviation from the ‘principle of the common law that
pre-existing native title rights
are respected and
protected’.
that the unique power to bring about extinguishment dictated that damages,
declaratory relief or a remedial constructive
trust be available to protect
native title from the actions of the
Dawson J, in dissent,
rejected any fiduciary obligation but this conclusion was founded on a false
premise: i.e., that native title
Surrender of Native Title
As to surrender of native title, the High Court declared a power unique to
the Crown to accept a surrender of native title. Brennan
J concluded ‘once
the Crown acquires sovereignty and the common law becomes the law of the
territory, the Crown’s sovereignty
over all land in the territory carries
the capacity to accept a surrender of native
This power aligns with the ruling that traditional owners can dispose of
their native title only to the Crown, thus compromising its
Dicta from the majority
Mabo (No 2)
recognised that a fiduciary obligation of the Crown could
attach to such a surrender.
Bartlett observes:
The imposition of a prohibition on alienation and the concomitant power of
the Crown to accept a surrender is a ... unique disability
imposed on native
title holders to serve the Crown interest in controlling the alienation of land.
It provides a glaring instance
of a circumstance where fiduciary accountability
should be imposed. The extraordinary power of the Crown over reserve lands
(especially
in Western Australia) set apart for Aboriginal people must be
similarly regarded.
Legislative Power to Deny Fiduciary Obligation
Mabo (No 2)
the plaintiffs made no submission that any fiduciary
obligation could restrain the government’s legislative power.
Australia, ‘sovereignty carries the power to ... extinguish private rights
and interests in land’.
Further, legislation cannot be struck down as contrary to a fiduciary
obligation, i.e. ‘the doctrine of the sovereignty of
Parliament means that
the courts must accept as binding law statutes enacted by parliamentary
however, in
Mabo (No 2),
A fiduciary obligation on the Crown does not limit the legislative power of
the Queensland Parliament, but legislation will be a breach
of that obligation
if its effect is adverse to the interests of the title-holders, or if the
process it establishes does not take
account of those
On this issue, the majority in
Mabo (No 2)
— Mason CJ, McHugh,
Brennan, and Dawson JJ — ‘failed to find any fiduciary obligation
with respect to the power
to alienate, but the nature of that majority and (no
subsequent High Court ruling) render any final conclusions as to the denial
such an obligation
tentative’.
II Further Australian
Australian courts since
Mabo (No 2)
have, in contrast to those in
Canada, have demonstrated a reluctance to find a fiduciary obligation imposed
upon the Crown with regard
to dealings with both traditional owners and their
land, and Indigenous peoples generally where, for example, non-economic
are concerned such as loss suffered by Stolen Generation
or where liability
may be established in tort or contract, as in a doctor-patient
relationship.
Three only of
several significant cases, focusing only on traditional owners, are briefly
mentioned below.
Wik Peoples v
fiduciary obligation was argued as a basis for imposing a
constructive trust in favour of the native title claimants over their
traditional
land. The plaintiffs succeeded on other grounds, and the majority
did not consider this issue. The minority, however — Brennan
and Dawson JJ — rejected this argument. Brennan CJ dismissed any generally
applicable fiduciary obligation, saying:
I am unable to accept that a fiduciary duty can be owed by the Crown to the
holders of native title in the exercise of a statutory
power to alienate land
whereby their native title ... is liable to be extinguished without their
consent and contrary to their
Brennan CJ confirmed the power to extinguish native
but supported the
existence of a fiduciary obligation on a surrender
referring to the
acceptance of a surrender in
, where the ‘statutory
scheme’ and the ‘subsequent dealing with the land imposed on the
Crown’ a fiduciary
Bodney v Western Airport Corp. Pty. Ltd
This case concerned the grant and compulsory acquisition of land claimed to
be subject to native title. The claimants emphasised a
fiduciary or trust relationship owed by the Crown so ‘as to protect the
Indigenous people’,
relied on Canadian,
authorities that
considered such a general obligation in the particular constitutional
circumstances in those jurisdictions. The
general obligation, however, is
dependent upon those circumstances: Canada —
Constitution
s 35(1); USA — the domestic dependant status of Indian
New Zealand — the
Treaty of Waitangi 1840.
Lehane J concluded that the authorities addressing such a general obligation
did not support ‘a fiduciary duty of the kind’
contended for and
that the ‘tendency of ... High Court (authority) is against the existence
of such a duty’.
Lehane J added:
[C]ircumstances (may) arise in which the Crown has fiduciary duties, owed to
particular indigenous people, in relation to the alienation
of land over which
they hold native title. Nor does (my conclusion) mean that where, in particular
circumstances, a duty of that
kind is breached (or a breach is threatened) a
constructive trust might not appropriately by
Northern Territory v
the court ruled that any fiduciary obligation allegedly
owed by the Crown to a claim group was displaced by the
Native Title Act
The Court referred to
discussion of fiduciary duty in
Mabo (No 2)
and concluded:
The observations of Brennan J and Deane and Gaudron JJ
Mabo (No 2)
are equivocal. And
, ... Brennan CJ stated (
) that where the Crown
extinguishes native title under statutory authority, the Crown is
duty to exercise the power of extinguishment in the
native title holders'
The High Court stated that observations of the majority in
Mabo (No 2)
‘tend against the conclusion that fiduciary obligations
III The Constitutional Factor
The Question whether the Crown owes fiduciary duties to Indigenous
communities and in what circumstances, if any, has been much discussed
British colonies, most relevantly in Canada and New Zealand. There, notions of,
‘The Honour of the Crown,’
impact of constitutional provisions, and
executing treaties with Indigenous groups are seen as very relevant context when
determine whether a fiduciary duty applies.
Constitution
Act 1982 s 35(1)
In Canada, the revised 1982
Constitution
existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada are
hereby recognised and affirmed.’ Thus,
in Canada concerning Indigenous rights and fiduciary duties have been justified
on constitutional grounds, and have maintained,
and strengthened, the
rulings. In
the Judges speaking for the Full Court discussed
the constitutional protection afforded Indian rights by
, and a resulting
‘burden (cast upon the government) of justifying any legislation that has
some negative effect on any Aboriginal
right protected under
In this context,
the Court stated:
The way in which a legislative objective is to be attained must uphold the
honour of the Crown and must be in keeping with the unique
contemporary
relationship grounded in history and policy, between the Crown and
Canada’s aboriginal
O’Connell states, regarding
This simple yet powerful provision ... has been instrumental in the
furtherance of indigenous rights in Canada, including the Canadian
system’s recognition of a fiduciary relationship between the Crown and
Indigenous Canadians.
Australia: The Way Ahead?
Constitutional Reform?
The question arises: could, or is it likely, that Australian courts might
recognise a fiduciary obligation between the Crown and Indigenous
indicated above, Australian courts to date have resisted extending the
principles of fiduciary law to embrace Indigenous-Crown
The above authorities
suggest that judicial reform is highly unlikely, without a ‘systemic or
paradigmatic shift such as the
implementation of Indigenous constitutional
recognition’.
The Australian
Constitution
contains no clause such as Canada’s s
35(1). The only references to Indigenous Australians –
127, both removed by referendum in 1967 — said nothing about protecting
Indigenous rights, let alone imposing fiduciary
duties upon the Commonwealth
Crown. Current resistance to Constitutional reform concerning Indigenous
Australians seems likely to
continue for some time following the Voice
referendum failure of October
As to constitutional reform, attention therefore must turn to the States and
Territories. The Constitutions of the six states and
two territories differ in
regard to their recognition of Indigenous peoples within their jurisdictions,
but none provide, it is suggested,
a firm basis upon which courts might rely to
establish fiduciary duties owed by the state/territory ‘Crowns.’
The Constitutions of Western Australia, the Northern Territory and the A.C.T.
all fail to mention their Indigenous
The Tasmanian
Constitutions, in
their preambles, ‘acknowledge’ their Indigenous peoples
‘traditional and original owners’ (Tasmania) or mention sharing
their lands (Queensland). It is doubted that such language,
establishes any obligations, fiduciary or otherwise, or provides a firm basis
for judicial discovery of any fiduciary
obligation of the Crown in right of the
government of these states. In short, much honouring but little of substance.
The constitutions of South
contain similar
‘recognition’ immediately negated by ‘no force or
effect’ provisions. This formulation would
seem to negate any argument of
supporting a fiduciary duty upon the respective Crowns. Such language provides
no protection for the
rights of Indigenous Peoples in Australia, in stark
to the ‘honourable’ simplicity of the Canadian
Constitution 1985 s 35(1).
In the USA, Canada and New Zealand, treaties between Indigenous communities
and colonizers — eg, the Treaty of Waitangi 1840
— have been an
important element, involving the ‘Honour of the Crown’, supporting
judicial rulings imposing fiduciary
In Australia, at the
federal level, following the disastrous failure of the Voice referendum, the
Prime Minister’s undertaking
at the Garma Festival in July 2023 that his
government would implement the Uluru Statement from the Heart
full’, including establishing a Makarrata Commission to pursue
‘Voice, Treaty Truth’ has stalled. There
is little indication that
this commitment to ‘Treaty and Truth’ will be met by the current
federal government.
As to the States and Territories, Queensland enacted treaty legislation, with
bi-partisan support, in May
Despite the opposition
abandoning that support, this initiative is
progressing.
In Victoria, treaty
initiatives are being actively pursued, also pursuant to
legislation.
Should a treaty
– or treaties – be executed in for example, Victoria, the impact
upon current judicial reluctance to
impose fiduciary duties upon the Crown when
dealing with Indigenous people may, or may not, be significant. That will be
interesting story.
IV Conclusion
Mabo (No 2)
opened the door to whether fiduciary duties apply to
the Crown in its dealings with traditional owners, Australian courts have since
resisted extending fiduciary principles to Indigenous-Crown relations. This
contrasts with other jurisdictions such as those in Canada,
the USA, and New
Zealand, where constitutional and treaty recognition of Indigenous rights have
played a crucial role in the finding
of fiduciary obligations. The recent
failure of the Voice referendum and the lack of significant constitutional
reform or treaty
recognition in Australia further diminishes the likelihood of
judicial reform in this area. However, emerging state-based treaty
initiatives,
such as those in Queensland and Victoria, may signal future shifts. Ultimately,
Mabo's legacy in relation to fiduciary
obligations remains unfinished, with the
path forward likely dependent on further legal or political developments.
Dr Bryan Keon-Cohen AM KC is retired from the Melbourne Bar, and
an Adjunct Professor at the Law Schools at Deakin and James Cook
Universities.
He expresses many thanks to anonymous peer reviewers, and to Liam Hancock, law
student at James Cook University, for
significant research assistance. Any
errors remain the author&#82
responsibility.
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Bryan Keon-Cohen,
Memoir: Island Kustom to Native title
(Zemvic Press, 2
2013) ch 2.3, 53–6 (‘
A Mabo Memoir
Others v Queensland & The Commonwealth: Statement of Claim,
at National Library of Australia, MS 9518, MC PAN vol 2,
document 1 (‘NLA MS 9518’).
A Mabo Memoir
41–2, concerning Deeds of Grant in Trust, i.e. DOGITS.
(1985) 13 DLR (4th) 321
[1984] HCA 64
(1984) 156 CLR 41
Hospital Products
Ibid 96–7, affirmed at
68–70 (Gibbs CJ), 116 (Wilson J), 142 (Dawson J);
Breen v Williams
[1995] HCA 63
(1996) 186 CLR 71
, 92–3 (Dawson and Toohey JJ). See subsequent cases
mentioned at Richard Bartlett,
Native Title in Australia
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 4
ed, 2019), 769–70.
See also Plaintiffs
Comprehensive Written Submissions, at NLA MS 9518, MC vol 63, ch 8, pp 6,
Plaintiffs H. Crt. Submissions
Hospital Products
Mabo v Queensland (No 1)
[1988] HCA 69
(1988) 166 CLR 186
Mabo (No 1)
A Mabo Memoir
See Amended Statement of
Claim, ordered by Moynihan J on 22
February 1989 at
Mabo (No 2)
A Mabo Memoir
191, 399–400, 409;
Plaintiffs H. Crt. Submissions
Ch 8. See also relief sought in the statement of claim at
Mabo (No 2)
4–5 and questions for the consideration of the Full Court
ordered by Mason CJ on 20 March 1991 at
Mabo (No 1)
Plaintiffs H. Crt. Submissions
(n 7) 1–14.
For an account of the
hearing, see
A Mabo Memoir
397–419; Bryan Keon-Cohen,
‘The Mabo Litigation: A Personal and Procedural Account’
[2000] MelbULawRw 35
Melbourne University Law Review
Ibid 112–13.
Ibid 15–16.
203 (Toohey J)
(emphasis in original).
Ibid, citing creation of
reserves in 1882 and 1912 and appointment of trustees in 1939.
Ibid, citing
Labourers’ Protection Act 1884
, Torres Strait Islanders Act
(Qld) establishing an Island Court and a form of ‘local
government’ and
Community Services (Aborigines) Act 1934
Ibid 204, citing
(n 4) 361 (Wilson J).
Mabo (No 2)
100, 112–13 (Deane and Gaudron JJ).
Ibid 113, 119; Bartlett
Ibid 168–9 (Dawson J);
Bartlett (n 7) 784.
Ibid 60 (Brennan J);
In contrast to the USA
doctrines, see Bartlett
Mabo (No 2)
60, where Brennan J (Mason CJ, McHugh J agreeing) stated: ‘If native
title were surrendered to the Crown in the expectation
of a grant of tenure to
the indigenous title holders, there may be a fiduciary duty on the Crown to
exercise its discretionary power
to grant a tenure in land so as to satisfy the
expectation’. See also Bartlett
Bartlett (n 7) 776.
Mabo (No 2)
(Brennan J).
Wik v Queensland
[1996] 63 FCR 450
, 694–5 (Drummond J), affirmed in the High Court in
Wik Peoples v Queensland
, 256 (Kirby J); 135 (Gaudron J), 131
(Toohey J) (‘
’). See also Mason CJ in
Commonwealth
[1993] HCA 42
(1993) 118 ALR 193
, 204; Bartlett
Mabo (No 2)
(Toohey J).
Re Wadi Wadi People’s Native Title Application
, where French J, as President of the National Native Title Tribunal,
rejected Toohey J’s opinion in
Mabo (No 2)
with respect to the
exercise of the power of alienation of land giving rise to a breach of fiduciary
obligation. In regard to a grant
made in 1817 by the NSW Governor, he stated
that compliance with a fiduciary duty ‘in my opinion, does not as a
general rule,
condition the validity of legislative and executive acts’.
Mabo (No 2)
(n 1) 187; Bartlett
See generally for cases
Mabo (No 2)
: Kirsty Gover, ‘The Honour of the Crown:
State-Indigenous Fiduciary Relationships and Australian Exceptionalism’
[2016] SydLawRw 16
(2016) 38(3)
Sydney Law Review
, 365–6; John O’Connell,
‘A Case for Recognition: A Fiduciary Relationship Between the Crown and
Indigenous Australians’
(2021) 18(2)
Canberra Law Review
(n 7) 2. In
Thorpe v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 21
(1997) 71 ALJR 767
Kirby J stated ‘whether a fiduciary duty is owed by the Crown
to Indigenous people of Australia remains an open question. This
simply not determined it. Certainly, it has not made an adverse determination to
the proposition. On the other hand, there
is no holding endorsing such a
fiduciary duty.’ See also
Williams v The Minister (Aboriginal Land
Rights Act 1983)
(1994) 35 NSWLR 497
, 511 where Kirby J held that the NSW
Aborigines Welfare Board was under a fiduciary duty to provide for the
plaintiff’s ‘custody,
maintenance and education.’ For further
discussion, see Stephen Gray, ‘Holding the Government to Account: The
Wages’ Issue, Fiduciary Duty and Trust Law’
[2008] MelbULawRw 4
Melbourne University Law Review
Cubillo v Commonwealth
[2000] FCA 1084
, 508 [1307];
South Australia v Lampard-Trevorrow
[2010] SASC 56
(2010) 106 SASR 331
Collard v Western Australia
[2013] WASC
Breen v Williams,
[1995] HCA 63
, 94 (Dawson and Toohey JJ), 110 (Gaudron and McHugh
JJ). See also Bartlett (n 7)
(Brennan CJ): ‘its weakness is that it is not an estate held from the
Crown nor is it protected by the common law
as Crown tenures are protected
against impairment by subsequent Crown grant.’ More recent High Court
cases have favoured the
requirement of ‘clear and plain intention’
by the Crown to extinguish: see, eg,
Akiba v Commonwealth
(2013) 250 CLR
(n 33) 96. See
also Bartlett (n 7) 778, 781.
[2000] FCA 1609
’); Bartlett
(n 7) 779–80.
[50]; Bartlett (n 7)
R v Sparrow
DLR (4th) 385
, 409 (Dickson CJC) (‘
Delgamuukw v
British Columbia
(1997) 153 DLR (4
Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe
of Indians v Morton
354 Supp 252 (1973) 256–8.
Te Runanga o Wharekauri
Rekohu Inc v Attorney-General
[1992] NZCA 503
Runanganui o Te Ika Whenua Inc Society v Attorney-General
[1993] NZCA 218
[1994] 2 NZLR 20
Cherokee Nation v
[1831] USSC 6
(1831) 17 where Marshall CJ ruled, famously: that
Indian tribes ‘may, more correctly perhaps, be denominated domestic
nations ... in a state of pupillage’ and that ‘[t]heir
relation to the United States resembles that of a ward to his
[2019] HCA 7
(2019) 269 CLR 1
Northern Territory v Griffiths
Ibid 75 [129].
Ibid 75 [130].
Ibid. See also
[1996] 3 SCR 101
(n 45); Bartlett (n 7) 779.
See O’Connell (n 36)
242, citing
R v Sparrow
[1990] 1 SCR 1075
Mabo (No 2)
Gover (n 36) 365. See also
Gray (n 36) 130. See however
Trevorrow v South Australia (No 5)
[2007] SASC 285
, [1006], [994]–[1011]. Gray J accepted that a fiduciary
relationship existed between the plaintiff (an Aboriginal man removed
parents as a child) and the S.A. Aborigines Protection Board, being the
plaintiff’s statutory legal guardian: at [994]–[1011].
Gray J also
found that ‘as an emanation of the State, legal responsibility falls on
the State with respect to these breaches
(of duty)’: at
[994]–[1011].
O’Connell (n 36)
See Shireen Morris,
Broken Heart: A True History of the Referendum
(La Trobe University
Press, 2024); Thomas Mayo,
Always Was Always Will Be
(Hardie Grant
Explore, 2024); David Hume and George Williams,
People Power:
How Australian Referendums Are Lost and Won
(UNSW Press, 2024).
Constitution Act 1889
Northern Territory (Self Government) Act 1978
Australian Capital Territory (Self Government) Act 1988
Constitution Act
(SA) preamble ‘acknowledges the Aboriginal people as
Tasmania’s First People and the traditional and original owners
Tasmanian lands and waters; recognises the enduring spiritual, social, cultural
and economic importance of traditional lands and
waters to Tasmanian Aboriginal
Constitution of
Queensland 2001
(Qld) preamble ‘honour(s) the Aboriginal peoples and
Torres Strait Islander peoples, the First Australians, whose lands, winds
waters we all now share; and pay tribute to their unique values, and their
ancient and enduring cultures, which deepen and enrich
the life of our
community...’
Constitution Act 1934
s 2, headed ‘Recognition of Aboriginal Peoples’
states in s 2(1)(b) that the ‘governance’ of South Australia
established ‘without proper and effective recognition, consultation or
authorisation of Aboriginal peoples of South Australia’,
‘recognises Aboriginal peoples as traditional owners and occupants of land
and waters’ in the state. S 2(3) states
‘the Parliament does not
intend this section to have any legal force of effect’.
Constitution Act 1902
(NSW) s 2, headed ‘Recognition of Aboriginal People’
‘recognises’, at s 2(2), ‘Aboriginal people, as
traditional custodians and occupants of the land in New South Wales’
avoiding the word ‘ownership.’ Clause
3 negates any legal impact in
fulsome terms: s 2(3) — ‘nothing in this section creates any legal
right or liability,
or gives rise to or affects any civil cause of action or
right to review an administrative action, or affects the interpretation
Act or law in force in New South Wales’.
Constitution Act 1975
s 1A, headed ‘Recognition of Aboriginal People’
acknowledges at s 1A(1): ‘that the events (establishing the colony)
occurred without proper consultation, recognition or involvement of the
Aboriginal people of Victoria’ and ‘(2) ...Victoria’s
Aboriginal people, as the original custodians of the land on which the Colony of
Victoria was established ...’ It then follows
a ‘no force or
effect’ section: s 1A(3) — ‘the Parliament does not intend
this section – to create
in any person any legal right or give rise to any
civil cause of action; or to affect in any way the interpretation of this Act or
of any other law in force in Victoria’.
Te Runanga v Attorney
[1992] NZCA 503
[1993] 2 NZLR 301
, 306 (Cooke P): ‘in New Zealand, the Treaty
of Waitangi is a major support for [a fiduciary] duty’; Gover (n 36)
See Queensland Government
Response to Department of Seniors, Disability Services and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Partnerships
Treaty Advancement Committee Report
(Report, October 2021); Department of Seniors, Disability Services and
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Partnerships (Qld),
Government Response to the Treaty Advancement Committee Report
2021); Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Qld), ‘Historic Path to
Treaty legislation Passes Parliament’
(Media Statement 97711, 10 May
Department of Treaty, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Partnerships, Communities and the Arts
(Web Page, 21 March 2023) <
https://www.dsdsatsip.qld.gov.au/our-work/aboriginal-torres-strait-islander-partnerships/reconciliation-tracks-treaty/tracks-treaty/path-treaty
Advancing the Treaty
Process with Aboriginal Victorians Act 2018
Treaty Authority and
Other Treaty Elements Act 2022
Entities pursuing treaty-making
in Victoria include the First Peoples’ Assembly, Yoorook Justice
Commission, a Treaty Authority
(to oversee and facilitate negotiations), a
Treaty Negotiation Framework and a Self-Determination Fund. See the Victoria
State Government
and First Peoples – State Relations,
Advancing the
Victorian Treaty Process Annual Report 2022–23
(Report, 2023).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (115 KB)
PDF format (419 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter