URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Syme Hildenbrand, Serenal --- "Data Sharing in the Australian Public Sector After the Optus and Medibank Incidents: Taking Reasonable Steps to Prevent Data Breaches" [2025] SydLawRw 5; (2025) 47(1) Sydney Law Review 21383
I Introduction
II The Reasonable Steps Standard under Information Privacy Legislation
A Australian Information Privacy Frameworks: The
(Cth) and State Counterparts
B The Application of the Reasonable Steps Standard to the Optus and Medicare Claims
III Public Sector Data Sharing Frameworks
A Data Sharing Frameworks: The DAT Act and State Counterparts
B Data Sharing Principles Based on the Five Safes
C Why Use of the Five Safes Framework Falls Short of the Reasonable Steps Standard
1 The Five Safes Framework Has Critical Design Weaknesses
(a) The Five Safes Disregards Legal Considerations
(b) The Five Safes Uses an Unrealistic Concept of Safety
(c) The Five Safes Relies on the Five Dimensions Being Independent When They Are Not
(d) The Five Safes Focuses on a Point in Time When Risks Extend across a Lifecycle
(e) The Five Safes Does Not Apply Any Independent Standard of Data Security
2 The Framework Does Not Adequately Address Personal Information
3 The Framework Demands a High Degree of User Sophistication
4 The Framework Is Poorly Suited for Adoption into Legislation
IV Comparing Public Sector Data Sharing Agreement Templates
A The Office of the National Data Commissioner DSA Template
B The Australian Capital Territory Public Sector DSA Template
C The South Australian Intra-Government DSA Template
D The DSA under the Victorian Government Data Sharing Heads of Agreement
E Key Elements of Public Sector DSAs
2 Defined Purpose or Project
3 Defined Data
5 Purpose Limitation
6 Risk Assessments
8 Data Lifecycle and Retention
V Improving Data Sharing Agreements to Meet the Reasonable Steps Standard
A Appropriate Security Governance and Risk Management Policies
B Data Retention Requirements
C Staff Training Requirements
D Contracting Obligations
E Auditing for Compliance
F Independent Standards
VI Conclusions
Data Sharing in the Australian Public Sector after the Optus and Medibank
Incidents: Taking Reasonable Steps to Prevent Data Breaches
Serena Syme
Hildenbrand
In this article I identify weaknesses in the framework for public sector data
sharing in Australia. Many Australian public sector
agencies must share personal
information they hold, potentially increasing the risk of a data breach. I
consider the legal standard
expected of data holders under the
(Cth) to take ‘reasonable steps’ to protect the data,
including in light of the 2022 Optus and Medibank breaches. For
public sector
data, legislated data sharing frameworks also apply, overriding some statutory
protections and introducing potential
areas of weakness and confusion. One
concern is public sector reliance on the unsuitable ‘Five Safes’
data sharing principles,
adopted into statutes with an apparent absence of
critical examination. Data sharing agreements (‘DSAs’) may assist,
but often fail to do so due to vague standards and contractual omissions. To
meet the reasonable steps standard, I argue that public
sector data holders
should ensure that their DSAs require data recipients to have appropriate
security governance and risk management
in place (ideally including compliance
with an independent security standard) and impose obligations regarding data
retention, staff
training, and auditing. To assist in meeting the reasonable
steps standard, security risk assessments should also be undertaken as
data sharing practice.
Introduction
In September 2022, the Optus data breach exposed the personal data of 9.8
The identity credentials of many of those customers were compromised, requiring
them to obtain new credentials to prevent identity
The breach was triggered by
an unidentified hacker accessing personal information through a system
vulnerability. Clare O’Neil,
the Australian Government Minister for Home
Affairs, characterised it as a ‘basic’ attack where Optus
‘effectively
left the window
A few weeks after the
Optus data breach, health insurer Medibank experienced a similarly serious
breach, resulting in the exposure
of 9.7 million personal records including
health information, some of which was
This was an intentional attack by a Russian cyber-crime gang, using stolen login
information.
Due to the sensitivity
of this data, Minister O’Neil described the Medibank breach as ‘the
single most devastating cyber-attack
we have experienced as a
Victoria Police
reported that at least 11,000 cybercrime incidents were linked to the Medibank
A number of regulatory and
civil actions have been brought against both Optus and Medibank, detailed
further below in
These exposures of private sector data were truly
and it is not difficult
to imagine a similar scenario playing out with sensitive public sector data
maintained by Australian governments.
As an example, the National Exchange of
Vehicle and Driver Information System (‘NEVDIS’) has been used since
collect driver and vehicle information from every Australian state and
territory with the combined database managed by Austroads,
the association of
Australian and New Zealand transport
records of driver licence details, representing every
current Australian driver.
Should NEVDIS data sharing pathways or databases be compromised, the damage
— including the need
to replace driver licences — would far exceed
the Optus and Medibank breaches. While NEVDIS contains personal information,
risks also exist with public sector data sharing initiatives involving
de-identified data. An example is the National Disability
(‘NDDA’), which will bring together de-identified data on people
with disability from all states and territories
to boost research, policy
development and service delivery around disability
Its privacy impact
assessment highlighted re-identification of the data as an ongoing risk
requiring monitoring
the NDDA will contain sensitive information about vulnerable people, such as
disability level/type, medical and treatment
data, offender and victim records,
housing status and welfare
Much has been written on the Optus and Medibank breaches and the threat they
pose to customers’ security and company reputations.
Malicious attacks
such as these are data breaches of great concern, but the term ‘data
breach’ encompasses broader actions
and consequences. The Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner (‘OAIC’) defines a data breach
as ‘an unauthorised
access or disclosure of personal information, or loss
of personal
information’.
A data breach can occur without malicious intent, simply through human error or
failures of process or
technology.
It can arise in
relation to any activity involving personal information: collecting and holding
customer information, as Optus and
Medibank did; data use; data destruction; and
most relevantly to this article, data sharing (where data is transferred from
holder to another for a specific purpose).
In this article I focus on the legal obligations of organisations handling
personal information to protect against data breaches,
with a particular focus
on public sector data holders and sharers. Government data holders are often
required to manage large volumes
of personal customer data, and public sector
data sharing (such as for NEVDIS, the NDDA and other purposes including law
enforcement)
is indispensable to meet legislative obligations and public
expectations. However, the act of sharing information may increase the
data breach. Personal information may be more vulnerable during the transfer
and its security after
transfer depends on the data recipient’s conduct and security environment.
Data recipients may also
on-share the data with third parties, adding additional
In Part II of this article I analyse the relevant legal obligations, starting
with the OAIC’s documented approach to assessing
whether an Australian
government or private sector organisation impacted by a data breach discharged
its obligations under the
’), specifically by reference to data security obligations imposed
under that Act by Australian Privacy Principle (‘APP’)
I also consider the various legal actions and grounds asserted against Optus and
Medibank to illustrate the standard a data holder
is expected to apply to
prevent data breaches.
In the public sector context, an additional source of legal obligations is
data sharing legislation such as the
Data Availability and Transparency Act
encourages public sector data sharing — there is no
equivalent legislation applicable to the private sector. Although it is
to operate consistently with the
and APP 11, I explore how
overlay adds complexity and operational weaknesses to the
task of protecting public sector data, potentially undermining
protections and confusing public servants involved in data sharing
management. I highlight why this is cause for concern, given the
significance
and sensitivity of such data.
To explore these issues, in
I focus on data sharing, describing the
legislative framework applicable to public sector data sharing in Australia, and
identifying
gaps arising from the more recent overlay of the
provisions on the existing
protective framework. In
particular, I highlight the role of state and federal data sharing legislation
such as the
in the widespread adoption and application of the
Five Safes framework (‘Five Safes’) as the de facto standard for
public sector data in Australia. Unfortunately, the Five Safes is deeply
flawed and regrettable in its application to personal information,
introducing
areas of weakness in protecting such data.
In Part IV I look at the additional protection offered by Data Sharing
Agreements (‘DSA’s) required by data sharing legislation.
four public sector DSA templates, together with relevant guidance, to assess
whether the DSAs commonly used by the Australian
public sector assist in
redressing the weaknesses introduced by application of the Five Safes. Overall,
I conclude that the DSAs
add value, but tend to be overly vague in their
application, perpetuating areas of weakness.
What can be done about these gaps in protection introduced by data sharing
legislation? Absent amendments to that legislation, in
Part V of this article I
propose additional protections that government data holders should include in
their DSAs to assist in both
protecting data subjects and mitigating these
risks. In Part VI
I conclude that following major data breaches such as Optus and Medibank,
public sector agencies would be well advised to apply a
higher level of data
protection. At its most simple, this can be achieved by putting stronger DSAs in
place and monitoring compliance
with them, and performing a security risk
assessment for each data share.
The Reasonable Steps
Standard under Information Privacy Legislation
Information Privacy Frameworks: The Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) and State
Counterparts
establishes the legislative framework for information
— federal public sector agencies as well as organisations
with annual turnover exceeding $3 million (including Optus and
provides that an APP entity interferes with
the privacy of an individual if it fails to comply with an APP in relation to
that individual’s
personal information, and
requires APP
entities to comply with the
Australian Privacy Principles
provisions can be found in state and territory information privacy laws covering
public sector
with most containing at least one privacy principle focused on information
security, paralleling APP 11:
11.1 If an APP entity holds personal information, the entity must take such
steps as are reasonable in the circumstances to protect
the information:
(a) from misuse, interference and loss; and
(b) from unauthorised access, modification or disclosure.
(a) an APP entity holds personal information about an individual; and
[(b)–(d) [that information is no longer needed or required to be retained
and is not contained in a Commonwealth record];]
the entity must take such steps as are reasonable in the circumstances to
destroy the information or to ensure that the information
de-identified.
clause is considered the ‘most operative and directly relevant protection
of personal data obligation in Australian
and is identified by the OAIC as ‘key to minimising the risk of a data
While the new
Cyber Security Act 2024
(Cth) requires APP entities to report to the
Australian Signals Directorate any ransomware payments to hackers and
facilitates voluntary
data breach notifications by any Australian organisation
(including with limited use protections around information shared), it does
change the central role of APP 11 in setting the standard for
preparedness.
APP 11 raises some important concepts. First, it references a central concept
in privacy regulation: ‘personal information’,
‘information or an opinion about an identified individual, or an
individual who is reasonably
identifiable’.
My references in this article to personal information point back to that key
underlying definition. Second, APP 11 indicates that
obligations are triggered
if the entity ‘holds’ that information, defined to mean that the
entity ‘has possession
or control of a record that contains the personal
information’.
The personal
information does not need to be in the entity’s possession for APP 11 to
apply, provided the entity ‘has
the right or power to deal with the
information’.
This is often interpreted to mean that a public sector data holder continues to
‘hold’ personal information it collects
and maintains even after it
has shared it, because it retains control through legal means (such as under a
Third, APP 11 imposes a reasonableness standard on organisations in managing
the security of personal information they hold (‘the
reasonable steps
standard’).
guidance on APP 11 indicates that reasonable steps will depend on a variety of
factors, all as assessed by the OAIC, including:
the organisation’s size
and resources; the amount and sensitivity of personal information held; the
potential harms; and the
feasibility of security
The reasonable steps standard is applied by the OAIC in its own discretion and
has not yet received ‘substantial judicial
consideration’.
OAIC’s approach is evident in a number of documented investigations of
data breaches, particularly breaches affecting
Sony Playstation Network
(‘Sony’) in
Avid Life Media (‘Ashley Madison’) in
Australian Recoveries & Collections (‘ARC’) in
and Marriott International (‘Marriott’) in
The OAIC’s investigations show that while the reasonable steps standard
is demanding, it does not require a data holder to ‘design
impenetrable
information security standards. Technology companies
Epsilon and Sony were found
by the Commissioner (in separate matters) to have met the reasonable steps
standard, at least partially
because they were operating in compliance with an
independent security standard, ISO
The investigations also demonstrate that security measures are inadequate if
they are not effectively implemented. In a joint report
with the Canadian
though security safeguards existed,
the reasonable steps standard was not met
because the safeguards were not coherently implemented with an appropriate
governance framework
including a security policy, a risk management process and
adequate staff training in privacy and
Such a security framework needs to include adequate monitoring, as noted by the
OAIC in relation to Marriott, which was found to
have fallen short of reasonable
steps largely due to deficiencies in security
monitoring.
Appropriate contractual protections are key if the data is in the hands of a
third party. The Blood Service breach involved the inadvertent
publication of personal information by a contractor. The OAIC identified a
failure to satisfy the reasonable steps standard
— despite the Blood
Service’s security framework with adequate safeguards — because the
security requirements in
the outsourcing contract ‘were not clearly
articulated or proportional to the scale and sensitivity of the information
Other missing protections identified by the OAIC were appropriate data
retention practices, staff training in privacy and security,
and auditing. The
Blood Service and Ashley Madison were both criticised for retaining personal
information longer than needed.
A lack of staff training contributed to both the ARC breach and Ashley Madison
Auditing was raised as
an issue in relation to the Blood Service, which had no reporting or assurance
mechanisms in its outsourcing
These investigations highlight that the reasonable steps standard of data
protection as applied by the OAIC is relatively demanding.
investigations and guidance indicate that for an organisation to achieve and
maintain the standard, considerable
focused action is required, including:
• implemented security and risk management policies (covering system
monitoring);
• appropriate contractual obligations on third parties and contractors;
• relevant data retention practices;
• staff training in privacy and security; and
• auditing or reporting on contract compliance.
Demonstrated compliance with independent security standards, such as the
Australian Government’s Protective Security Policy
ISO 27001 or the
Australian Cyber Security Centre’s Essential Eight security framework
(‘Essential Eight’),
will assist.
Review Report
recommended changes to strengthen
APP 11, of which the following were accepted by the Government:
(a) Amending APP 11.1 to indicate that ‘reasonable steps’
includes both technical and organisational measures. This amendment
is included
in s 34 of the
2024 Amendment Act
’), requiring organisations to
incorporate both types of measure in security
protections.
(b) Enhancing the OAIC’s guidance on what constitutes ‘reasonable
These changes are likely to assist in clarifying and applying the reasonable
steps standard in practice, without substantially amending
operational effect.
If an APP entity fails to meet this standard and a data breach ensues, it may
be subject to enforcement mechanisms under the
. This includes
injunctive relief,
a complaints
and substantial fines
for serious or repeated
interferences.
Amendment Act
added a suite of new enforcement mechanisms (most commencing
in December 2024) such as:
• more flexible civil penalties for privacy
infringement;
• expansion of the orders available to the Federal Court of Australia
to address privacy
• conferral on the Information Commissioner of increased powers around
public inquiries, determinations and
monitoring;
• inclusion of a statutory cause of action for serious privacy
• the criminalisation of doxxing
behaviours.
The practical impact of these new enforcement mechanisms will soon emerge.
But in the meantime, it is instructive to look at the legal
avenues pursued, and
claims made in the Optus and Medibank cases, outlined in the next section.
The Application of
the Reasonable Steps Standard to the Optus and Medicare Claims
The Optus breach arose from a vulnerability with an Application Programming
Interface (‘API’), effectively a gateway for
data access. A coding
error in 2018 weakened the protection of two Optus domains containing APIs. This
coding error was detected
by Optus and fixed in 2021 for one domain but not for
the second, which was exploited by the
The weakness existed for
four years prior to the breach and Optus had many opportunities to detect and
correct it.
Submissions by the
OAIC suggest that ‘[t]he cyberattack was not highly sophisticated ... [i]t
was carried out through a simple
process of trial and
The Medibank
breach was caused by compromised login credentials. A contractor had saved
Medibank passwords to his personal browser,
allowing the hacker to steal the
passwords and undertake multiple accesses to Medibank systems that were
unprotected by multi-factor
authentication and so poorly monitored that Medibank
did not uncover the ongoing breach for almost two
What options were open to the many Optus and Medibank victims? At the time,
it was commonly accepted that enforcement avenues for
individuals under the
inadequate.
Amendment Act
includes mechanisms that may have benefited those victims. One
is a tort for serious invasions of privacy, allowing natural persons
they experience an intentional or reckless intrusion of a serious
While this cause of
action is not broadly relevant to data breaches, it may have utility in the most
egregious cases of reckless
As already noted, the
2024 Amendment Act
also increases civil penalties
and extends the range of orders available to
A more targeted solution
recommended by the 2022
Review Report
(which the Government
accepted in principle but has not yet legislated) was the inclusion in the
of a direct right of action to allow data breach victims to
bring action against APP entities in respect of a breach of the Act and
Australian Privacy Principles
, seeking compensation for economic and
non-economic loss and aggravated
In agreeing
‘in-principle’ to this new enforcement mechanism, the Government
noted that damages should be unlimited,
but required a complainant to first
undertake a complaints process to prevent court
Such a right of action
will assist in data breach cases should it be legislated.
Given there was no direct right of action under the
and Medibank victims pursued other avenues: namely, representative complaints to
the OAIC under
, and class actions in the Federal
The OAIC also brought a civil penalty action against Medibank under
To what extent do these avenues of redress involve consideration of the
reasonable steps standard?
Representative complaints under the
interference with privacy, so an investigation of data breach complaints can be
expected to focus on the reasonable steps
standard under APP 11. Such a process
is low-cost to initiate and allows each class member’s circumstances to be
individually, with compensation available for loss and damage
including non-economic loss.
process is essentially inquisitorial, with the OAIC empowered to secure evidence
and investigate the claim without application
of the rules of
These complaints can be time consuming to
and the determination
is non-binding, potentially requiring court action for enforcement, which will
increase the time and cost before
a complainant receives
recompense.
The OAIC’s approach to ‘reasonable steps’ is likely to be
consistent with that detailed above in
Part II(A).
The second avenue pursued is class actions in the Federal Court of Australia.
The legal claims in such actions vary, but may include
a negligence ground, as
in the Optus class action.
actions are expensive and can take considerable time to reach a conclusion,
often with litigation funders taking a significant
portion of any damages
Despite strong interest
from lawyers and litigation funders there has not yet been a successful data
breach class action in
This contrasts with the United States, where negligence actions based on a
failure to discharge a duty of care have been successful
in class actions around
data breaches.
A successful negligence action in Australia would require the court to
identify a common law duty of care towards data subjects, which
has not yet been
established here as a legal basis for data breach
compensation.
A class action
might reference the reasonable steps
as part of the standard
of care expected of a data holder in a negligence claim. Given that Australian
courts have not yet recognised
the duty of care, the relevant standard of care
has not yet been considered or established by an Australian
Lerch and Whittaker refer
to the approach taken by US courts, where the standard of care was assessed by
considering the duties imposed
on defendants by privacy
legislation,
and conclude that
‘[i]t would therefore be reasonable for the [
Australian Privacy
] to be the standard of care applicable in [Australian] data
breach cases’.
yet to be seen in practice, including whether a court’s approach to
applying the reasonable steps standard would
align with the OAIC approach.
Future decisions in data breach class actions (like Optus) may further develop
our understanding of
the standard.
Finally, as noted earlier, the OAIC is pursuing a civil penalty action
against Medibank under
for serious or
repeated privacy interferences, focusing on whether Medibank met the reasonable
steps standard under APP 11.
Medibank is only the third defendant faced with such an
An OAIC submission in
this matter helpfully includes an Annexure listing expected security protections
aligned with independent standards
like the Essential Eight, consistent with the
reasonable steps considerations detailed
Significant penalties
apply for contraventions of
— even though new higher
penalties were introduced after the Medibank breach, applicable penalties in the
Medibank case are up to $2.22 million for each
contravention.
penalty action is an important mechanism to encourage better corporate
behaviour, but does not compensate victims.
A public sector data holder impacted by a significant data breach is less
likely to face a class action or civil penalty action. Even
if a duty of care to
prevent data breaches were established in Australia, courts may be reluctant to
extend it to public sector data
holders, given well-established judicial
concerns around imposing new liabilities relating to government’s failure
to act (typically
in a resource-constrained environment), and where the duties
and obligations of government may differ from those of other
The existence in
Australia of a statutory duty on public sector agencies (such as an obligation
under APP 11) is not usually enough
to found a new duty of
For a representative
complaint, a public sector APP entity will be in the same position as a public
company like Optus or Medibank,
and the OAIC will apply the APP 11 reasonable
steps standard. In
below, I focus solely on the public sector,
assessing whether public sector data sharing frameworks assist government data
to meet the reasonable steps standard.
Public Sector Data
Sharing Frameworks
I have noted that public sector data holders are often required to share
personal information for policy development, law enforcement
and other purposes
— and that data sharing potentially increases the risks of a data breach.
outline the importance of such data sharing and assess the impact
of legislated public sector data sharing frameworks.
The Australian public sector holds vast quantities of data. In 2017, the
Productivity Commission’s report from its inquiry into
the use of public
and private sector data (‘
Productivity Commission Report
estimated a potential boost to economic output of up to $64 billion per year if
public sector data were made more widely
The Report found that this value is not currently being realised, observing that
‘numerous hurdles to sharing and releasing
data are choking the use and
value of Australia’s
One such hurdle is
that data is ‘systematically siloed in the public sector with little
sharing between agencies or
notorious ‘Robodebt’ program highlighted Federal Government
cross-agency data sharing and data matching for
welfare debt recovery, such data
sharing activities are not
widespread.
Productivity
Commission Report
considered that the lack of coordinated data sharing among
public sector entities was contributing to ‘fragmentation and duplication
of data collection activities’ and
In this context, the
Victorian test case undertaken
as part of the NDDA pilot involved linking
disability service data and mental health service data to study the population
disability and mental health and to assess which
supports are most effective in improving
This is the type of
valuable data activity that is likely to attract community approval. Data
sharing is also highly beneficial for
law enforcement, including in fields such
as child protection or domestic violence prevention where it may allow patterns
behaviour to be detected and addressed, ideally preventing
NEVDIS falls in the law
enforcement category, allowing the tracking of stolen vehicles across state
borders and helping prevent vehicle
Safe, trusted and
effective public sector data sharing is needed to allow such important
initiatives to continue and increase. While
Productivity Commission
displayed frustration with current data sharing practices and a
strong desire to drive change, it recognised the importance of building
licence around data sharing, because otherwise such initiatives will be widely
rejected and fail.
Importantly,
one of the most critical components of social licence identified in the Report
was trust, as achieved through ‘[e]mbedding
genuine safeguards into
Australia’s data framework to assure people their data is being used
A key conclusion
Productivity Commission Report
was the need to free up government
data using a legislated data sharing
In evaluating this approach below, it is pertinent to keep the concepts of
social licence and genuine safeguards in mind.
Data Sharing
Frameworks: The
and State Counterparts
Productivity Commission Report
recommendation led to the passage
and 1 April 2022 commencement of the
establishing a
scheme under which Federal Government agencies may share public sector data with
accredited users from the federal
or state public sectors or Australian
universities in specified
circumstances,
sharing to be regulated by a new Office of the National Data Commissioner
was pre-dated by some public sector data sharing Acts in the
States all designed to facilitate public sector data sharing, such as
Data Sharing (Government Sector) Act 2015
Victorian Data
Sharing Act 2017
(Vic) and the
Public Sector (Data Sharing) Act 2016
Of these, the
Public Sector (Data Sharing) Act
(SA) is considered
the broadest, because it covers law enforcement data and overrides all other
state legislation.
, applying as it does to all public sector data in the hands of the
Commonwealth, may have an even greater
It is not mandatory
for Federal Government agencies to conduct their data sharing under the auspices
; they may choose instead to conduct their sharing under a
DSA or memorandum of understanding
they have identified an adequate legal basis for that
But because the
simplifies some sharing considerations, including
by providing a clear legal basis for sharing for certain allowed purposes, it is
likely that many organisations will employ it. For example, while NEVDIS does
not rely on the
, it is possible that the NDDA will.
Chapter 2 of the
sets out specific
‘authorisations’, allowing sharing and handling of public sector
data if specified conditions are met.
Importantly, if the sharing is so
authorised, s 23 provides that it may override all other laws
(federal, state or
territory).
This allows
authorised data sharing to take precedence over secrecy provisions, which
creates new risks for data protection. For
example, both the
Child Care Act
Age Discrimination Act 2004
strictly restrict the use of personal or protected information held
under those Acts, but such information could potentially be shared
requires the sharing to be for one of three
allowed purposes in s 15: the delivery of government services; informing
government policy
and programs; or research and development — not data
sharing for law enforcement.
There are numerous other conditions in s 13, including that the sharing
• consistent with constitutional requirements, including to an
appropriate recipient (s 13(4));
• consistent with specified ‘data sharing principles’ set
out in s 16 (s 13(1)(e));
• covered by and consistent with a valid DSA as defined in ss
18–19 (s 13(1)(c)–(d));
• subject to appropriate privacy protection in accordance with
s 16E (ss 13(1)(g), (i)); and
• not otherwise prohibited under s 17 (s 13(2)(c)).
Civil penalties apply if data is nominally shared under a
authorisation but fails to comply with
How might the
legislative override impact the
? While the override applies to any Australian legislation
prohibiting sharing (including laws enacted after it), the
’s legislative history indicates a strong intent for it
to operate consistently with the
The Revised Explanatory Memorandum for the DAT Bill specified that it was
‘not intended to override the
’ and demonstrated
an expectation that s 17(5) of the
would prohibit any data
handling inconsistent with the
Further, DSAs under
must include terms binding the parties to comply with all
Australian Privacy
Accordingly,
the legislative override will not limit the
Australian Privacy
, and the APP 11 reasonable steps standard will apply to all
sharing. But, in practice, the
contains weaknesses
in protection, and its complexity raises the practical risk that public servants
will view it as exhaustive and
fail to meaningfully apply APP 11. The main
weakness comes from its reliance on data sharing principles. The
Productivity
Commission Report
evidenced suspicion towards the use of DSAs and MOUs in
public sector data sharing, describing the MOUs as ‘unnecessarily
complicated
consuming’,
recommending reliance instead on data sharing principles based on the Five
Ultimately, the
retained DSAs but required them to implement data sharing
principles.
III(B)–(C) I assess these data sharing principles, a critical component of
Data Sharing
Principles Based on the Five Safes
A feature of the
and other Australian legislative data sharing
frameworks is the application of data sharing principles based on the Five
Five Safes is a framework for planning, designing and evaluating data
It was devised at the United Kingdom (‘UK’) Office for National
Statistics in the early 2000s to enable the sharing of
confidential business
survey data for research
This confidential
data was not personal information— it related to businesses and not
individuals. Subsequently, the Five Safes
was used to disseminate detailed but
anonymised census data.
short, the Five Safes was designed to allow confidential (but not personal) data
to be made available to academic researchers
in a controlled
In recent years, the
Five Safes’ designer Felix Ritchie has increasingly publicised the Five
Safes as an appropriate model
for public sector data
representing a
significant departure from the original use case.
Under the Five Safes, the prospective discloser must assess five dimensions
of a data request, namely: the project, people, settings,
data and outputs (see
Table 1 summary
Each dimension requires certain controls to be imposed to ensure a
‘safe’ outcome: safe projects, safe people, and so
on. The controls
can be shifted and combined to produce appropriate sharing controls overall, and
all five dimensions need to be
assessed together to determine whether an
adequate solution has been
Elements of the Five Safes
Assessment scope
Safe projects
Legal, moral and ethical considerations, public benefit, valid statistical
Safe people
Data user knowledge, skills and incentives
Safe settings
Practical controls on data access, including physical environment and
compliance processes.
Potential for re-identification of individuals in the data.
Safe outputs
Analysis of outputs to remove identifiable information.
The Five Safes is not prescriptive; ‘it is a framework for thinking,
but does not explicitly state a
It is not designed to identify the best solution, but rather a range of possible
solutions in which the term ‘safe’ is
regarded as a continuous
measure, rather than as a binary ‘safe’ or
In 2015, the Australian Bureau of Statistics started using the Five Safes to
share a wide variety of
The Five Safes was then adopted in Australian legislation, starting with the
Public Sector (Data Sharing) Act 2016
The original 2020 Explanatory Memorandum for the
refers to the
data sharing principles as ‘a key safeguard to manage risks of sharing
public sector data based on the internationally
recognised five safes
framework’.
A major Commonwealth data sharing agreement preceding the
Intergovernmental Agreement on Data Sharing between Commonwealth and
State and Territory Governments
, reflected this approach, including data
sharing principles based on the Five
The Five Safes is now represented in a wide variety of Australian legislation
and policy materials.
Unfortunately, this uncritical reliance on the Five Safes has introduced a
significant area of weakness into Australian public sector
The Five Safes is used in the UK, Canada and other countries, but it has
achieved significantly greater purchase in Australia, with
Ritchie and Green
identifying Australia’s public sector adoption of the framework both as
‘a substantial leap beyond
current practices in other countries’ and
also ‘more of a risk than a piecemeal
While the data sharing principles in s 16 of the
further detailed in Part 2 of the
Data Availability and Transparency Code
based on the Five Safes, they are slightly modified, as outlined in Table 2
Notice the differences between Tables 1 and 2: while the
purports to lean on an ‘internationally recognised’
the Five Safes is
an academic framework rather than a legislative code, so its implementation
unavoidably leads to potentially significant
Five Safes framework, as reflected in the
Principle (s 16)
Data sharer must satisfy itself that project is consistent with this
principle by:
Safe Projects
Project is appropriate
Applying a public interest assessment (s 6) and ethics assessment (s
Safe People
Data is only provided to appropriate persons
Addressing any conflict of interest (ss 8–10).
Considering the attributes, qualifications, affiliations, expertise and
experience of data recipients (ss 11–2).
Safe Settings
Data is handled in an appropriate environment
Considering whether reasonable and proportionate security standards are in
place (s 13).
Only data reasonably necessary for purpose is handled, with appropriate
protections
Considering whether data is reasonably necessary and whether it should be
treated prior to sharing (s 14).
Safe Outputs
The only output is final and necessary
Considering the nature and use of the output (s 15).
Why Use of the Five
Safes Framework Falls Short of the Reasonable Steps Standard
Given its wide use throughout the Australian public sector, the Five Safes
framework has received remarkably little formal
It was critiqued by 14 Australian privacy experts in their submission to a
Senate Committee on the
Even in the field of de-identification, the Five Safes has been criticised as
not fit for purpose. It is even less fit as a replacement
for current legal and
ethical criteria for sharing, because it was not designed to create an authority
to share personal information
in the first
community submission to a Western Australian privacy consultation
(‘Brennan et al WA Submission’) expressed doubt whether
Safes was an effective methodology, noting incisively that the submission
authors had ‘been unable to locate any material
produced by any privacy
regulator in the world that endorses
and strongly recommending that it not be adopted in that
The most scathing
assessment to date was a 2020 working paper by Culnane, Rubinstein and Watts,
which asserted that the Five Safes
framework is ‘fundamentally
flawed’ and ‘appropriates notions of safety without being anchored
in any objective
standard by which to assess or measure what is and is not
critiques are considered in the context of public sector data, it becomes clear
that there are significant risks in relying
on the Five Safes, as discussed
below in Parts III(C)(1)–(4).
The Five Safes Framework Has Critical Design
Five critical design weaknesses identified in the Culnane, Rubinstein and
Watts working paper and Brennan et al WA Submission are
as follows.
The Five Safes Disregards Legal
Considerations
Because of its statistical origins, the framework appears oriented towards
quantitative data,
explain why it appears to bypass legal protections and privacy
Applicable laws,
legal basis and privacy and security requirements are inadequately expressed
— other than a passing mention
of legal compliance under ‘Safe
The Brennan
et al WA Submission states that the Five Safes must only be used once the legal
authority to share personal information
identified.
non-compliance with law is likely; the UK Department of Education considered
that it was fully complying with the Five
Safes while sharing children’s
personal information with the private sector in contravention of applicable
The Five Safes Uses an Unrealistic Concept of
The Framework relies on a theoretical concept of safety, unattached to real
Further, the framework
evaluates ‘safety’ rather than risk, a more familiar concept in most
workplaces.
The Culnane,
Rubinstein and Watts working paper describes the use of ‘safe’ as
‘emotive’ and ‘overly
optimistic’.
the ‘use of “safe” was a deliberate attempt to dismantle the
binary meaning of safe/unsafe, and make it
explicitly a relative
may be poorly understood by the public servants applying it. The Brennan et al
WA Submission denies that the Five Safes
is a risk management framework at
The Five Safes Relies on the Five Dimensions
Being Independent When They Are Not
The framework assumes that the safes are independent of one
But in practice they
appear to depend on one another: ‘if one safe fails it can bring down all
or some of the rest’,
leading to comparisons with a ‘house of
The Five Safes Focuses on a Point in Time When
Risks Extend across a Lifecycle
The framework requires a point-in-time analysis, when the risks associated
with personal information apply to its whole
The Brennan et al
WA Submission notes that this base assumption of the Five Safes that risks are
static is wrong; the risks of disclosure
are dynamic and vary across the
The Five Safes Does Not Apply Any Independent
Standard of Data Security
The Five Safes does not require compliance with any independent security
standard, such as the Protective Security Policy Framework,
ISO 27001 or
Essential Eight: ‘[i]t appropriates notions of safety without being
anchored in any objective
The Framework Does Not Adequately Address Personal
Information
Descriptions of the framework imply that it applies to de-identified data
(many of the controls are intended to prevent identification
of the data), but
the framework does not make this
However, the Five
Safes is now applied to the sharing of personal information under the
by Australian public sector agencies, without clear awareness that this
contradicts its
The Framework Demands a High Degree of User
Sophistication
The framework is described by Ritchie and others as ‘explicitly
relativistic, subjective and
empirical’,
‘the use of the framework itself is no guarantee of good
considering the framework as part of a Technical White Paper, the Australian
Computer Society (‘ACS’) notes that ‘several
of the dimensions
are highly dependent on
judgement’.
concerning descriptors of a framework intended to be used by mid-level public
servants to protect sensitive data. Such
decision-making does not fall within an
established professional skillset, and the subjectivity makes consistency of
outcomes unlikely.
The ACS recommended the inclusion of additional dimensions, and also proposed
quantified risk thresholds for each
Under the ACS’ quantified approach, any data sharing project ‘using
personal information’ would be assessed at
‘Safe Level 1 – Not
safe project’, and would not
This means that the
ACS has concluded that the Five Safes is not suitable for sharing personal
information in
circumstances — and yet it remains the
Australian public sector standard for the sharing of personal information.
The Framework Is Poorly Suited for Adoption into
Legislation
How did Australian legislatures adopt the Five Safes as legislative
principles that may be inconsistent with, and undermine, their
existing laws?
Especially when faced with fast-moving technologies, it is not unusual for
legislatures to provide regulatory flexibility
by recognising rules and
guidelines developed by non-legislative bodies. Examples include industry codes
and standards under both
Telecommunications Act 1997
Safety Act 2021
But in those contexts, the external document is reviewed and confirmed by the
relevant regulator before being implemented. What is
unusual here is for
external principles to be included in a Bill, modified through the legislative
process and adopted into legislation
with minimal formal review and no rigorous
assessment of the modifications. The roots of this development are the
Productivity Commission Report’s
evident frustration with status
quo data sharing and its recommendation to adopt a principles-based legislative
framework weighted
towards data
A principles-based
approach requires principles, so the
Productivity Commission Report
identified the Five Safes as the preferred approach — seemingly in
reliance on the Australian Bureau of Statistics’ prior
adoption and an
article co-authored by Ritchie, and in the absence of any independent evaluation
of effectiveness.
Parliamentary scrutiny identified valid issues about the use of the data sharing
principles — their potential to undermine
consent; the failure to restrict
sharing to de-identified data; the vagueness of the ‘public
interest’ test; and the
(a legislative
instrument not subject to Parliamentary scrutiny) to flesh out the principles
— but did not secure major changes
to address these
The impact is
heightened by the
’s legislative override, which allows
authorised data sharing in compliance with the data sharing principles to
proceed despite
other laws.
As Witzleb noted in 2023, it remains to be seen whether the
achieves the appropriate balance between protection and enabling appropriate use
of government data.
In a recent article, Green and Ritchie assessed critiques of the Five Safes
including the Culnane, Rubinstein and Watts working paper
and the Brennan et al
WA Submission. Green and Ritchie dismissed them as
‘misinterpretations’ of the model, asserting
without analysis that
‘the problem is not the framework, but the
implementation’.
Green and Ritchie article did not tackle the critiques in any detail, focusing
instead on promoting the Five
In relation to
concerns that the Five Safes does not adequately recognise legal requirements,
Green and Ritchie stated that ‘modern
data protection laws are explicitly
multi-dimensional and recognise the impossibility of prescribing absolute
standards’,
misrepresenting the requirements of such
The approach to
defending the Five Safes in the Green and Ritchie article lacks academic rigour
and should give pause to governments
relying on it. In this light, recent
comments by Ritchie and Whittard that ‘in general [the Five Safes’]
use as a framework
is uncontroversial’ seem deliberately
misleading.
In Part II above, I detailed that the applicable legal standard for data
holders in defending against a data breach is the taking
of reasonable steps to
protect the data, in compliance with APP 11. Given the significant weaknesses in
its data sharing principles
based on the Five Safes, application of the
may result in data sharing conduct that does not meet this standard. The
Five Safes’ lack of focus on legal compliance, its
omission of defined
risk or information security standards, its inherently subjective approach and
its lack of alerts around dangerous
practice may result in public sector data
holders unwittingly engaging in poor and risky data sharing practice that falls
the reasonable steps standard. As an example, if the NDDA were to rely
for data sharing, the weaknesses in the model might result
in the sharing of inadequately de-identified personal information without
reasonable security protection. While the
prohibits a recipient
intentionally
re-identifying de-identified
this would not protect
data from re-identification if inadvertently disclosed — triggering a data
breach of considerable concern
given the vulnerability of the data subjects and
sensitivity of the data.
It is important to note that the
requires the use of DSAs,
which may apply an additional layer of protection. In Part IV below, I assess
the ability of DSAs to remedy
weaknesses introduced by the Five Safes. But at a
minimum, the widespread use of the Five Safes in the Australian public sector
critical evaluation.
Comparing Public
Sector Data Sharing Agreement Templates
DSAs are an important tool in managing the ongoing conduct of data sharing
involving personal information. A DSA allows the data holder
to communicate
expectations and legal requirements, undertake compliance monitoring and impose
sanctions where necessary. Even where
the recipient is bound by the same privacy
laws as the data holder and is subject to legislative compliance mechanisms, a
DSA provides
a practical way for the data holder to enforce those obligations,
such as by withholding data or terminating the DSA in the event
non-compliance. Unlike a ‘point-in-time’ data sharing decision, a
DSA also imposes ongoing obligations and helps manage
the data lifecycle, from
the method of sharing through to data destruction.
While Australian data sharing legislation did not eliminate DSAs, in most
cases it was closely followed by form-like DSA templates
intended to streamline
the DSA process, for completion by non-legal staff without significant legal
oversight. Perhaps inadvertently,
the templates risk focusing public servants on
obligations to the exclusion of reasonable steps requirements. In
this section I review four standard public sector DSA templates
from federal,
state and territory jurisdictions, to identify the additional protection they
Analysis by Krebs and
Bennett Moses concluded that ‘[m]ost of the Australian data sharing
agreements that we reviewed lacked
both specificity and comprehensiveness,
resorting to general principles and failing to include important
obligations’.
is to assess whether these templates contain adequate protections to overcome
weaknesses in the Five Safes and to help ensure
that the reasonable steps
standard is met.
The Office of the
National Data Commissioner DSA Template
The recently superseded 2022 ONDC DSA template (‘ONDC DSA’)
resembles a form and includes encouragement on the first page
for parties to
seek legal advice on whether it will be
As a relatively generic template, it focuses on recording the parties’
mutual intentions, rather than applying standards set
by the data provider. The
bulk of the template is devoted to the application of the data sharing
principles (that is, the Five Safes).
To the extent that there are obligations
under the ONDC DSA, they generally flow from the data sharing principles and
any gaps or weaknesses in the application of those principles. For
instance, under the principle ‘Setting’, cl 4.14 requires
parties to ‘[d]escribe in detail the physical and Information Technology
(IT) environment that will be used to transmit,
store and access the
The parties
could describe a completely unsuitable environment for personal information and
there is no guidance that this must be
rejected. Due to its reliance on the data
sharing principles, the ONDC DSA template is lacking safeguards to ensure that
an appropriate
level of protection is applied. While this template has been
superseded, it remains relevant due to its influence on other jurisdictions.
The Australian
Capital Territory Public Sector DSA Template
The Australian Capital Territory (‘ACT’) public sector DSA
template (‘ACT DSA’) is a version of the ONDC DSA,
tailored for use
Government.
It has a similar format and focus on the data sharing principles (that is, the
Five Safes), and accordingly carries the same weaknesses
as the ONDC DSA.
Australian Intra-Government DSA Template
The South Australian intra-government DSA template (‘SA DSA’),
used for South Australian agencies sharing data with one
another, is expressly
described as a ‘form’ in its
Like the ONDC DSA, it focuses on recording the parties’ mutual intentions,
with a substantial section (part 6) to step through
application of the data
sharing principles (ie the Five Safes). Again, this approach leaves significant
discretion to each individual
assessment, failing to set an objective standard
or indicating when sharing might be inappropriate. For instance, one of the Safe
Settings questions is ‘Based on these safeguards, is the likelihood of
accidental disclosure or access low?’ with a yes/no
If the answer is
‘no’, there is no guidance that additional controls must be applied.
It presumably assumes that the
signatory will review these criteria carefully
before signing, but in a busy public service agency that may leave too much room
The DSA under the
Victorian Government Data Sharing Heads of Agreement
The Victorian Government’s
Data Sharing Heads of Agreement
Agreement’)
was intended to operationalise the
Victorian Public Sector Data Sharing
The DSA (‘Vic DSA’), contained in Annexure 1 under the Heads of
Agreement, is non-binding and for use within Victorian
Government departments
who are signatories to the Heads of
The annexure also has the appearance of a form, but does import certain
obligations from the Heads of Agreement, such as the obligation
to only use the
data for a specified purpose (cl 8), and requirements for data handling,
retention and security, including compliance
with the Victorian Protective Data
Security Standards
completion of a security assessment (cl 12). Further, cl 4 of the
Heads of Agreement requires the parties to comply with applicable
and the Victorian Protective Data Security Standards, thereby upholding
compliance with independent security standards.
These elements make this DSA
considerably stronger than the others reviewed. While the explanatory material
indicates that the ‘[p]arties
are free to replace all or any part of the
annexures with the format/content that best suits their
circumstances’,
may undermine such requirements, the best view is that this flexibility was not
intended to, and should, not override the requirements
in the Heads of
Key Elements of Public Sector DSAs
Table 3 below provides a summary of the contents for the four DSAs (ONDC, SA,
ACT, Vic), compared against one another and two additional
frameworks:
(a) the requirements for a compliant DSA under the
(b) the Office of the Victorian Information Commissioner (‘OVIC’)
publication
Information Sharing and Privacy: Guidance for Sharing Personal
Information
OVIC Guidance
’), which includes a section
on the recommended contents of a
The shading in Table 3 shows the provisions that are present in each
document, with unshaded areas highlighting omissions.
Table 3 indicates that the following eight DSA elements are specified in all
four DSAs, required by the
s 19 and recommended for
inclusion by the
OVIC Guidance
The parties to the DSA should be clearly specified, generally including name,
ABN, address, role under the agreement (discloser or
recipient) and contact
Similarly, all four
DSAs require that the agreement be appropriately executed (while execution is
not mentioned in the
s 19 and the
OVIC Guidance
, it can be
assumed as being necessary to finalise an agreement).
Defined Purpose or Project
A standard and characteristic element of DSAs is a statement of the intended
purpose of data use.
is entered for a specific project, it will generally include a description of
the project and how the data will be used
as part of that project, and sometimes
the public benefits of the project.
Defined Data
It is usual to clearly specify what type of data is covered by the DSA,
potentially at the level of databases or data
This is often covered
by a defined term, such as the ‘Data’ or ‘Information’,
and referenced throughout the
Comparison of DSAs, the
OVIC Guidance
OVIC Guidance
Defined purpose/project
Purpose limitation
Defined data
Data lifecycle, retention
Data quality
Legislative basis
Matching, re-identification restrictions
Third party recipients, on-sharing
Addressed by data sharing principles
Incident management
Addressed by data sharing principles
Risk assessments
Addressed by data sharing principles
Non-compliance & enforcement
Termination
denotes coverage
denotes no coverage
All of the templates require some specification or definition of the relevant
users (noting that for the
s 19, this is encompassed by the data
sharing principles).
These elements are arguably all necessary to establish an effective and
meaningful DSA, but offer only a minimal contribution to satisfying
reasonable steps standard. The following elements, also present in all four
agreements, begin to contribute to meeting that standard.
Purpose Limitation
Each DSA includes a requirement that data use be restricted to the specified
Some DSAs may allow
uses incidental to the specified purpose (provided the incidental purpose(s) are
specified),
and some may
restrict the use to the specified purpose only, but there will generally be a
purpose limitation in any public sector
This purpose limitation
is important to the security of the data.
Risk Assessments
All templates consider whether other assessments are needed (for the
s 19 this is encompassed by the data sharing principles, which
mention an ethics assessment), and most require that a separate Privacy
Assessment (‘PIA’) be
A PIA will assess
compliance with applicable privacy laws and identify any privacy risks that need
to be controlled as part of the
project. A PIA will ideally encourage
compliance, but as it is commonly prepared by non-technical staff there
is a high risk that the APP 11 ‘reasonable steps’
analysis will be
inadequate. A security risk assessment is prepared by technical staff and is
generally more effective in this regard.
The Vic DSA also requires performance
of a security risk assessment (recommended in the
OVIC Guidance
and the ONDC DSA, SA
DSA and ACT DSA inquire whether ethics, finance or IT approval is
All templates require security controls to be considered and specified
(again, in the case of the
s 19, this is encompassed by the
data sharing principles).
most cases, this is included as a response to the ‘Safe Settings’
element of the Five Safes, asking that the chosen
security settings be
documented but not setting any minimum standards or
guardrails.
Some DSAs require
more detail than others, with the ACT DSA asking whether the data recipient
complies with ISO 27001,
without indicating how this information should be
Only the Vic DSA
requires a security risk assessment, which provides detail on applicable
security settings and potential areas of
weakness, and would usually require
technical staff to assess the security settings and evaluate their effectiveness
against an independent
security standard, and presumably action any
recommendations. A security risk assessment is a valuable component of any data
activity — this is a strength of the Vic DSA, which is also strong
in requiring compliance with an independent information
security standard, the
Victorian Protective Data Security Standards. The other three DSAs do not
require compliance with any independent
Data Lifecycle and Retention
While all DSAs refer to data retention, only the Vic DSA applies appropriate
data retention requirements, with the data recipient
being required to agree to
securely destroy the data once it is no longer
All other DSAs just
ask the parties to specify how they will treat the data at the end of the
project or purpose, with no standard
Table 3 (above) also points to some components that are less universal but
are specified in several of the DSAs. In Part V below,
I discuss the elements
that are lacking or should be more consistently applied to assist with meeting
the reasonable steps standard.
Improving Data Sharing
Agreements to Meet the Reasonable Steps Standard
There are additional DSA elements that would go a long way towards addressing
the deficiencies of the Five Safes and enabling a public
sector data holder to
ensure that it has taken reasonable steps to protect the shared data — as
well as building the social
licence around data sharing emphasised in the
Productivity Commission Report
by implementing genuine safeguards. The
OAIC findings discussed in Part II above suggest that an adequate DSA
should require the
data recipient to implement: security and risk management
policies (covering system monitoring); appropriate data retention policies;
staff training in privacy and security; and effective contractual arrangements
for any on-sharing to data recipient contractors.
In addition, the DSA should
include an assurance and audit framework for contract compliance and would
ideally require the data recipient
to operate in accordance with an independent
security standard. Considering these OAIC expectations for the reasonable steps
it is notable that the DSAs analysed in Table 3 (above) largely lack
those elements.
Appropriate
Security Governance and Risk Management Policies
None of the DSAs require the recipient organisation to have commonly
implemented security governance in place (such as security policies
management policies). An enterprise security management policy would usually
detail requirements for security threat monitoring
and alerting, and such
policies should also cover management of data incidents. The OAIC described such
governance in the Ashley
Madison joint investigation as ‘a basic
organizational security safeguard, particularly for an organization holding
significant
amounts of personal
information’.
investigation, the OAIC identified ‘critical gaps in security’ that
it attributed to the lack of an implemented
security governance and monitoring
Further, the lack
of a documented risk management framework in the Ashley Madison case seemed to
underpin a failure of appropriate
risk assessment, potentially contributing to
the loss of data.
clear risk of non-compliance with the reasonable steps standard if appropriate
security governance and risk management
policies are not required by the
relevant DSA.
Data Retention
Requirements
The DSAs should specify how long data may be kept, and how it should be
disposed of, consistent with APP 11.2. Only the Vic DSA is
adequate in this
regard, with an overarching obligation to dispose of data in the Heads of
and more detail on
data retention, destruction and assurance in the Vic DSA
The other DSAs merely
allow the users to record data retention arrangements — but data holders
using those DSAs should take
that opportunity to be prescriptive, following the
example of the Vic DSA. Applying the Blood Service findings around reasonable
steps under APP 11.2, both the data holder and the data recipient should have
systems and procedures in place ‘to identify
information the organisation
no longer needs and destroy or de-identify this
information’.
Staff Training
Requirements
None of the DSAs is prescriptive in relation to staff training in privacy and
security; only the
OVIC Guidance
makes any significant mention of
Some of the DSAs
request details of the users’ qualifications, but without setting a
minimum standard or requiring any refresher
training. By means of an enforceable
undertaking, the OAIC required ARC to develop, finalise and conduct privacy
training with its
staff on a regular basis, including during onboarding and at
regular intervals, and to maintain records of training
compliance.
While this was
considered necessary to implement the reasonable steps standard in the face of
the employee conduct that triggered
the ARC breach, it would be good practice in
any case. At a minimum, the DSA should require some type of staff compliance
in privacy and security, to ensure that employees understand their
obligations under the
Contracting
Obligations
None of the DSAs address the issue of whether subcontractors can be used to
manage the data and the obligations that should apply
to them. Given the
OAIC’s findings regarding contractual arrangements in the Blood Service
breach, this is likely to be a weakness.
Data recipients may engage
subcontractors to undertake data hosting and data analytics, or to manage
infringements or customer queries,
among other things. A DSA should specifically
require the data recipient to take responsibility for its subcontractors’
with the DSA, otherwise the protections of the DSA are likely to be
significantly undermined by subcontractor use. A related issue
is the offshoring
of data by contractors to jurisdictions with a lower level of legislative
can expose the data to considerable risk,
but was not addressed in any of the DSA
The DSAs should
specifically limit offshoring of the data.
Auditing for
Another common deficit in the templates is a lack of ongoing compliance and
assurance activity. Among the four DSAs, only the Vic
DSA references this,
suggesting that the parties document any assurance required for data
destruction, and also any other assurance
or audit processes — but without
requiring such assurance.
data holder cannot be confident of compliance in the absence of ongoing
reporting or auditing.
case of shared personal information, it is appropriate to apply regular auditing
to the data recipient (either self-assessment
or some level of independent
auditing) to ensure that agreed standards continue to be met. Resources
permitting, it may be appropriate
to specifically allow investigative access by
the data holder or its agent (such as a security testing company) to the data
recipient’s
environment and data use in order to confirm that appropriate
standards are being upheld. None of the DSAs require the data recipient
investigative access by the data holder. Ideally, all of the DSAs should be
reviewed and updated to add assurance requirements
and (where feasible) allow
for investigative access. Auditing and inspection activity often requires follow
up and ongoing supervision
to ensure that any identified issues are
appropriately rectified and closed out — such activities will need to be
resourced by the data holder.
Independent
With the exception of the Vic DSA, the DSAs do not require compliance with
any independent security standards. This omission from
the templates implies
level of protection may be adequate provided it is documented
and agreed. While the reasonable steps standard does not require compliance
an independent security standard, the OAIC’s investigations into Sony and
Epsilon indicate it can be beneficial in establishing
that reasonable steps were
Also, the OAIC
referenced independent standards to establish the measures that Medibank should
have implemented.
requiring compliance with the Victorian Protective Data Security Standards and
also a security risk assessment, the Vic DSA could
assist data holders in
demonstrating that reasonable steps were applied. The other three DSAs do not
require this. Guidance should
be developed for data holders using those DSAs,
encouraging them to require that data recipients comply with an independent
such as Protective Security Policy Framework, ISO 27001 or the
Essential Eight, including a security risk assessment in each instance.
The existing public sector DSA templates would be improved by paying
attention to the six elements discussed above in Part V(A)–(F),
address the weakness of the Five Safes and ensure that reasonable steps have
been taken. This is not a ‘set and forget’
exercise. To
appropriately monitor and oversee each DSA, ongoing contract management will be
required, including supervising annual
assurance activities and determining on a
risk basis whether additional controls (such as investigative access) should be
Public sector data holders should ensure that they are adequately
resourced to actively manage their data sharing arrangements throughout
sharing lifespan.
Conclusions
As illustrated by the NDDA and NEVDIS examples, public sector data sharing is
highly valuable — it underpins law enforcement,
policy development and
service delivery, and may unlock considerable economic value. But for such data
sharing to grow and flourish,
Productivity Commission Report
that it needs strong trust and social licence, based on the public’s
confidence that their data will not be negatively
impacted by a data breach or
otherwise. In this article I considered the OAIC’s application of the APP
11 reasonable steps
standard to understand the standard of conduct applicable to
public sector data holders to prevent a data breach. I also outlined
weakness introduced into public sector data management by the
which overrides some legislative protection and may apply inadequate data
protection due to reliance on unsuitable data sharing
principles. Although the
is intended to operate alongside and in addition to the
and APP 11, its complexity is such that public servants may
apply it and corresponding DSA templates in a standalone manner, resulting
weak or inadequate efforts to comply with the reasonable steps standard.
I stepped through the unfortunate process by which the Five Safes were
adopted as data sharing principles, and critiqued that framework,
outlining its
weaknesses in respect of the sharing of personal information. A high-level
principles-based approach like the Five
Safes framework, while potentially
suitable for research and statistics, raises too many risks and offers too
little guidance in
a public sector context. It is ill-equipped to satisfy the
reasonable steps standard. I also assessed the role of DSAs in helping
that gap, highlighting six areas that could immediately be improved to assist in
satisfying the reasonable steps standard.
This would involve updating or using
the DSAs to:
• require that the data recipient has appropriate security governance
policies and a risk management framework in place;
• apply appropriate data retention policies; impose obligations in
relation to staff training in privacy and security; include
restrictions and
obligations in relation to subcontracting;
• impose assurance and compliance activities on the data recipient; and
• require that a data recipient’s environment comply with an
independent standard where feasible.
Ideally, DSA templates would be amended accordingly, but they are
sufficiently flexible to allow data holders to include these requirements
practice, starting immediately. In this regard, the stronger Vic DSA provides a
— appropriate
ongoing management is needed throughout the data lifecycle.
Strengthened DSAs would ideally be combined with targeted guidance to public
servants on the ongoing relevance of APP 11 to data handling
. This guidance should strongly encourage the undertaking of a security
risk assessment as part of each
authorisation, together with the
implementation of any ensuing recommendations. Should such improvements be made,
it would allow
Australian public sector agencies to ensure that they take
reasonable steps in their data sharing activities to protect their
personal information, consistent with APP 11. Not incidentally,
such action is likely to build social licence around data sharing
implementing genuine safeguards that reduce the likelihood of a data breach and
protect important customer data.
Please cite this article as:
Serena Syme Hildenbrand, ‘Data Sharing in the Australian Public Sector
after the Optus and Medibank Incidents: Taking Reasonable
Steps to Prevent Data
Breaches’ (2025) 47
Sydney Law Review
1–34 <https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.21383>.
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0.
Unmodified content is free to use with proper attribution
PhD candidate, Deakin University, Faculty of Business and
Law, Deakin Law School, Burwood, Victoria, Australia; Associate Director
Sharing (driver and vehicle data), Department of Transport & Planning,
Victoria, Australia. Email: shildenbrand@deakin.edu.au.
ORCID iD: https://orcid.org/0009-0004-2664-5381. The views
expressed in this article are my own and not necessarily those of the
Department. I thank my supervisory team of Shiri Krebs, Matthew Groves and Bruce
Chen for their ongoing support and valuable input.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary
, House of Representatives, 26 September 2022, 1500 (Clare
O’Neil, Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Cybersecurity).
also Ben Knight and staff, ‘Optus Data Breach Class Action Launched for
Millions of Australians Caught Up in Cyber Attack’,
(online, 21 April 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-04-21/optus-hack-class-action-customer-privacy-breach-data-leaked/102247638>.
Lucy Cormack,
‘“It’s Almost a Fluke”: Why NSW Drivers’ Licences
Have Largely Been Spared in Optus Hack’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 1 October 2022)
<https://www.smh.com.au/‌politics/nsw/it-s-almost-a-fluke-why-nsw-drivers-licences-have-largely-been-spared-in-optus-hack-20220929-p5bm1v.html>.
Clare O’Neil, Minister
for Home Affairs (Cth), ‘Interview with ABC 7:30’ (transcript, 26
September 2022)
<https://minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/ClareONeil/Pages/interview-abc-730-26092022.aspx>;
Jake Evans, ‘Home Affairs Minister Clare O’Neil says Optus
“Left the Window Open” for Cyber Criminals to
Conduct Simple
(online, 28 September 2022)
<https://www.abc.‌net.au/news/2022-09-26/home-affairs-minister-blames-optus-for-cyber-attack-hack/101474636>.
Clare O’Neil, Minister
for Home Affairs (Cth), ‘Cyber Sanctions in Response to Medibank Private
Cyber Attack’ (Joint
Media Release with Richard Marles and Penny Wong, 23
January 2024)
<https://minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/ClareONeil/Pages/cyber-sanctions-in-response-to-medibank-private-cyber-attack.aspx>.
See also Tiffanie Turnbull, ‘Medibank Hack: Russian Sanctioned over
Australia’s Worst Data Breach’,
(online, 23 January
2024) <https://www.bbc.com/news/‌world-australia-68064850>.
O’Neil, ‘Cyber
Sanctions in Response to Medibank Private Cyber Attack’ (n
); Turnbull (n
O’Neil, ‘Cyber
Sanctions in Response to Medibank Private Cyber Attack’ (n
); Turnbull (n
Victoria Police, Submission No
34 to Joint Committee on Law Enforcement, Parliament of Australia,
into the Capability of Law Enforcement to Respond to Cybercrime
Note also the July 2025 Qantas
data breach, which exposed the personal information of 5.7 million individuals:
see, eg, Qantas, ‘Update
On Qantas Cyber Incident: Wednesday 9 July
2025’ (Media Release, 9 July 2025)
<https://www.qantasnewsroom.com.au/media-releases/update-on-qantas-cyber-incident-wednesday-9-july-2025/>;
Maurice Blackburn Lawyers, ‘Compensation Sought on behalf of Nearly Six
Million Aussies Caught Up in Massive Qantas Data Breach’
(Media Release,
18 July 2025)
<https://www.mauriceblackburn.com.au/media-centre/media-statements/2025/‌compensation-sought-on-behalf-of-aussies-caught-up-in-qantas-data-breach/>.
<https://austroads.com.au/drivers-and-vehicles/nevdis>.
Amanda Rishworth MP,
‘Governments Come Together to Deliver National Disability Data
Asset’ (Media Release, 9 June 2023)
<https://ministers.dss.gov.au/media-releases/11431>. See also
‘National Disability Data Asset Factsheet’,
National Disability
(Web Page) <https://www.ndda.gov.au/ndda-factsheet>.
National Disability Data
Asset (‘NDDA’),
Summary of the 2023 Privacy Impact Assessment
(Report) <https://www.ndda.gov.au/summary-pia-report>.
Interim Learnings
from Test Case Analyses
(Report, September 2021)
<https://www.ndda.‌gov.au/research-projects/pilot-phase-and-findings>.
Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner (Cth) (‘OAIC’),
Data Breach Preparation
and Response: A Guide to Managing Data Breaches in accordance with the
, (Guidance Material, June 2024) 8
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-guidance-for-organisations-and-government-agencies/preventing-preparing-for-and-responding-to-data-breaches/data-breach-preparation-and-response>.
See also the narrower definition of ‘eligible data breach’ in
’), which triggers mandatory notification to the OAIC under
See, eg, the OAIC data
breach notification form, which requires the organisation to advise whether the
incident was caused by malicious
or criminal attack; system fault; or human
error: OAIC, ‘Notifiable Data Breach Form’
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/2240/oaic-ndb-form-for-training-purposes-only.pdf>.
Ahmed Albugmi, Madini O
Alassafi, Robert Walters and Gary Wills, ‘Data Security in Cloud
Computing’ (2016)
2016 Fifth International Conference on Future
Generation Communication Technologies (FGCT)
Australian Privacy
Data Availability and
Transparency Act
) ss 6(1) (definitions of ‘APP
entity’, ‘agency’ and ‘organisation’), 6C.
Information Privacy
Personal Information Protection Act
Information Act
Information Privacy Act 2009
Personal Information Protection Act
Information Sharing Act
South Australia has a relevant Cabinet Administrative Instruction, which does
not offer equivalent protection: see
Information Privacy Principles (IPPS)
Instruction
(Premier and Cabinet Circular PC012). Note that the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(Qld) amends
from 1 July 2025, and the
is yet to fully
Australian Privacy
Principles (n
) APP 11. See also
the equivalent information/territory protection provisions
(‘IPP/TPP’) under state and territory legislation,
which have some
drafting differences but a similar effect:
) cl 12 (IPP 12);
) sch 1 IPP 4;
) sch 3 IPP 4;
) sch 1 pt 1.4 TPP 11;
) cl 4 (IPP 4);
) sch 2 IPP 4;
) sch 1 (IPP 4) (not yet
in effect).
Joel Lisk, ‘Data
Security in Australia: The Obligation to Protect’
(2023) 97(10)
Australian Law Journal
Data Breach
Preparation and Response
Cyber Security Act
. See also Australian Signals Directorate (Cth),
‘Ransomware Payment and Cyber Extortion Payment Reporting’,
Australian Cyber Security Centre
<https://www.cyber.gov.au/report-and-recover/report/ransomware-payment-and-cyber-extortion-payment-reporting>.
) s 6(1) (definition of ‘personal
information’).
Ibid s 6(1) (definition of
See, eg, OAIC,
(December 2022) 19 [B.84] <https://www.
‌oaic.gov.au/privacy/australian-privacy-principles-guidelines>.
See, eg, Office of the
Victorian Information Commissioner (‘OVIC’),
Guidelines to the
Information Privacy Principles
[4.59]–[4.62]
<https://ovic.vic.gov.au/privacy/guidelines-to-the-information-privacy-principles/>.
This is not a narrow
standard of reasonableness as applied under judicial review:
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
The OAIC guidance indicates that the APP entity must take positive
steps to protect the data: OAIC,
Australian Privacy Principles Guidelines
) 4 [11.7]–[11.8].
Australian Privacy
Principles Guidelines
[11.7]–[11.8]; OAIC,
Guide to Securing Personal Information:
‘Reasonable Steps’ to Protect Personal Information
<https://www.‌oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-guidance-for-organisations-and-government-agencies/handling-personal-information?external-uuid=2bc65cdd-f52f-4981-9f16-f4ec8716b507>.
) 757. This may change with the Optus and
Medibank cases.
Sony PlayStation
Network/Qriocity: Own Motion Investigation Report
[2011] AICmrCN 16
(29 September 2011) (‘
Sony Report
Dell Australia and
Epsilon: Own Motion Investigation Report
[2012] AICmrCN 2
(1 June 2012)
Epsilon Report
Adobe Systems Software
Ireland Ltd: Own Motion Investigation Report
[2015] AICmrCN 1
Joint investigation
of Ashley Madison by the Privacy Commissioner of Canada and the Australian
Information Commissioner
(Investigation Report, 24 August 2016) (‘
Ashley Madison Investigation
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/‌privacy/privacy-assessments-and-decisions/privacy-decisions/investigation-reports/ashley-madison‌-joint-investigation>.
Recoveries & Collections: Enforceable Undertaking
(Decision, 31 August
ARC Enforceable Undertaking
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-assessments-and-decisions/privacy-decisions/enforceable-undertakings/australian-recoveries-and-collections-enforceable-undertaking>.
International: Enforceable Undertaking
(Decision, 7 February 2023)
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-assessments-and-decisions/privacy-decisions/enforceable-‌undertakings/marriott-international-enforceable-undertaking>.
Adobe Systems Software
Ireland: Own Motion Investigation Report
International Organization
for Standardization,
ISO/IEC 27001: Information Security, Cybersecurity And
Requirements
Sony had implemented
‘internal information technology security standards that are based on the
international information security
standard ISO/IEC 27001’:
). See also
Ashley Madison
Investigation Report
Marriott International:
Enforceable Undertaking
DonateBlood.com.au
Data Breach (Australian Red Cross Blood Service)
(Decision, 7 August 2017)
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-assessments-and-decisions/privacy-decisions/investigation-‌reports/donateblood.com.au-data-breach-australian-red-cross-blood-service>.
Ashley Madison
Investigation Report
[114]–[116].
Ashley Madison
Investigation Report
ARC Enforceable Undertaking
DonateBlood.com.au
Data Breach
‘Applying the
Protective Security Policy Framework’,
Department of Home Affairs
<https://www.protectivesecurity.gov.au/about/applying-protective-security-policy-framework>.
Australian Signals
Directorate (Cth), ‘Essential Eight’,
Australian Cyber Security
<https://www.cyber.gov.au/resources-business-and-government/essential-cyber-security/essential-eight>.
Eight assesses an organisation’s cybersecurity maturity (ie, the
extent to which security controls are developed and ingrained
organisation) at levels 0–3, with a target maturity level of at least 2
appropriate for handling personal information.
Explanatory Memorandum,
(Cth) 4 [12],
43 [99]–[102].
Attorney-General’s
Department (Cth),
Review Report
(2022) 224–6
<https://www.ag.gov.au/rights-and-protections/publications/privacy-act-review-report>;
Attorney-General’s
Department (Cth),
Government Response:
Review Report
(2023) 33–4
<https://www.ag.gov.au/rights-and-protections/publications/government-response-privacy-act-review-report>
Government Response
Ibid ss 36, 52.
Ibid s 13G.
Legislation Amendment Act
(Cth) sch 1
Amendment Act
’) amending
) s 13G, inserting
) ss 13H, 13J–13K.
‘Doxxing’ is the malicious publication of personal data for
harassment: see
2024 Amendment Act
sch 3 inserting
Criminal Code Act
(Cth) sch 1 (
Criminal Code
) ss 474.17C–474.17D.
2024 Amendment Act
) sch 1 pt 9 inserting
2024 Amendment
) sch 1 pt 10 inserting
(n 13) pt IV div 3B; sch 1 pt 14 amending
2024 Amendment Act
) sch 2 adding
) sch 2 (in force from 10 June
2024 Amendment Act
) sch 3 inserting
Criminal Code
) ss 474.17C–474.17D.
‘Doxxing’ is the malicious publication of personal data for
harassment.
Australian Communications
and Media Authority (‘ACMA’), ‘Concise Statement’,
Submission in
Australian Communications and Media Authority v Optus Mobile
, Federal Court of Australia, VID429/2024, 19 June 2024, 2–3
Ibid 2 [12]–[13].
Ibid 3 [15].
Australian Information
Commissioner, ‘Concise Statement’, Submission in
Information Commissioner v Medibank Private Ltd
Federal Court of
Australia, VID497/2024, 19 June 2024, [8]–[18] (‘OAIC Concise
Statement’).
See, eg, Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission,
Digital Platforms Inquiry: Final
(June 2019) 23–4
<https://www.accc.gov.au/publications/digital-platforms-inquiry-final-report>.
) sch 2. The tort came into effect on 10
The tort is informed by the
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital
(Report No 123, June 2014) (‘
2014 ALRC Report
Explanatory Memorandum, Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Bill (n
) 8 [3]. The
2014 ALRC Report
specifically recommended that the tort not apply to data breaches because other
available remedies were more appropriate:
2014 ALRC Report
) 122 [7.61]–[7.62].
See above nn
Attorney-General’s
Department (Cth),
Government Response
‘Representative
Complaints Update’,
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
(Web Page, 13 December 2023)
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/newsroom/representative-complaints>; Knight and
); Colin Kruger,
‘Compensation for Medibank Hack Victims Could Be Fast-Tracked’,
(online, 8 April 2024)
<https://www.theage.com.au/business/companies/compensation-for-medibank-hack-victims-could-be-fast-tracked-20240405-p5fhrl.html?btis=>;
Melissa Brown, ‘Law Firm Launches Class Action on behalf of Millions of
Customers Caught Up in Medibank Data Hack’,
5 May 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-05-05/medibank-data-breach-class-action-slater-gordon/102307106>.
Australian Information
Commissioner v Medibank Private Ltd
(Federal Court of Australia,
VID497/2024, commenced 5 June 2024); ‘OAIC Takes Civil Penalty Action
against Medibank’,
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
(Web Page, 5 June 2024)
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/‌newsroom/oaic-takes-civil-penalty-action-against-medibank>.
The telecommunications
regulator (ACMA) also brought action against Optus under
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979
(Cth), but the
legal basis is beyond scope here due to its lack of general application to data
breach defendants:
Australian Communications and Media Authority v Optus
Mobile Pty Ltd
(Federal Court of Australia, VID429/2024, commenced 20 May
2024); see also Ry Crozier, ‘Optus to Face ACMA-Filed Court Case
Data Breach’,
(online, 23 May 2024)
<https://www.itnews.‌com.au/news/optus-to-face-acma-filed-court-case-over-data-breach-608235>.
Further, the Federal Government has applied cyber sanctions to the Russian
hackers in the Medibank case: Penny Wong, ‘Further
Cyber Sanctions in
Response to Medibank Private Cyberattack’, (Joint media release with
Richard Marles and Tony Burke, 12 February
<https://www.foreignminister.gov.au/‌minister/penny-wong/media-release/further-cyber-sanctions-response-medibank-private-cyberattack>.
‘Representative
Complaints Update’ (n
Medibank Private
Ltd v Australian Information Commissioner
(2024) 301 FCR 517
[108]–[109].
Rose Dlougatch,
‘Cyber-Insecurity: Data Breaches, Remedies and the Enforcement of the
Right to Privacy’
(2018) 25(4)
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
) s 52(1B); Aiden Lerch and Sophie
Whittaker, ‘More Valuable Than Oil: The Application of Tort Law and Equity
to Data Breach
(2019) 27(2)
Tort Law Review
Robertson v Singtel Optus
(Federal Court of Australia, VID256/2023, commenced 20 April 2023);
Knight and staff (n
Gavin Smith and Valeska
Bloch, ‘Where Are All the Data Breach Class Actions in Australia?’,
(Blog Post, 17 October 2018)
<https://www.allens.com.au/insights-news/insights/2018/10/pulse-where-are-all-the-data-breach-class-actions-in>.
Lerch and Whittaker (n
) 109; Smith and Bloch (n
). In 2017, 95% of US federal data breach
class actions included negligence, with 65% listing it as the primary cause of
action: Daniel
M Filler, David M Haendler and Jordan L Fischer,
‘Negligence at the Breach: Information Fiduciaries and the Duty to Care
(2022) 54(1)
Connecticut Law Review
Amanda Beattie, Kieran Doyle
and Nicole Gabryk, ‘The Rise of Data Breach Class Actions: Legal Trends
and Implications’,
Wotton Kearney
(Blog Post, 26 October 2023)
<https://www.wotton‌kearney.com.au/the-rise-of-data-breach-class-actions-legal-trends-and-implications/>.
See, eg, the Medibank
claims: Brown (n
Lerch and Whittaker (n
Ibid 110–1.
Australian Information
Commissioner v Medibank Private Ltd
Elizabeth Knight,
‘Medibank on the Hook for Trillions But There’s More at Stake than
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 5 June 2024)
<https://www.smh.com.au/business/companies/‌medibank-on-the-hook-for-trillions-but-there-s-more-at-stake-than-money-20240604-p5jj62.html>.
‘OAIC Concise
Statement’ (n
) Annexure B.
Amendment (Enforcement and Other Measures) Act 2022
(Cth) commenced in
December 2022 and increased s 13G penalties for a body corporate from $2.22
million to the higher of $50 million,
three times the value of benefit or 30% of
adjusted turnover. The
2024 Amendment Act
retained these penalty amounts
while clarifying what conduct meets the threshold for s 13G: Explanatory
Memorandum, Privacy and Other
Legislation Amendment Bill (n
) 20 [81]–[82].
Janina Boughey, Ellen Rock
and Greg Weeks,
Government Liability: Principles & Remedies
Nexis Butterworths, 2019) 412–18. There is also the concern that
liabilities would be funded from the public purse:
Mark Aronson, Matthew Groves
and Greg Weeks,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action and Government
(Lawbook Co, 7
ed, 2022) 1237 [21.440].
Productivity Commission,
Data Availability and Use
(Inquiry Report No 82, 31 March 2017)
117–8 <https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/data-access/report>
Productivity Commission Report
The Robodebt Scheme’s
cross-agency data activity relied on specific legislation — the
Data-matching Program (Assistance and Tax) Act 1990
regulates the use of tax file numbers across multiple agencies to detect
incorrect payments:
Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme
Report, July 2023) 11–13. This is the only data matching legislation at
the federal level: ‘Government Data Matching’,
Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-legislation/related-legislation/government-data-matching>.
Productivity Commission
Interim Learnings
from Test Case Analyses
Productivity Commission
) 147 (Box 3.4).
‘NEVDIS’ (n
). Vehicle cloning is where a registered
vehicle is used to hide the identity of a stolen vehicle.
Productivity Commission
The legislation is
summarised in a NSW review of its Act: Department of Customer Service (NSW),
Review of the
Data Sharing (Government Sector) Act 2015
(August 2021)
<https://www.‌parliament.nsw.gov.au/tp/files/80507/Statutory%20Review%20of%20the%20Data%20Sharing%20Government%20Sector%20Act%202015.pdf>
’). Western Australia now has new data sharing
legislation, not yet in effect:
) s 9 (definition of ‘public sector
data’). This could include data collected by the Commonwealth from states
private sector.
A data sharing MOU is a
non-binding DSA, often used between government parties because emanations of the
same Crown cannot enter
binding arrangements. In this article I treat a data
sharing MOU as a DSA and refer to it as such.
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum,
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2022
[30]–[31]. Legal basis generally consists of an allowed head of sharing
under privacy legislation, such as under
Australian Privacy Principles
) APP 6, together with a legislative
power allowing the data holder to share data for that purpose.
This implements the
Productivity Commission Report
recommendation regarding legal override:
Productivity Commission Report
) s 15(1). Data sharing for law
enforcement relies on
Australian Privacy Principles
) APP 6.2(e).
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum (n
[233]–[236].
) ss 3(b), 16E, 16F; Supplementary
Explanatory Memorandum,
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2020
[3], 5 [11], 6 [20].
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum (n
) 39 [236]; see also at
29 [168]. The
s 17(5)(a) bars sharing that would contravene a Commonwealth Act giving
effect to international law, which the
) ss 16E(2), 16F. See also Supplementary
Explanatory Memorandum (n
Productivity
Commission Report
) ss 13(d), 16, 19(7).
Felix Ritchie, ‘The
“Five Safes”: A Framework for Planning, Designing and Evaluating
Data Access Solutions’
(Conference Paper, Data for Policy 2017: Government
by Algorithm?, September 2017)
<https://uwe-repository.worktribe.com/output/880713>
“Five Safes”’).
Felix Ritchie,
‘Secure Access to Confidential Microdata: Four Years of the Virtual
Microdata Laboratory’ (2008) 2(5)
Economic & Labour Market
Ritchie, ‘The
“Five Safes”’ (n
Tanvi Desai, Felix
Ritchie and Richard Welpton, ‘Five Safes: Designing Data Access for
Research’ (Working Paper No 1601,
Economics Working Paper Series, UWE
Bristol Faculty of Business and Law, January 2016) 5
<https://uwe-repository.worktribe.com/output/914745>.
Felix Ritchie and
Elizabeth Green, ‘Frameworks, Principles and Accreditation in Modern Data
Management’ (Working Paper,
UWE Bristol Business School Working Papers in
Economics, 2020) 2
<https://uwe-repository.worktribe.com/output/6790882>.
Desai, Ritchie and
Ibid 17; ‘Five
Safes Framework’,
Australian Bureau of Statistics
<https://www.abs.gov.au/‌about/data-services/data-confidentiality-guide/five-safes-framework>.
‘Sharing Public
Sector Data’,
Department of Treasury and Finance (SA)
<https://www.treasury.sa.gov.au/Our-services/information-sharing-data-analytics/information-sharing-in-south-australia/sharing-public-sector-data>.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2020
(Cth) 23 [114].
Intergovernmental
Agreement on Data Sharing between Commonwealth and State and Territory
Governments
(signed and entered into force July 2021) cls 5(b), 12.
See, eg, Shiri Krebs and
Lyria Bennett Moses, ‘Data Sharing Agreements: Contracting Personal
Information in the Digital Age’
[2024] MelbULawRw 3
(2024) 48(1)
Melbourne University Law
Ritchie and Green (n
Data Availability
and Transparency Code 2022
requires a data sharing arrangement to be consistent with the data sharing
principles.
See above n
and accompanying quote.
Further, several
amendments were made to the data sharing principles through the legislative
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2022
Parliament of Australia
<https://www.aph.gov.au/‌Parliamentary_Business/Bills_LEGislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=r6649>.
Chris Culnane, Benjamin
IP Rubinstein and David Watts, ‘Not Fit for Purpose: A Critical Analysis
of the “Five Safes”’
(Working Paper, 4 November 2020) 2
<https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.‌2011.02142>.
Melanie Marks, Anna
Johnston et al, Submission No 2 to the Senate Committee on the Data Availability
& Transparency Bill,
Inquiry into the
Data Availability and Transparency
and the Data Availability and Transparency (Consequential Amendments)
(17 February 2021) 8, citing Culnane, Rubinstein and Watts (n
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/‌Committees/Senate/Finance_and_Public_Administration/DataTransparency/Submissions>.
Pip Brennan, Mark
Fitzpatrick, Juan Larranaga, Vicki O’Donnell, Maria Osman, Carol
Petterson, Julia Powles, Chris Twomey and
Ross Wortham, Independent Submission
Public Sector
Discussion Paper (2019), 13
<https://www.wa.gov.au/government/document-collections/what-we-heard-privacy-and-responsible-‌information-sharing>.
Ibid 14. In fact, the new
WA legislation includes ‘responsible sharing principles’ modelled on
the Five Safes, with which
DSAs must comply:
) s 175, sch 2.
Culnane, Rubinstein and
Desai, Ritchie and
Culnane, Rubinstein and
Desai, Ritchie and
Brennan et al (n
Emma Day, Kruakae
Pothong, Ayça Atabey and Sonia Livingstone, ‘Who Controls
Children’s Education Data? A Socio-Legal
Analysis of the UK Governance
Regimes for Schools and EdTech’ (2024) 49(3)
Learning, Media and
356, 362: ‘Only (deidentified) ‘safe data’ is
meant to be shared by [government], but of the 84 ... shares with
entities, 18 (23%) shares included either Level 1 “instant
identifier” (e.g., full names, addresses, email
addresses) or Level 2
“meaningful identifiers”’.
Culnane, Rubinstein and
Desai, Ritchie and
Brennan et al (n
Desai, Ritchie and
Culnane, Rubinstein and
Brennan et al (n
Culnane, Rubinstein and
See, eg, Desai, Ritchie
and Welpton (n
) 11. In their 2020
co-authored working paper, Ritchie and Green state that ‘[i]t could be
argued that the common measure across
all dimensions is “what is the risk
of re-identification?”’: Ritchie and Green (n
) 9. But the framework is now being
widely used in Australia for the sharing of personal information, where the
likelihood of identification
The Senate Standing
Committee sought unsuccessfully to limit the
to de-identified
information, which would have been appropriate: Senate Standing Committee for
the Scrutiny of Bills, Parliament
of Australia,
Scrutiny Digest
of 2021, 29 January 2021) 5 [1.10]
<https://www.aph.gov.au/-/media/Committees/Senate/committee/scrutiny/scrutiny_digest/2021/PDF/‌d01_21.pdf>.
Desai, Ritchie and
Ritchie and Green (n
Australian Computer
Society (‘ACS’),
Data Sharing Frameworks: Technical White
(September 2017) 69
<https://www.acs.org.au/content/dam/acs/acs-publications/ACS_Data-Sharing-‌Frameworks_FINAL_FA_SINGLE_LR.pdf>.
Sharing: A Guide for Business and Government
(November 2018) 18–19,
<https://www.acs.org.au/content/dam/acs/acs-publications/Privacy%20in%20Data%20Sharing%‌20-%20final%20version.pdf>.
Notably, such thresholds are explicitly rejected by Ritchie and Green, who
describe the lack of quantitative measures as a strength
of the framework:
Ritchie and Green (n
‘About Industry
Codes and Standards’,
Australian Communications and Media Authority
(Web Page, 10 October 2023)
<https://www.acma.gov.au/about-industry-codes-and-standards>. The page
indicates that industry
codes and standards are approved by the ACMA as the
‘Industry Codes and
Standards’,
eSafety Commissioner
(Web Page, 23 May 2025)
<https://www.esafety.gov.au/industry/codes>. The page indicates that codes
are developed by industry
and submitted as drafts to the eSafety Commissioner
for review and publication.
Productivity
Commission Report
Ibid 185, 418–19
(citing Desai, Ritchie and Welpton (n
Senate Standing Committee
for the Scrutiny of Bills (n
4–7 [1.9]–[1.17]. The scrutiny resulted in changes to the
Explanatory Memorandum, but did not substantially resolve
the identified issues:
Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills, Parliament of Australia,
Scrutiny Digest
(Digest 5 of 2021, 17 March 2021) 37–8,
[2.4]–[2.10].
Normann Witzleb,
‘Responding to Global Trends? Privacy Law Reform in Australia’ in
Moritz Hennemann, Kai von Lewinski,
Daniela Wawra and Thomas Widjaja (eds),
Data Disclosure: Global Developments and Perspectives
(De Gruyter, 2023)
Elizabeth Green and Felix
Ritchie, ‘The Present and Future of the Five Safes Framework’ (2023)
Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality
jpc.831, 6–7.
Ibid 14–16.
While information privacy
laws may avoid absolutes in relation to the
of data protection,
they tend to be very clear around permitted
for the use of
personal information: see, eg,
Australian Privacy Principles
Felix Ritchie and Damian
Whittard, ‘Using the Five Safes to Structure Economic Evaluations of Data
Governance’ (2024)
Data & Policy
e16, e16-4.
) s 16A(3).
I have not included the
Intergovernmental Agreement on Data Sharing between Commonwealth and State
and Territory Governments
because it does not contain its own DSA template,
stating: ‘A [separate] data sharing agreement can be used to ensure the
arrangement
is appropriately authorised and governed’:
Intergovernmental Agreement on Data Sharing between Commonwealth and State
and Territory Governments
Krebs and Bennett Moses
‘Data Sharing
Agreement Template’,
Office of the National Data Commissioner
(Template, 2022) 1
<https://www.datacommissioner.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-07/ONDC_Legislation_Agnostic_‌DSA_Template.doc>
(‘ONDC DSA’). This template was current until February 2025, when a
new dynamically generated template was introduced
in the Dataplace platform:
‘Data Sharing Agreements’,
Office of the National Data
Commissioner
(Guidance Note, 2025:2)
<https://www.datacommissioner.gov.au/data-sharing-agreements>.
ACT Government,
‘External Data Sharing Agreement Template’,
ACT Data Sharing
(2 January 2025)
<https://www.act.gov.au/open/act-data-sharing-policy> (‘ACT
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet (SA), ‘South Australian Intra-Government Data Sharing
Agreement’,
Data Sharing Agreement Forms
<https://www.treasury.sa.gov.au/Our-services/data-sharing/data-sharing-forms-and-templates>
(‘SA DSA’).
Ibid 7. Below the check
boxes, the form states ‘Provide specific details below’, but there
is no suggestion that such
details are required.
Victorian Government,
‘Victorian Public Sector (VPS) Data Sharing Heads of Agreement – as
at 19 August 2022’,
Victorian Public Sector Data Sharing Heads of
(19 December 2022)
<https://www.vic.gov.au/victorian-public-sector-data-sharing-heads-agreement>
(‘Heads of Agreement’).
Note that the application of data sharing
principles to these Heads of Agreement is a little unclear due to an outdated
of ‘National Data Sharing Principles’ as ‘the
principles set out in the Office of the National Data Commissioner’s
Best Practice Guide to Applying Data Sharing Principles
’: at 4. The
Guide referred to principles based on the Five Safes but has since been archived
and is no longer available on
the ONDC website: Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet (Cth),
Best Practice Guide to Applying Data Sharing Principles
(15 March 2019) <https://nla.gov.au/‌nla.obj-1856777422/view>.
‘Victorian Public
Sector Data Sharing Policy’,
Victorian Government
(Web Page, 1 May
<https://www.vic.gov.au/victorian-public-sector-data-sharing-policy>.
Victorian Government
,‘VPS Data Sharing Heads of Agreement - Template Annexures - Version
3.1’ (December 2022)
<https://www.vic.gov.au/victorian-public-sector-data-sharing-heads-agreement>
(‘Vic DSA’).
Protective Data Security Standards Version 2.0 Implementation Guidance v 2.1
(January 2021)
<https://ovic.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/20210216-VPDSS-V2.0-Implementation-Guidance-V2.1.pdf>.
Victorian Protective Data Security Standards are the Victorian equivalent of
the Protective Security Policy Framework.
Information
Sharing and Privacy: Guidance for Sharing Personal Information
April 2021) 14–17 (‘
OVIC Guidance
<https://ovic.vic.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/‌Information-Sharing-and-Privacy-Gudiance-on-Sharing-Personal-Information.docx>.
) s 19(1); ONDC DSA (n
) 2–4; SA DSA (n
) 1–2; ACT DSA (n
) 4; Vic DSA (n
OVIC Guidance
) s 19(2); ONDC DSA (n
) 5; SA DSA (n
) 2; ACT DSA (n
) 5; Vic DSA (n
OVIC Guidance
) s 19(3); ONDC DSA (n
) 10; SA DSA (n
) 4; ACT DSA (n
) 9; Vic DSA (n
OVIC Guidance
ONDC DSA (n
) 8–9; SA DSA (n
) 5; ACT DSA (n
) 7; Vic DSA (n
OVIC Guidance
) s 19(6); ONDC DSA (n
) 4; ACT DSA (n
) 6; Vic DSA (n
) 2 (item 1);
OVIC Guidance
) s 19(6)(a)(ii).
The purpose restriction
might also be imposed by legislation — see, eg,
Road Safety Act
, which requires the relevant agreement to include a
binding undertaking that the recipient will only use the shared personal
information
for the specified purpose.
See, eg, ONDC DSA (n
) 7; SA DSA (n
) 3; ACT DSA (n
) 6; Vic DSA (n
) 3 (item 4), Annexures 2–3
(combined with Heads of Agreement (n
OVIC Guidance
) 3 (item 3), Annexure 3 (combined with
Heads of Agreement (n
OVIC Guidance
ONDC DSA (n
) 7; SA DSA (n
) 3; ACT DSA (n
ONDC DSA (n
) 9–10; SA DSA (n
) 4, 6–7; ACT DSA (n
) 8; Vic DSA (n
) 3 (item 3);
OVIC Guidance
See, eg, SA DSA (n
) 6–7; ACT DSA (n
International
Organization for Standardization (n
Heads of Agreement (n
) cl 13; Vic DSA (n
) 4 (item 8).
See, eg, ONDC DSA (n
) 8; SA DSA (n
) 7; ACT DSA (n
Ashley Madison
Investigation Report
Ibid 15 [67].
Heads of Agreement (n
) 4 (items 8, 10).
DonateBlood.com.au Data Breach
OVIC Guidance
ARC Enforceable
Undertaking
The data holder may wish
to prepare and supply relevant user training to data recipients, especially if
there are complexities around
appropriate use of the data.
It may also point to
non-compliance with APP 8, which covers the cross-border disclosure of personal
information and requires an
APP entity to ‘take such steps as are
reasonable in the circumstances to ensure that the overseas recipient does not
Australian Privacy Principles
(other than Australian Privacy
Principle 1)’:
Australian Privacy Principles
) 4 (items 8, 10).
See, eg, the OAIC Guide
reference to auditing: OAIC,
Guide to Securing Personal Information
Sony Report
Epsilon Report
‘OAIC Concise
Statement’ (n
) Annexure B.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (486 KB)
PDF format (611 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter