URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2001/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sainsbury, Maree --- "Databases and Copyright - Finding the Match" [2001] DigTechLawJl 3; (2001) 3(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 3
and Copyright -
Finding the Match
University of Canberra
Introduction
Use of existing
decision: the facts
Supreme Court decision
position under Australian law
implied term or implied licence
Implications
of the Tasini decision
and collective works - some observations
existence of copyright in a collective work
and electronic databases - some conclusions
Introduction
have a complementary relationship. Using digital technology to create
maintain a database has
many advantages. The two main ones are, first,
amounts of information can be stored in a relatively small amount of
it is possible to create a search engine to search the
makes it easier and faster to retrieve information, or to search
information according to the needs of the user. As a consequence, it
an increasingly common practice for information
in a database to be
into digital form.
recent decisions have
highlighted the issues that the practice of creating digital databases
for the application of copyright
law. Each decision reflects a
perspective. The United States Supreme Court decision in
York Times Co. Inc
decision) concerned the right of an author to prevent digital
reproduction of
his or her work as part of an electronic database.
The decision of the
Court of Australia in
Telstra Corporation Limited v Desktop
Marketing Pty Ltd
considered when the creator of a database, digital or otherwise, had
to prevent reproduction of that database
on the grounds of copyright
infringement.
of these decisions are discussed
below, together with the broader implication for the use of digital
for the author
of the original information, the creator of the
the user of the database.
of existing copyright material in a database
The Tasini decision: the facts
Tasini is a freelance
writer. He sold articles to various publishers, including
New York Times
publishers had later sold the articles to University Microfilms, Inc
MEAD Corporation for inclusion in their electronic
Unimpressed when
his article also appeared on LEXIS-NEXIS and elsewhere in digital form,
Tasini took the publishers
to court. Five other freelance authors who had written articles for
newspapers, a magazine published
by the New York Times and other
publishers,
joined him in alleging that their copyright had been infringed. The
the publishers were entitled to reproduce, or permit
reproduction of,
the articles in an electronic form.
United States Copyright Act
(the US Act), like its
Australian counterpart,
grants copyright to the author of an original literary work.
Where a number of works are
collated, a
new copyright may also arise in the collation, or collective work.
This occurs where the collective
itself be seen as an original literary work.
There are then two layers of copyright. First, the
underlying works, in which copyright will have first vested in the
Secondly, the
author of the collective work will own the copyright in the collective
201(c) of the US Act
'Copyright in each separate
contribution to a
collective work is distinct from copyright in the collective work as a
initially in the author of the contribution. In the absence
express transfer of the copyright or of any rights under it, the
of reproducing and distributing the contribution
as part of that
collective work, any revision of that collective work, and any later
work in the same series.'
other words, the agreement of
an author to contribute to a collective work, such as a database, does
affect the underlying
contribution. The copyright vesting in the author of a collective work
only extends
to his or her original contribution to that collective work. The author
separate contribution is free to continue to use his
or her individual
contribution, for example, by publishing it elsewhere. The author of
collective work has no rights in that
contribution except as a part of
collective work.
decision, the
publishers relied on section 201(c), alleging that this granted to them
right to 'reproduce and distribute' the
authors' works including the
reproduction
in electronic databases. They further argued that a finding for the
and the granting
of an injunction, would have devastating consequences.
texts going back decades. A ruling for the authors would mean that
there would
be gaps in this electronic history. The authors' argument
was that the
publication of the articles in electronic databases was outside the
section 201(c) as it did not amount to
a use as a part of the
collective work,
but rather a different use. Consequently, as no permission had been
that this was a breach of the authors' copyright.
August 1997, the District Court
found for the publishers on the basis that section 201(c) allowed the
reproductions.
found that this privilege could be transferred from the original
publishers to
the electronic publishers. The databases reproduced
the original works
of a ... revision of the collective work'. To qualify as a revision,
only preserve some significant
original aspect of the collective work.
the databases preserved the original publisher's selection of articles.
of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed this
decision in September 1999,
finding that copyright had been infringed. This was on the basis that
number of periodicals.
The Supreme Court decision
Ginsburg delivered the majority opinion of the
Court. Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Breyer agreed, delivered a
majority found that the actions of the publishers were
not within section 201(c) as the articles had not been distributed as a
the collective work. It was found that the databases reproduced and
distributed
the articles standing alone and not in context.
As a result, both the
electronic publishers had infringed the authors' copyright.
to the Court, the databases did not constitute
'revisions' of the original publications. The articles were presented
different way. Divorced of the original context, each article could be
as a separate item. In one of the digital
products the graphics and
were also different. Therefore, it could not be said that the digital
reproduced the
articles as 'part of' or as a 'revision' of the original
publication. The articles could more readily be viewed as part of a new
compendium, or, alternatively, as no longer part of a collective work
as presented individually.
publishers attempted to make an analogy between their
products, and microfilm and microfiche, arguing that the transfer of a
between media should not alter the character of that work for copyright
purposes. The Court found this analogy wanting.
Microfilm typically contains a photographic reproduction
of a periodical. Articles appear in exactly the same context, and with
the same formatting, as they did in the original publication. The
placing the individual articles in a digital database
was more than
conversion from one media to another. The publication of works in a
overrides the author's rights to
control the individual reproduction
distribution of each article.
dissenting judgement found that the electronic
articles were
published for the purposes of section 201(c). The
aggregation of a
number of editions of periodicals within one database did not
equation. The individual contributions had not been modified, nor
published in
an entirely different way. A collection
of articles from a single
the newspaper, converted into electronic form, could be seen as a
revision, as
'one of the hallmarks
of copyright policy... is the principle of media
neutrality'.
not matter that the revisions might look and feel quite different from
original as a result of the different medium being
used. Therefore, the
emphasis that the majority placed on the differences in formatting and
was unwarranted. As long as each
electronic reproduction specifically
to the name of the publication in which the article first appeared, the
that publication and the location of the article within that
publication, it
could be seen as a part of a revision. The electronic
files contained
entire editorial content of the original edition of the New York Times
day. The articles, therefore,
did not stand-alone. The collection of a
of editions of the publications was analogous to placing single
editions in a
public library or bookstore.
The fact that an individual user could view or print
copies of the individual articles did not change the nature of the
a revision. This was again a media-specific necessity, and no
different, for
example, than storing a newspaper on microfiche.
looked at the policy behind the enactment of
section 201(c). At the time it was enacted, the developments in
digitisation
which provided the background to this litigation would not have been
anticipated. Copyright laws should only restrict the dissemination
insofar as necessary to encourage their production.
It should also promote the broad public
availability of literature, music and the arts.
According to Stevens J, the majority had discounted the
effect its decision would have on the availability of digital
mean that electronic archives would remove freelance pieces from their
freelance writers
suffer any detriment. Section 201(c) made it clear that they still
unlikely that the user of an electronic
would be looking for a stand-alone article of a particular author.
Instead, the
subject. Therefore, on balance, according to the minority,
publisher better advanced the purposes of copyright law.
The position under Australian law
decision turned on the interpretation of one
section in the US Act. The Australian Act does not have an equivalent
Where a freelance author authorises a publisher to use an article as
collective work, the uses which the publisher can
make of the article
depend on the nature of the authorisation.
There are a
number of different situations which may
exist, each of which will give rise to different considerations in
determining
whether a publisher is entitled to make use of an article in an
electronic database.
there may be a written or verbal express agreement
between the author and the publisher. In this case, the rights of the
to use the article will depend upon the terms of the agreement. In
permit publication of the article, the agreement will
either include a
or an assignment of copyright.
Secondly, the author may simply send an article to a potential
publisher for
publication. The issue of copyright may never be expressly
situation will give rise to one of two situations. Where the publisher
the work for publication and provides
payment to the author, there will
implied contract. The rights of the publisher in relation to the work
depend upon the
implied terms of this contract. If there is no binding
between the parties, the rights of the publisher will depend on the
the implied licence which has been granted by the author.
These situations are considered
An express agreement
Australian Act grants to the author of an original
literary work the following rights:
a) to reproduce the
work (in a material
b) to publish the work;
c) to perform the work in public;
d) to communicate the work to the public;
e) to make an
adaptation of the work;
f) to do any of the acts set out in paragraphs (a) to
(d) above in relation
to an adaptation of the work.
context, it is important to note the definition of
'communicate'. It means make available online or electronically
(whether over a path, or a combination of paths, provided by a material
substance or otherwise) a work or other subject-matter.
A copyright
owner may deal with each of these rights
separately.
example, a journalist may assign, or grant a licence in respect of, the
to reproduce the work, while retaining the right
to communicate the
Consequently, the owner of the right of reproduction (or the holder of
licence) would have to seek the
permission of the author to make the
available on-line, or electronically transmit the work. However, the
the work will include the right to reproduce the work
electronically,
unless that is specifically excluded. The right of communication
required where the work is to be made available on-line or transmitted
An implied term or implied licence
Where there
is a contract between the author and
publisher, the terms of which do not grant the publisher a right to
publish the
in electronic form, the publisher may be able to argue that there
implied term to this effect.
be implied in fact (usually to give business
efficacy to the contract or to reflect custom, usage or a course of
in law (given the nature of the contract itself) or by statute.
In this context, the most likely
argument is that there is a term implied in fact, to give business
efficacy to
a contract.
circumstances in which a court will imply a term to
give business efficacy to a contract were outlined by the Privy Council
Refinery (Westenport) Pty Ltd v Shire of Hastings
the Board emphasising that any
implication must be based on the presumed or imputed intention of the
Their Lordships expressed
the relevant principles as follows:
'...for a term to be
implied, the following
conditions (which may overlap) must be satisfied: (1) it must be
reasonable and
(2) it must be necessary to give business efficacy to the
so that no term will be implied if the contract is effective
must be so obvious that 'it goes without saying'; (4) it must be
clear expression; (5) it must not
contradict any express term of the
In applying
these principles, the circumstances of the
author and the publisher will vary greatly. In determining whether
publication
in an electronic database is reasonable and equitable, the nature of
article, and the nature of the publication to which the
author has sent
will be relevant. Any detriment caused to either party will be
considered.
the work in a digital database may have an
adverse effect on the author, in some circumstances enabling the author
that an implied term is inequitable. Disadvantages for the author
that alteration of the work is easier to achieve and difficult
detect. It is
harder for the owner to control use of the work. A digital work is much
to distribute, being easily compressed
and easily transmitted to many
locations and across national boundaries. The nature of the work may be
that it cannot
be digitally reproduced with accuracy.
All of these factors may suggest that
such a term is inequitable.
greater obstacle to the existence of an implied
term may prove to be establishing that a term allowing digital
reproduction
reproduction in an electronic database is necessary to give business
to the agreement and so obvious that it goes without
saying. It will
particular circumstances that this will be the case. It may be that the
is aware that the publisher
was envisaging electronic publication, for
because that is the publisher's practice in the ordinary course of its
or that it is in some way vital to the publisher's business.
implied term in a contract, the existence and
scope of an implied licence will depend upon the facts of the case. The
difference is that a publisher will be able to argue on the basis of an
licence even where there is no binding contract between
the parties.
third party may be able to establish an implied licence as a defence to
for copyright infringement.
In some instances, the test applied by the
to determine whether there is an implied licence may be seen as
analogous to
test used to determine whether there is an implied term in the
The Federal
Acohs Pty Ltd v R A Bashford
Consulting Pty Ltd
) considered
comprehensively the situations in which
an implied licence will exist.
Applying the principles set down in
Beck v Montana
Constructions Pty Ltd
) the Court set out
three questions which must be answered:
there an implied licence to use
the copyright material to carry out a particular purpose?
is the purpose?
the use by the alleged
infringer in accordance with the licence conferred?
determining whether any implied licence exists
is only the first step in establishing a defence to copyright
infringement.
scope of the licence must also be considered and a determination made
whether the defendant's actions are within the scope
of that licence.
situation where the purpose for which the copyright
material is licensed may include electronic publication is where that
common and well known in the particular industry. In
the copyright
material consisted of material safety data sheets (MSDS's) containing
information about hazardous substances
and other chemicals used in
throughout Australia. Acohs was a company providing computerised
information management
services using a database management system
the respondents claimed copyright in a number of the MSDS's. The
Australia Standard for Control of Workplace Hazardous
Substances (1994)
obligations on manufacturers, importers, suppliers and employers to
make MSDS's
available for all hazardous
substances which they supplied or used. A
Code of Practice specifically referred to the possibility of providing
to MSDS's by computerised database (clause 8.6). The Court therefore
copying of the MSDS's for use in a computerised database
and for safety
purposes fell within the scope of an implied licence.
stage, it is unlikely that an analogy could be
drawn between the facts of
and the situation
of a publisher compiling an
electronic database. The freelance author is not providing information
be used for the purpose of providing information to others
industrial safety matters. The public interest element in allowing
reproduction
of this type of material was one component of the Court's reasoning in
Ordinarily, the
freelance author is providing material to a publisher for the purpose
publication in the course of that publisher's
business, to earn income
journalist and to enhance his or her reputation. Where it is in the
the publisher's business
to include material in an electronic database,
author is aware of that fact, then it is likely an implied licence will
found to allow that use. Where that is not the case, it is arguable
inclusion in an electronic database may contribute to enhancing
reputation. However, a publisher would be taking a risk in relying such
untested, and debatable, proposition.
, determining the scope of an implied
licence will hinge on the purpose for which the copyright material is
used. Where an author
submits a work for publication, this purpose will
that publication. However, whether or not that purpose includes
publication or inclusion in a database will depend on the facts. As
implied terms, where the author is aware that the publisher
publishes work electronically or includes work in an electronic
argument based on an implied licence is likely
to succeed. However, the
of the licence will be limited. It will only extend to publication in
of database in which
the publisher ordinarily includes material. Where
publisher ordinarily keeps an online database, then the licence may
the inclusion of the work in that database, but not to authorising a
party to include the work in a database of a different
nature. The
decision in
De Garis & Moore v Neville Jeffress Pidler
supports this proposition. It was
stated there that a
freelance writer submitting material for publication impliedly licences
relevant media organisation to publish it. But if a freelance
submits an article to a media organisation for publication
newspaper or magazine or submits a film or recording for broadcast by a
particular station, a licence to publish
it in another publication or
broadcast it on another station is not, ordinarily, implied
determining the terms or scope of any implied licence,
one issue which may arise is whether the implied licence is an
irrevocable
If not, the author would be able to revoke the licence at any time,
that the publisher remove the article or pay compensation
inclusion of the article in the database would then infringe the
Trumpet Software Pty Ltd v OzEmail Pty
considered the circumstances in which an implied licence may be
It was found that a
bare licence (i.e., a non contractual licence) could be revoked at any
the licensor. However, where the
licensee was able to establish that it
acted upon the licence to its detriment, the licensee may be able to
licensor should be estopped from revoking the license.
Where the publisher has acted on
basis of an implied licence and taken steps to include the work in a
then detriment
could be established.
journalist receives payment for an article, any
implied licence will be contractual and the reasoning in
apply. Consideration was given to the implications of revocation of a
contractual licence in
Cowell v Rosehill Racecourse Co Ltd
Where no proprietary interest was
granted, it was found that a contractual licence could be revoked,
there being a remedy
available for breach of contract. The issue then
whether a court would grant an order for specific performance as a
whether damages would be adequate.
Where the removal of the article would cause hardship or
injustice to the publisher then specific performance would be the
appropriate
It would be
a matter for the courts discretion, in balancing the claims of both
parties, to
decide on the most appropriate remedy.
Implications of the Tasini
decision has important implications for
freelance writers and publishers in the United States. The fact that
an electronic
rights means
that the writer whose works have been used in this way without his
consent will be entitled to compensation. Further, to prevent future or
infringement, the publishers who compile electronic
remove articles from their databases.
The Supreme Court dismissed arguments based on this fear
as 'unavailing', stating that the ruling did not mean publishers would
forced not to include articles in databases. The court could award an
appropriate remedy, which may mean compensation. However, this
that requiring the publisher to remove the work will never be an
appropriate
In reality,
it may be that the authors and publishers
reach some compromise which allows the authors to receive payment. This
is likely to be in the best interests of the authors,
publishers and
the public. Jonathon Tasini has been quoted as stating that
put out the olive branch to the media industry and ... avoid all that
wrangling)'.
consequence of the decision is that publishers who
wish to compile, or authorise others to compile, electronic databases,
need to obtain consent from the author. This may mean requiring
writers to assign the right to publish the works electronically
are accepted for publication. As noted in the dissenting judgment in
New York Times
has since 1995 required
freelance authors to grant to the
Times the 'electronic rights' to articles.
In the majority of cases the publisher, with a superior
bargaining power, will be able to insist on this as another clause in a
form contract. It may also mean that written contracts are
often. This is a positive development, meaning that the rights
can be clearly defined. However, given the superior bargaining power of
publishers, this advantage may prove
to be artificial.
some observations
The existence of copyright
in a collective work
collective work will itself attract copyright protection
where it is original.
Depending upon the nature of the collection, for the purposes of the
Act it will most likely be classified as a literary
work, which is
include a compilation.
Determining
when a collective work or compilation is
original enough to attract copyright protection has been the subject of
debate, both judicial and academic.
The recent Federal Court decision in
Telstra Corporation
Limited v Desktop Marketing Pty Ltd
illustrates the issues. Telstra Corporation Limited
(Telstra) had alleged that Desktop Marketing Pty Ltd had infringed its
in the white and yellow pages telephone directories (the
directories).
respondent, Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd (DtMS)
had produced three CD Rom products which Telstra alleged infringed its
in the directories. These were:
CD Phone Directory - a product
containing the white and yellow pages listings data. It could be
- containing the same
information, but allowing more sophisticated searching options.
Pro - enabled businesses
to be classified by type and reference to various other classification
It also included
additional information where available, such as the
employees, AusDoc number, facsimile number and whether or not the
wanted to be canvassed for marketing purposes. All this information
accessed by doing various searches.
The primary
data for all these products came from the
Telstra directories, although the information was changed in some minor
(for example, the expansion of abbreviations, and the
incorporation of
some different headings).
The Telstra
directories were literary works for the
purposes of the Australian Act. The issue before the court was whether
directories
possessed the required level of originality for the
purposes of
There is no
compiles facts, this compilation can be original for the purposes of
The facts themselves will not be protected, rather the way the facts
published or compiled. There are two general theories
as to when a
compilation
of facts will be original for copyright purposes:
'sweat of the brow' theory.
According to this point of view, so long as the author has exerted some
in compiling the facts,
this time and labour will be rewarded by a
Kingdom. For
example, in
Walter v Lane
the copying down and publication of speeches of the Earl of Rosebery
to attract copyright protection. The exact level of
exertion required
issue which has never been clearly decided (see the discussion in
(Aust) Pty Ltd v Compact Business Systems Pty Ltd
need for intellectual effort
in the selection or arrangement of the facts. This is the approach
accepted in the
United States,
the leading case being
Feist Publications, Inc
v Rural Telephone
Service Co, Inc.
Supreme Court rejected the sweat of the brow theory, stating that the
originality was that the choice in making the
compilation must 'entail
minimal degree of creativity'. O'Connor J stated that in most cases
be satisfied in the case
of a compilation, however, there may be cases
the 'creative spark is utterly lacking or so trivial as to be virtually
nonexistent'.
Therefore, the standard of creativity is low, but it does exist.
decision, Finkelstein J considered that,
as a judge sitting at first instance, the Australian approach of
following UK
authorities
should continue. He found that copyright existed both in
directories (as there was much evidence that skill and effort had been
in their creation) and also the headings used in the yellow pages
(following the authority of
Lamb v Evans
in which copyright was found to
exist in the headings used
in a trade directory.)
the threshold of protection for a compilation of
factual data involves balancing a number of policy issues, which were
in this decision. On the one hand, to grant protection too
would limit the ability of authors to build on earlier works,
progress. On the other hand, the collection of factual material is
essential to
the economy. Databases provide information
to businesses, professionals
consumers and, as such, rewarding the efforts of the authors should
their development.
decisions discussed in this article illustrate the
need to give consideration to copyright when compiling and using an
novelty of the capacity to easily develop electronic databases,
nature of the copyright implications is still being realised. Yet, the
electronic database is an extremely important resource,
and one which
going to grow in importance as technology progresses.
decision and the
illustrate one important point. If in doubt, seek permission. The
decision has broader implications for any organisation which is
considering, or
has, digitised works. The decision offers protection
for the author of
allowing him or her to retain the right to decide if, and in what form,
electronic publication is to
take place.
Australian context, given the differences in the
law, the decision is not directly relevant. However, should a similar
arise, the facts would test the willingness of a court to find an
licence or implied contractual term allowing digital reproduction.
submitted that the same conclusion would be reached and that, except in
exceptional circumstances, a court would be reluctant
to find a right
reproduce or distribute electronically in the absence of an express
decision illustrates the courts willingness to
protect those who take the time and effort to compile a database. Once
offers important protection for the author. The author of a
work will not have to establish any intellectual effort, but
for the time and effort expended in compiling what is often a useful,
economically valuable, business tool.
decision and the
decision are good
ones. Both represent a warranted protection of the rights of an author.
rights of the users of copyright material
are affected. However, on
the copyright user still possesses the ability to negotiate with the
owner and obtain
the right to publish a work electronically or to
reproduce a
of these uses, a control which is important in a digital environment.
Slip opinion, No 00-201, available at
http://www.supremecourtus.gov/opinions/00slipopinion.html/.
More detail on the law suit, and the history behind it, is available at
http://www.nwu.org/tvt/tvthomehtm/
[2001] FCA 612
, available from
http://www.austlii.edu.au/
LEXIS-NEXIS operate the database NEXIS, a computerised database
articles in text only format from various periodicals.
Subscribers can
the database and view, print or download articles. The formatting of
articles on the database will be
very different from the way they
appear in the
original journal publication, as heading size and page breaks are not
reproduced.
LEXIS-NEXIS also permitted
reproduction of some
of the articles on CD products, the New York Times OnDisc and General
Periodicals
On Disc. Both products are also searchable in a similar way
17 USC ยง101 (1994).
(Cth) (the Australian Act).
The US Act provides that 'copyright protection subsists ... in original
of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression
... from which
can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated'. 17 USC
For the distinction between a joint work and a collective work, see
21. Another category of work is the derivative work
(or adaptation) in
one or more pre-existing works are altered to form a new creation. With
collective work, alterations to
the original contributions are minimal.
Smith, F H, 'Tasini v New York Times Co: A Copyright or a Right to
New England
Law Review, vol 32, no 4 (available at
http://www.nesl.edu/lawrev/vol32/32-4/smith.htm/
As to which see paras 40-47.
The general position is that it is the author of the work who is the
being works created in the course of employment. In this case,
vest in the employer (section 201(b)
of the US Act). For the Australian
equivalent, see
section 35.
See above, note 4.
This section was introduced in 1976 to protect authors who had
consented to
their works being published as part of a collective work.
The law prior
amendment only recognised copyright when an article was printed with a
(ยง18 of the
of 1909, Stat.
1079). Many publishers refused to print notices attributing copyright
individual contributors, meaning that
the work became public domain
had been assigned to the publisher).
New York Times Co v
, see above note
Another issue which arose in interpreting
section 201(c)
was whether
granted to the author of the collective work were transferable. The
Court found that they were (United
States District Court, Southern
District of New
York, 93 Cir. 8678 (SS)). The Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court
unnecessary to decide the issue, finding that
section 201(c)
See paras 11-16.
United States District Court, Southern District of New York, 93 Cir.
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit,
972 F. Supp. 804
New York Times v Tasini
, see above note 1, p 15.
New York Times v Tasini
, see above note 1, p 16.
New York Times v Tasini
, see above note 1, p 7.
New York Times v Tasini
, see above note 1, p 12.
New York Times v Tasini
, see above note 1, p 15.
Twentieth Century Music Corp v Aiken
[1975] USSC 122
, 156 (1975).
There are express provisions dealing with works of joint authorship
however a work of joint authorship is defined as 'a work that has been
by the collaboration of two or more authors and
in which the
contribution of
each author is not separate from the contribution of the other author
contributions of the other
authors'. Thus, a work of joint authorship
distinct from a collective work, which is the combination of the works
of authors in which the contribution of each author is clearly
identifiable.
Note that the position with regards to employed journalists will be
Section 35(4) of the Australian Act grants copyright
to the journalist
far as it relates to reproduction of the work for inclusion in a book
or reproduction
of the work in the
form of a hard copy facsimile, but not including
reproduction by the proprietor of the magazine, newspaper or periodical
connected with publication. For all other purposes, the
proprietor owns
the copyright. Therefore, the proprietor would have the right
reproduce the
work in an electronic database.
The discussion in the article is limited to a commercial re-use of a
Where the re-use is not commercial in nature, the user
of the work may
defence based on fair dealing. In relation to literary works, these
are set out in the Australian
Act in sections 40-42. A fair dealing
allowed where it is for the purpose of research or study, criticism or
reporting of news. Where the purpose is for research or study,
gives some further guidance as to what will be a fair dealing.
the purpose and character of the dealing and the nature of the work are
(section 40(2)). It will be a fair
dealing for the purposes of research
study where a reasonable portion is taken (section 40(3)). Ten percent
pages of a work, or, where it is an electronic work, ten
the total work, is deemed to be a reasonable portion (section
10(2A)). Whether or not a greater amount constitutes a fair dealing
will depend
on the facts. The reproduction of
an article by a publisher is unlikely
within any of the fair dealing categories. See the decision in
Moore v Neville Jeffress Pidler Pty Ltd
(1990) 37 FCR 99
where Beaumont J
rejected an argument that the reproduction and collation of news
clippings was
for the purposes of research and
study. Although it may have been used
research or study, it was the purpose of the person making the
reproduction
that was relevant,
and in this case that purpose was to make a
commercial gain
from providing a service. Further, it was held that the defence of fair
for the purpose of reporting of news was unavailable. This defence only
where the reproduction is contained in a
newspaper, magazine or similar
periodical.
The situation may be
different where an
individual compiles a database for the purposes of their own research
However, the
reproduction of an entire article is unlikely to be a
portion, especially where the researcher already possesses a hard
A complete assignment of copyright can only be achieved if it is in
writing and
signed by, or on behalf of, the assignor (section
There is an overlap between the implied licence and implied contractual
as a licence may exist as a contractual term. The distinction
may also exist in the absence of a binding contract. See
Express Co Pty Ltd v Time Life International (Nederlands) B.V.
[1977] HCA 52
(1977) 138 CLR
Carter, J W and Harland, D J,
Contract Law in Australia
3 ed, Butterworths,
Sydney, 1996, p 237.
(1994) 180 CLR 266 - decided by the Privy Council in 1977, on appeal
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria.
(1994) 180 CLR 266 at 283.
For example, an art work. However, literary works may also be different
reproduced electronically.
Trumpet Software Pty Ltd v OzEmail Pty Ltd
[1996] FCA 560
at 499. However,
where there is no agreement of any kind between the parties, the
contractual
approach will not be applicable. (See
Van Caenegem, W,
Intellectual
Butterworths, Sydney, 2001, p 338).
(1997) 37 IPR 542.
(1963) 80 WN (NSW) 1578.
For example, in
Trumpet Software Pty Ltd v OzeMail Pty Ltd
[1996] FCA 560
(1996) 34 IPR 481
it was held there that although an implied licence existed for the
distribution
of shareware, it did not extend to the distribution
of that shareware
altered form. Therefore, even where an implied licence is found to
scope will need to be carefully
considered.
This was relevant to the decision, as one of the grounds for the Court
the relief sought was that it would be contrary to
the public interest
Court to grant an injunction preventing publication of the MSDS's for
reasons. It was stated that
was difficult to conceive of a situation
court would grant an injunction the effect of which would deprive
public of the benefit of information necessary for their safety.
The test for proving an implied licence exists has proven to be a hard
satisfy in other contexts. For example, in
Fylde Microsystems
Ltd v Key Radio
Systems Ltd
[1998] Info TLR 374
the defendant had requested
the plaintiff to
develop a circuit board for a mobile radio which were to be loaded with
software known
as Keyport. The defendant had also used the software in
radios. The defendant argued that, if the plaintiff owned the copyright
the software (which was in dispute), the defendant had an implied
to use it. This argument was put forward on the basis
that there had
collaborative venture where neither party paid the other for work done,
a result, a licence for each
party to use the outcome should be implied
reasons of commercial efficacy. Laddie J found that such a term was
nor reasonable.
See also the recent decision
of the United States
District Court of the Southern District of New York in
House Inc v
Rosetta Books
(01 Civ. 1728 (SHS)), where Stein J found that
the granting of
the right by an author to a publisher to 'print, publish and sell
in book form' did not give the publisher the right to publish the books
electronic format.
(1990) 37 FCR 99.
[1996] FCA 560
(1996) 34 IPR 481.
On the basis of
Walton Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
[1988] HCA 7
(1988) 164 CLR 387.
(1937) 56 CLR 605.
Hewett v Court
[1983] HCA 7
(1983) 149 CLR 639
See the discussion at paragraphs 37-39.
See Mayfield, K, 'Writers Fight for E-Rights' in Wired News,
http://www.wired.com/news/prin/0
,1294,42538,00.html/
where it was state that 'This result will have unexpected,
unprecedented and
irreversible consequences for the
integrity and accessibility of the
record and the progress of historical scholarship'.
McGuire, D, 'Supreme Court to Create More Freelancer Wrangling' in
http://wwwnewsbytes.com/im.display.printable?client.id
newsbytes@story.id
New York Times v Tasini
, see above note 1, per
Stevens J, p 17.
As to the nature of a collective work, paras 5-6.
Section 10(1)
See, for example, Bannister, J, 'Originality and access; copyright
of compilations and databases' in
Journal of Law and
Information Science
(2) 1999 : 227-245; Trimmer, A, 'Copyright protection of compilations
Computers And Law
, (30) September 1996: 46-47.
[2001] FCA 612.
[1900] AC 539.
(1985) 84 FLR 101.
[1892] 3 Ch 463 (Chitty
[1893] 1 Ch 218 (CA).
Desktop Marketing Systems lodged an appeal to the Full Federal Court on
http://www.dtms.com.au/whatsnew/telstra.html.
See Yastrebroff, N, 'Copyright for Online Databases',
Intellectual
Property Law Bulletin
, May 1996, p 33. Yastreboff states
that online databases
have the fundamental nature of 'public good'. They have high design and
development costs relative to the costs of reproduction and
distribution. Unless
producers are able to prevent unauthorised reproductions,
they will not
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter