URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawSymp/2006/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thomson, Colin J H --- "Thinking and Writing about Law, Religion and Medicine" [2006] MqLawSymp 4; (2006) 1(1) Macquarie Law Symposium 45
THINKING AND WRITING ABOUT LAW, RELIGION AND
COLIN J H THOMSON
I INTRODUCTION
Professor Smith states that the purpose of his essay is ‘to explore the
conjunctive and disjunctive influences that religion
has in one specific field
of current socio-political debate: namely, bio-medical technology and ethical
decision making’. The
essay contains a rich collection of ideas and
observations on the influences religion has had on the formation of the United
constitution, in contemporary constitutional litigation and the
implications of these for bio-medicine and ethics.
The essay could be said to describe the context of the influences that
religion has on bio-medical technology and ethical decision-making,
but does not
explore those influences in detail. Valuable as this can be, a response is left
speculate on how the context that
Professor Smith describes will affect the way that religion influences
bio-medical technology and
ethical decision-making,
question why the context that he
describes is relevant to those influences,
analyse the expression, demanding a
tight conceptual consistency and seizing on any apparent departure or
note some shortcomings of the
approach adopted for the stated purpose and suggest another. This response
chooses the last option.
II THE NATIONAL CONTEXTS
The richness of the intersections and historical explanations that the essay
reveals owes much to the overt role of religion in United
States public affairs,
since the formation of that nation. By contrast, religion in Australian public
life has had a subdued and
indistinct role, an issue that continues to be a
source of on-going historical debate.
explanations for this lie in an examination of the establishment of the
Australian colonies and, later, the formation of the
nation and are well beyond
the scope of this response – and the competence of its author. One
observation is, however, offered.
This is that in Australian public life,
religion is respected as the substance of private individual contributions but
on as a ground for public decisions. So, parliaments and court terms
traditionally open with Christian prayers and legislators are
freed from public
political allegiances to exercise a personal conscience vote on certain public
issues. Accordingly, Australians
are perhaps more likely to see that an
individual decision-making level of discussion will better trace
religion’s influence.
III IS IT WORTH DOING?
Given the breadth of the issues discussed and the range of scholarship that
is relevant and the complexity of their interaction, is
the task set by the
paper simply too hard? Are the complexities involved in thinking and writing
such that there can be no fruitful outcome?
Professor Smith says that law has not risen to the challenge of an unerring
definition of religion.
The opening account of
controversies about the physical emblems of religion in public places seems to
be symbolic of something deeper.
However, the value of pursuing the
relationships among law, religion and medicine may not lie in whether one can be
defined in the
terms of another. Rather, the value may be in exploring how one
affects the practice of the others.
The value may lie not in an historical or contextual account, but rather in
how the three disciplines shape their human practice and
what they share in
their sources and commitments. How does religion motivate conduct? How does the
formulation of religious argument
and persuasion take hold in public discourse
and justification? Do the motivations of lawyers and medical practitioners
include religion?
If so, is this with the accepted and acceptable traditions of
those disciplines or are such professionals denying the coherence of
professions?
Indeed, reflecting the earlier observation that the roles of religion in
Australian public life are private and individual rather
than public and
institutional, similar relationships may be found between professional and
personal values. Professional responsibilities
permit a conscience vote in the
form of conscientious objection. What will be the effect of advances in
bio-medical technology on
the scope of the rights of health and law
professionals not to work in areas of health or health law to which they
conscientiously
object? As bio-medical technology reveals more and more about
the scientific origins of human life and opens wider possibilities
to intervene
at formative levels, it relentlessly confronts the religious foundations of
health and legal professionals’ conscientious
objection. As bio-medical
technology widens its applications, will the scope for these personal freedoms
expand or contract?
To this (Australian) author, these seem to be more fruitful starting points.
They confront the question of what is the appropriate
level of attention or
IV LEVELS OF ATTENTION
Professor Smith’s level of discussion uses, with one notable exception,
what he describes as a macro level. The one exception
seems to be a result of
the gravitational pull that litigation and case law have for academic lawyers.
The discussion of judicial
contests between opponents and supporters of the
teaching of creation or of Darwin’s theories is a characteristic academic
lawyer’s treatment of decisions and justifying principles.
What is interesting about this contrast of levels is that writing at the
macro level has been chosen to discuss the stated purpose
of the paper when, as
indicated above, a micro level might well fulfil the purpose of the paper more
clearly. Professor Smith accepts,
in the fourth section of the paper, that
religion as a source of ethical values can find purchase in judicial decision
making because
legal rules are indeterminate, leaving scope for reliance on
moral considerations that can be informed by religion. If so, would
not judicial
decision making be an appropriate level at which to explore whether the
influences of religion exist or not? A recurrent
focus of legal and religious
attention in the field of bio-medical technology and ethical decision-making has
been on specific decisions:
those that direct health practitioners in deciding
relationships
with patients and their families and deliberate the role and
limits of the role of the state in the private lives of its citizens.
‘clear in the crucible of
One reason for addressing these matters at a macro level may be that, because
of the national context, the concepts used are familiar
and it has been widely
accepted that law, religion and science are related. Examples include the
statement that ‘religion is
the bed rock of moral order and a moral order
works to stabilize law and medical science’, and that the three
disciplines are
forces that, in synergy, ‘combine in a dynamic partnership
to form a communitarian alliance dedicated to providing a framework
in which man
can pursue the peace of ordered harmony which allows for a balanced happiness in
his social, spiritual, and physical
relationships’. Australians may be
less familiar in this level of attention and tend to approach such matters more
pragmatically
and see this discourse as an invitation for further scholarship
that would demonstrate the truth or falsity of their central assertions.
However, a micro level, that of Llewellyn’s trouble-case, is not
without risks and weaknesses. One is that it privileges law
over all other
disciplines as sources of decisions and justifications. Professor Smith’s
discussion of the United States cases
clearly. Those cases are determinative: they settle the question legally. For
science, they are
merely contingent conclusions that are inevitably subject to
revision as science progresses. For religion, they are at least revealed
instances of wisdom or, more often, a dismissal of the religious source of
knowledge in favour of the hard reason of the words of
Constitution
recognition of this capacity in legal analysis, Llewellyn advocated that the
task was to search below the presenting justifications
of principle for the
realism of the true sources and grounds of decision.
V THE CONCEPTUALISATION OF LAW, RELIGION AND MEDICINE
In his paper, Professor Smith describes law, religion and medicine as
disciplines, as cultures and as forces. At the macro level at
which he writes,
this variety is plausible. However, when examined at any more applied level, the
variety of terms used conceal an
underlying uncertainty and the prominence of
one form of conceptualisation.
In the first section of the paper, Professor Smith suggests that religion, in
responding to bio-technology and molecular biology,
is faced with the task of
adapting to applying to those issues or reshaping itself or, in his words,
‘to modernize foundational
texts into a constructive dialogue with
science: one which escapes the confines of abstract applications and offers
specific guidance
and modern ethical norms of resolving concrete biomedical
conflicts’.
His conceptualisation thus appears to force religion on to the Procrustean
bed of reason. This may deny the one characteristic that
makes religion unique:
the way in which knowledge is accepted as being the product of revelation.
Religion uses reason in the development
of its precepts, principles and guidance
but these are derived from a truth that has its foundation in a position that is
not discovered
but revealed. Professor Smith, in the fifth section of the paper,
seems to accept this when he says that it is a misconception that
religion needs
only faith in order to sustain itself, whereas the truth is that religion
requires belief and belief is built on knowledge.
He also suggests that
scientific investigation is very similar to religious experience. This he says
emerges from the fact that in
science the defining event is when that which was
unknown becomes visible and even clear and in spirituality, ‘experiences
with meaning, purpose and teleology are foundational’. So, he says,
‘semantic differences remain small between scientific
insight and
religious revelation’.
Scientific insight and discovery or revolution, as Thomas Kuhn
may appear deceptively similar. For
instance, was Darwin’s identification of the principle of natural
selection a rationally
derived explanation of recurring patterns that he
observed in many species, or was it an insight? Even if it was an insight, and
it is Kuhn’s theory that science progresses by revolutionary insights, it
was a humanistic and not a theistic discovery. Religious
revelation is of the
truth revealed to humans not discovered by them: it depends on the existence of
the divine being. An exploration
of the contribution of religion to law and
medicine cannot justly deny religion this ground of its knowledge.
However, to reduce these differences to a matter of semantics equates
humanistic insight with theistic revelation – and overcomes
differences
between science and religion by denying religion’s central tenet. This, it
seems, fails to recognize the fundamental
distinction made by Aquinas between
divine law (
) and revealed or natural law: a distinction that
rested on a central tenet that the church, with access to the Divine, was the
authoritative
interpreter. The Protestant reformation may have eroded the
church’s exclusive claim to interpretation, but it did not deny
of divine revelation as a source of knowledge.
VI THE WESTERNISATION OF RELIGION, LAW AND MEDICINE
The concerns discussed in Professor Smith’s paper are familiar debates
of the last century or so of Western culture and liberal
democratic politics.
For that culture, the distinctions among law, religion and medicine are
obviously matters of deep moment because
Professor Smith’s vectors of
force are understood to be separated. His paper reflects our characteristic
Western preoccupation
to find concepts that show and explain this
separation.
As that culture has been carried into contact with other older, more unified
cultures, at first by the greed of colonialism and most
recently, ironically, by
medicine, it has been confronted with unified cultural traditions for whom the
separateness that the West
worries over is often unnecessary and the effort
devoted to support the separation wasteful. For many of these older cultures, it
does not matter that religion, law and medicine are parts of a whole way of
life. Living that life teaches how to grasp that unity.
In recent intersections, examples recur of the West’s desire to assert
itself – and post-colonial societies continue to
reap the often bitter
harvest. Professor Smith’s reference to the dreamtime is a small, yet
revealing, example. He refers to
a ‘dreamtime’ of tomorrow and in
this appears to misconceive that idea. Dreamtime, as superficially understood by
non-indigenous
Australians, was and is and will be. Dreamtime not only explains
but also constitutes the past, the present and the future reality
in which men
women and children have lived and now live their lives. To refer to a future
dreamtime, as if different from a past
or present one is to contradict this
VII CLOSING REMARKS
The observations in this short response have been stimulated by Professor
Smith’s thought and scholarship. This reader, like
others, is indebted to
him for bringing attention to these issues and to the extent of recent
scholarship that shares his interest
in their examination. That some readers, as
this author, respond with a desire for a more applied level of treatment need
not detract
from the value of being confronted with some significant current
moral, cultural, political and professional challenges.
Adjunct Professor, Division of Law,
Macquarie University.
Fr Frank Brennan, ‘5Rs for the
Enlargers: Race, Religion, Respect, Rights and the Republic’, the Seventh
Manning Clark
Lecture, presented at the National Library of Australia, 2 March
2006, http:///www.manningclark.org.au/papers/MCLecture-2006 (11.4.06)
However, as Professor Smith himself
notes, the Australian High Court has done so – out of statutory
Both expressions are used in K Llewellyn
and E A Hoebel,
The Cheyenne Way
See, T Kuhn,
The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter