URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2021/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barnett, Katy --- "Nine-Tenths Of The Law?" [2021] UNSWLawJlF 7; (2021) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 7
NINE-TENTHS OF THE LAW?
KATY BARNETT
An Expressive Theory of Possession
JR Crawford, Hart Publishing, 2020, ISBN 978-1-50992-992-4)
The doctrine of possession is a critical concept in understanding ownership
and the right to title, but it remains under-theorised
by property lawyers, and
hence some have suggested the concept is so hopelessly vague that it should be
abandoned altogether. Crawford’s
book is an illuminating and elegant
exception to this rule: he attempts to unpack what he calls ‘the
possession puzzle’.
definition of possession is simply ‘those relations between people and
tangible things which, as a matter of social fact,
constitute accepted ways of
claiming some form of entitlement to
This work will be of
interest to property law teachers and scholars, legal theorists specialising in
property law, and even to non-legal
readers who wish to learn more about the
concept of ownership and
possession.
It is worth noting
that, distinctively, Crawford does not focus on possession of land or the
concept of seisin in his analysis, but
it is suggested that it will also
nonetheless be of interest to an adventurous real property lawyer.
Crawford’s work departs from the usual common law dichotomy according
to which lawyers conceive of possession, namely factual
control and
(intention to
Control per se is not,
according to Crawford’s argument, central to possession: what is important
is that the means of claiming
possession is legitimate within that society (an
to why it exists, Crawford says, ‘[f]or largely inscrutable psychological
reasons, the fact of possession was, and continues
to be, prominent to those who
must decide which objects belong to
As someone who has
become interested in the law of possession when considering the development of
the law of ownership of animals
from both a historical and modern perspective,
this resonated with me.
In his introduction, Crawford notes that there is a long-standing
methodological division running through private law
scholarship.
On the one hand,
English private law scholars tend to engage in strict doctrinal analysis,
whereas American private law scholars
tend to favour interdisciplinary
Crawford’s work
weaves together
doctrinal analysis and interdisciplinary analyses.
In my view, this is a tremendous strength of Crawford’s work. It is
that this book is derived from Crawford’s PhD, undertaken at
Melbourne Law School.
is culturally in between England and America, and hence Australian private law
scholars can have an ability to accommodate
both doctrinal analyses and
interdisciplinary analyses in a way which is unique and valuable. I commend
Crawford’s book as
an exemplar of this.
In Chapter 1, Crawford outlines the basic theory of property rights which
underpin his analysis and advances his beguiling theory
that the right to
exclude, not the right to possess, is at the core of property rights (the
‘exclusion model’).
Rather, possession is simply a fact which leads to the creation of property
rights. He uses a Hohfeldian analysis of property to
suggest that there is an
asymmetrical but simple explanation for property rights over tangible
Intangible things are
excluded from the analysis simply because they are impossible to
Under Crawford’s
analysis, the holder of a property right has a certain liberty to use property
in a myriad of ways, and there
is a duty upon others not to physically interfere
with that property (enforced by proprietary torts such as trespass, conversion
and detinue).
Of course, the
property must not be used in a way which harms others, which is where the tort
of nuisance comes in: it is not predicated
upon interference but upon a
circumscription of rights to use in a way which harm others. He disclaims the
‘bundle of rights’
theory, saying instead that property law is
‘right light and liberty
The point is not
that an owner has certain specific rights: instead the point is that the owner
has certain liberties in regard to
the property which other people do not have
(and in fact, other people can be excluded from interfering with the property).
never been comfortable with the ‘bundle of rights’ theory
Crawford’s theory
is exceptionally elegant. It does not require us to enumerate rights. On the
other hand, I wonder about more
limited property rights (such as easements) and
how they might fit in his scheme.
In Chapter 2, Crawford notes that there is a persistent difficulty in
conceptualising possession and the arcane terminology sometimes
used to describe
the rights of parties to a particular thing confuses more than it
illuminates.
He argues this
confusion stems back to medieval times when, even in relation to ownership of
land, there was not a clear distinction
between ‘having’ a thing and
‘having a right to’ a
I found his discussion of
medieval law and policy preventing landowners from violently retaking their land
to be fascinating. However,
he notes that the modern law has (mostly) broken
away from the physical need to ‘have’ a thing in order to have a
to it. The common law has a concept of relative title (eg, a finder of
thing has good title against the world other than the original
Crawford argues that ‘possessory title’ simply means a hint that
someone else might have better
In order to untether the
law of property from the medieval notion that in order to have a right to a
thing, it was also necessary
to have that thing, Crawford argues that we must
jettison the notion of a ‘possessory right’ and other
In Chapter 3, Crawford advances his thesis that possession is a fact which
gives rise to proprietary rights, and that it plays an
function beyond simply controlling the thing itself, drawing on the work of
In other words, Crawford
The significance of the physical element of possession lies instead in its
expressive function. Certain acts qualify as ‘possession’
whether they amount to actual control, they send the recognised signal by which
someone communicates his intention to claim
a stake in some thing ... [T]his
account does not argue that physical control is irrelevant. Rather, it argues
that its relevance
is confined to the clarity of the signal that such acts send
to the relevant audience.
This explains why, depending upon the property in question, it is not
necessary to physically control something as long as it is
constitute a ‘social fact’ signalling possession. Thus, intention to
possess is pivotal to Crawford’s account
because such intention to send a
signal is necessary.
uses a variety of examples of possession norms from several cultures, including
norms which apply in Australia: we know
that if someone drapes their jacket over
a seat in the cinema, the intention is to stake a claim over that space
regardless of the
fact that the person is not present and controlling access to
the seat. While that does not create a proprietary right in law, it
societal norm. The significance and value of Crawford’s work is that it
bridges the gap between the theories of
possession as ‘behavioural
expression’ and the orthodox common law concept of property which have
been dominated by discussions
of possession in the context of real property law.
I found Crawford’s discussion of whaling rules fascinating, as this is
something I have noted myself will depend upon culture
Similarly, his
discussion of the famous American fox-hunting case
Pierson v Post
enlightening:
he sees the
decision as being explicable on the basis that social norms with regard to
possession should be readily understood as
such by a wide group, not just a
small group of hunters.
the degree of control is relevant insofar as it expresses a clear intention to
possess, and in deciding possession cases,
judges draw on extra-legal societal
In Chapter 4, Crawford discusses the
of possession and concludes
that it is an unconscious selection intrinsic to human psychology, with
reference to game theory (although
as he properly notes, the book is not about
game theory per se).
I wonder if
shadows of these concepts are displayed by other mammals: we all know how a dog
will growl if you attempt to take their
bone, and chimpanzees have displayed
complex norms governing entitlement to meat from hunted colobus
I very much enjoyed
Crawford’s discussion of spontaneous order, and the role of convention as
a solution to coordination problems
(using game theory as an
illustration).
Chapter 5 contains a fascinating discussion of fairness and possession. It is
suggested that possession is
, and that as
a basic allocative rule, it works because any given member of society can be in
the position of possessor in a contest
over scarce
Moreover, the law
should incorporate basic conventions when they are tolerably fair if those
conventions reflect widely held expectations
the possibility for people to misuse force and to hoard property is something
that has been of
concern to theorists from Locke
He acknowledges that in
individual cases, possession norms may give rise to unfair
However, he argues that
the rule is fair because it turns on what a person does, not on what a person is
(although a person’s
individual characteristics might make it harder to
assert the convention in a given
situation).
A second advantage
is that because it is readily understood, and indeed possibly intrinsic, it is a
norm which appeals to laypeople.
And even in complex abstract land registration systems, possession still retains
Chapter 6 contains a discussion of losing property and the law of finders
(one of my favourite topics when teaching Property Law:
lost bracelets, buried
canoes, medieval brooches and rings hidden in chimneys). Crawford considers
whether these rules are manifestations
of the general norms of possession, and
concludes that the disputes between finders and occupiers of land do not fit
into the general
norm of possession – ie, it depends upon whether the item
is attached or unattached to the land, and a variety of other
circumstances.
Chapter 7 grasps the bull by the horns and considers the notoriously
difficult problem of property rights in the wake of theft, and
the role of the
good faith purchaser. Thieves
have a relative property right in items
they have stolen, but this has been criticised as allowing immoral persons to
assert proprietary
Crawford suggests that the problem is not with norms of possession themselves,
but with the question of whether it is right for a
court to enforce a
thief’s property rights.
The good faith purchaser rule is justified by considering the signalling
aspect of possession. If someone reasonably looks like they
have a right to own
something, then we allow those who purchase from them to assume that there was a
right to sell.
The difficulty,
of course, is if the original owner and the new purchaser both claim property,
then the law is presented with an
impossible contest between two equally
deserving parties, both of whom have equal reasons to assert ownership. The law
tends to favour
purchasers over owners. Crawford suggests that in some cases, a
registration system will be appropriate to deal with issues of unfairness
created thereby.
Crawford’s use of doctrine, economic theory and psychology is
ingenious. He suggests that the main role of possession is signalling
convention, but that it is necessary (and indeed inevitable) that these norms
become law. In conclusion, I recommend Crawford’s
book to all scholars
interested in property rights, personal property and the theory of property law
and commend him on an excellent
scholarly monograph.
* Professor, Melbourne Law School. Thank you to the anonymous referees for
their helpful suggestions.
1 Michael JR Crawford,
An Expressive Theory of Possession
Publishing, 2020) 1.
I have recently recommended the book to a
friend who has an interest in economic history and notions of ownership.
Crawford (n 1) 9.
Katy Barnett and Jeremy Gans,
Pigs: The Weird and Wonderful History of Animal Law
(La Trobe University
Press, forthcoming) ch 1.
Crawford (n 1) 4–7.
Ibid 12–18.
The role of torts is discussed at ibid
See Katy Barnett, ‘
Australia v Ward
: One Step Forward and Two Steps Back: Native Title and the
Bundle of Rights Analysis’
[2000] MelbULawRw 17
(2000) 24(2)
Melbourne University Law
Crawford (n 1) 42–8.
Philosophy of Right
(Batoche Books, 2001).
Carol M Rose, ‘Possession as the
Origin of Property’
(1985) 52(1)
University of Chicago Law Review
; Carol M Rose, ‘The Law Is Nine-Tenths Possession: An Adage Turned on
Its Head’ in Yun-Chien Chang (ed),
Law and Economics of Possession
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 40; Carol M Rose,
Property and Persuasion:
Essays on the History, Theory and Rhetoric of Ownership
(Westview Press,
Crawford (n 1) 63.
Interestingly, in
(1910) 30 NZLR 343
, New Zealand adopted whaling norms that were more
similar to American norms than the Greenland norms.
3 Cai R 175
(1805). For a detailed
description of the history behind
Pierson v Post
I recommend Angela
Pierson v Post: The Hunt for the Fox
(Cambridge University
Press, 2018). There was apparently underlying family rivalry between the
Piersons and the Posts.
Crawford (n 1) 75–7.
Christophe Boesch, ‘Cooperative
Hunting Roles among Taï Chimpanzees’ (2002) 13(1)
Human Nature
Crawford (n 1) 93–113.
Ibid 124–7.
Ibid 132–4.
Ibid 135–8.
Ibid 138–40.
Ibid 146–71.
Ibid 173–84.
Ibid 186–91.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52.7 KB)
PDF format (405 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter