URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McMillan, James; Lilley, Rob --- "Why Isn't All Legal Education Practical?" [2025] WALawTRw 4; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 49
WHY ISN’T ALL LEGAL
EDUCATION PRACTICAL?
JAMES MCMILLAN & ROB LILLEY
In this article, the authors draw on their experience as law academics,
practical legal training (‘PLT’) instructors,
and as legal
practitioners, and argue that reform of legal education to better meet the
expectations of the profession and community
requires a re-evaluation of the
continuum of legal education, from commencement of primary law studies (ie,
Bachelor of Laws ‘LLB’
or Juris Doctor ‘JD’) until first
admission as a legal practitioner, and potentially beyond. To focus solely on
deficiencies of the current approach to PLT, as has recently played out in
the media, is to miss the point. As the title of this
article suggests, would it
not be better to integrate ‘practical’ training throughout a trainee
lawyer’s legal
studies? As this article demonstrates, there is duplication
between primary legal studies and PLT and removing that duplication can
reduce the burden and cost of a separate PLT program. In reconsidering the
pathway to legal practice, there is scope for
much of the necessary
‘practical’ training to be delivered during primary law studies and
thereby reduce the need for
students to complete a lengthy and costly
postgraduate PLT course.
I INTRODUCTION
This paper is the third in a series of articles
published in this journal which address the current approach to practical legal
As noted previously,
aspiring legal practitioners. PLT emerged
in its modern form in Australia in the
...overcome the inadequacies of articles training by providing training in
the essential skills and major areas of practice so as
to ensure that a person
entering the legal profession can function at a standard of competency which can
reasonably be expected of
a first-year
practitioner.
There is emerging evidence that the current form of PLT in Australia does not
achieve this
The purpose of this article is to consider alternative ways to train new legal
practitioners to better meet the needs of the legal
profession and the broader
community. It is too early in the debate about the future of professional legal
education in Australia
to be definitive about one approach or another. However,
it is appropriate as the debate evolves to ensure that all options for
improvement
are on the table, and this article is a contribution to that debate.
In this article, we argue that consideration should be given
to making primary
legal studies (Bachelor of Laws ‘LLB’ or Juris Doctor
‘JD’ – in this article referred
to as ‘academic’
law study) more practical and thereby reduce the need for further postgraduate
PLT study for most new
legal practitioners, whilst ensuring that the
effectiveness of legal education and the outcomes for students are enhanced.
II THE ORIGINS OF PLT IN AUSTRALIA
Most Australian jurisdictions, including New South Wales, South Australia,
Victoria, Queensland and the Australian Capital Territory,
introduced PLT
courses in the 1970s and 1980s as a replacement for the former articles-based
training approach, and completion of
PLT progressively became the sole pathway
to legal practice for a law graduate. The PLT course (known as ‘Legal
taught at the Australian National University in the Australian
Capital Territory accepted its first students in
Australian PLT course commenced in
Australia was the last Australian jurisdiction to adopt the PLT model in
Numerous PLT
courses are now available in Australia, delivered by both university and
non-university providers.
There is an extensive body of academic literature about PLT in an Australian
context, with a dedicated journal (the
Journal of Professional Legal
published between
1983 and 1998 by the Centre for Publication & Information of the College of
Law on behalf of the Australian
Professional Legal Education
Conference.
perusal of the index to the 16 volumes of that journal indicates the extent of
scholarship at that time about the development of
the Australian approach to
PLT, much of which still resonates to an interested reader in 2025 and therefore
remains relevant to reviews
of the Australian PLT approach.
The lead author of this article was a student in the PLT course delivered by
the South Australian Institute of Technology in 1985,
described by
course was taught full-time (ie, 9am to 5pm each day) over a three-term academic
year, with a mandatory attendance requirement,
and all students completing 15
days of external legal workplace experience placements. The course was taught
through a workshop format,
simulating a legal practice environment, with
students allocated to small ‘firms’ of 3 students each, with
interaction
between the ‘firms’ in undertaking various tasks. Most
PLT students were then admitted to practice in December, following
completion of
the course. At that time, a newly admitted legal practitioner in South Australia
was entitled to an unrestricted practising
certificate, and although not common,
some new practitioners would establish their own firms (either alone or with
other practitioners)
immediately after admission. Of course this is no longer
possible, with a new practitioner now required to complete a period of
legal practice, and subject to a further requirement to complete a
practice management course, before obtaining an unrestricted practising
certificate. Nevertheless, the historical point is somewhat relevant, with the
emphasis of the early Australian PLT courses (at least
in part) being the
development of skills to allow a new practitioner to run their own legal
practice. Times have changed and the
issues and concerns that led to the
introduction of the first Australian PLT courses in the 1970s are not the same
as those facing
new practitioners and the profession more than 50 years later in
the 2020s. This reality should be reflected in any review now undertaken
adequacy of contemporary Australian legal education. The demands placed on new
practitioners in the mid-2020s should now be
the primary focus of any redesign
of the Australian approach to practical legal education in the future, with an
emphasis on teaching
students how to perform the type of tasks new practitioners
are likely to encounter in their early years of practice to meet the
the legal profession for new practitioners who are better equipped with the
necessary skills required for legal practice
(referred to in this article as
‘practice ready’).
III THE MOVEMENT FOR CHANGE TO PLT
We previously wrote about the initiative of the Council of Australian Law
Deans for a reconsideration of the adequacy of legal education
in Australia
(including both the Priestley 11 requirements and the PLT standards set by the
Law Admissions Consultative Committee
‘LACC’) in preparing law
graduates for professional
that article we described the current approach to PLT in Australia, including a
broad description of how PLT courses are structured.
We also noted a recently
published study on the attitudes of legal practitioners, which indicates
widespread dissatisfaction with
the level of ‘work-readiness’ among
newly admitted legal practitioners in
Queensland.
Since then, there
has been further impetus for change, especially following a speech given by the
Honourable Andrew Bell, Chief Justice
of the New South Wales Supreme Court, at
the 2025 Opening of Law Term Dinner on 6 February
In that speech, His Honour expressed concern about the cost of PLT courses and
also about their quality and content, with a particular
focus on the course
offered by the NSW-based College of Law.
Reflecting these concerns, the NSW Legal Profession Admission Board
(‘LPAB’) sponsored a survey of practitioner attitudes
to PLT, the
results of which were the subject of a statement by His Honour on 14 April
with further details of the report available from the LPAB’s
His Honour’s statement noted the following ‘themes’ identified
in the Report:
• PLT is seen as a box-ticking exercise, lacking deep relevance to
legal practice;
• the move to most of the course being delivered online has led to a
lack of in-depth learning;
• a lack of academic rigour was reported with the course being seen as
hard to fail;
• PLT costs can be prohibitive and are not seen as providing value;
• work undertaken during study, such as paralegal work, was reported to
be more useful than PLT; and
• employer-funding of PLT could steer new lawyers towards private
practice, deepening the existing workforce imbalance across
It should be noted that the LPAB’s Report, and the remarks of Chief
Justice Bell, are focused on the PLT component of legal
education. This article
has a broader focus and suggests that PLT is part of a continuum of legal
education that commences with LLB
or JD study at law school (or equivalent). If,
as the LPAB Report suggests, there is a high level of dissatisfaction with the
of the current PLT approach, we argue that changes to PLT should not be
considered in isolation from a broader review of the curriculum
primary academic law studies.
Moreover, standards for entry to the legal profession are now set by a
national body, the Law Admissions Consultative Committee (‘LACC),
the Chair of the NSW LPAB is a member, along with representatives of the other
Australian admission bodies, the Council
of Australian Law Deans (representing
the law schools at Australian universities), and the Australasian Professional
Legal Education
Community Inc (representing most of the PLT
Presumably, it remains
the case that the Australian legal profession admission bodies will seek to
maintain consistency in their
approach to admissions standards and other legal
education issues, through the LACC forum, and that a period of consultation will
be necessary to achieve consensus about future education requirements for new
Australian legal practitioners.
IV INTEGRATING PLT WITH ACADEMIC LAW STUDY
The next part of this article examines some of the contextual issues that
need to be considered in reforming legal education in Australia
to ensure that
new-entrant lawyers are practice-ready before considering a possible
‘blueprint’ for reform.
A The Role of Law Schools in Training New Lawyers: the
Academic v Practical Tension
As explained earlier in this article, any review of the adequacy of legal
training for new lawyers should extend beyond the existing
PLT approach and
should consider how PLT can be better integrated with academic law studies.
There is already an impetus to embed
practical skills in the foundational law
degrees. For instance, the
Australian Law School Standards
require that
(as a minimum) Australian law schools must endeavour to:
...provide, so far as practicable, experiential learning opportunities for
its students, including, but not limited to, clinical programs,
internships,
workplace experience, and pro bono community
Additionally, the Higher Education Threshold Standards require all Australian
Universities (ie, not limited to law schools) to demonstrate:
...engagement with employers, industry, and the professions in areas in which
it offers courses of study. This engagement may include...work-integrated
We acknowledge, of course, that the role of a law school at an Australian
university extends beyond that of training new lawyers for
professional
practice, especially when one considers that many law graduates do not practice
law after graduation
Legal research,
including in higher degree by research academic programs, is a core function of
a law school and, by its nature, that
research tends to be more theoretical than
practical. In the contemporary Australian university environment, research
output (especially
publication of journal articles) is an important performance
measure for most academics, including legal academics. This creates
and a potential barrier to advancement, for those academics with a more
‘practical’ legal education focus.
As explained by Hutchinson, it is
important for legal scholars in the twenty-first century to embrace social
science research methodologies,
reflecting the existence of law within a social
setting rather than in ‘an objective doctrinal
which can be challenging for
legal researchers with primarily doctrinal research interests. A law
school’s role in training
future lawyers co-exists with the research
demands placed on legal academics. It must also accommodate students who do not
to engage in legal practice after graduation. However, we contend that a
foundational law degree should teach both theory and practice
such that a law
graduate is ‘practice ready’. Accordingly, theoretical legal
research and the practical training of future
lawyers both remain core functions
of all modern Australian law schools, and one cannot be placed above the other
in its importance,
at least from the perspectives of the universities and legal
academics themselves.
It remains the case that law schools must also meet the needs of external
stakeholders: the judiciary, the legal profession more generally,
community. There are some clear messages that key external stakeholders desire
changes to legal education, to ensure new
entrants to the legal profession are
better equipped and skilled to meet the demands placed on them when they
commence practice.
In an Australian context, this is reinforced by the
requirement for external accreditation of law degrees offered by law schools
meet the admission requirements of the admission bodies in each jurisdiction. In
that sense, the admission bodies quite rightly
have a significant say in how
legal education is provided in Australia, and law schools must meet the
requirements reflected in the
several LACC standards which have been
promulgated, most notably, the so-called ‘Priestley 11’
requirements, which specify
core areas of legal knowledge that must be studied
by law students aspiring to enter legal
There is an existing
challenge for law schools to manage these inherent tensions and ensure that a
focus on training future lawyers
can comfortably co-exist with a parallel focus
on legal research, including purely theoretical or doctrinal research. We
that a move towards a greater focus on practical skills development
during an aspiring practitioner’s academic law studies
can be achieved as
a natural extension of the significant role already played by law schools in
preparing graduates for legal practice.
B The Role of the Legal Profession: Setting Expectations
for New Practitioners
Reports such as those commissioned by the Queensland Law
and the NSW
establish the need for change
to the current legal education approach in Australia. In implementing change,
the legal profession
can also play another related role, which is highly
significant: identifying and articulating the skills that entry-level lawyers
require to be better practitioners. The legal profession (including the
judiciary) needs to work hand-in-hand with legal educators
and admission bodies
(through LACC) to identify what new practitioners need to know and the skills
they need to have. It then falls
to legal educators to work within their areas
of expertise to ensure that students gain the skills and knowledge in those
critical need identified by the profession.
C How Best to Teach Skills? Challenging Assumptions about
As noted above, much of the current focus on the need for change relates to
the way in which PLT is taught. However, any assumption
needs to change must be challenged. At a minimum, future reviews of legal
education should also consider the extent to which
legal skills can be taught as
part of academic legal study. In Part V of this article, we explore in more
detail what this means
and how it might be achieved. Changes in legal education
over the past 50 years already include legal educators' acceptance of the
to incorporate more practical skills training into LLB/JD studies, including
through ‘authentic’ learning and
The way in which law
students are taught in the 2020s is more practical when compared to 50 years
ago. There is evidence from the
literature that a focus on integrating practical
legal skills development with core LLB curriculum is not a recent phenomenon,
Woellner describing the development of a ‘practical skills
program’ by the Faculty of Law at the University of Western
Sydney in the
Examples of authentic assessments in the authors’ own recent experience
as legal academics at Curtin Law School include an interview-based
assessment in
Introduction to Torts
course, and the preparation of a statement of
claim as an assessment in the
Civil Procedure
course, as well as elective
units available to students in advocacy and opportunities to gain academic
units. Mooting can also play
a role in introducing law students at an early stage of their studies to the
skills of advocacy and
developing legal arguments.
Earlier this year, the second author developed and taught a
unit at Curtin Law School as a theoretical-clinical hybrid. The unit was
designed around the central premise of this article: that
legal education can
(and should) be both theoretical and practical. The unit starts by building a
solid foundation in the theory
of succession law and culminates in the student
taking instructions for, preparing, and executing a simple will in the John
Law Clinic (which is part of the Curtin Law School), under the direct
supervision of an experienced legal practitioner. It is early
days yet, and
there is currently no empirical data available on the success (or otherwise) of
this approach in the context of this
particular unit, but informal feedback
obtained from students thus far has been extremely positive.
We hypothesise that this hybrid approach is better for students as it allows
the practical aspects to be scaffolded onto the theoretical
underpinning of the
This allows students to put the
theory into practice, further reinforcing their knowledge, before their memory
of the subject fades
with time. The existing PLT model is such that several
years may pass between a student’s theoretical study of a subject and
student encountering the subject again in PLT. However, we acknowledge that
there are some constraints in embedding practical
skills training in
foundational legal education, not the least of which is a lack of experienced
legal practitioners on law school
At the minimum, we argue that a further expansion of these kinds of unit
design and assessment approaches could be part of the answer
to how we change
the current approach to legal education, thereby better meeting expectations
held by the legal profession and the
broader community about capabilities of
entry-lawyer lawyers. In other words, there may be greater scope for
development to be shifted into the program of academic law
studies and reduce (or potentially eliminate?) the need for those skills
taught separately and independently in a PLT course.
D Obstacles to Integration: LACC and Priestley 11
Pre-requisites
At present, LACC already contemplates that a law school may be accredited to
provide a combined academic law/PLT course and has published
a document entitled
‘Guiding Principles for Integrating Academic and PLT
These principles
nevertheless contemplate a separation of ‘academic’ and
‘PLT’ components, and they expressly
require that students must
complete all Priestley 11 requirements before PLT studies are
Illustratively, with this
requirement in place, it would not be possible to incorporate instruction and
assessment of the PLT ‘Civil
Litigation Practice’ component with the
‘academic’ study of
Civil Dispute Resolution
(one of the
Priestley 11 required areas of academic study). Similarly, it would not be
possible to incorporate PLT advocacy training
as part of academic study of
Criminal Law
Viewed in its historical context, when legal educators teaching foundational
law courses had little interest in teaching practical
skills, this separation
between ‘PLT’ and ‘academic’ study made sense, with the
PLT serving as the skills
top-up to supplement undergraduate law studies. This
article challenges the assumption that such a separation should continue in
2020s and beyond, and poses the question: ‘Why isn’t all legal
education practical?’ It follows that a review
of the current approach to
legal education should extend beyond PLT to consider how the Priestley 11
subject areas are taught and
assessed, to allow for greater integration of
academic law studies with PLT, to avoid duplication, and to provide a better
experience for students.
V A BLUEPRINT FOR CHANGE?
This part of the article addresses some of the issues that would arise in
achieving greater co-ordination and integration of PLT and
academic education
for aspiring future legal practitioners. We note that an integration process may
be resisted by some law schools
and law academics, due to the challenges
(particularly those associated with resourcing) of implementing significant
changes to curriculum
design and delivery, and specialist PLT course providers
might also be resistant to change due to the impact on their business models.
Extensive consultation with all stakeholders (especially through LACC) is
required and the process of change will take time to implement.
A Aligning PLT and Priestley Requirements
It is outside the scope of this article to examine the adequacy of the
current Priestley 11 requirements and whether changes are needed,
and for the
purposes of this discussion we have assumed the existing Priestley 11
requirements will continue.
As things stand, there is obvious cross-over between LACC’s
‘Prescribed academic areas of knowledge’ (ie, the Priestley
requirements) and LACC’s ‘Practical Legal Training Competency
Standards for Entry-Level
As can be readily
observed, Priestley-prescribed areas of knowledge such as
Criminal Law
Administrative Law
Company Law
Civil Dispute
Ethics and Professional
Responsibility
all, to some extent, overlap with requirements of the
Compulsory and Optional Practice Areas under the PLT competency standards.
example, many of the PLT ‘Lawyers Skills’ requirements could
conceivably be taught and assessed in one or more of
the Priestley 11 prescribed
areas of study. These ‘PLT’ skill requirements encompass
communication, cross-cultural awareness,
interviews, letter writing, drafting,
negotiating settlements and agreements, early representation of disputes and
representing a
client in a legal
Each of these
‘skills’ could be the subject of well-designed assessments and other
learning tasks taught within the framework
of a Priestley LLB or JD unit.
There are some other PLT requirements, especially with the ‘Work
Management and Business Skills’ competency
which do not fit so
neatly with academic law studies. These skills might be better taught as part of
a short postgraduate ‘work-readiness’
intensive course prior to
admission, in a similar way to the Practice Management course.
More generally, if the teaching of the current PLT requirements can be
integrated with academic legal study, it would make sense for
students to
complete the practice-oriented Priestley 11 subjects towards the end of their
LLB or JD study program, meaning that some
restructuring of the sequence in
which law subjects are taught might then be necessary.
B Challenges Facing Law Schools and Regulators Under a
If integration of PLT and academic law studies can be achieved, law schools
would face challenges in making the transition. This would
include new
curriculum development and ensuring that staff teaching the practice-oriented
subject areas have appropriate qualifications
and skills to do so. It is
relevant that under the current PLT competency standards, PLT instructors are
expected to have current
or recent experience in the practice of law. Many
current law academics would not meet this requirement. It makes sense that legal
skills are best taught by legal practitioners with relevant experience, so this
is another challenge that needs to be addressed,
both in setting new standards
for law academics involved in teaching in practice-oriented areas and ensuring
that sufficient suitably
qualified staff are available. It may be that
‘team-teaching’ approaches become necessary, where legal academics
experienced legal practitioners work together to deliver law courses
incorporating both theoretical and practical/skills-based elements.
Law schools would also need to satisfy legal regulators that curriculum and
assessments are sufficiently ‘practical’ to
meet the objectives
currently set for PLT courses. It may be that the resulting increased curriculum
demands in academic law studies
would require that some existing units be split,
and perhaps the minimum length of full-time academic law study to meet
admission requirements would need to be reconsidered. At present,
several Australian academic law courses can be studied over 3 years,
combined academic law/PLT course should be taught over 3.5
In re-designing the law
curriculum, other options could also be considered to ensure that
‘academic’ and ‘practical’
legal skills are taught in
the optimum manner. We are confident these challenges can be met, and we cite
the recent example of the
Succession Law
course taught at Curtin Law
School (discussed in the preceding part) in support of the proposition.
It should be noted that several Australian law schools already provide PLT
courses, and there are other schools which have previously
taught PLT but no
longer do so. At some law schools, agreements have been made with PLT providers
to deliver a co-ordinated academic
law/PLT course. At least one law school has
fully integrated its LLB and PLT courses in combination with its law clinic. If
else, this demonstrates the capacity within law schools to deliver
traditional PLT-style courses and skills training, as well as
flexibility for
collaboration with independent PLT providers, and indicates that a move towards
greater integration of academic law
study with practical legal skills training
is feasible.
C Future of Legal Workplace Experience: A Staggered
Approach to Admission?
In our previous article, the authors expressed reservations about the varied
approach to legal workplace experience requirements and
differences between
Australian jurisdictions
the favourable views expressed by practitioners about the value of workplace
experience, commented on by the NSW Chief Justice,
the Honourable Andrew
Nevertheless, we remain of
the view that the current PLT legal workplace experience requirement should be
abolished, to bring the
Australian approach into line with the long-standing
approach taken in New Zealand
However, we also think it would be worthwhile considering an alternative
‘stepped’ approach towards obtaining an unrestricted
certificate.
Perhaps inspiration can be drawn from the Australian approach to motor
vehicle driving licences and the well-known ‘L Plate/P
Plate’ model
– so that a newly admitted practitioner would be subject to close
supervision for a preliminary training
period (say, 6 months – the
‘L’ plate), on completion of which they could move up to a less
restricted supervised
work period (say, 18 months – the ‘P’
plate) in which they would be permitted to perform more tasks independently,
following which they would become eligible for an unrestricted practising
certificate.
Another alternative might be the requirement to provide evidence of
satisfactory performance through the completion of PLT competency
assessments in
the workplace during the existing two-year restricted practice period. This form
of assessment would allow students
to develop and gather evidence of their
skills in a way that is directly relevant to their work, and which aligns with
competency assessments in other professions, including medicine,
nursing, policing, and teaching. Under this possible regime, law
graduates might
be immediately eligible for admission to practice, but unable to obtain an
unrestricted practising certificate until
they have gathered sufficient evidence
to demonstrate the required competencies. This approach, combined with the
embedding of practical
skills into foundational legal training, could eliminate
the need for law graduates to incur the cost of a separate PLT course
altogether.
In considering changes of this nature, it might also be appropriate to
consider more rigorous testing and evaluation of ethics and
professional
standards as part of the transition to unrestricted practising status. Likewise,
there is scope to consider enhanced
continuing professional development
requirements for new practitioners as they transition towards unrestricted
practice rights. These
considerations all form part of the mix in a
reconsideration of how legal education can be improved to ensure new
practitioners are
better equipped for practice.
VI OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSION
Over recent months, there has been a marked acceleration in the movement for
change to the way in which law graduates are taught practical
skills, to prepare
them for legal practice. Scrutiny of the cost and effectiveness of existing PLT
courses has grown. Concerns have
increased about the adequacy of the current
Australian approach to legal education to ensure new entrants to the legal
are practice-ready.
Much of the recent scrutiny has been on PLT courses. In this article, we
argue that in designing future legal education reform, options
for greater
integration of academic law and PLT courses need to be considered. We suggest
that one of the potential solutions is
that more practical skills training and
assessment could be integrated with academic law studies and delivered as part
of a law student’s
LLB or JD studies. Change is needed, and a shift
towards making all legal education more practical could be one way to address
current concerns.
Dr James McMillan is a Lecturer
at Charles Darwin University and was previously the Practical Legal Training
Course Lead at Curtin
Law School. Rob Lilley is a Lecturer at Curtin Law School
and the Principal Lawyer of the John Curtin Law Clinic.
Rob Lilley and Christina
Do, ‘What Should an Entry-level Lawyer Look Like in a Post-COVID
World?’ (2022) 1
Western Australian Law Teachers’ Review
Jim McMillan and Rob Lilley, ‘After Law School: A Critical Evaluation of
Practical Legal Training in the Australian Context’
Australian Law Teachers’ Review
McMillan and Lilley (n 1)
Frank Langley,
‘Preparing for the Practice of the Law: Post-Graduate Pre-Admission
Training in Australia’
(1985) 3(2)
Journal of Professional Legal
Lilley and Do (n
) 24; Francina Cantatore, Tanya Atwill and
Rachael Field,
The Job Readiness of Law Graduates and Entry Level Solicitors
in Private Practice
(Final Report, 1 December 2022) 73–8.
Alan Hogan, 'The
Legal Workshop at the Australian National University Canberra, A.C.T.'
Journal of Professional Legal Education
Elizabeth Burnett,
'The South Australian Course in Legal Practice'
(1983) 1(1)
Professional Legal Education
Lilley and Do (n 1)
21; Kelli MacMillan, ‘The End of an Era: WA Farewells ATP’
Available online at
<https://heinonline.org/HOL/Index?index=journals/proleged&collection=journals>.
Christopher Roper, ‘Editorial’ (1983) 1(1)
Professional Legal Education
McMillan and
Lilley (n 1) 6.
Cantatore, Atwill and
Field (n 4).
Andrew Bell, ‘Present and Future Challenges to the Rule of Law and for the
Legal Profession’ (Opening of Law Term Dinner
Address, 6 February 2025)
<https://supremecourt.nsw.gov.au/documents/Publications/
Speeches/2025-speeches/bellcj/CJOLTD_20250206.pdf>.
Letter from Andrew Bell to the New South Wales Legal Profession, 14 April 2025
<https://lpab.nsw.gov.au/documents/rules/LPAB_PLT_letter_CJ_2025.pdf>.
‘The Legal Profession’s Experience of Practical Legal
Training’ (Report, 9 April 2025)
<https://lpab.nsw.gov.au/documents/rules/LPAB_Urbis_Experience_of_Practical_Legal_Training_Research_Report_Final.pdf>.
Bell (n 14)
Details of LACC membership can be found here:
<https://legalservicescouncil
org.au/about-us/law-admissions-consultative-committee.html>.
Council of Australian Law Deans (‘CALD’),
Australian Law School Standards
(Standards, 30 July 2020)
<https://cald.asn.au/the-australian-law-schools-standards/>.
Higher Education Standards Framework (Threshold Standards)
(Cth) pt B1
This is evident from the difference in the number of practising
solicitors between 2011 and 2022 and the available data on law school
For example, approximately 5,700
lawyers joined the profession between 2016 and 2018, but there were
approximately 16,000 law graduates
in that same period. Given the demographics
of the profession, it is unlikely that the difference is attributable to
attrition alone.
As to solicitor demographics, see Urbis,
2022 National
Profile of Solicitors
(Report, 26 April 2023) 7. As to graduate numbers, see
2018 Data Regarding Law School Graduate Numbers and Outcomes
(Report, 2018)
<https://cald.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/Updated-Factsheet-Law_Students_in_Australia-20-04-2019.pdf>.
Researching and Writing in
ed, 2010) 97.
LACC (n 29)
Cantatore, Atwill and Field (n 4).
Urbis (n 15).
See, eg, Linda Kam et al, ‘Get Real! A Case Study of
Authentic Learning Activities in Legal Education (2012) 19(2)
University Law Review
17; Toni Collins, ‘Authentic Assessment: The
Right Choice for Students Studying Law?’ (2022) 32(1)
Legal Education
Robin H Woellner, 'Developing and Presenting a Skills Program in
the LLB: A Discussion of Design and Operational Issues' (1998) 16(1)
of Professional Legal Education
As to scaffolding as a learning theory, see, generally, David
Wood, Jerome S Bruner and Gail Ross, ‘The Role of Tutoring in
Solving’ (1976) 17
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry
S Vygotsky,
Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological
(Harvard University Press, rev ed,
As to scaffolding in legal education,
see Kam et al (n 25) 19; Collins (n 25) 3, 13.
LACC, ‘Guiding Principles for Integrating Academic and PLT
Courses’ (Document, rev October 2017)
<https://legalservicescouncil
org.au/documents/Guiding-principles-for-tntegrating-academic-and-PLT-courses-revised-Oct-2017.pdf>.
The Priestley 11 requirements are formally referred to by LACC as
‘Prescribed academic areas of knowledge’, covering
Criminal Law and
Procedure, Torts, Contracts, Property, Equity, Company Law, Administrative Law,
Federal and State Constitutional
Law, Civil Dispute Resolution, Evidence, and
Ethics and Professional Responsibility
guidelines can be accessed from the Legal Services Council website, here:
<https://legalservicescouncil.org.au/documents/prescribed-academic-areas-of-knowledge.pdf>.
Accessible from the Legal Services Council website, here:
<https://legalservicescouncil
org.au/documents/PLT-competency-standards-for-entry-level-lawyers-Oct-2017.pdf>.
LACC (n 28)
McMillan and Lilley (n 1)
Bell (n 13)
Sir Andrew Tipping,
Review of the Professional Legal Studies
(Report, August 2013) 1–2,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (115 KB)
PDF format (526 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter