URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stilwell, Frankand; Grealis, Ann; Piper, Margaret (update) --- "Refugees Working: Afgans in Young, NSW" [2007] HRightsDef 10; (2007) 16(1) Human Rights Defender 27
Refugees Working: Afgans in Young, NSW
Economic impacts
What has worked to make this a success?
Long Term Implications
Refugees Working: Afgans in Young, NSW
Frank Stilwell and Anne Grealis
This article was originally printed in the HRD, Vol 12 issue 1 2003. It
is followed by an update written for this issue by Margaret
The NSW country town of Young used to be called Lambing Flat. There, on 13
November 1860, diggers on the goldfield drove about 500
Chinese miners away,
destroying their tents, Further assaults by vigilante groups followed,
culminating in a ‘roll-up’
on 30 June 1861 when a mob of thousands
violently attacked the remaining Chinese and their property. As a direct result
disturbances, the colonial government of NSW passed the 1861 Chinese
Immigration Act - a precursor to the infamous White Australia
Young is currently the focal point for a very different, and notably more
positive, experience with workers of Asian origin. Starting
in mid 2001, Afghan
refugees came to the town to work in the local meatworks. From an initial two
dozen, their numbers swelled to
nearly ninety by the end of that year. Some left
in April 2002 following the closure of the nightshift at the meatworks, and at
start of 2003 about 45 Afghan refugees remained. All are male, mostly aged
between 20 and 40, and typically holding Temporary Protection
Visas that give
them the right to live and work in the country for three years.
The Afghan refugees coming to Young are Hazara people, an ethnic minority
subject to discrimination in Afghanistan long before the
Taliban regime came to
power. They have fled appalling treatment, seeking refuge in a safe country and
the opportunity to work, hoping
in most cases to establish a case for permanent
settlement and family reunion.
Have the Afghan refugees been good for Young? Local opinions vary, but the
dominant view seems to be that their contribution as workers
has been valuable
and that no significant social problems have arisen. The mayor and all his
fellow councilors have been publicly
supportive of the presence of the Afghans,
and invited all local citizens to put their views in writing, compiling them
into a loose-leaf
book at the Council offices. Of the 119 responses, about half
were critical of the Afghan presence, half were supportive and four
undecided or seeking further information. The favourable views were typically
expressed at greater length and with greater sophistication
than the critical
Perhaps the most clearly positive aspect of the Afghan presence in Young is
economic, focussing primarily on their work for the largest
employer in the
area, Burrangong Meat Processors (BMP). BMP employs around 270 persons and
services both national and international
markets. It has one recurrent problem
though – securing an adequate workforce. Working in an abattoir is hard
physical work,
for modest remuneration. It is not the first choice of employment
for many people. Rates of labour turnover are quite high and absenteeism
problem throughout the industry. BMP has sought extra workers by getting the
Federal governments’ ‘Jobs Network’,
to advertise vacancies
nationwide. It was in response to those advertisements that the Afghan refugees
first started coming to Young.
Economic impacts
The economic impact of the Afghan refugees in Young arises, in the first
instance, from the income flows generated by their employment
at BMP. Wages are
paid at a little above the award rate. An estimate of the total yearly net
income, after tax, received by the Afghans
working at the abattoir is put at
is spent locally.
The Afghans in Young are renting flats and houses in the town.
Their housing conditions are simple, yet clean and tidy, containing
consumer durables including radios and televisions, as well as second-hand
furniture. Some have cars and a number have mobile
phones. They are spending on
inexpensive clothing and a variety of food and drink.
Not all the income generated by the Afghan workers re-circulates locally.
Recently arrived migrant groups, and refugees in particular,
usually try to
achieve relatively high saving rates. The Afghans in Young have evidently worked
hard with this intention. How much
of these savings have been repatriated to
families in Afghanistan or in refugee camps in Iran and Pakistan cannot readily
but it seems likely to be a lower proportion than would normally be
the case for refugees. Many of the Afghans in Young have no contact
families, not knowing where they are, or indeed even whether they are alive, as
a result of the terrible turmoil in their
facilities in Afghanistan are limited outside the capital of Kabul: transferring
money is not a simple
matter, often requiring the use of private intermediaries
of uncertain reliability. Of the estimated total net income of $2.25 million,
seems likely that between $1.3 and $1.6 million re-circulates in the form of
additional regional expenditures. To that must be
added the extra expenditures
resulting from the more buoyant profits generated by BMP as a result of the
Afghans’ presence,
and the way that additional incomes add to further
economic expansion: for every additional person employed in the local economy
another half a job is generated indirectly. On that basis, it seems likely that
the Afghan presence has produced a total additional
regional income of between
$2.4 and $2.7 million over the 18 month period.
Against these estimated economic benefits have to be set any
‘displacement’ effects. In other words, the estimated regional
impact would be lower to the extent that the presence of the extra Afghan
workers foreclosed other possible regional developments
or displaced other
employees. There is little evidence of any such negative effects in practice.
The wage rates paid are uniform
for all workers, so there has been no problem of
‘wage-cutting’. As for job displacement, it seems that, over the
term, no local employees who want to work regularly at the abattoir have
lost their jobs directly as a result of the Afghans being
employed there. Among
other means of addressing continuing labour shortages, BMP continues to scour
neighbouring regions for suitable
employees by sending its free bus to transport
workers to the abattoir.
There are also effects that operate more indirectly and in a more long-term
manner. The renowned strong work ethic of the Afghan workers
in Young is
pertinent in this respect, in terms of long term impacts on productivity. To
quote one of the contributors to the Mayor’s
book of comments:
“I’ve spoken to a number of the local staff at the abattoir who have
nothing but praise for the Afghani
men working amongst them. Their work ethic is
extremely high, thus setting a wonderful example to other workers.”
Undoubtedly,
the Afghans have proved to be good workers with low absenteeism
rates who are valued in helping reach production targets.
The effects on the reputation of the town are also important. Young has
received quite a lot of national publicity as a result of
its acceptance of the
Afghan refugees. The multi-ethnic character of the BMP workforce features in
publicity material by the Anti-Discrimination
Board of NSW. One of the other
contributors to the Mayor’s book of comments said, “[I] am in the
process of purchasing
property on the Central Coast. When told I was from Young,
the real estate agent said that the positive exposure of our acceptance
refugees was worth a million dollars of advertising.” Were the Afghans
able to stay on in Young they could also be expected
to contribute to a rather
more cosmopolitan town character, for example by opening restaurants and other
small businesses. This could
in turn help give Young an edge in attracting
professionals and others to the town.
What has worked to make this a success?
Often success comes down to human factors. This experiment of a large ethnic
group of traumatised men with limited English language
coming to work at the
abattoir is unlikely to have succeeded without their acceptance by fellow
workers and support from management.
In the latter respect what seems to have
been important was the commitment and support given to the Afghans by the Human
Manager employed by BMP until late 2002 in smoothing out work and
practical difficulties. Some viewed this as favouritism, and management
has since moved away from providing extra support, believing that this is the
fairest management practice for the workforce
overall. It remains to be seen if
this adversely impacts retention rates of the Afghan workers.
The mobilisation of social capital also is a significant factor. Social
scientists have stressed the importance of strong social networks
as the basis
for economic development. In the case of the Afghans in Young there is evidence
of a strengthening of that social capital,
as local community groups, the Shire
Council and local businesspeople have worked together to make the experiment
succeed. TAFE teachers,
volunteer tutors, local library staff, Amnesty
International organisers, the mayor and his staff and many others have come
in cooperative activities for this purpose. An Afghan ‘cultural
evening’ organised at the neighbourhood centre attracted
130 people.
Strong social bonds have already been created between the Afghans and some of
the locals in Young who visit them in their
development of social ties has evidently been an important element in building
effective social
The mayor of Young observed that one of the benefits of hosting the Afghan
was that it gave the Young residents, in particular children,
an opportunity to
have a richer social perspective outside of the region and a connection to world
events. He stressed that the support
of local schoolteachers was very important
in children making the most of this learning opportunity in multiculturalism.
Long Term Implications
What of regional dynamism in the longer term? For regions to survive and
prosper they require population renewal and growth. Achieving
problematic as, given the choice, the majority of immigrants settle in the
cities. Regional and rural life requires settlers
to be tough and resilient to
survive relative hardship and make a productive contribution to the local
economy. Who would be tougher
and better suited for the region (and nation) than
people who have proven their strength by surviving generations of oppression as
an ethnic minority in their own country? Who have escaped from their war-torn
taken the risk of sailing in
crowded boats on the high seas, endured refugee camps, found their own way to
Young and are now coping
with family separations, loss and traumatic memories
while supporting themselves and then attending English classes after work? The
Afghan refugees in Young have shown their qualities as family-minded, hard
working, law abiding and peaceful people who are trying
their best to fit in
with regional Australian cultural ways. The Young Shire Council has recognised
the future potential of the Afghan
refugees for the region and has been active
in trying to make their situation permanent.
If the Afghan refugees were permitted permanent residency, many would stay in
Young and contribute to its further economic development.
Of course, some would
move on to employment in other localities, including the major metropolitan
areas, but the positive experience
many have had in Young evidently has
established a strong preference for local settlement. Many of the Afghans in
Young are from
rural backgrounds, familiar with working in a small farm or
small-town business situation.
Many would bring their wives and children to settle in the region. That would
change the ratio of workers to dependents, of course.
It would help redress the
demographic imbalance characteristic of country towns elsewhere where there is a
drain of young people
seeking urban employment and social opportunities. It
would help maintain demand for locally provided services. It would tend to
reduce savings rates and increase local expenditures, thereby having yet more
positive regional multiplier effects. Many would buy
houses, develop their
skills, and start new local businesses.
The commitment of the Afghans in Young to learning English is indicative of
this general orientation: 51 of the Afghan refugees were
enrolled in English
language courses at the local TAFE in 2002. Some have been adding a
distinctively Australian flavour to their
language education. ‘No worries,
mate’ were the first words heard by the authors when visiting the Afghans
in their homes.
However, the Federal Minister for Immigration remains adamant that the
Afghans should not be permitted to stay beyond the expiry of
their temporary
protection visas. Replying to a letter written by the Mayor suggesting that the
Afghan refugees employed at the meatworks
in Young should be considered for
permanent residency, the Minister reaffirmed the policy that: ‘TPV holders
are granted interim
protection in Australia for three years. They are expected
to leave at the end of that time unless there is a need for ongoing protection.
It is not possible for Afghani TPV holders who are not refugees to remain in
Australia’. The Federal Government is currently
offering $2000 to any
refugees willing to leave Australia by June 2003. Evidently, the
Government’s view is that the national
interest would be better served by
the departure of the Afghans, notwithstanding their humanitarian claims and
productive economic
There is a common perception of refugees as a burden on society: the case of
the Afghans in Young suggests a different reality. Even
as short-term visitors,
in traumatic circumstances of being refugees from terrible tragedies affecting
their families and friends,
and facing uncertain futures, the Afghans in Young
have made valuable economic contributions. They have boosted the region’s
largest business and generated various indirect economic benefits. There are
also important lessons about how to create the social
conditions that make an
experiment like this productive and advantageous. A positive economic role,
clear acceptance by local political
leaders, a supportive role by human resource
management in the workplace and strong efforts by local community activists to
the visitors feel welcome are evidently the keys.
As one of the contributors to the Mayor’s book of comments noted,
‘Young has come a long way from the 19th Century abuse
of the Chinese in
the Gold Rushes.’ (Incidentally, it now has a ‘sister city’
relationship with a city in China
and a Chinese gardens in a bushland setting.)
The town of Young’s acceptance of the Afghan refugee signals the
possibility
of a ‘win-win’ situation, splicing the hopes and
aspirations of refugees who have suffered so much with real prospects
regional development in Australia.
Frank Stilwell is a Professor of Political Economy at the University of
Sydney and has written widely on Australian economic policies,
regional development and economic inequality. Ann Grealis is a senior social
Four years on, what of the Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) holders of Young
and of the many other regional centres that refugees gravitated
to in search of
work? As TPVs are only valid for three years, they would have been required to
undergo a new round of refugee status
determination. For most of those coming
from Afghanistan and Iraq, determination rates were very high. The few who were
unsuccessful
were offered other ways to regularise their status. Permanent
status opened the way for reunification with wives and children. Many
move to cities with better educational and other prospects but significant
numbers have remained in regional centres,
still supported by the communities
who helped them through their time of limbo.
While the era of refugee migration documented by Stilwell and Grealis has
largely drawn to a close, another has opened. Unlike the
first wave, the new
refugees have not come as asylum seekers but rather as part of the
government’s humanitarian program, which
identifies refugees offshore and
enables them to enter with permanent status and access to a wide range of
settlement services.
Many current entrants, especially those from Africa, have regional
backgrounds and/or have spent many years in camps. As such, big
cities can be
daunting so settlement options are sought in regional centres. Federal, state
and local government work in partnership
in the selection process, in
consultation with the receiving community. In some places such as Shepparton,
NSW, the community has
enthusiastically embraced the prospect of new arrivals.
In other places, like the widely reported situation in Tamworth, the community
has been divided about the prospect of refugee settlement. Many things doubtless
underlie the resistance, not least residual misconceptions
generated during the
Tampa episode and the perception that refugees simply come to Australia for a
better life and have nothing to
contribute. If only the dissenters in Tamworth
had read the Stilwell and Grealis article, we might have be spared the ugly
of distrust and discrimination that was played out in the media.
Margaret Piper currently works as a consultant and was Executive Director
of the Refugee Council of Australia between 1991 and 2005.
She is a member of
Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council, which advises the Minister for
Immigration, and a life member of the Refugee
Advice and Casework Service.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (35.8 KB)
PDF format (252 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter