URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LawTechHum/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Esko, Terhi --- "Disconnections in Legal Tech Design: An Infrastructural Problem?" [2025] LawTechHum 20; (2025) 7(2) Law, Technology and Humans 126
Disconnections in Legal Tech Design:
An Infrastructural Problem?
University of Helsinki, Finland
Digitalisation; court system; biographical approach;
legal infrastructures.
1. Introduction
Designing technologies for the public judiciary
can be difficult. While changing work practices in legal settings, technology
the regulatory environment, judicial structures, decision-making and
legal language.
At the same time,
law is often described as rigid and conservative – unlike fast-paced,
innovative technology. Research literature
on information system development
within the judiciary is rife with examples of unsuccessful projects, suggesting
a conflict of cultures
between law and
technology.
However, there is still
a shortage of research on the digitalisation of public judicial
so more empirical,
context-specific accounts on information systems developed for legal settings
are needed. As the technological
cannot be separated from the social, cultural
and organizational,
it is paramount
to scrutinise digitalisation and law in context. For this purpose, science and
technology studies (STS) provide an
interdisciplinary and empirically oriented
research approach.
In what follows, I present a case study of a large-scale digitalisation
project (AIPA Data Bank, 2007–2024) in the Finnish court
system. The AIPA
project is understood as providing historical context for building legal digital
infrastructure in the public
The project’s aim
was to rethink the work processes in general courts and to involve users in the
design process to ensure
legal expertise in the design. The AIPA system was also
seen as the cornerstone of the future digital courtroom and justice system,
connections to other authorities’ IT systems – mainly those of the
police and other pre-trial investigation authorities.
It can be understood as an
attempt to build interconnected IT systems that operate together through the
concept of the ‘data
pipe’ covering the whole life-cycle of a legal
document. I adopt a biographical approach and ask how design turned into
use in the AIPA project. Given the nature of legal work (autonomy of
the judges, discretion in decision-making) and the complex structures
judiciary, the development of information systems often
I argue that this is because
IT systems are understood as tools, even though they are part of the legal
infrastructure.
Theoretically, the article draws on science and technology studies (STS) and
infrastructure studies, and is inspired by the method
of biographical
In its attempt to account
for multiple temporalities of technology and balancing representations of users
and designers of technology,
the approach emphasises ‘technology in the
making’, the co-constitution of the phenomenon and context as well as
the same object during a longer period instead of ‘snapshot
I diverge from
approaches that see technology merely as a tool for streamlining digital public
administration and instead understand
it as forming, affecting and co-evolving
with the digital legal infrastructure. To this end, I employ methods developed
for following
large-scale design projects over
Thus, technology is seen as
an indeterminate and unstable artefact whose significance is negotiated,
interpreted and sometimes
Reflecting against the
literature of infrastructures and
breakdowns,
I suggest that the
disconnection
offers a way forward in terms of analysing legal
tech design as part of legal
infrastructure.
This adds to
STS-oriented debates on infrastructure, which have usually considered law as a
background factor.
The findings suggest that, even when aimed at broader interoperable
information systems, IT design easily collapses into tool development
various reasons, missing the opportunity to ‘think
infrastructurally’ about the materialities and infrastructures
Based on the findings, I
argue that disconnections in the design phase will later manifest as unintended
consequences in the use
of the designed technology. As court IT systems are
supposed to be interoperable with other public actors’ systems, they form
legal infrastructure. Treating IT projects only as tool development blurs their
role in the infrastructures of law. The article is
structured as follows. I
begin by discussing technological development and design in judicial systems. I
then present the concept
of disconnections, reflecting it against the literature
from infrastructure studies and IT systems design literature. After describing
the research design, methodology and findings, the conclusion discusses a way
forward for legal tech and digitalisation of judicial
2. Technology Development in Judicial Systems
In its efforts to digitalise judicial procedures, technology is often
understood as a tool to enhance the judicial system’s
activities. When
considered only as a tool, technology is deprived of its constitutive role in
human interactions.
have suggested that ‘ICT constructs a new set of technologically mediated
interdependences that regulate the way in
which organizational procedures and
processes are executed’.
Prior experience has shown that successful development of information systems
requires both technological maturity and a legal foundation.
However, it appears
that the law tends to yield ground as technologies
This adaptation can be
seen as a dynamic interplay where law and technology influence each other as
legal frameworks are likely to
evolve over time.
Legal scholars have often focused on legal sources and technology regulation
from a doctrinal perspective, and empirical studies have
remained in the fringes
of legal scholarship.
scholars interested in law and technology have started to pay attention to the
broader interconnections between law, technology
and societal change. Especially
in the context of automated decision-making and artificial intelligence (AI)
regulation, legal scholars
have called for more interdisciplinary and empirical
Recently, the critical
program of law and technology has focused on the co-constitutive relations
between the legal and the socio-technical,
as well as on methodologies that
combine studies of regulation and data
infrastructures.
Following this
critique, rather than perceiving a legal ‘gap’ to be filled with
‘new digital rights’, we
should be more interested in how law is
already embedded within existing
infrastructures
. Similarly, the
theoretical and methodological needs within STS have revealed a ‘blind
spot’: ‘the failure to give
consideration to such issues of how
research results may be as much affected by the study framing as by theoretical
point of departure’.
Moreover, design issues have increasingly been reconceptualised by incorporating
interdisciplinary perspectives into legal
scholarship.
Nevertheless, as a
context for technology use, the courts have largely remained under-studied
empirically.
From an organisational perspective, information technology is not a
stand-alone tool but rather an environment that requires predetermined
standardised processes. This has pushed courts and judiciaries to re-examine the
governance of their justice
At the European level,
the design of e-justice services is seen as a question of interoperability and
system adaptability, but so
far the design, development and implementation of IT
projects have suffered from fragmentation. Instead of embedding technologies
into the structure and organisation in which they were supposed to operate,
technology development projects have remained isolated
This suggests that, in
the legal context, IT is seen as a tool. I propose looking at the
co-constitutive relationship between law
and technology.
While many judiciaries have benefited from the ‘traditional’
digital technologies such as case-management systems and
the digital exchange of
data, the era of AI promises
At the same time,
technology challenges the institutional settings, making
‘value-sensitive’ design of legal algorithmic
and automated systems
a key issue. Scholars have moved towards searching for living interactions
between law and technology.
environments also discipline and force users (prosecutors, lawyers, clerks and
judges) to adapt and perform tasks according to
digital processes calling for
new skills. Prior research on IT development in the judiciary points to
mismatches in technology development
projects, as well as errors that go
unnoticed even in simple
inscriptions.
According to Reiling and
law and technology
interact through procedural standardisation (uniformity), workflow
re-engineering and user involvement. Implementing
technology is risky and
depends on the type of court, the type of matter and the willingness of those
involved; it is often affected
by over-ambitious
suggests three models
for handling the information processes in court IT solutions. First, relatively
simple, and short processes
can be replaced by digital processes in their
entirety. The second alternative is reforming existing processes, such as large
cases. These need more redesigning and probably require changes in the
legal basis. The third, and most successful, model is to design
a new process
altogether. The case I present here falls into this category.
All the models mentioned tend to be difficult to execute and require an
understanding of how the legal procedures and processes
Liberation from routines
comes with a price as it is not clear how well one can design the systems in
advance to accommodate both
the concerns of the law and those of technology.
This means that the weaknesses of any organisation become visible when
IT environments, a particularly pervasive difficulty in court
settings that exhibit a high level of
complexity.
To mitigate the risks associated with development, user engagement has become
paramount. The concept of a user is central to the case
as the project aimed to
involve end-users in the design
Research suggests that
technological design and users’ contributions to technology have often
gone unnoticed,
and there has
been a tendency to bypass the nuanced practices affecting the design and
deployment of technology.
Scholars have argued that it makes more sense to talk about user contributions
and series of configurational moments and movements
when shaping
technology.
The question is not
only who decides, translates and designs technological systems, but also
concerns when technology is used and
reiterated over time. Therefore, ‘the
user is not a transcendental being who dictates how artefacts are used, but a
construction, in the sense of embodying the longstanding lessons of
experience that may often transcend the life span of
individuals’.
In law, professionals often retain their power through materialities,
procedural practices and autonomy. Yet, scholars are concerned
a phenomenon in which formal rules are transformed into code, digital interfaces
and back-end operations that automate
and guide human
New IT systems cement
and endorse practices, which then have outcomes affecting legal personnel as
well as those who are subject
to the law. This challenges the role of one of the
most significant elements: the human actor. Legal decision-making traditionally
relies on the human decision-maker, and keeping the ‘human in the
loop’ is envisioned as a safeguard. In the judicial
system, this has meant
broad discretionary power for the judge to make
The digitalisation of
judicial work, in turn, calls for broad legal concepts to become articulated and
standardised – which,
as Contini and
argue, is the weak link
of technological development because human discretionary power and independence
are now curtailed and partly
moved into the hands of software developers.
3. IT Design as a Legal Infrastructural Problem
One way to conceptualise court digitalisation projects is to consider them as
creating infrastructure in a similar way to courthouse
buildings or cables. Such
framing could also explain why such systems seem to be perceived as neutral and
inconsequential in both
the literature and empirical
IT systems in court
organisations are typically viewed merely as tools, especially in the design
phase. However, these systems mediate
legal knowledge and practice shaping
judicial relations and
imaginaries.
Infrastructures
draw together both social and technical elements, and as a process, designing
large-scale IT system networks fits
into this category.
To enhance understanding of information system design and its constitutive
role in creating digital legal infrastructure, I apply
the concept of
disconnection
as an analytical lens to the case. This approach is
informed by ongoing scholarly debate about unintentional consequences and
infrastructure
in infrastructure studies, as well as
perspectives on sociotechnical systems provided by STS
Some conceptual
clarification is needed: a disconnection is something that makes certain design
choices invisible, and they later
materialise as unintended consequences (and
possibly breakdowns). Breakdowns, in turn, make infrastructure visible and can
material components breaking down, resources diminishing and so
The key difference is that
unintended consequences and breakdowns are an integral part of technology
whereas disconnections are
part of the design process. When designing an IT system as a tool, it hides the
infrastructural aspects
of technology use in the judiciary.
Infrastructure studies have discussed the maintenance and repair of
infrastructures, focusing on their spatiality, temporality, (in)visibility
materiality.
literature on design gaps exists on assumptions and user expectations but not so
much in the context of law.
Information or digital infrastructures, which consist of interconnected systems,
are thought of as open-ended, heterogeneous and
stretching across space and
time; they differ from information systems, which have distinct functionalities
and boundaries.
information systems contribute to the creation of infrastructure, although they
are not equally open and generative. They
are often part of a wider network, and
their interfaces enable interaction between organizations. In addition, it can
be argued that
they form a part of the legal infrastructure,
often missing in infrastructure studies and legal studies. Legal scholarship
often focuses on data infrastructures as objects
of regulation, whereas in
STS-related infrastructure studies, law is considered a background
infrastructurally, as Kingsbury notes, means understanding infrastructure as a
set of relations, processes and
imaginations.
Digital infrastructure research considers digital infrastructures as a
specific type of IT artefact,
but so far research has not focused much on IT’s role within legal
infrastructures. By extending the historical timeline of
observations, the
infrastructural aspects of IT development can be detected. For instance, earlier
documents the
developments of the Finnish case-management system in the 1990s; in our case
study, this is among those AIPA is set
to replace. Studying the AIPA system is
justified as it supersedes earlier systems once considered successful.
Consequently, it is
intertwined with the historical trajectory of court IT
infrastructure. Recently, law itself has been considered a form of
infrastructure
with the legal comprised of interconnected legal norms,
practices, and
institutions
perspective highlights law’s materiality and distributional aspects.
Therefore, the question is more about how legal norms
and practices move through
physical/digital infrastructures, forming a co-constitutive
relationship.
Previous research on technological development in the judiciary suggests
various types of shortcomings. For example, there appears
domain-specific legal knowledge that is difficult to ‘extract’
because it can be tacit from expert’s perspective.
Unsuccessful IT
projects also fail for strategic reasons: organisations lack the ability to
position themselves and plan IT in alignment
with their overall purpose and
In the public judiciary,
the organisational perspective is sometimes overshadowed by the strong focus on
the legal autonomy and discretion
of the judges, as well as efficiency
expectations, driven by managerial goals. Additionally, the literature has
focused on intended
unintended consequences
of technology use,
highlighting the need for a situated and processual approach, given the
difficulty in predicting technology adoption
organisations.
Regarding design,
unintended consequences can be something of which designers are unaware or that
they choose to ignore – that
is, they are consequences of organised rather
than independent action.
The initial mismatch between law and technology design, as suggested by
is that IT system
design should look to the future whereas the law usually works by judging past
events. Second, in large judiciary
IT projects, the context involves several
actors, leading to complexity at the political, organisational and collaborative
Many IT projects have introduced software developers as the true
determinants of procedural law as they encode and implement the
information
systems, although legal experts would have been involved in
This form of translation
of legal expertise into code, no matter how accurate the translation is, shifts
discretionary power away
from legal professionals. In addition, the question
remains: Do we consider legal experts to be disposable once we have extracted,
standardised and automated their
Research suggests
that this, to some extent, is the
Why look at disconnections in design in the legal context? I propose that
disconnections in design are related to interactions, which
are connected to
living legal practices.
Practices are manifestations of infrastructures, as technical systems enable
certain actions while hindering
This perspective
enhances understanding of courts as organisations – which, despite
operating under similar premises, are rather
dissimilar in terms of interaction.
Courts form a hierarchical and interconnected system. In the case at hand, the
existing and future
legal infrastructure is connected to organizational aspects
of each district court, adding to the complexity. However, court IT systems
their design offer an opportunity to view these design processes as efforts to
create a digital legal infrastructure. The biographical
approach, in turn,
allows us to study these processes empirically and in context.
4. Research Design
In spring 2023, the research group collected documentary data and held two
preliminary meetings with the key informant from the AIPA
project office. The
group also had access to the documentary material related to the decisions
behind the project, as well as the
design and implementation phases of AIPA.
These included the Enterprise Architecture description, the purchase documents
and feedback
material gathered on the usability, user experience and
effectiveness of the system. In the latter part of 2023, thematic interviews
= 13) were conducted with individuals engaged in various phases of the project,
including members of the advisory board, technology
consultancy and project
office management, as well as end-users of the AIPA system. Five interviewees
were decision-makers, while
the remaining eight end-users (judges, secretaries)
represented six different district courts. Some of the end-users had held a
role as contact persons or office trainers for the AIPA system, giving
them longer experience with the system and enabling them to
reflect extensively
on its development.
My analysis was inspired by the biographical approach, drawing from biography
of artefacts and practices
It pays attention to the
historical trajectory of the case and data collection from various sources
contributing to understanding
the AIPA project’s long-term evolution
dynamics. In this way, it offers an alternative to more quantitative and
pseudo-objective
approaches. The biographical approach has its roots in research
projects among STS scholars in Edinburgh and Helsinki in the mid-
The approach draws from a
pluralist theoretical foundation being compatible with various theories in STS,
such as social shaping
of technology, symbolic interactionism, situational
analysis, the social construction of technology and some aspects of
actor-network
theory (ANT).
My analysis followed the framework suggested by Hyysalo et
focusing on a multi-site
case study of six independent district courts. Although AIPA is designed for
general court use, it integrates
with various actors, both within and outside
the court system. The study draws on diverse data from multiple sources –
example, the project office and the Legal Register Centre, which is
responsible for archiving project documentation. The biographical
allowed me to follow the key locales, people and interstices to gain a more
detailed picture of the development and use
of AIPA. The analysis includes
tracing the choices, technology and actors involved in the AIPA project. In the
analysis, recursively
moving between the datasets and sampling strategies was
My first analytical step was constructing the general timeline of the AIPA
project to understand the project’s configurational
movements, phases and
context. The fact that AIPA’s development took over ten years means that
many technologies reached the
end of their lifespan during that time. This is
why the biographical approach is helpful: it goes beyond focusing solely on
and provides conceptual clarity on the complex ways in which the
aims, expectations and uses of technology change. Figure 1 illustrates
tiers, which loosely follow the levels of infrastructure suggested by
First, the political
decision-making and structural changes in the judicial system create the
societal context in which AIPA was
embedded. Second, the project office made
decisions on the technical development of the system, which required
collaboration beyond
the court system boundaries, involving interaction between
the technology developers, end-users and decision-makers. Third, the
implementation
of AIPA took place through several phases and pilots, which meant
cyclical interactions between the project office and the users
courts. Once the timeline was ready, it was presented to the key informant, who
then commented on its accuracy.
Figure 1. AIPA timeline, 2007–2024
In the case of AIPA, the legacy systems are quite well documented and
researched.
The most notable
systems that AIPA is set to replace are Tuomas, Sakari and RITU. By the time the
AIPA project started, several of
these legacy systems were working independently
and becoming technologically outdated, prompting the need to design new systems.
In addition, AIPA was envisioned to operate with the information systems
developed simultaneously by the Police (VITJA system) and
the Prison and
Probation Services of Finland (Roti system). However, the VITJA project was
terminated before it had been implemented.
The second part of the analysis was based on the
document data and interviews, which were analysed with the help of qualitative
focusing on
the project’s goals, conflicts expressed by the informants and
unintentional outcomes of the
In analysing the
interviews, I coded expressions that highlighted gaps in knowledge and
shortcomings in the technological choices.
I then identified the following
disconnections: (1) those concerning technological knowledge and legal
knowledge; (2) those concerning
the technological shortcomings between the
legacy systems and the new system; and (3) those involving unintended
consequences, which
materialised in work practices when AIPA was piloted and
implemented.
I used the document data (procurement documents, indicators monitoring the
project’s progress, usability surveys, evaluation
report, etc.) as
representations of the formal progress of AIPA. In the following sections, I
present the context and case of the
AIPA project before discussing the
disconnections in more detail.
5. Context: The AIPA Project
The AIPA project (2012–2024) is the most recent effort to digitalise
the Finnish general courts, which operate in a network
with several other
actors, such as the police and probation services. Initially, the project was
established to create an information
system entity and to improve and harmonise
case and document-management processes nationwide, enabling cross-administrative
cooperation with the systems of other actors in the
The reform aimed to
upgrade the outdated technology, which was mostly developed for the purposes of
each court level without much
consideration for electronic data transfer between
At the same time, the
processing times of cases were considered too long, system errors caused
problems in enforcement of judicial
decisions, and efficiency was sought, guided
by the ideal of a paperless court.
Currently, the AIPA system provides a joint
system for processing of summary fines, secret coercive measures, petitions
(e.g. divorce,
child custody) and large-scale litigation. It includes a data
bank, a digital archive system and a data pool for reporting statistics
to the general courts and prosecutor’s office. The information system aims
to support judges in their work improving
the quality and transmission of legal
information. Additionally, by minimising (mostly secretarial) routine work, the
duration of
court proceedings should be reduced. All the changes were envisioned
to bring more flexibility to work
Both the Ministry of Justice and the AIPA project office stressed that
engaging the users in the design would help to avoid earlier
experiences in IT development.
AIPA was envisioned to play a significant role in the structural reorganisation
of the Finnish courts system, where creating administratively
larger units would
allow for more efficient workload and resource
aim shows an effort to create a techno-legal infrastructure based on the use of
technological solutions.
6. Disconnections Concerning Knowledge
The first disconnection was about knowledge gaps between the tech developers
and legal experts. The project office played a significant
role in prioritising
the project’s goals and making crucial decisions about design. For
example, the information system’s
usability was a primary focus, aligning
with the objectives of the Ministry of Justice to involve end-users in the
design process.
This decision reflects prior experiences of unsuccessful and
overly technology-driven IT projects. Early on, a decision was made
that people
working in the judicial system would be the product owners, as this would ensure
the domain-specific knowledge needed
to build an IT system. Therefore, many
participants had a legal background rather than technological expertise.
Consequently, the
project office brought together actors with diverse roles in
the judicial system to incorporate the voice of end-users in the design
system’s architecture.
Initially, several working groups planned the functionalities and enterprise
architecture for the AIPA system. These working groups
communications, human resource issues and stakeholder collaboration. To support
the change-management efforts, an agency
manager network of 250 people was
established to strengthen the implementation of the AIPA system. It consisted of
two people from
each court level trained to become AIPA contact persons and
‘AIPA trainers’ in district courts and courts of appeal.
usability expert worked as a leader of the user interface working group to
ensure the viewpoints of the end-users were
considered.
From the start, the project office was described as having a good atmosphere
and enthusiasm. However, the interviewees mentioned a
knowledge gap between the
legal experts and technology developers:
In a way, these two worlds, our knowledge of what the law is, and the
consultants’ knowledge of how things can be done technically,
did not meet
much at that point. (H6 Judge)
In addition, the project was described as unrealistic in its initial
goal-setting. The target state descriptions included trivial
and self-evident
things alongside more ‘sci-fi’ views about what digitalisation is
and what can be automated, without
a concrete understanding of what would be
needed to achieve those visions. A member of the advisory board pointed out that
of thinking ‘legally’ diverged significantly from a
developer mindset:
I somehow got the feeling that there was quite a lot of crosstalk, or
side-talk. The suppliers and the architects were talking about
this AIPA and
meant something by it. And then again, this “courtroom crowd” was
talking about AIPA, and meant something
completely different. Those words or
phrases did not match. (H5 Advisory board).
The same informant described how the seemingly straightforward legal process
unexpectedly has special circumstances and details, affecting
the working
groups’ meetings:
I have the impression that when there was a workshop aiming to describe the
legal process, the lawyers came in and talked for three
hours about the
deviation of a deviation. And then they went away, and the actual process was
not described. It kind of happened
that the workshops did not produce it [the
envisioned outcome]. Or it would have taken an awful lot of workshops to go
through the
deviations. This is probably also the lawyer’s mindset.
This quote crystallises how legal knowledge is amalgamated with knowledge on
legal processes and exceptions within them. It also highlights
standardisation of legal processes is challenging. Other informants mentioned
that sometimes knowledge was so obvious to
the legal experts that they failed to
mention it, and technical experts did not know how to ask about it.
The situation was further complicated by the fact that the IT providers
lacked knowledge, experience or understanding of the legal
context. However, as
one informant stated, the AIPA project had been planned for six years before the
procurement, and the subscriber
knew what they wanted. Moreover, as there are
not many IT companies specialised in law in Finland, the tech provider lacked
understanding
that the system subscriber thought was important. Sharing tacit
knowledge would have taken more time than the project start allowed,
understanding how law ‘works’ would have made the tech developers
more aware of the context in which the technology
was to be used. From the
project’s perspective, increasing the number of workshops would also have
meant more money spent.
Despite the initial shortcomings, the first versions of
the AIPA system were implemented with good results.
When characterizing their involvement with the project, the informants
described it as learning a new language or culture. For example,
product owners
had not fully realised their responsibility for making technological decisions:
What was surprising was that my role was not, as I had perhaps imagined or
hoped, that I would be able to maintain my role as a judge.
It was a surprise to
me, and I think to everyone else who came into the role of product owners, how
far we had to go ourselves to
think about what exactly those [IT] functions are
in practice, not just the desired outcome. (H6 Judge)
The quote implies that the legal experts had envisioned their role to be
simpler and that the technological domain was perceived as
difficult. Thus, gaps
in knowledge and dialogue on both technology suppliers’ and legal
experts’ side hindered the planning
and design phase.
7. Disconnections Concerning Technology: The Weight of the Legacy Systems
The second disconnection happened when the informants compared the new AIPA
system with the old ones. This type of comparison is understandable
because the
legacy systems were in use while the AIPA system was developed. Although it was
clear that the new system would replace
the old ones and require new practices
within organisations, informants still referred to the current systems when
describing their
expectations of the new system:
I personally had thought that AIPA should at least be able to do what our
Tuomas-Sakari-Notes system and RITU can do. This is based
on the fact that there
must have been requirement specifications for those systems as well, and they
have been relatively easy to
use as a basis. I have fundamentally thought that
the level our system currently provides is sufficient [for AIPA as well]. (H8
The expectation that old specifications would be used when designing the new
system remained in the minds of the users, although the
starting point of the
AIPA project was to design a completely new IT system. The disconnection was
both practical and material: whatever
was imagined – a new IT system
– was connected to the practical side of work in the district courts. The
weight of the
legacy systems was not the same for everyone, though. Depending on
the organisation, some systems that were in use in district courts
were not in
use elsewhere. There was, for example, some speculation that the prosecutors
might object to using AIPA because they
did not have the RITU system in use, so
they had not experienced the problems related to its use. The difference between
systems and AIPA was also explained by the differences in the logic of
the old systems. Now all work was supposed to move
contrast to the old systems, which were perceived to operate
the context of judges’ work – for instance, in courtroom
Comparing the new system with the old ones is a concrete example of how the
existing systems are integral to the material working
environment, making the
legal practice visible. The disconnection was crucial because, in the AIPA
documentation and goals, it was
envisioned to be part of the district court work
practice reform, not solely a new IT system design. Thus, the disconnection
illustrates
how, to some informants, AIPA brought new problems compared with the
existing systems:
So, all those specific functions, for example, that currently go directly
through RITU, will need to be sent to the prosecutor using
some workaround. They
don't go directly from AIPA. One example is that if a respondent or any party in
a case expresses dissatisfaction,
we used to record this dissatisfaction in
RITU, and it was approved there. At the same time, there was an option to send a
notification
to the prosecutor that a dissatisfaction notice had been received.
Now, that option is not available. So, we need to come up with
a clever way to
ensure that this information also reaches the prosecutor. (H9 secretary)
Working around the technological solutions takes time, which was already
perceived as a scarce resource. The disconnections caused
frustration and led to
unintended consequences, which I will describe next.
8. Materialised Disconnections
The third disconnection happened because, over time, the project office was
perceived as losing touch with practical work in the courts.
Delays are common
in large-scale projects,
from the viewpoint of end-users the disconnection meant unintended consequences
as they felt technical engineering knowledge
had begun to override practical
legal needs:
It was good at the beginning when they started the AIPA project, that they
took these product owners out of the field. The original
idea was to get
practical insight [to the project], but now the problem is perhaps that when
AIPA project has been running for ten
years, these people who originally
transitioned from the field to the project no longer understand what the
practical need is. That
substantive expertise inevitably declines when you are
only there on the technical side. (H2 Judge)
As mentioned above, end-users equated the project office with ‘the
technical side’, highlighting a disconnect between
the practice of law and
technical development. From an infrastructural perspective, legal practices
essential for the public judiciary’s
function have become detached from
the design. This perceived disconnection was particularly problematic due to
delays in implementing
the final parts of AIPA, the criminal cases. Criminal
cases can be complex and the current version of Criminal Case AIPA was perceived
as insufficient and disconnected from the daily work of judges:
The incompleteness of the criminal case AIPA is somewhat shocking to me. When
I think about the document element and the solutions
that have been implemented.
How our document management is handled, it is inadequate and weak. It seems to
me that the system should
have been developed more in line with the law
user’s needs and their session work, rather than focusing on the system
requirements,
data protection, data security and system development. That has
undoubtedly been the biggest challenge of the AIPA journey for me
Even though judges have been involved in defining and creating it, the system is
such a vast entity that perhaps the end
user's genuine, real way of working is
not sufficiently visible. (H10 Judge)
Legal experts, who were supposed to bring the ‘field’s
knowledge’ to the design process, had become disconnected
practice as they had been working for the project organisation. The discomfort
related to the implementation of the last
part of AIPA presents a
configurational moment in the making, as the pilots were only starting at the
time of the interviews. Despite
the users’ critical tones towards the
Criminal Case AIPA, they thought that other case types, such as summary fines,
measures and petitionary matters, worked well. These processes may be
easier to standardise than large criminal cases for several
reasons, such as the
low number of documents (forms, evidence) needed and the reduced level of
discretion involved.
There was a particularly critical disconnection between the AIPA system
development and the work practices of judges: the system did
not work well in
courtroom sessions, which were understood as the core of the judges’ legal
expertise. Next, to exemplify the
materialisation of these disconnections as
unintended consequences, I will zoom in on the session work of the judges.
8.1 Courtroom Interaction: A Critical Environment for Using Technology
In a court session, situations can change swiftly, and there is no time to
pause, for example, if the prosecutor changes the charge
or when a party speaks
very quickly, as explained by the informants. Many judges described that, in
such cases, it is easier to use
pen and paper to take notes. The disconnection
between the project office and the district courts was perceived as a
disconnection
of practice and current knowledge of the ‘field’, but
in the interactions during courtroom sessions as
technological dysfunction hindering the practice of judging.
The following quote highlights how opening large documents and cases in AIPA
can delay the session:
I tested it in one larger case. It took 15 minutes to open the documents in
AIPA. That kind of delay cannot happen when the session
starts. So, we save
everything on the desktop. In practice, we don’t use AIPA in session
because of its slowness. If you start
to open a document which you need, that
element is difficult to use. (H2 Judge)
This quote is at odds with the narratives of fast-paced technology. It
reveals the swift, but hidden, workings of law as practice:
while law may be
considered slow and technology
we might not have looked
deeply enough into the practices. Many informants found AIPA still too
unreliable and slow to use in a fast-paced
courtroom session. This can be
interpreted as a moment in which living legal
collides with the
(immature) technological solution. The quote also describes why AIPA users
resort to alternative work practices
when they want the court session to proceed
swiftly. In fact, many described how they organised the documents with the help
network drive to create a working copy of the case. The slowness of
document management in AIPA was perceived as a real challenge:
Yes, in practice, quite a big challenge or disappointment is how to work with
the system of judging. It is a lot of sitting in that
courtroom, and the
document element functionalities for that work are poor. The documents open very
slowly, and you can't make notes
in them, even with a PDF editor in the
courtroom, which would be very important for the judge to be able to get the
evidence out
and then save his own notes. So, in a way, it is perhaps the kind
of thing where I would have hoped that it would work better in
the judging
process. (H10 Judge)
Both quotes highlight the particularity of courtroom work and the practice of
being present for the people in the courtroom. Information
systems should not
interfere with interactions between people in the courtroom. If that happens, it
creates a crucial breakdown between
humans produced by technology. When
technology does not work well, people tend to create ‘shortcuts’ or
alternative ways
of circumventing technology. Using or not using AIPA in the
courtroom manifests a disconnection referred to earlier: the initial
AIPA system was for it to form a part of the digital courtroom. However, as
explained by the informants, the work in a
courtroom session is detached from
the AIPA and only after the session is it used ‘outside’ of the
9. After AIPA
In 2024, the National Audit Office of Finland evaluated the three IT
development projects: AIPA, VITJA and Roti. The evaluation was
primarily as all the projects had significantly exceeded their budgets and
schedules, and the VITJA project had been terminated
before the IT system could
be implemented. I reflect on some of the evaluation report’s outcomes
against the case study. First,
the evaluation highlights several similar issues
concerning the AIPA project that I have identified in this case study, such as
unrealistic and unclear expectations at the project’s outset and the
shortcomings (or disconnections) in user involvement as
the project experienced
delays. However, the evaluation report suggests that the problem was a lack of
IT expertise within the project.
This is to an extent contradictory to the
interviews, which depicted a situation where the IT providers lacked sufficient
understanding
of the legal context.
Second, the evaluation report lists critical points for IT
For example, the
report states that the end-users must be involved in the project through
techniques of change management and by
correctly timed user training, which it
admits are problematic issues in the three evaluated projects. The report also
advises against
giving overly optimistic views of the system to the end-users.
In the AIPA case study, the informants had expected the new system
to perform at
least as well as the old ones. Comparing the legacy systems to the new one was a
practical issue in a situation where
the new system was not working and remained
unfinished.
Third, the report stated that the three IT projects had exclusionary effects
when it came to other IT projects, meaning that the evaluated
projects had
blocked other IT initiatives. Overall, the outlook of the evaluation report is
realistic in acknowledging that the interoperability
of the three systems was
not achieved, meaning that information will not move freely between the systems
any time soon.
10. Conclusion
I have examined a digitalisation project from the perspective of
disconnections. Inspired by the biographical approach and the vocabulary
provided by infrastructure studies in STS, I argue that disconnections exemplify
and manifest the problems encountered in legal tech
design and are connected to
what ultimately will construe the legal (digital)
infrastructure.
existing literature and the analysis, I have identified several types of
disconnections as well as their interconnectedness.
From the perspective of the
biographical approach, these types of disconnections may provide insight into
the configurational moments
and movements identified by prior literature, which
has emphasised the coming together of diverse user
communities.
As demonstrated
through several disconnections, the realities of district courts and legal
practices became invisible, including
judges’ and legal secretaries’
everyday work. These disconnections, however, contribute to current and upcoming
practices affecting the way law is enacted. Whereas breakdowns make
technological infrastructure
disconnections do the
same in the design contexts, first by hiding the traces of design and then by
manifesting them as unintended
consequences and breakdowns in the actual legal
work. These will mostly be addressed as governance issues within public
administration.
The disconnections in this study relate to project organisation and knowledge
acquisition, the technological comparisons between the
existing and the new IT
systems and the manifestation of these disconnections in practical legal
settings, particularly courtroom
sessions. While the AIPA system was envisioned
as an infrastructure, in practice the project was perceived as tool development,
the new system being compared with previous and existing systems and
practices in courtrooms. However, in the legal context, IT is
only one element
intertwined with legal practices, influenced by various factors and situations.
The case provides perspectives on
the relationship between law and technology,
such as how to realign the two existing infrastructures: the legal
infrastructure and
the technological infrastructure. In this realignment, the
relationship between legal knowledge and technical knowledge in IT design
complex and co-constitutive,
while legal knowledge is often situated and tacit. A gap between tech
suppliers’ and legal professionals’ understanding
other’s domains influences the design of the system. However, in the case
of AIPA, the knowledge and use of the existing
IT systems made it difficult to
imagine a completely new system. I suggest that because, in practice, the
projects are reduced to
tool development instead of creating techno-legal
infrastructure, legal knowledge and user experience fade into the background
the initial design phase.
Regarding users, the study raises several questions. The case demonstrated
that, over time, professionals in the field perceived the
project office as too
technology oriented. This highlights the challenge of accurately identifying the
‘end-user’ while
respecting the diversity and independence of work
practices, without separating expertise from actual field practices during
processes. One possibility is to promote knowledge exchange earlier in
the procurement phase and facilitate bridging the domains
of law and information
technology. Another issue concerns the ideals of expertise; as the case shows,
the disconnection from the
users still occurred when legal experts working for
the project office lost touch with legal practice.
For further studies, I suggest examining legal professionals and the domain
of law from the perspective of expertise needed to carry
out massive projects
engaging the ‘end-users’. This perspective opens the difficult, yet
previously unaddressed issue
of who the IT systems are created for. I fear that
by focusing solely on technical design from the perspective of tech developers
and civil servants’ collaboration, the citizens are excluded, even though
they are, in a broad sense, the end-users of these
systems. Given that these
systems, as stated in AIPA goals, are supposed to improve the public judiciary
and its services, the exclusion
of the citizen perspective is troubling.
Neglecting the public aspect of legal work is magnified when one adopts an
infrastructural
To summarise, I argue that because IT systems are understood primarily
through their instrumental value as tools, legal scholarship
has failed to
acknowledge them as significant components of legal infrastructure. For the
infrastructure debate that is now emerging
within legal
scholarship,
the insights from
science and technology studies (STS) are valuable. The fact that the AIPA system
operates within a network of other
public authorities, and was supposed to be
compatible with the IT system of the police, suggests that an infrastructural
is relevant in the context of law use and the general court system.
Additionally, as scholars have already pointed
we should be interested in
the methodologies and theorisations regarding research of legal contexts as
sites for work organization
and technology design, which have a profound impact
on law and citizens. While the present case study may not qualify as a
biographical study, it is a step towards it. In the future, more
ethnographically oriented biographical studies are needed to experiment
concept of disconnection in diverse contexts.
The research received funding from the Research Council of Finland, funding
number 341434.
Bibliography
Allsop, James. “Technology and the Future
of the Courts.”
University of Queensland Law Journal
(2019): 1–14.
https://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/UQLawJl/2019/1.html
Arvidsson, Matilda and Gregor Noll. “Decision Making in Asylum Law and
Machine Learning.”
Nordic Journal of International Law
(2023): 56–92.
https://doi.org/10.1163/15718107-bja10057
Barry, Andrew. “The Material Politics of Infrastructure.” In
TechnoScienceSociety: Technological Reconfigurations of Science and
, edited by Savine Maasen, Sascha Dickel and Christoph Schneider.
Dordrecht: Springer, 2020.
Bennani-Taylor, Sophie. “Infrastructuring AI: The Stabilization of
Artificial Intelligence in and Beyond National AI
Strategies.”
First Monday
29, no 2 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v29i2.13568
Bowker, Gerry and Susan Leigh Star.
Sorting Things Out:
Classification and Its Consequences
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
Bowker, Gerry, Karen Baker, Florence Millerand and David Ribes. “Toward
Information Infrastructure Studies: Ways of Knowing
in a Networked
Environment.” In
International Handbook of Internet Research,
edited by Jeremy Hunsinger, Lisbeth Klastrup and Matthew Allen,
97–117. Dordrecht: Springer.
Byrne, William Hamilton, Thomas Gammeltoft-Hansen and Nora Stappert.
“Legal Infrastructures: Towards a Conceptual Framework.”
Law Journal
25 (2024): 1229–1246.
https://doi.org/10.1017/glj.2024.78
Byrne, William Hamilton, Thomas Gammeltoft-Hansen and Nora Stappert.
“Editors’ Introduction to Special Issue on Legal
Infrastructures.”
German Law Journal
25 (2024): 1221–1228.
https://doi.org/10.1017/glj.2024.75
Contini, Francesco. “Artificial Intelligence and the Transformation of
Humans, Law and Technology Interactions in Judicial Proceedings.”
Technology and Humans
2, no 1, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.5204/lthj.v2i1.1478
Contini, Francesco and Antonio Cordella. “Law and Technology in Civil
Judicial Procedures.” In
The Oxford Handbook of Law, Regulation and
, edited by Roger Brownsword, Eloise Scotford and Karen Yeung,
246–268. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Contini, Francesco and Giovan Lanzara. “Introduction: The Challenge of
Interoperability and Complexity in European Civil Proceedings.”
Circulation of Agency in E-justice. Interoperability and Infrastructures for
European Transborder Judicial Proceedings
, edited by Francesco Contini and
Giovan Lanzara, xiii–xxi. Dordrecht: Springer, 2014.
Contini, Francesco and Giovan Lanzara. “The Elusive Mediation Between
Law and Technology: Undetectable Errors in ICT-based Judicial
Proceedings.” In
Tools of Meaning: Representation, Objects, and Agency
in the Technologies of Law and Religion
, edited by Patricia Branco,
Nadirsyah Hosen, Massimo Leone and Richard Mohr, 39–66. Ariccia: Aracne
editrice, 2017.
Contini, Francesco and Dory Reiling. “Double Normalization: When
Procedural Law is Made Digital.”
Oñati Socio-legal Series
no 3 (2022): 654–688.
https://opo.iisj.net/index.php/osls/article/download/1362/1617/8968
Di Natale, Lisa Julia and Antonio Cordella. “Digitising the Judicial
Sector: A Case Study of the Dutch KEI Programme.”
International
Conference on Electronic Participation,
139–153. Cham: Springer,
Edwards, Paul N., Stephen J. Jackson, Gerry C. Bowker and Cory P. Knobel.
“Understanding Infrastructure: Dynamics, Tensions,
and Design.” In
Report of a Workshop on History & Theory of Infrastructure: Lessons for
New Scientific Cyberinfrastructures
Edwards, Paul N. “Infrastructure and Modernity: Force, Time, and Social
Organization in the History of Sociotechnical Systems.”
and Technology
, edited by Thomas J. Misa, Philip Brey and Andrew Feenberg,
185–225. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Eriksen, Thomas Hylland. “Afterword: Some Unintentional Consequences of
Infrastructure.” In
Infrastructural Being: Rethinking Dwelling in
a Naturecultural World
, edited by Jarno Valkonen, Veera Kinnunen, Heikki
Huilaja and Teemu Loikkanen, 199–208. Cham: Springer, 2022.
Fabri, Marco. “E-justice in Finland and in Italy: Enabling Versus
Constraining Models.” In
ICT and Innovation in the Public Sector:
European Studies in the Making of E-Government,
edited by Francesco
Contini and Giovan Lanzara. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Fenwick, Mark and Erik P.M. Vermeulen. “The Lawyer of the Future as
‘Transaction Engineer’: Digital Technologies
and the Disruption of
the Legal Profession.” In
Legal Tech, Smart Contracts and Blockchain:
Perspectives in Law, Business and Innovation
, edited by Marcelo Corrales,
Mark Fenwick and Helena Haapio, 253–272. Singapore: Springer, 2019.
Fisher, Angelina and Thomas Streinz. “Confronting Data
Inequality.”
Columbia Journal of Transnational Law
60, no 3 (2022):
https://www.jtl.columbia.edu/volume-60/confronting-data-inequality-xyrkf
Glaser, Vern, Neil Pollock and Luciana D’Adderio. “The Biography
of an Algorithm: Performing Algorithmic Technologies
in Organizations.”
Organization Theory
2 (2021): 1–27.
https://doi.org/10.1177/26317877211004609
Grint, Keith and Steve Woolgar.
The Machine at Work: Technology, Work and
Organization
. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Harwood, Tracy G. and Tony Garry. “An Overview of Content
The Marketing Review
3, no 4 (2003): 479–498.
https://doi.org/10.1362/146934703771910080
Heikkonen, Sofia. “Transparency Materialised: How Registers Can
Regulate Access to Documents?”
European Law Open
1 (2024): 111–131.
https://doi.org/10.1017/elo.2024.7
Henfrídsson, Ola and Bendik Bygstad. “The Generative Mechanisms
of Digital Infrastructure Evolution.”
MIS Quarterly
(2013): 907–931.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/43826006
Hyysalo, Sampsa and Jouni K. Juntunen. ”Series of Configurational
Movements: User Activities in Technology Generalization”.
Technological
Forecasting & Social Change
200, 123158 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.123158
Hyysalo, Sampsa, Neil Pollock and Robin Williams. (2019). “Method
Matters in the Social Study of Technology: Investigating the
Biographies of
Artifacts and Practices.”
Science & Technology Studies
(2019): 2–25.
https://doi.org/10.23987/sts.65532
Ikuesan, Adeola. “Digitalising Justice: Goals, Metrics and
Unintentional Outcomes in Case AIPA: An Empirical Analysis of Finland’s
Digitalisation Project in the Judiciary.” MA thesis, Aalto
University, 2024.
Jackson, Steven J. “Rethinking Repair.” In
Media Technologies.
Essays on Communication, Materiality and Society
edited by Tarleton
Gillespie, Pablo J. Boczkowski and Kirsten A. Foot, 221–239. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Jackson, Steven J., Paul N. Edwards, Gerry C. Bowker and Cory P. Knobel.
“Understanding Infrastructure: History, Heuristics
and Cyberinfrastructure
First Monday
, 12, no 6 (2007).
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue12_6/jackson/index.html
Jalas, Mikko, Jenny Rinkinen and Antti Silvast. “The Rhythms of
Infrastructure.”
Anthropology Today
32, no 4 (2016): 17–20.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8322.12267
Jarrahi, Mohammad Hossein, Steve Sawyer and Ingrid Erickson. “Digital
Assemblages, Information Infrastructures, and Mobile Knowledge
Journal of Information Technology
no 3 (2022): 230–249.
https://doi.org/10.1177/02683962211050943
Kallinikos, Jannis. “The Regulative Regime of Technology.” In
ICT and Innovation in the Public Sector. European Studies in the Making of
E-Government
, edited by Francesco Contini and Giovan Lanzara, 66–87.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Kingsbury, Benedict. “Infrastructure and InfraReg: On Rousing the
International Law ‘Wizards of Is’.”
Cambridge International
Law Journal
no 2 (2019): 171–186.
https://doi.org/10.4337/cilj.2019.02.01
Koch, Stefan and Edward Bernroider. “Aligning ICT and Legal Frameworks
in Austria’s e-bureaucracy: From Mainframe to the
Internet.” In
ICT and Innovation in the Public Sector. European Studies in the Making of
E-Government
, edited by Franesco Contini and Giovan Lanzara, 147–173.
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Koivisto, Ida, Riikka Koulu and Stefan Larsson. “User Accounts: How
Technological Concepts Permeate Public Law Through the EU’s
Maastricht Journal of European and Comparative Law
31, no 3 (2024):
https://doi.org/10.1177/1023263X241248469
Koivisto, Ida and Riikka Koulu. “Miten hyvä hallinto
digitalisoidaan? Haaste oikeustieteelliselle tutkimukselle.”
6 (2020): 798–821.
https://www.edilex.fi/lakimies/21645.pdf
Kontiainen, Laura, Riikka Koulu and Beata Mäihäniemi.
”Oikeuden digitalisaatio ja juristityön arkipäivä.”
2 (2021): 173–199.
https://journal.fi/lakimies/article/view/90972
Koulu, Riikka. “Crafting Digital Transparency: Implementing Legal
Values into Algorithmic Design.”
Critical Analysis of Law
https://doi.org/10.33137/cal.v8i1.36281
Koulu, Riikka. “In Search of Living Law: How Should We Design for
(Digital) Legal Interaction?”
Digital Society
(2024): 31.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s44206-024-00117-y
Koulu, Riikka. “Proceduralizing Control and Discretion: Human Oversight
in Artificial Intelligence Policy.”
Maastricht Journal of European and
Comparative Law 27
, no 6 (2020): 720–735.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1023263X20978649
Koulu, Riikka, Beata Mäihäniemi, Vesa Kyyrönen, Jenni
Hakkarainen and Kalle Markkanen. ”Algoritmi
päätöksentekijänä?
hyödyntämisen mahdollisuudet ja haasteet kansallisessa
sääntely-ympäristössä.”
Valtioneuvoston
selvitys- ja tutkimustoiminnan julkaisusarja
http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-287-764-2
Koulu, Riikka and Jenni Hakkarainen.
Law and Digitalisation: Rethinking
Legal Services
. Helsinki: Print Veiters, 2018
Lanzara, Giovan. “The Circulation of Agency in Judicial Proceedings:
Designing for Interoperability and Complexity.” In
The Circulation of
Agency in E-Justice
, edited by Francesco Contini and Giovan Lanzara,
3–32. Cham: Springer, 2014.
Monteiro, Eric, Panos Constantinides, Susan Scott, Maha Shaikh and Andrew
Burton-Jones. “Qualitative Research Methods in Information
Systems: A Call
for Phenomenon-Focused Problematization.”
MIS Quarterly: Management
Information Systems
46, no 4 (2022): iii–xix.
McAfee, Andrew. “Mastering the Three Worlds of Information
Technology.”
Harvard Business Review
84, no 11 (2006): 141.
https://hbr.org/2006/11/mastering-the-three-worlds-of-information-technology
OM. “Käräjäoikeusverkoston kehittäminen.”
Mietintöjä ja lausuntoja
OM. “Oikeudenhoidon uudistamisohjelma vuosille 2013–2025.”
Mietintöjä ja lausuntoja
OM. “Yleisten tuomioistuinten asianhallinnan kehittäminen”.
Mietintöjä ja lausuntoja
OM. “Tuomioistuinlaitoksen kehittämiskomitean
Oskamp, Anja, Arno Lodder and Martin Apistola. (2004).
IT Support of the
Judiciary: Australia, Singapore, Venezuela, Norway, The Netherlands and
Cambridge: TMC Asser Press/Cambridge University Press.
Orlikowski, Wanda J., JoAnne Yates, Kazuo Okamura and Masayo Fujimoto.
“Shaping Electronic Communication: The Metastructuring
of Technology in
the Context of Use.”
Organization Science
6, no 4 (1995):
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2634996
Pinch, Trevor J. and Wiebe E. Bijker. “The Social Construction of Facts
and Artefacts: Or How the Sociology of Science and the
Sociology of Technology
Might Benefit Each Other.”
Social Studies of Science
3 (1984): 399–441.
https://doi.org/10.1177/030631284014003004
Pollock, Neil and Robin Williams. “E-infrastructures: How Do We Know
and Understand Them? Strategic Ethnography and the Biography
Artefacts.”
Computer Supported Cooperative Work
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1616593
Rabardel, Pierre. “People and Technology: A Cognitive Approach to
Contemporary Instruments”
Université Paris
https://hal.science/docs/01/02/07/05/PDF/people_and_technology.pdf
Reiling, Dory.
Technology for Justice: How Information Technology Can
Support Judicial Reform.
Leiden: Leiden University Press, 2009.
Reiling, Dory. “Digital Justice: Nice to Have but Hard to
Achieve.” In
Technology, Innovation and Access to Justice. Dialogues on
the Future of Law
, edited by Siddharth Peter de Souza and Maximilian Spohr,
131–143. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021.
Reiling, Dory and Francesco Contini. “E-Justice Platforms: Challenges
for Judicial Governance.”
International Journal for Court
Administration
13, no 1 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.36745/ijca.445
Ribes, David, Andrew Hoffman, Steven Slota and Gerry Bowker. “The Logic
of Domains.”
Social Studies of Science
49, no 3 (2019):
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312719849709
Rosner, Daniela and Morgan Ames. “Designing for Repair? Infrastructures
and Materialities of Breakdown.” In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social
(2014), 319–331.
Sankari, Suvi, Riikka Koulu and Jenni Hakkarainen. “Digitaalinen oikeus
tutkimuksen kohteena.”
https://journal.fi/lakimies/article/view/156633
Silvast, Antti and Virtanen, Mikko. “On Theory–Methods Packages
in Science and Technology Studies.”
Science, Technology, & Human
48, no 1 (2023): 167–189.
https://doi.org/10.1177/01622439211040241
Star, Susan Leigh and Karen Ruhleder. 1996. “Steps Toward an Ecology of
Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information
Information Systems Research
7, no 1(1996): 111–134.
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.7.1.111
Star, Susan Leigh. “The Ethnography of Infrastructure.”
American Behavioral Scientist
no 3(1999): 377–391.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00027649921955326
Steinhardt, Stephanie B. “Breaking Down While Building Up: Design and
Decline in Emerging infrastructures.”
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(2016): 2198–2208.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858420
Sullivan, Gavin. “Law, Technology, and Data-Driven Security:
Infra-legalities as Method Assemblage.
Journal of Law and Society
https://doi.org/10.1111/jols.12352
Tilson, David, Kalle Lyytinen and Carsten Sørensen. ”Digital
Infrastructures: The Missing IS Research Agenda.”
Information Systems
21, no 4 (2010): 748–759.
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1100.0318
Van Den Meerssche, Dimintri. “International Law and Technology as a
Critical Project: A Collective Reading.”
The European Journal of
International Law
35, no 4 (2024): 963–970.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ejil/chae069
Von Hippel, Eric.
The Sources of Innovation
. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1988.
VTV. “Vanhat Tietojärjestelmät. Tarkastuskertomus.”
Valtiontalouden tarkastusviraston tarkastuskertomukset
Walsh, Hannah, Andy Dong and Irem Tumer. “Towards a Theory for
Unintended Consequences in Engineering Design.” In
Proceedings of the
Design Society: International Conference on Engineering Design
341–3420. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Wiegel, Valeri. “Beyond the Single-Site Study: The Biographical
Analysis of Technology”.
EASST Review
no 4 (2015):
https://www.easst.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/review_2016_12.pdf
Kontiainen, “Oikeuden
digitalisaatio”; Fenwick, “Lawyer of the Future”; Koivisto,
“User Accounts.”
Reiling, “E-Justice
Platforms”; Di Natale, “Digitising the Judicial Sector”;
Contini, “Introduction.”
Di Natale, “Digitising
the Judicial Sector.”
Bennani-Taylor,
“Infrastructuring AI.”
See Bowker, “Toward
Information Infrastructure Studies.”
Reiling, “Technology for
Hyysalo, “Method Matters.”
Wiegel, “Beyond the
Single-site Study.”
Hyysalo, “Method
Grint, “The Machine at
Barry, “The Material
Byrne, “Legal
Infrastructures.”
“Infrastructure and InfraReg.”
Rabardel, “People and
Technology.”
Contini, “Law and
Technology,” 3.
Koch, “Aligning
“Digitaalinen oikeus tutkimuksen kohteena.”
See Koulu, “Law and
Digitalisation”; Koivisto, “Miten hyvä hallinto
digitalisoidaan?”
Van Den Meerssche,
“International Law and Technology”; Sullivan, “Law, Technology
and Data-Driven Security.”
Van Den Meerssche,
“International Law and Technology.”
Hyysalo, “Method
Matters,” 4.
Koulu, “In Search of
Living Law.”
McAfee, “Mastering the
Three Worlds”; Reiling, “E-Justice Platforms”; Reiling,
“Digital Justice.”
Lanzara, “The
Circulation of Agency”; Oskamp, “IT Support of the
Judiciary.”
Contini, “Artificial
Intelligence.”
Koulu, “In Search of
Living Law”; Koulu, “Crafting Digital Transparency.”
Contini, “The Elusive
Mediation”; Reiling, “Digital Justice.”
Reiling, “E-Justice
Platforms.”
Allsop, “Technology
and the Future.”
Reiling, “Digital
Reiling, “Digital
Reiling, “Digital
Justice”; Di Natale, “Digitising the Judicial Sector.”
See Lanzara and Patriotta,
“Technology and the courtroom”.
Hyysalo, “Series of
Configurational Movements.”
Glaser, “The Biography
of an Algorithm”; Pollock, “E-infrastructures.”
Hyysalo, “Method
Matters”; Glaser, “The Biography of an Algorithm”; Hyysalo,
“Series of Configurational
Movements.”
Kallinikos,”
Regulative Regime of Technology,” 69.
Contini,” Double
Normalization.”
Proceduralizing Control and Discretion.”
Contini, “Double
Normalization.”
“Transparency Materialized.”
“Infrastructure and InfraReg.”
Pinch, “Social
Construction of Facts”; Edwards, “Infrastructure and
Modernity”; Eriksen, “Afterword:
Some Unintentional
Consequences.”
Star, “Steps Toward an
Ecology”; Steinhardt, “Breaking Down.”
Rosner, “Designing for
Jackson, “Rethinking
Repair”; Bowker, “Sorting Things Out”; Barry, “Material
Politics of Infrastructure”;
Edwards, “Understanding
Infrastructure”; Star, “The Ethnography of
Infrastructure.”
Understanding Infrastructure.”
Jarrahi, “Digital
Assemblages, Information Infrastructures.”
Byrne, “Legal
Infrastructures.” On data infrastructures and law, see Fisher,
“Confronting Data Inequality.”
“Infrastructure and InfraReg.”
Tilson, “Digital
Infrastructures.”
Henfrídsson,
“Generative Mechanisms”; Fabri, “E-justice in
Byrne, “Legal
Infrastructures,” 10.
Byrne, “Legal
Infrastructures.”
Reiling, “Technology
for Justice.”
Monteiro, “Qualitative
Research Methods”; Orlikowski, “Shaping Electronic
Communication.”
Walsh, “Towards a
Reiling, “Technology
for Justice.”
Contini,” Double
Normalization.”
Ribes,” The Logic of
Contini,” Double
Normalization.”
Koulu, “In Search of
Living Law.”
Jalas, “The Rhythms of
Infrastructure.”
Monteiro, “Qualitative
Research Methods”; Glaser, “The Biography of an Algorithm”;
Hyysalo, “Method
Matters”; see also Von Hippel, “The Sources
of Innovation.”
Hyysalo” Method
Matters”; Silvast and Virtanen, “On Theory-Methods
Silvast and Virtanen,
“On Theory-Methods Packages.”
Hyysalo, “Method
“Infrastructure and Modernity.”
Fabri, “E-Justice in
Harwood, “An
see also Ikuesan,
“Digitalising Justice.”
Asettamispäätös 15/31/2010.
OM, “Yleisten
tuomioistuinten asianhallinnan kehittäminen.”
OM, “Oikeudenhoidon
uudistamisohjelma,” 18.
“RITU Usability
Käräjäoikeusverkoston kehittäminen,” 29.
Reiling, “Technology
for Justice.”
Arvidsson and Noll,
“Decision Making in Asylum.”
Koulu, “In Search of
Living Law.”
VTV, “Vanhat
Tietojärjestelmät,” 6.
see Byrne, “Legal
Infrastructures.”
Hyysalo,” Method
Matters”; Glaser, “The Biography of an Algorithm.”
Star, “The Ethnography
of Infrastructure.”
Lanzara, “Technology
and the Courtroom”; Kingsbury, “Infrastructure and
See Byrne, “Legal
Infrastructures”; Byrne, “Editors’ Introduction.”
See Pollock,
“E-infrastructures.”
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (584 KB)
PDF format (850 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter