URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Taylor, G --- "Executive privilege in response to a demand for documents by the legislature in Germany" [2010] UMonashLRS 13
EXECUTIVE PRIVILEGE IN RESPONSE TO A DEMAND FOR DOCUMENTS
BY THE LEGISLATURE IN
is the pre-peer reviewed version of the following article: Taylor, G.,
'Executive privilege in response to a demand for documents
by the legislature in
(2010) 21 King's Law Journal 399
, which has been published in final
http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/hart/klj/2010/00000021/00000002/art00010
1. Introduction
In jurisdictions in which the legislature enjoys the power to call for
documents held by the executive, conflict is pre-programmed.
In the USA there is
the famous decision in
United States
several later controversial
In Australia,
too, there have been numerous cases involving a refusal by the executive to hand
over documents required by
Parliament.
2009 the German Federal Constitutional Court handed down a
on the same
inherently interesting decision, involving as it does a parliamentary
investigative committee set up to examine the response
to the attacks of 11
September 2001 and also the Iraq war and the international fight against
terrorism so far as they involved the
German government and German nationals.
Furthermore, the decision emanates from a jurisdiction which is unencumbered by
law’s ideas of executive privilege in litigation, which in
common law countries do tend to confuse the matter. This note is
analysing the German court’s decision.
2. Background
Article 44 of the German Basic Law provides as
[Committees of inquiry]
shall have the right, and on the motion of one
quarter of its Members the duty, to establish a committee of inquiry, which
take the requisite evidence at public hearings. The public may be
(2) The rules of criminal procedure shall apply
mutatis mutandis
the taking of evidence. The privacy of correspondence, posts and
telecommunications shall not be affected.
(3) Courts and administrative authorities shall be required to provide legal
and administrative assistance.
(4) The decisions of committees of inquiry shall not be subject to judicial
review. The courts shall be free to evaluate and rule
upon the facts that were
the subject of the investigation.
It is worth noting, first of all, the fact that a ‘qualified
minority’ of MPs—one-quarter—is all that it takes
committee of inquiry to be established. The excellent idea of putting this power
in the hands of a sufficiently large
minority as well as the majority was
originally conceived by Max
legislature’s right to hold inquiries is to be worth anything, this is an
essential provision in a system such as the
German one in which there is only
one elected House of Parliament and the government is formed by the majority of
members of that
House. The power to set up inquiries is thus available to the
opposition as well as to the government. (In Austria, where a majority
members is required to set up an investigatory committee, such committees have
naturally enough been little used, and it would
be desirable if the German rule
were to make its way to
law of 19 June 2001, entitled An Act Governing the Law relating to Investigatory
Committees of the German Bundestag, further
permits a committee to make an order
calling for evidence, including both witnesses and written evidence such as the
executive’s
files, if one-quarter of the members of the
committee—which must have a make-up that reflects the party composition of
Bundestag itself—requires
Pursuant to these provisions, the Bundestag established in April 2006 an
investigatory committee with a very wide-ranging remit to
look into the matters
mentioned in the introduction. At this point there were three opposition parties
in the Bundestag: the Free
Democrats, a party of economic liberals; the Greens;
and a party which is pleased to describe itself simply as ‘the
which consists of the old East German communists and some former
Social Democrats who have broken away from that party. Those three
parliamentary
parties, along with three members of the investigatory committee itself, were
the plaintiffs in the action before the
Federal Constitutional Court. The
government, which was the defendant in the action, was at this time the
so-called ‘Grand
Coalition’ and consisted of the two largest
parties, the centre-right Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats.
An official English translation of the committee’s terms of reference
was produced and can be viewed
the committee was to investigate matters such as whether the German government
or German territory were involved in secret
prisons or abductions or transport
of prisoners; the fate of German citizens at American hands; the provision of
intelligence by
German agencies to foreign powers; the state of knowledge of the
German government regarding various matters; German intelligence
operations in
Iraq and the monitoring of journalists by the intelligence service; and whether
any breaches of law occurred or recommendations
should be made for the
tightening of the law in the future.
As might be expected, government witnesses before the committee repeatedly
refused to answer questions on the grounds of what we in
the English-speaking
world should call executive privilege, and files sent for by the committee were
either not produced at all or
were produced only in part. The plaintiffs
challenged this before the Court, which decided that many of these refusals were
unjustified
under Article 44. This was so even having regard to the
restrictions on its apparently unlimited terms which emerge from a closer
at its provisions and as a result of its interpretation within the whole
constitutional system, which produce something like
executive privilege even
though no such concept is to be found in the Article itself. The interest of the
decision lies not so much
in the detail of the individual cases in which this
occurred and was found unconstitutional, but in the Court’s reasoning and
the principles it propounded.
3. The Court’s reasoning
The Court mentioned five circumstances in which the government could justify
a refusal to provide information:
where a demand
falls outside the terms of reference;
cases in which
the demand is inconsistent with the doctrine of separation of powers;
cases in which
the welfare of the state demands the withholding of information;
cases involving
an infringement of the rights guaranteed by the Basic Law;
where the power
to send for documents and witnesses is being abused, for example simply as a
The Court said little of note on the first topic, which involves an
restriction,
nothing on the fifth, which did not arise on the facts of the case. In what
follows, therefore, I concentrate on the second,
third and fourth topics. I
shall then turn to the duty to justify the withholding of information which the
Court also identified
and which was the basis for the plaintiffs’ success
in the case.
a. Separation of powers
The German Basic Law clearly gives effect to the doctrine of separation of
same time, the fact that the executive is formed from a majority of the lower
House of the legislature means, of course, that
the separation between those two
as definite as it is in, for example, the USA. This means that the
executive’s claim to a separate realm must be
weaker than in the USA,
where the executive does not depend for its maintenance in office on the will of
the executive.
Nevertheless, even in the German system there is still obviously some
distinction between legislature and executive and some area
of freedom is
required within which the executive must be allowed to govern without constant
interference from and the revelation
of its secrets and deliberations the
legislature.
Building on its earlier case law, these considerations led the Court to the
conclusion that the executive was entitled to a ‘core
area of executive
responsibility, which includes the functions of initiating action, deliberation
and acting and which is in principle
not open to examination by the
legislature’s investigatory
committees’.
This included not only discussions at Cabinet level, but also the preparatory
work behind Cabinet and ministerial decisions. What
had to be avoided under the
principle of separation of powers, said the Court, was co-government by the
legislature. That meant,
in turn, that investigatory committees could not seek
information about matters currently being considered; they were confined, so
speak, to already closed files, to the investigation of matters that had been
the subject of a decision.
Even in relation to concluded matters, limits still existed in order to
prevent the spectre of a co-governing legislature and the
disappearance of the
executive’s core functions. However, at this point the Court took a step
back and mentioned at length
the need for Parliament also to be able to conduct
effective investigations. In cases involving closed files, therefore, there was
no complete prohibition on parliamentary demands for information; rather, it was
necessary to balance the legitimate interests of
executive and legislature. The
Court mentioned only two matters of importance in conducting this process of
balancing: first, one
had to consider how close the information sought was to
the actual decision-making processes of government; discussions in Cabinet
receive special protection. Secondly, the parliamentary interest in receiving
information would be particularly great if there
were possible breaches of the
law or similar abuses in the acts of the
these points were closely related to the case in hand.
The Court was quite clear on the point that, once a decision has been taken,
information can often be demanded by the legislature
even if it concerns the
decision-making processes of the government. In so doing it resolved a dispute
in the case law between State
constitutional courts, one of which—the
on one interpretation of its judgment to have held that high-level government
decision-making processes were closed
to parliamentary scrutiny even after the
decision was taken. This was denied by the State of Bremen’s
Constitutional
clear that the latter was right and that a balancing process must be undertaken
in these cases.
b. The welfare of the state
The phrase ‘welfare of the state’ is taken from § 96 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, made applicable to Parliament
by the first
sentence of Article 44(2) quoted above. The principle of state welfare
states that information does not have to be divulged
when doing so would harm
the welfare of the state (including both the federal and State governments). The
principle is used to protect
state secrets.
Previous case
had left it
unclear whether this concept was merely an instance of the restrictions imposed
by the separation of powers or a separate
idea of its own. The Court’s
decision solves this puzzle and makes it clear that the two concepts are in fact
separate grounds
upon which access can be
The Court, however, took seriously, as indeed it is directed to do by
Article 44(2) (‘
differences between withholding documents in an ordinary criminal trial and when
a demand by the legislature for state
papers is made. The legislature, it
pointed out, is part of the state; furthermore, it is ‘as a rule’
not lawful to keep
information secret from Parliament if effective measures to
prevent leaks can be taken. The fact that leaks might nevertheless still
does not, the Court held, nullify this consideration given that leaks from the
executive have been known to occur as well.
Therefore, it is only ‘under
very special circumstances’ that the principle of the welfare of the state
can be used to
deny information to the
legislature.
particular, it is not the case that contacts with foreign intelligence agencies
are necessarily exempted from the reach of an
investigatory
c. Basic rights
In relation to clashes between the basic rights and parliamentary
requirements for information, the Court had resort to its tried-and-tested
method of requiring a balancing between the right or rights which are alleged to
be in peril and the needs of the Parliament. In
so doing, it pointed out, it
might be helpful if (as Article 44(1) expressly allows) the public were
excluded from a committee’s
proceedings in order to protect sensitive
personal information or other measures to maintain secrecy were
should be that both the basic right and the parliamentary investigation each
receive as much effect as can possibly be given
The special mention of the guaranteed right to secrecy of communication in
Article 44 prevented committees from ordering the seizure
of mail or the
telephones.
not, however, prevent the committee from seeking files if they contained
material which the executive had obtained in violation
of the right of secrecy
of communications applicable to it (Article 10 of the Basic Law). In
criminal trials, the Court said, deterrence
of the executive might require the
suppression of illegally obtained information; the reverse was the case when
such information
is sought by a parliamentary committee for the purposes of
revealing illegalities or abuses. This was obviously very likely to be
the whole point of a committee was to investigate whether such illegalities and
d. The duty to justify
The Court broke new ground in its formulation of a duty to justify the
withholding of information. Such a duty had never been formulated
previously.
The reason for this is that the aforementioned Act Governing the Law relating to
Investigatory Committees of the German
Bundestag had been passed only in June
2001, and this was the first case to have arisen under it.
§§ 18(2) and 23(2) of
that law are the formal basis for the duty.
They apply respectively to demands for material such as files and to the
examination
of witnesses, and each requires reasons to be given when access is
However, this appears at first sight to be a weakness of the newly formulated
duty. The Act is a simple statute and does not have
constitutional status. The
one-quarter minority which can set up a committee cannot prevent a change to the
statute. It can be changed
by a majority of the Bundestag at any time. One
wonders whether this is what is referred to in the coalition agreement between
Christian Democrats and the Free Democrats entered into after the elections
of September 2009. Given that the latter were one of
the plaintiffs in the case
under discussion, having been in opposition at the time, it may be hoped not. At
all events, the coalition
agreement states, rather wordily and certainly very
unclearly, merely that ‘we have reached agreement on taking in hand the
consideration of a reform
of June 2001.
Perhaps the view that the Bundestag could abolish the duty it has created by
statute is an unduly pessimistic and formalist one, however.
The Court’s
order and several crucial passages of its
that the lack of information given by the government about the reasons for its
refusal offend not the statute of June 2001,
but rather Article 44 itself.
Is the Court trying to tell us that the obligation to give reasons in case of
refusal set out in the
statute are to be regarded as inevitable concomitants of
the right to set up investigatory committees under Article 44, so that that
obligation would survive the statute’s repeal? This may well be so. At
another point in its
Court indicated that the giving of reasons was necessary to enable a balancing
exercise to be carried out between, for example,
the legislature’s right
to information and the executive’s power to govern, a process which does
not have a statutory
source but is, rather, based on the constitutional doctrine
of separation of powers.
That may be a question to be resolved in the future. For the moment, the
Court insists on there being a serious attempt to provide
reasons, not merely a
reference to one of the headings under which access can be refused. The Court
gave examples: if the welfare
of the state were the ground claimed, for example,
the government would need to give ‘detailed and complete’
information
to the committee, perhaps in a closed session, about the need for
secrecy; if a claim were made that information were being sought
from the core
area of responsibility of the executive, it would be necessary to state in
detail exactly why the information sought
fell into that area and if necessary
why it could not be presented to the legislature even after deliberations on the
matter concerned
obligation could not as a rule be discharged by simply providing the withheld
information to the chair of the committee, an expedient
which was to be resorted
to only after withholding had been adequately justified and if there were still
questions from the committee
Court took time to add that this was particularly so in relation to this
given that its chair and deputy chair both belonged to government
Having thus identified the obligation to give reasons, the Court was easily
able to hold that it had not been discharged. The witnesses
who had refused to
give evidence and the explanations accompanying the refusal of access, or full
access, to files had done little
more than quote the headings under which
refusal may be sustained. They had not given any information about why each case
an analogy:
legislature had received merely a headline, when it should have received a
detailed report.
4. Commentary
When a demand for files is made, it often turns out to be the case that the
executive has all the trump cards. In the case under discussion,
too, it was
unfortunate that a rather hollow victory was achieved by the legislature. The
Court’s judgment was handed down
on the day before the last sitting of the
investigative committee. An election was scheduled (and did occur) only a few
months later,
at the end of September 2009. A motion was nevertheless introduced
into the Bundestag before the election by the Free Democrats calling
government to respect the Court’s judgment and hand over the
(a somewhat
cheeky request given that compliance with it would, needless to say, have gone
beyond what the Court actually required).
The motion was rejected in late August
by the majority coalition government and also, surprisingly, by the
In a debate
on the Court’s decision the Free Democrat speaker rather hopefully called
upon the government to surrender the
voluntarily.
Needless to say this did not occur, and at the time of writing a search did not
reveal any further action in the newly constituted
Bundestag elected in late
September 2009—in which, it will be recalled, the Free Democrats, in
opposition before the election
and among the plaintiffs in the case under
discussion, form part of the new coalition government.
The Court’s decision is to some extent necessarily vague. It is, first
of all, difficult to know precisely when a decision-making
process is concluded
so that the embargo on parliamentary demands for documents ends. This question
had earlier been the subject
of a sharp division of opinion in the Bavarian
Constitutional Court, four dissenting judges taking the view that although the
process of decision-making had not concluded, as a matter of practice the
decision had already been taken by the government and was
no longer open to
being changed.
Court did not deal with this problem in the case under discussion. It requires
very little ingenuity to think of further situations
in which it is debatable
whether a decision can be said to have been taken or not, and indeed what the
‘decision’ is:
for example, is taking the decision to build a new
road and then deciding upon its precise route one decision or two?
This distinction between open and closed files, so to speak, is certainly of
long standing in German law: it goes back to the Weimar
Nevertheless one wonders whether the reasoning behind it is quite as convincing
as it appears at first sight. The problems involved
in determining which matters
count as open and which as closed—when a decision can be said to have been
taken—might be
thought to be symptomatic of a problem with the distinction
itself: as a means of enforcing the separation of powers, it misses the
it is feared that the Parliament might start to try to become a sort of shadow
government, why not just ask directly whether
the parliamentary demand is of
such a nature that it amounts to an attempt to take over the functions of the
executive? It is surely
possible that some parliamentary investigations will not
amount to that even though a decision is still to be taken. Surely there
some circumstances in which plans and concepts of the executive can properly be
investigated by a parliamentary committee.
It is sometimes suggested by commentators in Germany that the power of
Parliament to demand documents should, as a general rule, have
preference over
the executive’s needs, given that Parliament is the directly elected body
and the executive, in the German
system, is not directly elected but merely
chosen from the majority of the
legislature.
Certainly this argument is weaker in Germany than it is in the United Kingdom
with its tradition of absolute parliamentary supremacy
and omnipotence. Such
ideas are quite foreign to post-Nazi Germany, in which power is divided between
organs of government by the
supreme constitution and supremacy belongs to the
Basic Law as the constitution, the law and the people as sovereign rather than
to any constitutional creature, even one as exalted as the
legislature.
Furthermore, as a practical matter most people do not vote for particular MPs,
but for a party leader (candidate for head of the
executive); it would hardly be
going too far to say that the executive is in form indirectly but in reality
directly elected, while
the legislature is in form directly but in reality
indirectly elected through the mediation of political parties and their leaders.
Then again, it might be argued that democracy is as much about the rights of
minorities as it is about majorities—as the German
provision enabling
one-quarter of MPs to set up an investigatory committee vividly
illustrates—and thus the opposition also
has a form of qualified but
directly conferred democratic mandate to hold the government accountable, albeit
not to govern.
However one thinks about these issues of theory, it is still true that in
Germany the executive is dependent upon the continued confidence
of Parliament
for its very maintenance in office—surely the ultimate in co-government.
Indeed, if a purely parliamentary system
were in place without the vast power of
the political parties, Parliament might even on occasion decide to use its legal
the full and dismiss a government that refused to hand over files. And
we may also ask: if Parliament can debate governmental plans,
as it surely can,
why can it not investigate them as well?
In other democracies the separation of powers has not been endangered by the
lack of the German principle that only concluded decisions
can be the subject of
parliamentary demands for information. Admittedly in countries such as the UK
and Australia a minority of one-quarter
of MPs cannot set up a committee, but
what about the Upper House, which is not always under the control of the
government? It would
therefore be best for the clarity of the law and for the
effectiveness of the system if the distinction between open and closed files
were wholly abandoned, as some dissentients have long
suggestions, albeit in a mild form, have now reached the pages of the most
prestigious commentary on the Basic Law, so it is
disappointing to find the
Court sticking to the old line in the decision under review
level illustrates the unduly restrictive effect that this view can have. The
opposition in a German State Parliament wished
to set up an investigation into
the State government’s negotiations with the former princely ruling house
of the area relating
to various unresolved questions of property rights, and it
was held that as these negotiations were still going on it and the government
had not made a decision it was unable to do so. The State Constitutional Court
held that the negotiations would be ‘severely
prejudiced’
if the negotiating strategy of the government were revealed to the public.
Leaving aside the possibility of holding the investigation
in closed session,
the obvious danger of prejudicing the negotiations would clearly be apparent to
all the members of the proposed
committee, and it would hardly be likely that
the opposition party would wish to suffer the political opprobrium of having
State millions of euros by asking indiscreet questions. The proposed
investigation might even have revealed useful information which
speeded up the negotiations or strengthened the government’s case, or
both. In other words, the problem of investigating
currently open questions on
which the government has not yet made a decision is a problem that can be dealt
with politically as well
as, if not better than, it can be dealt with judicially
by the sledgehammer method of banning investigations altogether.
The German Federal Constitutional Court’s decision under discussion
here might also be criticised because it gives insufficient
guidance on how the
various balancing processes it requires are to work in individual cases. Given
that this criticism had also been
made of one of the very few earlier rulings on
not easy to excuse this failing with vague references to the difficulty of
foreseeing all questions in advance. Furthermore,
the lack of specificity is a
weapon in the hand of the executive, which can use it as a further means to spin
out the process of
seeking access to files—as it did in the case under
discussion here—until it is saved by the next election or a general
of public interest in the question under debate.
The Court’s emphasis on the duty of the executive to give reasons is,
however, a major advance which improves the responsiveness
of the executive to
parliamentary requests in a concrete and much-needed way. It would be worth
thinking about a similar duty to
give explicit reasons in other countries in
which the legislature has the right to send for witnesses and documents subject
to executive
privilege. It is to be hoped that a fully-fledged and tenable
doctrinal justification can be found for this new principle as an outgrowth
merely of a statute but of Article 44 itself, and also that it is taken to
heart by the executive so that a long series of further
court cases fleshing out
the principle and deciding whether the executive has lived up to it in
particular cases will not be necessary.
wishes to thank the University of Mannheim, which invited him to teach in its
Masters of Comparative Law course, during
which time this note was written, and
particularly Herr Professor Hans-Joachim Cremer and Herr Dr Dirk Hanschel.
Thanks are also
due to Herr Univ-Ass Dr Konrad Lachmayer of the University of
Vienna for drawing my attention to one of the Austrian cases cited
below. Unless
otherwise stated, all translations in this article are the author’s. All
websites accessed on 8 July 2010.
[1974] USSC 159
(1974) 418 US
useful analysis of these in M Rosenberg, ‘Presidential Claims of Executive
Privilege: History, Law, Practice and
Recent Developments’ (Congressional
Research Service, Washington, DC 2008),
www.fas.org/sgp/crs/secrecy/RL30319.pdf.
A recent case is
analysed in G Taylor, ‘Parliament’s Power to Require the Production
of Documents—A Recent Victorian
(2008) 13(2)
Court file nos
2 BvE 3/07. At the time of writing the court’s judgment had not
been reported in the official series of reports,
and was most easily accessed on
the court’s website (www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de) under the date of
its decision. Reflecting
the practice in many other European countries, the
court’s decision is not known by the names of the parties, and it has no
official title. It will be referred to below simply as ‘the court’s
judgment’, followed, where called for, by a
reference to the paragraph of
the decision in brackets. There had been a false start in this matter, when the
question was brought
before the Federal Court of Justice rather than the Federal
Constitutional Court: the former’s judgment on appeal is reported
2009 Nr 398.
The comparison
between this area of German law and US executive privilege is made expressly by
some courts and commentators in Germany,
eg H-J Mengel, ‘Die
Auskunftsverweigerung der Exekutive gegenüber parlamentarischen
Untersuchungsausschüssen’
Europäische
Grundrechte-Zeitschrift
The translation
is from the version at https://www.btg-bestellservice.de/pdf/80201000.pdf.
F Klein in R
Grundgesetz—Kommentar
[‘Maunz/Dürig’]
(CH Beck, 55th edn 2009) Art 44,
K Rueprecht and
F Pallin, ‘Ausgewählte Fragen zum parlamentarischen
Untersuchungsrecht und zum prozessualen Selbstbezichtigungszwang’
Österreichische Juristen-Zeitung
545, 546. After that article
was written, there were however controversies in Austria about blacking out
parts of files transmitted
to an investigatory committee on the
‘Euro-fighter’: see
http://orf.at/070514-12252/?href=http%3A%2F%2Forf.at%2F070514-12252%2F12234txt_story.html;
and see the report of the proceedings of the investigatory committee into the
Ministry of the Interior and other ministries of 13
www.parlament.gv.at/PG/DE/XXIII/KOMM/KOMM_00148/pmh.shtml. These do not however
appear to have resulted in any definitive
rulings on the state of the law.
According to Klein (n 7) 42, the idea of permitting a minority to set up an
investigatory committee
has been taken up in other EU countries such as Portugal
and Greece, and also in many of the newer democracies of eastern Europe
which German constitutional learning has been most influential).
§§ 4, 17(2) of that Law.
http://www.bundestag.de/bundestag/ausschuesse/ua/1_ua/auftrag/auftrag_erweiter_eng.pdf.
This appears
not to be an exclusive list, given that other possibilities have been mentioned
in earlier decisions as being out of
bounds, for example topics that are wholly
non-public in nature (a claim made but rejected before the Saxon Constitutional
recently: LKV 2008, 207) and those that do not belong to federal
responsibility: BVerfGE 77, 1, 44. Then again, it is odd that the
fifth topic,
abuse of power, was mentioned by the Court although it did not arise on the
facts of this case. Is the Court trying
to imply that this is a conclusive
Nevertheless,
it did hold that the executive’s interpretations of the terms of reference
were too narrow and it had unjustifiably
refused access on this ground also:
Court’s judgment, [182]–[218].
Art 20(2) states: ‘(2) All state authority is derived from the
people. It shall be exercised by the people through elections
and other votes
and through specific legislative, executive and judicial bodies’ (source
of translation as in n 6).
possible for an investigation to infringe the separation of powers between
legislature and judiciary. Such a claim was
considered but rejected recently by
the Saxon Constitutional Court in LKV 2008, 207.
was made by the Bremen Constitutional Court in a most impressive judgment
reported in BremStGHE 5 (1989), 15, 32f.
judgment, [122].
judgment, [123]–[127]. This built on a case in the Court decided under the
Constitution
of Schleswig-Holstein: BVerfGE 110, 199, 221f.
BayVerfGE 38
(1985), 165, 176.
BremStGHE 5
(1989), 15, 33. There is a good summary of this debate in C Meyer-Bohl,
Grenzen der Pflicht zur Aktenvorlage und Aussage vor parlamentarischen
Untersuchungsausschüssen unter Berücksichtigung
der Besonderheiten der
Hamburger Verfassung
(Duncker & Humblot, 1992) 100–5.
For example,
BVerfGE 67, 100, 139; the decision of the Constitutional Court of Hamburg in
DöV 1973, 745. See also H Bogs, ‘Steueraktenvorlage
parlamentarische Untersuchung (Art 44 GG; § 30 AO)—zur
Entscheidung des BVerfG v. 17.7.1984, BVerfGE 67, 100
(Flick-Untersuchungsausschuß)’ JZ 1985, 112, 114.
case note, Deutsche Verwaltungsblätterl 2009, 1239, 1240.
judgment, [130], [165] (referring to an incident in which the ‘Left’
party lost a file which later found
its way into a news magazine; further
information about this is in Drucksache 16/13400, 53). The point that the
executive might also
be the source of leaks was taken from the earlier case of
BVerfGE 67, 100, 136.
judgment, [154], echoing BVerfGE 67, 100, 139.
judgment, [134].
judgment, [133].
judgment, [135]. This question has also come up in relation to the files of the
former East German secret police which
contain much material obtained by abusing
the right of secret communications: Umbach in DC Umbach and T Clemens (eds),
Grundgesetz: Mitarbeiterkommentar und Handbuch,
vol 2 (CF Müller,
2002) 206f.
judgment, [136].
Bildung. Zusammenhalt. Der Koalitionsvertrag zwischen CDU, CSU und FDP
www.cdu.de/doc/pdfc/091026-koalitionsvertrag-cducsu-fdp.pdf.
For example,
judgment, [138].
judgment, [166].
judgment, [139]–[144], [146]–[153], [172], [175] and further
paragraphs.
Mine, not the
Drucksache 16/13865.
the Bundestag, 26 August 2009, 26 274.
BayVerfGE 38
(1985), 165, 188.
judgment of the Hessian State Constitutional Court, ESVGH 17 (1966), 1, 13.
Constitutional Court, BremStGHE 5 (1989), 15, 23f; M Morlok in H Dreier (ed),
Grundgesetz—Kommentar
vol 2 (Mohr Siebeck, 1998) 930f. Contra:
Lower Saxon State Constitutional Court, NdsVBl 1996, 189, 190 (the executive
owes Parliament
a duty to account for its actions but not the revelation of all
its internal secrets). Agnostic: V Busse, ‘Der Kernbereich
Eigenverantwortung im Spannungsfeld der staatlichen Gewalten’ [1989]
Die Öffentliche Verwaltung
G Memminger,
‘Parlamentarische Kontrolle der Regierung durch
Untersuchungsausschüsse’ [1986]
Die Öffentliche
For example,
E Kaufmann, ‘Untersuchungsausschuß und Staatsgerichtshof’ in
AH van Scherpenberg
Autorität und Freiheit:
Gesammelte Schriften von Erich Kaufmann
vol I (Otto Schwartz, 1960) 321 (a
reprint of a piece originally written in 1920); Mengel (n 5) 97, 102, who also
points out that
the government might delay making a formal decision in order to
be able to withhold files. A good summary of the debate on this topic
found in A Weisgerber,
Das Beweiserhebungsverfahren parlamentarischer
Untersuchungsausschüsse des deutschen Bundestages
(Peter Lang, 2003)
Klein (n 7)
Constitutional Court of Baden-Württemberg, ESVGH 58 (2007), 15.
Bogs (n 20)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter