URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2023/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Labbafi, Amin --- "Where Are Cities in the International Legal Order? the Exercise of Supranational Regulatory Authority by Cities" [2023] MelbJlIntLaw 12; (2023) 24(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 307
I INTRODUCTION
II CITIES AS INVISIBLE ACTORS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
III THE GAP BETWEEN CONSTITUTIONAL INCAPACITY AND FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY: VOLUNTARY COMMITMENT AS A TOOL FOR SELF‑EMPOWERMENT
IV GLOBAL LAW AND THE CITY: CHARACTERISTICS OF CITIES’ ENGAGEMENT IN GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
A Hybridity of International Law and Global Law
B Trans-Local Law: A Growing Imaginary of the Global Legal Order
C Global Law as the Fertile Ground for Cities’ Supranational Authority
D A Typology of Trans-Local Engagements
V CONCLUSION
WHERE ARE CITIES IN THE INTERNATIONAL LEGAL ORDER? THE
EXERCISE OF SUPRANATIONAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY BY CITIES
AMIN LABBAFI
Nowadays, cities are not merely providers of local services to residents.
Indeed, cities and their local governments are increasingly
engaged in the
diffusion and creation of supranational norms and regulations. One manifestation
of this phenomenon is the rise of
cities’ multilateral cooperation in
areas as diverse as human rights and climate regulation to housing and health
during the recent two decades. By means of an analytical distinction
between global and international law, this paper reflects upon
three aspects of
the exercise of supranational regulatory authority by cities. Those are: first,
the construction of a basis for
cities’ supranational authority based on
the functional capacity of city governments and the dysfunctionality of states;
the lack of international legal personality of cities; and finally, the
problem of accountability and enforcement regarding the supranational
commitments made by cities.
This paper suggests that normative transactions between cities could be best
grasped by the notion of trans-local law. Trans-local
law is the product of
normative transactions and multilateral cooperation among cities with the
potential to steer the behaviour
of local governments. The result of that is a
form of complementarity in the regulation of supranational issues that
complements
public international law and has the capacity to influence state
legal systems. As such, the complementarity of trans-local law could
normatively desirable as it results in more robust governance of supranational
issues, such as climate change, preventing the
failure of one level of
regulation — national or international — from turning into a
complete failure for the wider global
I INTRODUCTION
Cities have turned into global actors that can influence the landscape of the
global legal order, and their presence in the global
legal order is becoming
widespread. There is, nowadays, an abundance of global city networks, such as
the C40 Cities Climate Leadership
Group (‘C40’) and the United
Cities and Local Governments
These city networks mimic the form of state-centric international organisations
and function as global forums that promote the supranational
(cross-polity) role
of cities in the governance of various areas, such as global climate
governance.
Equally important, the engagement of cities in
the global legal order has caused conflicts between the local governments of
and central governments as well as state-centric transnational
organisations. One notable example is the case before the Court of
the European Union brought by the cities of Paris and Brussels and the
municipality of Madrid against the European
Commission.
The General Court, indeed, granted standing to cities as legal persons under the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
, and the case was
initially decided in favour of the cities and municipalities, granting them
wider authority to regulate for stronger
environmental
protection.
However, on appeal, the
Court of Justice ruled that the General Court erred in its decision regarding
the admissibility of the case
as the European Commission’s regulation
regarding vehicle emissions standards did not directly concern those
Despite the Court of
Justice’s decision, the case illustrates a direct legal encounter between
several cities and the institution
of a state-centric supranational body, the
European Commission. Another notable national example is the tension between the
Netherlands’
central government and the city of
The city advocated
international human rights law and the right to shelter as authoritative grounds
to justify providing shelter
to undocumented migrants, despite objections from
the Netherlands’ central
government.
This phenomenon is, however, in an uncomfortable relation with international
legal architecture, which only recognises the legal personality
of states and
state‑made international
organisations.
The incorporation of cities inside this architecture raises difficulties. On the
one hand, under a doctrinal understanding of international
law, only states can
make valid legal norms. On the other, cities are taking up supranational
functions that do not fit the state-centric
architecture of public international
The present paper aims to give a brief and non-exhaustive account of the
global rise of cities as crucial tiers of local government
in two interrelated
domains of international law and the global legal order. Through an analytical
distinction between global law
and international law, we could better understand
the avenues which are open to cities for claiming a role in mitigating at least
some of the global governance issues, such as environmental protection. The
paper reflects on the main limitations that cities encounter
for taking up the
role of a global actor and the available relevant strategies, legal or
discursive, to overcome such restraints.
These interrelated difficulties are:
first, the construction of the legal capacity for global engagement based on
functional capacity;
second, the difficulty of accountability and enforcement;
and finally, the problem of legality concerning norms created in supranational
and cross-polity arrangements of city governments (legality here means the
criteria that determines when a norm is a legal norm).
Together, these could
direct the future trajectory of cities as emerging global legal actors that are
increasingly expressing their
relevance not only as local-level governments but
also as significant global actors.
AS INVISIBLE ACTORS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
Legal pluralist scholarship has been mostly concerned with non-state legal
actors, and not until recently did the nascent role of
cities and local
governments attract
The need for further concentration on cities — these units of government
rooted in the pre-nation-state era — is evident
since they have an
in‑between characteristic. This in-betweenness makes them a peculiar and
borderline case of non-state actors
in two important ways. First, unlike other
non‑state actors, they are territorial entities constituted through
national constitutions
or equivalent national
Second, they are the closest level of government to people as they have public
functions and a system of administration that goes
to the office based on public
participation of city residents (at least in democratic states), and their
decisions affect the daily
lives of the local
population.
Rather than being driven by a desire to promote self-interest, their
decision-making is public in the sense that they play an important
mobilising and responding to public
Additionally, there is little trace of cities in academic teaching and formal
sources of international law. As Chrystie Swiney observes,
the curricula of
academic institutions show ‘a lack of focus on cities in international law
Even though legal scholars have started to pay more attention to cities as the
objects of their research analysis, the topic is still
a burgeoning field of law
in need of further
investigation.
Likewise, the formal international law sources reflect the same thing. Article
2(1) of the
Vienna Convention of the Law of Treaties
definition of the ‘treaty’ to only ‘international agreements
concluded between
Article 38 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice
the sources of international law to state practice and agreements among
Article 25(3) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States
expressly excludes the
independent standing of sub-national governments as a party to investment
disputes and disregards them as
independent bearers of
responsibility.
Although cities are almost invisible in formal sources of international law
and are overshadowed by the state-centric architecture
of public international
law, the trajectory of the development of modern international law has usually
been affected by non-state
actors in addition to sovereign
Cities are a recent and peculiar example of these influential non-state actors.
As Martti Koskenniemi argues, international law today
has two opposing
characteristics and those are rigorous formalism and political
open-endedness.
This means that
the making, interpretation and application of laws within the international
legal order are influenced not only by
formal sources, rules, principles and
actors of international law but also by open-ended politics and contestations
between states,
non-state actors and societal forces. Indeed, the oscillation
between formalism (formal rules and principles) and realism (contestation
established rules or established interpretation of rules) is part of ‘the
standard experience of any international lawyer
in the normal contexts of
academy or practice’.
is also part of the generative grammar of international
In other words,
international law reconstructs itself through these opposing aspects.
Drawing upon Koskenniemi’s distinction between the formal aspect and
argumentative aspect (or politics) of international law,
the role and status of
cities and sub-state governments appear to be driven more by the politics
surrounding international law than
by its formal aspects, such as established
rules and principles.
the distinction between formalism and realism, it seems that the formal rules,
principles and institutions of international
law do not easily lend themselves
to accommodating local government authority in international lawmaking and
law-applying. This is
because local governments, in general, lack international
legal personality, depriving them of the capacity to independently form
relations, which is a necessary precondition for claiming authority to create
laws under international
Despite lacking recognised legal personality in public international law, cities
can influence the development of public international
law by engaging in its
Despite the lack of formal status in what is commonly known as hard law
sources of international law, cities are proactively engaged
in several global
governance areas, including human rights, environmental protection and climate
governance.
For instance, the significant capacity of cities to fill the gap related to the
slow progress of states in curbing their greenhouse
gas (‘GHG’)
emissions is acknowledged time and again by different United Nations
In the context of climate governance, it is enough to mention two statistical
facts about the significant potential of cities in
mitigating climate change:
more than half of the world population lives in urban
and more than 70% of
anthropogenic GHG emissions originate from cities and urban-related
operations.
Importantly, several
main emission sources, including the building sector, transportation and waste
management, have strong ties
with cities’ daily
operations.
These are areas that
often fall under cities’ authority to
Therefore, the special
position of cities in regulating these climate-related areas makes them
important actors in delivering climate
governance objectives.
In the same vein, in 2015 the number of
transnational and local city networks amounted to 170 and this number has grown
These networks pursue
their own independent initiatives for tackling global governance issues and
their importance for galvanising
international law norms and goals at a local
level, such as the realisation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, is being
time and again by leading international
institutions.
The considerable
size, range of actions and ambitious targets of these networks are remarkable.
The biggest and one of the oldest
of these global city networks is the UCLG,
which comprises 240,000 sub-national members at different tiers across 140
Constitution
states that ‘[s]tates cannot centrally manage and control
the complex integrated cities and towns of today and
Moreover, the
UCLG has an internal governing structure consisting of the General Assembly,
World Council and Executive Bureau that
meet regularly, produce normative
documents such as declarations and pacts, and set goals for the organisation to
As such, it is one of
the most important city networks that cooperates with different bodies of the UN
including UN-Habitat, and
fosters city governments’ capacity in
supranational regulations.
Another notable example is the C40, which is primarily active in climate
governance and has about 100 member
The C40 is actively
present in Conferences of the Parties (‘COPs’) to the
Framework Convention on Climate Change
Climate Change
’) and its primary goal is to unite cities to
‘confront the climate
exemplified in the adoption of a series of mandatory membership criteria by the
C40 Steering Committee, which requires city
members to adopt ‘climate
action plan aligned with the 1.5˚C ambition of the
’ to remain on track to meet their
It also convenes an
initiative called Cities Race to Zero by which city members commit to
‘reach (net‑) zero in the 2040s
or sooner, or by mid-century at the
latest’ and report on their progress
These illustrative examples of supranational cooperation among cities through
networks or multilateral regulation of global issues
indicate the growing
presence of cities in mitigating global challenges. This not only grants cities
the ability to govern and steer
supra-state matters but also provides them with
a normative and regulatory capacity that has significant connotations for the
In the following sections,
we will go through some of these connotations.
GAP BETWEEN CONSTITUTIONAL INCAPACITY AND FUNCTIONAL CAPACITY: VOLUNTARY
COMMITMENT AS A TOOL FOR SELF‑EMPOWERMENT
As Ran Hirschl argues, in the Westphalian legal system cities are
constitutionally voiceless.
is because national constitutions are central in defining competencies for
foreign relations, and these competencies are among
the constitutionally
entrenched competencies of central governments rather than cities and local
tiers of government.
Nonetheless, the rise of cities on the global stage is a challenge to the idea
of cities as voiceless governmental units. Indeed,
the constitutional
competencies of local governments fall short of being the only factor in
determining the proactive role of cities
in supranational
Global environmental governance shows that cities and other tiers of local
government have not been the simple followers of states
in their supranational
agendas and policy preferences due to constitutional
incapacity.
Indeed, the growing
prevalence of multi-level governance arrangements allows cities to pursue their
local interests against their
national governments’
This has occurred even among those sub-state units that have a thin
constitutional competency concerning energy regulation, not to
even speak of
formal capacity to engage supranationally in climate-related governance
Thus, a direct causal
relationship between the constitutional capacity and the engagement of local
governments in supranational decision-making
forums cannot be firmly
established.
In this respect, one explanation for cities’ increasing interest in
global decision‑making processes is the expansion
of decision-making over
a wide range of issues at the global level and the unmediated impact of those at
the local level.
mobilised them to create a niche in the global legal
Using such global niches,
they protect those local interests that go beyond the confines of national
borders, such as environmental
policy. Borrowing from Simona Piattoni, one of
the consequences of these developments is that states have lost their
gatekeeping
capacity, as solo actors on supranational
This provides cities and
other sub-state entities with opportunities to bypass states and engage with
international and global forums
decision-making.
Despite the
evolving situation regarding sub-state governments’ legal personality on a
supranational level
crucial questions, sub-state governments use the fluid, multi‑level
governance structures of the global order to
pursue claims ‘without
laissez‑passer
’ such as constitutional
competency.
The spillover effect
of the growth of this practice can either be an increase in dialogue between
local and central governments about
the governance of supranational issues or
possible jurisdictional
As such, the supranational presence of cities seems to be partly the logical
consequence of the increased decentralisation of
and the prominence of
multi-level governance arrangements at national and supranational
In this regard, one can
see that the involvement of cities in global norm-making centres is
characterised by peculiar modes of authority-building.
Indeed, cities empower
themselves by employing the language of commitment towards the implementation of
existing international rules.
By undertaking commitments to realise the
substance of already existing international legal norms, cities are able to
build up authority
Let us consider one
example: following the withdrawal of the United States from the
, several American cities signed the
Chicago Climate Charter
Chicago Charter
’) and announced that they will comply with
Paris Agreement
despite the US central government’s
The preamble of the
Chicago Charter
states that the
specifically cites ‘the importance of cities and local
governments in engaging in climate
The preamble continues as follows: ‘President Trump’s decision to
withdraw the United States from the
Paris Agreement
spurred over 380
cities in the US ... to commit themselves to the
agreement’.
The voluntary undertaking of commitments seems to serve a double purpose for
both overcoming the lack of formal legal capacity under
the international law
structure and for contesting nation-state decisions. The result of employing the
language of commitment is
that when local governments commit themselves to
implement an international rule, they indirectly claim the authority to act
on their functional suitability. In other words, they claim competence to
complement states’ commitments under public international
law, to fill the
gap caused by a state’s reluctance regarding the discharge of their
international commitments, or to regulate
an unregulated global governance area.
As such, cities contest nation‑states’ monopoly on international
norm-making by
either advocating for the provisions and objectives of
international agreements or by the local incorporation of norms that their
states are reluctant to
LAW AND THE CITY: CHARACTERISTICS OF CITIES’ ENGAGEMENT IN GLOBAL
of International Law and Global Law
Cities promote their supranational presence along two distinct but
interconnected frontiers of international law and global
Different conceptions of legality, enforcement and authority guide these two
legal universes. The former is a legal space that is,
though not exclusively,
directed by sovereign states. The latter is characterised by fluid authority and
is occupied by various actors
with norm-making capacity that could affect the
state-centric system of international law. These two universes overlap and
by lending and borrowing different aspects (such as language,
expertise, authority and formality) from one
For instance, the international environmental regime has hybrid characteristics
belonging to each of these
In the international law domain, there is growing acknowledgment of
cities’ significance in implementing international law norms
objectives, particularly in areas like environmental protection and global
sustainable development.
play dual roles, serving as both specific objects of regulation under
international law
strategic partners of international institutions in the implementation of
international rules.
mentioned in the previous section, cities are gaining more visibility as
influential actors in the politics of international law.
The strategic
partnerships between cities, global city networks and international
organisations, as well as the active contributions
of cities and local
governments in recent COPs to the
Paris Agreement
Convention on
Biological Diversity
, show that local governments and cities are gaining a
firmer foothold in the politics of international
Although these engagements and cooperations in international norm-making
forums and with international institutions have not led to
recognition of cities’ roles by states, international courts or tribunals,
there has been an incremental acceptance
of their contributions to both the
development and implementation of international legal norms. For instance, the
UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights highlights the crucial role of cities in
complementing the responsibility of states in promoting and protecting
international human rights
Another notable example is the proactive contribution of local governments to
Kunming–Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework
, which led to
the recognition of the significance of cities’ submissions in the
development of the post-2020
Global Biodiversity
Despite such developments, it seems that cities remain more as objects of
regulation or similarly as instruments for the implementation
of international
law rules rather than legal subjects with legal personality in public
international
As a result, the puzzling questions related to accountability and enforcement of
commitments undertaken by cities remain unanswered.
The main reason for this, as
was mentioned earlier, is tied up with the lack of independent legal personhood
of cities at a supra-state
This prevents them from
possessing full ‘actorness’ since even if they undertake
commitments, they cannot be held legally
responsible for those commitments under
a doctrinal perspective of international law due to their lack of legal
personality in public
international law.
There are two ways to study cities’ exercise of supranational
regulatory authority. Those are either studying cities’
actorness within
international law structures or the frame of global law. The space of
international law has a stronger doctrinal
emphasis and stands on certain
principles, such as the doctrine of state
responsibility.
In this setting,
as mentioned, cities are invisible units of
Even when attention is
paid to cities, they are seen as strategic partners for implementing
international norms, rather than as subjects
capable of exercising supranational
norm-making authority.
In contrast to international law, the domain of
global law seems to be the main ground on which cities are emerging as global
In this respect, global law proposes a different legal imaginary that is
opposed to the ‘sovereigntist’ and state‑centric
imaginary of
international law, which is predominantly based on the monopolisation of legal
personality by states.
if we look at the supranational presence of cities purely from an international
law perspective, we might miss the bigger
picture. That bigger picture offers a
fuller scene, showing a multiplicity of different actors on different levels and
areas of governance
that can make and apply norms crossing national polities.
The benefit of global law language is that it acknowledges the multi-level
character of supranational norm‑making and is more descriptively accurate
in depicting the influential role of other non-state
actors capable of producing
norms that would have supra-state reach.
This paper proposes the framework and language of global law as a better
prism for studying the emergence of cities in global governance.
The importance
of adopting new and more dynamic approaches for the study of cities is also
important due to growing global urbanisation
and the intensive effects of global
crises, such as climate change and pandemics, on urban centres because of the
concentration of
population, infrastructure and capital in
This indicates there is
a burden on legal scholars, especially international lawyers, to take cities
seriously in supranational forms
of lawmaking and try to understand this
phenomenon more accurately rather than excluding it through a monist,
state‑centric
But what is global law? The best way to explain this is to map three main
characteristics of global law. First, global law transcends
demarcated state
Second, it crosses internal–external and private–public dichotomies
and connects these dichotomies in the process of
the creation and application of
Lastly, it lacks an
institutionalised centre such as an organisation or tribunal with authority to
produce norms or decide about
normative conflicts between
In a classic but still valid article, Gunther Teubner articulates his ideas
of global law by using the example of
lex mercatoria
and global corporate
governance.
Teubner argues
global law grows out of ‘the social peripheries, not from the political
centres of nation-states and international
institutions’.
In a subsequent writing Teubner states:
[T]he source of the new global law is no longer only institutionalized
politics which
is still not really global but only international
, but also and especially other social systems that in the race to
globalization have long overtaken politics. The economy, not just
the economy
but other social sectors such as science, technology, the mass media, ... are,
on their specific path to globalization,
developing a massive requirement for
norms that is met not by governmental and intergovernmental institutions but by
themselves in
direct action upon the
Cities and city networks can be added to this list. These normative sectors
are not limited to
lex mercatoria
and could be equally valid in other
areas of transnational regulations, including
lex sportiva
environmental law, the regulation of emerging technologies, and various other
emerging fields, including trans-local law
as a growing field within global
Therefore, global law, in general terms, refers to the global reach of law
regardless of national boundaries. These are legal norms
made by non-sovereign
and non-state actors who interact on a global scale and coordinate their
activities regardless of national
law is and who can make legal norms supranationally. As such, global legal norms
national legal systems by means of internally making and applying legal
norms (norms that are applicable only to members of a cooperation
supranational forms of cooperation.
The universe of global law comprises interacting normative communities on a
supranational scale, including private global regulatory
bodies such as the
International Sustainability Standards Board and International Accounting
Standards Board.
These entities
are guided by distinct conceptions of legality, which may differ from the
criteria used in public international law
or national jurisdictions to determine
what constitutes a legal norm.
As Neil Walker argues:
On this view, the national level remains important ... Crucially, however,
national law and the actors of the national legal system
are less and less
self-contained and self-reliant. They are increasingly unlikely to operate in
isolation, without the catalyst,
guidance, support, moderation or challenge of
regulatory forms situated beyond the national jurisdiction or otherwise not
coterminous
with the national jurisdiction, or without effects on destinations
situated beyond or otherwise not coterminous with the national
whether these be legal rule-making sites or decision-taking
Within the realm of global law, cities demonstrate their potential for
supranational cooperation and multilateral formulation of rules
that impact the
structure and content of their local laws and policies.
Trans-Local
Law: A Growing Imaginary of the Global Legal Order
As mentioned, city governments have gone beyond the local and national
borders and are increasingly taking actions in areas that fall
outside the neat,
categorical divisions of local, national and
international.
In her scholarly
works on the idea of the global city, Saskia Sassen shows how cities can bypass
local and national scales and become
significant actors on the supra-state scale
even though cities are traditionally perceived as locally bounded
By providing examples from three global cities — New York, London and
Tokyo — Sassen convincingly argues that these cities
have been able to
cooperate independently and can significantly influence the trajectory of the
global economy.
This line of
argument has been further developed by international politics scholars, such as
Michele Acuto, who assert that cities,
in addition to impacting the global
economy, are also building the capability to influence global
governance.
Turning to the
global capacity of cities, although the city is prima facie a local entity
tasked with performing certain functions
in relation to the local public, this
does not preclude the fact that cities cannot interact with the global scale and
transnationally.
With respect to the global presence of cities, the present paper proposes the
trans-local
to grasp the normative transactions not only between
cities but also between cities and the principal actors of international law,
including states and international organisations. Trans-locality could be
defined as the interconnection and interaction between
localities beyond the
local and national boundaries. Applying that definition of trans-locality,
localities, including cities, would
not merely be locally bounded entities; they
can form interrelations not only with other localities but also with
international forums
of norm-making. These interrelationships could be seen in
diverse contexts of environmental, economic, construction and sociocultural
policies of a locality which are either formed by voluntary adherence to
international legal norms or by independent agreement among
cities to abide by
certain norms and standards.
One example of this is the Net Zero Carbon Buildings Accelerator, which is an
initiative signed by 29 cities that are members of the
The member cities
commit ‘to enact regulations and planning policy to ensure new buildings
operate at net zero carbon by 2030
and all buildings by
It exemplifies not only the norms developed by cities in the form of intercity
cooperation to mitigate global warming but also the
independent and voluntary
incorporation of the objectives of an international agreement, specifically, the
Paris Agreement
. In this respect, the notion of trans-local law seeks to
describe and analyse the multilateral arrangements among localities that
produce normative documents with the result of influencing the behaviour of
local governments through local laws and local policies.
There remains a question looming behind the supranational regulatory
authority of cities: does the accumulation of normative documents
and city-made
commitments have any legal character? To take this to its extreme, could the
normative engagement of cities in global
governance lead to the development of a
special trans-local legal regime, or in a sense, a normative community capable
of regulating
the acts of city governments? One could say that the growing
development of the body of standardised practices and normative agreements
cities and local governments is aimed at regulating those city behaviours that
have a global dimension, such as environmental
policies. These demonstrate two
important characteristics of cities’ supranational regulatory claims.
First, cities use the language of international law, including human rights
treaties and other agreements made between states. Drawing
on Neil Walker,
international law provides an important platform (or language) for actors who
are not traditionally understood as
actors of international law but are
nonetheless active and emerging non-state actors in the decentralised space of
global law.
International law
finds a capricious quality here. It is both an enabling and a limiting factor in
relation to cities’ supranational
norm-making capacity (due to their lack
of international legal personality). In other words, the formal sources and
principles of
international law give the necessary language to cities to begin
with their presence on the global norm-making landscape.
Second, cities and their supranational normative instruments (declarations,
initiatives, etc) grow an independent-like language that
seems to ignore the
principles underpinning the dominance of sovereign states in international law
— principles that limit
local governments’ capacity to have
supranational standing. Indeed, the supranational regulatory authority of cities
fall short of a fully differentiated normative order, but it depicts an
independent identity indicating an emerging normative order.
For instance, the
Pact for the Future of Humanity
adopted by the UCLG starts as
We, local and regional governments and their associations from around the
world, representing communities large and small, metropolitan,
rural and urban,
gathered at the 7
UCLG World Congress ... under the theme of Local
and Regional Governments Breaking through as One, adopted the Pact for the
of humanity
The text above illustrates how some of these normative documents which are
made by similar multilateral arrangements among city governments
constitutional tone. Such a tone is characterised by the use of the first plural
pronoun, the use of the present tense verb
in provisions and the devising of a
list of rights resembling international human rights treaties or national
constitutional bills
These characteristics provide multilateral arrangements of cities with a form of
legitimacy and authority to effectively bypass national
governments in
implementing international treaties and norms, which also challenges the
nation-state claims as the only relevant
representative of public interests in
supranational regulatory
Law as the Fertile Ground for Cities’ Supranational Authority
Three consequences could be speculated from supranational governance by
cities. First, the emergence and development of city governments
transnational level will influence the content and the trajectory of the
international legal system. The supra-state effect
of this development would
enable cities to gain firmer footholds in the international legal system through
reserving seats around
the tables of international norm-making forums, as
illustrated by local governments’ significant presence in the COP to the
Climate Change
important since international norm-making mechanisms were traditionally under
state monopoly throughout the modern manifestation
of international law since
Second, the ramifications of this shift will not be limited to international
law but will also have spillover effects on our understanding
of other areas of
law, such as constitutional law, which have been traditionally associated with
state-centrism, as well as the relationship
between local governments and
central governments. Indeed, the example of North American cities signing the
Chicago Charter
indicates how city governments self-constitute authority
to regulate certain issues without necessarily having or even demanding
constitutional modifications in relation to the scope of their
However, this
might have capricious effects. On the one hand, it could introduce conflicts
with a normative, critical edge as in
the case of Utrecht city, and result in
robust and multi-layered protection of human rights concerning marginalised
individuals,
such as undocumented
On the other, it
could erode national constitutions as traditional legal instruments for
maintaining the rule of law and the division
of authority as well as for
determining competencies.
The last and perhaps most crucial consequence of supranational
norm‑making by cities would be the development of a form of trans-local
law within the space of global law, which influences the local ordinances, local
laws and policies of municipal governments that
are a member of a global city
network such as UCLG (a form of internal regulation). This could be explained
more clearly by adopting
the theoretical framework of a strand of legal
pluralism that was crafted by Eugene Ehrlich and was developed in one way or
by Gunther Teubner, Paul Berman, Sally Falk Moore and John
In general terms,
this strand of legal pluralism holds that in addition to state law at both
national and international levels, there
is a thick multiplicity of legal orders
interacting, overlapping and contesting each
As Paul Berman puts it, legal pluralism is an entrenched reality not only in
what we know as transnational law but also in international
law and domestic
legal orders that were traditionally conceived as monistic state‑centric
legal systems.
The emergence and development of these plural legal orders are the results of
the internal normative ordering of associations and
communities which are active
on multiple levels — local, national and global — and pursue
purposes as diverse as climate
regulation, regulation of the construction
industry, protection of human rights,
In this respect, the
norms and rules produced by cities within the structures of global city
networks, such as UCLG or C40, have
this characteristic. The law here refers to
norms that are applicable only to member cities directing the local lawmaking
choices of those cities. For instance, the signing of the
by North American cities is a form of the internal ordering of
climate-relevant policies and local laws of member cities based on
provisions of the
Paris Agreement
. The same argument could be made about
Pact for the Future of Humanity
adopted by the UCLG that, one way or
another, directs cities to align their local laws, ordinances and policies with
the norms reflected
Sceptics might question this and say that normative documents adopted because
of city governments’ supranational arrangements
are only a series of
aspirational documents.
Indeed, the issue here is not whether these documents are considered legally
binding documents when it comes to adjudication by domestic
or international
courts. They most certainly will not be given such weight when it comes to
adjudication by courts. Rather, the point
here is that the emergence and growth
of these municipal movements, conceived as normative communities in legal
pluralist terms,
constitutes a phenomenon with far-reaching significance
affecting the development of law, especially on a supranational level. This
significant because global city networks and other forms of supranational
cooperation among cities enable them to transcend state
legal systems and formal
international law structures to independently decide supranational issues
through the channels of their
normative communities (city networks
If these supranational
normative engagements are not outrightly challenged by state legal systems and
international law organisations,
they will continue to direct the policy
preferences and local laws of the involved
Another consequence of such labour for making norms within cities’
supranational cooperation arrangements will be the injection
of discourse,
especially the moral discourse of local care, as well as the discourse on
multi-level complementarity.
The result of this is not a sheer conflict and radical rapture from state legal
systems. Quite the opposite, the phenomenon suggests
a sense of multi-level
overlap and complementarity based on the re-specification of international law
rules and principles coated
with new understandings offered by local
governments. This will inevitably affect the development of law discursively, in
interpreting and applying it in courts, international tribunals or
international organisations.
One example is the report of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
cruciality of local governments for the respect, protection
and implementation
of human rights.
mirrors the idea of complementarity regarding the accountability of both state
and local governments regarding human rights
obligations.
It remains vague
as to how local governments, which have no legal personality within the monistic
structure of international law,
could be held accountable within the same
However, it
indicates that the global municipal movement in the past two decades has been
able to get acknowledgment from state-centric
institutions of international law
to highlight the importance of city governments as crucial frontline
implementers of international
Typology of Trans-Local Engagements
Based on the preceding analysis, I propose a typology for mapping trans-local
forms of cooperation and norms, which could hopefully
aid further research in
this area. It is essential to acknowledge that this typology is analytical and
the categories are not mutually
exclusive. Therefore, these forms can coexist
concurrently in reality.
Rule-making →
Referential
Spontaneous
Rule-applying →
Complementary
Incorporative
In general, trans-local engagements could be divided into two main categories
of rule-making and rule-applying. With regard to cities’
rule-making on
the supranational level, these norms are either independently created without
reference to rules of international
law or other foreign legal systems
(spontaneous) or inspired by the objectives and provisions of a treaty or
agreement that already
exists in public international law (referential). One
example of the spontaneous type of rule-making is the Net Zero Carbon Buildings
initiative, in which member cities commit to locally adhere to certain standards
and principles in their urban building
regulations.
Indeed, the initiative is crafted in the absence of any overarching
international legal framework concerning the construction of
urban buildings.
The referential category is exemplified by the
Chicago Charter
no new norm is created by cities that signed the Charter. The
reflects the ambition of signatory cities to align with the
objectives of the
Paris Agreement
, an existing international agreement,
in response to the US withdrawal from the
It is noteworthy that both referential and spontaneous types of rule-making
can involve supranational norms that conflict with a state’s
position on
an international or a global legal norm. An example of conflicting local and
national agendas is the city of San Francisco’s
advocacy of the provisions
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Despite non-ratification of the treaty by the US, the city of San Francisco
endorsed the
provisions and mainstreamed the Convention’s
objectives in its local
ordinances.
The second category concerns the rule-application aspect of trans-local
engagements. This can be divided into two subcategories: complementary
rule‑application and incorporative rule-application. The complementary
rule‑application refers to types of local engagements
in which one state
signs and ratifies an international treaty or agreement, but its sub-state units
and municipal governments take
a more ambitious approach regarding the
implementation or promotion of certain treaty objectives and provisions. One
example of complementarity
is the C40’s Climate Action Planning programme,
through which member cities may take a more ambitious approach compared to
nationally determined targets regarding climate governance and commit to set
‘ambitious interim goal[s] and/or carbon budget[s]’
by 2030 and
‘to become an emissions neutral city by 2050 at the
Incorporative rule-applying refers to instances where a city incorporates or
commits to incorporate a norm produced within a city
network or an international
law norm into its local laws. It is noteworthy that this is not equally
available to all cities due to
the difference in constitutional competencies
that local governments enjoy across different states. However, when a city has
legal capacity to make and apply laws in different areas of local
governance, this gives them enough room to import supranational
norms into their
local law’s corpus. This also enhances the enforceability of incorporated
norms, as cities become accountable
(legally or democratically) for
non-adherence when they incorporate a norm into their local or urban laws. It
means that a city or
local government can, in theory, be challenged in a
national court or have its membership in a city network suspended if it fails
abide by laws that it has incorporated in its urban laws. Moreover, unlike the
complementary rule-application, the incorporative
rule-application can align
with or diverge from national legal norms.
To illustrate, let us reconsider the example of the Net Zero Carbon Buildings
Accelerator.
The signatory
cities to this initiative committed to incorporate the targets and principles of
the initiative in their local laws
regulations.
As such, the
City of San Francisco (a member city of this initiative) incorporated those
commitments by amending its environmental
code and required ‘new
construction ... to exclude natural gas and include exclusively all-electric
energy sources’.
Although these commitments might not be enforced through international
adjudicatory bodies, once a city incorporates supranational
norms into its local
or urban laws, this opens up the possibility of holding a city liable for
non‑compliance with its own
local laws. This can be achieved through
national courts or democratic, political processes in local elections,
especially if the
non‑adherence negatively affects local residents.
V CONCLUSION
According to Barber, ‘the nation-state is failing us on a global scale.
It was the perfect political recipe for the liberty
and independence of
autonomous peoples and nations. It is utterly unsuited to
interdependence’.
Despite the growth of cities’ significance in dealing with different
crises of global character and despite their potential
for mitigating those
crises, it remains important to avoid treating cities as a panacea for solving
all the complex problems of global
governance. Indeed, we should be cautious
accompanied by new configurations of power relations that could
potentially introduce new types of centre–periphery divides
exclusions. As observed by one scholar, notwithstanding the negative effects of
global crises such as climate change on cities’
functions, the same crisis
can gather new actors around the mitigation of such crises to use cities as
platforms for shaping governance
issues for their private
This might lead to
marketing the city as a global window for private actors rather than as public
governmental entities which are
concerned with the protection of public
interests of the locals against effects of climate
Although the authority of states on regulating supranational and cross-polity
affairs has been increasingly eroded due to the socio-economic
globalisation,
states and the
state-centric structure of international law will remain important. Indeed, the
point this article tried to show is
not that engagement of cities in
supranational norm-making constitutes a rapture from the statist instruments and
structure of international
law. Rather, it is to emphasise that supranational
norm-making by cities within the space of global law will have directive and
constraining
effects on international law institutions and states. This means
that states and international law institutions are no more than
mere normative
actors when it comes to the regulation of issues with supra-state reach.
As such, the problem does not seem to lie in treating states as important
legal actors. The problem lies in excluding the constructive
role of local
levels of government that are closest to people, including cities in
supranational lawmaking processes. In other words,
the descriptive and critical
robustness of legal pluralist accounts, which is embedded in the global law
framework, is not based
on celebrating non-state actors at the expense of
excluding states. As Neil Walker argues, states will remain ‘the most
source of law within the global
‘mosaic’ characteristic of legal sources and the interaction between
state and non-state legal actors that
needs to be acknowledged more
In this respect, the development of trans-localism as a family member of
global law and governance could offer several benefits. It
could facilitate
opportunities for innovative legal experiments, relieving states from an
old-fashioned expectation that sees nation-states
as the sole resolver of all
issues on a global scale.
Further, it fills the gap in regulating those issue areas that states are
reluctant to regulate due to a lack of local knowledge
trans-localism promotes complementarity towards both making the global legal
norms and co-enforcing commitments with the
cooperation of cities. This could
also foster the interaction of cities with the domain of international law in
which cities will
continue to be informal but strategic actors. It also provides
them with the potential to affect the construction of future international
By way of conclusion, the prospect of an emerging trans-local legal regime
promotes complementarity, as the most promising type of
trans-localism, towards
co-enforcing international law commitments with the cooperation of cities. This
interactive approach could
complement the still-dominant state-centrism in both
public international and domestic public
The result of such
complementarity is the robust governance of supranational issues, which prevents
the failure of one level of regulation,
such as national or international, from
turning into a total failure for the whole global regulatory system.
PhD Candidate, Faculty of Law,
University of Helsinki. I would like to thank Professor Tuomas Ojanen and Dr
Massimo Fichera for their
invaluable insights, support and encouragement. I am
also deeply appreciative of Professor Neil Walker for his valuable comments
during my research visit to Edinburgh Law School. Moreover, I am thankful for
the time and constructive feedback given by anonymous
reviewers and the
editorial team of the
Melbourne Journal of International Law
extend my appreciation to the Oskar Öflunds Foundation and the Finnish
Section of the Nordic Federation of Public Administration
for financially supporting my work. Any error or shortcoming in the arguments
presented remains mine.
Michele Acuto and Steve
Rayner, ‘City Networks: Breaking Gridlocks or Forging (New)
Lock-Ins?’ (2016) 92(5)
International Affairs
1147, 1156–7;
‘About Us’,
United Cities and Local Governments
https://uclg.org/about-us/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8S7C-SG58
‘About C40’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40.org/about-c40/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4MMP-Q7BB
>. This paper
aims to broadly explore the involvement of sub-state units like cities,
municipalities and local governments in supra-state
norm-making activities. The
terms ‘city’, ‘municipality’ and ‘local
government’ are used interchangeably
throughout, as the focus is not on
analysing their differences. It is worth noting that while ‘city’
lacks a clear legal
definition, ‘municipality’ and ‘local
government’ are more familiar terms in legal contexts.
Katherine Schroeder,
‘Cities in International Law: The New Landscape of Global
Governance’ (2021) 61(2)
Virginia Journal of International Law
390, 396, 400. Throughout the article, the terms ‘supra-state’,
‘supranational’ and ‘transnational’
interchangeably, despite the differences they might have in literature. The
overarching intention is to broadly denote forms
of norm-making that surpass
state legal systems and extend beyond national borders, exerting regulatory
Ville de Paris v European
(Court of Justice of the European Union, T-339/16, T‑352/16
and T-391/16, ECLI:EU:T:2018:927, 13 December 2018) [19]–[20]
Paris, Bruxelles and Madrid v EC
Ibid [38]–[40], [84],
Federal Republic of Germany
v European Commission
(Court of Justice of the European Union, C-177/19 P,
C-178/19 P and C-179/19 P, ECLI:EU:C:2022:10, 13 January 2022)
[101]–[103].
Any natural or legal person, including a non-EU member state,
that is directly affected by a regulatory Act can bring an action for
of that Act under art 263 of the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European
, opened for signature 7 February 1992, [2016] OJ C 202/47 (entered
into force 1 November 1993):
Paris, Bruxelles and Madrid v EC
See generally Moritz
Baumgärtel and Barbara Oomen, ‘Pulling Human Rights Back In?: Local
Authorities, International Law
and the Reception of Undocumented Migrants’
(2019) 51(2)
Journal of Legal Pluralism and Unofficial Law
Chrystie Swiney, ‘The
Urbanization of International Law and International Relations: The Rising Soft
Power of Cities in Global
Governance’ (2020) 41(2)
Michigan Journal of
International Law
See, eg, Barbara Oomen and
Moritz Baumgärtel, ‘Frontier Cities: The Rise of Local Authorities as
an Opportunity for International
Human Rights Law’ (2018) 29(2)
European Journal of International Law
607, 625–6.
Simona Piattoni,
Theory of Multi-Level
Governance: Conceptual, Empirical, and Normative
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 29–30.
Report of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development
A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1(Vol. I) (3–14 June 1992) annex II (‘
See Gerald E Frug and David
J Barron, ‘International Local Government Law’
(2006) 38(1)
) 235 n 41.
See, eg, Frug and Barron (n
); Judith Resnik, ‘Translocal
Transnationalism: Foreign and Domestic Affairs’ (2008) (102)
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting (American Society of International Law)
341 (‘Translocal Transnationalism’); Judith Resnik, ‘Foreign
as Domestic Affairs: Rethinking Horizontal Federalism
and Foreign Affairs
Preemption in Light of Translocal Internationalism’
(2007) 57(1)
Law Journal
(‘Foreign as Domestic Affairs’); Mariana
Valverde, ‘Seeing Like a City: The Dialectic of Modern and Premodern Ways
of Seeing in Urban Governance’ (2011) 45(2)
Law and Society Review
277; Jolene Lin,
Governing Climate Change: Global Cities and
Transnational Lawmaking
(Cambridge University Press, 2018); Helmut Philipp
Aust and Janne E Nijman (eds),
Research Handbook on International Law and
(Edward Elgar, 2021).
Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties
, opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
into force 27 January 1980) (‘
Statute of the
International Court of Justice
Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
opened for signature 18 March
1965, 575 UNTS 159
into force 14 October 1966). See Frug and Barron (n
See Frug and Barron (n
) 18; Jean d’Aspremont,
‘Conclusion: Inclusive Law-‑Making and Law-‑Enforcement
Processes for an Exclusive
International Legal System’ in Jean
d’Aspremont (ed),
Participants in the
International Legal System: Multiple Perspectives on Non-State Actors in
International Law
(Routledge, 2011) 425, 428–9.
Martti Koskenniemi,
Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International Legal Argument
University Press, rev ed, 2005) 562–3.
Ibid 565 (emphasis
Ibid 563–4.
See Yishai Blank,
‘International Legal Personality/Subjectivity of Cities’ in Helmut
Philipp Aust and Janne E Nijman
Research Handbook on International Law
(Edward Elgar, 2021) 103, 106–8 (‘International Legal
Personality/Subjectivity of Cities’).
Schroeder (n
) 390–4; Acuto and Rayner (n
1147, 1151–3.
See United Nations
Environment Programme,
Climate Commitments of Subnational Actors and
Business: A Quantitative Assessment of their Emission Reduction Impact
(Report, June 2015) viii–ix, 1, 11
http://www.unep.org/resources/report/climate-commitments-subnational-actors-and-business-quantitative-assessment-their
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4T7S-P4VU
Climate Commitments of Subnational Actors and Business
Development’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.worldbank.org/en/
topic/urbandevelopment/overview
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/4LJM-2WBV
Megha Mukim and Mark
Roberts, ‘Main Messages’ in Megha Mukim and Mark Roberts (eds),
Thriving: Making Cities Green, Resilient, and Inclusive in a Changing
(World Bank, 2023) xvii, xvii; ‘Climate Change’,
(Web Page) <
https://unhabitat.org/topic/climate-change
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7ZKR-79F5
‘Cities and Climate
United Nations Environmental Programme
(Web Page) <
https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/resource-efficiency/what-we-do/cities/cities-and-climate-change
archived at <
https://perma.cc/H5RX-LMXX
>. See also
the C40 Climate Action Plan Inventory that measures waste as one major source of
urban-related emissions: ‘Greenhouse
Gas Emissions Interactive
Dashboard’,
C40 Knowledge Hub
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40knowledgehub.org/s/article/C40-cities-greenhouse-gas-emissions-interactive-dashboard?language=en_US
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/H5SN-9RSW
Frug and Barron (n
Acuto and Rayner (n
) 244–7, 264.
United Cities and Local
Governments,
Who Are We?
(Fact Sheet) <
https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/uclg_who_we_are_0.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7UTW-V78Y
Constitution
of the World Organisation of United Cities and Local
Governments
(signed and entered into force 5 May 2004) <
https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/eng_constitution
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/MVT5-5YPG
Constitution
Ibid arts 32–3, 35,
39–41, 45, 48–9, 55.
‘Our Cities’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40.org/cities/
>, archived
https://perma.cc/7624-3KUK
See, eg, C40,
(Report, 31 March 2023) 6 <
https://www.c40.org/wp‑content/uploads/2023/03/C40-Cities-Annual-Report-2022_
Published-Online-31-Mar-2023.pdf>
, archived at <
https://perma.cc/RP6U-2ZNM
‘About C40’ (n
C40 Cities Steering
Committee, ‘Statement by the C40 Cities Steering Committee on the
Organisation’s New Leadership Standards’
(Press Statement, C40
Cities, 6 January 2021) <
https://www.c40.org/news/statement-by-the-c40-cities-steering-committee/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/Z2XG-LT4P
‘Cities Race to
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40.org/what-we-do/building-a-movement/cities-race-to-zero/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/6452-DKJF
For more information on the
relationship between the power to govern and the power to regulate, see
Jiří Přibáň,
Constitutional Imaginaries: A
Theory of European Societal Constitutionalism
(Routledge, 2022) 21–3,
Ran Hirschl,
State: Constitutionalism and the Megacity
(Oxford University Press, 2020)
Tom Ginsburg,
‘Comparative Foreign Relations Law: A National Constitutions
Perspective’ in Curtis A Bradley (ed),
The Oxford Handbook of
Comparative Foreign Relations Law
(Oxford University Press, 2019) 62,
See, eg, Elin Royles and
Nicola McEwen, ‘Empowered for Action?: Capacities and Constraints in
Sub-State Government Climate
Action in Scotland and Wales’ (2015) 24(6)
Environmental Politics
1034, 1043–4.
See, eg, Chicago Council on
Global Affairs,
The Chicago Climate Charter: North American Cities Taking
Action on Climate
(Summit Report, December 2018) (‘
Chicago Climate
Charter Summit Report 2018
’). See also
UCLG Constitution
). The preamble to the UCLG
Constitution
emphasises the inability of states to ‘manage and control the complex
integrated cities and towns of today’ and indicates
the need of cities to
pursue their local interests.
See, eg, Royles and McEwen
) 1033–4. See also Elin
Royles, ‘Sub-State Diplomacy: Understanding the International Opportunity
Structures’ (2017)
Regional and Federal Studies
author argues that ‘[g]reater autonomous external projection was evident
in the policy domains where the Welsh Government
had least constitutional basis
for international activity’: at 407. It can be inferred that
constitutional competencies alone
do not solely determine the extent of
engagement by cities and sub-state tiers of government in transnational
norm-making and decision-making
Jan Klabbers, Anne Peters
and Geir Ulfstein,
Constitutionalization of International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2009) 93.
Piattoni (n
‘International Legal Personality/Subjectivity of Cities’ (n
Piattoni (n
Corporation v United Mexican States (Award)
(ICSID Arbitral Tribunal, Case
No ARB(AF)/97/1, 30 August 2000) [73]. See also
Willem v France
Court of Human Rights, Chamber, Application No 10883/05, 16 July 2009)
For a comparative analysis
of decentralisation and the empowerment of local authorities, see Liesbet
Hooghe, Gary Marks and Arjan
The Rise of Regional Authority: A
Comparative Study of 42 Democracies
(Routledge, 2010) ch 4.
See Martin Jänicke,
‘The Multi-Level System of Global Climate Governance: The Model and its
Current State’ (2017)
Environmental Policy and Governance
Chris Thornhill,
‘Rights and Constituent Power in the Global
Constitution
International Journal of Law in Context
357, 365. Thornhill argues
that legal and political actors often utilise the language of rights to empower
themselves in norm-making
and decision-making. Interestingly, at the global
level, local governments have adopted the language of commitments or obligations
instead of rights as a strategy to establish their supra‑state norm-making
Chicago Climate
(signed and entered into force 4–5 December); Office of the
Mayor of the City of Chicago, ‘Mayor Emanuel and Global Mayors
Chicago Climate Charter at the North American Climate Summit’ (Press
Release, 5 December 2017) <
https://www.chicago.gov/city/en/depts/mayor/press_room/press_releases/2017/december/ChicagoClimateSummitCharter.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/N99R-4AL4
Climate Charter
) Preamble.
Schroeder (n
See David J Gordon and
Kristin Ljungkvist, ‘Theorizing the Globally Engaged City in World
Politics’ (2022) 28(1)
European Journal of International Relations
Neil Walker,
Intimations
of Global Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 50–1, 58–9. One
example of such interaction is the preamble to the
Constitution
the language of the preamble to the
Charter of the United Nations
UCLG Constitution
Climate Commitments of
Subnational Actors and Business
For instance, UN
Sustainable Development Goal 11 in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
focuses on urban areas and cities:
Transforming Our World: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development
, GA Res 70/1, UN Doc A/RES/70/1 (25
September 2015) paras 21–2, 34. See also Mirko Sossai, ‘Invisibility
of Cities in
Classical International Law’ in Helmut Philipp Aust and Janne
E Nijman (eds),
Research Handbook on International Law and Cities
Elgar, 2021) 64, 71–3.
Kunming–Montreal
Global Biodiversity Framework
, Decision 15/4, 15
mtg, Agenda
Item 9A, UN Doc CBD/COP/DEC/15/4 (19 December 2022) 2 (‘
Biodiversity Framework
’). See also
Report of the Conference of the
Parties Serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement on Its
Third Session, Held in
Glasgow from 31 October to 13 November 2021
1/CMA.3, UN Doc FCCC/PA/CMA/2021/10/Add.1 (8 March 2022) 9 [88].
Local Government and
Human Rights: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
, UN GAOR, 51
sess, Agenda Items 2–3, UN Doc
A/HRC/51/10 (22 July 2022) 12 [55] (‘
Local Government and Human
Global Biodiversity
, UN Doc CBD/COP/DEC/15/4
Janne Nijman, ‘The
Future of the City and the International Law of the Future’ in Sam Muller
et al (eds),
The Law of the Future and the Future of Law
(Torkel Opsahl
Academic EPublisher, 2011) 213, 224–5 <
https://www.toaep.org/ps-pdf/11-muller-zouridis-frishman-kistemaker
archived at <
https://perma.cc/GJ9F-GKLV
>. See Gordon
and Ljungkvist (n
) 66; Oomen
and Baumgärtel (n
citing Yishai Blank, ‘Localism in the New Global Legal Order’
Harvard International Law Journal
, 266–9 and Yishai
Blank, ‘The City and the World’
(2006) 44(3)
Columbia Journal of
Transnational Law
, 898; Schroeder (n
) 368–72, 375–7, 390, 412.
See Ngaire Naffine,
‘Who Are Law’s Persons? From Cheshire Cats to Responsible
(2003) 66(3)
Modern Law Review
Frug and Barron (n
) 19–20; Swiney (n
Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
, GA Res 56/83, UN GAOR,
plen mtg, Agenda Item 162, UN Doc
A/RES/56/83 (28 January 2002) annex (‘
Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts
See above Part II.
Frug and Barron (n
) 2–3; Swiney (n
) 248–9; Nijman (n
Montevideo Convention on
the Rights and Duties of States
, opened for signature 26 December
[1936] LNTSer 9
(entered into force 26 December 1934) art 2. See Nijman (n
New Urban Agenda
Res 71/256, UN GAOR, 71
plen mtg, Agenda Item
20, UN Doc A/RES/71/256 (25 January 2017, adopted 23 December 2016) annex,
Gunther Teubner,
‘“Global Bukowina”: Legal Pluralism in the World
Society’ in Gunther Teubner (ed),
Global Law without a State
(Dartmouth, 1997) 3.
Gunther Teubner,
‘Global Private Regimes: Neo-Spontaneous Law and Dual
Constitution
Autonomous Sectors?’ in Karl-Heinz Ladeur (ed),
Public Governance in
the Age of Globalization
(Ashgate, 2004) 71, 73 (emphasis added).
See Roger Cotterrell,
‘What is Transnational Law?’
(2012) 37(2)
Law and Social
, 500. On the trajectory of international law in face of global
urbanisation, see Nijman (n
See generally ‘About
the International Sustainability Standards Board’,
https://www.ifrs.org/groups/international-sustainability-standards-board/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/ZQ7K-MKKG
‘About the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.ifrs.org/groups/international-accounting-standards-board/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/E4XP-V8BN
In general, the doctrinal
perspective in public international law takes a norm as a legal norm when it is
reflected in a treaty or
agreement that State X has signed and ratified, or
reflected in the opinion or decision of an international court or tribunal whose
international law and State X has not consistently objected
to that norm: see
Statute of the International Court of Justice
) art 2. On the juridical nature of
customary practices in international law, see
North Sea Continental Shelf
(Federal Republic of Germany v Denmark) (Judgment)
[1969] ICJ Rep 3, 44
See above n
and accompanying text.
Saskia Sassen,
Global City: New York, London, Tokyo
(Princeton University Press,
ed, 2013) 171–2, 330.
For a discussion on the
concept of a ‘global city’, see ibid.
Acuto and Rayner (n
) 1147–51. See also Kristin
Ljungkvist,
The Global City 2.0: From Strategic Site to Global Actor
(Routledge, 2016) ch 3.
See Sassen (n
) 171–2; Acuto and Rayner (n
‘Net Zero Carbon
Buildings Accelerator’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40.org/accelerators/net-zero-carbon-buildings/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/W524-QCZ6
See Walker (n
United Cities and Local
Governments Congress,
Pact for the Future of Humanity: The Daejeon Political
Declaration
(Declaration) 3 <
https://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/
uclgpactforthe_future.pdf
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/5DXH-VJLB
Daejeon Political Declaration
Schroeder (n
Ibid; Oomen and
Baumgärtel (n
628–30; Judith Resnik, ‘The Internationalism of American Federalism:
Missouri and Holland’
(2008) 73(4)
Missouri Law Review
1116–21. On the supremacy of national government in matters related to
foreign policy, see, eg,
Crosby v National Foreign Trade Council
[2000] USSC 54
, 389–91 (2000).
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
, opened for signature 4 June
1992, 1771 UNTS
(entered into force 21 March 1994).
Chicago Climate
); Schroeder (n
also Oomen and Baumgärtel (n
For a discussion on
legal pluralism and globalisation, see generally Gunther Teubner (ed),
Law without a State
(Dartmouth, 1997); Gunther Teubner,
Autopoietic System
, tr Anne Bankowska and Ruth Adler (Blackwell, 1993); John
Griffiths, ‘What is Legal Pluralism?’
(1986) 18(24)
Legal Pluralism and Unofficial Law
; Paul Schiff Berman,
Global Legal
Pluralism: A Jurisprudence of Law Beyond Borders
(Cambridge University
Press, 2012); Sally Falk Moore,
Comparing Impossibilities: Selected Essays of
Sally Falk Moore
(HAU Books, 2016) ch 11; Sally Falk Moore, ‘Local
People and Global Goings-On: An African Story’ in Paul Schiff Berman
The Oxford Handbook of Global Legal Pluralism
(Oxford University Press,
2020) 41, 64–5.
Brian Z Tamanaha,
Legal Pluralism Explained: History, Theory, Consequences
University Press, 2021) 169–86.
Paul Schiff Berman,
‘The Evolution of Global Legal Pluralism’ in Roger Cotterrell and
Maksymilian Del Mar (eds),
Authority in Transnational Legal Theory:
Theorising across Disciplines
(Edward Elgar, 2016) 151, 151; Acuto and
See above 12–13;
Cotterrell (n
) 520–1; Acuto
and Rayner (n
Daejeon Political
Declaration
10–11, 14–15, 17–18.
) 178–9, 191.
Cotterrell (n
) 520–1; Resnik, ‘Foreign as
Domestic Affairs’ (n
40–1, 78–80; Oomen and Baumgärtel (n
‘Translocal Transnationalism’ (n
Cities are the most
proximate level of government to people, and the most caring level of government
too because of such proximity:
A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1(Vol. I) (n
Local Government and
Human Rights
[48]–[50], [53].
See, eg, ibid
15–16 [67]–[72];
Climate Commitments of Subnational Actors and
C40 Cities,
Zero Carbon Buildings Declaration: How Cities Are Delivering Low Carbon and
Energy Efficient Buildings
(Annual City Progress Report, February 2022)
C40 Net Zero Carbon Buildings Declaration
Chicago Climate
Charter Summit Report 2018
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
, opened for
signature 1 March
1980, 1249 UNTS 13
(entered into force 3 September 1981).
SF, Cal, Admin Code ch
33A (2017).
Climate Action Plans’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40.org/what-we-do/raising-climate-ambition/1-5c-climate-action-plans/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/
‘Net Zero Carbon
Buildings Accelerator’,
(Web Page) <
https://www.c40.org/accelerators/net-zero-carbon-buildings/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/6SBU-3DZC
C40 Net Zero Carbon
Buildings Declaration
SF, Cal, Ordinance 8-20
(28 January 2017).
Benjamin R Barber,
Mayors Ruled the World: Dysfunctional Nations, Rising Cities
University Press, 2013) 3.
David J Gordon,
‘Global Urban Climate Governance in Three and a Half Parts:
Experimentation, Coordination, Integration (and
Contestation)’ (2018) 9(6)
WIREs Climate Change
e546:1–15, 9–10.
Acuto and Rayner
) 23–4; Nijman (n
) 223–4, 229.
) 16 (emphasis omitted).
Baumgärtel (n
) 628; Simon Curtis
‘Cities and Global Governance: State Failure or a New Global Order?’
(2016) 44(3)
Millennium: Journal of International Studies
Baumgärtel (n
) 608; Acuto and
) 224–5, 228.
See Tamanaha (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (597 KB)
PDF format (435 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter