URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2017/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Waters, Emily; Bond, Christine; Eriksson, Li --- "Examining the Accuracy of Print Media Representations of Homicide in Australia" [2017] CICrimJust 19; (2017) 29(2) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 137
Examining the Accuracy of Print Media Representations of Homicide
in Australia
Emily Waters,
Lethal violence is particularly ‘newsworthy’, and international
research suggests that media representations of homicides
provide a distorted
depiction of the actual nature and risk of homicides. Understanding media
portrayals of homicide is important
given the impact crime reporting may have on
public opinion and policymaking. However, much of the past research has been
in the United States and the United Kingdom. Using a sample of
Australian newspaper articles published between 1 July 2008 and 30
this study focuses on whether media representations of homicide are consistent
with the actual characteristics of homicide
in Australia (as reported in the
National Homicide Monitoring Program (Bryant & Cussen 2015) data). This
study revealed mixed
findings. Although the reporting in the sample was
inconsistent
with official homicide victim and situational
characteristics, the reported offender characteristics were
the actual characteristics of offenders in Australia.
media – newspaper – homicide – newsworthy
– Australia
Introduction
News is a social construction. Rather than presenting ‘the
facts’, media outlets deliberately choose to include certain
not others in their crime reporting (Chermak & Chapman 2007). Homicide
(defined as the unlawful killing of a person,
including murder and manslaughter:
Bryant & Cussen 2015) is particularly ‘newsworthy’, and
international research
suggests that homicides are over-reported in the media
(Chermak & Chapman 2007; Gekoski, Gray & Adler
For example, Chermak
and Chapman (2007) found that while homicide accounts for less than one per cent
of reported crimes in the United
States (‘US’), it features in over
15 per cent of crime stories in newspapers. The over-representation of homicide
crime reporting can be explained — at least in part — by the way
in which homicides commonly contain characteristics
that research suggests
editors and journalists use in selecting and writing stories. These assessments
reflect ‘news values’
(such as predictability, simplification, risk,
violence or conflict, and graphic imagery) that infer judgements about what will
appealing to the public (Jewkes 2015). However, it is not just that homicide
itself is newsworthy as it fits into many of the news
values due to its violent,
graphic and ‘risky’ nature. These values also influence which
homicides are reported, resulting
in a mismatch between the
‘reality’ of homicide and its representation in the media.
International research also suggests the particular circumstances of
homicides that are more likely to reflect these news values.
Particular victim,
offender and situational characteristics appear to increase the news value of
homicides (Hong 2008; Lundman 2003;
Peelo et al. 2004). For example, research
shows that homicides involving children and the elderly, female victims and
strangers are
more likely to be reported in the media (Buckler & Travis
2005; Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro 2013; Johnstone, Hawkins &
1994; Peelo et al. 2004; Pritchard & Hughes 1997; Sorenson, Manz & Berk
However, the research to date has examined media reporting of homicide in the
US and the United Kingdom (‘UK’), with little
research on how
homicides are reported in Australia. Although homicide is a rare occurrence in
Australia (1.07 per 100,000 people)
(Bryant & Cussen 2015), whether its
portrayal by media outlets is distorted (and which features are misrepresented)
an important issue. Regardless of its rarity compared to other nations,
how lethal violence is portrayed in the Australian news media
has important
implications for public perceptions of safety and, in turn, criminal justice
policymaking. Given that the media is
a key source of information for the public
(Beckett & Sasson 2003; Duwe 2000), it is not surprising that the portrayal
in the media has been linked to increased fear of victimisation
(Grabosky 1995; Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak 2009; Reiner 2002).
perceptions of crime and fear of victimisation may in turn increase
receptiveness to tough-on-crime policies, although the
effect may be small
(Roberts & Indermaur 2007; Scheingold 1991).
Media representations of crime can also influence public policy as
policymakers sometimes use media coverage to determine what the
public opinion
is concerning crime (Beckett & Sasson 2003). In Australia, recent examples
include the various statutes passed
concerning so-called ‘one-punch
homicides’. The enactment of such laws in the Northern Territory, Western
Australia and
New South Wales (for example, increased sentencing penalties for
violent offending by intoxicated persons, and mandatory minimum
sentences), is a
political response to the strong media coverage of the tragic deaths of young
men caused by unprovoked assaults
by an unknown intoxicated assailant (Quilter
2014). These Australian examples highlight the influence of media
representations of
homicide on public opinion and, subsequently, on policy
enactment. This is highly concerning if media outlets do not provide an accurate
depiction of homicide in Australia, and may lead to inappropriate policy and
legal responses. Thus, given the role that the media
can play in influencing
fear of crime, public opinion and public policy, understanding the portrayal of
homicide in Australian media
is important.
Prior empirical research on media representations of homicides
Common explanations for the over-reporting of particular victim, offender and
situational characteristics of homicides, or crimes
more generally, include the
rarity of the phenomenon, ideal victim/stereotypical offender characteristics,
and news values. Scholars
who apply a rarity framework suggest that the more
uncommon or unusual the homicide, the more it will be perceived as newsworthy
(Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak 2009; Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994;
Lundman 2003; Pritchard & Hughes 1997). Other
scholars have argued that
homicides that involve an ‘ideal’ victim (for example, those who are
blameless and vulnerable,
or not known to their offender/s) are more likely to
be included in news coverage (Christie 1986; Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro
2013). Jewkes (2015) suggests that there are 12 news values that assist
journalists and editors when judging whether a story appeals
to the public and
is consequently newsworthy. These are threshold, predictability, simplification,
individualism, risk, sex, celebrity
or high status persons, proximity, violence
or conflict, visual spectacle, or graphic imagery, children, and conservation
and political division (Jewkes 2015). What these explanations have in
common is that they recognise that particular combinations
of victim, offender
and situational characteristics raise the newsworthiness of a homicide, and
result in a greater likelihood of
its reporting by the media.
Previous international research has identified a range of victim, offender
and situational characteristics related to the reporting
of lethal violence
(Buckler & Travis 2005; Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak 2009; Johnstone,
Hawkins & Michener 1994; Lundman
2003; Peelo et al. 2004; Sorenson, Manz
& Berk 1998). Although there is a general pattern, there remains some
contradictory empirical
evidence for the ‘newsworthiness’ of some of
these characteristics.
Victim characteristics
Research provides inconsistent results about the role of sex and
race/ethnicity of the victim on the likelihood of a homicide being
reported in
the media. Most studies from the US and the UK find that newspapers more
frequently report homicides involving female
victims than those involving male
victims (Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994; Peelo et al. 2004; Pritchard
& Hughes 1997;
Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998), despite official homicide
statistics consistently showing that males are more at risk of being shomicide
victims than females (Buckler & Travis 2005; Sorenson, Manz & Berk
1998). Further, in the US, studies also show that homicides
involving white
victims are more likely to be covered by print media compared to Hispanic or
black victims (Johnstone, Hawkins &
Michener 1994; Paulsen 2003; Sorenson,
Manz & Berk 1998), yet victims of homicide are more likely to be Hispanic or
opposed to white (Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994; Paulsen 2003;
Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). However, more recent international
suggests that the sex and the race/ethnicity of the victim may not matter. In
the US, Schildkraut and Donley (2012) examined
the reporting of homicides in
The Baltimore Sun
in 2010 to identify the factors that contributed to
newsworthiness for victims. They found that the sex and race of the victims were
not important factors to determine whether a homicide was included in print
media. Furthermore, in a study of English and Welsh reporting
of homicides,
Peelo et al. (2004) found that the ethnicity of the victim was not an indicator
of whether a homicide would be included
in print media coverage. Thus there may
have been a shift in whether the sex and race/ethnicity of the victim determines
if a homicide
is likely to be included in print media coverage. At the very
least, there is no clear consensus that victim sex and race influence
newsworthiness, independently of other features of the homicide.
Research examining the age of the victim has provided more consistent
results, suggesting that the age of the victim determines whether
a homicide is
included in print media coverage. Peelo et al. (2004) examined the nature of
homicide reporting by examining three
newspapers in the UK from 1993–97
and found that when victims are young children, but not infants, the homicide is
more likely
to be reported in the media. This finding is supported by other
studies that have found increased media coverage when homicides involve
or elderly people as victims regardless of national context (Pritchard &
Hughes 1997; Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998).
For example, Pritchard and Hughes
(1997), in a study of two Milwaukee newspapers, found the most consistent
predictor of a homicide
being covered in those newspapers was that the victim
was a child or elderly. Gekoski, Gray and Adler (2012) found similar results
using a different methodology: questionnaires to reporters asking their opinion
on which types of homicides they considered most
newsworthy. They found that 80
per cent of respondents considered homicides involving children to be among the
most newsworthy homicides.
The final main characteristic examined in past research is the number of
victims. Studies have consistently found that the presence
of multiple victims
predicts reporting by the media (Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak 2009;
Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994;
Paulsen 2003). For example, Paulsen
(2003) found that 87 per cent of homicide incidents involving multiple victims
were reported
Houston Chronicle
compared with only 68 per cent of
homicide incidents involving one victim. Other research has also found the
presence of multiple
victims to be the strongest predictor of the reporting of a
homicide (Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994; Paulsen 2003).
Offender characteristics
Similar to the research examining the newsworthiness of victim
characteristics, international studies provide inconsistent findings
offender sex and race. Previous research found homicides involving male
offenders with female victims received more coverage
in print media (Johnstone,
Hawkins & Michener 1994). Similarly, examining homicides reported in print
media between 1997 and
2005, Gruenewald, Pizarro and Chermak (2009) incidents
involving male offenders received longer media coverage than those involving
female offenders. In contrast, Peelo et al. (2004) found that the sex of the
offender and the ethnicity of the offender were not
indicators on whether a
homicide would be included in print media coverage. Thus, there appears to be no
clear consensus in the prior
research as to whether the sex and race of the
offender determines if a homicide is likely to be included in print media
Other characteristics, including number of offenders and offender age, are
shown consistently by international research to impact
the perceived
newsworthiness of a homicide. For instance, the greater the number of offenders
involved, the more likely it is that
the homicide will receive print media
coverage (Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro 2013; Paulsen 2003). Paulsen (2003)
77 per cent of homicide incidents involving multiple offenders were
reported in the
Houston Chronicle
compared to only 68 per cent of those
incidents that involved one offender. In terms of offender age, Peelo et al.
(2004) found that
young (under 16) and elderly (over 75) offenders of homicide
were more likely to be reported in print media.
Situational characteristics
There are also characteristics relating to the situational circumstances that
determine the news value of a homicide, including motive,
victim-offender
relationship, weapon use and location of the homicide. Peelo et al. (2004) found
that homicides with a sexual motive
and homicides where the offender had no
apparent motive are more likely to be reported in print media.
In addition, research has shown that when the victim and offender were
strangers, it was more likely to be reported (Buckler &
Travis 2005;
Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro 2013; Peelo et al. 2004; Sorenson, Manz &
Berk 1998). Situations involving guns
receive more media coverage (Gruenewald,
Chermak & Pizarro 2013) than the use of non-firearm weapons (Gruenewald,
Chermak 2009; Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). Research has also
suggested that the type of neighbourhood where the homicide was
committed can
impact newspaper coverage. For example, in a study of homicide in LA County
during 2007, Petersen (2016) found that
homicides in disadvantaged black and
Latino neighbourhoods were less likely to be included in media coverage than
homicides in white
neighbourhoods. Furthermore, Johnstone, Hawkins and Michener
(1994) and Sorenson, Manz and Berk (1998) found that homicides that
occurred in
wealthier neighbourhoods were more newsworthy.
The current study’s aim
If certain victim, offender and situational characteristics are
overrepresented in the media compared to its actual incidence according
official statistics, then the general public is provided with an inaccurate and
distorted representation of the true characteristics
of homicide, which, in
turn, may have an effect on public opinion and policymaking (Beckett &
Sasson 2003; Duwe 2000). As reviewed
above, there is some empirical support in
the international literature for the inaccurate representation of homicide in
although there is disagreement on why it occurs, whether because a
homicide is newsworthy, the victim and offender characteristics
are rare, or the
homicide involves an ideal victim and stereotypical offender.
While prior research has suggested that the media provides a distorted view
of homicide, most of this research has been conducted
in the US or the UK. There
has been little research examining whether media reporting provides an accurate
depiction of homicide
characteristics in Australia. Some notable exceptions
exist, such as research examining media representations of violence against
women (Morgan & Politoff 2012) and violence against women and their children
(Sutherland et al. 2016), though these studies are
limited through their focus
on violence involving female victims. Further, some of the research findings
provide mixed results, particularly
around how sex and race of homicide victims
and offenders affect media representations. In other words, it is unclear if the
and race of victims and offenders will have an impact on whether a homicide
is likely to be reported in the media. Adding to this,
some prior research is
relatively dated (1990s onwards) and media reporting may have changed since
these studies were conducted.
The current study addresses these gaps by
examining whether Australian newspaper media representations of homicide are
with the actual characteristics of homicide in Australia.
Data sources and sample
This study used two data sources: newspaper articles and official homicide
statistics. The newspaper article data consisted of a random
sample of 120
Australian newspaper articles published between 1 July 2008 and 30 June 2012.
These were sampled from the database
, which is a comprehensive
global news source database that covers full text news sources. The search was
limited to all regional,
state and national Australian newspapers available in
. Broad search terms (homicide, homicides, filicide, lethal
violent, murder, murders, manslaughter and murdered) were used to identify
population of reports on homicide during the specified period. The initial
as relating to
homicide. A sample of these articles was selected by using a stratified random
sampling method. The newspaper articles
were first stratified by the financial
year and then randomly selected within each stratum. A sample of 30 newspaper
articles per
year was selected, with a total sample of 120 newspaper articles.
Any article selected that did not relate to homicide incidents
(for example,
those covering attempted homicide or fictional homicide accounts) or that
reported on a homicide that had occurred
outside Australia were discarded and a
replacement newspaper article was randomly selected from the initial pool. The
majority of
articles came from state newspapers (58.3 per cent), with 35.8 per
cent appearing in regional newspapers and nearly six per cent
appearing in
national newspapers.
This study focused exclusively on print newspapers, as opposed to other media
outlets (for example, television or radio). There were
five main reasons for
this. First, it allowed for comparisons with international research, as the
majority of existing research conducted
on media representations of homicide
have used newspapers as their data source (Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak
2009; Johnstone,
Hawkins & Michener 1994; Lundman 2003; Paulsen 2003; Peelo
et al. 2004). Second, newspapers leave researchable tracks (Lundman
available through databases containing transcribed newspapers. Other broadcasted
media in Australia, such as television and
radio news, are not as readily
available. Third, newspaper articles are often used as the source for television
and radio reporting
of homicide (Golan 2006; Meyers 1996). Further, research
shows that traditional newspapers significantly influence the news agenda
online newspapers, suggesting that traditional newspapers still remain key
agenda-setters within media outlets (Hoffman 2006).
Finally, print newspaper
readership rates in Australia are still relatively high despite the increase in
online news subscriptions
(Roy Morgan Research 2015). For example, from July
2014 to June 2015, on average, approximately 970,000 people read
, 1,227,000 people read
The Courier Mail
, 1,549,000 read
The Daily Telegraph
, and 1,241,000 read
The Sydney Morning Herald
per week (Roy Morgan Research 2015). These figures suggest that newspapers are
still considered an authoritative source of media
reporting of news in
The second data source consisted of official homicide statistics accessed
from publicly available data from the Australian Institute
Criminology’s National Homicide Monitoring Program (‘NHMP’)
(Bryant & Cussen 2015). The NHMP has collected
information concerning
homicides in Australia since 1 July 1989 (Bryant & Cussen 2015), prior to
which there was no systematic
information or monitoring of homicide in Australia
(Mouzos 2002). The NHMP relies primarily on police offence reports and coronial
records, supplemented with police officers’ first-hand knowledge of the
homicide, data from other government agencies (such
as statistical services,
homicide squads or major crime units) and press clippings (Mouzos 2002). The
data are considered to be comprehensive
of homicides in Australia as very few
homicides go unreported or undetected (Mouzos 2002), although a ‘dark
homicide (for example, hidden bodies, missing people) always
remains (Brookman 2005; Mouzos 2002). The NHMP contains information
relating to
victims, offenders, and situational characteristics of homicide in aggregate
data form. The data was accessed through
published reports in aggregate form,
not in raw data on individual incidents. The data covered the same time period
as the newspaper
article data, from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2012. Overall, there
were 989 known homicide incidents in Australia during this period.
Coding procedures
The sample of newspaper articles was coded for victim, offender and
situational characteristics. The inclusion of variables was based
research, while also guided by the data availability in the official homicide
statistics. Variables coded included: victim
age and sex; number of victims;
offender age and sex; number of offenders; victim-offender relationship; and
mode of death (see below
for a full description). Other empirically and
theoretically relevant variables (for example, victim and offender ethnicity)
high levels of missing data and consequently had to be dropped from
Ten per cent of the sample of newspaper articles (12 articles) was randomly
selected for inclusion in a pilot study to trial the coding
schedule and check
for inter-coder reliability, or consistency across the coders (Kraska &
Neuman 2011). Overall, there was 72.5
per cent agreement between the two coders.
While some variables had near perfect agreement (for example, victim/offender
the number of victims/offenders), the disparities highlighted the need
for revision of the coding rules for some variables. For instance,
identifying
the mode of death and the relationship between the victim and offender needed
further clarification. Once the coding
schedule had been amended, the full
sample was coded.
Victim characteristics
Three victim characteristics were included:
of the victim;
of the victim; and the presence of
multiple victims
coded into the following categories: 0–9 years, 10–14 years,
15–17 years, 18–24 years, 25–34
years, 35–49 years,
50–64 years, and 65 years plus. These were in accordance with how the NHMP
categorised victim age
(Bryant & Cussen 2015). The variable
was coded as two or more victims in the same homicide incident, also
in accordance with the NHMP’s classification. The NHMP
victim’s sex and age and the number of victims as unknown in less than one
per cent of homicides.
Of the newspaper articles, 8.8 per cent did not state the victim’s sex,
30.9 per cent did not state the victim’s age,
and less than one per cent
did not state the number of victims.
Offender characteristics
Similarly, offender
at time of the homicide,
and presence of
multiple offenders
were coded from the news reports.
Offender age was coded into the following categories: 0–17 years,
18–24 years, 25–34
years, 35–49 years, 50–64 years, and
65 years plus in accordance with the NHMP categorisation (Bryant & Cussen
In contrast to victim age, offenders under 18 were grouped together in
one category for the purposes of the analysis due to the low
number of homicides
involving offenders under the age of 18. The NHMP stated the offender’s
sex and age as unknown in less
than one per cent of homicides. Of the newspaper
articles, 12.9 per cent did not state the offender’s sex, and 35.3 per
did not state the offender’s age. The variable
was operationalised as two or more offenders in the same homicide
incident, in accordance with the NHMP (Bryant & Cussen 2015).
stated the number of offenders was unknown in less than six per cent of
homicides, while the number of offenders was not
listed in 13.9 per cent of the
newspaper articles.
Situational characteristics
In accordance with the NHMP (Bryant & Cussen 2015),
victim-offender
relationship
consisted of three categories: domestic, acquaintance and
stranger. Domestic homicides are incidents involving the death of a family
member of a person from a domestic relationship. Acquaintance homicides are
incidents where the victim and offender knew each other
but were not related or
living in a domestic relationship. Stranger homicides are incidents where the
victim and offender did not
know each other. In cases of multiple victims and/or
offenders (and consequently multiple relationship types), the relationship was
coded as the closest known relationship between any one victim and offender pair
in the NHMP. In 13.5 per cent of homicide incidents
the relationship
between the victim and offender was unclassified in the NHMP aggregate data. For
the purposes of this analysis,
relationship between victim and offender were
coded as acquaintance, domestic (known) or other (stranger or relationship
The final variable is the
mode of death
. Mode of death was grouped
into four categories, based on the NHMP classifications. These are beatings,
stab wound, gunshot wound
and other. Further classification of mode of death was
not possible due to the low numbers in the media reports. The mode of death
inferred from the newspaper article. For example, if an article said that the
victim was shot and killed, it is inferred that
the mode of death was gunshot
wound. However, the mode of death was not identified in 35.8 per cent of the
newspaper articles.
Analytic strategy
The analysis aimed to compare the distribution of selected characteristics of
victims, offenders and homicide situations between those
reported in the primary
data source and the official homicide statistics. As the NHMP contains
aggregated data, the newspaper data
was weighted by count to determine the
percentages (Hinton, McMurray & Brownlow 2014). Pearson’s chi-square
test was used
to estimate whether there was a difference in the distribution
between the two sources, except in the case of two by two tables,
Yate’s Correction for Continuity. Effect size was estimated using the phi
coefficient value for two by two tables
(Pallant 2013), and Cramer’s V for
larger tables, to take into account the degrees of freedom (Pallant 2013).
Victim characteristics
Table 1 shows the distribution of victim characteristics (sex, age, multiple
victims) coded from the newspaper sample compared to
those in the NHMP data.
Overall, there were statistically significant differences between the reported
victim characteristics in
the sample and those in the official data. While
nearly half of the sampled newspaper articles included female victims of
only one-third of homicide victims during the time period were female
according to the national homicide statistics. Similarly, homicides
multiple victims were over-reported in the sampled newspaper articles compared
to the national homicide statistics. The analyses
further show statistically
significant differences in terms of the age of the victims. Table 1 shows that
victims under 24 years
old are over-reported in the newspapers sampled, while
victims over 25 years old are under-reported. The differences are particularly
apparent for young children (aged 0–9).
Table 1: Victim characteristics coded from newspaper articles compared to
Effect size
Multiple victims
characteristics
Table 2 compares the distribution of offender characteristics (sex, age,
multiple offenders) coded from the sample with those in the
NHMP data. The
results show no statistically significant differences for any of the offender
characteristics between the homicides
reported in the newspaper sample, and the
national homicide statistics. This shows that, unlike the victim
characteristics, newspaper
article reporting of offender sex, offender age, and
number of offenders was consistent with the national homicide statistics.
Table 2: Offender characteristics coded from newspaper articles compared
to NHMP data
Effect size
One offender
Multiple offenders
Situational characteristics
Table 3 compares the distribution of situational characteristics coded from
the sampled newspaper articles with those in the NHMP
data. Overall, there were
statistically significant differences between the reported situational
characteristics in the sample and
those in the official data. As seen in Table
3, the sampled newspaper articles tend to over-report gunshot wounds and
under-report
knife wounds and beatings as the mode of death.
Table 3: Situational characteristics coded from newspaper articles
compared to NHMP data
Effect size
Mode of death
Gunshot wound
Relation-ship
Acquaint-ance
Table 3 further shows that newspaper reporting of victim-offender
relationship is not consistent with existing homicide data. Table
3 indicates
that over one-third of homicide incidents in Australia involved victims and
offenders whose relationship was classified
as acquaintance. However, homicides
involving acquaintances were reported in only 16.7 per cent of the sampled
newspaper articles.
Furthermore, more than one-third of homicide incidents in
Australia involved victims and offenders whose relationship was classified
domestic. In comparison, this relationship was found in just over one-quarter of
the sampled newspaper reports.
The aim of this study was to examine whether Australian newspaper media
representations of homicide are consistent with the actual
characteristics of
homicide in Australia. The analyses revealed mixed findings. While some
characteristics of homicide were not consistent
with those of actual homicide,
others were. Overall, the study found that the sampled newspaper articles were
inconsistent with official
homicide victim and situational characteristics.
However, interestingly, the results also indicated newspaper reporting of
provided a relatively accurate depiction of the offender
characteristics of homicide in Australia, including sex, age and number
Inaccurate depictions of homicide
The results indicated that certain groups of victims, based on sex, age and
number of victims, were over-reported in the newspaper
sample. Homicides
involving female victims were more likely to be reported in the media. This is
consistent with much of the previous
literature, which suggests that female
homicide victims are over-represented in the media compared to male victims
(Boulahanis &
Heltsley 2004; Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994;
Pritchard & Hughes 1997; Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). The apparent
newsworthy nature of female victims is consistent with a number of explanatory
frameworks. In particular, the concept of rarity and
ideal victims may assist in
explaining why female victims are more commonly reported on in the media, and
thus considered more newsworthy
compared to male victims. The rarity framework
suggests that if an incident is considered uncommon, it is more likely to be
and receive media attention (Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak 2009;
Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994; Lundman 2003; Pritchard
1997). The results of this study appear consistent with this explanation given
that, statistically, females are less
likely than males to be victims of
homicide in Australia (Bryant & Cussen 2015). It has also been suggested
that society is more
sympathetic towards female victims, and that crimes
involving female victims are therefore more likely to be reported in the media
(Christie 1986). The notion that females represent the ‘ideal’
victim compared with males was also supported in this
The results also indicated that victims aged under 25 are more likely to be
reported by the media. This is particularly true for children
between the ages
of 0 and 9. This is consistent with previous literature that found children were
more likely to be reported in the
media (Peelo et al. 2004; Pritchard &
Hughes 1997; Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). Jewkes (2015) suggests that
children are
newsworthy subjects. Because being a child victim of homicide is
rare compared to an adult victim, this result again supports the
rarity. In addition, children are often seen as vulnerable, which is one of the
characteristics of the ideal victim (Christie
1986). This could also explain why
children were over-represented in this study.
Nevertheless, some results are inconsistent with prior research on victim
age. The study found that victims between the ages of 18
and 24 are more likely
to be reported in newspaper articles. In fact, elderly victims were slightly
under-represented in the findings.
This was not seen in previous literature,
which found young and elderly victims more likely to be reported in the media as
to young adults (Peelo et al. 2004; Pritchard & Hughes 1997;
Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). This might indicate a particular
phenomenon in terms of newspaper reporting, with an emphasis on expected
victims, rather than rare victims. This is supported
by Jewkes’ (2015)
notion of predictability that suggests that a story may be newsworthy if it is
predictable as journalists
can plan their reporting in advance. The possible
orientation of reporting around young adult victims of violence requires further
exploration.
The results further indicated that homicides involving the presence of
multiple victims are more likely to be reported in Australian
compared to homicides involving one victim. This is consistent with previous
research and the concept of rarity. Previous
research states that homicides that
have multiple victims occur infrequently, but are more likely to be included in
media coverage
(Gruenewald, Pizarro & Chermak 2009; Johnstone, Hawkins &
Michener 1994; Lundman 2003; Paulsen 2003; Peelo et al. 2004; Sorenson,
& Berk 1998). Thus, one explanation is that homicides involving multiple
victims are considered rare and consequently more
newsworthy, so therefore are
more likely to be reported by the media. Another explanation could be
Jewkes’ (2015) notion of
threshold that suggests that events have to meet
a level of perceived importance or drama in order to be newsworthy and a
with multiple victims could be perceived as important.
In addition to victim characteristics, the results indicated that a range of
situational characteristics was also over-represented
in the sampled articles.
The mode of death from a gunshot wound was over-represented, and beating was
under-represented in the sampled
newspaper articles. This is consistent with
previous research that found dangerousness and the risk the offender or crime
society to be factors in whether a homicide is included in media
reporting (Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro 2013). Homicides that
involve guns
may be seen as more dangerous and therefore receive more media coverage
(Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro 2013). This
is consistent with the concept of
rarity as it is more rare for the mode of death to be from a gunshot wound
compared to a beating
(Bryant & Cussen 2015). Also, the ‘other’
category was over-represented in the sampled newspaper articles. The
category contained homicides involving burns, shaking,
drowning and being pushed from high places. These modes of death are rare,
may be considered particularly disturbing to the public, making them more
newsworthy.
Previous literature has indicated that when a victim and offender were
strangers, the homicide was more likely to be reported in the
media (Buckler
& Travis 2005; Gruenewald, Chermak & Pizarro 2013; Peelo et al. 2004;
Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). This
study supports these findings as the
results showed that homicides involving domestic or acquaintance victim-offender
relationship
were less likely to be reported by the media. The fear of crime
literature shows that people are more fearful of stranger violence
victimised by someone they know (Scott 2003). It may be that the media actively
uses this notion of ‘stranger danger’
to its advantage given the
‘victim-blaming’ narrative that still exists within some legislative
and policy frameworks
(for example, defensive homicide)
(Fitz-Gibbon 2012). Homicides where the victim knew the offender may be
considered less newsworthy as society may not sympathise with
victims who are
perceived to be at least partially to blame for their own victimisation
(Christie 1986).
Accurate depictions of homicide
While this study has
shown inconsistencies between the sampled newspaper articles and the actual
characteristics of homicide, there
are also consistencies. All of the offender
characteristics in the sampled newspaper articles were accurate portrayals of
characteristics of homicide in Australia as reported by the NHMP.
This included the offender characteristics of sex, age and multiple
Thus, in the current study, newspaper articles provide a relatively accurate
portrayal of offenders who commit homicide
in Australia.
The majority of offenders in Australia are male between the ages of 18 and 49
and are single offenders (Bryant & Cussen 2015).
These are also the
characteristics that are presented in the majority of the newspaper articles.
Except for offender sex (Barlow,
Barlow & Chiricos 1995), these findings are
not in line with prior research, which shows that the greater number offenders,
more likely the homicide is to be covered by the media (Johnstone, Hawkins
& Michener 1994; Lundman 2003), and that young and
elderly offenders of
homicide are more likely to be reported in the media (Peelo et al. 2004). Thus,
it appears that rarity may not
be able to explain offender variables as well as
it may explain victim and situational variables. Therefore, alternative
explanations
should be sought.
It may be that, despite globalisation, Australia is culturally different from
the countries in which most media research on homicide
to this date has been
conducted, such as the US. This may be particularly the case in terms of the
social context of homicide. First,
Australia has significantly lower levels of
homicide compared to the US (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2011).
Thus, there
are fewer homicide incidents that the media have at their disposal
to report on. Second, the rate of gun ownership in the US is significantly
higher than in Australia (Chapman & Alpers 2013) and research confirms
cross-national variations in the nature of homicide (United
Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime 2011), which could explain why there are inconsistencies between
the current study and previous
studies conducted in the US. Alternatively, the
different findings from international research could be a function of the
While the newspaper articles were randomly selected, it is possible that
the articles sampled may not be a representation of the
whole set of newspaper
articles and selection bias may have inadvertently occurred. This suggests the
need for further research to
replicate this study.
What the public conceives to be true about crime is strongly influenced by
information provided by the media (Chermak & Chapman
2007). However, this
study has shown that the Australian print media does not provide an accurate
depiction of homicide overall,
at least in regards to victim and situational
characteristics. The implication of this is that if the public is provided with
a distorted
view of homicide, policy could be implemented that reflects this
distorted view as opposed to the reality of homicide. This is because
policymakers use media coverage to determine what the public opinion is
concerning crime (Beckett & Sasson 2003). For example,
over-representation
of female victims might result in policies and prevention strategies that
inadvertently ignore the needs of male
victims. Furthermore, this distortion of
homicide can increase the public’s fear of homicide (Reiner 2002). For
example, the
over-representation of stranger homicides might increase the public’s
fear of homicide out of proportion to the actual risks.
This fear may in turn
increase the public’s receptiveness to tough-on-crime policies for certain
Limitations
and future research
There are some limitations that should be noted. The study focused on
newspapers and did not examine other media sources such as radio,
television or
online material. Newspapers were chosen for three major reasons: databases
containing transcribed newspapers (for example,
) facilitate data
collection, newspaper articles are often used as the source for television and
radio reporting of homicide (Sweetser,
Golan & Wanta 2008), and print
newspaper readership rates in Australia are still relatively high despite the
increase in online
news subscriptions (Roy Morgan Research 2015). However, more
research is needed to examine whether the findings from the current
study extend
to media representations of homicide within other media sources such as radio,
television and online material.
In particular, online environments such as social media have facilitated
audience participation in shaping media content (Surette
2015; Bruns 2011) and
agenda-building (see Milivojevic & McGovern 2014). These issues need to be
examined further in future research.
A second limitation is that this study’s timeframe was between 1 July
2008 and 30 June 2012, which is a relatively short period.
Research shows that
media reporting has changed significantly over the decades (Williams 2009) and
it may be important to examine
media reporting of homicide within a historical
context (see Fairbairn & Dawson 2013). Some of the previous research on
media representations of homicide stems from the 1990s. Much of media
reporting may have changed since these studies were conducted,
including what is
considered newsworthy and the regulatory frameworks within which media
organisations operate. More research is
required to further understand this
historical context.
Also, this study was not able to conclusively determine why the results
indicated that newspaper reporting of homicide provided a
relatively accurate
depiction of the offender characteristics of homicide in Australia compared to
previous literature (which found
an over-representation of certain
characteristics, such as offender sex and age). Therefore, further research is
required to examine
whether these differences stem from cultural variations,
sampling techniques, or other reasons.
A fourth limitation is that this study focused on skewness by quantitatively
examining whether newspaper articles are overall consistent
or inconsistent with
official homicide data. As such, the study did not examine the narratives in
newspaper articles. Peelo (2006)
highlights the importance of qualitatively
examining media at the micro level of textual analysis. Such analyses can reveal
discursive content. For example, Monckton-Smith’s (2012) work
shows that news reporting of cases involving men who kill their
female intimate
partners are often framed around narratives of romantic love as a
rationalisation for homicide, whereas other narratives
such as violence and
coercive control are not given much prominence.
Finally, there was not enough data in the sampled newspaper articles to
examine if race was a factor in determining whether a homicide
is reported in
the media in Australia. Race is an important determinant of newsworthiness as
seen in previous international studies
(Johnstone, Hawkins & Michener 1994;
Paulsen 2003; Sorenson, Manz & Berk 1998). Given the high rate of homicide
within Indigenous
communities in Australia (Bryant & Cussen 2015), future
research is required to examine whether race is a factor in impacting
homicide is likely to be reported in the media.
Overall, the study suggests that newspapers in Australia do not represent
homicide accurately. This is problematic, as the media can
policymaking, tough-on-crime policies, and the public’s fear of crime
(Beckett & Sasson 2003; Gruenewald, Pizarro
& Chermak 2009; Reiner 2002;
Scheingold 1991). The results of this study indicated significant differences in
newspaper reporting
of victim and situational characteristics compared to the
national homicide statistics provided by the NHMP. There was an
over-representation
of female homicide victims, victims under 24 and homicides
involving multiple victims. In addition, homicides where the mode of death
gunshot wound were over-represented, as well as homicides where the victim and
offender were strangers. However, interestingly,
the results indicated newspaper
reporting of homicide provided a relatively accurate depiction of the offender
characteristics of
homicide in Australia. A rarity framework, the concept of
‘ideal’ victims, and news values assist in explaining what
considered newsworthy and, therefore, what is included in media coverage.
However, while they may explain victim and situational
characteristics, these
concepts appear less apt to explain the newsworthy nature of offender
characteristics.
Barlow, MH, Barlow, DE & Chiricos, TG 1995, ‘Economic conditions
and ideologies of crime in the media: a content analysis
of crime news’,
Crime & Delinquency
, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 3–19.
Beckett, K & Sasson, T 2003,
The politics of injustice: crime and
punishment in America
Sage Publications, California.
Boulahanis, JG & Heltsley, MJ 2004, ‘Perceived fears: the reporting
patterns of juvenile homicide in Chicago newspapers’,
Criminal Justice
Policy Review
, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 132–60.
Brookman, F 2005,
Understanding homicide
, Sage, London.
Bruns, A 2011, ‘Gatekeeping, gatewatching, real-time feedback: new
challenges for journalism’,
Brazilian Journalism Research Journal
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–36.
Bryant, W & Cussen, T 2015,
Homicide in Australia: 2010–11 to
2011–12: National Homicide Monitoring Program report
, Australian
Institute of Criminology, Canberra, viewed 1 November 2017,
http://aic.gov.au/publications/current series/mr/21-40/mr23.html.
Buckler, K & Travis, L 2005, ‘Assessing the newsworthiness of
homicide events: an analysis of coverage in the Houston Chronicle’,
Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Culture
, vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
Chapman, S & Alpers, P 2013, ‘Gun-related deaths: how Australia
stepped off “the American path”’,
Annals of Internal
, vol. 158, no. 10, pp. 770–1.
Chermak, SM & Chapman, NM 2007, ‘Predicting crime story salience: a
replication’,
Journal of Criminal Justice
, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
Christie, N 1986, ‘The ideal victim’, in EA Fattah (ed.),
crime policy to victim policy
Springer, London.
Duwe, G 2000, ‘Body-count journalism the presentation of mass murder in
the news media’,
Homicide Studies
, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
Fairbairn, J & Dawson, M 2013, ‘Canadian news coverage of intimate
partner homicide: analyzing changes over time’,
Criminology
, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 147–76.
Fitz-Gibbon, K 2012, ‘The Victorian operation of defensive homicide:
examining the delegitimisation of victims in the criminal
court system’,
Griffith Law Review
, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 555–81.
Gekoski, A, Gray, JM & Adler, JR 2012, ‘What makes a homicide
newsworthy? UK national tabloid newspaper journalists tell
British Journal of Criminology
, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1212–32.
Golan, G 2006, ‘Inter-media agenda setting and global news coverage:
assessing the influence of the New York Times on three
network television
evening news programs’,
Journalism Studies
, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
Grabosky, PN 1995,
Fear of crime and fear reduction strategies. Trends and
issues in criminal justice no. 44
Australian Institute of
Criminology, Canberra.
Gruenewald, J, Chermak, SM & Pizarro, JM 2013, ‘Covering victims in
the news: what makes minority homicides newsworthy?’,
, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 755–83.
Gruenewald, J, Pizarro, J & Chermak, SM 2009, ‘Race, gender, and
the newsworthiness of homicide incidents’,
Journal of Criminal
, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 262–72.
Hinton, PR, McMurray, I & Brownlow, C 2014,
SPSS explained
Routledge, London.
Hoffman, LH 2006, ‘Is internet content different after all? A content
analysis of mobilizing information in online and print
newspapers’,
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly
, vol. 83, no. 1, pp.
Hong, SY 2008, ‘The relationship between newsworthiness and publication
of news releases in the media’,
Public Relations Review
no. 3, pp. 297–9.
Jewkes, Y 2015,
Media and crime
2nd edn, Sage, Los
Johnstone, JW, Hawkins, DF & Michener, A 1994, ‘Homicide reporting
in Chicago dailies’,
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly
vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 860–72.
Kraska, P & Neuman, WL 2011,
Criminal justice and criminology research
2nd edn, Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
Lundman, RJ 2003, ‘The newsworthiness and selection bias in news about
murder: comparative and relative effects of novelty and
race and gender
typifications on newspaper coverage of homicide’,
Sociological
, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 357–86.
Meyers, M 1996,
News coverage of violence against women: engendering
Sage Publications, California.
Milivojevic, S & McGovern, A 2014, ‘The death of Jill Meagher:
crime and punishment on social media’,
International Journal for Crime,
Justice and Social Democracy
, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 22–39.
Monckton-Smith, J 2012,
Murder, gender and the media: narratives of
dangerous love
Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Morgan, J & Politoff, V 2012,
Victorian print media coverage of
violence against women: a longitudinal study
, VicHealth, viewed 7 July
2015, http://thelookout.sites.go1.com.au/sites/thelookout.
sites.go1.com.au/files/PVAW Print-media-Tech Report_FINAL.pdf.
Mouzos, J 2002,
Quality control in the National Homicide Monitoring
Program (NHMP)
, Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra, viewed 1
November 2017, https://aic.gov.au/
publications/tbp/tbp002.
Pallant, J 2013,
SPSS survival manual
5th edn, McGraw-Hill
Education, London.
Paulsen, DJ 2003, ‘Murder in black and white the newspaper coverage of
homicide in Houston’,
Homicide Studies
, vol. 7, no. 3, pp.
Peelo, M 2006, ‘Framing homicide narratives in newspapers: mediated
witness and the construction of virtual victimhood’,
Crime, Media,
, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 159–75.
Peelo, M, Francis, B, Soothill, K, Pearson, J & Ackerley, E 2004,
‘Newspaper reporting and the public construction of homicide’,
British Journal of Criminology
, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 256–75.
Petersen, N 2016, ‘Neighborhood context and media constructions of
murder a multilevel analysis of homicide newspaper coverage
in Los Angeles
Homicide Studies
, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 25–52.
Pritchard, D & Hughes, KD 1997, ‘Patterns of deviance in crime
Journal of Communication
, vol. 47, no. 3, pp.
Quilter, J 2014, ‘One-punch laws, mandatory minimums and
“alcohol-fuelled” as an aggravating factor: implications
criminal law’,
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social
, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 81–106.
Reiner, R 2002, ‘Media made criminality: the representation of crime in
the mass media’, in M Maguire, R Morgan and R
Reiner (eds.),
handbook of criminology
5th edn Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Roberts, L & Indermaur, D 2007, ‘Predicting punitive attitudes in
Australia’,
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
, vol. 14, no. 1, pp.
Roy Morgan Research 2015,
Newspaper cross-platform audience, 12 months to
, viewed 1 February 2016,
http://www.roymorgan.com/industries/media/readership/newspaper-cross-platform-audience.
Scheingold, SA 1991,
The politics of crime: criminal process and cultural
Temple University Press, Philadelphia.
Schildkraut, J & Donley, AM 2012, ‘Murder in black a media
distortion analysis of homicides in Baltimore in 2010’,
, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 175–96.
Scott, H 2003, ‘Stranger danger: explaining women’s fear of
Western Criminology Review
, vol. 4, no. 3, pp.
Sorenson, SB, Manz, JG & Berk, RA 1998, ‘News media coverage and
the epidemiology of homicide’,
American Journal of Public Health
vol. 88, no. 10, pp. 1510–14.
Surette, R 2015, ‘Performance crime and justice’,
Issues in Criminal Justice
, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 195-216.
Sutherland, G, McCormack, A, Pirkis, J, Vaughan, C, Dunne-Breen, M, Easteal,
P & Holland, K 2016,
Media representations of violence against women and
their children
, viewed 1 November 2017,
http://media.aomx.com/anrows.org.au/H3_2 2_Media_CONTENT_low.pdf.
Sweetser, KD, Golan, GJ & Wanta, W 2008, ‘Intermedia agenda setting
in television, advertising, and blogs during the 2004
Communication & Society
, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 197–216.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 2011,
2011 Global study on
homicide: trends, contexts, data
, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
viewed 1 November 2017, https://www.unodc.org/
unodc/en/data-and-analysis/statistics/crime/global-study-on-homicide-2011.html
Williams, K 2009,
Read all about it!: a history of the British
, Routledge, London.
Doctoral Candidate, School of
Criminology and Criminal Justice, Griffith University, Mt Gravatt Campus,
Mt Gravatt Qld 4122, Australia.
Email: emily.waters@griffithuni.edu.au.
Associate Professor, Griffith Criminology Institute &
School of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Mt Gravatt Campus, Griffith
University, Mt Gravatt Qld 4122, Australia. Email: c.bond@griffith.edu.au.
Lecturer, Griffith Criminology Institute & School of
Criminology and Criminal Justice, Southport Campus, Griffith University,
Southport Qld 4222, Australia. Email: l.eriksson@griffith.edu.au.
‘The media’
is a broad term encompassing a range of fictional (for example, crime
dramatisations) and
non-fictional (for example, documentaries) material. This study is concerned
with the representation of news in the media due to the
significant effect news
reporting has on public perceptions of crime and fear of victimisation (Beckett
& Sasson 2003; Gruenewald,
Pizarro & Chermak 2009; Reiner 2002;
Scheingold 1991).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (632 KB)
PDF format (719 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter