URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2011/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Asher, Raynor --- "Legal and education standards in New Zealand" [2011] ALRS 5
Legal and education standards in New
The Honourable Justice Raynor Asher
Between 1841 and 1930 legal education, and the requirements for admission to
the profession in New Zealand, were the responsibility
of the Judiciary of New
Zealand pursuant to a number of Colonial Ordinances and Acts of Parliament, and
prescribed in consecutive
sets of Judges’ Rules. After the establishment
of the University of New Zealand in 1870, the practical implementation of the
admission requirements was progressively delegated by the Judiciary to the
University.
In 1925, a Royal Commission which had been commissioned to examine a number
of matters relating to University education in New Zealand,
recommended that
... a Council of Legal Education representative of the Judges, the leaders
among practising barristers and solicitors, and the University
teachers of law
is the most satisfactory method for providing and for watching over a course of
legal education which shall comply
with the requirements of a good professional
education, and at the same time satisfy the demand for a training which is
strong enough
on the practical side.
Accordingly in 1930 the Council of Legal Education was established. The
original Council consisted of six members: two judges of
the Supreme Court, two
representatives of the New Zealand Law Society, and two law professors or
teachers from the University of
New Zealand. The Council was given
recommendatory powers for the purpose of enabling the University to discharge
its functions,
which concurrently with the establishment of the Council had been
given the responsibility for prescribing and conducting the necessary
qualifications and examinations.
However, in 1961 the University of New Zealand was dissolved and the
constituent Colleges established in their own right.
In order to
preserve uniformity across law degrees, to maintain standards, and to secure
input from representatives of all, rather
than one particular category of
stakeholder in legal education, the Council of Legal Education was reconstituted
in 1961 as an independent
statutory body to take over the role of defining,
prescribing and arranging for the provision of courses of study, including
training, for those persons (from New Zealand and overseas) wishing to
be admitted as barristers and solicitors, and generally to
supervise legal
education in New Zealand.
In 1961 the membership of the Council consisted of representatives from the
Judiciary, the New Zealand Law Society and the Law Schools.
By 1982 membership
had been extended to encompass a District Court Judge and law student
representation, and by 1990 a non-lawyer
member nominated by the Minister of
The 1990 Amendment Act amended the Law Practitioners Act 1982. Some major
consequences for the Council were –
(a) It expanded the membership of the Council to strengthen the interests of
the public without affecting the balance between academic
and professional legal
interests which had always been a characteristic of the Council.
(b) It established the Council as body corporate with perpetual succession,
a common seal, and the rights, powers and privileges
necessary to carry out its
(c) It established the basis for the Council to be subject to Part V of the
Public Finance Act 1989 as if it were a Crown entity
specified in the Fourth and
Fifth Schedules to that Act.
(d) It authorised the charging of fees for work done for services performed
by the Council and for entry into the Council’s
examinations.
(e) It made requirements of the Council as an employer, including
consultation with the State Services Commission.
(f) It set out the Council’s financial responsibilities and exempted
it from income tax.
(g) It set out the Council’s duty to report annually to the Minister
of Justice.
The Lawyers and
Conveyancers Act 2006
was passed in March 2006 and came into
force on 1 August 2008.
The Council is covered by Part 8 of the Act. The Council was reconstituted
with its current form and membership. Some changes have
been made to the
Council’s operations as noted below:
(a) The Council has been renamed the New Zealand Council of Legal
(b) The functions and powers of the Council, whilst remaining essentially the
same as in the 1982 Act, have been sharpened and modernised
to reflect current
terminology and practices.
(c) A new function has been introduced into the Council’s role and that
is responsibility for recognition of qualifications
for the purposes of the
principles set out in section 15 of the Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Act
(d) The Act makes the Council responsible for making the final decision in
respect of the assessment of applications of all overseas
graduates and admitted
practitioners.
(e) The Act confirms that the Council may deliver courses itself, or arrange
for the delivery of courses by other providers.
(f) There is a specific power enabling the Council to license other providers
of practical legal training.
(g) The funding mechanism for the Council has changed so that rather than be
funded through the New Zealand Law Foundation, the Law
Society is required to
levy practitioners to secure the necessary funds for the Council.
(h) With respect to the Institute, new provisions are included in the Act.
Under these provisions the Council is statutorily required
to maintain the
Institute in its current form as a committee of Council. An express requirement
to ensure that the Institute continues
to provide practical legal training for
candidates for admission as barristers and solicitors of the High Court is
imposed on the
General activities of the New Zealand Council of Legal Education
The Council is a regulatory body and is responsible for the regulation,
quality and provision of legal training for those wishing
to be admitted as
barristers and solicitors to the profession in New Zealand.
These activities include –
setting courses
of study for the examination and practical legal training of persons wishing to
be admitted as barristers and solicitors
in New Zealand;
providing, or
arranging for the provision of, those courses of study;
arranging for
the moderation and assessment of those courses of study;
assessment of
qualifications particularly those of overseas law graduates and legal
practitioners wishing to practice in New Zealand;
arranging for
the provision of research as necessary, and tendering advice on legal
administering
and conducting certain examinations.
To carry out its tasks in discharge of its functions set out in the
Lawyers and
Conveyancers Act 2006
, the Council maintained its general liaision
with the Judiciary, the legal profession, the Universities and law students, and
specifically
undertook the activities detailed below.
Provision of Courses
The Council prescribes the core curriculum for the bachelor of laws degree
and monitors these subjects through a moderation system.
The five compulsory subjects which are moderated are –
Property Law (or
Land Law and Equity and Succession where Property Law is not offered)
There is concern in some quarters that this list of core subjects
is too narrow. It was much broader but in 1987, at a time when
everything was
being deregulated in New Zealand, the core subjects were greatly reduced.
During 1997 the Council introduced a requirement for all law students who
completed their bachelor of laws, or bachelor of laws with
Honours degrees after
31 July 2000 to pass a university course in legal ethics as a further
requirement for admission. On 1 August
2008 the requirement was extended
to all applicants for admission regardless of the completion date of their
The course which was prescribed and moderated by the Council, has as its
broad principles –
an introduction
to ethical analysis including an examination of various theories of ethics;
applicability of ethical analysis to legal practice;
the concept of a
profession and the ethical professional duties of practitioners (which includes,
among other topics, conflicts of
interest, confidentiality, duties to the Court,
duties of loyalty and fidelity);
responsibilities of lawyers in the community.
The course was introduced in response to a
had recommended that courses in legal ethics be required at three levels of
legal education: academic, vocational training
and continuing education after
admission to the profession. In New Zealand this was implemented by the Council
by the introduction
of the undergraduate university course in legal ethics
which, while not a compulsory degree subject, is required for those students
wishing to be admitted to the profession. The requirement was further
implemented by the introduction of Ethics and Professional
Responsibility
components into the Council’s Professional Legal Studies Course.
Assessment of overseas law qualifications
The overseas qualification assessment system involves examination of the
credentials of overseas law graduates and practitioners through
a process of
analysis and written assessment, notification and liaison with candidates,
assistance and advice, reviews and appeals.
It also involves reporting
requirements, and preparation of material for applicants.
The recommendation produced by the Council forms the basis for eligibility
for admission of overseas graduates and practitioners to
the legal profession in
New Zealand, upon completion of the prescribed requirements.
Applications are decided on their merits, after thorough examination of all
documents, and following earlier policy and precedents
established by the
A review process is available for applicants who present new material not
considered in the earlier assessment. Reviews take place
in approximately 10%
to 20% of cases.
The assessment process involves a detailed analysis of –
applicant’s tertiary academic qualifications;
the nature and
extent of the applicant’s professional training;
the nature and
extent of the applicant’s professional experience; and
the nature and
extent of the applicant’s knowledge and experience in the use of the
English language.
The examination requires an analysis of the extent to which the
applicant’s degree, training and experience equate with the
requirements for New Zealand candidates.
In particular the Council seeks to establish –
applicant has completed the equivalent of the New Zealand four year bachelor of
laws degree (LLB) and that at least three
years full-time study of law subjects
has been undertaken by the applicant. If, on analysis, it is found that the
applicant’s
degree is not in terms of length or breadth broadly the
equivalent of the New Zealand law degree the applicant may be required to
New Zealand University degree courses to broaden their degree.
applicant has included in their degree, and passed, courses that broadly cover
the content of the compulsory Council of Legal
Education New Zealand LLB
subjects. Currently these subjects are Legal System, Contract, Torts, Public,
Criminal and Property Law.
(The Property Law course includes a trust and equity
and succession law component.) If the applicant has completed a course that
found to adequately correspond with any of the above subjects, the applicant may
receive a credit in that subject, otherwise the
applicant will usually be
required to undertake that course at a New Zealand University.
All New Zealand law graduates who wish to be admitted to the
profession must also undertake a university course in legal ethics.
assessment process the Council also examines whether an overseas applicant has
completed a course in legal ethics and
professional responsibility. Any
applicant who has not completed such a course may be required to do so.
An assessment is also made by the Council of the scope of any courses or
practical training that an applicant may have completed,
and any related
experience. If the combined practical training and experience is insufficient
an applicant may be required to complete
a skills-based training course.
Applications are processed as expeditiously as possible. A typical
application may take 12 weeks to consider, and sometimes a longer
time may be
required depending on the nature of the application and the number of cases
under consideration.
Number of applicants
The total number of applications dealt with during the year was 101.
Applications were received from the following countries:
Argentina, Belgium, Bangladesh, Brazil, China (including Hong Kong),
Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Korea, Malaysia,
Philippines, Scotland, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago,
United Kingdom, United States of America and
The total number of applications received since 1998 are listed in the table
Applications
Internal credits
In the case of the Council’s overseas credits system an overseas
graduate or admitted practitioner applies to the Council to
have an overseas
qualification assessed, the Council examines the core law degree subjects
undertaken by that person. If a person’s
degree subject is found to
adequately cover the common law principles in the subject, the applicant is
given a credit in that particular
subject. However, the applicant will almost
certainly have to undertake the Council’s New Zealand Law and Practice
Examination
in the equivalent Part, which tests understanding of the New Zealand
law. It is rare for any exemptions to be granted from the New
Zealand Law and
Practice Examination. There must be clear evidence of a real knowledge and
understanding of the relevant New Zealand
law. It is unlikely that any person
who has not worked in New Zealand or been in a New Zealand University would be
given credit.
If an applicant has not graduated but has partially completed an overseas law
degree, and wishes to enter the profession in New Zealand,
or to obtain a law
degree, the applicant will proceed to a University in New Zealand, enrol in an
LLB degree, and seek credit in
any relevant subjects, which may include the core
law subjects.
A potential difficulty arose because if the Universities granted credit in
the core law subjects without any further requirements
being imposed, those
undergraduates who commenced their undergraduate degree overseas, but
transferred, or wished to transfer to
a New Zealand LLB degree, were
significantly advantaged over their graduate/admitted compatriots, who would
have to undertake the
New Zealand Law and Practice Examination prescribed by the
Council. From the Council’s standpoint, those undergraduate students
also disadvantaged in that they had at no stage studied or been assessed in New
Zealand law in these core law subjects.
Similar considerations applied to students seeking to undertake core law
courses on an exchange programme. In those cases students
might obtain passes
in the equivalent core law subjects overseas, but not be required to undertake
any further study in the area
in New Zealand.
As a result of these potential inconsistencies, a Protocol was drafted,
through the Chief Executive’s Office and the Law Deans,
initiative between the Council and the Faculties. The Protocol, entitled the
Protocol between the Council and the Universities on Internal Credits
designed to remedy any inconsistencies in processes, by establishing a standard
procedure to be followed in internal credit cases.
The Protocol
The Protocol encourages the Faculties to seek a recommendation from the
Council as to the credit to be given in core law subjects
in respect of –
presenting with a course from an overseas country or jurisdiction in
substitution for any core law course;
students seeking
to undertake a course at an overseas institution and to substitute that course
for a core law course through an exchange
The Council’s recommendation may include requiring the
applicant to complete the equivalent Part of the New Zealand Law and
Examination.
The Protocol came into effect on 1 April 2003. Since then the Council has
provided recommendation for a number of applications from
the Law Schools.
Examination in New Zealand Law and Practice
The Council requires almost all overseas applicants to pass all, or a number
of Parts, of an examination on the law of New Zealand
– the New Zealand
Law and Practice Examination.
The examination consists of a six Part written examination following a
comprehensive self-taught prescription. It is generally held
bi-annually, over
a period of four days. The purpose of the examination is to test the
applicant’s knowledge of the distinct
features of the New Zealand law, and
proceeds on the basis that the applicant will already have an understanding of
the common law
principles in that subject, by virtue of the applicant’s
overseas law degree.
The examination covers the areas of legal system, contract law, criminal law,
property law, torts and equity and succession. Each
part consists of one
written examination of 90 minutes duration. Applicants are required to sit
these papers unless they can show
that they are familiar with the relevant law
of New Zealand in relation to the particular subject. The knowledge of
applicants is
assessed by a specialist Credits Committee appointed by the
During the year the Council, through the Chief Executive’s Office,
implemented systems to deal with applications for exemptions
from certain
Council requirements on the basis of equivalent training.
Professional legal studies course
The Council is also responsible for providing practical legal training for
New Zealand law graduates, and overseas graduates and practitioners
In 1986 a review commissioned by the Council of Legal Education and the New
Zealand Law
recommended the establishment of a full-time practical skills-based training
course which would complement the experience which a
law graduate gained while
working in a legal environment, and would replace the fifth professional year at
university where students
had previously been trained in practically oriented
legal subjects.
In order to provide the course the Council established the Institute of
Professional Legal Studies in 1987.
Institute of Professional Legal Studies
The Institute is the Council’s provider arm for the delivery of the
Professional Legal Studies Course. The Council has a statutory
duty to arrange
the provision of such a course, and must ensure that it has the ability to do so
to ensure that the course is accessible
to all students.
The Institute is managed by a National Director, who is appointed by the
Chief Executive of the Council. A Delegation Document has
been in place since
2003 under which the National Director operates and reports to the Chief
Executive of the
In 2003 the Council also redrafted the regulations governing the Professional
Legal Studies Course which allowed for a generic, rather
than provider specific,
set of regulations.
A major review of these regulations was undertaken in 2004 which resulted in the
promulgation of the Professional Legal Studies
Course Regulations 2004 which
further emphasised the generic nature of the regulations.
In 2003 the Council licensed the Institute of Professional Legal Studies to
provide a 13-week face to face, full-time course, and
a 19-week part face to
face, part distance delivered course. The Council has also licensed another
provider, originating in Australia,
the College of Law New Zealand. The College
was licensed, by the Council, to provide an 18-week part face to face, part
delivered course. Both organisations were licensed for a period of two
years. It operates in competition with the Institute. At
present it attracts
slightly more than 50% of those enrolling in professional courses. The
licensing of a second provider added
a significant new dimension to the
Council’s operations. Since then both providers have been relicensed
twice, each time for
three years.
A special regime applies to Trans-Tasman admission. It is covered by the
Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Admission Regulations 2008.
practitioners on application are able to practice in New Zealand in the same way
New Zealand practitioners can practice
in Australia. The assessment of any
application is carried out by a Registrar of the High Court.
Much of the
material for this paper is taken from the annual report of the New Zealand
Council of Legal Education.
QC and C Roper
Report on a Project on Education and Training in Legal Ethics
and Professional Responsibility for the Council of Legal Education and
Zealand Law Society
(Wellington, 1996).
Report on the Reform of Professional Legal Training in New Zealand for the
New Zealand Law Society and the Council of Legal Education
(Wellington,
Statement of Accountability Relationship Between the Council of Legal
Education and the Institute of professional Legal Studies
(Wellington,
Professional Legal Studies Course Regulations 2004.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter