URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crofts, Penny --- "Ensuring Corporate Criminal Responsibility in the 21st Century" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 15; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 105
ENSURING CORPORATE CRIMINAL
RESPONSIBILITY IN THE 21st CENTURY
Penny Crofts*
I Introduction
II Do We Need Law Reform?
III Corporations As Criminal Legal Subjects
V Corporate Harms Are Not Crime
VI Punishment
VII Conclusion
ENSURING CORPORATE CRIMINAL
RESPONSIBILITY
Penny Crofts
I Introduction
Recent government inquiries in Australia have focused on financial
wrongdoing,
and there is also
awareness of physical harms caused by corporations and large organisations,
including environmental harms,
injuries and deaths.
Despite long
term recognition of the significant, widespread systemic harms that corporations
prosecutions of corporations
in Australia, relative to individuals, are extremely
The ALRC recently undertook a
review as to whether there needs to be more effective laws in response to
corporate wrongdoing,
appears to have been little to no progress on the prosecution of corporations
for widespread harms.
The lack of criminal prosecution of corporations is problematic on multiple
levels. In theory, corporations are primarily controlled
through responsive
regulation, which favours responding to wrongdoing with persuasion and less
coercive measures, holding out a threat
of escalating to criminal sanctions for
serious breaches of the law.
However, if criminal sanctions are rarely (or never) applied then the top of the
pyramid is missing and rationally, corporations
will continue with profitable
wrongdoing.
Moreover, criminal law
not only has a deterrent influence, it also serves an expressive function, that
is, it communicates moral
opprobrium.
The failure to criminalise corporate wrongdoing is thus a message
corporate harms are simply a cost of doing business as opposed to
something that
This emboldens
corporations to undertake a cost-benefit analysis as to harms, rather than
prohibiting the harms. Civil measures are
important, but while corporations
might agree to (massive) payouts, they do not require the corporation to admit
It also suggests that
despite causing systemic harms, corporations can evade the law. This undermines
the rule of law, a key tenet
of which is that we are all subject to the
II Do We Need Law Reform?
On any account, the massive systemic harms caused by corporations meet two of
the major justifications for criminalisation, that of
harmful consequences and
public wrongs.
What then, are
the barriers in the way of prosecuting corporations for widespread harms? In
accordance with the theme of this volume,
I will consider what law reforms, if
any, need to occur to prosecute corporations for these harms. When discussing
the im/possibility
of prosecuting corporations for wrongs, some key themes
emerge from the general public and scholars alike, and there is a tendency
slip from one theme to the next. I will respond to common concerns drawing upon
a criminal legal doctrinal perspective to interrogate
whether criminal law
reform is needed or if we need to transform our cultural and legal imagination
and apply existing criminal law
to corporations. I am writing this article in a
spirit of optimism and idealism – a belief in classic tenets of criminal
and the rule of law.
III Corporations As Criminal Legal Subjects
A key barrier to criminal prosecution is the failure to conceive of
corporations as subjects of criminal law at all. This was exemplified
Australian Inquiries and Royal Commissions where despite articulating long term
wrongdoing by corporations, prosecution
of corporations was not suggested. For
example, despite its terms of reference and title, the Royal Commission into
Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse did not suggest any prosecutions
nor any law reforms to assist with the prosecution of
corporations.
It is clear that corporations can be charged with criminal offences. As
Hallet J commented in
DPP v Kent and Sussex
Contractors
it makes good
sense and good law that a corporation should not escape the consequences that
would follow an individual by showing
that they are not a natural person. There
are, however, some difficulties. Corporations can and do exploit existing
doctrine such
as the corporate veil to restructure to avoid legal responsibility
for harms. An infamous example was the restructure of James Hardie
2001, moving from Australia to the Netherlands, to minimise liabilities for
asbestos-related claims.
transpired that James Hardie NV had under-funded its subsidiary foundation
responsible for compensation by about $2
James Hardie asserted
that it had undertaken all legal steps in relation to setting up the foundation
and would not provide any further
funds. It was only after a government inquiry,
political and union pressure, that shareholders of the Dutch company voted to
$4 billion over next 40 years to fund claims against the former
subsidiaries. One response to restructures such as this and phoenix
is to apply criminal law categories of identity to corporations, rather than
corporate law categories. In criminal law,
even if an offender changes their
identity this will not insulate them from prosecution for past wrongs. Why then,
can corporations
fudge their identities to avoid liability, but keep the profits
from past wrongdoing?
area that is recognised amongst scholars and the judiciary as ripe for analysis
and reform.
Alternatively, this
is an area where personal responsibility of corporate officers may be a better
Leaving aside issues of the corporate veil, there are far too many examples
of corporate wrongdoing which do not have a complicated
corporate identity, and
yet there is still no suggestion of prosecution of those corporations. For
example, the recent inquiries
into Crown and Star casinos found long term money
laundering and did not recommend criminal prosecution of either corporation.
has pursued both corporations for civil penalties, but at the time of
writing, despite the availability of strict liability criminal
offences, no
corporation has been prosecuted for money laundering in
These arguments are
not intended to displace the possibility of prosecution of corporate officers,
which may well be warranted –
either in addition to, or instead of, the
prosecution of corporations.
Legally there is no barrier to prosecuting corporations, but then a key
question arises of how can corporations think and act? That
is, what kind of
agency do corporations have? Responses to the question of corporate agency can
be divided into nominalists and realists.
Nominalists accept that corporations
are legal entities but argue that they are nothing more than collectives of
individuals. They
can only act and intend through individual human beings. This
reflects an individualistic bias that only individual humans can be
Despite philosophical analysis of group
on the whole, we still
tend to think of agency in individualistic terms. This focus on individual human
actors is reflected and reinforced
in the criminal justice system and by
scholars, particularly as the criminal law was constructed around the archetypal
legal subject
– the responsible, biological human
In contrast, realists
argue that corporations are more than the sum of their parts and can act and be
at fault in ways that are different
from the ways in which their members can act
and be at fault.
This realist / nominalist debate frames questions around how to establish the
of corporations. The common law developed identification
doctrine, which equates the corporation’s mind with the individuals
are its ‘directing mind and
This approach has
proven to be an obstacle to prosecution due to difficulties in identifying who
the directing mind is (frequently
the Board of Directors), and then what they
knew and when, particularly for large corporations where knowledge and
responsibility
is diffuse. Identification doctrine and the American approach of
vicarious liability (holding a corporation responsible for what
its individual
employees knew and intended) is consistent with the nominalist approach, that
is, the idea that a corporation can
only be at fault due to individual members
of the collective. The underpinnings of identification doctrine have informed
recent public
inquiries, with the unexamined assumption that corporate
wrongdoing can be regarded as a governance issue rather than that of
criminality.
For example, the Bergin Inquiry was scathing of Crown’s
‘problems’ (including money laundering) and found that
they stemmed
from ‘poor governance, deficient risk management structures and processes
and a poor corporate
Thus, it is
assumed that if some of the senior management are replaced, the
‘problems’ of the corporation will be resolved.
A variety of different ideas have developed to deal with the problem of
. A very common approach is to bypass
the requirement of proving
altogether, for example with strict
liability or failure to prevent
Whilst these offences
increase the likelihood of a successful prosecution they suggest that
corporations are only committing ‘quasi’
criminal offences, rather
than ‘real’ criminal offences which are more ‘serious’
One of the reasons why
this distinction is asserted is because strict liability offences do not require
. This conflicts with the legally and socially dominant
model of culpability as subjective, that is, that we can only be held
responsible
for intentional
wrongdoing.
One rejoinder to
this is that there are other, significant models of wickedness, including a
negative model of wickedness, that is,
of failure or lack. This negative model
works really well for corporate
wrongdoing,
but distracts from
the actions and choices exercised by corporations across time. That is, a
narrative of (culpable) failure contributes
to the idea that corporations lack
agency. For example, in response to four people being killed on the Thunder
River Rapids Ride
(TRRR) at Dreamworld Australia in October 2016, Ardent
International plead guilty to three failures to fulfil safety duty offences.
deaths were framed as a result of failure:
The failures of the defendants were not momentary. Nor were they confined to
a discrete safety obligation. They encompassed failures
in each of the
following: the provision of maintenance of safe plant and structure. The
provision of maintenance of safe system of
work. The provision of information,
training and instruction to
Rather than regarding this as failure, Anthony and I note that the coronial
inquiry pointed to multiple breakdowns of the TRRR prior
to the deaths, removing
bits of the ride when they became waterlogged and not replacing them or
analysing the effect of the modifications
on the safety of the ride, and not
fixing the emergency stop procedures despite being advised in 2001 that it
needed to be fixed.
Alternative, innovative approaches to determine corporate intention and to
more accurately capture culpability have been proposed.
This includes the much
touted but almost never applied corporate
whereby corporate
knowledge and intention can be attributed to a corporation based on a
‘corporate culture’ that ‘directed,
encouraged, tolerated or
led to non-compliance with the relevant
provision’.
Corporate law
scholar Elise Bant has proposed the idea of system intentionality, which
conceptualises the state of corporate mind
as manifested in its systems,
policies and practices.
Alternatively, this question of corporate intentions can be analysed in the
terms of classic criminal legal doctrine that is applied
to the archetypal legal
subject. In the absence of a confession from an individual accused, juries are
directed to infer or deduce
intention based on the circumstances, conduct, and
what a person says.
argued in relation to my analysis of the film
, this question of
corporate intentions should not be
over-complicated.
even though we do not understand their language or organisational structure,
it is clear what the aliens want – to survive and
reproduce. The same kind
of analysis can be applied to corporations. Thus, instead of using a language of
failure, we can point to
Ardent’s knowledge and choices to minimise costs
and avoid shutting down Dreamworld’s most popular ride even briefly
undertake basic safety
procedures.
Moreover, the assumption of difficulties of establishing corporate intent
belies the extent to which after a history of denial, it
becomes apparent that
the corporation knew of the dangers and harms long before anyone else and
continued to act regardless. There
are too many examples of this, with the
tobacco industry particularly effective
James Hardie and
and the recent
revelations about 3M and DuPont and toxic forever
is conclusively established, there is no prosecution. For example,
Johnson and Johnson was sued in 1999 for causing mesothelioma,
but successfully
argued that its talc was safe. Later lawsuits revealed documents indicating that
the product had asbestos in it,
and the company knew from at least the 1970s
that the talc tested positive for small quantities of
As a consequence the
company has been successfully sued in various countries for causing harms
including ovarian cancer.
Louis circuit court judge found that there was evidence of ‘particularly
reprehensible conduct on the part of the defendants,
including that defendants
knew of the presence of asbestos in products that they knowingly targeted for
sale to mothers and babies,
knew of the damage their products caused, and
misrepresented the safety of these products for
And yet, even
when we know their intentions and are aware of the massive harms that they have
caused, they are still not prosecuted.
One barrier is that we tend to think of specifics with regard to intention,
for example, the intention to kill a specific person.
But with companies such as
James Hardie, Johnson and Johnson, and Purdue – there is knowledge that
their product
kill, there is just no specific victim. Surely though,
this is at least as bad, if not worse than, an intention to kill specific
There is a willingness that an unspecified number of people will die so
that the corporation can continue peddling a product that
it knows will kill so
that it will continue to profit. The failure to prosecute relegates these deaths
to accidents, disasters and
tragedies as though corporations had no culpability
despite knowingly choosing profit and externalising harms for decades. In these
situations, particularly where the corporation knowingly ran the high risk of
killing on an industrial scale for decades, the corporation
can and should be
prosecuted for manslaughter or even murder. But they are not. This is a failure
of normative and legal imagination
of the corporation as criminal, rather than a
failure of criminal law.
V Corporate Harms Are Not Crime
An additional obstacle to prosecution is the perception that corporate harms
are not criminal, linking back to the characterisation
of strict liability
offences as minor, regulatory offences. There is no question that there is a
proliferation of minor regulatory
which have led
scholars and the ALRC to express concern about the over-criminalisation of
corporations. This concern is reflected
and reinforced by a tendency to
characterise corporate crimes in euphemistic terms. For example, in the
Financial Services Royal
Commission banking practices were labelled fees for no
service, rather than fraud. This is in part an expression of power, for example,
the Australian Retailers Association prefers ‘unlawful non-payment or
underpayment of employees’ remuneration’
This euphemistic thinking
is facilitated by law, for example, instead of being prosecuted for the
manslaughter of four people, Ardent
was prosecuted for three breach of safety
offences. This euphemistic language shores up the perception of corporations as
non-criminal.
The same behaviour by individuals results in prosecutions for
crimes, whereas corporations may be prosecuted for regulatory offences
other names at most, or for civil penalties.
I have argued that far from over criminalisation, there is an under
criminalisation of corporate harms because they are ‘too
big, too bad and
too nasty’ for criminal
Our system is geared to
respond to and categorise harms that are caused by individuals. Corporations are
capable of causing harm
on an industrial scale that radically exceeds even the
most motivated super villain.
are thus left with the perverse outcome that the most serious and widespread
harms are excluded from purview of criminal law,
which claims for itself the
worst public wrongs – because they are too much for criminal law
categories. This suggests that
we need to rejig and expand our numerical
categories of harms to include the sheer proliferation of corporate
Legally and socially, we
must stop using euphemistic language in response to corporate harms and use the
language and categories
VI Punishment
A major barrier to prosecution is the belief that corporations cannot be
imprisoned, and therefore there is no point to engaging with
the criminal
justice system.
However, it has
long been recognised that corporations are motivated by reputational interests,
and not just money.
confirmed in the Banking Royal Commission, where the banks preferred to be
regarded as incompetent and/or immoral, rather
There is, accordingly,
a power in the label of criminality. Rather than giving up, we need to get
imaginative about punishments,
so that a wide range of sanctions are available.
This approach is already adopted by the Land and Environment Court (LEC), where
local councils may be found guilty of illegal dumping and financial punishments
will affect innocent rate-payers. The LEC can impose
penalties such as
advertising the offence in local newspapers and remediation of land for the
benefit of the community. Additionally,
Thomas and Diamantis have argued that
corporate punishments should communicate wrongdoing and condemn wrongdoers, and
be done by ‘branding’ corporate criminals, in the same
way that we brand tobacco as harmful to health. This would signal
corporation’s criminal status to observers including potential customers,
who could then exercise a choice as to whether
Other proposals
include equity fines,
debarment regime,
and the notion
of moral insolvency for severe corporate wrongdoing, such as forced liquidation
of awards of equity to victims, as
Accordingly, meaningful
punishments are available – we just need to apply them.
VII Conclusion
Corporations cause horrific harms on an industrial scale and this is only
getting worse. There is an urgent need to prosecute corporations
as criminal
legal subjects. The failure to do so suggests that corporate harms are
acceptable costs of doing business, rather than
prohibited wrongs. Much of
existing criminal legal doctrine can and should be applied to corporations
– there is no lack of
offences, just a lack of
enforcement.
interrogate our legal imagination as to why we continue to permit corporations
to get away with crime.
Dr Penny Crofts is a Professor at the Faculty of Law, University
of Technology Sydney: <https://profiles.uts.edu.au/Penny.Crofts>.
Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking,
Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
(Final Report, February 2019)
vol 2; Independent Liquor and Gaming Authority,
Inquiry under
Section 143
Casino Control Act 1992
(Report, February 2021) vol 1.
Jennifer Nielsen, ‘Lawful
Destruction, Native Title and Epistemicide’ (2022) 2(1)
Thalia Anthony and Penny
Crofts, ‘The Dreamworld Deaths: Corporate Crime and the Slumber of
Law’ (2024) 36(2)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
(‘Anthony and Crofts’); Health and Safety Executive,
Fatal Injuries in Great Britain, 2021
(Report, 2021) 32.
For example, the East India
Company was granted a royal charter in 1600, establishing a monopoly on all
English trade in the East
Indies as part of the colonial project of exploration
and domination, resulting in horrific acts of trading slaves and destroying
culture: William Dalrymple,
The Anarchy: The Relentless Rise of the East
India Company
(Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, 2019).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Corporate Criminal Responsibility
(Report No 136, April 2020)
96 (‘Australian Law Reform Commission’); George Gilligan and Ian
Ramsay, ‘Is There
Underenforcement of Corporate Criminal Law? An Analysis
of Prosecutions Under the ASIC Act and Corporations Act 2009-2018’
Company and Securities Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 5).
John Braithwaite,
or Persuade: Enforcement of Coal Mine Safety
(State University Of New York
Press, 1985).
Vicky Comino, ‘The
Challenge of Corporate Law Enforcement in Australia’ (2009) 23(3)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Dan Kahan, ‘The Secret
Ambition of Deterrence’
(1999) 113(2)
Harvard Law Review
Gregory Gilchrist,
‘The Expressive Cost of Corporate Immunity’
(2012) 64(1)
Law Journal
3M Company, ‘3M
Settlement with Public Water Suppliers to Address PFAS in Drinking Water
Receives Final Court Approval’,
(Web Page, 1 April 2024) <
https://investors.3m.com/news-events/press-releases/detail/1836/3m-settlement-with-public-water-suppliers-to-address-pfas
There have recently been
increases to maximum penalties under the
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) and the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), which, under some
circumstances, can amount to over $782 million. In
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
(2022) 274 CLR 450
, the High Court
held that proportionality is not a relevant factor. It is beyond the scope of
this article, but it may well be that
some of these penalties are so severe that
they amount to a criminal sanction which serve both to deter and disgorge
profits: Cam
Truong and Luisa Alampi, ‘Increased Civil Pecuniary Penalties
– The “Cost of Doing Business” or an Effective
Deterrent?’ (2020) 28(2)
Australian Journal of Competition and Consumer
101; Penny Crofts and Honni van Rijswijk,
Technology: New
Trajectories in Law
(Routledge, 2021); Jennifer Hendry and Colin King,
‘Expediency, Legitimacy, and the Rule of Law: A Systems Perspective on
Civil/Criminal
Procedural Hybrids’ (2016) 11(4)
Criminal Law and
Andrew Ashworth and Jeremy
Principles of Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press,
I am of course aware of the
impact of power on the construction and application of law, but I also believe
that the ideals of law
hold a power that we can draw upon to challenge
inequalities and injustices.
Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse
(Final Report, 2017) vol
Director of Public
Prosecutors v Kent and Sussex Contractors Ltd
[1944] KB 146.
Matt Peacock,
Company: James Hardie Exposed
(ABC Books, 2009) (‘Peacock’).
Special Commission of
Inquiry into the Medical Research and Compensation Foundation,
Report of the
Special Commission of Inquiry into the Medical Research and Compensation
(Final Report, September 2004).
Penny Crofts and Honni van
Rijswijk, ‘Corporations as Haunted Entities: Conceptualising
Responsibility for Historical Harm’
in Penny Crofts (ed),
Corporations: Law, Culpability and Regulation
(Routledge, 2024) 206.
Gregory Allan, ‘To
Pierce or Not to Pierce? A Doctrinal Reappraisal of Judicial Responses to
Improper Exploitation of the Corporate
Form’ (2018) 7
Business Law
Penny Crofts and Honni van
Rijswijk, ‘A Case Study of State-Corporate Crime: Crown Resorts’
(2023) 35(1)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
John HC Colvin and Brendan
Hord, ‘Criminal Director Liability: A Bridge Now Too Far?’ (2020) 35
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Christian List and Philip
Group Agency: The Possibility, Design, and Status of Corporate
(Oxford University Press, 2011); Stephanie Collins,
Organizations
as Wrongdoers: From Ontology to Morality
(Oxford University Press,
Ngaire Naffine, ‘Our
Legal Lives as Men, Women and Persons’ (2004) 24(4)
Legal Studies
Stephanie Collins,
Organizations as Wrongdoers: From Ontology to Morality
(n 23); Stephanie
Collins, ‘Corporate Vice’ in Penny Crofts (ed),
Corporations
(Routledge, 2024) 47.
HL Bolton Engineering Co
Ltd v TJ Graham & Sons Ltd
[1957] 1 QB 159
Independent Liquor and
Gaming Authority Patricia Bergin,
Inquiry under
Section 143
Control Act 1992
(Report, 1 February 2021) vol 2, 568.
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 5) 81.
There is some basis for this
distinction: see, eg, the failure to lodge returns on time: See generally
Australian Law Reform Commission
Penny Crofts,
and Crime: Laws of Homicide and Malice
(Routledge, 2013); Australian Law
Reform Commission (n 5) 35. ‘It is fault that should distinguish criminal
conduct from prohibited
conduct that is subject only to civil
regulation.’
Jonathan Clough,
‘“Failure to Prevent” Offences: The Solution to Transnational
Corporate Criminal Liability’
in Elise Bant (ed),
The Culpable
Corporate Mind
(Hart, 2023) 395; Penny Crofts, ‘Criminalising
Institutional Failures to Prevent, Identify or React to Child Sexual
(2017) 6(3)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social
Guilfoyle v Ardent
[2020] QMC 13
Anthony and Crofts (n
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 5) 66. Corporate culture is expressly excluded from a broad range
of legislation.
Criminal Code Act
(Cth) pt 2.5 s 12.3(2)(c).
Elise Bant, ‘The
Culpable Corporate Mind: Taxonomy and Synthesis’ in Elise Bant (ed),
The Culpable Corporate Mind
(Hart, 2023) 3.
‘Judicial Commission
Criminal Trial Courts Bench Book 3-200
(Web Page) <
https://www.judcom.nsw.gov.au/publications/benchbks/criminal/intention.html>
Penny Crofts, ‘Aliens:
Legal Conceptions of the Corporate Invasion’ (2022) 34(3)
387. See also, Mihailis Diamantis, ‘How to Read a
Corporation’s Mind’ in Elise Bant (ed),
The Culpable Corporate
(Hart, 2023) 209.
Anthony and Crofts (n
SM Carter and S Chapman,
‘Smoking, Disease, and Obdurate Denial: The Australian Tobacco Industry in
the 1980s’ (2003)
Tobacco Control
Peacock (n 17).
Lauren Richter, Alissa
Cordner and Phil Brown, ‘Producing Ignorance Through the Regulatory
Structure: The Case of Per- and
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS)’ (2021)
Sociological Perspectives
Owen Dyer, ‘Johnson
& Johnson Knew for Decades Talcum Powder Contained Asbestos, Reports
Allege’ (2018) 363
Owen Dyer, ‘Jury
Awards $4.7bn Damages against Johnson & Johnson in Talcum Cancer Case’
(2018) 362(8162)
Associated Press,
‘Salter J. Judge Refuses to Overturn $4.7 Billion Talc Powder
The Washington Post
(online, 20 December 2018)
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/judge-refuses-to-overturn-47-billion-talc-powder-verdict/2018/12/20/d837edac-0498-11e9-958c-0a601226ff6b_story.html>.
For example, the failure to
place an Australian Company Number on certain company documents: Australian Law
Reform Commission (n
Economic References
Committee (Cth),
Systemic, Sustained and Shameful: Unlawful Underpayment of
Employees’ Remuneration
(Report, March 2022) 7.
Penny Crofts, ‘The
Horror of Corporate Harms’ (2022) 38
Australian Journal of Corporate
Timothy Peters, ‘You
Are Bad Guy, but This Does Not Mean You’re Bad Guy: The Office of the
Villain in Despicable Me,
Megamind and Wreck-It Ralph’ (2023) 73(1)
Crofts, ‘The Horror of
Corporate Harms’ (n 48).
John Coffee Jr, ‘No
Soul to Damn: No Body to Kick: An Unscandalized Inquiry into the Problem of
Corporate Punishment’
(1980) 79(3)
Michigan Law Review
Brent Fisse and John
Braithwaite,
The Impact of Publicity on Corporate Offenders
University of New York, 1983).
Penny Crofts,
‘Strategies of Denial and the Australian Royal Commission into Misconduct
in the Banking, Superannuation and
Financial Services’ (2020) 29(1)
Griffith Law Review
William Thomas and Mihailis
Diamantis, ‘Branding Corporate Criminals’ (2024) 47
Fordham Law
Eugene Schofield-Georgeson,
‘Equity Fines for Corporate Crime: Why They Should Be Back on the
Legislative Agenda’ (2019)
Alternative Law Journal
Australian Law Reform
Commission (n 5) 42.
Meredith Edelman,
‘Responsive Law and the Problem of Corporate Crime’ (2022) 38(1)
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Stephen Speirs,
‘Examining the Criminal Regime in Chapter 7 of the
Corporations Act
[2021] UQLawJl 11
(2021) 40(2)
University of Queensland Law Journal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (105 KB)
PDF format (331 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter