URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moloney, Niamh --- "Regulation of the Market and Intermediaries: Global Comparison and Contrast - What is Best Practice" [2008] MqJlBLaw 1; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 1
Regulation of the Market and Intermediaries: Global Comparison and Contrast – What is Best Practice?
Recent Developments in UK and European Union Market and Intermediary Regulation
I The Regulatory Environment
A Introduction – the Reform Movement
B The European Union as a Driver for Reform – the Context
C The UK and the UK Financial Services Authority – the Context
II Markets And Intermediaries (1): Regulatory Design And Supervision
A Better Regulation
B Principles-Based Regulation
1 More Principles-Based Regulation
2 The Application of MPBR
3 The Risks
C The EU and Principles-Based Regulation
D Case Study: Conflicts of Interest and Principles-Based Regulation
3 Best Practice?
E Supervision
F Best Practice?
III Markets and Intermediaries (2): Reforms to the Regulation of Trading Markets
A Restructuring EU Equity Trading Markets – Competitive Order Execution Markets and the Role of Regulation
1 Competitive Order Execution
2 The New Regulatory Regime for Equity Trading
B The Debt Trading Markets: Transparency Reform and Regulatory Design
1 Spill-Over Risks
2 Momentum Risks
3 Industry Engagement
4 Policy Formation
5 Market Discipline
C Internationalisation and Financial Markets – Regulatory Impact
IV Markets and Intermediaries (3): Intermediaries
A The Impact of MiFID on Intermediary Regulation
1 The MiFID Regime
2 Conduct of Business Regulation
B Emerging Regulatory Risks
1 Regulatory Arbitrage
2 Hedge Funds and Private Equity
Regulation of the Market
and Intermediaries: Global Comparison and Contrast – What is Best
Recent Developments in UK
and European Union Market and Intermediary Regulation
NIAMH MOLONEY
I The Regulatory
Environment
A Introduction –
the Reform Movement
One of the most striking features of capital market regulation worldwide at
present is the extent to which it is characterised by
large-scale reform and
innovation, from regulatory, supervisory, and institutional
perspectives.
While the US Sarbanes Oxley Act 2002 remains the classic example of
controversial and swingeing regulatory, supervisory, and institutional
the International Organisation of Securities Commissions continues to extend its
reach and influence,
and markets
worldwide are experiencing major reform
initiatives.
This movement reflects
an international momentum, and what might be termed a ‘copy cat
approach’ to reform,
following the series of disclosure and corporate governance scandals of which
Enron is now the paradigm example. It also reflects
recent innovations in law
and finance scholarship, which suggest that there is a correlation, if a
controversial one, between regulation
and market conditions and financial
development.
The prejudicial effects of over-regulation and liability risk have also
recently come under sharp political focus following concerns
in the US as to a
weakening in the competitive position of the US as the world’s leading
financial market which may, although
this is contested, reflect the stringent
requirements of the Sarbanes Oxley Act 2002 and the US liability and enforcement
and as markets worldwide adopt more sophisticated regulatory regimes and
compete in attracting capital.
the UK, the 2006 bid by NASDAQ for the London Stock Exchange prompted concern
that any risk of change in regulatory oversight
(in particular US SEC oversight)
over the London Stock Exchange could threaten the Exchange’s competitive
International regulatory
developments and regulatory burdens, and particularly EU requirements, now form
part of the UK Financial
Services Authority’s (hereafter FSA) Annual Risk
Outlook and are the subject of specific discussion in its Annual International
Regulatory Outlook. For example, the FSA noted in 2006 that one of the priority
risks to its achieving its aim of efficient, orderly,
and fair markets was the
substantial volume of international regulatory change affecting UK financial
institutions. At the very least,
the risks of law are becoming apparent.
The form, design, and quality of regulation are therefore increasingly policy
priorities. This overview of recent developments considers
the new focus on the
quality of regulatory design in the regulation of intermediaries and markets in
the UK and the EU which is currently
a major feature of regulatory and policy
discussion. But the UK and the EU are also experiencing large-scale substantive
reform. The discussion therefore also considers the major themes of
the recent reforms to markets and intermediaries in the UK and
whether they can be regarded as best practice and a template for reform
internationally.
B The European Union as
a Driver for Reform – the Context
Since 1999, the EU (currently composed of 27 Member States) has been engaged
in a massive and wide-ranging reform project to upgrade
its financial markets
architecture and its regulatory framework. Dramatic reforms to the regulation of
markets and intermediaries
have been taking place under the Financial Services
Action Plan (the FSAP), an ambitious reform agenda adopted in 1999 and completed
in 2005. The FSAP extends from the issuing of securities and issuer disclosure
(initial, periodic and ongoing), through to trading
in securities (including
trade execution and transparency rules) and the supply of investment services,
gatekeeper reform (including
credit rating agencies and investment analysts),
and on to market infrastructure, in particular clearing and settlement systems.
It demands a radical reform of financial market regulation across all 27 Member
States. Under the EU’s constitutional arrangement,
rules adopted by the
EU’s “quasi-federal” institutions - the Council (which
represents the Member States and their
national political interests), the
Commission (the EU’s independent executive and bureaucracy which
represents the EU interest),
and the Parliament, (composed of directly elected
representatives) - must be implemented by the Member States in their national
EU rules take precedence over national rules.
The key FSAP measure for markets and intermediaries is the groundbreaking
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 2004
which was applied across
all EU financial markets from November 1 2007 and which is projected to
transform the regulatory landscape
for markets, intermediaries, and the trading
of securities. MiFID is designed to apply a single European rulebook to
wholesale and
retail transactions in financial instruments and to the full range
of investment services. It has two core regulatory elements:
(i) authorisation and regulation of investment services; and
(ii) the support and regulation of a competitive and transparent order
execution market.
MiFID is considered by many to be the most significant reform ever to affect
the European financial services industry and it will
“significantly alter
how firms operate their businesses and how they interact with
customers.”
In the UK, for
example, the Financial Services Authority’s major policy priority for some
time has been the massive and resource-intensive
exercise to implement the MiFID
reforms in the UK national rulebook for markets and intermediaries. Market
participants are also
undergoing large-scale and costly systems change to
reflect the new rulebook. The projected upfront costs of MiFID in terms of IT,
compliance, and risk management systems are
This paper reviews some
of the most significant MiFID reforms for intermediaries and markets.
C The UK and the UK
Financial Services Authority – the Context
From a regulatory reform perspective, the EU is now the context within which
almost all financial market policy development, regulatory
reform, and market
engagement takes place across the 27 Member States, including the UK. The UK
retains control over supervision
and enforcement, however, and has also recently
engaged in very considerable reform to its overall approach to regulatory
including in the implementation of EU rules, under its More
Principles-Based Regulation (MPBR) initiative (see section II below).
UK financial markets are overseen by the UK Financial Services Authority, an
independent single financial market supervisor of almost
2,600 regulators,
funded by a levy on market
participants,
which regulates
approximately 25,000 banks, investment firms, insurance companies, brokers, and
financial advisers.
It operates
Financial Services and Markets Acts 2000
(FSMA), 11 High Level
Principles for Business (which have the status of rules), and some 5,000 rules,
both adopted by the FSA under
The FSA has four statutory objectives under FSMA:
(i) to maintain confidence in the UK financial system;
(ii) to promote public understanding of the financial system;
(iii) to secure the appropriate degree of protection for consumers;
(iv) the reduction of financial crime.
Although the adoption of these principles was controversial, a clear
statement of objectives provides, at least, support for effective
and coherent
supervision across different sectors and the efficient allocation of supervisory
resources. It should also facilitate
cost benefit analysis of the application of
the regime.
Regulation of intermediaries is based on the authorisation of
“regulated activities,” a very wide range of activities
include accepting deposits, insurance, dealing in investments as a principal,
dealing in investments as an agent, arranging
deals in investments, managing
investments, safeguarding and administering investments, and advising on
investments. In the investment
services sphere, once a firm is authorised,
regulation is primarily based on the twin pillars of conduct of business
regulation and
conflict of interest management.
Regulation of markets is based on FSMA’s provisions concerning
recognised investment exchanges and recognised clearing houses.
These provisions
reflect a long tradition of self regulation. In principle, a recognised
investment exchange is exempt from FSMA,
but recognition depends on compliance
with FSMA requirements.
may also issue directions to an exchange and veto rule changes - its residual
powers remain considerable. The admission to
listing process and the approval of
listing particulars also rests with the FSA and with its Listing Authority
division, not with
the London Stock Exchange. This separation of functions was
required under EU law and reflects the LSE’s status as a listed
company. RIEs remain responsible for admission to trading, however, and monitor
and enforce trading rules. Exchange participants
are regulated under the
FSA’s regime for investment activities. The influence of the EU has also
resulted in ever-increasing
prescription on the regulation of markets.
All UK regulation is, however, closely based on EU rules and, in particular,
on the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 2004
(MiFID). The key
substantive reforms for markets and intermediaries introduced by this measure
are considered in sections III (markets)
and (more briefly for intermediaries)
section IV.
Markets And Intermediaries (1): Regulatory Design And Supervision
This section considers the emerging importance of better regulation and
effective regulatory design in the recent reform movement.
Although its approach to supervision faced considerable criticism in the wake
of the Northern Rock collapse,
the FSA has for some time faced criticism that it over-regulates the UK
A 2007 Report from the
National Audit Office, for example, reported that the FSA was “rich in
process” and needed to
streamline its bureaucracy and focus on
One of its responses
has been the adoption and close application of the Better Regulation Agenda.
The Better Regulation agenda (December
2005) is based on four principles:
(i) increased use of principles, and an outcomes-based, incentive-driven
approach, to drive the operation and behaviour of firms;
(ii) the removal of rules where the costs cannot be justified by the
(iii) a more robust application of risk-based regulation; and
(iv) supporting firms in complying with FSA
requirements.
Risk-based and outcome-focused regulation is now a key objective for the
Better regulation is also entrenched in the background statutory regime. FSMA
2000 requires the FSA to follow principles of good regulation
in carrying out
its activities.
In seeking to
meet these objectives, the FSA follows three strategic aims:
(i) promoting efficient, orderly and fair markets;
(ii) helping retail consumers achieve a fair deal; and
(iii) improving its business capability and effectiveness.
Effective cost benefit analysis is of particular concern to the FSA as it has
a statutory responsibility to assess the costs and benefits
of each measure it
adopts. The FSA has deployed considerable resources to developing appropriate
performance review measures, given
the difficulties in quantifying the effects
of financial market regulation.
It has, for example, in an attempt to improve its cost-benefit assessment of
measures, recently engaged in a major ‘Costs of
Regulation’ exercise
in the corporate finance, institutional asset management, and investment and
pension advice sectors,
enjoyed considerable market support.
The concern to promote Better Regulation also reflects a general and
intensifying concern in the UK financial markets (and
internationally
) with the risks
and quality of regulation. For example, the Financial Markets Law Committee, an
independent committee of the Bank
of England, considers issues of legal
uncertainty which give rise to material risks in the wholesale financial
markets. Major market
actors concerned with the quality of regulation include
trade associations such as the London Investment Banking Association (LIBA),
influential City trade association which has addressed effective policy
formation and regulatory impact
Internationally, the
International Council of Securities Associations (ICSA), which represents a wide
range of financial market self-regulatory
and trade associations, regularly
addresses the effectiveness of the regulatory
A focus on more effective regulation is now a major theme of the current
policy dialogue on financial markets in the EU generally.
Overall, there is an
increasing concern across UK and EU financial market policy, to promote:
(i) more effective regulatory design, particularly with respect to costly
investment services disclosure;
(ii) less prescriptive regulation and more incentive-driven,
principles-based regulation based on self-assessment by market participants;
(iii) the use of “softer” ancillary measures, such as investor
education and market discipline/industry solutions, which
may reduce the need
for prescriptive regulation.
B Principles-Based
1 More Principles-Based Regulation
One of the most important themes of UK financial market policy at present,
and a major current preoccupation of the markets, is the
move away from detailed
prescriptive regulation to principles-based, outcome-driven intervention.
Principles-based regulation is
designed to change firm behaviour and culture,
encourage self-assessment of the application of regulatory principles, and
incentives for compliance. It is particularly important in providing
flexibility in dealing with the risks inherent in the different
business models
for markets and investment services.
Although principles-based regulation is not new in the UK market, the UK FSA
has recently formally committed to a movement towards
principles-based regulation’ (MPBR) as part of its 2005 Better Regulation
This agenda may yet
deliver to a ‘potentially revolutionary shift in the nature of the
regulatory process’.
current FSA Handbook contains 11 Principles but over 5,000 rules and related
guidelines. The FSA is concerned that this imbalance
between principles and
rules can dilute the clarity of its objectives and, in particular, reduce senior
management’s sense
of responsibility. Under the Better Regulation agenda,
the FSA believes that “better outcomes can be achieved by encouraging
focus on the best actions to take in a particular situation rather than
following a mechanistic
It has also,
however, warned of the complexities in changing the balance of regulation.
Under MPBR, the FSA is likely to rely more
heavily on principles alone, to strip
out detailed prescriptive rules where appropriate, to enforce on the basis of
high level principles
and to focus on outcomes, leaving firms greater freedom to
determine how outcomes are achieved. Greater reliance is likely to occur
industry guidance and codes.
Senior management is expected to engage with the desired regulatory outcomes,
ensure that any necessary changes to deliver an outcome-based
approach are
embedded in the organisation, and to satisfy themselves that the minimum
standards set by the Principles are
More enforcement on the
basis of the 11 High Level Principles, which have the status of enforceable
rules, rather than on the basis
of the detailed rules in the FSA Handbook, is
expected. Overall, MPBR is designed to deliver a stronger focus on outcomes and
principles-based approach to delivering outcomes, based in particular on
highlighting the responsibility of senior management to
engage with the
Principles and ensure firms deliver outcomes that meet the
Principles.
It reflects in part
a concern that detailed rules have not been successful in preventing a series of
recent financial mis-selling
scandals, including with respect to personal
pensions, endowment mortgages, and split capital investment
2 The Application of
While progress is likely to be slow, as it involves a significant cultural
shift in the marketplace, the new approach is increasingly
being relied on. The
‘Treating Customers Fairly’ initiative for investment services, for
example, has seen the FSA adopt
a principles-based rather than a rules-based
approach in order to achieve greater flexibility. Treating Customers Fairly
now a major business priority for the FSA. It is based on the General
Principle 6 of the FSA’s High Level Principles for Business:
that a firm
must pay due regard to the interests of its customers and treat them fairly. It
is designed to address the FSA’s
finding of repeated failures in the
retail sector to treat customers fairly and to ensure that firms treat customers
fairly through
all stages of the product life cycle, from product design, to
marketing, to sales and advice, and to after sales information and
handling. Rather than defining the ‘treating customers fairly’
obligation through specific rules, or definitions
of ‘fairness’,
however, the FSA has asked senior management to consider this question, taking
into account their particular
business models, and to ensure a TCF culture is
implemented throughout the firm.
It has also provided guidance materials on its TCF website, including
hypothetical case studies and reports giving examples of good
and bad practice.
Self assessment tools are also being made available, while direct engagement
with the FSA is possible through the
FSA’s Firms Contact Centre, FSA
roadshows and individualised “surgeries”, and FSA TCF workshops.
TCF is designed to become embedded in a firm’s culture and is subject
to FSA enforcement. Six consumer outcomes under TCF have
also been established
to guide firms.
Although there
is some market concern as to the lack of firm guidelines on TCF, the FSA has
argued that “additional regulation
in this area could create defensive and
less competitive markets, reduce flexibility, and increase costs.”
Similarly in the hedge fund area, the FSA has resolved not to adopt detailed
prescriptive rules but to rely on better dialogue with
the industry and on the
application of generic rules to particular risks. For example, the giving of
preferential “side letters”
to particular hedge fund investors,
which give investors more information and preferential redemption terms, has
been stated by the
FSA as a breach of Principle 1 which requires firms to carry
our their business with integrity.
The 2007 revision of the FSA’s conduct of business rules for
intermediaries (the NEWCOB element of the FSA Handbook) is the
flagship for
MPBR. The Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 2004 required major reforms
to the FSA’s conduct of business
regime for intermediaries, but these
reforms have reflected the MPBR strategy, albeit within the confines of the
limits posed by
the EU rules.
The principles-based approach has, according to the FSA, resulted in a new
sourcebook on conduct of business regulation (NEWCOB)
which is simpler and
shorter and “allows firms more discretion to achieve outcomes that are
appropriate for their particular
As part of this
strategy, guidance on the new regime has been limited and only included where it
was believed to be benefit to firms,
notwithstanding some market demand that
more guidance be provided (the FSA, has however, highlighted the role of
industry guidance).
examples include the FSA not defining how, for the purpose of applying the
suitability test, a client’s knowledge and
experience is to be taken into
but instead committing
to providing case studies as the regime
The FSA has also
removed the rule that firms advise the “most suitable” packaged
product from the range on which they
advise, given that the objective of this
requirement would be covered by a combination of conduct of business rules
including disclosure,
best interest of client obligations, suitability
requirements, and the over-arching TCF
3 The Risks
While there is generally strong market support for the more principles-based
regulation initiative, there is also a concern to ensure
that principles are
supported by guidance which provides intermediaries and markets with certainty
but which also has some degree
of endorsement by a regulatory
There is a difficult
balance to be achieved between the clarity, cost, and flexibility benefits of a
principles-based regime and
the needs of market participants for certainty and
for safe harbours. The sources of MPBR remain unclear – major speeches
FSA executives, Dear CEO standard letters, press releases, industry
guidance, FAQ documents, case studies and other soft sources
all form a matrix
from which MPBR derives and which is developing outside the formal Handbook.
This can be highly unsatisfactory for intermediaries seeking clarity and to
reduce regulatory risk. Concerns have been raised as to
the uncertain status of
“softer” information, and as to the risks that a proliferation in
this material could bring back
detailed regulation by the “back
door”. Consumer groups have also expressed concern that careful
supervision and enforcement
is required to mitigate the risk of detriment to
consumers in practice, particularly as firms may not, initially at least, fully
understand what is required of them in an MPBR environment.
The FSA has responded by confirming that once a firm complies with the
FSA’s High Level Principles, it is irrelevant whether
it has complied with
any other material, but that firms which reasonably rely on FSA material will
also have a defence in any subsequent
The FSA has also
highlighted that, in addition to developing the capabilities of its staff with
respect to MPBR, its regulatory
approach will be directed away from detailed
procedural issues and towards regulatory outcomes and that there will be
increased emphasis
on high level rules and outcomes in
enforcement.
Considerable controversy surrounds the role of industry guidance, with the
FSA adopting an approach based on ‘confirming’
guidance which, where
complied with, protects regulated actors from subsequent enforcement action by
Industry guidance looks set to be critical for MiFID implementation, with the
FSA acknowledging the role of industry and MiFID Connect,
a groundbreaking
association of the major market associations impacted by
already providing
guidance on the implementation of
While this reliance on
guidance to support regulation chimes with outcomes-driven, culture-based
regulation, and also fits with the
wider move towards the capturing of market
discipline as a market management technique (section III below), MPBR may
generate a more
opaque regulatory environment, with proliferating guidance and
governance risks in terms of consumer input, unless these risks are
C The EU and
Principles-Based Regulation
Similar efforts are underway at the EU level, with principles-based
regulation a core commitment of the 2005-2010 financial services
agenda which
sets regulation for all 27 Member States.
More specifically, although the new MiFID regime imposes detailed rules for
intermediaries and markets, it is, in principle, designed
to be generic and to
be applied by investment firms to their particular business models and
situations. The legislative guidance
to the MiFID regime, for example, notes
that “investment firms vary widely in their size, their structure, and the
their business. A regulatory regime should be adapted to that
diversity while imposing certain fundamental regulatory requirements
appropriate for all firms. Regulated entities should comply with their high
level obligations and design and adopt measures
that are best suited to their
particular nature and circumstances.”
D Case Study: Conflicts
of Interest and Principles-Based Regulation
Conflict of interest management and prevention is a major theme of the recent
EU (and therefore UK) reforms to intermediary regulation.
MiFID’s new
conflict of interest regime, which will be applied in the UK, also provides a
useful case study for principles-based
regulation.
The MiFID regime imposes an upgraded, but generic, conflict of interest
regime on the supply of investment services generally and,
in particular, to
address the risks of multi-service investment firms. It is designed to operate
as a principles-based template against
which firms self-assess and manage their
potential exposure to conflicts of interests.
The new regime is designed to be applied by firms to identify, assess, and
manage the particular conflicts they face under their particular
business model.
It is stated to provide ‘flexible principles of general application across
the whole range of business models’.
As such, it reflects a concern to
ensure that conflict rules are sufficiently flexible to reflect changing
business activities and
structures. Although the regime contains a number of
detailed rules, it is, in essence, based on self-assessment by firms and on
application of core principles. The strong underlying theme is of application by
firms of the core rules to the specific businesses
and risks they face. In
effect, the regime attempts to bring about cultural change instead of a
box-ticking mentality. The formalities
of disclosure-based controls are replaced
by policy and procedural requirements, designed to ensure that investment firms
the management of specific risks. Overall, the legislative guidance
note states that the regime is designed to “ensure that
investment firms
take a holistic approach to conflicts management, regularly reviewing their
business lines to ensure that at all
times their policies reflect the full scope
of their activities and the possible conflicts that may emerge.” The new
was, however, strongly resisted by the market during the consultation
process given what was regarded as a more prescriptive and
structural approach
to the management of conflicts of interest, concerns as to the administrative
burdens and the failure to assess
the costs and benefits of the new regime.
The conflicts of interest regime is unusual within MiFID’s otherwise
calibrated structure as it is a fundamental obligation.
It applies regardless
of whether the client is a retail investor, professional investor, or
counterparty engaged in arms-length
own-account trading with the firm, despite
the market hostility to the extension of conflicts obligations to counterparties
previous UK regime, for example, did not apply to market counterparties).
This extensive application reflects the centrality of conflict
of interest
management to the new regime and its high political profile – although it
cuts against the traditional characterisation
of sophisticated market actors as
entities capable of bargaining for their own protections. There is also a
striking movement away
from the disclosure techniques which dominate in the
conduct of business sphere, and towards more interventionist procedural and
structural requirements which ensure the independence of the investment firm.
There are two strands to the core conflict of interest
obligation imposed on
investment firms, whatever their activities.
The first core obligation is an identification requirement. Investment firms
must take “all reasonable steps” to identify
conflicts of interests
that arise in the course of providing investment
These are broadly
defined as conflicts arising between themselves (including their managers,
employees and tied agents, or any person
directly or indirectly linked to them
by control) and their clients, or between one client and other. The conflict
regime is not
therefore dependent on an existing fiduciary obligation but it is
triggered by the firm/client relationship.
The second core obligation is an organisational requirement. All firms must
maintain and operate “effective organisational and
administrative
arrangements” with a view to taking “all reasonable steps”
designed to prevent conflicts of interest
from “adversely affecting”
the interests of their clients.
These two obligations are linked by a default disclosure requirement. Where the
organisational and administrative arrangements adopted
are not sufficient to
ensure “with reasonable confidence” that risk of damage to client
interests will be prevented,
the firm must clearly disclose the general nature
and/or the sources of the conflicts of interest to client, before undertaking
on its behalf.
Central to the new regime for managing conflicts of interest is the
requirement placed on firms to establish, implement and maintain
an effective,
written conflicts of interest policy. Reflecting the emphasis in the conflicts
regime on calibration and self-assessment,
the policy must be appropriate
‘to the size and organisation of the firm and the nature, scale and
complexity of its business’.
The conflicts policy must contain certain
minimum requirements. It must first identify the ‘circumstances’
which constitute
or may give rise to a conflict of interest entailing a material
risk of damage to the interests of one or more clients with reference
specific investment services and activities carried out by, or on behalf of the
firm. Reflecting the generic nature of this
requirement but the special risks
posed by multi-service firm, firms must pay “special attention” to
the activities of
investment research and advice, proprietary trading, portfolio
management, and corporate finance, where the firm, or persons directly
indirectly linked by control to the firm, performs a combination of two or more
of these activities.
The detailed rules which implement the conflicts regime make clear that
simple disclosure of conflict of interests is not sufficient
to meet the
conflicts obligation:
the disclosure of conflicts of interest by an investment firm should not
exempt it from the obligation to maintain and operate the
organisational and administrative arrangements requirement…..while
disclosure of specific conflicts of interests
is required….an
over-reliance on disclosure without adequate consideration as to how conflicts
may appropriately be managed
is not permitted.
Disclosure is not, therefore, a panacea, but a last resort: ‘disclosure
of a conflict of interest to a client is a last resort
and should only be used
in specific cases where measures adopted…may not prevent risk of damage to
the client in the case of
that specific conflict.’
While the roll-back of disclosure places more responsibility on firms to
address conflicts, a responsibility which disclosure can
reduce or disable
altogether, and reflects well-established weaknesses in investor decision-making
it does not reflect
the overall emphasis on disclosure across the investment services regulation
generally and particularly in the
new MiFID regime. Neither is it entirely
consistent. Unlike the pre-MiFID UK FSA regime, the regime does not recognise
that refraining
from acting can be a remedy where a prejudicial conflict exists.
If conflicts are of such severity that they cannot be managed by
procedures, it seems unlikely that retail investors will be able to assess the
degree of risk through disclosure - unless
particular attention is given by
supervisory authorities to the format in which this disclosure is presented, and
the detail it contains.
The current EU policy emphasis on testing
may predict close
supervisory attention to how firms provide this disclosure – but it
remains to be seen.
3 Best Practice?
It remains to be seen whether the new conflict of interest regime will be
successful and whether the EU’s approach, based on
self-assessment and
flexible application of core principles, in parallel with a move away from
disclosure, has potentially wider
application.
Although disclosure of conflicts can be of doubtful effectiveness,
particularly for retail investors, there is some uncertainty as
procedural requirements will be any more effective than disclosure in preventing
prejudice to clients.
Prescriptive regimes exacerbate the general risk of obsolescence to which
financial market rules are subject, given the speed at
which business models
develop and the increasing use of conflict of interest tools to manage emerging
risks. But considerable risks
attach to reliance on self-assessment of risks by
firms, based on flexible principles. Until now, conflict of interest breaches
tended only to attract enforcement attention following high-profile,
large-scale, and systemic
Successful application
of the new conflicts identification and management regime is, therefore, likely
to reflect current attitudes
towards general risk-management of an investment
firm and, in particular, the priorities of senior management. The new regime
therefore, test the market’s and individual firms’ culture
with respect to conflict of interest management, and the strength
of reputation
risk as a control on firms.
Effective cost-benefit analysis and review of the new regime will be
Ultimately, however, successful management of conflicts of interest,
certainly in the EU context where there are limits on the ability
of investors
to take private actions,
on strong enforcement by supervisory authorities which will support the
development of an effective market culture in dealing
with conflicts of
interests. The framework nature of the regime, and the emphasis on flexibility,
suggests that supervision, not
regulation, will determine the effectiveness of
the new regime.
It success rests
to a large degree, therefore, on supervisory resources and on the effectiveness
of supervisory monitoring and enforcement
tools in building a compliance
The UK FSA is committed to tough enforcement of conflict of interest
breaches, given the centrality of its conflicts of interest policy
to investment
services regulation (see section IV on the role of conflict of interest
management in addressing hedge fund and private
equity risk), and has a range of
weapons at its disposal. Of particular importance, and reflecting the move
towards “softer”,
outcome-driven measures, is its use of “Dear
CEO” letters, addressed to senior management and designed to outline the
FSA’s view of best practice in a particular area. In 2004 and 2005 the FSA
issued “Dear CEO” letters to the investment
services sector which
outlined the principles which a well-managed firm would follow with respect to
conflict of interest management
and how non-standard transactions, which might
carry particular conflict of interest risks, should be
While these principles
are not regulatory requirements, they were developed in consultation with the
industry and the FSA recommended
their adoption as best practice. Softer
technique such as these carry the benefits of allowing close dialogue with the
industry and
also flexibility and are increasingly appearing as a supervisory
tool across the EU.
E Supervision
While regulation of markets and intermediaries is largely dictated by the EU,
supervision remains the province of the Member States.
While the role played by law and regulatory design in supporting market
development remains controversial, it as least clear that
a complex interplay of
different factors, and different aspects of financial market intervention beyond
the adoption of rules, particularly
the effectiveness of public and private
enforcement and the quality of supervision, drives financial market
development.
In the UK, there
have been significant innovations in monitoring and supervision, reflecting the
FSA’s integrated approach
to supervision.
The FSA operates under a “risk-based model” of regulation and
supervision across all markets, actors, and sectors under
its supervision under
the “ARROW”
The ARROW system is designed to allow the FSA to: identify the main risks to its
objectives; measure the importance of the
risks; mitigate those risks where
required; and monitor and report on risk management. A whole-firm approach is
adopted whereby risk
assessment is designed to capture the “regulatory
footprint” of the firm and the potential risk it poses to the FSA’s
objectives. ARROW is based on an assessment of the different risks posed by a
firm and aligns the management of these risks with
the firm’s own risk
management systems. The business risk posed by a firm is assessed along with the
quality of controls in
place. Low impact firms (typically small firms) are
rarely subject to firm-specific risk assessment. Other firms are subject to
risk assessments.
model reflects the FSA’s position that not all risks can be removed from
the markets and that a “zero-failure”
approach would be
prohibitively costly. Supervisory resources are, therefore, concentrated in
areas which represent the most serious
risks to the FSA’s statutory
objectives. The FSA also appoints a nominated FSA manager to larger firms to
ensure effective
communication and monitoring.
While most recent policy attention has been closely focused on the
substantive reforms to intermediary and market regulation dictated
(sections III and IV below), a wider concern to promote more effective
regulatory design generally has also emerged as a
strong trend of UK and EU
financial market policy.
Although considerable risks attach to the MPBR initiative in particular, the
risks of flawed regulation and the intensifying sophistication
of markets,
suggest that traditional rule-based “command and control”
will become
increasingly ineffective in dealing with new challenges. The FSA’s move to
MPBR remains highly controversial and
potentially
and is still being worked
out. New staff, for example, are being recruited to deal with a more
outcome-driven regime.
signs are promising. The FSA’s May 2007 review of the TCF project reported
good progress, with many firms already investing
substantially in changing the
way in which they conducted
The FSA also reported,
however, that further progress was needed to “reach the embedding phase
and ensure the consistent delivery
of fair consumer outcomes. This is, and will
continue to be, a significant challenge for most firms, and requires sustained
from senior
management.”
It is at least a brave attempt to pull back from direct regulatory
intervention and to rethink how regulators intervene on the markets,
complexity of financial markets and the limitations of prescriptive regulation,
and to deliver more effective market discipline
by focusing on general
standards, the delivery of outcomes, and the engagement of senior management in
the development of effective
firm processes and
procedures.
It should allow
firms more freedom to innovate in designing their response to delivering
regulatory outcomes. It may yet act as a
template for more effective regulation
internationally and is being closely followed in the
At the very least, the new
focus on regulatory design has led to greater engagement by the markets with the
law-making process and
closer attention to the fundamentals of market
regulation.
III Markets and
Intermediaries (2): Reforms to the Regulation of Trading Markets
This section considers recent developments with respect to the regulation of
trading markets.
A Restructuring EU
Equity Trading Markets – Competitive Order Execution Markets and the Role
of Regulation
1 Competitive Order Execution
Notwithstanding the uncertain relationship between law and financial market
characteristics and development,
and the wider uncertainties as to the relationship between the financial markets
and wider economic growth,
EU (and therefore UK) policy commitment to the financial markets as agents of
economic growth and, in particular, to law and
regulation as a means of driving
market development appears
unshakeable.
One of the best
illustrations of this policy commitment (and of the risks of large-scale
regulatory design) comes from the recent
dramatic reforms to securities market
trading across the EU under MiFID – these reforms came into force in
November 2007.
MiFID is designed in part to address order execution and trading markets and
to “establish a comprehensive regulatory regime
governing the execution of
transactions in financial instruments irrespective of the trading methods used
to conclude those transactions”
(MiFID, recital 5). A major objective of
MiFID is the liberalisation of the pan-EU trading market for order execution and
the playing field for competing execution venues. MiFID supports a
competitive pan-EU market in order execution by abolishing the
“concentration rule,” which previously allowed Member States to
route retail equity orders to central stock exchanges,
and by enhancing
transparency and effective price formation. France, Spain and Italy, for
example, required all retail trades to
be executed centrally on a stock market.
Across Europe, trading in equities has traditionally been centred on the main
national stock
MiFID’s adoption followed a fiercely contested debate as to the merits of
competition in order execution and the risks of
fragmentation in trading as
order interaction becomes more diffuse in a competitive environment. The
EU’s policy institutions
strongly supported a competitive order execution
market as a means of delivering competition (by supporting the growth of
alternative
venues), greater choice in trading venue, and better responses to
investors’ trading needs – reflecting the proposition
that no single
venue can meet all investors’ trading requirements. Opponents pointed to
risks from market fragmentation, poorer
liquidity, weaker price formation, and
investor protection risks linked to conflicts of interests. After bitter
negotiations, a controversial
regulatory regime has been imposed in support of
the competitive order execution policy which is designed to be neutral as to
models but to reflect the sensitivities of different trading
functionalities.
Pan-EU trading in securities has the potential to become highly competitive
as traditional stock exchanges, alternative trading systems,
and internalisers
(investment firms which execute client orders against their proprietary order
book) all compete to provide execution
services, following technological
innovation, the liberalisation of securities trading, and a loosening of the
grip of the major
From a regulatory
perspective, competitive order execution raises difficult questions as to
whether to characterise trading venues
as investment firms (with the major focus
on investor protection) or trading markets (with a concern for wider market
integrity, and liquidity risks).
MiFiD’s new trading market regime was subject to fraught negotiations
as traditional stock exchanges fought to protect their
position from emerging
competitors, notably
internalisers.
Their primary
argument was that the quality of trading and of price formation would be damaged
unless trades, and particularly retail
trades, were routed to a regulated
market, but that if investment firms were permitted to execute trades, they
should be subject
to the same regulation as all trading markets, particularly
with respect to transparency rules. Transparency rules are, of course,
sensitive to the particular business model adopted by a trading venue, can carry
significant costs, and, given that they require
venues to disclose their trading
position, can pose significant risks for internalising investment firms who
trade bilaterally with
investors and do not supply liquidity in the same manner
as stock exchanges and alternative trading
Internalising firms
argued that pre-trade transparency, which requires firms, in effect, to act as
liquidity providers, commit capital,
and stand ready to buy and sell at the
disclosed prices, even though investment firms to do not carry the liquidity and
trading capacity
of exchanges, would increase costs, severely prejudice
internalisation, and dilute the benefits of competitive order execution. They
argued that investor protection was more appropriately delivered under the
investment firm model and through conflict of interest
rules, best execution
requirements, and post trade transparency requirements.
2 The New Regulatory Regime for Equity
MiFiD’s new trading markets and order execution regime is based on
elements of investment firm and trading market regulation.
It distinguishes
between three actors: (i) systematic internalises or investment firms who
execute client orders bilaterally on their
own trading book of securities rather
than sending them for execution elsewhere; (ii) multilateral trading facilities
(alternative
trading systems); and (iii) regulated markets. Regulation of these
actors becomes progressively more sophisticated, with “regulated
markets” (essentially traditional stock markets) subject to extensive
regulation and their distinguishing feature, the admission
of securities to
trading, subject to admission requirements (the “regulated market”
concept is in effect a proxy for
regulated, liquid, securities trading markets).
The new trading market and order execution regime adopts an approach based on
the characterisation of the venue either as an investment
firm (internalising
firms and multilateral trading facilities (although the latter are subject to
particular rules)) or a regulated
market. The generic MiFID investment services
regime (see section III – it applied to all investment services across the
from November 2007), including its authorisation, prudential, and operational
conduct of business requirements, applies to
internalisers
and to market
operators that operate multilateral trading facilities
Given the particular investor protection, conflict of interest, and market
stability risks involved in securities trading, particularly
where it is carried
out on a large scale as in an MTF, MiFID imposes three sets of distinct rules,
additional to the generic investment
services regime, on systematic
internalisers and MTFs: (i) pre- and post-trade transparency requirements; (ii)
trading requirements
for MTFs, including a requirement for transparent and
non-discretionary trading rules and basic securities admission criteria; and
(iii) compliance requirements for MTFs, including a requirement to report
conduct which may involve market abuse.
The new transparency regime, which is designed to counter fragmentation and
price discovery risks in a competitive order execution
context, was particularly
problematic. A lighter, if complex, pre-trade transparency regime applies to
systematic internalisers.
The major reform concerns the introduction of a new
and controversial quoting obligation for internalisers. The key element is the
requirement is that internalisers publish firm quotes in respect of shares
admitted to trading on a regulated market for which there
is a liquid market.
Firms must therefore provide continuous quotes for liquid shares. Where the
market is not liquid (increasing
the risks to the internaliser), quotes are to
be provided to clients on request. This pre-trade transparency requirement only
when the internaliser is dealing in sizes up to “standard market
size.” Particular and contentious rules apply to price
improvement, or the
ability of the internaliser to improve on published quotes. Price improvement is
prohibited for retail investors
whose trades must be executed at the published
quotes (for retail trades up to the standard market size). Price improvement is
for professional investors, subject to conditions. For the first time,
post-trade transparency requirements concerning the time,
volume, and price of
completed trades are also imposed on internalising investment firms. This
information must be published in as
close to real time as possible, although
deferred publication is possible for large trades.
MTFs and regulated markets are subject to a very similar pre- and post-trade
transparency regime, given their similar functionality
with respect to trading.
In effect, current bid and offer prices and the depth of trading interest at
those prices must be published,
although exceptions apply to accommodate
particular market models which are sensitive to pre-trade transparency (such as
dealer markets)
and may require time delays and to large transactions. The
post-trade transparency regime requires publication of the price, volume,
time of transactions executed in the relevant system, subject to deferred
publication for particular sizes and types of trade.
While the transparency regime therefore attempts to address different trading
functionalities, while at the same time seeking to level
the trading playing
field and ensure efficient price formation and effective transparency, the new
trading regime also provides an
example of an attempt to integrate different
regulatory techniques. One of the most acute risks in the multi-service firm
currently of concern to EU policy makers, is the potential conflict
which arises where an investment firm acting as broker internalises
trading order. Investors face conflict of interest risks in this new competitive
order execution environment, as well as
the benefits of choice and competition.
MiFID’s new, principles-based conflict of interest regime (section II
above), however,
is designed to support competition in order execution and
deliver investor protection.
In addition, a new and controversial best execution
is designed to address
the conflicts which may arise and to promote strong price discovery. Investment
firms must take all reasonable
steps when executing orders to obtain the
“best possible result” for their clients, taking into account price,
speed, likelihood of execution and settlement, size, nature, and other
relevant considerations. In a new approach (certainly for
the UK), firms are now
required, as a result, to take into account a range of factors, other than
price, in achieving best execution
(a total consideration benchmark applies for
retail trades). These factors must be assessed according to the nature of the
and the transaction. Investment firms must also establish and implement
effective arrangements, including establishing and implementing
execution policy for each asset class, to allow them to obtain the best possible
result. They must also monitor the effectiveness
of their execution arrangements
and policy and identify and correct any deficiencies. At the request of a
client, firms are also
required to demonstrate that orders were executed in line
with the execution policy. All investors must be provided with
“appropriate
information” on the policy and retail investors must be
provided with specified disclosure on the firm’s execution policy,
including the key venues on which the firm places significant reliance in
meeting its best execution obligations and the relative
importance the firm
places on the different factors feeding into best execution. Client consent to
the policy must be provided, and,
where the policy provides for execution
against the firm’s proprietary trading book, the firm must inform the
investor of this
possibility and obtain prior express consent before proceeding
to execute. Some attempt is made to manage the costs of this system
consent can be obtained in a general agreement.
A multi-layered approach, therefore, applies to the management of emerging
conflict of interest risk in the new trading environment,
based on the generic
conflict of interest regime and an upgraded best execution requirement.
Transparency requirements, the best
execution rule and conflict of interest
rules (together with new trade reporting requirements and order handling
are designed to work
together to minimize the investor protection and market efficiency and liquidity
risks attendant on greater
competition in order execution.
The impact of MiFID’s new order execution model and the robustness of
the trade transparency regime is uncertain and will remain
so for some time
until evidence emerges from the new trading
environment.
It is widely
accepted, however, that major structural change will follow. Some markets which
have traditionally operated a concentration
model (Spain, Italy and France) will
face more competition, while other markets (including the UK) will be required
to increase transparency
requirements for internalisers.
One of the biggest open questions raised by MiFID is whether investment firms
will change their business model and take the form of
‘systematic
internalisers’.
given the risks and costs of the new regime, reduce their internalisation
activities, potentially decreasing market liquidity,
increasing the costs of
trading, and defeating one of MiFID’s major
objectives.
But initial signs
suggest that the market is reacting to the opportunities created by the
regulatory reforms, with November 2006
seeing the dramatic announcement of
‘Project Turquoise’, under which a group of the world’s
largest investment
banks announced plans to build a major equity trading
platform, using MiFID’s new regulatory structures, to challenge the major
exchanges in share trading.
Legal reform therefore appears to be driving market innovation or, less
dramatically, at least responding to market demands.
Whether policy and regulatory support of competitive order execution
represents best practice will depend on the extent to which the
new regime has
successfully reflected the different functionalities in trading model and
supported effective price formation and
liquidity – careful ex-post
monitoring and review will be required. But it also depends on whether investor
protection has
been delivered under the new regime – particularly at a
time when there is a strong push to develop a European equity culture.
In one respect, however, the new regime reflects very poor legislative
practice, albeit in a context which is peculiarly European.
Initial orientations
on the MiFID regime suggested only limited transparency requirements for
internalisers and no pre-trade requirements.
The complex and controversial
pre-trade transparency regime for internalisers was inserted by the President of
the European Commission
at the last moment before final political negotiations,
a move which was widely interpreted as supporting the continental stock exchange
lobby. The substantive merits of this approach remains to be seen. But the MiFID
negotiations are also a warning as to the difficulties
in achieving radical
regulatory reform in the face of fierce political and market
B The Debt Trading
Markets: Transparency Reform and Regulatory Design
While it remains to be seen whether competitive and efficiency benefits will
follow from the new competitive trading market environment
which MiFID promotes,
and whether investor protection and pricing efficiency will be supported, this
significant reform of securities
trading has generated considerable momentum and
spill-over risks in the debt markets, which may provide a wider lesson in the
of regulatory design.
MiFID’s controversial transparency regime is currently restricted to
the equity markets: Member States had the option to extend
the regime to other
financial instruments, but have not done so. But Article 65(1) MiFID is
something of a hostage to fortune in
that it requires the Commission (the
EU’s independent executive arm and bureaucracy) to report to the
EU’s key political
institutions, the European Parliament and the Council,
on the possible extension of the regime to non-equity markets across the EU.
question of debt market transparency (and particularly in cash government and
investment-grade/high yield corporate bonds markets)
has accordingly come to the
top of the regulatory, policy, and market agenda across the EU and has become
the subject of intense
Although the market is largely hostile to the imposition of transparency
requirements (particularly pre-trade
requirements)
and with little
appetite across all stakeholders for major
the debate raises a
number of important themes of wider importance for regulatory design and may
have some lessons for the management
of controversial regulatory change.
1 Spill-Over Risks
Debt markets operate under very different transparency and price formation
mechanisms to the equity markets. A wider range of issuers
are active in these
markets (including special purpose vehicles and governments), issuers make
repeat issues, and debt instruments
can be considerably more complex and
structured than equities. Debt markets can be less liquid than the equity
markets and experience
much thinner trading patterns, with trading typically
concentrated at the time of issue. Debt instruments are also traded on a much
wider range of venues, with dealer structures
and trading often
decentralised and concentrated in the OTC
Investors tend to be
institutional and block traders, with much less significant participation by
retail investors than in the equity
markets. Pricing (linked to the rate of
return of the security) is affected by a range of factors beyond trading
information including
macro economic conditions (particularly for government
bonds) and credit risk – including credit agency ratings – (for
corporate bonds). In the EU, the bond market represents approximately two-thirds
of all securities outstanding and is dominated by
government bonds and those
issued by financial
institutions.
Across the EU, approaches to debt market transparency vary, but broadly
reflect the particular features of debt markets. Transparency
requirements are
typically only imposed on transactions concluded on regulated markets or stock
exchanges. In the UK, for example,
transparency requirements for debt securities
operate through the high-level recognition requirements for Recognised
Investment Exchanges
which are translated into transparency requirements by the
These require that
sufficient pre-trade transparency is delivered through trading arrangements and
practices and that sufficient
post-trade transparency (taking into account the
nature and liquidity of the instruments, market conditions, and the scale of
transactions)
is ensured, given the needs of different market participants for
timely information. OTC bond markets (in which cash corporate bonds
for the most part) are not subject to mandatory transparency requirements.
The debate on mandatory transparency requirements for debt markets is
multi-faceted.
Any regulatory
response needs to engage with the potential for fragmentation risk in the
absence of transparency requirements, given
the nature of bond trading across
multiple venues, and address the strains imposed on investment firms
(particularly smaller firms)
seeking to meet best execution obligations in the
absence of full transparency given the search costs. But it must also engage
the particular risks of dealer-driven markets and the danger that
transparency requirements could lead to a withdrawal of liquidity
as the risks
of committing capital become higher. More limited transparency can lead to an
increase in liquidity providers.
The risk always existed that the ever-present danger of regulatory creep
would have pulled cash debt and other markets into MiFID’s
controversial transparency
This risk was averted
during the MiFID negotiations, but the current review process raises the risk
that an inevitability of reform
arises and a template which is inappropriately
based in the equity regime is imposed on the debt markets.
So far, this risk seems to be receding, with initial indications suggesting
that there is a policy realisation that cash bond markets
have different
dynamics and that any transparency regime must reflect those dynamics. The
Committee of European Securities Regulators
which advises the EU institutions on
securities market policy (it is composed of the national financial market
regulators from the
27 Member States), for example, has, in its initial
orientations in 2007,
that there is little evidence of market failure affecting wholesale market
participants in the EU debt markets with respect
to transparency levels, with
the market having developed an appropriate level of transparency which suits
major market participants.
has warned that any increase in transparency requirements would need to be
carefully managed and tailored to ensure that liquidity
provision and
competition were not damaged by dealers withdrawing from the markets or reducing
their level of commitment. Initial
stakeholder feedback to the EU Commission
also suggests that the markets for non-equity instruments are functioning well
adequate level of transparency and that mandatory transparency
obligations could undermine liquidity in what are primarily OTC
The UK FSA has also
entered the policy debate with its 2005 policy paper suggesting that there was
no material market failure in
the UK bond markets, although some risks may exist
in the retail markets, followed by its subsequent endorsement of this position
in 2006 following evidence-gathering and market
consultation.
2 Momentum Risks
More generally, review clauses are, in principle,
necessary for effective financial regulation, not least because financial
are dynamic while rules are static, and can have unintended
consequences.
But review and
reporting clauses similar to MiFID Article 65 run the risk that controversial
questions are disposed of by reporting/review
clauses that may provoke
institutional momentum building up behind inappropriate measures. Once a
regulatory question is placed on
the policy agenda, it becomes very difficult to
3 Industry Engagement
One of the striking features of the debt market debate has been the close
engagement by industry, at a very early stage, in the policy
debate. While the
expertise and informational asymmetry between regulators/policy makers, and the
market, with respect to technical
and complex issues of market design is
considerable, and while market expertise must be harnessed to ensure effective
design, the challenge for effective law-making and policy formation
is to how harness this market expertise appropriately and ensure
stakeholders are appropriately
represented.
The debt market transparency debate, for example, suggests that there are
some signs of influential cost-benefit analysis being, in
effect, outsourced to
the market. A group of influential UK and European trade associations active in
the bond trading markets combined
to commission research into the European bond
market to inform the industry’s contribution to the EU’s
which has been
welcomed by the European Commission, although it has, nonetheless, pledged to
keep an “open mind”. The
Commission published a Call for Evidence on
extending the transparency regime in June 2006 which makes clear that public
consultations
will also be undertaken, expert advice will be sought from the
Committee of European Securities Regulators and the new European Securities
Market Expert Group (a group of market-facing advisers) will be
The very strong
market input should therefore be counterbalanced and distilled into the final
policy response.
4 Policy Formation
The debt markets discussion is also notable for the extent to which the
EU’s institutions are engaging in close examination
of the rationale for
regulatory intervention. As noted in section II above, the EU has only very
recently committed to a Better Regulation
agenda. Much of the new regulation
imposed under the FSAP has been adopted without reference to cost benefit
analysis, impact assessment,
or market failure analysis.
The 2006 Call for Evidence on Transparency, however, sets out the
Commission’s methodology, how impact assessments will be used,
proposed scope of the Commission’s analysis, and the possible rationales
for intervention.
establishes the extent of a market failure as the key policy question – an
approach which has been supported by the
The 2007 policy
paper recently prepared by the Committee of European Securities Regulators also
engages closely with market failure
analysis, considering whether failures arise
as to externalities, information asymmetry, market power, or under-supply of a
good in the form of pricing information in the debt markets and
concluding that there is no significant evidence of a market
As a recent example of how to build a response to a sensitive and complex
area where market interests are likely to be organised,
vocal, and expert, the
Commission’s approach augurs well for interventions in other controversial
areas currently on the EU
agenda, including private equity and hedge funds.
5 Market Discipline
Finally, the trend towards principles-based,
outcome-driven regulation discussed in section II above reflects a related trend
in financial
market regulation towards reliance on internal control mechanisms,
as the financial markets become increasingly complex and difficult
This is best exemplified internationally in the Basel II reforms to capital
adequacy, which are applied in the EU to banks
and investment firms under the
2006 Capital Requirements
In a related
development, market discipline, supported to varying degrees by regulatory
structures, is increasingly appearing as
a tool to manage the markets in the UK
and across the EU. This development can also be observed in the debt market
transparency debate.
There is considerable market support for a transparency model based on the
development by the market, in an evolutionary manner, of
transparency systems.
Considerable trading information, and particularly pre-trade transparency, is
currently made available under
market-developed systems.
Industry-led solutions have been
supported, with the Committee of European Securities Regulators acknowledging
that the practical
reality that transparency is delivered by the market through
a variety of channels might suggest that transparency initiatives be
industry-led, particularly in a cross-border and multi-jurisdictional context,
as long as regulators remained confident that the
market could deliver an
appropriate solution and that appropriate governance structures are adopted. It
is heartening that a central
question in the reform debate is who is best placed
to deliver the right
Evidence to the
European Commission similarly suggests that market innovation is contributing to
increases in transparency levels
across non-equity markets, but that this could
be prejudiced by regulatory intervention.
C Internationalisation
and Financial Markets – Regulatory Impact
It is now axiomatic in financial market regulation that international
financial markets are interconnected – the recent swathe
of reports and
initiatives in the US
addressing concerns that the US market is viewed as unattractive to issuers
globally and as imposing burdensome regulatory and liability
testament to this.
corporate sector increasingly looks to international financial markets as a
major source of new capital, while institutional
investors are seeking to
diversify their portfolios through the acquisition of securities outside their
are responding by strengthening their presence in
the international marketplace. Regulators are responding by developing
for managing this marketplace, whether through acceptance of
international best practice standards through institutions such as IOSCO,
Financial Stability Forum, the Basel Committee, and the International Accounting
Standards Board, or through the consideration
of new techniques for recognising
or endorsing host regulatory
In the EU, the
impact of internationalisation can be seen particularly clearly with respect to
trading markets, with regulatory policy
development closely connected to
international, and specifically transatlantic, developments.
One clearly emerging lesson for EU and UK policy makers, and reflecting the
Better Regulation theme which undercuts recent reforms,
is the critical
importance of transatlantic regulatory dialogue, both upstream on new policy
and downstream as
issues develop or unforeseen consequences
The US and the EU are
now engaged in regular, high-level dialogue on financial regulation through the
Financial Markets Regulatory
Dialogue. While much of the engagement concerns
financial reporting and the difficult question of IFRS and US GAAP
convergence,
Dialogue’s biggest recent successes concerns market regulation and
de-listing from US markets. Reflecting the risk
that regulation can have
unforeseen outcomes, one of the consequences in the EU of Sarbanes-Oxley was
that EU issuers sought to exit
the US market, and its regulatory burdens, by
de-listing from the New York Stock Exchange. But delisting does not terminate an
reporting requirements as long as the issuer has at least three
hundred US shareholders and remains subject to SEC
registration.
The resulting
problem for EU issuers was memorably described as reminiscent of the Hotel
California – you can check out any
time you want, but you can never
The deregistration problem and the difficulties faced by EU issues in leaving
the US market provoked very substantial market concern
and close contact and
lengthy negotiations between EU and US regulators. A solution was finally
reached in March 2007 which makes
it easier for EU companies listed on US
markets to terminate SEC reporting and which is regarded in the EU “as a
of the Financial Markets Regulatory
The importance of international markets and developments, and the impact of
costly regulation on international market competitiveness,
is also clearly
reflected in the recent efforts in the UK to protect the City’s
international status as a principles-based,
risk-based, light-touch regulation
The proposed takeover
by US exchange NASDAQ of the London Stock Exchange in
which came in the wake
of the politically controversial merger between Euronext and the New York Stock
raised concerns
that the LSE could be brought within the reach of the SEC. In principle, the
question of oversight over trades on
an international stock exchange is a
difficult one.
But concern
that NASDAQ ownership could trigger SEC oversight, and make the LSE less
attractive to issuers and the trading community,
prompted the highly unusual and
accelerated adoption of the Investment Exchanges and Clearing Houses Act 2006
towards the end of
2006. This very short Act gives the UK FSA a veto over any
regulation proposed by a UK exchange or clearing house which is
“excessive”
– a requirement is excessive if it is not
justified as pursuing a reasonable regulatory objective or is disproportionate
the end to be achieved. In considering whether a requirement is excessive,
the FSA is to consider all relevant circumstances, including
the effectiveness
of existing legal and other requirements, the global character of financial
services and markets and the international
mobility of activity, the
desirability of facilitating innovation, and the impact of the proposed
provision on market confidence.
The Act is designed, in effect, to allow the FSA
to reject any rule changes proposed by a foreign-owned UK exchange, promoted or
required by a foreign regulator, which are seen as
disproportionate.
it ringfences the LSE’s regulatory position from foreign regulatory
This approach does, however, carry considerable risks. The speed and timing
of the intervention raises the perception, at least, of
protectionism –
albeit that steering Minister Ed Balls has stated that it is not intended to
make the overseas ownership of
UK exchanges any easier or more difficult than at
The Act also places
the FSA, as an independent supervisor, in the centre of potentially politically
and economic sensitive
judgements.
More generally,
crisis-led regulation
kind rarely generates optimum
But the Act
certainly serves as a testament of the extent to which international
developments are impacting on regulatory design
and to the importance of the
link between regulation and international competitiveness.
IV Markets and
Intermediaries (3): Intermediaries
This section considers, more briefly, recent developments with respect to the
regulation of intermediaries and key themes.
A The Impact of MiFID
on Intermediary Regulation
1 The MiFID Regime
As noted above, the regulation of investment firms in the EU (and in the UK)
is currently undergoing large-scale reform under the
MiFID regime which applies
to the supply of investment services as well as to trading markets.
The investment services regime covers the authorisation and regulation of
investment services, which include broking, own account
dealing, underwriting,
portfolio management, operating multi-lateral trading facilities or MTFs (see
section III), and providing
investment advice, in relation to a range of
financial instruments including commodities and derivatives. Investment banks,
brokers and broker-dealers, corporate finance firms, portfolio managers,
private banks, future and options firms, and commodities
firms are all covered.
The regime is functional rather than institutional in application.
Authorisation is required once an entity provides “investment
services,” as defined. Credit institutions, for example, must be
authorised where they carry out investment services such as
selling securities
or packaged products which contain securities. The regime is also designed to
reflect multi-service investment
firms carrying out a range of investment
services from investment advice, to corporate finance, to asset management
within the same
firm. Conflict of interest rules are, therefore, pivotal to the
application of the regime (see section II). But the regime is also
designed to
reflect the particular business models adopted by investment firms by relying on
principles-based rules which can used
flexibly across different business models.
There are two main sets of reforms: (i) conflict of interest management
(section II) and (ii) conduct of business regulation, discussed
2 Conduct of Business Regulation
There are three elements to the new conduct of business regime. MiFID Article
19 addresses conduct of business in the investor/investment
firm relationship.
Article 21 introduces a best execution obligation (see also section II). Article
22 imposes new order allocation
and handling rules.
Article 19 contains a number of elements which together form a classic
conduct of business regime:
• an obligation to act fairly, honestly, and in the best interests of
investors (Article 19(1));
• information and marketing disclosure to be fair, clear, and not
misleading (Article 19(2));
• firm, service, and product disclosure to be provided prior to
contract conclusion (Article 19(3));
• suitability rules (Article 19(4)-(6)); the customer agreement
(Article 19(7)), and
• ongoing investor reporting requirements (Article 19(8)).
The Article 19 regime therefore covers the life cycle of the
investor/investment firm relationship from initial marketing and disclosure
through to suitability assessment and the customer agreement and on to ongoing
record-keeping requirements.
All of these high level rules are subject to detailed rules, particularly
with respect to the content of investor marketing and disclosure
respect to the nature of the suitability and know your client rules (a graduated
regime applies with full suitability applied
to investment advice and asset
management, no advice required for execution-only transactions in specified
non-complex instruments,
and an intermediate appropriateness test for all other
services and products).
In terms of regulatory design, of particular note (and reflecting the
increasing reliance on high level principles) is the emerging
importance of the
umbrella Article 19(1) obligation to act in the best interests of clients. It
is, for example, being used to deliver
investor protection to the professional
sector. While the nature of marketing and investment firm/service/product
disclosure is prescribed
by MiFID for retail investors, it is not for
professional investors who are regarded as protected by the Article 19(1) high
obligation. Article 19(1) has also been used as the basis for an extensive
investment firm inducements regime under MiFID which also
reflects the
importance of conflicts of interest management under MiFID. Although the market
strongly resisted rules on inducements
where there was no evidence of a conflict
of interest, an extensive inducement regime has been adopted based on the
generic obligation
to act in the best interests of the client, even in the
absence of a traditional conflict of interest. An investment firm will be
regarded as acting honestly, fairly, and professionally in accordance with the
best interests of a client if that firm accepts
a fee, commission, or
non-monetary benefit in relation to the service provided to the client, unless
(i) that payment is clearly disclosed to the client in a comprehensive,
understandable, and accurate manner, and
(ii) unless the payment is designed to enhance the quality of the service to
the client and does not impair compliance with the firm’s
duty to act in
the best interests of the
A separate requirement provides that when a firm is identifying conflicts of
interests which may damage the interest of clients as
part of the core conflicts
of interest obligation (see section II) imposed on firms, the minimum criteria
applied by the firm must
include whether the firm receives inducements in
relation to a service provided by a client other than the standard commission or
fee for that service.
conflict of interest rule and the best interest rule therefore both engage with
respect to inducements – with respect to
investor protection and more
specifically with respect to conflict identification and
management.
As noted in section II above, Article 21 introduces a best execution
obligation for the first time in EU investment services law.
addresses the processing of investor orders and the management of conflicts of
interest, requiring investment firms to
implement procedures and arrangements
which provide for prompt, fair, and expeditious execution of client orders,
relative to other
client orders and the trading interests of the investment
The conduct of business regime generally is risk-based and calibrated to
reflect the different needs of retail and sophisticated investors.
All detailed
technical rules on the conduct of business regime must take into account the
retail or professional nature of investors.
The Article 21 best execution regime
also reflects the different needs of retail and professional investors by
adopting a total consideration
benchmark for retail trades and particular
disclosure requirements for retail investors. Article 24 disapplies Articles 19,
22 from eligible counterparties or sophisticated market participants who
enter into transactions with investment firms. MiFID also
contains detailed
guidance on how to classify an investor as professional for the purposes of the
Directive. Authorised institutions
such as investment firms, collective
investment schemes and credit institutions and sophisticated investors such as
governments and
regional authorities are classified as professional (although
they may request non-professional status), while private actors may
classified as professional on request, based on their meeting competence and
asset-based tests.
B Emerging Regulatory
1 Regulatory Arbitrage
Appropriate regulatory differentiation and segmentation is key to effective
capital market regulation. Investor protection regulation
traditionally segments
investors into retail and sophisticated sectors for the purposes of applying
protective rules and ensuring
regulatory burdens fall appropriately. In the
trading markets, as examined in section III above, market regulation must
reflect market
structures, the instruments traded, and market participants to
manage liquidity, investor protection, and efficiency risks. But segmentation
also raises the risk of regulatory arbitrage, a risk which is now emerging from
the recent reforms and which may provide some lessons
for best practice.
Although MiFID is designed to operate functionally, it is limited to investment
services and to nominated financial
instruments – excluding, in
particular, insurance-related
One of the classic occasions for arbitrage concerns product regulation, with
markets moving to design products which fall outside
particular regulatory
regimes. The UK FSA has recently committed to removing product-driven
regulation, to the greatest extent possible,
from its Handbook – this has
been particularly evident in the recent redesign of the conduct of business
The new inducement regime (outlined above) has proved particularly
controversial with the markets. One particular concern was whether
apply where inducements passed within group structures, where a firm adopted a
business model based on intra-group activity
– a vertical model. In
designing the legislation, care was taken to ensure that payments made between
distinct legal entities
within the same group offering group products were
treated in the same way as other inducements. Similar concerns arose with
to the sale of products which fall outside the MiFID investment services
regime, such as insurance-wrapped products. The risk of
potential arbitrage in
designing products, and of a distortion in the playing field, have been put on
the policy agenda for possible
future action.
2 Hedge Funds and Private Equity
The new, generic conflict of interest regime (outlined in section II) is
likely to be critical in ensuring investors are protected
against conflict of
interests in the EU’s fast-growing alternative investment market. In
particular, hedge funds are currently
a preoccupation of EU regulators,
particularly with respect to the conflict of interest risks they
Hedge fund activity
generates multiple conflict of interest risks. Prime brokers which provide
credit and trading services to hedge
funds may be conflicted with respect to
best execution and robust risk management. There is also an increased risk of
asset managers
feeding riskier investments into investor portfolios,
particularly managers of multi-service investment firms which also hold own
account portfolios of hedge fund investments and other riskier investments, and
where the firm provides the hedge fund product. Concerns
are also growing that
investors may be exposed to conflict of interest in the design of structured
products designed and sold by
investment firms to allow investors exposure to
riskier alternative investments, including hedge funds. Although the EU’s
to hedge fund risk and alternative investment (see below) is evolving,
it appears that the preferred policy approach towards retail
risk, in any event,
is the application of generic conduct of business (particularly suitability) and
conflict of interest rules to
the distribution and advice chain, rather than
direct product regulation. On the wholesale side, the UK FSA, for example, has
conflict of interest as a particular risk of the hedge fund chain,
particularly with respect to valuations, and has relied on general
conflict of
interest principles to proceed against hedge fund managers in its recent
thematic review of hedge fund
General conflict of
interest rules are also increasingly being used by the FSA to address growing
concerns as to the more widespread
use of credit derivatives and the potential
for conflicts of interest related to the use of confidential
information.
More generally, the emerging approach to hedge fund risk (and private equity)
sheds some light on how new challenges are being addressed
principles-based/Better Regulation environment. While considerable political
heat and light is being generated by these sectors,
the regulatory response
across Europe has been more sanguine.
The hedge fund sector, which has raised concerns internationally with respect
to “retailisation” (or the risk of growing
retail exposure through
funds of hedge funds in
exposure is also increasing through pension fund
investments)
and with respect
to market stability,
expected to attract considerable regulatory attention. Similarly, following the
explosive growth in private equity
and with concern
growing as to the role the industry now plays in the EU economy following a
series of high profile buyouts of public
companies, the private equity industry
has drawn high-level political attention, with concerns raised by labour and
other stakeholder
constituencies.
But a low-key, facilitative approach has been emerging from the EU
institutions, if not always at domestic Member State
The EU Commission has
focussed on supporting cross-border transactions in these sectors and supporting
industry efforts to build
a common consensus as to the definition of a
“private placement” which would facilitate the cross-border
operation of
hedge and private equity funds. An earlier era would probably have
seen efforts, at least, to harmonise regulation in these controversial
This light-touch strategy reflects the pan-EU industry view (in advising the EU)
in the 2006 Report of the Alternative Investment
Expert Group on private equity
which also highlighted the dangers of regulation, given the role of private
equity in allocating resources,
re-energising companies and supporting wider
economic growth and job creation, and called for any strategy to incorporate
practice and
Information-gathering exercises appear to be the primary concern at present,
with the establishment of a Task Force on Private Equity
which brings together
EU regulators and central bank supervisors. Support for a non-legislative
strategy also came from the Expert
Group’s Report on hedge
EU Commissioner
McCreevy, who holds the financial services portfolio, has recently been robust
in response to critics demanding EU
action on hedge funds and private equity,
arguing that they are good for the market, support liquidity, drive innovation,
and increase
shareholder
This approach to two
sectors which are under unprecedented political and regulatory scrutiny
domestically and internationally suggests
that the EU is now willing to allow
certain sectors to develop free of targeted regulation, notwithstanding the
potential political
attractions of intervention.
The UK response, domestically, has been similarly low-key, albeit that the UK
is the centre for hedge fund management in Europe. The
FSA produced a number of
important reports in the last two years on the retail and wholesale market
aspects of hedge fund risk.
On the wholesale side, the FSA clearly recognises the liquidity and efficiency
benefits of hedge fund activity and has adopted an
information-based strategy
which is designed to enhance understanding of the hedge fund management industry
and establish greater
specific requirements, whether linked to specific authorisation requirements
stress testing, on the prime brokers who provide credit facilities to funds and
hedge fund managers (both of which, as investment
firms and credit institutions
are in the FSA’s regulatory net - hedge funds rarely are as they are
typically domiciled offshore),
but to intensify the application of pre-existing
generic rules. The FSA is to continue its six-monthly survey of prime broker
which, so far, suggests that levels of exposure to hedge funds do not
raise concern. It has also decided to ask additional questions
of all fund
managers (in their Integrated Regulatory Report) concerning the nature of their
asset management activities and whether
it includes hedge-fund-related
activities including managing unregulated collective investment schemes, using
derivatives for investment
and shorting techniques, and undertaking venture
capital management. It is also clear, however, that the FSA is aware of the
of additional reporting and is concerned to minimise these requirements.
The FSA is also to enhance its supervision of hedge fund
managers identified as
posing particular risks to the FSA’s objectives. More specifically, the
FSA is also addressing valuation
as an aspect of conflict of interest management
given the incentives for hedge fund managers to overstate valuations given the
between fund values and remuneration. Overall, a strong theme of the hedge
fund strategy is a reluctance to impose new prescriptive
rules but to maximise
information-gathering and the effective risk-based application of the current
generic rules on investment services.
In its 2007 Annual Risk Outlook, the FSA noted that hedge fund performance
remained broadly positive, while querying whether investors
were receiving
returns which justified the very high fees paid to hedge fund managers. It did,
however, note an increase in the number
of hedge funds and in assets under
management, along with fierce competition among investment banks to provide
services, and a related
risk that competition could influence robust risk
management and weaken credit assessment
procedures.
The 2007 Outlook
also reported “generally reassuring results” on prime broker
exposure and, in particular, that the high
profile winding-down of the Amaranth
hedge fund in 2006 had minimal systemic
and showed that
investment banks had managed counterparty credit exposures
appropriately.
On private equity, the FSA appears to be keeping a watching
politically speaking the industry is coming under very considerable pressure,
with private equity leaders summoned
to a select committee of the House of
Commons earlier in June.
FSA’s 2007 Risk Outlook noted a rapid increase in leveraged lending,
associated with private equity, and greater concentration
of exposures in
private equity lending, although it also reported that banks were succeeding in
distributing underwritten
It also noted the
widely-reported erosion in loan covenants “with less robust
triggers” that reduce protection for lenders.
The hedge fund discussion also reflects the importance of
internationalisation and transatlantic dialogue in policy development.
a particular concern for the FSA, is being addressed by IOSCO,
collaboration in hedge fund supervision is being discussed by the
Financial Markets Regulatory Dialogue) (and in FSA/SEC bilaterals), while the EU
was heavily (albeit unsuccessfully) involved
in negotiating an exemption for EU
investment firms from the 2005 SEC registration requirement for hedge fund
which has since
been struck down as invalid.
In terms of best practice, it remains to be seen whether the light touch
approach being adopted to hedge fund risk, in particular,
will be robust against
a major crisis, although the FSA’s industry reports are encouraging while
the recent reluctance among
G8 Member States to impose a code of conduct on the
industry also suggest confidence in the regulatory supports which already apply
to entities in the hedge fund risk chain. More generally, the care being taken
in the UK and at EU-level to develop a nuanced regulatory
response to hedge
funds and private equity in the teeth of often considerable political pressure
is reassuring for the development
of regulatory policy.
Professor of Capital Markets
Law, University of Nottingham and Fellow, Department of Business Law and
Taxation, Monash University.
This analysis of recent
developments was presented at the Monash University and Macquarie University
Conference on Financial Services
Reform Third Anniversary – Where to Next?
Sydney, 13 July 2007. It reflects major developments and trends as at May 2007
does not reflect later events, including the worldwide credit crunch and the
subsequent policy response.
Influential IOSCO standards
include the 2004 Code of Conduct for Rating Agencies, which was adopted as a
self-regulatory standard
for rating agencies in the EU in early 2006.
Korea, for example, is in the
process of reforming its financial market regime.
G Hertig, On-Going Board
Reforms: One Size Fits All and Regulatory Capture (2005), available on
http://ssrn.com/abstractid=676417.
This scholarship is
spearheaded by the influential and controversial work of economists La Porta,
Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny. See R, La Porta, F Lopez de Silanes, A
Shleifer and R Vishny, ‘Investor Protection and Corporate
Governance’
Journal of Finance
(2000) 3. For a recent
application in the insider dealing sphere see L Beny, ‘Do Insider Trading
Laws Matter? Some Preliminary
Comparative Evidence’ 7
American Law and
Economics Review
(2005) 144 and for a recent critique see John Coffee,
‘Law and the Market: the Impact of Enforcement’ (2007), available
http://ssrn
.com/abstract=967482.
See, eg, the high-profile
report of the Committee on Capital Market Regulation, Interim Report of the
Committee on Capital Market
Regulation (November 2006) which made a series of
recommendations for increasing the attractiveness of US capital markets for
and international investors. It highlighted the regulatory and
litigation burden (including class action law suits), restrictions
capital markets (the difficulties in exiting the US), and multiple enforcement
agencies, among the causes for the decline
in the competitiveness of the US
capital market.
US Treasury Secretary Paulson also called for a fundamental re-examination of
how the US regulates its capital markets, “mark[ing]
a fundamental break
with a regulatory approach rooted in the securities markets of the 1930s”
(J Grant and K Guhna, ‘Paulson
seeks more flexible market rules’
Financial Times
, 21 November 2006, 7).
2006 saw, for the first time, more finance raised on the London Stock
Exchange than on the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq (D Wrighton,
‘Threat to New York as centre of finance’
Financial Times
November, 1).
Former New York Governor Eliot Spitzer also convened a top-level panel to
consider modernisation of New York’s financial services
regulation in
order to ensure New York’s competitiveness with London in particular. B
Masters, ‘Spitzer convenes top
level panel to update Wall Street
Regulation’,
Financial Times
, 27 May 2007, 1.
See section III below.
Directive 2004/39/EC OJ (2004)
L145/1. It has been described as a “sprawling directive with far-reaching
implications for
any firm involved in buying and selling securities in
Europe.” Editorial,
Financial Times
, 23 August 2005, 14.
Business Plan
One-off costs to the UK
investment services industry have been estimated at £877 million -
£1.17 billion and ongoing costs
at £80 million. FSA, The Overall
Impact of MiFID (November 2006).
Its budget for 2006-2007 is
£276 million.
It authorises and regulates
deposit taking, insurance, mortgage lending, general insurance advice, mortgage
advice, and investment
business. It has four business units: wholesale and
institutional markets; retail markets; regulatory services; and corporate
The FSA regime is contained
in the extensive FSA Handbook, which is composed of a series of individual
Sourcebooks organised in
particular Blocks. They are being reformed under the
move to more principles-based regulation (section II).
The High Level Standards Block, eg, includes individual Sourcebooks on: the
Principles for Business (the 11 High Level Principles);
the Senior Management
Arrangements, Systems and Controls (which addresses the responsibilities of
directors and senior management);
and the Fit and Proper Test for Approved
The Business Standards Block includes Sourcebooks on: Conduct of Business
(for firms with investment business customers) (now called
NEWCOB following
recent extensive reforms); Client Assets; and Market Conduct.
The Specialist Sourcebooks Block includes the Sourcebook on Collective
Investment Schemes and on Recognised Investment Exchanges.
The Listing, Prospectus and Disclosure Block includes the Listing Rules.
Variations in
the Intensity of Financial Regulation: Preliminary Evidence and Potential
Implications
, Discussion Paper 521, 08/2005 (2005), John M Olin Center
for Law, Economics and Business, Harvard University, available on
http://www.harvard.edu/programs/olin_center
These include that the RIE
have adequate financial resources, be a fit and proper person to perform the
functions of a RIE, ensure
its business is conducted in an orderly manner, take
effective measures against issuers who do not comply with disclosure
obligations,
and have effective arrangements for monitoring and enforcing
compliance with its rules.
The FSA’s targeted
and risk-based approach to supervision, which is informed by its
principles-based approach (discussed in
this section), came under severe
criticism in the wake of the autumn 2007 run on Northern Rock. The FSA was
criticised as having
‘systematically failed in its duty as a regulator to
ensure that Northern Rock would not pose a systemic risk’ and the
‘regarded as a substantial failure of regulation’ given the
FSA’s failure to tackle the fundamental weakness
posed by the bank’s
funding model and to respond to the warning signals as to the scale of liquidity
risks being carried by
the bank: House of Commons, Treasury Committee,
Run on the Rock. Fifth Report of Session
(2008), 34, 37.
In its initial reaction, the FSA was robust in response, acknowledging failures
in supervision but arguing that
its principles-based approach was not flawed: C
Briault, ‘Regulatory Developments and the Challenges Ahead’, Speech
the Compliance Institute, 20 January 2008, available on
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pages/library/Communication/Speeches.
Former Prime Minister Tony
Blair warned that the FSA is “hugely inhibiting of efficient
business.” D Lascelles and J
Fuller, ‘Opening Up the Debate,
Financial World
, February 2006, 15. Similarly a major survey of
businesses in 2006 by the FSA’s Practitioner Panel reported considerable
unhappiness
with the FSA. Particular concerns included the cost and burden of
compliance and a lack of clarity with respect to certain principles-based
initiatives.
B Jopson, ‘FSA told
streamlining needed’,
Financial Times
, 1 May 2007, 18.
Annual Report
These include: the need to
use its resources in the most efficient and economic way; that burdens should be
proportionate to benefits;
that innovation in regulated activities should be
supported; and the need to support competition.
For an example of the
FSA’s approach, see its analysis of the new investment research regime:
Ex Post Analysis of FSA’s Conduct of Business Rules on Conflicts
of Interest in Investment Research
The survey was designed to
deliver a broad picture of costs in the wholesale and retail markets by
establishing the costs of complying
with FSA rules and to demonstrate the
validity of the methodology used. It does not, however, address the indirect
costs of regulation
(such as opportunity costs).
See above, n 5, for recent
US developments.
Annual Report
(2005), 20-21, 22-23.
Initiatives include the
Statement on Regulatory and Self Regulatory Consultation
(October 2004), and the ICSA
Statement on Rule Making and
Regulation in Financial
Markets, Principles for Better Regulation
(October 2006), both available on
http://www.icsa.bz
. The London Investment Banking
Association publicly supported the 2006 statement in advance of the November
2006 IOSCO meeting in
London, noting that “over regulation of the
financial sector is a real threat…too often regulatory initiatives have
introduced without clearly establishing evidence of a problem, or evidence
that the regulation proposed is a proportionate response
to a problem…Many
regulators are aware of the dangers of over regulation and some...have adopted
new disciplines…the
best of these make it clear that the burden of proof
is on regulators to show that the regulation is necessary and proportionate,
not on the industry to show that it is not”.
MPBR is the FSA’s
main strategic priority for 2007-2008. FSA, Business Plan 2007/2008. For a
recent discussion see FSA,
Principles-based regulation – focusing on
the outcomes that matter
(April 2007).
Herbert Smith,
‘Principles-Based Regulation: the Challenge for Stakeholders’,
Financial Regulation
, April 2007.
Better Regulation
Action Plan
M Hopper and J Stainsby,
‘Pause for Thought’,
International Financial Law Review
January 2007, 2.
The FSA has noted that
under MPBR key regulatory decisions will move to a more senior level of the
company and the Board of Directors
will be required to engage with the
regulatory environment: “managing regulatory risk will become much more
akin to managing
commercial risk.” FSA (April 2007), above n 25, 17.
The benefits of MBPR have
been identified as increased flexibility for firms to decide on their business
and operating processes,
consumer benefits deriving from firms being more
attuned to their needs, and a strengthening of the ability of the FSA to have
“business-like
conversations” with firms and to make risk-based
judgements. FSA,
Business Plan 2007/2008
The FSA has noted that its
response to mis-selling and mis-buying problems has typically been to make more
detailed rules which
have added to the costs of regulation but failed to address
root causes – such as firms’ failure to consider the reasonable
information needs of investors. The new approach is designed to break this
cycle. FSA, Reforming Conduct of Business Regulation (October
2006), 13. It has
also noted that the risks of prescriptive regulation include greater
difficulties in responding to innovation and
product development,
inaccessibility to smaller regulated firms in particular, and attention becoming
focused on the letter rather
than the purpose of regulatory standards. FSA
(April 2007, above n 25), 6.
Firms were to be, at least,
implementing TCF in a substantial part of their business by March 2007.
(1) consumers can be confident that they are dealing with firms where the
fair treatment of customers is central to the corporate
(2) products and services marketed and sold in the retail sector are designed
to meet the needs of identified consumer groups and
targeted accordingly;
(3) consumers are provided with clear information and kept appropriately
informed before, during, and after the point of sale;
(4) advice is suitable and takes account of consumer circumstances;
(5) consumers are provided with products that perform as firms have led them
to expect and the associated service is of an acceptable
standard and as
consumers have been led to expect; and
(6) consumers do not face unreasonable post-sale barriers imposed by firms to
change product, switch provider, submit a claim or make
a complaint.
The FSA has recommended that firms adopt a structured approach to revising
their business following 4 phases: awareness; strategy
and planning;
implementing; and embedding. FSA,
Treating Customers
towards fair outcomes for consumers
(July 2006).
NEWCOB is about half the
length of the earlier conduct of business regime.
Reforming Conduct
of Business
, Feedback (May 2007), 2.
Following industry concern
that investor education, qualifications and employment do not necessarily
provide a reliable indicator
of product understanding.
Conduct of Business
(May 2007), above n 35, 50-51.
Ibid, 49-50.
LIBA Annual
FSA April 2007, above n
The FSA has taken the view
that if firms “engage positively with their regulatory responsibilities
and can demonstrate that
they have taken all reasonable steps to achieve the
right outcome”, the FSA will take that into account in regulatory action.
FSA Conduct of Business (May 2007), above n 35, 13.
Confirmation of
Industry Guidance
(November 2006) and FSA,
Policy Statement on
Confirmation of Industry Guidance
(September 2007).
MiFID Connect is an unusual
and powerful grouping of the 11 major trade associations active in the UK
financial markets which was
formed in 2006 to support member firms in applying
MiFID requirements and which has articulated a co-ordinated position on
It has produced industry
guidance on a number of aspects of MiFID (the guidance is subject to FSA rules),
available on http://www.mifidconnect.com.
MiFID, A18(1).
MiFID, A13(3).
MiFID, A18(2).
On the limitations of
conflict of interest disclosure see D Cain, G, Loewenstein, and D Moore,
‘The Dirt on Coming Clean:
Perverse Effects of Disclosing Conflicts of
Journal of Legal Studies
Traditionally, the EU has
not market-tested disclosure formats or requirements, notwithstanding
well-documented failures in investor
competence and understanding. But current
indications suggest a move away from this approach and greater engagement with
the realities
of investor understanding of disclosure. Reforms are currently
underway, eg, to the EU investment fund regime and particularly to
simplified, summary mutual fund prospectus supplied to retail investors. The new
regime, which will be market-tested among investors,
is likely to be based on a
core obligation on fund managers to deliver ‘key investor
information’ which reflects the
investor profile, the product, and the
sales channel used, and which ‘has far more chances to meet the real
information needs
of investors’. Commission, Exposure Draft,
orientations for discussion on possible adjustments to the UCITS Directive.
Simplified Prospectus – Investor Disclosure Regime
In the European investment
research context and querying whether separation improves research, see A Lehan
and O Randly, Chinese
Walls in German Banks (2003), available on
http:www.ssrn.com/abstracted=424010 (2003). The UK FSA, however, has reported
results from its reforms to investment analysis. N 54 below.
In the UK, eg, a
wide-ranging investigation took place into the split capital investment trust
sector following concerns, after
a collapse in the value of these investments
and significant losses in the retail sector, as to conflicts of interest where a
manager managed a series of funds. Although specific enforcement action
was not taken, the investigation resulted in a settlement
of £194 million
by the industry. FSA/PN/114/2004.
On reputation risk and
conflict of interest management see J Santos,
Commercial Banks in the
Securities Business: A Review
(Bank for International Settlements,
See, eg, the UK FSA’s
ex-post examination of the UK’s new investment research regime: FSA, Ex
Post Analysis of FSA’s
Conduct of Business Rules on Conflicts of Interest
in Investment Research (2005). It found that conflict of interest management had
improved and that research was less biased, although it was unclear to what
extent this was driven by regulatory reform.
Including limitations on
class actions.
G Ferrarini,
‘Contract Standards and the Markets in Financial Instruments
European Review of Contract Law
The principles suggest that
the firm: has an up-to-date view of the totality of the types of conflict of
interest involved in its
business activities; regularly reviews the types of
mitigation it considers acceptable to address conflict risks; has a conflicts
architecture able to deliver the mitigation resulting from the review process;
involves senior management in the process; uses management
information on the
extent and mitigation of conflicts of interest; has a culture which supports
effective management of conflicts
of interest; and has a conflict architecture
which results in a process capable of being subject to independent review. They
suggest that a well-run firm will have systems and controls in place to
identify non-standard transactions and escalate them for
On the relationship between
financial market development and enforcement see Coffee, above n 4.
Advanced Risk-Responsive
Operating Framework. It has recently been reformed and a new, more transparent,
and risk-sensitive model
(ARROW 2) was implemented over 2006.
The ARROW assessment by
the FSA includes: management, governance and culture; control functions; capital
and liquidity; customers,
products, and markets; and client money. The process
concludes with the FSA establishing a Risk Mitigation Plan for the firm which
sets out the action which must be taken by the firm to achieve particular
See generally J Black,
‘Mapping the Contours of Contemporary Financial Services Regulation’
Journal of Corporate Law Studies
(2002) 253, 256.
The FSA’s Business
Plan for 2007-2008 reported a need for £50 million to improve the
effectiveness of its staff with
respect to delivering MPBR and to invest in IT.
The cost will be spread over a 10 year fee increase plan.
‘We need a different
conversations with chief executives
and boards, rather than people who can read
a rule and tick a box.’ per John Tiner, FSA chief executive, quoted in B
and S Goff, ‘FSA Regulation move set to cost City £50
Financial Times
, 7 February 2007, 4.
Treating Customers
Fairly Initiative: progress report
(May 2007), 2. Ninety three per cent of
major retail groups met the March deadline, although only 41% of directly
authorised small
firms met the deadline (87% of medium firms). Failure to meet
the deadline has been related by the FSA to a lack of commitment from
management and, accordingly, to an inability to rely on senior management to
deliver the right outcomes and a consequent increase
in the focus and intensity
of supervision for these firms.
Report 2005-2006
The move to more
principles-based regulation is being closely followed in the US following fears
that recent reforms have damaged
the competitiveness of US financial markets
(n5). Treasury Secretary Paulson has noted that the US could learn from a
principles-based
approach. B Jopson, ‘Business remains unhappy with the
Financial Times
, 30 November 2006, 2. Similarly, a McKinsey
Report commissioned by New Mayor Bloomberg and Senator Schumer noted that US
leaders saw the benefits of the UK’s single principle-based
regulator model, while the Capital Markets Committee (above, n
5, 8) argued that
regulation should be “risk-based and principles-based” and it was
“particularly important that
the regulators accompany principles-based
rules with well-articulated guidance to firms and that regulators be mindful of
this guidance
in their enforcement activities.”
Above, n 4.
See, eg, R King and R
Levine, ‘Finance and Growth: Schumpeter might be right’ 108
Quarterly Journal of Economics
(1993) 681; R Rajan and L Zingales,
‘Financial Dependence and Growth’ 88
American Economic Review
(1998) 559; R Levine, ‘Law, Finance and Economic Growth’ 8
Financial Intermediation
(1999) 8; M Khan and A
Financial Development and Economic
Growth: An Overview
IMF Working Paper/00/209 (2000), available on
http:www.imf.org/external/pubs.
Commission,
Services White Paper 2005-2010
, White Paper.
Although there has been
growth in alternative trading systems, they account for only 1% of equity
trading volumes in the EU. G Ferrarini
and F Recine, ‘The MiFID and
Internalisation’ in Ferrarini and Wymeersch,
Investor Protection in
Europe. Corporate Law-making, the MiFID and Beyond
(OUP, 2006), 235,
See generally R Davies, A
Dufour, and B Scott-Quinn, ‘The MiFID: Competition in a New European
Equity Market’, in Ferrarini
and Wymeersch,
Investor Protection in
Europe. Corporate Law-making
the MiFID and Beyond
(OUP, 2006),
See, eg, in support of
competition, the position paper on
Innovation, Competition, Diversity,
Choice, A European Capital Market for the 21
(2002) prepared by a group of 7 leading trade associations including the
International Securities Market Association and the London
Investment Banking
Association.
See generally Ferrarini and
Recine, above n 71, 235.
A systematic internaliser
is defined as an investment firm which on an organised, frequent, and systematic
basis deals on own account
by executing client orders outside a regulated market
MTFs are defined as
multilateral systems which bring together multiple third party buying and
selling interests in financial instruments
in the system and in accordance with
non-discretionary rules in a way that results in a contract.
MiFID, A21.
MiFID As22 and 25.
See, eg, the 24 April 2006
statement by a group of twelve leading trade associations which argues that any
fragmentation in market
transparency data under MiFID’s order execution
model would not lead to a reduction in execution quality but could be controlled
by market forces (available on
http://www.isda.org/speeches
At the very least, MiFID
demands serious strategic consideration of the new regulatory and trading
environment, with a leading commentator
predicting that “MiFID is nothing
short of a revolution: it will see banks operating as exchanges for some
activities, exchanges
offering alternative execution services that more closely
resemble the structure of OTC markets than traditional organised markets,
the decentralisation of order execution among a panoply of venues in markets
previously governed by concentration rules….the
shock to the status quo
will represent a profitable opportunity for those who are a well-prepared
– and a death sentence for
those who cannot adapt to the new
environment.” K Lannoo and JP Casey,
The MiFID Revolution
Capital Markets Institute, 2006).
B Riley, ‘Goodbye to
Financial World
, June 2006, 22. Investment firms are
being advised to consider carefully the business case for the systematic
internaliser model,
particularly with respect to IT costs related to
transparency requirements. J Neasham, ‘Eyes on the IT horizon’,
, Supplement on Countdown to MiFID, May 2006, 50, 50-51. One
senior City figure has suggested that the additional regulatory burden
that only the largest institutions will exploit the strategic opportunities
represented by the MiFID regime: A Belchambers,
‘No time like the
present’, ibid, 54 at 55.
N Cohen, ‘A clash of
the titans: why big banks are wading into the stock exchange fray’,
Financial Times
, 24 November 13.
The MiFID negotiations on
the transparency regime for internalisers have been well-described as “one
of the most intense political
struggles that Europe ever experienced over a
piece of financial regulation.” Ferraini and Racine, above n 71, 253.
See, eg, FSA,
Transparency in UK Secondary Bond Markets
(2005) which found against
mandatory transparency requirements. The question is also being debated
internationally (IOSCO,
Transparency of Corporate Bond Markets
calling for IOSCO members to assess the appropriate level of debt market
transparency).
For a major contribution to
the debate, reflecting market sentiment, see Centre for European Policy Studies,
European Corporate Bond Markets: transparency, liquidity and efficiency
See, eg, Commission,
to transactions in classes of
financial instruments other than shares (November
2006), 3-4 and 5, noting that even positive responses tended only to be
“open-minded”
concerning reform.
The UK equity market, by
comparison is, for the most part, based on electronic order-book trading.
In the UK, eg, most trading
is bilateral, dealer-based, and OTC, although multi-dealer trading platforms are
developing (such as
the Gilt-Edged Market Makers platform which operates under
LSE rules). Multilateral trading facilities have also developed for government
CEPR Corporate Bonds Study,
above n 85, 1.
High level rules also apply
to trades conducted on alternative trading systems.
The academic literature on
debt market transparency is not conclusive, not least given limited data on the
debt markets and limited
trading which leads to hypothetical models and proxies
being relied on. See generally CEPR Corporate Bonds Study, above n 85.
This has happened before in
EU policy. The EU’s 2003 Prospectus Directive, which sets out an
extensive pan-EU disclosure
regime for public offers, can be analysed as an
example of retail disclosure standards leaking across to the sophisticated
markets. As a result, the exemption regime from the Directive for debt
offerings, private placements and offers to sophisticated
investors was fiercely
negotiated.
Non Equity Market
Transparency, Consultation Paper
(May 2007). See also FSA (2005), above n
The evidence suggests that
spreads in European corporate bonds are tighter than in their US equivalents,
notwithstanding that a
post trade reporting transparency system operates in the
US under the TRACE (Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine) mechanism. CEPR
Corporate Bonds Study n 85 and FSA, Trading Transparency in the UK Secondary
Bond Markets (2006).
Commission, Feedback
Statement, Pre- and Post-Transparency Provisions of MiFID in relation to
transactions in classes of financial
instruments other than shares (November
The FSA concluded in 2006
that there was no market failure to support regulatory intervention to mandate
transparency, although
it considered that more formal post-trade transparency
could be beneficial in the corporate bond markets, although it suggested that
this be industry-led.
This concern is frequently
raised by the markets internationally and in the context of the EU’s
reform programme. See, eg,
the International Council of Securities Associations
Statement on Consultation Practices (2004).
See C Scott,
‘Analysing Regulatory Space: Fragmented Resources and Institutional
The London Investment
Banking Association, the Association of British Insurers, the Investment
Management Association, the European
High Yield Association, and the European
Primary Dealers’ Association (LIBA Annual Report (2005), Chairman’s
3). The extensive CEPR reports were published in May 2006; above n 85
– the CEPR also produced a parallel report on government
bond market
transparency).
Commission,
Evidence, Pre- and post-trade transparency provisions of the Markets in
Financial Instruments Directive in relation to transactions
in classes of
financial instruments other than
, 12 June 2006.
Unusually, the Call for
Evidence refers to a review of the relevant academic and institutional
literature. At 7.
Response to
Commission’s Call for Evidence by a group of 13 leading EU trade
association (September 2006)
For a similar example
see the FSA’s 2005 and 2006 papers on Debt Market Transparency which
contains extensive discussions
designed to develop FSA policy, canvass market
opinion, and influence the EU response.
Comprised of Directive
2006/48 EC OJ (2006) L177/1 and Directive 2006/49/EC OJ (2006) L177/201.
Key industry initiatives
in the EU bond markets include the trading information provided through
regulated markets and multilateral
trading facilities (such as EuroMTS which
supports intra-dealer trading in euro denominated government bonds) and by firms
provide quotes through channels such as Bloomberg (which supports quotes
by a large numbers of dealers across Europe) and the development
of bond market
indices (including iBoxx (cash bonds) and iTraxx (derivatives)).
The Committee of
European Securities Regulators has noted that while a range of criteria
(governance, reliability, depth and breadth
of information provided, timeliness
of the data, cost efficiency, and the delivery mechanism) need to be taken into
account in assessing
the effectiveness of an industry-led solution, these
criteria also apply to the development of a regulatory solution, leading to
common question – who is best placed to deliver the best response? Above n
Above n 5. SEC
initiatives include postponing by one year the application of the controversial
section 404 internal control requirements
to foreign companies (the costs of
which are estimated at $4.36 million for an average company, Committee on
Capital Market Regulation
above n5, 5), the movement on IFRS/US GAAP
convergence, and the reforms (noted below) to the SEC deregistration regime.
The headline statistics
indicate that 24 of the 25 largest IPOs took place outside of the US in 2005.
Committee on Capital Market
Regulation, above n 5, 2. The Committee also noted
that London has increased its share of the global IPO market from 5% to almost
25% and is beginning to attract a greater share of IPOs from US-domiciled
companies. The Bloomberg/Schummer Report similarly reported
that the US share of
global IPOs has fallen from 57% in 2002 to 16% in 2006, while Europe’s
share has increased from 33% to
63%. Also of concern is that newly privatised
Chinese companies have listed in Hong Kong in preference to New York. H Scott,
Need for a New Look at Capital Markets Regulation Post Enron’,
Journal of International Banking Law Review
(2006) 166.
In one of the most
significant developments, see the recent discussion by two senior SEC officials
(speaking unofficially) of a
potential model for SEC enforcement based on
“substituted compliance” with SEC rules under which foreign stock
and broker dealers would apply for an exemption from SEC registration
based on their compliance with “substantively comparable”
regulation and supervision by a regulator with comparable powers to the
SEC’s and with a comparable regulatory and
enforcement philosophy –
the challenge lies in the notion of comparability and how this is benchmarked. E
Tafara and R Peterson,
‘A Blueprint for Cross-Border Access to U.S.
Investors: A New International Framework’, 48
Harvard Journal of
International Law
Dialogue on hedge funds
forms part of the Dialogue (see, eg, EU Commissioner McCreevy’s support
for the President’s
Working Group Report on Hedge Funds (Principles and
Guidelines regarding Private Pools of Capital) which advocated a light touch
approach given the efficiency and liquidity benefits of hedge funds) – the
EU has yet to finalise its approach to hedge funds,
although all recent
indications suggest a light-touch approach (section IV below).
For a recent example see
the 2005 report by a powerful coalition of US and UK market associations calling
for greater convergence
in EU and US regulation to support cross-border
wholesale dealings in equities and equity derivatives. The extensive report (in
volumes) is designed to capture the costs of regulatory compliance in the
transatlantic trading market and make the business case
for a more coherent
framework of regulation. EU-US Coalition on Financial Regulation,
Transatlantic
Dialogue in Financial Services: The Case for Regulatory
Simplification and Trading Efficiency
The SEC and the EU have
agreed a roadmap on IFRS/US GAAP convergence. Recent developments include the
conclusion of information-sharing
agreements between the SEC and EU Member
States. In June 2007, the SEC proposed a rule allowing non-US companies to file
rules according to IFRS by 2009
Rule 12g3-2(a) under the
Exchange Act
Commission Director
General Schaub, speaking at a September 2006 conference on TransAtlantic
Financial Services Dialogue. See K,
Alexander, E Ferran, N Moloney, and H
Jackson, ‘TransAtlantic Financial Services Dialogue’ 7(4)
European Business Organisation Law Review
(2006) 647.
EU Commissioner Charlie
McCreevy, Press Release 32/07, Delegation of the European Commission to the
For a challenge to any
characterisation of the UK regime as being weak as a result of these features
see FSA Chairman McCarthy,
speech on ‘Financial Regulation: Myth and
Reality’, British American Business London Insight Series and Financial
Forum, 13 February 2007, available on
http://www.fsa.gov.uk/speeches.
The offer lapsed in
February 2007. NASDAQ currently holds approximately 30% of the LSE. The LSE is
currently in merger talks with
the Italian Stock Exchange. N Cohen, ‘LSE
in merger talks with Borsa Italiana’,
Financial Times
NYSE Euronext started
trading in April 2007. 2006 was a volatile year in the consolidation of
Europe’s exchanges. It saw the
NYSE and Deutsche Börse bidding for
Euronext, the successful NYSE Euronext tie up, and the failed NASDAQ bid for the
The Committee on Capital
Market Regulation, eg, has noted that supervising trades on globally-merged
exchanges will “ultimately
require cooperation among international
regulators to produce harmonized trading rules….The US regulator (or for
that matter,
any regulator) cannot impose its rules on others.”; above n
The Notes are rather
muted and simply provide that the Act is intended to meet concerns that UK
recognised bodies might introduce
regulatory provisions which impose an
excessive regulatory burden on the issuers of securities admitted to trading on
their markets,
on their members, or on other users of those markets.
E Balls, Speech, City of
London Corporation Dinner, 25 October 2006.
In its 2007 Risk Outlook
the FSA appears to protect its position, noting that it “take[s] a neutral
stance on the ultimate
ownership of Recognised Bodies, provided they continue to
meet their regulatory requirements”, at 48.
The legislation has been
described as having ‘the feel of emergency legislation, akin to wartime
measures’: T Plews,
‘The “Balls Clauses [the legislation was
steered by Treasury minister Ed Balls]” are a mixed blessing for the
Financial Times
, 29 November 2006, 18.
It is now almost
standard in securities regulation literature to describe Sarbanes Oxley as an
ill-considered crisis-led response
to a market crisis, in a tradition of earlier
crash-driven legislation (the
Securities Act 1933
Exchange Act 1934
which followed the 1929 crash). See, eg, L Ribstein,
‘Bubble Laws’ 40
Houston Law Review
A26, MiFID Implementing
Directive 2006/73.
A21, MiFID Implementing
Directive 200673.
The conflicts regime is
designed to deliver general organisational and disclosure strategies for dealing
with divided loyalties,
while the best interest regime is designed to address
specific cases in which a firm might not act in the best interest of the
MiFID covers a wide
range of instruments including transferable securities, money market
instruments, units in collective investment
undertakings, financial derivatives,
commodity derivatives, and credit derivatives.
Conduct of Business Regulation
(May 2007), 11. An example includes the move
towards more generic risk disclosure requirements rather than
instrument-specific requirements
(the current FSA approach) – on the basis
that a product-specific approach encourages the belief that risk identification
for the regulator rather than the firm. A notable general exception concerns
the requirement to supply a point-of-sale Key Features
Document (KFD) (on the
product’s aims, the investor’s commitment and risk factors –
format and content rules apply)
when selling investment products which is a core
feature of UK retail investor protection. The detail of the disclosure regime
however, be replaced with high level principles which will ensure the
document adequately describes the product, reflects its complexity,
reasonable and sufficient to support informed investor decision-making, and does
not disguise or diminish key warnings.
See, eg: FSA,
Funds: A Discussion of Risk and Regulatory Engagement
(March 2006),
Netherlands Authority for Financial Markets,
Hedge Funds: An Exploratory
Study of Conduct-Related
(2005), and the Alternative
Investment Expert Group (which advises the European Commission),
Servicing and Marketing Hedge Funds in Europe
(July 2006).
Hedge Funds: A
Discussion of Risk and Regulatory Engagement
(March 2006), 9 and 17,
referring to the use of conflict of interest principles as a key element of the
existing supervisory tools
used by the Hedge Fund Managers Supervision Team.
G Tett, ‘FSA tells
derivatives market to tackle conflicts of interest’,
, 20 September 2006, 1.
Consultation Report – The Regulatory Environment for Hedge Funds. A
(March 2006).
In the UK, the number of
pension funds allocating to hedge funds has increased from 5% in 205 to 7.5% in
Financial Risk Outlook 2007
Most concern is directed
to market stability rather than to retail investor protection. As noted above,
the UK FSA intends to liberalise
the rules applicable to collective investment
to facilitate retail investor access to hedge fund investment techniques through
of hedge funds (FSA, Funds of Alternative Investments (March 2007).
2007 saw the
announcement of the largest ever leveraged buy out transactions in the US (the
TXU utility group and KKR/Texas Pacific
Group deal ($44.5 billion)) and the UK
(the KKR led bid for Alliance Boots (£11.1 billion)). Over £60 billion
by private equity funds in the UK over 2005 and 2006.
Eg, major trade unions
have called on the G8 to address the perceived dangers of private equity. A
Taylor, ‘Unions demand
G8 action on private equity’,
, 16 March 2007, 1. Political criticism has been particularly strong in
France and Germany, with then presidential candidate Sarkozy
calling for a tax
on speculative capital movements. M Arnold, ‘Sarkozy aims to push for
European tax on hedge funds’,
Financial Times
, 14 February 2007,
There has been some
concern in Germany as to hedge fund activity (one widely reported remark by
German’s minister for labour
in 2005 likened hedge funds to locusts)
– related to the success of the highly activist The Children’s Fund
in scuppering
Deutsche Börse’s bid for the London Stock Exchange.
Germany’s calls for code of conduct for the hedge fund industry
the May 2007 G8 meeting following US and UK opposition. But a plan to create new
incentives for private equity investors
was dropped in May 2007 following
political tensions. B Benoit, ‘Berlin backtracks on private equity’,
Financial Times,
16 May 2007, 10.
Report of the
Alternative Investment Expert Group,
Developing Private Equity
Report of the
Alternative Investment Expert Group,
Managing, Servicing and Marketing Hedge
Funds in Europe
(July 2006).
T Buck, ‘Hedge
funds and private equity “are good for the market”’,
Financial Times
, 9 February 2007, 6.
Wider Range
Retail Investment Products. Consumer protection in a rapidly changing world
(June 2005) and Feedback Document (March 2006);
Hedge Funds. A Discussion of
Regulatory Engagement
(June 2005) and Feedback Document
(March 2006)
Funds of Alternative Investment Funds
(March 2007).
Financial Risk
Outlook 2007
Amaranth sustained heavy
losses (US$6.4 billion) in September 2006 from energy trading on natural gas
Financial Risk
Outlook 2007
It addressed the risks
from private equity in a 2006 paper (Private Equity: a discussion of risk and
regulatory engagement (November
2006 – Feedback June 2007) and does so
regularly in its regular
Financial Risk Outlooks
. Particular concern was
raised with respect to increased levels of leverage, potential market abuse
risks given flows of sensitive
information and the risk of insider dealing (via
the increasing number of external advisers in deals), conflicts of interests in
private-equity fund management (between the fund and the companies owned by the
fund), conflicts of interest in advisers and finance
providers as between their
proprietary and advisory functions, stability risk on the collapse of a large
buy-out, and limited transparency
to the wider market. Although the FSA
highlighted that the study was not a precursor to regulation, and concluded that
the existence
of private equity did not raise systemic risks, it has committed
to close supervision of the leveraged loan market and to address
leverage risk through semi-annual leveraged lending surveys and to carry out
regular visits to the 14 largest private equity
firms. In its June 2007
follow-up report it committed to carrying out thematic reviews of conflict of
interest risk and highlighted
conflict management as an area of supervisory
focus for all FSA-authorised firms involved in the private equity markets and to
maintaining
its focus on market abuse in private equity transactions. Its
conclusions in June 2007 on the risk posed by private equity were that
market abuse and conflict of interests were high, excessive leverage was of
medium high risk, while market access and market
opacity risks were medium low
and the risk of an overall reduction in overall capital market activity was
This generated very
considerable print media and television interest. See, eg, J Eaglesham and M
Arnold, ‘Ps to target buy-out
Financial Times
Financial Risk
Outlook 2007
SEC Rule on Registration
Under the Investment Advisers Act of Certain Hedge Fund Advisers (2005).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (371 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter