URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ledda, John --- "Referring Legislative Matters to the Commonwealth: Four Common Drafting Issues" [2025] MelbULawRw 6; (2025) 48(2) Melbourne University Law Review 483
REFERRING LEGISLATIVE MATTERS TO THE COMMONWEALTH: FOUR COMMON DRAFTING ISSUES
II Recent Proliferation of Referral Schemes
III The First Issue: Confining a Matter Referral
A The Legal Context
B Combined Text and Amendment References
C Uncertainty concerning Combined References
D Delegating Amendment Approval to the Executive
IV The Second Issue: Minimising State Law Inconsistency with Commonwealth Law
A How Inconsistencies May Arise
B Statements about Concurrent Operation
C Avoiding Direct Inconsistencies Using Winding Back Triggers
V The Third Issue: Starting and Ending a Matter Referral
A An Ongoing Debate
B Starting a Matter Referral
C Ending a Matter Referral
D Can the Commonwealth Law Continue after a Referral Ends?
1 Mandatory Language of Referred Matters Power
2 The Previous and Future Operation of Commonwealth Law
3 Uncertainty about Effect on Previous Operation of Commonwealth Law
4 State Transitional Provisions
5 Continued Operation without Transitional Provisions
6 A Better Approach: Enacting Commonwealth Transitional Provisions
VI The Fourth Issue: Enacting a Commonwealth Law Adoption Instead of a Matter Referral
A The Question of Timing
B A Power Subject to a Qualification
C The Drafting Approach for Commonwealth Law Adoptions
D What Needs To Be Adopted?
VII Conclusion
REFERRING LEGISLATIVE MATTERS TO THE COMMONWEALTH:
FOUR COMMON DRAFTING ISSUES
The current Commonwealth statute book is replete with legislation that relies
Commonwealth’s legislative power under
s 51(xxxvii)
Constitution
to make laws with respect to matters referred to the Commonwealth Parliament
by Australian state parliaments. This article examines
uncertainties concerning
the scope of the power by focusing on four drafting issues that legislative
drafters have commonly needed
to consider when preparing legislation for schemes
that rely on the power. It is argued that these uncertainties are either
or can be addressed using appropriate drafting techniques.
Consequently, the power offers a constitutionally sound cooperative
mechanism that allows the Commonwealth and the states to legislate
for issues of
national concern when they
individually have insufficient legislative
power to do so.
The Commonwealth of Australia is a polity whose
legislative powers are limited to those enumerated in the
Constitution
However, the legislative
powers of Australia’s states are plenary rather than limited to specific
subject matters.
The High Court has read
Commonwealth legislative powers very broadly ever since its decision in
Amalgamated Society of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co
Even so, the Commonwealth is
sometimes prevented from enacting comprehensive legislation to deal with issues
of national concern
the subject matters specifically enumerated for it in the
Constitution
insufficient. The states are similarly limited in their ability to
individually enact comprehensive legislation to deal with these
issues because
they transcend
These limitations on legislative power have resulted in the Commonwealth and
the states implementing cooperative legislative schemes.
The use of one type of
scheme has become increasingly prevalent in recent
of scheme — a ‘referral scheme’ — relies on the
legislative power conferred on the Commonwealth
Parliament by
s 51(xxxvii)
Constitution
(the ‘referred matters
The referred matters power allows the Commonwealth Parliament to make laws
with respect to ‘matters referred to the Parliament
of the Commonwealth by
the Parliament or Parliaments of any State or States, but so that the law shall
extend only to States by whose
Parliaments the matter is referred, or which
afterwards adopt the law’.
is engaged in two ways:
1 By a state parliament referring a matter to the Commonwealth Parliament for
legislation (a ‘matter referral’); or
2 By a state parliament adopting a Commonwealth law based on a matter
previously referred by another state parliament (a ‘Commonwealth
adoption’).
The scope of the referred matters power in connection with the creation of
referral schemes is too large a topic for a single article.
Accordingly, the
focus of this article is more limited. It examines uncertainties concerning the
scope of the power by focusing on
four drafting issues that legislative drafters
(including, formerly, the author of this article) have commonly needed to
when preparing legislation for referral schemes.
Those issues are:
1 How to confine a matter referral to prevent Commonwealth overreach;
2 How to avoid state laws being rendered inoperative for inconsistency with a
Commonwealth law based on a matter referral;
3 How to start and end a matter referral; and
4 Whether to enact a Commonwealth law adoption instead of a matter
A referral scheme usually involves legislation enacted by all, or almost all,
for the sake of economy, the examples used in this article to illustrate these
four drafting issues are limited to the legislation
of two states. Examples from
New South Wales (‘NSW’) are used to illustrate matter referrals
because that State is often
the lead jurisdiction for
Examples from Western Australia
(‘WA’) are used to illustrate Commonwealth law adoptions because
that State often enacts
considering these examples, it is important to appreciate that state legislation
for referral schemes is usually based on agreed
model provisions prepared or
sanctioned by the Australasian Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee
(‘PCC’) for the purpose
of implementing intergovernmental
agreements.
The use of model provisions
ensures that all of the participating states in a referral scheme enact uniform
matter referrals and
Commonwealth law adoptions.
II Recent Proliferation of
Referral Schemes
The current Commonwealth statute book is replete with legislation that
relies, whether wholly or partly, on the referred matters power as a source
of legislative power. Examples include Commonwealth legislation
the following:
Business names;
Consumer credit;
Corporate regulation and financial services and markets;
Financial matters concerning de facto relationships;
Industrial relations;
Personal property securities;
Mutual recognition within Australia of certain occupations and standards for goods;
Water management in the Murray-Darling Basin.
The proliferation of Commonwealth legislation supported by the referred
matters power is a relatively recent
phenomenon.
This proliferation is at least partly explained by High Court decisions that
thwarted a previous attempt at a cooperative legislative
scheme concerning
corporate regulation. That scheme involved each state and the Northern Territory
(‘NT’) individually
legislation to apply the text of a law enacted by the Commonwealth for the
Australian Capital Territory
A brief survey of the
history of this scheme provides some important context for the four drafting
issues considered by this article.
In 1989, the Commonwealth attempted to enact comprehensive legislation on the
topic of corporate regulation by relying principally
on its legislative power
Constitution
That power enables the Commonwealth Parliament to make laws with respect to
‘foreign corporations, and trading or financial
corporations formed within
the limits of the Commonwealth’.
However, in 1990 the High Court struck down provisions of the legislation that
dealt with the incorporation of trading or financial
corporations because they
were not supported by
From 1991–2001, the Commonwealth, the states and the NT participated in
a cooperative legislative scheme aimed at overcoming
the limitations on the
Commonwealth’s legislative power concerning
corporations.
This scheme involved the Commonwealth enacting legislation, limited in its
application to the ACT, using the legislative power conferred
Commonwealth Parliament by
Constitution
make laws for the government of Commonwealth
territories.
The substantive text
regulating the incorporation and activities of corporations, called the
‘Corporations Law’, was
then applied in the states and the NT by
legislation enacted by each of those
In 2000, the High Court in
cast doubt on the constitutional viability of this cooperative legislative
scheme by holding that the Commonwealth could
not, even with the consent of the
Commonwealth
Parliament, validly accept power conferred on its officers or
instrumentalities (in
, the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions) by a state law that adversely affected the rights of individuals
unless the Commonwealth
had the legislative competence to confer those powers
decision, together with the High Court’s decision in
Re Wakim; Ex parte
, which denied states the power to confer state jurisdiction on
federal courts, sounded the death knell for the
To avoid the potential collapse of Australia’s corporate regulatory
regime, the Commonwealth, together with all of the states,
quickly used the
referred matters power to create a referral scheme (the ‘corporations
legislation referral scheme’)
to support the enactment of both the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and the
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission Act 2001
These Acts remain the mainstays of corporate regulation in
Also, as we will see, the state
legislation for the scheme has provided a template for
subsequent referral schemes.
III The First Issue:
Confining a Matter Referral
Occasionally commentators writing on the referred matters power speak loosely
of a referral of ‘power’ to the
Commonwealth.
However, the referred matters power is not engaged by a state parliament
referring a ‘power’ to the Commonwealth Parliament;
it is engaged by
a state parliament referring a
The chapeau to
Constitution
confers on the Commonwealth Parliament the ‘power to make laws for the
peace, order, and good government of the Commonwealth’
with respect to
matters that have been referred to it
51(xxxvii).
The approach that is currently taken by state parliaments to confining
matter referrals so as to prevent Commonwealth overreach can be traced to the
decision of the High Court in
R v Public Vehicles Licensing Appeal Tribunal
(Tas); Ex parte Australian National Airways Pty
Ex parte ANA
, the High Court held that a state parliament must
express its will about the scope of a matter referral by enacting its will in a
Such statutes are called
‘state referral Acts’ in this article. Specifically, the High Court
held that the referred matters
power should be applied without making
implications or imposing limitations that are not found in its express words and
should, because
it is a constitutional provision, be construed with all the
generality that its words admit.
Court also held that a matter referral can be expressed in terms of general
subject matters because it would be ‘absurd
to suppose that the only
matter that could be referred was the conversion of a specific bill for a law
into a law’.
Ex parte ANA
, there are two
constitutionally permissible ways for a state referral Act to confine a matter
1 By referring specific statutory provisions for enactment by the
Commonwealth Parliament; or
2 By referring specified subject matters for Commonwealth legislation rather
than specific statutory provisions for
Combined Text and
Amendment References
State parliaments sometimes refer only a subject matter to the Commonwealth
Parliament.
The more common approach is to
refer both initial statutory provisions for enactment by the Commonwealth
Parliament along with a
subject matter that enables the Commonwealth Parliament
to amend those provisions. The
National Redress Scheme for Institutional
Child Sexual Abuse (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2018
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
’) provides a recent example of this combined
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
first refers ‘[m]atters to which the initial referred provisions
The ‘initial referred provisions’ are defined to mean the scheduled
text to the extent that the scheduled text deals
with matters included in the
legislative powers of the Parliament of
The ‘scheduled text’ is in
turn defined to mean the text of a proposed Bill for the Commonwealth Act set
out in sch 1
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
Although the proposed Bill is set
NSW Redress Scheme Referral Act
, state referral Acts commonly
specify provisions for a proposed Bill using text that is tabled in a state
parliament if the proposed
Bill is too large to be included within a state
The referral of the matters to which initial referred provisions relate is
expressed to be ‘only to the extent of making laws
with respect to those
matters by including the initial referred provisions in a Commonwealth Act
enacted in the terms, or substantially
in the terms, set out in the scheduled
The expression
‘substantially in the terms’ is intended to enable the Commonwealth
Parliament to make minor adjustments
to the scheduled
The referral of the initial referred provisions is called the ‘text
reference’ in the
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
It is also sometimes called the
‘initial reference’ in other state referral
article uses the more descriptive term ‘text reference’ for this
kind of matter referral.
NSW Redress Scheme Referral Act
then refers
[m]atters relating to a redress scheme for institutional child sexual abuse ...
except as provided by sections 5 and 6 ... but only to the extent of making
laws with respect to those matters by making express amendments
of the National
‘National Redress Act’ is defined to mean a Commonwealth Act
‘enacted in the terms, or substantially in the
terms, of the scheduled
text and as in force from time to
An express amendment of the ‘National Redress Act’ is defined to
mean ‘the direct amendment of the text of that
Act (whether by the
insertion, omission, repeal, substitution or relocation of words or matter) by
another Commonwealth Act or by
an instrument under a Commonwealth Act’;
this definition expressly excludes ‘the enactment by a Commonwealth Act of
provision that has or will have substantive effect otherwise than as part of
the text of the
National Redress
This definition is based on a
common precedent in other recent state referral
The referral of matters limited to the express amendment of the
‘National Redress Act’ is called the ‘amendment
reference’ in the
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
Other state referral Acts use the
article also uses the term for this kind of matter referral.
Uncertainty
concerning Combined References
An uncertainty to do with the approach of combining text and amendment
references is the extent of a state parliament’s power
requirements or exclusions on the Commonwealth Parliament concerning the
exercise of the referred matters power with respect
to the references. This is
because it is arguable that a state parliament may only confine the matters to
be referred and not the
Commonwealth’s legislative power with respect to
those matters.
The basis for this argument
is that the legislative power with respect to a given referred matter is
conferred by the chapeau to
Constitution
not by a given state referral Act. The role of a state referral Act is limited
to defining the extent of the subject matter for
the exercise of this
legislative power.
Two examples of requirements and exclusions commonly imposed by state
referral Acts illustrate this uncertainty.
The first example concerns the requirement to include provisions in a
particular Commonwealth Act if they are based on a text or amendment
practical benefit of that requirement is obvious. It helps referring states keep
track of how the Commonwealth exercises its
legislative power with respect to
the references and also when it ceases to do so.
The second example concerns the exclusion of specified kinds of provisions
from the making of laws based on an amendment reference.
For instance,
the matters referred by the amendment reference given by s 4(2) of the
NSW Redress Scheme Referral Act
limited by the words ‘except as provided by sections 5 and 6’ (of
that Act). Section 5(2) of the Act provides that
the amendment reference does
not include ‘the matter of making a law to the extent that the law would
operate to prevent or
limit the power to establish, or to prevent or limit the
operation of, any State redress mechanism’. Section 6 of the Act excludes
from the reference the matter of making a law to the extent that the law would
substantively remove or override a provision of the
‘National Redress
Act’ that requires the agreement of NSW.
one view, the requirement or exclusion involved in these examples is an attempt
to limit the exercise of legislative power with
respect to the matters to be
referred rather than to confine the scope of those matters. The first example
seems to be a direction
by a state parliament for the Commonwealth Parliament to
limit the exercise of its legislative power based on a text or amendment
reference to a particular Commonwealth Act. The second example also seems to
direct the Commonwealth Parliament not to exercise its
legislative power so as
to enact particular kinds of provisions.
The distinction between limiting a matter and limiting the legislative power
with respect to a matter should not be applied formalistically.
This would be
inconsistent with the guidance of the High Court in
Ex parte ANA
to read the referred matters
power with all the generality that its words
Rather, the characterisation of a
requirement or exclusion should focus on what is being done in substance rather
than in form.
For the first example above, it is important to recall that the High Court in
Ex parte ANA
explicitly acknowledged that a
matter referral may, but need not, be confined by referring a specific Bill for
a Commonwealth statute
to the Commonwealth Parliament for
Sometimes a text reference
refers provisions for insertion into an existing Commonwealth statute rather
than referring a Bill for
a new statute.
Similarly, an amendment reference confines the matters it refers to express
amendments of an existing Commonwealth
referral of a Bill for a new Commonwealth statute necessarily operates to
require that provisions are located in the resulting
If it is constitutionally
permissible to require the Commonwealth Parliament to enact a particular
statute, there is no justification
for denying a state parliament the power to
require provisions to be included in a particular Commonwealth
statute even if the text or amendment reference concerned does not refer the
text of a Bill for a new statute. To permit one but not
the other is to favour
form over substance. A requirement concerning where provisions should be
located does not diminish the substantive power of the Commonwealth
Parliament to enact the provisions or regulate the matters covered by the
text or amendment reference.
For the second example above, a state parliament could achieve the same
result by using only a text reference that does not include
the excluded kinds
of provisions. As we have seen, the use of a text reference to confine a matter
referral to specified provisions
is constitutionally
permissible.
There is no justification for
denying a state parliament that gives both a text and amendment reference the
alternative avenue of
confining the amendment reference by excluding particular
kinds of provisions. Again, to permit one but not the other is to favour
over substance. The exclusion of provisions from an amendment reference operates
in substance to confine the matters covered
reference just as the specification of provisions confines a text
These examples can be contrasted with s 4 of the
Commonwealth Powers Act
(NSW), which provided that
no law made by the Parliament of the Commonwealth with respect to matters
referred to it by this Act shall continue to have any force
or effect, by virtue
of this Act or the reference made by this Act, after the expiration of [the
period for the reference].
That section did not seek to confine
the matters referred to a period: this would have been
permissible.
Rather, the section purported
to provide that the
Commonwealth law ceased to be supported by the referred matters power once
the period for the reference ended.
Delegating Amendment
Approval to the Executive
Confining a matter referral using referred provisions or specified subject
matters can be contrasted with a type of amendment reference that appears to
have been used only once.
Section 4(1)
Mutual Recognition (New
South Wales) Act 1992
NSW Mutual Recognition Referral
’) confines its matter referrals to the matters to which the
schedule to the Act relates but only to the extent of ‘(a)
the enactment
of an Act in the terms, or substantially in the terms, set out in the
Schedule’ and ‘(b) the amendment
of that Act (other than the
Schedules), but only in terms which are approved by the designated person for
each of the then participating
sets out the provisions of a proposed Bill for a Commonwealth
The Act provides that the designated person is: for a given state, that
state’s Governor; for the ACT, the
Chief Minister of the ACT; and for the NT, the
Administrator of the NT.
Although not entirely free from doubt, the use of ‘approve’ in
the past tense suggests that the relevant approval must
be given before the
amendments can be enacted.
The approval of amendments by these designated persons is problematic having
regard to the High Court holding in
that a state parliament must express its will about the scope of a
matter referral by statute.
There are at
least three reasons why it is difficult to reconcile the amendment approval
process in the
NSW Mutual Recognition Referral Act
proposition.
First, the designated persons of the states are state executive
As a result, their decisions
concerning amendment approvals may not necessarily reflect the prevailing will
of their state parliament
at the time that the approval is given. In particular,
the fact that there is no process included in the Act for a designated
state parliament to disallow an approval may result in that
approval reflecting the will of the state’s executive rather than
parliament. In addition, it would be difficult to say that an approval reflected
the will of a parliament that originally
enacted the matter referral. The
enactment of the
approval mechanism suggests that the Parliament of NSW had not formed a
considered view about what kinds of amendments would be appropriate.
Secondly, there is no clear limit imposed by a state parliament on the kinds
of amendments that can, or cannot, be approved on its
behalf. It might be argued
that the approval power is limited by the prefatory words in s 4(1) of the Act
to the matter referral
— these words limit the matter referral to
‘matters to which the Schedule
This limit, if it is a limit, provides a very uncertain guide for the designated
person concerning what kinds of amendments can,
or cannot, be approved on behalf
of that person’s state parliament. The need for an approval mechanism
itself suggests that
these prefatory words were considered to be too imprecise
to effectively limit the matters referred by the Act. The
referral of specific subject matters by a state referral Act at least
textual guide, enacted by a state parliament itself, that operates to limit
the scope of the matters referred by the Act even if those
matters are expressed
using broad language.
Thirdly, authorising a state executive official to approve amendments is not
analogous to authorising such an official to terminate
matter referrals. As we
will see, the High Court has held that a state governor can be empowered by a
state referral Act to terminate
a matter referral that is for a
However, these two kinds of
executive power are distinguishable. A power to terminate a matter referral is
limited to ending a referral
whose scope has previously been defined by the
state parliament that conferred the power. A power to approve amendments is
because that power gives an official, instead of their state
parliament, the power to define the precise scope of amendments that
are covered
by the referral.
It is interesting to note that the
NSW Mutual Recognition Referral Act
was amended in 2021 to refer additional matters to the Commonwealth Parliament
concerning mutual
recognition.
fresh amendment reference was enacted for this
along with an express statement
that the operation of the existing text and amendment references are ‘not
affected’ by
the fresh amendment reference and vice
The fresh amendment reference
specifies subject matters for amendments rather than requiring the approval of
amendments by designated
IV The Second Issue:
Minimising State Law Inconsistency with Commonwealth Law
How Inconsistencies
The legislative power conferred by the chapeau to
Constitution
is a power to make laws for the
‘peace, order, and good government
Commonwealth’
Consequentially, a
law based on a matter referral operates as a Commonwealth law for the purposes
Constitution
even though a state law referred the relevant
Constitution
will therefore apply
to resolve a conflict between a state law and a Commonwealth law based on a
matter referral.
Section 109
Constitution
provides that when a state law is inconsistent with a Commonwealth law, the
Commonwealth law prevails and the state law is invalid
to the extent of the
inconsistency. Although
provides that an inconsistent state law is
‘invalid’, the High Court has read the section as rendering an
otherwise valid
state law inoperative while the inconsistency persists, with the
state law resuming its operation once the inconsistency
Section 109
Constitution
not only when there is a direct inconsistency but also when a Commonwealth law
evinces an intention to ‘cover the
field’ of the law’s subject
matter and a state law intrudes into that
A Commonwealth law can include a
statement that the law is not intended to cover the field (which is effective
against an argument
that the law covers the field), but such a statement will
not prevent the application of
to direct inconsistencies between
provisions of the Commonwealth law and state
When drafting state referral Acts, the potential application of
lead to uncertainty concerning the effect of that section on existing state laws
if a Commonwealth law is enacted based on matter
referrals given by the state
referral Acts. It may not be feasible to confine a matter referral so as to
remove this uncertainty.
This is because the aim of most, if not all, matter
referrals is to enable Commonwealth law to deal comprehensively with a subject
matter where the states and the Commonwealth cannot do so
individually.
comprehensiveness often carries with it the danger that state laws might
unintentionally be rendered inoperative by
for inconsistency with
Commonwealth law based on the referred matters
Statements about
Concurrent Operation
One technique used to address this danger is for a Commonwealth law based on
a matter referral to include a statement that it is intended
concurrently with state law and not to cover the
As noted above, these kinds of
statements do not prevent the application of
to direct inconsistencies
between a Commonwealth law and a state
inconsistency may arise if it is not possible to obey both
It may also arise if one law confers
a right and the other law takes away or detracts from that
Avoiding Direct
Inconsistencies Using Winding Back Triggers
A technique used to avoid unintended direct inconsistencies is to include
provisions in the Commonwealth law that enable participating
states or the
Commonwealth to wind back the operation of the law when state laws are incapable
of operating concurrently with it.
The corporations legislation referral scheme
provides a useful illustration of the technique.
Corporations Act 2001
Cth) provides in
the legislation enacted under the corporations
legislation referral scheme,
defined in the Act as the ‘Corporations legislation’, is intended
concurrently with the laws of the states and
territories.
Part 1.1A also includes the
following provisions:
• Section 5
F, which provides that the
Corporations legislation does not apply to a matter in a state or territory if
that matter is declared
by a law of the state or territory to be an excluded
matter for the purposes of s 5F (a ‘matter’ is defined to include
‘act, omission, body, person or
• Section 5
G, which provides that the
Corporations legislation does not apply so as to prevent an inconsistency with a
specified provision of
a law of a state or territory if a law of that state or
territory declares that specified provision to be a Corporations legislation
displacement provision for the purposes of s
• Section 5
I, which in sub-s (1) enables
the Governor-General to make regulations that modify the operation of the
Corporations legislation so
that (a) provisions of the Corporations legislation
do not apply to a matter dealt with by a specified state or territory law or
no inconsistency arises between the operation of a provision of the Corporations
legislation and the operation of a specified
provision of a state or territory
law (‘matter’ is defined in the same way as s
These additional provisions involve the Corporations legislation winding
back its own operation by using different triggers. One trigger relies on
Commonwealth regulations; the other two triggers rely on a state law making
an appropriate declaration.
The winding back trigger that relies on Commonwealth regulations is an
example of what is sometimes pejoratively called a Henry VIII
clause, named
after the English monarch because of his unfortunate tendency to rule by
proclamation.
The High Court has
described a Henry VIII clause as a
provision of a statute that authorises the making of delegated legislation
that may be inconsistent with or amend the
The winding back triggers that rely on state law declarations do not fall
directly within this description because they may not necessarily be made
using regulations or similar forms of delegated legislation.
For example,
declarations are often included in state
Nevertheless, these triggers,
Henry VIII clauses, involve an action by a body other than the Commonwealth
Parliament that results in the winding back of a Commonwealth
All of these triggers raise an important question: are they constitutionally
permissible given that they empower a delegate of the
Commonwealth
Parliament to alter the operation of the Parliament’s own
legislation?
Victorian Stevedoring & General Contracting Co Ltd v Dignan
Dignan’s Case
’), the High Court upheld the validity
of a provision in a Commonwealth Act that enabled Commonwealth regulations to be
with respect to the employment of transport workers ‘notwithstanding
anything in any other Act’.
so, the High Court rejected the notion that there is a strict
separation between Commonwealth legislative and executive powers under the
Constitution
that prevents the Commonwealth
Parliament from conferring
legislative power on a delegate.
Nonetheless, the High Court in
held that the Commonwealth could not ‘abdicate’ its
legislative power. As Evatt J explained:
On final analysis therefore, the Parliament of the Commonwealth is not competent
to ‘abdicate’ its powers of legislation.
This is not because
Parliament is bound to perform any or all of its legislative powers or
functions, for it may elect not to do
so; and not because the doctrine of
separation of powers prevents Parliament from granting authority to other bodies
to make laws
or by-laws and thereby exercise legislative power, for it does so
in almost every statute; but because each and every one of the
laws passed by
Parliament must answer the description of a law upon one or more of the subject
matters stated in the
Constitution
. A law by which Parliament gave all
its law-making authority to another body would be bad merely because it would
fail to pass the
In a similar
vein, Dixon J observed that, despite the absence of a strict constitutional
separation between legislative and executive
power, ‘[t]here may be such a
width or such an uncertainty of the subject matter to be handed over that the
enactment attempting
it is not a law with respect to any particular head or
heads of legislative
The approach of the High Court in
Dignan’s Case
has been criticised as
being overly formalistic and ripe for restatement, particularly in its
application to Henry VIII clauses.
the approach remains the law. Indeed, Mason CJ, Dawson and McHugh JJ said in
Capital Duplicators Pty Ltd v Australian Capital Territory [No 1]
would not be easy to make out a case of an abdication of Commonwealth
legislative power ‘[s]o long as Parliament retains
the power to repeal or
amend the authority which it confers upon another body to make laws with respect
to a head or heads of legislative
power entrusted to the
Parliament’.
Applying the approach in
to the winding back provisions in
Corporations Act
(Cth), it is difficult to see why the provisions in that part could not
be characterised as being with respect to a matter under
the referred matters
power. This is because these provisions were included in the initial referred
provisions for the corporations
legislation referral
There is no doubt that they
formed, and were intended by the
referring states to form, part of the matter referral for the scheme.
Moreover, the amendment reference for the scheme is broad enough
to enable the
Commonwealth Parliament to repeal or amend the
provisions.
V The Third Issue:
Starting and Ending a Matter Referral
There has been a debate that has happened over many years (extending
of a state’s power to revoke or terminate a matter
referral, particularly
once the Commonwealth has enacted legislation based on the
In terms of realpolitik, it is unlikely that any state would be willing to
refer legislative matters to the Commonwealth Parliament
if the referral
resulted in the state surrendering in perpetuity its legislative power with
respect to the matter. Consequently,
it is important when drafting state
referral Acts to ensure that a matter referral can, if necessary, be brought to
Starting a Matter
A logically anterior issue to whether it is possible to end a matter referral
is determining when a referral starts. This issue is
particularly important for
the Commonwealth because of its relevance in deciding the appropriate timing for
enacting Commonwealth
legislation.
In considering when a referral starts, it is first important to understand
the process for enacting state and Commonwealth statutes.
This is because
Ex parte ANA
held that the will of a state
parliament concerning a matter referral must be expressed by
The Commonwealth Parliament
also exercises the referred matters power by enacting statutes.
A state or Commonwealth statute is enacted if the Bill for the statute is
passed by both Houses of Parliament (or, in the case of
the unicameral
Parliament of Queensland, its Legislative Assembly) and the state Governor (or,
for Commonwealth statutes, the Governor-General)
gives Royal Assent (on behalf
of the monarch) to the Bill as passed.
However, a statute only has practical legal operation once it
Often a statute commences on
assent, but sometimes a later day is specified by the statute itself or it is
left to the state governor
(or the Governor-General) to fix the date by
proclamation. The use of a proclamation to commence a state referral Act is now
commonplace
as the timing for the completion of the legislative process for
enacting the Act in each participating state is likely to
The PCC has indicated in its published protocol concerning the drafting of
national uniform legislation that ‘[i]n recent times,
the Commonwealth has
been prepared to introduce its legislation once at least one of the States has
introduced its referral legislation
(with passage being delayed until at least
one State’s referral legislation is
The rationale for this approach is likely to be that referral schemes often need
to be put into place expeditiously.
corporations legislation referral scheme provides a prime example of the need
for expedition.
Although an uncommenced state statute is still a state law, the referred
matters power does not mention state laws — rather,
it mentions
‘matters referred’ by state
parliaments.
The use of the past tense
of ‘refer’ indicates that the referral of a matter must happen
the Commonwealth Parliament can make laws with respect to the
relevant matter. As matter referrals must be given by statute, this
that a matter is not referred until the provisions of the state referral Act
giving the referral have commenced.
Since a Commonwealth statute also does not become a law until the Bill for
the statute receives Royal Assent, it is arguable that
a Commonwealth statute
based on a matter referral is constitutionally valid if the referral commenced
at any time before assent is
given to the Commonwealth
This argument receives some
textual support from reading the chapeau to s 51 of the
Constitution
(which confers the power to make laws on the Commonwealth
Parliament) together with s 1 of the
Constitution
(which provides that
Commonwealth Parliament shall consist of ‘the [monarch], a Senate, and
a House of Representatives’).
Nevertheless, the more conservative approach taken by the Commonwealth to the
introduction and passage of Commonwealth legislation
matter referral is preferable. That approach, as noted above, requires at
one state referral Act to be passed before the relevant Commonwealth
legislation is passed.
prudent approach if for no other reason than
that a state referral Act can sometimes be amended during its passage
through Parliament.
Also, the text of a state referral Act is not finally settled until the Bill
for that Act is passed by both houses, or the only house,
of that state’s
parliament. There would be real doubt as to whether Commonwealth legislation was
properly enacted based on
a matter referral if that legislation was passed in
circumstances where the text of the Bill for the relevant state referral Act
amended after the passage of the Commonwealth legislation but before the state
legislation received Royal Assent. In such a circumstance,
there would be no
consideration by the Commonwealth Parliament of the amendments to the state
Bill. There would also be no parliamentary
consideration about whether the
Commonwealth Bill was supported by the matter referrals given by the resulting
state referral Act.
Ending a Matter Referral
The High Court has held that a matter referral can be given for a
High Court has also held, in
Ex parte ANA
, that a state referral Act can
provide for such a period to end on a day fixed by a proclamation of a state
Because of this clear authority, state referral Acts provide for a matter
referral to begin on the day that the referral commences
and end on the day
proclaimed by the state governor for its
termination.
The proclamation power is
discretionary and is usually accompanied by a power to revoke a previous
proclamation or to fix a later
day by a new proclamation, provided that power is
exercised before the then-prevailing termination
In some cases, a fixed period has
been specified in a state referral Act for a matter referral with a power given
to the state Governor
to extend that
The issue about which some uncertainty remains is whether a matter that is
referred without specifying a fixed or terminable period
may nevertheless be
revoked by a state
parliament.
A matter referral of this kind is called an
‘indefinite matter referral’ in this article.
Generally, a state parliament cannot renounce or abdicate its power to repeal
or amend its own statutes.
, the High Court noted that ‘[t]he will of a Parliament is
expressed in a statute or Act of Parliament and it is the general
conception of
English law that what Parliament may enact it may
As a matter referral
needs to be given by statute, another statute would be required to revoke an
indefinite matter referral by either
repealing the
referral or expressly stating that it is revoked. Accordingly, to say that a
state parliament cannot revoke an indefinite matter referral
is effectively to
say that the parliament cannot repeal or amend its own statute.
If a state parliament cannot revoke an indefinite matter referral, it must be
because it is permissible to read such a limitation
on its legislative power
into the referred matters power. But the High Court made it clear in
Ex parte ANA
that the referred matters power
should be applied without making implications or imposing limitations not found
in its express words.
There are several
reasons for not reading this limitation into the referred matters power.
First, the expression ‘matter referred ... by the Parliament or
Parliaments of any State or States’ in the referred matters
power is inapt
language for implying a limitation on a state parliament’s power to revoke
a referral.
This language may be contrasted with the language of s 111 of the
Constitution
, which provides that:
The Parliament of a State may surrender any part of
the State to the Commonwealth; and upon such surrender, and the acceptance
by the Commonwealth, such part of the State shall become subject to the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Commonwealth.
The referred matters
power could have used the language of surrender, but it did not — indeed,
without comparable language in
the power, the better view is that a state
parliament cannot bind its successors by purporting to give an irrevocable
matter referral
even if it wished to do
Secondly, such a limitation is inconsistent with High Court authority. In
Ex parte ANA
, the High Court held that a state parliament can
authorise a state executive official to end a matter referral using a terminable
period referral.
It makes little sense
to deny the same state parliament the power to revoke the referral when it fails
to use that artifice. Also,
the High Court held in
’) that the
Commonwealth Parliament has a concurrent, rather than exclusive, power with
respect to a matter that has been
A state parliament does not
surrender legislative power with respect to a matter that it refers; it merely
shares it with the Commonwealth
while the referral
remains in force (subject to the operation of
Constitution
Another argument concerning whether a state can revoke an indefinite matter
referral should be mentioned if only to dismiss it. That
argument is that a
state statute revoking a matter referral that supports a current Commonwealth
law would be rendered inoperative
Constitution
the grounds of inconsistency.
With respect, it is wrong to apply
to the revocation of matter
referrals in the same way in which that section is applied to resolve conflicts
between a state law and
a Commonwealth law based on a legislative power other
than the referred matters
referred matters power, unlike almost all other Commonwealth legislative powers,
requires the participation of the states, or
a state, for its
The focus of
resolving conflicts between laws of a state and the Commonwealth concerning the
regulation of a particular subject matter where
both polities independently have
the power to make laws with respect to that subject
enactment of a state referral Act, which is a necessary precondition for the
referred matters power to be enlivened, facilitates
the Commonwealth’s
entry into a field that it would otherwise have insufficient legislative power
to enter — this is
not a case of both the Commonwealth and the state
independently having legislative power to regulate the same field. To adapt the
metaphor used by Fullagar J in
Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth
applying s 109 to prevent the revocation of a matter referral would permit the
stream to rise higher than its
Can the Commonwealth
Law Continue after a Referral Ends?
An additional area of uncertainty is whether a Commonwealth law based on a
matter referral can have any continuing operation once
the referral
Although the end of a matter
referral does not operate to repeal a Commonwealth law based on the referral, it
has been suggested
that ‘[the Commonwealth law], however, would cease to
be operative, or valid, because the essential basis for its validity
This suggestion pays
insufficient attention to the
language of the referred matters power.
Mandatory Language of
Referred Matters Power
The referred matters power uses mandatory language: ‘but so that the
[Commonwealth] law shall extend only to States by whose
Parliaments the matter
is referred, or which afterwards adopt the
This mandatory language
suggests that the power itself dictates when the Commonwealth law concerned
applies to a state. In particular, the language suggests
the following:
• As the Commonwealth law can only apply to states that refer the
matter or adopt the law, it follows that the law ceases to
to a state if the state ends its referral or adoption; and
• If only one of several states ends its referral, the Commonwealth law
can continue to ‘extend’ to the remaining
referring or adopting
states because their referrals and adoptions continue in force.
The mandatory language in the power also suggests that it would be beyond the
legislative competence of both the Commonwealth Parliament
and a state
parliament to enact a law providing for the Commonwealth law to apply,
or not to apply, to a state in a way that is inconsistent with the
mandatory language.
The Previous and
Future Operation of Commonwealth Law
With this language in mind, it is useful to consider the effect of the end of
a matter referral on a Commonwealth law by first distinguishing
between the
law’s ‘previous operation’ and its ‘future
operation’.
The ‘previous operation’ of the Commonwealth law is concerned
with the rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities
that arose under the law
before the day on which the matter referral ended. The ‘future
operation’ of the Commonwealth
law is concerned with any rights,
privileges, obligations or liabilities that would otherwise have arisen under
the law on or after
A Commonwealth law based on a matter referral that ends in a state can have
no future operation in that state. The mandatory language
of the referred
matters power limits the application of the Commonwealth law to states where the
matter ‘is referred’.
the referral ends, the constitutional underpinning for the continuing creation
in the state of rights, privileges, obligations
or liabilities under the law has
Uncertainty about
Effect on Previous Operation of Commonwealth Law
The effect of the end of a matter referral on the previous operation of a
Commonwealth law is less certain because its previous operation usually takes
two different forms.
First, the previous operation of a Commonwealth law includes the rights,
privileges, obligations or liabilities arising under that
law that have been
completely or fully exercised, complied with or enforced before the relevant
matter referral ended. There is therefore no more work
for that Commonwealth
law to do in the future. In this article, this operation is called a
law’s ‘completed previous operation’.
Secondly, the previous operation of a Commonwealth law also includes any
rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities arising under
that law before the
relevant matter referral ended but which had not by that time been completely or
fully exercised, complied with
or enforced. That Commonwealth law would need to
continue to have effect for the complete or full realisation of those rights,
privileges,
obligations or liabilities. For example, the prosecution of a person
for an offence committed against a Commonwealth law before the
matter referral ended may require the continued operation of an enforcement
regime for offences set out in that Commonwealth law.
In this article, this
operation is called the law’s ‘uncompleted previous
operation’.
State Transitional
Recent state referral Acts have sought to address the uncertainty mentioned
above concerning the previous operation of a Commonwealth
law based on combined
text and amendment references by enacting state transitional
provisions dealing with what happens if the amendment reference is terminated
before the text reference is terminated.
These state transitional provisions, as typically enacted, provide that the
termination of the amendment reference does not affect:
1 Commonwealth laws that were made under the amendment reference
before the termination (whether or not they have come into operation
before the termination); or
2 The continued operation in the relevant state of Commonwealth laws as in
operation immediately before that termination or as subsequently
affected by the Commonwealth laws made as mentioned in
Such state transitional provisions also provide that the amendment
reference continues to have effect for these limited purposes, despite its
termination, unless the text reference is also
terminated.
Older referral schemes such as the corporations legislation referral scheme do
not include these state transitional
provisions.
Such state transitional provisions do not distinguish between completed and
uncompleted previous operations of the Commonwealth law.
Nonetheless, they seem
broad enough to encompass both. The continuation of an amendment reference to
support the continued operation
of a Commonwealth law with respect to its
previous operation avoids the argument that the continued operation of
provisions affected
by amendments is not supported by a matter referral.
However, such an amendment reference only continues in force
unless the text
reference is terminated
Accordingly, state transitional provisions will not provide
in a matter referral for the previous operation of a Commonwealth law if the
relevant text reference is terminated.
Continued Operation
without Transitional Provisions
What happens, in the event of a termination of a referral, if a state
referral Act does not continue a matter referral in force to
support the
previous operation of a Commonwealth law?
An answer is more easily provided in relation to the completed previous
operation than in relation to the uncompleted previous operation of a
Commonwealth law. As Deane J explained in
University of Wollongong v
, if a provision of an organic law such as the
Constitution
is framed so as to act on a
particular reality, a subordinate law made by a parliament cannot
retrospectively deny the existence of that reality if that reality truly
The referred matters power is framed to act on a particular reality:
1 A matter referral engaged the power; and
2 A Commonwealth law based on the referral extended to a state while that
state’s parliament referred the relevant matter.
The completed previous operation of this Commonwealth law would have been
supported by the referral for the entire period of its operation
result, the law would always have extended to the referring state during this
A Commonwealth or state law, which is subordinate to the
Constitution
cannot operate to alter this constitutional reality
retrospectively.
Commonwealth or state law that operated to deny that the Commonwealth law
extended to a given state during that period would be inconsistent
mandatory language of the referred matters powers concerning when the
Commonwealth law extended to that
An answer about the effect of the end of a matter referral on the uncompleted
previous operation of a Commonwealth law is less easily
provided. This is
because the continued operation of a Commonwealth law will be needed for the
rights, privileges, obligations or
liabilities concerned to be completely or
fully exercised, complied with or enforced.
Providing an answer is also complicated because Commonwealth laws that are
based on matter referrals include provisions concerning
their application to
referring or adopting states. The
Business Names Registration Act 2011
Cth Business Names Act
provides examples of these kinds of provisions.
Section 10 of the
Cth Business Names Act
limits the application of that Act and the
Business Names Registration
(Transitional and Consequential
Provisions) Act 2011
(Cth) (together, the ‘National Business
Names Legislation’) to the geographical areas of the referring or adopting
Section 8(5
Cth Business Names
provides that a state ceases to be a referring or adopting state if the
state terminates (as the case requires) its text reference
adoption of the initial versions of the National Business Names Legislation.
Section 8(6) of the
Cth Business Names Act
provides that, subject to certain conditions, a state also ceases to be a
referring or adopting state if its amendment reference
is terminated. This is
despite the fact that the state referral Acts for the National Business Names
Legislation scheme contain provisions
continuing the effect of the amendment
reference to support the previous operation of
the National Business Names
Legislation.
Accordingly, the
Cth Business
would itself prevent the
continued application of the National
Business Names Legislation to the uncompleted previous operation of the
legislation in a state that terminates its matter referrals.
The approach taken in the
Cth Business Names Act
can be contrasted
with the approach taken in the
Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
Cth PPS Act
Cth PPS Act
seeks to apply its
provisions to ‘non-referring states’ by relying on various
Commonwealth legislative powers apart from
the referred matters
approach relies on a patchwork of legislative powers, so it would not
necessarily save the entirety of the previous
operation of the Act for states that became non-referring states due to
ending their matter referrals.
A Better Approach:
Enacting Commonwealth Transitional Provisions
It would be a better approach for future referral schemes to address the
uncertainty concerning the end of matter referrals directly
by enacting
appropriate Commonwealth transitional provisions. These Commonwealth
transitional provisions could be modelled on
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth). That
section, which has counterparts in all state and territory interpretation
statutes, preserves both the completed and
uncompleted previous operation of a
repealed Commonwealth
Ideally, the transitional provisions would be supported by a limited
transitional matter referral despite the principal
matter referrals having ended. This would remove any doubt about whether the
provisions were supported by a Commonwealth legislative power.
Even if the Commonwealth transitional provisions were not supported by a
limited transitional matter referral, the express incidental
Constitution
would probably support the provisions — the express incidental power
enables the Commonwealth Parliament to, among other things,
make laws with
respect to ‘matters incidental to the execution of any power vested by
Constitution
in the Parliament or in either House
The express incidental power is different from the implied incidental power.
The implied incidental power, which is said to inhere
in each legislative power
conferred on the Commonwealth Parliament, is a power to legislate in relation to
matters that are incidental
or ancillary to the subject matter of a legislative
power if they are necessary to effectuate the main purpose of that
has been recognised that the implied incidental power is concerned with matters
incidental to the
subject matter
of a specific Commonwealth legislative
power while the express incidental power is concerned with matters incidental to
the exercise
of legislative
It is arguable that the implied incidental power cannot be relied upon to
support Commonwealth transitional provisions for a matter
referral that has
ended because the subject matter of that referral has gone. Nonetheless, as the
express incidental power applies
to exercises of legislative power, it is
arguable that transitional provisions could be supported by that power because
those provisions
deal with a previous exercise of legislative power vested in
the Commonwealth Parliament by a matter referral. Provisions are
‘incidental’
for the purposes of the express incidental power if
they deal with ‘something which attends or arises in [the exercise of the
legislative power]’.
Nevertheless,
it has been said that provisions enacted on the basis of either the implied or
express incidental power must be reasonably
and appropriately adapted to the
pursuit of an end within the main legislative
Commonwealth transitional provisions, which are aimed at facilitating the
orderly winding up of the
operation of a Commonwealth law based on a matter referral, would seem to
satisfy both of these tests.
Commonwealth transitional provisions that are supported by the express
incidental power would not be inconsistent, in the relevant
sense, with the
mandatory language of the referred matters power. This is because these
provisions ensure the effective continuation
of the Commonwealth law for the
limited purposes of saving the completed previous operation of the law and
enabling its uncompleted
operation to be completed. These provisions are
entirely tethered to the rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities that
matter referrals undoubtedly supported their creation, exercise or
enforcement. These provisions affirm, rather than deny, that the
Commonwealth
extended to the state while the matter referrals were in force.
Nevertheless, the most constitutionally secure support for Commonwealth
transitional provisions remains a limited transitional matter
VI The Fourth Issue:
Enacting a Commonwealth Law Adoption Instead of a Matter Referral
The Question of
There are at least two reasons why a state may prefer to enact a Commonwealth
law adoption instead of a matter referral. One reason
is that the state may not
be able to meet the timetable for enacting the matter referral. The other reason
is that the state may
wish to take a ‘wait and see’ approach
concerning the
practical operation of a referral scheme in other states.
The question of timing is often a significant issue when it comes to
Commonwealth law adoptions. Consideration of that question is necessitated by
the very language of the referred matters power.
A Power Subject to a
Qualification
The referred matters power confers a power to make laws with respect to a
matter referral subject to an express qualification. That
qualification is that
‘the law shall extend only to States by whose Parliaments the matter is
referred, or which afterwards
This qualification recognises that a Commonwealth law based on the referred
matters power can extend to states if their parliaments
‘afterwards adopt
The use of the
expression ‘afterwards adopt the law’ suggests that the framers of
the referred matters power considered
it necessary to provide an alternative to
deal with situations where a state parliament did not refer the relevant matter
time that the Commonwealth law (on the subject matter of that putative
referral) was enacted. Its use also suggests that the framers
of the power did
not think that a state parliament could refer a matter after the
relevant Commonwealth law was enacted — otherwise, including the words
‘afterwards adopt the law’ would have been
unnecessary.
Some commentators have asked whether a law adopted by a state parliament is a
Commonwealth law or a state
respect, it cannot be right to say that it is a state law. As former Chief
Justice Robert French has noted, writing extra-curially:
[I]t is difficult to see how the language of [s 51(xxxvii)] could contemplate a
law [that relies on the referred matters power] somehow changing its
character from federal to State depending upon whether it applied
to a referring
or an adopting
the referred matters power, ‘the law’ that can be
‘afterwards’ adopted picks up the language used in the
Constitution
, namely ‘laws
for the peace, order, and good government
Commonwealth
The adopted law
is necessarily a Commonwealth law.
The Drafting Approach
for Commonwealth Law Adoptions
It is useful to consider the approach taken to the drafting of state statutes
that provide for Commonwealth law adoptions. These statutes
‘state adopting Acts’ in this article.
Contemporary state adopting Acts tend to adopt the version of the
Commonwealth law as in force at the time of its adoption coupled
amendment reference to enable the law to be subsequently amended in its
application to the adopting state. The
Personal Property Securities
(Commonwealth Laws) Act 2011
WA PPS Adopting Act
provides an example of this approach.
Section 6(1) of the
WA PPS Adopting
provides that the ‘relevant version of
the Commonwealth PPS Act is adopted within the meaning of [the referred matters
The ‘relevant version of the Commonwealth PPS Act’ is
defined in s 3 of the
WA PPS Adopting Act
to mean, in effect, the
as originally enacted and as later amended by the
Property Securities
(Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
Personal Property
Securities (Corporations and Other Amendments) Act 2010
(Cth) and the
Personal Property Securities (Corporations and Other Amendments) Act 2011
(Cth). Significantly, this definition does not capture the
Cth PPS Act
in force from time to time. Rather, it is limited to the version of the
, as amended, up until the time of that Act’s adoption.
Section 6(2) of the
WA PPS Adopting Act
provides that the adoption of the Commonwealth PPS Act has effect for a period
commencing when s 6(1) of the
WA PPS Adopting
commences and ‘ending at the end of the day fixed [by the
Governor] under section 7 as the day on which the adoption is to
terminate, but
no longer’.
Section 8(1) of the
WA PPS Adopting Act
provides that the
referred PPS matters in relation to personal property (other than fixtures and
water rights) are referred to the Parliament of the
Commonwealth on the day on
which [s 8(1)] commences, but only to the extent of the making of laws with
respect to those matters in
relation to property of that kind by making express
amendments of the Commonwealth PPS
‘Commonwealth PPS Act’ is defined in s 3 of the
WA PPS Adopting
to mean, in effect, the
Cth PPS Act
as in force from time to
This amendment reference mirrors the amendment reference given by the states
that originally referred the text for the
Section 8(6) of the
WA PPS Adopting Act
provides that the
amendment reference has effect for a period commencing when the
‘subsection under which the reference is
made commences’ and
‘ending at the end of the day fixed [by the Governor] under section 9 as
the day on which the reference
is to terminate, but no longer’.
Section 10 makes it clear that it is the
intention of the Parliament of WA that the Commonwealth PPS Act can be amended
by the Commonwealth
Parliament using its legislative powers both on account of,
or apart from, a reference of any matters, or the adoption of the relevant
version of the Commonwealth PPS Act, under the referred matters power.
There is an important difference to note between
the amendment reference and the adoption in the
WA PPS Adopting Act
Section 8(5
)(a) of the Act
expressly provides
that a matter referred by the amendment reference in s 8(1) has effect only if,
and to the extent that, the matter
is not included in the legislative powers of
the Commonwealth Parliament otherwise than by a reference for the purposes of
the referred
matters power. This means, in effect, that matters in s 8 are not
effectively referred if the Commonwealth Parliament already has
legislative
power with respect to those matters. However, the adoption is not limited to the
provisions of the relevant version of
the Commonwealth PPS Act that rely
exclusively on a matter referral for their enactment. Instead, under s 6(1) of
WA PPS Adopting Act
, the whole of the ‘relevant version of the
Commonwealth PPS Act’ as defined in s 3 of that Act is adopted.
What Needs To Be
The open-textured language of the qualification in the referred matters power
creates some uncertainty about what needs to be adopted
for the purposes of
satisfying that qualification.
considering this uncertainty, it is useful to distinguish between a
‘principal law’ and an ‘amending law’.
‘principal law’ is legislation that contains substantive legal
provisions that are not limited to the repeal or amendment
legislation.
An ‘amending
law’ is legislation that is limited to provisions that either repeal or
amend legislation (or both).
The approach of combining a Commonwealth law adoption with an amendment
reference is typically used for an adoption of a Commonwealth
law that is based
on a text reference for a Bill for a new principal Commonwealth
The use of this approach may be
explained by three inferences that can be drawn from the expression
‘afterwards adopt the law’
in the qualification in the referred
matters power.
First, the need for a state parliament to ‘afterwards adopt’ the
Commonwealth law suggests that a state parliament, in
the absence of an
amendment reference, would need to adopt a Commonwealth law each time that law
is amended because adoptions must
occur after the relevant Commonwealth law
provisions are enacted.
Combining an
amendment reference with a
Commonwealth law adoption avoids the need to adopt each new version of
the Commonwealth law resulting from that law’s amendment.
This can be contrasted with the approach taken by WA to amendments made in
2021 to the
Mutual Recognition Act 1992
(Cth). The State, which had
previously adopted the entire Commonwealth Act, adopted only the amendments that
had been made to the
Act without disturbing the Act’s previous
With respect, the adoption of
only the amendments to a principal Commonwealth law is pointless. Textual
amendments made to a principal
law by an amending law do not have legal effect
unless and until they commence and are incorporated into the text of the
law. What requires adoption is not the amendments — it is the
principal Commonwealth law as amended.
Secondly, the expression ‘afterwards adopt the law’ directs
attention to ‘the’ law rather than ‘a’
law enacted by
the Commonwealth Parliament based on a matter referral. The use of the definite
article to identify what is capable
of being adopted presupposes that a
Commonwealth law will rely exclusively on a matter referral to support the
enactment of all of
its provisions. This may explain why state adopting Acts
tend to adopt the whole of a principal Commonwealth law as in force at the
of its adoption.
However, a Commonwealth law does not always rely exclusively on a matter
referral for its enactment. For instance, as we have seen,
relies on legislative powers apart from the referred matters power to
ensure that some of its provisions can apply to so-called ‘non-referring
The fact that a Commonwealth law does not expressly rely on alternative heads of
legislative power does not mean that its provisions
are unsupported by those
powers. A Commonwealth law may be supported by more than one head of
legislative power
simultaneously.
In such cases, it is unnecessary to find the sole or dominant character of a
Commonwealth law provided that there is a sufficient
connection with at least
one head of power to support the
provisions concerned.
It is also important to appreciate that the usual drafting practice for
matter referrals is to provide for the referral of a matter
to have effect if
and to the extent that the Commonwealth Parliament does not otherwise have
legislative power with respect to that
main object of matter referrals is to fill gaps in the Commonwealth’s
legislative powers rather than to support the enactment
of a Commonwealth law in
its entirety.
With this in mind, it is suggested that the adoption of a principal
Commonwealth law could be limited to the adoption of provisions
for which the
Commonwealth Parliament does not have legislative power (apart from the matter
referral). There is no need (and, arguably,
no power) for an adopting state to
adopt Commonwealth provisions that would apply to that state even without their
adoption. Limiting
an adoption in this way would be consistent with the language
of the referred matters power, which limits adoptions to Commonwealth
are based on matter referrals given by other
would also be consistent with the drafting practice mentioned above of providing
for a matter to be referred only if and to the
extent that the Commonwealth
Parliament does not already have independent legislative power with respect
to that matter.
Even if this is the correct constitutional approach for Commonwealth law
adoptions, state adopting Acts that purport to adopt the
whole of a Commonwealth
law without distinguishing between the sources of Commonwealth legislative power
that support its provisions
are likely to withstand constitutional challenge.
This is because state interpretation statutes enable courts to read down
of state statutes that would otherwise be in excess of state
legislative power.
A state adopting
Act that adopted the whole of a
Commonwealth law could be read down to adopt only the provisions that relied
exclusively on the matter referral for their validity.
Thirdly, the requirement in the referred matters power for a state parliament
to adopt ‘the’ law rather than ‘a’
law also suggests a
limitation on the power of an adopting state to choose which provisions of a
Commonwealth law based on a matter
referral to adopt.
, Williams J said that
[t]here is no reason to suppose that the framers of the
Constitution
intended that legislation of the Commonwealth Parliament with respect to matters
referred to it by a State Parliament should have a different operation in
State to its operation in a State which afterwards adopts the
In the absence of
this limitation, a state parliament would be free to choose its own version of
the Commonwealth law rather than
the law that the Commonwealth Parliament had
actually enacted based on a matter referral. This limitation would therefore
a state parliament from declining to adopt some of the provisions of a
Commonwealth law based on a matter referral simply because
it found them
uncongenial. A state parliament must adopt either all of the provisions or none
of them. This may be another reason
why Commonwealth law adoptions tend to adopt
the whole of a Commonwealth law as in force at the time of its adoption.
This limitation also has an important consequence for amendments to a
principal Commonwealth law. A state adopting Act that adopts
the version of a
principal Commonwealth law that is fixed at the time of its adoption without
providing an amendment reference would
result in the adoption failing when the
law is next amended in its application to referring states. This is because the
amended principal
law would have a different operation in the referring states
than in the adopting state.
A possible drafting technique to avoid this result would be for a state
adopting Act to adopt the principal Commonwealth law as in
force from time to
time. This anticipatory adoption of amendments could be expressed as being
limited to the amendments supported
by the amendment reference given by the
referring states. However, such an approach is not free from doubt. In
particular, can it
be said that a state parliament has ‘afterwards
adopt[ed]’ provisions that have not yet been enacted? The safer course
a Commonwealth law adoption remains the adoption of the relevant provisions of
the principal Commonwealth law at the time of
adoption coupled with an amendment
reference that mirrors the reference given by referring states.
VII Conclusion
James Madison argued that the cause of liberty within a nation is best
secured through the division of power between different governments,
between different branches of the same government, because doing so establishes
a system of government with appropriate
division of power inherent in any federated nation means there are often
issues of national concern that require cooperative action
by the nation’s
polities because each polity lacks sufficient legislative power to address
those issues on its own.
It has been argued elsewhere that the referred matters power ought to be used
for Australian cooperative legislative schemes only
as a last resort principally
because its use encourages unwelcome ‘centralisation’ in
Australia’s federal system
and a lack of state political
accountability.
However, as we have
seen, decisions of the High Court have imposed significant limitations on the
capacity of cooperative legislative
schemes that are grounded in state law to
involve the Commonwealth and its courts and
instrumentalities.
limitations can only be overcome if a cooperative legislative scheme is
grounded in Commonwealth law rather than state
Referral schemes
provide this grounding.
This article has examined uncertainties concerning the scope of the referred
matters power by focusing on four drafting issues that
legislative drafters
commonly need to consider when preparing legislation for schemes that rely on
the power. It has been argued
that these uncertainties are either overstated or
can be addressed using appropriate drafting techniques. Consequently, the
thesis of this article is that the referred matters power offers a
constitutionally sound cooperative mechanism to allow the Commonwealth
states to legislate for issues of national concern when they individually have
insufficient legislative power to do so.
* LLB, LLM (Syd). Former Deputy Parliamentary Counsel, New South Wales
Parliamentary Counsel&#82
s Office. Unless
otherwise specifically indicated, the views expressed in this article are my
personal views and should not be taken
to reflect the views of the Commonwealth
or any state or territory, their respective legislative drafting offices or the
Australasian
Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee. I thank Chief Justice Lucy
McCallum of the Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory for kindly reviewing earlier versions of this
article. I also thank the referees and editors who were
burdened with reviewing
and editing this article for their suggestions. All errors, at least those in
this article, are mine.
Melbourne Corporation v
Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 26
(1947) 74 CLR 31
, 83 (Dixon J);
Constitution
Union Steamship Co of Australia Pty
[1988] HCA 55
(1988) 166 CLR 1
, 9 (Mason CJ, Wilson,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ). See also
Australia Act
Australia Act 1986
(UK) ss 2, 5.
(1920) 28 CLR 129
, 144, 153–4 (Knox
CJ, Isaacs, Rich and Starke JJ).
See, eg, Graeme AR Johnson, ‘The
Reference Power in the Australian
Constitution
[1973] MelbULawRw 4
(1973) 9(1)
University Law Review
See Nicolas Moses, ‘Re-Evaluating
the Role of the Referral Power in Australian Federalism: A Tool of Last
[2023] UWALawRw 1
(2023) 50(1)
University of Western Australia Law Review
For a discussion of the different
approaches to, and the taxonomies used for, cooperative
legislative schemes, see generally Guzyal Hill, ‘Referred, Applied and
Mirror Legislation as
Primary Structures of National Uniform Legislation’
(2019) 31(1)
Bond Law Review
Constitution
51(xxxvii).
See Anne Twomey,
Constitution
New South Wales
(Federation Press, 2004) 813.
The referral scheme for proceeds of
crime (sometimes called ‘unexplained wealth’) is a rare example of a
referral scheme
involving only the Commonwealth and two states: see
of Crime Act 2002
div 2, which relied on a matter referral
Unexplained Wealth (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2018
Unexplained Wealth
Referral Act
’) and was adopted by
Unexplained Wealth (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2021
(SA). Before South
Australia’s adoption of the scheme, New South Wales (‘NSW’)
was the only participating jurisdiction:
see Natalie Skead et al,
‘Pocketing the Proceeds of Crime: A Case for Reform of Criminal Property
Confiscation Legislation
in New South Wales, Queensland and Western
(2021) 45(1)
Criminal Law Journal
National Redress Scheme
for Institutional Child Sexual Abuse (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2018
WA Redress Scheme Adopting Act
Personal Property
Securities (Commonwealth Laws) Act 2011
WA PPS Adopting
The committee consists of the heads of
the legislative drafting offices of the Commonwealth, each of the states, the
Australian Capital
Territory (‘ACT’), the Northern Territory
(‘NT’) and, for relevant projects, New Zealand: ‘About
Australasian Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee
https://pcc.gov.au/about.html
>, archived at
https://perma.cc/QHQ3-A7CV
>. For information
some referral schemes, see ‘National Uniform Legislation: Official
Australasian Parliamentary Counsel’s Committee
(Web Page) <
https://pcc.gov.au/uniform_legislation_official_versions.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/TZ7L-95XL
Business Names
Registration Act 2011
(Cth) div 3.
National Consumer Credit
Protection Act 2009
(Cth) div 2.
Corporations Act 2001
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) div 3 (‘
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), as amended by
Family Law Amendment Act 1987
Amendment (De Facto Financial Matters and Other Measures) Act
Fair Work Act 2009
Personal Property
Securities Act 2009
(Cth) div 2 (‘
Cth PPS Act
Mutual Recognition Act
Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Act 1997
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) s 100.3.
Water Act 2007
See below nn
–8 and accompanying text.
Explanatory Memorandum,
Corporations
(Cth) 10 [17]. See generally
Corporations Act 1989
Constitution
New South Wales v Commonwealth
(1990) 169 CLR 482
, 503 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh
Corporations (New South Wales)
Corporations (Northern Territory) Act
Corporations (Queensland) Act 1990
Corporations (South
Australia) Act
Corporations (Tasmania)
Corporations
(Victoria) Act
(Vic) pt 2;
Corporations (Western
Australia) Act 1990
See also Governor, ‘
Corporations (New
South Wales) Act 1990
No 83: Proclamation’ in New South Wales,
South Wales Government Gazette
, No 180, 24 December 1990, 11457, 11457.
Corporations Act
(Cth) applied the ‘Corporations Law’ set out in
(and regulations made under that Act) to the ACT. The
Corporations Act
(Cth) was later repealed by the
Corporations (Repeals,
Consequentials and Transitionals) Act 2001
See above n
(2000) 202 CLR 535
, 558 [46] (Gleeson
CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and
Callinan JJ) (‘
’). For an analysis of
) and its implications, see
generally Dennis Rose, ‘The Hughes Case: The Reasoning, Uncertainties and
[2000] UWALawRw 12
(2000) 29(2)
University of Western Australia Law Review
(1999) 198 CLR 511, 551 [39] (McHugh
J), 577 [113] (Gummow and Hayne JJ, Gleeson CJ agreeing at 540 [3], Gaudron J
agreeing at 546
[26]), 625 [256] (Callinan J).
Corporations (Commonwealth
Powers) Act 2001
NSW Corporations Referral
Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Act
Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Act
Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Act
Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2001
Corporations
(Commonwealth Powers) Act
The Commonwealth relied on
its power under s
Constitution
to apply the
Corporations Act
(Cth) and the
) to the ACT and the NT:
Corporations
See ‘Key Documents in the
History of Australian Corporate Law’,
Melbourne Law School
https://law.unimelb.edu.au/centres/mccl/research/research-programs/corporate-law-and-financial-regulation/resources/history/key-documents-in-the-history-of-australian-corporate-law
archived at <
https://perma.cc/V9PM-4KJS
See, eg, Robert S French, ‘The
Referral of State Powers’ (2003) 31(1)
University of Western
Australia Law Review
19, 27; Hill (n
) 92, citing John Wanna et al,
Strengthening Australia’s Cooperative Federalism
(Final Report,
https://www.caf.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/976942/Common-Cause-Strengthening-Cooperative-Federalism.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/MB95-JD4U
Ross Anderson, ‘Reference of
Powers by the States to the Commonwealth’ (1951) 2(1)
University of Western Australia Annual Law Review
1, 6. See also
Sande v Registrar, Supreme Court (Qld)
(1996) 64 FCR 123
(Lockhart J) (‘
Graham v Paterson
[1950] HCA 9
(1950) 81 CLR
, 21–2 (McTiernan J) (‘
[1964] HCA 15
(1964) 113 CLR 207
Ibid 226 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Ibid 225 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Ibid. Section
Commonwealth Powers (Air Transport) Act
(Tas), which was considered in
Ex parte ANA
), provided that
he matter of air transport is referred to
the Parliament of the Commonwealth’: see at 221 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
) 130 (Lockhart J), citing
) 225 (Dixon CJ, Kitto,
Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Commonwealth Powers (De
Facto Relationships) Act 2003
Commonwealth Powers (Family
Law—Children) Act 1986
Industrial Relations
(Commonwealth Powers) Act 2009
NSW Industrial
Relations Referral Act
Personal Property Securities
(Commonwealth Powers) Act 2009
Referral Act
National Redress Scheme for
Institutional Child Sexual Abuse (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2018
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
(definition of ‘initial referred provisions’).
(definition of ‘scheduled text’).
Business Names
(Commonwealth Powers) Act 2011
(definitions of ‘tabled
text’, ‘initial business names matters’ and ‘continuing
business names matter’),
NSW Business Names Referral
NSW Corporations Referral Act
) ss 3(1) (definitions of ‘referred
provisions’ and ‘tabled text’), 4(1)(a);
NSW PPS Referral
) ss 3 (definitions of
‘initial referred provisions’ and ‘tabled text’),
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
See Explanatory Note, Corporations
(Commonwealth Powers) Bill 2001 (NSW)
concerns the purpose of the expression ‘substantially in the
terms’ as found in cl 4(1)(a) of
the Corporations (Commonwealth Powers) Bill 2001 (NSW).
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
) ss 3 (definition of ‘text
reference’), 4(1).
NSW Industrial Relations
Referral Act
(definition of ‘initial reference’), 5(1)(a);
NSW PPS Referral
) ss 3 (definition of
‘reference’), 6(1).
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
(definition of ‘National Redress Act’).
(definition of ‘express amendment’).
The concept of ‘express
amendment’ appears to have been first used in the
NSW Corporations
Referral Act
s 3(1) (definition of ‘express
amendment’). For another example, see
PPS Referral Act
(definition of ‘express amendment’).
NSW Redress Scheme Referral
) s 3 (definition of ‘amendment
reference’).
Water (Commonwealth
Powers) Act 2008
(definition of ‘amendment
reference’), 4(1)(b);
NSW PPS Referral Act
) ss 3 (definition of ‘amendment
reference’), 6(2)–(4).
P Buchanan, ‘The Queen v Public
Vehicles Licensing Appeal Tribunal of Tasmania; Ex parte
Australian National Airways Ltd’
[1965] FedLawRw 3
(1965) 1(2)
Federal Law Review
NSW Industrial Relations
Referral Act
) s 5(1)(a);
NSW PPS Referral Act
) 225 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor, Menzies,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Ibid. See above n
and accompanying text.
NSW Industrial Relations
Referral Act
(definition of ‘initial referred
provisions’), 5(1)(a), sch 1.
Thomas v Mowbray
[2007] HCA 33
’), Kirby J’s reasoning presupposed
that an amendment reference could be limited to express amendments of a
Commonwealth
Act because his Honour found that the amendments concerned did not
fall within the definition of ‘express amendment’
in the relevant
state referral Act: at 379–80 [203]–[207]. The reasoning of
Hayne J upholding the amendments also necessarily presupposed that such a
limitation is
constitutionally effective: see at 461–2 [452]–[455].
See above Part III(B).
See above n
and accompanying text.
See below Part V(C).
Commonwealth Powers Act
Mutual Recognition (New South
Wales) Act 1992
(NSW) sch 1 (‘
NSW Mutual Recognition
Referral Act
Ibid s 4(3).
Ibid s 4(1)(b).
Ex parte ANA
) 226 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor, Menzies,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
) 382 [213], where Kirby J said that
‘[a]s the language of the
Constitution
makes clear, the reference
power belongs to the Parliaments of the States and only to
those Parliaments’.
Constitution
Constitution
of Queensland
Constitution
Constitution
(Tas) pt II;
Constitution
(Vic) pt IV;
Constitution
Acts Amendment Act 1899
(WA) pt II.
NSW Mutual Recognition Referral
See below nn
–18 and accompanying text.
NSW Mutual Recognition Referral
) s 5A, as inserted by
Mutual Recognition (New South Wales) Amendment Act 2021
(NSW) sch 1 item
NSW Mutual Recognition Referral
Ibid ss 5A(1)–(3).
Constitution
(emphasis added).
Airlines of NSW Pty Ltd v New South
[1964] HCA 2
(1964) 113 CLR 1
, 38 (Taylor J, Kitto J agreeing at 30), 53 (Windeyer
Airlines of NSW
’). See also
) 19 (Latham CJ, Fullagar J agreeing at
26), 22 (McTiernan J), 25 (Williams J), 25 (Webb J).
) 19–20 (Latham CJ, Fullagar J
agreeing at 26), 24 (Williams J), 25 (Webb J).
Carter v Egg & Egg Pulp
Marketing Board
[1942] HCA 30
(1942) 66 CLR 557
, 573 (Latham CJ), 599
(Williams J, Rich J agreeing at 581) (‘
v A-G (Vic)
[1961] HCA 32
(1961) 106 CLR 268
, 274 (Fullagar J), 278 (Kitto J, Menzies J
agreeing at 286), 282–3 (Taylor J, Menzies J agreeing at 286,
Windeyer J agreeing at 286).
Ex parte McLean
[1930] HCA 12
(1930) 43 CLR
, 483–4 (Dixon J);
Clyde Engineering Co Ltd v Cowburn
, 489 (Isaacs J).
R v Credit Tribunal; Ex parte
General Motors Acceptance Corporation
[1977] HCA 34
(1977) 137 CLR 545
563–4 (Mason J, Barwick CJ agreeing at 552, Gibbs J agreeing at 552,
Stephen J agreeing at 552, Jacobs J agreeing at 565).
See above n
and accompanying text.
Cth PPS Act
) ss 243, 254.
See above n
and accompanying text.
R v Licensing Court of
Brisbane; Ex parte Daniell
[1920] HCA 24
(1920) 28 CLR 23
, where inconsistency arose when
the relevant state law required a referendum to be held on a particular day and
the relevant Commonwealth law prohibited referendums being held on that day:
(Knox CJ, Isaacs, Gavan Duffy, Powers, Rich and Starke JJ), 32 (Higgins
Colvin v Bradley Brothers
[1943] HCA 41
(1943) 68 CLR 151
, where a Commonwealth law permitted women to be
employed in a particular industry and a state law made it an offence for an
in that industry to employ women in that industry: at 160 (Latham CJ),
162 (Starke J), 164 (Williams J).
Corporations Act 2001
(definition of ‘Corporations legislation’).
(definition of
ss 5G(3)(b)
items 3, 5,
(definition of
The pejorative use of the term can be
traced to the
Proclamation by the Crown Act 1539
, 31 Hen 8, c 8, also
known as the
Statute of Proclamations
, which stated:
[T]he Kinge for the tyme beinge with thadvice of his honorable Counsell ...
may set forth at all tymes ... pclamacons, under suche
penalties and paynes and
of suche sorte as to
his Highnes and his seid honorable Counsell ... shall see necessarie and
requisite; And that those same shalbe obeyed observed and
kept as thoughe they
were made by Acte
of Parliament ...
ADCO Constructions Pty Ltd v
(2014) 254 CLR 1, 6 n 10 (French CJ, Crennan, Kiefel and Keane
James Hardie (Civil
Liability) Act 2005
Legal Profession Uniform Law 2014
(NSW) ss 108(5), 258(6);
AGL Corporate Conversion Act 2002
[1931] HCA 34
(1931) 46 CLR 73
, 84 (Gavan Duffy CJ
and Starke J), 101 (Dixon J, Rich J agreeing at 86–7), 124 (Evatt J).
Ibid 83–4 (Gavan Duffy CJ and
Starke J), 101 (Dixon J, Rich J agreeing at 86–7), 117 (Evatt J).
See, eg, Gerald Ng, ‘Slaying
the Ghost of Henry VIII: A Reconsideration of the Limits upon the Delegation of
Commonwealth Legislative
[2010] FedLawRw 7
(2010) 38(2)
Federal Law Review
[1992] HCA 51
(1992) 177 CLR 248
Corporations Bill 2001
which made up part of the tabled text referred to the
Commonwealth Parliament by the
NSW Corporations Referral Act
), included the
winding back provisions: see
Corporations Bill 2001
(Cth) cls 5F, 5G, 5I. See
NSW Corporations Referral Act
) ss 3(1) (definitions of ‘referred
provisions’ and ‘tabled text’), 4(1)(a).
Section 4(1)(b) of the
Corporations Referral Act
refers the matters of the formation of corporations,
corporate regulation and the regulation of financial products and services to
the Commonwealth Parliament but only to the extent of the making of laws with
respect to those matters by the making of express amendments
to the Corporations
legislation. Amendments made to
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), which would necessarily affect the extent to which the Corporations
legislation applied in relation to those matters, would
seem to fall within this
amendment reference: see
NSW Corporations Referral Act
) s 4(1)(b).
) 69–75. See also French (n
) 25–7, citing
Official Record
of the Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
, Melbourne, 27 January
1898, 217 (Alfred Deakin), 218 (John Quick), 222–3 (Isaac Isaacs), 223
(Richard O’Connor); Andrew
Lynch, ‘After a Referral: The Amendment
and Termination of Commonwealth Laws Relying on s 51(xxxvii)’
[2010] SydLawRw 17
(2010) 32(3)
Sydney Law Review
) 226 (Dixon CJ,
Kitto, Taylor, Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Constitution
Constitution
(NSW) ss 3 (definition of ‘The
Legislature’), 5;
Constitution
(Qld) ss 1–2A;
Constitution
(SA) ss 4–5;
Constitution
(Tas) s 10;
Constitution
(Vic) ss 15–16;
Constitution
Acts Interpretation Act
Interpretation Act 1987
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
Acts Interpretation
Interpretation Act 1984
NSW Industrial
Relations Referral Act
Terrorism (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2002
Terrorism Referral Act
Parliamentary Counsel’s
Protocol on Drafting National Uniform Legislation
(Protocol, 21 February 2018) 4 [4.3].
See Victoria,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 20 March 2001, 302–3 (Stephen Bracks,
See above nn
–3 and accompanying text.
Constitution
51(xxxvii).
See ibid ss 1,
See above n
and accompanying text.
A recent example is the
Recognition (New South Wales) Amendment Bill 2021
(NSW), which was amended
during its passage through the Parliament of NSW (although not in relation to
the scope of the matter referral):
New South Wales,
Parliamentary
, Legislative Council, 10 June 2021, 5994–5 (Mark
Buttigieg).
Airlines of NSW
) 38 (Taylor J, Kitto J agreeing at 30),
52 (Windeyer J). See also
Ex parte ANA
) 226 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor, Menzies,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Ex parte ANA
) 226 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor, Menzies,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
NSW Terrorism Referral
NSW Industrial Relations Referral Act
ss 5(5), 7(1).
NSW Terrorism Referral
NSW Industrial
Relations Referral Act
NSW Corporations
Referral Act
Unexplained Wealth Referral Act
) s 11. Andrew Lynch has questioned
whether a power to extend a referral is valid, although he concedes that it is
less objectionable
if a state parliament is capable of revoking the extended
matter referral: Lynch (n
Some judges have questioned, or
left open the issue of, whether a state parliament has the power to revoke an
indefinite matter referral:
) 25 (Webb J);
Airlines of NSW
) 53 (Windeyer J);
Ex parte ANA
) 226 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ);
) 131 (Lockhart J).
Gould v Brown
(1998) 193 CLR 346, 486 [287] (Kirby J), citing
Cobb & Co Ltd v Norman
Eggert Kropp
[1967] 1 AC 141
, 157 (Lord Morris for the Court). A complete
renouncement or abdication of legislative power is to be distinguished from
permissible manner and form requirements for the exercise of
legislative power: cf
Australia Act 1986
Australia Act 1986
) 226 (Dixon CJ,
Kitto, Taylor, Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Ibid 225 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
It was suggested in
Australia v Commonwealth
[1942] HCA 14
(1942) 65 CLR 373
, 416 by Latham CJ that:
A State Parliament could not bind itself or its successors not to legislate
upon a particular subject matter, not even, I should think,
by referring a
matter to the Commonwealth
Parliament under
(xxxvii) of the
Constitution
decision upon that provision is called for in the present case.
Ex parte ANA
(Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor,
Menzies, Windeyer and Owen JJ).
Ex parte ANA
) 226 (Dixon CJ, Kitto, Taylor, Menzies,
Windeyer and Owen JJ).
) 19–20 (Latham CJ, Fullagar J
agreeing at 26), 22 (McTiernan J), 24–5
(Williams J), 25 (Webb J).
See Twomey (n
See, eg, W Anstey Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia
ed, 1976) 171.
See Johnson (n
) 69–70. See also Lynch (n
The other example of a legislative
power requiring state participation is
s 51(xxxviii)
Constitution
which enables the Commonwealth Parliament to make laws with respect to
the exercise within the Commonwealth, at the request or with the concurrence
of the Parliaments of all the States directly concerned,
of any power which can
at the establishment of [the
Constitution
] be exercised only by the
Parliament of the United Kingdom or by the Federal Council of Australasia.
) 573 (Latham CJ).
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
See, eg, French (n
) 33, in which it is asserted (without
the provision of reasons) that ‘[a]bsent any other provisions, it would be
expected that
[the Commonwealth law] would continue in force for there is
nothing in the grant of the power which makes the laws under it self-terminating
upon revocation of the referral’. This assertion has been criticised for
having a lack of basis (whether textual or otherwise):
see Lynch (n
Anderson (n
Constitution
51(xxxvii).
Anderson (n
NSW Redress Scheme
Referral Act
PPS Referral Act
NSW Industrial Relations Referral Act
NSW Redress Scheme
Referral Act
PPS Referral Act
NSW Industrial Relations Referral Act
See generally
NSW Corporations
Referral Act
Recognition Referral Act
See above n
and accompanying text.
(1984) 158 CLR 447, 478.
This argument is not inconsistent
R v Corbett
[2004] 1 Qd R 146
that case, the Queensland Court of Appeal held that a provision of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) could validly extend to acts occurring before
the matter referral for the Act commenced:
(n 145) 160–1 [30]–[31] (Davies JA, Williams JA agreeing at 161
[33], Jerrard JA agreeing at 161 [34]). However, the Court
held that the
provision was distinguishable from a provision that purported to create or
assert the facts necessary to engage the
legislative power used to enact the
provision (which would be invalid): at 159 [21] (Davies JA, Williams JA agreeing
at 161 [33],
Jerrard JA agreeing at 161 [34]).
See above n
and accompanying text.
NSW Business Names Referral
Business Names
(Commonwealth Powers) Act 2011
Business Names
(Commonwealth Powers) Act 2012
Business Names (Commonwealth
Powers) Act 2011
Business Names (Commonwealth
Powers) Act 2011
(Vic) s 9(2);
Business Names (Commonwealth Powers)
WA Business Names Adopting
Cth PPS Act
) pt 7.3 div 2. See especially at s
Legislation Act 2001
Interpretation Act 1987
Interpretation Act 1978
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
Interpretation of
Legislation Act 1984
Interpretation Act 1984
Grannall v Marrickville
Margarine Pty Ltd
[1955] HCA 6
(1955) 93 CLR 55
, 77 (Dixon CJ, McTiernan,
Webb and Kitto JJ).
Le Mesurier v Connor
[1929] HCA 41
, 497–8 (Knox CJ, Rich and Dixon JJ) (‘
’), cited in Garry A Rumble, ‘
Section 51(xxxix)
Constitution
and the Federal Distribution of Power’
[1982] FedLawRw 10
(1982) 13(2)
Federal Law Review
Le Mesurier
) 497 (Knox CJ, Rich and Dixon JJ),
Gazzo v Comptroller of
Stamps (Vic)
[1981] HCA 73
(1981) 149 CLR 227
, 236 (Gibbs CJ).
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
, 29–30 (Mason CJ) (‘
’), discussing
Davis v Commonwealth
(1988) 164 CLR 79.
Nationwide News
93–4 (Gaudron J), 101–5 (McHugh J). But see at 87–9 (Dawson
Constitution
51(xxxvii).
See James A Thomson,
‘Adopting Commonwealth Laws: Section 51(xxxvii) of the Australian
Constitution
(1993) 4(3)
Public Law Review
, 156, citing Ross
Anderson, ‘The States and Relations with the Commonwealth’ in
Justice Else-Mitchell (ed),
Essays on the Australian
Constitution
ed, 1961) 93, 93, 112–13, PH Lane,
Commentary on the Australian
Constitution
(Law Book, 1986) 276–7,
571–88, Leslie Zines,
The High Court and the
Constitution
(Butterworths, 3
ed, 1992) 330–3, Johnson (n
) 69–75. See also French (n
) 31. See also Twomey (n
Emphasis added.
WA PPS Adopting Act
) s 4(1) (definition of
‘referred PPS matters’).
NSW PPS Referral Act
) ss 4, 6(2);
Personal Property
Securities (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2009
Property Securities (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2009
Personal Property Securities (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2009
(Tas) ss 4,
Personal Property Securities (Commonwealth Powers) Act 2009
Part VI(B).
NSW Government, ‘Types of NSW
NSW Legislation
(Web Page, 28 November 2023) <
https://legislation.nsw.gov.au/information/types-of-nsw-act
archived at <
https://perma.cc/ZL6Q-8MRQ
WA Business Names Adopting Act
WA Redress Scheme Adopting Act
Constitution
51(xxxvii).
On the difference between inferences and implications, see James
Edelman, ‘Implications’
(2022) 96(11)
Australian Law Journal
) 156–7. See also Twomey (n
Mutual Recognition (Western
Australia) Act 2020
Part VI(C).
See above n
and accompanying text.
Actors & Announcers
Equity Association of Australia v Fontana Films Pty Ltd
(1982) 150 CLR 169
192 (Stephen J), 201–2 (Mason J, Aickin J agreeing at 215), 216 (Brennan
Actors & Announcers
’). See also
Commonwealth
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353
, 372–3 (Barwick CJ).
Actors & Announcers
) 190–2 (Stephen J), 202 (Mason
J, Aickin J agreeing at 215),
221–2 (Brennan J);
Commonwealth v Tasmania
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
(Mason J), 270
(Deane J), cited in James Stellios, ‘Constitutional Characterisation:
Embedding Value Judgements about the Relationship between
the Legislature and
the Judiciary’
[2021] MelbULawRw 15
(2021) 45(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
295. See also
Cunliffe v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
(1994) 182 CLR 272
, 334 (Deane J),
394 (McHugh J);
Leask v Commonwealth
[1996] HCA 29
(1996) 187 CLR 579
(Gummow J), 633 (Kirby J).
NSW PPS Referral Act
NSW Industrial Relations Referral Act
See above n
and accompanying text.
Interpretation Act 1987
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
Interpretation of Legislation Act 1984
Interpretation
(n 36) 24. See also
James Madison, ‘The
Federalist No 51: The Structure of the Government Must Furnish the Proper Checks
and Balances between the
Different Departments’ in Alexander Hamilton,
James Madison and John Jay,
The Federalist Papers
, ed Ian Shapiro (Yale
University Press, 2009) 263, 263–5.
See, eg, Moses (n
See above n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (341 KB)
PDF format (318 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter