URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mason, Scott --- "Fiscal Federalism Run Amuck: How to Make the False Claims Act Work when the Government Defrauds the Government" [2004] IntTBLawRw 7; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 183
Fiscal Federalism Run Amuck: How to Make the False Claims Act 2000 Work When the Government Defrauds the Government
Introduction
The court’s struggle to apply the FCA to municipal corporations
An alternative interpretation: municipal corporations are not persons under the FCA
A proposed statutory revision: liability for municipal corporations, but only compensatory damages
Fiscal Federalism Run Amuck: How to Make the False
Claims Act 2000 Work When the Government Defrauds the Government
Scott Mason
Introduction
Although one might not realise it given the recent publicity about a
‘fiscal crisis’ facing the US,
the federal government
distributes hundreds of billions of dollars to state and local governments every
According to the US Department of Commerce, in 2002 the
federal government distributed $362 billion to state and local governments
through over 700 grant programmes.
Although scholars have long
debated the proper division of fiscal responsibility in this system of
intergovernmental dependency known
as ‘fiscal federalism,’
this article will focus on a more practical problem associated with local
government access to federal grant money: fraudulent claims
presented by
employees of municipal corporations
who receive these federal funds.
A recent spate of lawsuits brought under the
provisions of the federal False Claims Act (FCA)
demonstrates
that these municipal employees are looting millions of federal taxpayer dollars.
For example, in
United States ex rel Garibaldi v Orleans Parish School
, an auditor for the Orleans Parish School Board brought a
suit after discovering that 90 percent of the unemployment and
workers’ compensation claims that the board charged to the federal
government were false.
The claims were for employees who were not
working in federally-funded programmes and were therefore ineligible for federal
unemployment
and workers’ compensation.
As a result of these
false claims, the federal government lost $7.6 million.
In another case,
United States ex rel Chandler v Cook County,
, a doctor at a Chicago hospital brought a
discovering that several other doctors falsified information to keep a $5
million federal grant.
The doctors had requested the funds to study
the effects of a new form of treatment on drug-addicted pregnant women.
During the course of the study, the doctors failed to follow numerous
procedures stipulated in the terms of the grant.
misrepresented the success of the study by reporting ‘ghost’
patients and filling out phony ‘progress
reports’ to make it appear
that these taxpayer funds were put to their intended use.
provision seemed like the ideal vehicle to
expose and prosecute this government waste. The FCA provides liability for any
makes a false or fraudulent claim for payment by the federal
government.
Violators are liable for treble damages and are subject
to fines ranging from $5,000 to $10,000 for each false claim.
encourage prosecution of suits the federal government would not otherwise know
provision to give private persons an
incentive to blow the whistle on their employers when they discover fraud
against the federal
government.
Under this provision, the
claimant (the relator) may file suit on behalf of the federal
government.
In the event of a successful suit, the relator may
recover between 10 and 30% of the judgment, plus expenses and attorney
The amount the relator may recover depends on two factors:
the extent he participates in the prosecution of the suit; and the amount
otherwise unavailable information he provides to the government.
Although relators have successfully used the FCA against private contractors
since its enactment in 1863,
courts have struggled with recent
attempts to apply the FCA to municipal corporations. In particular, two problems
prompted disagreement
among the courts. One problem was that the FCA provides
liability for any ‘person’ violating the statute, but the statute
contains no definition of the term ‘person’.
courts disagreed on whether municipal corporations were ‘persons’
subject to FCA liability.
The second problem was that the FCA
provides treble damages and automatic fines for violators.
municipal corporations are traditionally immune from punitive damages, courts
disagreed on whether the FCA’s treble
damages applied to municipal
corporations.
During 2001 and 2002, the three federal circuit courts to consider these
issues reached opposite conclusions.
The Third and Fifth Circuits
held that municipal corporations were not subject to FCA liability.
By contrast, the Seventh Circuit held that municipal corporations could be
held liable under the FCA.
The United States Supreme Court, in
Cook County v Chandler
, recently sided with the Seventh Circuit, holding
that municipal corporations were ‘persons’ under the FCA and could
be subject to its treble damages.
Because of the
ruling, municipal corporations are now subject
to the FCA’s treble damages and fines, notwithstanding their status as
taxpayer-supported
government entities. Considering the fiscal crisis currently
facing local governments, it is unfortunate that the court sanctioned
further financial burden on municipal corporations.
Furthermore, a
closer look at the historical context of the FCA demonstrates that Congress
never intended municipal corporations
to be targets of the FCA.
Nevertheless, municipal corporations will remain subject to the Supreme
Court’s ruling unless Congress acts to eliminate the
problem of excessive
damages awards.
This article will outline the process by which America’s highest court
came to the conclusion that municipal corporations may
be compelled to pay
excess damages to the federal government for the wrongdoing of their
Next, this article will argue that the proper
interpretation of the FCA is that municipal corporations are not included in the
definition of ‘persons’.
Finally, this
article will propose a revision to the FCA that subjects municipal corporations
only to compensatory damages, rather
than treble damages and fines.
This revision will allow the federal government to continue recovering
money wrongfully taken through fraud, without burdening local
governments any
further with excess damage awards.
The court’s struggle to apply the FCA to
municipal corporations
Under the common law, courts have long considered municipal corporations
immune from punitive damages.
This is because when punitive damages
are assessed against a taxpayer-supported government entity, neither the
retributive nor the
deterrent goals of punitive damages are furthered.
The only parties punished by punitive damage awards against municipal
corporations are taxpayers, who generally play no part in the
wrongdoing that
prompts such awards.
Furthermore, punitive awards against
governments serve no deterrent purpose, because taxpayers exercise very little
control over
the government officials’ conduct that gives rise to such
For these reasons, municipal corporations are generally
immune from punitive damages unless a statute provides otherwise.
However, if Congress, in enacting the FCA, subjected municipal corporations
to treble damages, courts would have to apply the FCA
to them despite any
policy-based objections. Although municipal corporations are immune from
punitive damages at common law, nothing
Constitution
prohibits Congress
from subjecting them to lawsuits
or punitive damages.
Thus, the issue confronting the courts that faced the new wave of
municipal FCA suits was not whether Congress should impose treble
liability on
municipal corporations, but whether Congress actually did so.
resolve the issue of municipal liability under the FCA, the courts had to
determine whether municipal corporations were among
the ‘persons’
subject `to FCA liability.
Courts face a difficult task when interpreting statutory terms, and they
often aid their understanding by using interpretive presumptions.
However, the courts found it especially difficult to interpret the term
‘person’ in the FCA, because the FCA’s features
implicated two
conflicting presumptions. The first presumption was that municipal corporations
are included in statutory definitions
of ‘person’.
second presumption was that municipal corporations are
statutes that impose punitive damages.
Obviously, municipal
corporations could not be both included in and excluded from the FCA’s
definition of ‘person’.
Thus, the courts came to different
conclusions with respect to municipal liability depending on which of these
presumptions they
applied, and whether they determined that the opposing parties
successfully rebutted the presumptions.
In the first federal appellate decision to consider the issue, the Fifth
Circuit, in
United States ex rel Garibaldi v Orleans Parish School Board
found that municipal corporations are not ‘persons’ under the
To reach this conclusion, the court applied only the second
rule, the presumption that municipal corporations are not subject to
The court noted that imposing punitive damages on
municipal corporations is contrary to sound public policy because it punishes
who had nothing to do with the wrongdoing that prompted the
Next, the court determined that the FCA contained no
language indicating that municipal corporations could be held liable.
Thus, the court held that municipal corporations were not included in the
FCA’s definition of ‘person’, and therefore
were not subject
to the FCA’s treble damages.
One year later, the Third Circuit agreed in
United States ex rel Dunleavy
v County of Delaware
, holding that municipal corporations are not
‘persons’ subject to FCA liability.
court, the Dunleavy court applied the rule that municipal
corporations are presumed immune from punitive damages unless Congress expressly
provides otherwise.
For two reasons, the court determined that
Congress did not provide express authorisation for municipal liability. First,
noted that in a previous decision involving the federal RICO statute,
which also imposes treble damages, the court had determined
that municipal
corporations are not ‘persons’ under that statute.
Next, the court pointed out that several federal statutes define
‘person’ to include municipal corporations.
reasoned that Congress could have likewise amended the FCA to include explicitly
municipal corporations if it intended
to subject them to FCA liability.
For these reasons, the court concluded that municipal corporations are not
included in the FCA’s definition of ‘person’,
and are not
subject to the FCA’s treble damages.
However, at the same time the Seventh Circuit reached the opposite conclusion
United States ex rel Chandler v Cook County, Illinois
, holding that
municipal corporations are ‘persons’ subject to the FCA’s
treble damages.
To reach this conclusion, the court used a
completely different method of interpretation, which incorporated both of the
presumptions
governing municipal corporations.
First, the court
noted that municipal corporations are ‘presumptively included in the
definition of “person”’.
Applying this
presumption, the court found that neither the original text of the FCA nor any
of its amendments excluded municipal
corporations from the definition.
Thus, because the court applied a rule in which municipal corporations
were presumed included, rather than presumed excluded, the
court found that
municipal corporations were ‘persons’ subject to FCA liability.
court also considered the presumption that municipal
corporations are excluded from liability under the FCA because of its punitive
However, the court determined that because of certain
features of the FCA’s damages, municipal corporations were included in
FCA’s definition of ‘persons’ despite this presumption.
First, the court found that the policy reasons for protecting taxpayers
from punitive damages awards were not applicable because the
themselves were enriched by the municipal employees’ fraudulent
Secondly, the court found that the concern over excessive
damages did not apply because the FCA provided fixed treble damages and
give courts discretion to award excessive damages.
Thus, the court
held that, despite the presumption that municipal corporations are immune from
treble damages, they are among the
‘persons’ subject to liability
under the FCA.
As the preceding discussion reflects, the courts’ determinations of
municipal liability varied depending on how each court approached
its analysis
of the FCA’s text. Courts that applied only the presumption of municipal
immunity from punitive damages held that
municipal corporations are not liable
under the FCA.
However, the Seventh Circuit, which applied both the
presumption of municipal personhood and the presumption of municipal immunity,
determined that municipal corporations are ‘persons’ subject to FCA
The circuits remained split on the issue of municipal
liability under the FCA until early in 2003, when the United States Supreme
Court finally resolved the issue in the appeal from the Seventh Circuit’s
United States ex rel Chandler v Cook County, Illinois
, the Court affirmed the Seventh Circuit’s ruling,
holding that municipal corporations are ‘persons’ subject to
The court applied the presumption that municipal
corporations are ‘persons.’
However, the court also
noted that the presumption is ‘not immutable’ and that municipal
corporations may be excluded
from the definition of ‘persons’ if the
circumstances indicate that they should be excluded.
The court then
addressed Cook County’s arguments that municipal corporations were not
included in the definition of ‘person’.
First, Cook County argued that municipal corporations were not among the
parties targeted by the FCA, which were private Civil War
contractors.
However, the court rejected that argument, finding
that the FCA should be construed broadly to reach all types of fraud.
The county also argued that municipal corporations were not capable of
committing the frauds the FCA was designed to remedy.
rejected this argument as well, finding that municipal corporations were capable
of committing the harms to be remedied
by the FCA.
Thus, the court
determined that Cook County did not overcome the presumption that municipal
corporations are included in the FCA’s
definition of
Next, the court considered the presumption that municipal corporations are
excluded from punitive damages.
The court found that the
presumption did not prevent municipal corporations from being held liable for
treble damages under the FCA.
Like the Seventh Circuit, the court
found that the FCA’s treble damages differed from punitive damages because
the FCA did
not allow courts discretion to award large damages.
court also found that treble damages were ‘necessary for complete
recovery’ for the federal government because part
of the damages go to the
relator and make up for pre-judgment interest.
However, the primary reason the court determined that the presumption of
municipal immunity did not apply was that it conflicted with
yet another
presumption: that ‘repeals by implication are disfavoured’.
According to the court, to hold that municipal corporations are exempt
from the FCA’s treble damages would require a finding
that Congress
impliedly excluded them from liability
The court explained that
the original FCA, which included municipal corporations as
‘persons’, only provided double damages.
court noted that in 1986, Congress amended the FCA to include treble damages,
but did not change the term ‘person’.
according to the court, because municipal corporations were included in the
definition of ‘person’ when the
FCA was enacted, the only way they
could have been excluded from the 1986 revision’s treble damages would be
if Congress ‘wordlessly
redefined “person” to exclude
municipalities’ when it amended the FCA.
Because the court
deemed such a finding ‘implausible’, it found that municipal
corporations are not excluded from the
FCA’s definition of
‘person’ and are therefore subject to its treble damages.
An alternative interpretation: municipal
corporations are not persons under the FCA
As Karl Llewellyn long ago demonstrated, for every rule of statutory
construction, there is another one that will compel the opposite
conclusion.
decision is a perfect illustration
of this phenomenon. When the presumption of municipal immunity suggested that
municipal corporations
are not persons,
the court countered it by
invoking the presumption against repeals by implication,
would not have applied but for the court’s initial use of the presumption
of municipal personhood.
The court’s application of this
bewildering array of presumptions led to the conclusion that municipal
corporations may be
compelled to pay treble damages under the FCA.
However, the crucial flaw in the
court’s ruling was not
the court’s selection of which presumptions to use, but the court’s
use of a presumption
not found in the authorities it cited. A presumption is a
legal assumption that a fact is true unless its opponent proves it false.
court cited
Monell v Dep’t of Social
and several other authorities, in support of the
‘presumption’ that municipal corporations are persons.96 But
merely used the ‘presumption’ of municipal personhood
as one of several extrinsic aids to interpret the statute at issue
in the case,
the Civil Rights Act of 1871.
court did not
assume that municipal corporations were persons absent a contrary
court took a rule designed to be
an interpretive aid and converted it into
prima facie
proof of municipal
personhood.
As the following discussion will illustrate, the result
is an interpretation of the FCA that is inconsistent with the statute’s
purpose and beyond anything contemplated by the Congress that enacted it.
The proper use of the municipal personhood rule is best illustrated by the
most recent decision the
court cited,
Monell v Dep’t of
Social Services
, the Supreme Court held that
municipal corporations are ‘persons’ under the Civil Rights Act of
To support its holding, the
court cited
several reasons that specifically related to the historical context of the Civil
Rights Act:
1 Congress had expressly stated, in pre-enactment debates, that the Act
should be construed as broadly as possible because it was
designed to secure
‘the preservation of human liberty and human rights’;
2 municipal corporations were capable of inflicting the harms that the Civil
Rights Act was designed to remedy;
3 Congress expressly stated in
pre-enactment debates that members of Congress understood ‘persons’
to include municipal
corporations;
4 when the Civil Rights Act was enacted in 1871, municipal corporations were
presumed persons for virtually all statutory construction
After considering all four of these factors, the
concluded that municipal corporations were included in the Civil Rights
Act’s definition of ‘person’.
As the foregoing discussion reflects, the ‘presumption’ that
municipal corporations are persons was simply one of several
extrinsic aids the
court used to interpret the Civil Rights Act of 1871.
court considered this ‘presumption’
prima facie
proof that municipal corporations are included in the
FCA’s definition, and placed the burden on Cook County to prove
However, a more accurate statement of the
rule is that whether municipal corporations are ‘persons’ under
any given statute depends on congressional intent, determined
by reference to
the historical context of the statute’s enactment.
comparison of the historical contexts of the FCA and the Civil Rights Act,
applying the same criteria used by the
court, reveals that if the
court had properly used the rule of municipal personhood as an
interpretive aid rather than a ‘presumption’, it may have
that municipal corporations are not included in the FCA’s definition of
First, unlike the Civil Rights Act, the FCA was not intended to be construed
broadly. When Congress enacted the Civil Rights Act,
one Congressman
specifically stated that the Act should be construed as broadly as possible to
advance the statute’s purpose
of securing human rights and
By contrast, Congress made no similar statements prior
to enacting the FCA.
On the contrary, Congress indicated that the
FCA was designed for the more discrete and specific purpose of protecting the
treasury from unscrupulous contractors.
Thus, the first
criterion, broad construction, does not support the conclusion
that municipal corporations are ‘persons’ under the FCA.
Secondly, in 1863 municipal corporations were not ‘capable of
committing the harms to be remedied’ by the FCA, as distinguished
finding that they were capable of violating the Civil
Rights Act when that statute was enacted.
A municipal violation of
the Civil Rights Act would have been likely in 1871, because such a violation
could potentially arise out
of any transaction between a municipal corporation
and an individual.
But a municipal violation of the FCA could only
arise out of a transaction between a municipal corporation and the federal
government.
At the time Congress enacted the FCA, this sort of
transaction would have been unlikely, because such transactions were virtually
non-existent in 1863.
In the 19th century, the federal government did not distribute cash grants to
local governments.
Although the federal government had several
land grant programmes in 1863, the current system of conditional money grants to
and local governments is a 20th century phenomenon.
established the first systematic cash grants in the early 20th century,
and these grants only developed into the pervasive scheme of subsidies in
existence today after the New Deal revolution of the 1930s
and the ‘Great
Society’ reforms of the 1960s.
As potential recipients of
these funds, municipal corporations are capable of violating the FCA
but this was not true in 1863.
Thus, at the
time the FCA was enacted, municipal corporations were not ‘capable of
committing the harms to be remedied by the
Thirdly, unlike the debates over the Civil Rights Act, the debates preceding
the FCA’s enactment did not contain any statements
to suggest that
Congress understood ‘persons’ to include municipal
corporations.
Upon introducing the bill proposing the FCA, the
sponsor indicated that the Act applied to persons in the military, defence
contractors,
and persons neither in the military nor contracting with the
Although Congress debated whether defence contractors
should be subjected to military courts-martial, as the FCA originally required,
none of the statements suggested that municipal corporations would be among the
nonmilitary and non-defence contractor targets of
the debates preceding enactment of the FCA provide no basis for the conclusion
that municipal corporations are included in
the FCA’s definition of
As the foregoing discussion reflects, the FCA differs from the Civil Rights
Act under three of the four criteria that supported the
court’s conclusion that municipal corporations are
‘persons’ under the Civil Rights Act. The only relevant similarity
between the two statutes is that both contain the undefined term
‘person’ and are therefore subject to the ‘presumption’
of municipal personhood. However, the
court only used this
‘presumption’ to find municipal corporations liable under the Civil
Rights Act after finding that
three other clues from the historical context of
the statute supported such a finding.
court done a similar analysis, instead of predetermining the analysis with a
prima facie
rule of municipal personhood, it would have found no other
indications that municipal
corporations were included in the FCA’s definition of
Thus, if the
Court applied
the presumption of municipal personhood consistently with the authority it
cited, the court could have concluded that
municipal corporations are not
‘persons’ under the FCA and are not subject to the FCA’s
treble damages.
A proposed statutory revision: liability for
municipal corporations, but only compensatory damages
Regardless of any academic criticism of the
decision, its
ruling means that municipal corporations are now subject to treble damages and
fines for the wrongdoing of their employees.
The unfortunate
consequences of this ruling were most recently illustrated with the revival of
judgment against the Orleans Parish School Board.
, the federal district court for the Eastern District
of Louisiana recently granted
’s petition to revive the
$22 million judgment against the school board.
In response, school
board officials stated that the board would be unable to pay the judgment
without cutting educational services.
The potential fiscal burdens
placed on the Orleans Parish School Board by the
illustrate why local governments are traditionally immune from punitive
case also illustrates why
legislative reform is necessary to prevent other local governments from facing
such onerous and unnecessary
treble damages awards.
Congress can reduce local governments’ exposure to the FCA’s
treble damages awards by changing the FCA’s damages
scheme. The revised
scheme should reduce damages awards against municipal corporations, while
retaining enough of an incentive for
relators to come forward and
expose municipal government fraud. To achieve this balance, Congress should make
the following changes
to the FCA: 1) eliminate the treble damages and fines that
apply to municipal corporations; and 2) provide that municipal corporations
the relators’ fees when held liable.
First, Congress should exempt municipal corporations from the FCA’s
treble damages. The FCA currently imposes treble damages
and fines on all
Instead, the damages scheme should be split so that
private entities may still be subject to treble damages and fines, but municipal
corporations will only be subject to compensatory damages and relators’
fees. Although it may seem more appropriate to eliminate
the treble damages
altogether, so that all classes of legal entity receive equal treatment,
complete elimination of the FCA’s
treble damages would defeat the purpose
of the 1986 amendments.
Congress trebled the damages in the 1986 amendments specifically to enhance
the FCA’s incentives for private relators.
Because the vast
majority of FCA suits are brought against private contractors,
eliminating the treble damages altogether is a less sensible alternative
than providing separate damages schemes for private and municipal
defendants. If
Congress eliminated treble damages, it would reduce the incentives that have
prompted so many successful suits against
private entities to reach a
comparatively small number of municipal entities involved in fraudulent
A statute with separate damages schemes for private and
municipal defendants would be more appropriate, because it would ensure that
FCA retains its current incentives vis-à-vis suits against private
entities, without forcing municipal taxpayers to pay
excess damages for
municipal fraud.
Additionally, the extra fines the FCA imposes should not apply to municipal
corporations. Currently, the FCA subjects violators to
penalties ranging from
$5,000 to $10,000 for each violation.
The fines apply regardless
of the dollar amount of the false claim.
However, courts have
occasionally held that FCA fines violated the Eighth Amendment, because the
fines were so disproportionate to
the amount of the claims that the courts
considered them ‘excessive fines’.
disproportionate fines have not yet surfaced in a suit against a municipal
corporation, eliminating the fines, at least
as to municipal corporations, will
ensure that such a problem does not arise in future litigation.
Because relators must be compensated to provide an incentive for FCA
enforcement,
the revision also must provide for relators’
fees. Specifically, the revision should provide that any municipal corporation
held liable must pay the relator’s fee of 10 to30% of the damages.
This requirement would shift the cost of the relator’s fee, because
the fee is currently deducted from the federal government’s
rather than assessed against the defendant.
However, differences
between treble and compensatory damages justify shifting the relator’s fee
from the federal government
to offending municipal corporations.
Because the FCA’s current damages are treble, deducting the
relator’s fee from the federal government’s recovery
currently does
not result in under-compensation for the federal government.
However, if the FCA is amended to provide compensatory damages, any fee
deducted from the federal government’s recovery would
deny the government
a portion of its compensation. If one party must bear the burden of compensating
the relator, it should be the
wrongdoer, rather than the victim. Thus, under the
revised FCA, any municipal corporations found liable should pay the
fee. Forcing municipal corporations to bear this burden would
require them to pay a measure of extra-compensatory damages, but these
would be much smaller than the treble damages required under the current
Such a compromise poses little likelihood of ‘undue
fiscal constraints’ on municipal corporations.
importantly, this compromise is essential to ensure the continued use of the FCA
to prosecute municipal fraud.
When Congress enacted the False Claims Act in 1863, it intended to remedy
fraud perpetrated by private corporations.
At the time, Congress
could not have contemplated the extensive federal subsidies to state and local
governments that now allow these
governments to defraud the federal government
Because the current system of intergovernmental grants
did not exist in the 19th century, the Congress of 1863 never considered the
possible consequences of municipal liability under the FCA, which would have
been different than liability for private corporations.
result, prior to the Supreme Court’s
decision, courts were
understandably reluctant to infer that Congress intended municipal corporations
to be liable.
Because the federal government distributes over $300 billion to state and
municipal governments every year,
Congress must ensure that the
FCA remains viable against these entities, to deter further mischief by
municipal recipients of federal
funds. However, Congress also needs to bear in
mind that punitive damages against municipal corporations are disfavoured,
such damages only punish taxpayers, who are already being looted by the
perpetrators of municipal fraud.
Thus, any revision to the FCA
should expressly include municipal corporations, but limit damages against them
to compensatory damages.
With such a revision, Congress can ensure that cheated
taxpayers have a remedy against municipal fraud, without making some of the
taxpayers pay for it again three times over.
* JD, Loyola University, New Orleans. Attorney. 1 See eg Dan Bals,
Cash-Strapped Governors Seek Aid; Bipartisan Request for Help to
Education, Security, Seattle Times, 25 February 2003 at A4 (describing how the
states are facing the ‘worst fiscal
crisis in half a century’ and
detailing state governors’ requests for further federal aid); See also
letter from Paul
E Patton, Governor of Kentucky, and Dirk Kempthorne, Governor
of Idaho, to Don Nickles, Senator and Chairman of the Senate Budget
Kent Conrad, Senator and Ranking Member of the Senate Budget Committee, Jim
Nussle, Representative and Chairman of the
House Budget Committee, and John M
Spratt, Representative and Ranking Member of the House Budget Committee (11
March 2003), at http://www.nga.org/nga/legislativeUpdate/letterDetailPrint/
1.1421,5152,00.html (describing ‘unprecedented budget challenges’
and the impact of unfunded federal mandates and requesting
funding for
federally-mandated education and
public safety programmes).
US Census Bureau, US Dep’t of Commerce, Federal Aid to States for
Fiscal Year: 2002 (2003).
‘Fiscal Federalism’ is defined as the division of economic
functions between the ‘different levels of government,
and the ways in
which they relate to one another through such instruments as intergovernmental
grants’. Wallace E Oates, An
Essay on Fiscal Federalism, 37
1120 (1999). Scholars who favour local control over spending, as
opposed to centralised federal financing of government services,
centralised financing is undesirable because the government officials
responsible for spending are further away from,
and therefore less accountable
to, the taxpayers. See Michael S Greve, ‘Against cooperative
federalism’,
, 558 (2000) (arguing that
‘co-operative federalism’, a broader term that denotes state
enforcement of policies set by
the federal government, fiscal or otherwise,
‘undermines political … accountability … diminishes policy
competition
among the states, and erodes self-government and liberty’). On
the contrary, proponents of centralised federal funding prefer
a centralised
system because it is more likely to promote an equitable distribution of
resources. See Deborah R McFarlane and Kenneth
J Maier, ‘Do different
funding mechanisms produce different results? The implications of family
planning for fiscal federalism’,
J Health Pol, Pol’y & L
423, 448 (1998) (arguing that ‘without a strong national presence
exemplified by tightly constructed federal statutes and categorical
federalism can lead to great regional inequities’).
‘Municipal corporation’ means essentially the same thing as a
unit of local government, but the term is subject to a
great deal of
definitional confusion. According to one classic treatise, municipal
corporations are ‘incorporated cities, towns
and villages having
subordinate and local powers of legislation’. Eugene McQuillin, The Law of
Municipal Corporations s 2.07.10
(3rd edn, 2003, Deerfield, IL: Callaghan and Company). However, a more recent
treatise rejects the use of the term ‘municipal
corporation’ to
describe local governments because it has been applied to cities, towns and
villages, but not to counties or
‘special purpose’ local government
entities such as school boards or levee districts. John Martines, Local
Law s 2.02 (2002)
???details???
. Because courts applying the
FCA have used the term ‘municipal corporation’ to refer to both the
cities, towns and villages
of the traditional McQuillin definition and the
counties and special purpose units discussed by Martines, the term, for the
of this article, will encompass all five of these types of local
government unit.
’ comes from the phrase ‘
qui tam pro
domino rege, quam pro se ipso in hac parte sequitur
’, which means
‘who pursues this action on our Lord the King’s behalf as well as
his own’. Vermont Agency
of Natural Res v United States ex rel Stevens,
[2000] USSC 47
, 769 (2000) (citing 3 William Blackstone, Commentaries 160). The qui
tam provision of the False Claims Act enables individuals, upon
discovering
fraud, to file ‘whistleblower’ suits against their employers on
behalf of the federal government. 31 USC
s 3730 (2000). See below fnn
15–20 and accompanying text for a more detailed discussion of the FCA and
the qui tam provision.
31 USC. ss 3729–33 (2000).
United States ex rel Garibaldi v Orleans Parish Sch Bd
21 F Supp 2d
, 611 (ED La 1998),
[2001] USCA5 139
244 F 3d 486
(5th Cir, 2001),
22174241 (ED La 18 September 2003).
United States ex rel Garibaldi v Orleans Parish Sch Bd
[2001] USCA5 139
, 488 (5th Cir, 2001),
Cook County, Illinois v United
States ex rel Chandler
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
(2003). The damages included $4.6
million from the board’s unemployment compensation programme and $3
million from the workers’
compensation programme.
[2002] USCA7 26
277 F 3d 969
, 971–72 (7th Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 1897
United States ex rel Chandler v Hektoen Inst for Med Research
Supp 2d 1078
, 1080 (ND Ill
[2002] USCA7 26
277 F 3d 969
, 971–72 (7th Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
31 USC s 3729(a) (2000). The FCA provides liability for any person who (1)
knowingly presents, or causes to be presented, to an
employee of the Government
of the United States or the Armed Forces of the United States, a false or
fraudulent claim for payment
or approval; (2) knowingly makes or uses a false
record or statement to get a false or fraudulent claim paid or approved by the
Government;
(3) conspires to defraud the Government by getting a false claim
allowed or paid; (4) possesses Government property or money and,
with intent to
defraud the Government, delivers less than the amount for which the person
receives a certificate or receipt; (5)
authorised to deliver a document
certifying receipt of property to be used by the Government, delivers such a
receipt without knowing
that the information on the receipt is true; (6)
knowingly buys property from the Government from someone not authorised to sell
such property; (7) knowingly uses a false record or statement to conceal, avoid,
or decrease an obligation to pay or transmit money
or property to the
government. 31 USC s 3729(a) (2000).
31 USC s 3729(a) (2000).
Cong Globe, 37th Cong, 3d Sess 956 (1863) (quoting the statement of one
senator during the debates preceding enactment of the FCA,
in which he said that
provisions were based ‘upon the old-fashioned idea of
holding out a temptation, and ‘setting a rogue to catch
a rogue,’ which is the safest and most expeditious way
… of bringing rogues to justice’).
31 USC. s 3730(b) (2000).
, s 3730(d).
31 USC s 3730(d) (2000). After the relator files suit, the government may
either intervene and prosecute the action itself, or decline
to intervene and
allow the relator to prosecute the suit.
. If the government
intervenes, the relator may recover between 15 and 25% of the proceeds of the
claim. 28 USC s 3730(d) (2000).
However, if the action is primarily based on
information derived from another source, such as a pending indictment or a news
account, then the relator may only recover 10%.
government declines to intervene, the relator may recover between 25 and 30% of
the proceeds of any judgment.
Richard A Bales, ‘A constitutional defence of
2001 Wis L Rev 381
, 388–90 (2001) (detailing the history of the FCA).
According to Bales, the FCA has primarily been used against defence contractors,
beginning with its enactment during the Civil War era. Bales,
388–90. The FCA fell into disuse after the Civil War ended, and was not
regularly used again until the 1930s, when the
federal government expanded its
economic activity pursuant to the New Deal and World War II.
prosecutions declined again in the post-World War II era, and did not re-emerge
again until the 1980s, when Congress amended
the statute in response to
increasing fraud by Cold War defence contractors, most notably the ‘$400
hammers and $600 toilet
United States ex rel Chandler v Cook County, Illinois
[2002] USCA7 26
, 974 (7th Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
(2003) (noting that
Congress provided no definition of ‘person’ in the FCA’s
liability provision).
United States ex rel Garibaldi v Orleans Parish Sch Bd
[2001] USCA5 139
, 493 (5th Cir, 2001),
Cook County, Illinois v United
States ex rel Chandler
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
(2003) (holding that municipal
corporations are not ‘persons’ under the FCA). Chandler, 277 F 3d at
976 (holding that
municipal corporations are ‘persons’).
31 USC. s 3729(a) (2000) (stating that any ‘person’ who
commits certain fraudulent acts against the federal government
shall be liable
for a fine between $5,000 and $10,000 and three times the amount of the damages
sustained because of the fraud).
, 244 F 3d at 491–92 (noting that local governments
are not subject to punitive damages, and concluding that the FCA’s
damages therefore do not apply to municipal corporations);
F 3d at 977-78 (acknowledging municipalities’ ‘traditional, common
law immunity’ from punitive damages, but
holding that the FCA’s
damages nevertheless apply to municipal corporations).
United States ex rel Dunleavy v County of Delaware
[2002] USCA3 20
279 F 3d 219
226 (3rd Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 2239
123 S Ct 1619
F 3d at 981;
, 244 F 3d at 495.
, 279 F 3d at 226;
, 244 F 3d at 495.
, 277 F 3d at 981.
Cook County, Illinois v United States ex rel Chandler
[2003] USSC 1897
, 1249 (2003).
See Dale Russakoff, Budget Woes Trickle Down; Hard-Hit State and Local
Governments Say Bush and Congress Left Them to Make Cuts,
Raise Taxes, Wash
Post, 15 July 2003, at A1 (describing reductions in state and federal aid to
local governments, which have prompted
local governments to cut services and
increase property taxes).
See below fnn 110–26 and accompanying text (examining the historical
context of the FCA, and arguing that Congress did not
intend municipal
corporations to be liable under the FCA).
See below fnn 44–88 and accompanying text (explaining the decisions
of the federal circuit courts that ruled on the issue
of municipal liability
under the FCA, and the United States Supreme Court decision that held that
municipal corporations are ‘persons’
subject to the FCA’s
treble damages).
See below fnn 89–128 and accompanying text.
See below fnn 129–48 and accompanying text.
City of Newport v Fact Concerts Inc
(1981) (discussing several cases
dating back to the 19th century, in which courts held that municipal
corporations could not be subjected to punitive damages).
Genty v Resolution Trust Corp
[1991] USCA3 740
937 F 2d 899
, 910 (3rd Cir, 1991).
Newport, 453 US at 267. This failure of the retributive purpose is not
unique to municipal corporations, but also applies to private
corporations. As
Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, ‘Punitive damages: an economic
, 951 (1998). As Polinsky and Shavell
have noted, blameless parties also pay when private corporations are assessed
with punitive
damages, because the cost is passed on to consumers in the form of
higher prices, and to shareholders in the form of diminished returns.
, at 951. Nevertheless, other distinctions between
private and municipal corporations support common law immunity for municipal
corporations.
See below fn 38 (discussing the differences in accountability
between private corporate officers and municipal officers).
, 937 F 2d at 911. Although taxpayers may register their
disapproval of municipal conduct on ballots every few years, taxpayers generally
have little practical control over municipal officials’ management of
government functions.
. Furthermore, the only way taxpayers may
disassociate themselves from a municipal corporation upon discovering misconduct
to another location, which is often unfeasible due to practical
factors such as economic means or educational commitments of children.
. By contrast, shareholders of private corporations may monitor their
officers’ conduct through quarterly reports, and may promptly
disassociate
themselves by selling their stock.
, 937 F 2d at
. These differences in accountability explain why municipal corporations
enjoy immunity
from punitive damages, but private corporations do not.
, 453 US at 261 n 21.
Alden v Maine
[1999] USSC 62
, 756 (1999) (stating that Eleventh
Amendment immunity does not extend to municipal corporations, or local
government entities that
are not ‘arms of the state’). 18 Eugene
McQuillin, The Law of Municipal Corporations s 53.01.10 at 134 (3rd edn, 2003)
(noting that unlike the nation and the states, which may not be compelled to
submit to a court’s jurisdiction without their
consent due to their
sovereign status, municipal corporations ‘must submit to any proper legal
action’, regardless of
whether they consent to jurisdiction).
City of Newport
, 453 US at 261 n 21 (stating that punitive damages
are not recoverable from municipal corporations ‘unless expressly
by statute’).
United States ex. rel. Chandler v Cook County, Illinois
[2002] USCA7 26
, 974 (7th Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
(‘The issue is one of statutory interpretation …we must determine
whether Congress, when it enacted the FCA, intended
[municipal corporations] to
be defendants in
United States ex rel
Garibaldi v Orleans Parish Sch Bd
[2001] USCA5 139
244 F3d 486
, 489 (5th Cir, 2001),
Cook County, Illinois v United States ex rel Chandler
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
(2003) (stating that the court must interpret the language of the
FCA to determine whether Congress intended to hold municipal corporations
, 244 F 3d at 490.
2A Norman Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction s 45.13, at 107 (6th
edn, 2000) (noting that ‘the process of statutory
construction is
conditioned by various presumptions which courts consistently apply’).
, 277 F 3d at 974 (citing
Monell v Dep’t of Social
[1978] USSC 102
, 685-89) (noting that municipal corporations are
‘presumptively included within the meaning of
“person”’).
However, see below fnn 97-99 (arguing that Monell
did not establish a ‘presumption’ of municipal personhood, but
observed that municipal corporations are ‘treated as natural
persons for all purposes of … statutory analysis’,
and used that
observation as one of several reasons for finding that municipal corporations
were ‘persons’ under the
statute at issue). As argued herein, the
‘presumption’ of municipal personhood is not a well-established
rule, but a
rule that finds its origin in
’s misapplication
of Monell and other authorities. See below fnn 97–99.
, 244 F3d at 491 (referring to the ‘well-settled
presumption’ that local governments are not subject to punitive damages).
, (holding that municipal corporations are presumed immune from
punitive damages, and that nothing in the text of the FCA indicates
otherwise).
, 277 F 3d at 974-80 (holding that Cook County, the
municipal defendant, did not overcome the presumption that municipal
corporations
are ‘persons’ and that the presumption of municipal
immunity from punitive damages did not prevent a finding that municipalities
subject to the FCA’s treble damages).
, 244 F 3d at 495.
, at 491–92.
, 244 F 3d at 492.
[2002] USCA3 20
279 F3d 219
, 226 (3d Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 2239
123 S Ct 1619
, at 222 (noting that ‘[u]nless Congress clearly provides
otherwise, a local governmental entity is immune from punitive damages
, 279 F 3d at 223-24 (citing
Genty v Resolution Trust
[1991] USCA3 740
937 F 2d 899
, 914 (3rd Cir, 1991). RICO, the Racketeer-Influenced and
Corrupt Organisations Act, 18 USC ss 1961–68 (2000), is a federal
and criminal statute designed to protect the public from criminal organisations
whose activities affect interstate commerce.
Pamela H Bucy and Steven T
An Overview of RICO
, 283 (1990). RICO
makes it unlawful for any ‘person’ associated with an
‘enterprise’ affecting interstate
commerce to participate in the
enterprise’s affairs through a pattern of racketeering activity. 18 USC. s
1962(c) (2000). A
person who is injured in person or property by such activity
may sue and collect treble damages.
, s 1964(c).
, 279 F 3d at 224 (citing the Clean
1362(5) (2000), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC s 6903(15)
(2000), the Wild Bird Conservation Act of
1992, 16 USC s 4903(4) (2000) and the
Oil Pollution Act of 1990, 33 USC s 2701(27) (2000)).
, 279 F 3d at 224.
[2002] USCA7 26
277 F 3d 969
, 981 (7th Cir, 2002).
, at 974–81.
, 277 F 3d at 974.
, 277 F 3d at 977 (stating the issue as whether
‘Congress has made it sufficiently clearthat municipalities do not enjoy
traditional common-law immunity of municipalities from punitive damages for
FCA claims’).
, 277 F 3d at 977–79.
, at 978 (finding that to require taxpayers to pay the
FCA’s treble damages is not unjust because the taxpayers have received,
without justification, the benefit of the municipal employees’ fraudulent
acquisition of federal funds).
, (finding that the FCA does not afford juries broad discretion
in assessing the amount of punitive damage awards, but limits awards
, 277 F 3d at 979 (holding that the presumption of
municipal immunity has been overcome because Congress did not express any
that it wished to exempt municipal corporations from the FCA’s
treble damages).
See above fnn 48–58 and accompanying text (discussing the reasoning
courts’ holdings that
municipal corporations are not ‘persons’ subject to the FCA’s
treble damages).
, 277 F 3d at 974–79 (holding that Cook County did
not overcome the presumption that municipal corporations are
and that the claimant overcame the presumption that
municipal corporations are not subject to punitive damages).
[2003] USSC 1897
123 S Ct 1239
, 123 S Ct at 1249.
, 123 S Ct at 1245.
, (citing United States v Neifert-White Co,
[1968] USSC 41
, 123 S Ct at 1246 (citing
Monell v Dep’t of
Social Services
[1978] USSC 102
, 685–86) (finding that ‘whatever
municipal corporations may have been doing in 1863, in 2003 local governments
are commonly
at the receiving end of all sorts of federal funding schemes and
thus no less able than individuals or private corporations to impose
public fisc’).
, 123 S Ct at 1246.
, 123 S Ct at 1247 (finding that treble damages are not the
same as classic punitive
damages, which give juries open-ended discretion to assess large damages
awards). 83
, at 1248 (citing
Posadas v National City Bank
[1936] USSC 6
, 503 (1936)). 84
, 123 S Ct at 1246.
The court had previously held that the FCA’s original double
damages were ‘remedial’, whereas the treble damages added by the
1986 amendments were ‘punitive in nature’.
Vermont Agency of
Natural Resources v United States ex rel Stevens
[2000] USSC 47
(2000) (holding that states are not ‘persons’ under the FCA).
, 123 S Ct at 1248.
, 123 S Ct at 1248–49.
Karl Llewellyn, Remarks on the theory of appellate decision and the rules
or canons about
how statutes are to be construed,
, 401 (1950).
Llewellyn paired 26 canons side by side with contradictory counterparts.
. For example, ‘a statute cannot go beyond its text’, but
‘to affect its purpose, a statute may be implemented beyond
, 123 S Ct at 1246 (calling a ‘sound premise’
Cook County’s argument that the FCA’s definition of
does not include municipal corporations because of the
presumption of municipal immunity from punitive damages).
, 123 S Ct at 1247 (‘Working against the
County’s position, however, is a different presumption … the
rule that repeals by implication are disfavoured”’
Posadas v National City Bank
[1936] USSC 6
, 503 (1936))).
, at 1248 (holding, after finding that municipal corporations
were included in the FCA’s original definition of ‘person’,
that they could not have been excluded when the 1986 revisions established
treble damages unless Congress ‘wordlessly redefined
to exclude municipalities’).
, 123 S Ct at 1249.
Black’s Law Dictionary 964–65 (7th edn, 2000).
[1978] USSC 102
, 123 S Ct at 1244–45 (holding that municipal
corporations should be treated as natural persons for all purposes of
constitutional
and statutory analysis (citing
, 436 US at 687-88)).
court also cited several 19th century authorities, including
United States v Amedy
[1826] USSC 29
Cowles v Mercer
[1868] USSC 20
(1868). However,
noted that there was no
‘settled course of decisions’ on whether a corporation is a
‘person’ within the meaning
of a statute.
court concluded that private corporations were within the
statute in question because they were equally capable of the ‘mischief
intended to be reached by the statute’, and because they have previously
been held within the purview of other penal statutes.
. Furthermore,
did not involve the issue of statutory construction, but held that
municipal corporations have the capacity to be sued in federal
, 74 US at 121. Most of the other authorities cited by
also concerned municipal corporations’ capacity to sue or be sued. See
, 123 S Ct at 1244. However, as
indicates, capacity
to be sued is simply one of several criteria to consider in determining whether
municipal corporations are persons,
and is not equivalent to a
‘presumption’ that they are persons.
, 436 US at 687.
, 436 US at 683–89 (discussing several facts about the
historical context of the Civil Rights Act that suggested that the Act’s
definition of ‘person’ includes municipal corporations, and then
noting that ‘in addition’ to this evidence,
municipal corporations
were treated as persons for statutory construction purposes by 1871). The Civil
Rights Act of 1871 provided
civil liability for any ‘person’ who,
under colour of state law, deprives any person of federally protected rights,
or immunities. 17 Stat 13 (1871) (codified at 42 USC s 1983 (2000)).
Like the FCA, the Civil Rights Act did not contain a definition
‘persons’ who could be held liable under the Act.
, 436 US at 683–89.
, 123 S Ct at 1244–45 (finding that the term
‘person’ includes municipal corporations, but that the meaning of
is not immutable and may be rebutted).
[1978] USSC 102
, 436 US at 690.
, at 685-86 (‘[m]oreover … municipalities through
their official acts could, equally with
natural persons, create the harms intended to be remedied by
[the Civil Rights Act]’).
, 436 US at 687.
, at 690 (‘[o]ur analysis of the legislative history of
the Civil Rights Act compels the
conclusion that Congress did intend municipalities and other local government
units to be included among those persons to whom s 1983
, at 683–90.
Cook County, Illinois v United States ex rel Chandler
[2003] USSC 1897
, 1245 (2003) (holding that the meaning of ‘person’ is not
immutable, and considering Cook County’s arguments that
the context of the
FCA shows that ‘person’ should have a more limited meaning).
, 436 US at 683 (holding that an examination of the debates
preceding the passage of the Civil Rights Act, and the appropriate rules
construction show that the Civil Rights Act was intended to cover municipal
corporations).
, 436 US at 684.
See Cong Globe, 37th Cong, 3rd Sess 952–8 (1863).
, (quoting one Senator’s statements that he has been
hearing ‘complaints respecting the
frauds and corruptions practiced in obtaining pay from the government during
the present war’ and that ‘further legislation
is necessary to
prevent this great evil’).
, 436 US at 685–86.
, 436 US at 686–87 (referring to the public taking of
private property without compensation as an example of municipal conduct
could give rise to liability under the Civil Rights Act).
See above fn 15 (listing the acts that give rise to FCA liability, all of
which involve actions or statements made in connection
with transactions with
the federal government).
See below fnn 117-20 (discussing the absence of intergovernmental grants
in the 19th century, and the emergence of such grants in
the early 20th
W Brooke Graves, American Intergovernmental Relations 478 (1964). See
also Robert P Inman, ‘Federal assistance and local services
in the United
States: the evolution of a new federalist fiscal order’, in Fiscal
Federalism 36 (Harvey S Rosen, (ed)) (detailing
the development of federal
intergovernmental grant programs from the early 20th century to the present
, fn 80 at 478.
, at 516 (describing three major grant programs established
during the World War I era, which financed agriculture, highways and vocational
education). Graves also notes that Congress’s expansion of grant programs
was a direct consequence of the enactment of the
Sixteenth Amendment, which
allowed the federal government to collect income taxes without apportionment
among the states, US Const
amend XVI, and ‘assured the national government
of a substantial annual income.’ Graves,
, fn 117 at 516.
J Richard Aronson and John L Hilley, Financing State and Local Government
49–50 (1986) (stating that the most ‘explosive’
federal grants to state and local governments took place during the 1930s and
Cook County, Illinois v United States ex rel Chandler
[2003] USSC 1897
, 1246 (2003) (‘Whatever municipal corporations may have been doing in
1863, in 2003 local governments are commonly at the receiving
end of all sorts
of federal funding schemes…’).
Cong Globe, 37th Cong, 3d Sess 953-58 (1863).
United States ex rel Graber v City of New York
8 F Supp 2d
, 352 (SDNY 1998) (‘[N]othing in the available record suggests that
Congress specifically intended to subject states or local
governments to
liability under the Act. Rather, the chief purpose of the Act was to address war
fraud by private contractors’).
Monell v Dep’t of Social Services
[1978] USSC 102
, 683-89 (1978)
(holding that municipal corporations are ‘persons’ under the Civil
Rights Act, after finding that Congress
intended for the Act to be construed
broadly, municipalities were capable of violating the Act at the time it was
enacted, members
of Congress stated that they understood the definition of
‘person’ to include municipalities, and municipalities are
considered persons for statutory construction purposes).
See above fnn 110–126 and accompanying text (analysing the FCA
under the factors that supported
holding that municipal
corporations are persons under the Civil Rights Act and concluding that none of
those factors suggest that
municipal corporations are persons under the FCA,
except for the ‘presumption’ used in isolation by the
, 123 S Ct at 1249 (affirming the Seventh Circuit’s
holding that municipal corporations are subject to liability and treble
under the FCA).
United States ex rel Garibaldi v Orleans Parish School Board
Civ A 96-0464, 2003 WL 22174241 (ED La 18 September 2003).
, 2003 WL at 8.
Brian Thevenot, Federal Judge Revives Ruling Against Schools,
TIMES-PICAYUNE
, 19 September 2003 at A1 (quoting Orleans Parish School Board
President Ellenese Brooks-Simms). Brooks-Simms stated that the board
‘made all the cuts [it] can make on the administrative side, without
touching the schools’, and suggested that the
board would probably have to
work out an instalment plan to pay the federal government if the revived
judgment is upheld on appeal.
Thevenot, above at A6.
City of Newport v Fact Concerts Inc
, 263 (1981)
(noting that one reason for municipal immunity from punitive damages is to avoid
‘undue fiscal constraints’).
31 USC s 3729(a) (2000). The only exception is that the court may order
double damages if a liable party co-operates with the investigation.
United States ex rel Wilson v Graham County Soil and Water
Conservation Dist
, 2002 WL 487162, at 4 (WDNC) (stating that the trebling of
damages was intended ‘to unleash a posse of ad hoc deputies to uncover
prosecute frauds against the government’).
Press Release, US Dep’t of Justice, Justice Department Recovers
Over $1 Billion in FY 2002 (16 December 2002), at
http://www.usdoj.gov/opa/pr/2002/December/02_civ_720.htm
(noting that FCA
recoveries exceed $10 billion since 1986, and listing some of the Department of
Justice’s largest 2002 recoveries
under the FCA, including over $700
million from various pharmaceutical companies, HMOs and hospitals in connection
with Medicare
fraud cases).
See US Dep’t of Justice, above, fn 136 (indicating that the vast
majority of FCA claims are brought against private contractors).
City of Newport v Fact Concerts Inc
, 262-63 (1981)
(discussing the public policy reasons for municipal immunity from punitive
damages, including the need to ‘protect
… the public from unjust
punishment, and municipalities from undue fiscal constraints’).
31 USC s 3729(a) (2000).
United States v Kates,
419 F Supp 846
, 852-53 (ED Pa 1976).
United States ex rel Smith v Gilbert Realty Co
840 F Supp 71
74–75 (ED Mich 1993) (holding that fines of $290,000 for 58 false claims
were excessive and violated the Eighth Amendment,
because they amounted to more
than 178 times the amount of actual damages, which were $1,630). But see
United States v Byrd
100 F Supp 2d 342
, 345 (EDNC 2000) (holding that
fines of $1,320,000 for 264 claims were not excessive, although the actual
damages only amounted to
Jaime Mcmahon, ‘Qui tam can, qui tam can’t: an analysis of
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v United States ex rel Stevens
St U L Rev 1119
, 1119 (2001) (‘[t]he incentive for private citizens to
fight the government’s battles lies in the relator’s ability
collect a portion of the proceeds from the suit’).
The fee could be calculated the same way it is under the current FCA, in
which the compensation depends on the extent to which the
relator assists in
prosecuting the suit. 31 USC. s 3730(d) (2000). See S Rep No 99–345
(1986), reprinted in 1986 USS CAN 5266,
5292–93 (stating that the reason
for variable percentages was to ‘guarantee that relators will receive at
portion of the award’ as an incentive to take the risk of
suit, but still allow courts discretion to adjust it
depending on the relator’s contribution to the prosecution of the suit).
31 USC s 3730(d) (2000).
, s 3729(a) (2000).
31 USC s 3730(d) (2000).
City of Newport v Fact Concerts Inc
, 263 (1981)
(citing ‘undue fiscal constraints’ as a policy rationale for
municipal immunity from punitive damages).
See S Rep No 99–345 (1986), reprinted in 1986 USS CAN 5266, 5279
(describing the need for sufficient incentives to encourage
relators to break the ‘conspiracy of silence among government
contractor employees’ and take the ‘significant personal
associated with exposing government fraud).
See above fn 21 and accompanying text (discussing Congress’s
enactment of the FCA in response to fraud by Civil War defence
contractors).
United States ex rel Graber v City of New York
8 F Supp 2d 343
352 (SDNY 1998) (‘Congress in 1863 did not contemplate that states and
cities would be defendants in False Claims Act suits,
nor did it intend that
they should be so subjected to False Claims Act liability’).
, fn 117 at 36. See
Hunt v City of Boonville
(1877) (discussing the differences between municipal and private
corporations).
, 8 F Supp 2d at 355 (stating that the court will not
‘amend … the statute by judicial fiat to hold liable legal entities
that have existed since the initial enactment of the statute but that have never
been expressly brought within its purview’).
See US Census Bureau, US Dep’t of Commerce, above fn 2 (detailing
the amount of federal funding to state and local governments).
United States ex rel Dunleavy v County of Delaware
[2002] USCA3 20
, 222 (3rd Cir, 2002),
[2003] USSC 2239
123 S Ct 1619
(2003) (finding that the
FCA’s damages violate public policy because they punish ‘the
taxpayers and citizens who constitute
the very persons who are to benefit from
the public example which the granting of such damages is supposed to make of the
wrongdoer’).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (167 KB)
PDF format (126 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter