URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2004/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brannigan, Colm --- "The UDRP: How Do You Spell Success?" [2004] DigTechLawJl 2; (2004) 5(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 2
How Do You Spell Success?
Introduction
1. In order
to comment on the success, or lack of it, of the Uniform Domain Name Resolution
we must use objective criteria to determine
‘success’. Obviously, a comparative study is impossible as
there is no comparable,
functioning online dispute resolution system.
However, there are a number of theoretical models that articulate criteria
to test the adequacy of the UDRP.
2. Julie Hörnle, one of the most perceptive and thoughtful writers about Online Dispute Resolution (
has commented, “in essence, legal dispute
resolution is a complex and highly sophisticated form of information
and processing. For this reason, it lends itself to the use
sophisticated information technology.”
Surely, the Internet’s own dispute resolution system should be
the prime example of the use of cutting edge system and technological
design? This paper uses principles of alternative dispute resolution
systems design, together with an analysis of the growing body
literature on the UDRP to comment on the success of the UDRP as a
resolution system.
In 1998, the US government decided to privatise the domain name system.
The result was the nonprofit Internet Corporation for Assigned
) that includes advisory bodies which develop and recommend
policies, such as the Domain Name Supporting Organisation.
UDRP came about as an alternative to litigation for resolving disputes
trademark owners and domain name registrants.
It was decided that a
dispute resolution policy should be adopted, to prevent disputants
being subjected to differing process
and policy issues depending on
where the domain name was
registered.
4. The World Intellectual Property Organisation (
) created the framework
for the UDRP.
The UDRP derives its power from
ICANN's control of Internet resources. To register a domain name it must be
obtained from a registrar
has the right to enter names in the ICANN approved registry. Since ICANN
determines the approved registries, it is able to compel
every registrant to accept the
5. The significance of the UDRP as a dispute resolution system
can be determined by the fact that it has so far decided 7,671 cases
involving 13,149 domain names.
Although the UDRP coexists with
national legal systems, its decisions have effectively resulted in the development of a body of privatised
international trademark law.
Domain Name
6. Domain name disputes fall into four main types. The first is the conflict between trademark law and the methods which
domain allocates
names. The second is where there are two or more parties with
legitimate claims to use a mark as their domain name. The third, and
growing area, is called "reverse domain name hijacking."
fourth type of conflict is one of priority, or when two parties want a
particular domain name but neither has any trademark rights
ICANN sets out that,
“under the policy, most types of trademark-based domain name
disputes must be resolved by agreement,
court action, or arbitration
registrar will cancel, suspend, or transfer a domain name.
UDRP was adopted on 24 October 1999 to deal with allegations
a domain name is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark or service mark in which the complainant has
the registrant has no rights in the domain name,
being used in bad faith.
8. In the administrative proceeding the complainant must prove that each of these elements are present.
To trigger the UDRP, a trademark owner files a complaint in a court of
proper jurisdiction, or in cases of abusive registration,
complaint to an approved dispute-resolution service provider.
are only four approved dispute resolution providers in operation at the present
9. Clearly, the UDRP has three basic
objectives:
to create globally uniform rules for resolving domain
name - trademark disputes;
to provide an inexpensive, just and relatively simple process to resolve such disputes; and
to resolve only the most abusive cases of cybersquatting, as there is
great sensitivity in replacing national law with global
10. In light of these objectives, and the number
of cases dealt with so far, the UDRP certainly seems to be
“successful”.
However, given the importance of the UDRP to
e-commerce, perhaps it should be required to meet more than just
Comments on the UDRP
The chair of the
Internet Law & Policy Forum, Masanobu Katoh remarked: “Never,
and I mean never, have I seen a dispute
resolution mechanism work so
well…These cases have been handled quickly, inexpensively and
most important of all, fairly.
Without question, the UDRP is an
important model
for dispute resolution in other e-commerce
Perhaps unfortunately, or not, this panegyric view is not shared by all
commentators. There has been a rapid development of journal
literature, particularly in North America, on the UDRP. Interestingly,
several articles are authored
by practicing domain
name arbitrators. Two of the
most significant and
influential papers are the
Rough Justice
report from
University's Convergence Center and Professor Michael Geist's,
“Fair.com?”.
Rough Justice
report posits that, although the policy itself is sound, the
interpretation of the UDRP and forum-shopping by litigants result in
bias toward large trademark holders.
Professor Geist’s
analysis of patterns in UDRP decision-making focuses on perceptions of service
provider bias leading
to systemic
and agrees with the
Rough Justice
Giest concludes that the identity of the arbitrators is the most
important factor in
determining case
outcomes, and "case
allocation appears to be heavily biased toward
ensuring that a majority of cases are steered toward 'complainant-
panelists',
generated heated discussion and
controversy.
14. Critics of the studies and supporters of
the UDRP responded that these theories are methodologically flawed. A major
is that there is no identification
of whether the actual decisions by the so-called 'complainant-friendly' arbitrators were correct
Another UDRP proponent commented that most
decisions have been correct with faulty judgements representing a
percentage of
the total ... a smaller percentage than happens in courts of law”.
A further study by Annette Kur of the
Max Planck Institute in Germany, concluded that the UDRP has been operating
satisfactorily,
although there is a need for some fine-tuning.
Other endorsements exist,
where some commentators see the UDRP as a fundamentally positive process that been damaged by
the acts of individual
arbitrators.
15. Comments range from “one can see the superficial
appeal of an ICANN-like
process to resolve international Internet disputes”
to “an impressive
percentage of ICANN arbitration rulings handed down thus far reflect a faithful
application of the ICANN
Uniform Policy and Uniform Rules.
One of the strongest defences of the UDRP concludes
that: “The UDRP constitutes a tremendous achievement in a key
Internet governance. Its shortcomings to date are, on balance,
significantly outweighed by its
achievements.”
16. Finally, in response to
Geist’s specific criticisms, one author commented: “While the
UDRP is fundamentally fair ...
it could be improved. ... If ICANN truly wants to
establish confidence in the system, it needs to establish the rule of law
the extent that the Study (Geist) seeks to brand the UDRP as unfair,
must firmly disagree.”
17. In April,
2003, ICANN responded to its critics by setting up a Domain Name
) Task Force to examine the UDRP Rules and identified the following issues facing the UDRP:
Procedural Issues
(UDRP Rules)
(1) Should there be improved centralised, searchable
access to administrative
panel decisions? (2) Should
complainant and respondent
filings be publicly available? (3) Should
complainants and respondents be allowed to amend and/or supplement
their filings? (4) Should
the provider and panel selection processes be
modified to address concerns about potential conflicts of
interest? (5) Should standards
for accrediting providers and panelists
promulgated? (6) Should transfers of proceedings between providers be
permitted? (7) Should
refunds of providers' fees in the event of settlement be mandatory
standardised? (8) Should the notice requirements be
(9) Should the procedure for implementing orders to transfer
registrations be amended? (10) Should administrative panel decisions
subject to internal appellate review?
Substantive Issues
(1) Should the policy be changed to require registrars to wait until
deadlines expire before taking
action in response to
court orders? (2) Should the policy be
amended with respect to protection for non-registered marks? (3) Should
the policy be amended
to provide guidance regarding the
interpretation of "confusing similarity"? (4) Should multiple
complaints be allowed concerning
the same registration and
registrant? (5) Should the policy address the question of whether
"holding" constitutes
"use"? (6) Should
"settlement negotiation" communications be excluded
permissible evidence of bad faith? (7) Should complainants be required
post a bond and/or pay a penalty in order to deter "reverse domain-name
hijacking"? (8) Should the policy expressly include affirmative
defences? (9) Should administrative panel decisions have precedential
effect? (10) Should "cancellation" (deletion of the registration
– allowing subsequent re-registration by anybody) continue to be
available remedy?
Staff Manager’s Issues Report on UDRP
) which considered the “pros” and “cons” of these issues did not recommend any significant
changes. The Report
stated, “while there are some areas where improvements
may be possible, there does not appear to be an urgent need for
6 Further, the review notes “if and when the issues are addressed ... [the
taskforce] recommends that priority be placed on
the following
questions:” (1) Should there be improved centralised, searchable access to
administrative panel decisions? (2)
Should complainant and respondent
filings be publicly available? (3) Should complainants and respondents
be allowed to amend and/or
supplement their filings? (4) Should administrative panel decisions be subject to internal appellate
review? (5) Should the procedure
for implementing orders to transfer
registrations be amended?
19. It is interesting that ICANN
did not consider whether contested matters should
be decided by three person panels; a major issue
for UDRP’s critics.
document gives a sense that ICANN is quite satisfied with the UDRP.
The issue was not on the agenda at the ICANN Annual
Meeting in Tunisia in October
2003 and is unlikely to be a major topic
next meeting in March 2004 in Italy. This may be unwise, as many of the
suggestions made for “reform” could lead to a
comprehensive dispute resolution policy.
The UDRP as an Alternative
Dispute Resolution System
The UDRP is quite novel as a dispute
resolution system. Despite the number of cases decided, as with ADR in
general, its legitimacy
is still at issue. The availability of parallel
litigation and judicial review is a critical element of the UDRP and
may be needed
as the UDRP is not merely the application of
“technical” standards to domain name disputes. Further,
decisions made in
applying the UDRP guidelines have the potential to
the substantive legal rights of millions of
registrants.
21. Because the UDRP represents an alternative dispute resolution system, it is appropriate to examine it in
those terms.
There are some common
theories and models of ADR
systems design.
The most commonly used are the models
Ury, Brett and Goldberg, Costantino and Merchant, and Slaikeu and
In Ury, Brett and Goldberg’s pioneering work, the three common
methods of resolving disputes were identified. These are
power-based
remedies, rights based remedies, and interests based
Their preference, in
common with most in the alternative
dispute resolution movement is to focus on interests based solutions.
most conflict is not of a single issue distributive nature, an interest
based focus provides more opportunities for comprehensive
However, in the case of the UDRP, disputes are “win-lose”
and so a rights or power based analysis
is more appropriate. This does
not mean that other aspects of dispute resolution system design cannot
analysis of the
23. An effective conflict resolution
system model was developed by evaluating the following
the transaction costs of conflict;
disputant satisfaction with outcomes;
conflict and its resolution on relationships; and
the frequency
of dispute recurrence.
These criteria can be applied,
some more than others, to the UDRP. Costantino and Merchant modified
the Ury, Brett and Goldberg
model and noted the importance of
satisfaction in
promoting an organisation's goals.
Their belief in the spiral non-linear nature of conflict and stakeholder participation in the
design process led to their formulation
of a somewhat different list of principles.
Of importance to the UDRP are at least two of these. Firstly, creating
systems that are simple to use and easy to access; and, more
contentiously, allow disputants to retain maximum control when
selecting of neutrals wherever
25. A further refinement of systems design was made by Slaikeu and Hasson.
They added avoidance as a fourth method of conflict
resolution. This addition to the theoretical overview fits with the reality of
conflict. Avoidance is a
legitimate response to conflict and
may be the appropriate response in many
situations. This is especially
so where there is lack of empowerment, whether actual or perceived, on the part
of a disputant to resolve the conflict in a way
fits the culture of the
organisation where the dispute occurs. Does the UDRP’s record of
“default” decisions show
a flaw in the system where avoidance has
become the choice of a significant number of disputants?
26. These various models work from the assumption that conflict management process
should move from low to high cost. Cost is defined
in such a way as to include both financial and emotional components.
In the UDRP we have a transition from “low cost” arbitration by a UDRP provider
policy to “high cost” adjudication
by national
How does the UDRP hold up when compared to these models? In
fact, quite well. While the UDRP is mandatory in one the sense, it
voluntary in that the rules do not preclude the filing of a lawsuit
during the proceeding or after its conclusion,
albeit with strict time
limits. There is general consensus about the requirements for a fair
effective system of dispute resolution
that would include independence,
low cost, transparency, adversarial procedure, representation,
legality, and
liberty as essential
elements. The UDRP has some
28. The UDRP allocates most of the
cost of a proceeding to the complaining trademark holder. It resolves
disputes quickly. It also
has a degree of transparency in that the
substantive and
procedural provisions of the UDRP are posted on the ICANN web site. All
arbitral decisions are in writing, and are usually published. In fact,
without this transparency, many of the difficulties with the
exist but would be impossible to evaluate, especially in the way that
Geist analysed cases.
29. One of the most
difficult problems for any ADR
system is the enforcement of decisions. The UDRP solves the problem
through ICANN,
although it is not a solution that could easily be
replicated in a different context. The process is therefore successful
in providing
the participants with a final and enforceable result.
However, the ICANN process falls far short of due process ideals in
other ways.
Most of were identified in ICANN's internal report and by
The UDRP also demonstrates that procedural
choices designed primarily to expedite can frustrate some due process
of traditional
litigation. Usually the justification for an arbitral
model, which eliminates procedural and substantive rights, is that the
have consented to those reduced rights. This is not true in the
case of the UDRP. The lack of fully voluntary participation is
troubling, although mandatory participation in court
mediation, which flies in the face of mediation as the quintessential
“voluntary” process, seems to be much more
accepted today.
31. There are also procedural
flaws in cases where
one party needs information from the other. Even systems without a
"discovery"
process have alternate mechanisms to compel disclosure. The
"hearing" process is a poor model for any dispute that involves
contested facts, especially contested facts not embodied in
pre-existing documents.
Any dispute resolution system that applies law
to fact, including an
system, requires ways to deal fairly with factual disputes.
there are many benefits to face-to-face communication, other modes of
communication fit more appropriately with the needs
of the disputants in this
The use of an online process in the UDRP is an effective use of
technology, as long as advances in technology are recognised by changes
in their use. Currently, this does not appear to be
happening. The UDRP does not make maximum use of existing technology.
Essentially,
it ignores and virtually prohibits the use of video
conferences, telephone conferences, or web conferences so that the
arbitrator’s
decision is based on written submissions and
accompanying documents. Again, against an ideal model, video
technologies could be
synchronously or asynchronously. While it could not completely
replace in person, face-to-face encounters, it could provide an
improvement
present system.
33. The UDRP also ignores
many existing ADR methods,
looking only to stripped- down arbitration that neglects numerous
richer options.
For example, ADR mediators are actively involved in
developing the
standards and skills needed to adapt to the online environment
mediated resolution may provide a more satisfying solution to all
Other techniques, such as early neutral evaluation
or mediated
conferences may also be useful in the online setting despite that these
techniques would take the UDRP away
from its summary nature. This may
add further complexity to the process, especially where the option of
litigation, however impractical
or expensive, exists as an
alternative.
34. The UDRP is a dispute resolution process based on
established ADR principles
and represents a broader shift away from traditional
adjudication.
Comparatively, ODR is a relatively new process,
but it offers
quick and cost- effective commercial solutions for disputes. The
jurisprudence
arising from the UDRP experiences can
teach us more about the promise
and challenges of privatised law making, law and the Internet and
35. By virtue of its simplicity and cost
effectiveness to disputing parties, the UDRP process seems closer to the
medieval law merchant
than to modern arbitration and represents economic
efficiency on a global scale. However, viewed from the perspective of ADR system
design, some of the features of the UDRP cannot be applied to existing dispute
resolution schemes and reflect its uniqueness. The
UDRP meets the minimum
criteria set out in the various ADR models discussed and is a significant
in itself. Hornle comments that: “The ambit of the
UDRP is to create a speedy and cost efficient procedure to counter the narrow
ambit of cybersquatting cases. Therefore it is inevitable that the proceedings
are to a certain degree a form of "rough justice".
Within this scope the
procedure has been successful indeed.”
36. In fact, the unique nature of the UDRP contributes to its
comprises: WIPO’s participation despite the ambiguity of its
the overall transparency of the process, the self-executing
due to its online process. In applying critical models and calling for
amount to an overly ornate level
of procedural perfection, we must
remember that the UDRP was designed, unlike traditional civil
litigation, for resolution of a small
class of disputes.
this context, it represents a successful method of dispute resolution which is
“a positive first step in establishing a
global set of rules for the
resolution of certain kinds of Internet-related trademark
37. Before applying reforms which would
make the UDRP another model of procedural hide-bound international
arbitration, as happened
with law merchant,
it should be demonstrated
that the finished product would be worth the increase
in financial
expense and procedural
complexity.
This may be
difficult to
*B.A. (Toronto) LL.B (Queen’s) LL.M
(Osgoode Hall Law School of York University)
For another example of an
ODR system based on “private law” see Katsh, Ethan, Rifkin, Janet
and Gaitenby, Alan, ”E-Commerce,
E-Disputes, and E-Dispute Resolution:
In the Shadow of ‘eBay Law’,”
(2000) 15 Ohio State Journal
on Dispute Resolution, 705.
Available at: www.umass.edu/cyber/katsh.pdf
Julia Hörnle "Disputes Solved In Cyberspace and the Rule of Law",
16th BILETA Annual Conference, Edinburgh, April 9th-10th,
Available at:
www.bileta.ac.uk/01papers/horle.html
See Timeline for the Formulation
and Implementation of the Uniform Domain-Name Dispute-Resolution Policy.
Available at: http://www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-schedule.htm
C. Anderson .and Timothy S. Cole, “The UDRP - A model for Dispute
Resolution in E-Commerce,”
(2002) 6 The Journal of Small and Emerging
Business Law, 235.
At pp. 247-248.
Statistical Summary of Proceedings
Under Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy16 Jan
2004 http://www.icann.org/udrp/proceedings-stat.htm
.Last visited 23 January
Michael Froomkin, “ICANN's "Uniform Dispute Resolution
Policy"--Causes and (Partial) Cures,”
(2002) 67 Brooklyn Law Review 605
According to ICANN’s Rules for Uniform Domain Name
Dispute Resolution Policy, reverse domain name hijacking means using the
in bad faith to attempt to deprive a registered domain-name holder of a domain
name. Available at: http://www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-rules-24oct99.htm
Wayde Brooks, "Current Public Law and Policy Issues in ADR: Wrestling Over the
World Wide Web: ICANN's Uniform Dispute Resolution
Policy for Domain Name
(2001) 22 Hamline Journal of Public Law & Policy, 297
pp 306-311.
http://www.icann.org/udrp/ Last visited 23 January 2003. Unless noted otherwise, all Internet references are as of this
http://www.icann.org/dndr/udrp/policy.htm
http://www.icann.org/udrp/
The approved dispute resolution providers
Asian Domain Name Dispute Resolution Centre (approved effective
28 February 2002).
CPR Institute for Dispute Resolution (approved
effective 22 May 2000).
The National Arbitration Forum (approved
effective 23 December 1999).
WIPO (approved effective 1 December
Peter Chan, “The Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Policy as an Alternative to Litigation” 2002 9(2) E-Law: Murdoch
University Electronic Journal of Law. Paras. 3-4. Available
at: http://www.murdoch.edu.au/elaw/indices/issue/v9n2.html
Annual Conference, 11. September 2000, transcript of proceedings available at
www.ilpf.org/events/jurisdiction2/conf00d1.pdf
Referred to in Hornle, n2
M. Mueller, “Rough Justice: An Analysis of
ICANN’s Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy,” Syracuse University
Convergence
Centre, 2000. Available at:
http://dcc.syr.edu/roughjustice.htm.
Michael Geist,, "Fair.com?: An
Examination of the Allegations of Systemic Unfairness in the ICANN UDRP." (2002)
27 Brooklyn Law School
Journal of International Law 903. Available
at: http://aix1.uottawa.c/~geistudrp.pdf and at:
http://www.udrpinfo.com/resc/fair.pdf
.Refer also to Geist, “A response
to INTA’s Rebuttal of Fair.Com,” Available at:
http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~geist/geistintaresp.pdf
and Geist, "Fundamentally
Fair.com? An Update on Bias Allegations and the ICANN UDRP." Available at:
http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~geist/fairupdate.pdf
Mueller, “Rough
Justice,” op. cit. p. 26
Geist, “Fair.com?” op. cit.
Geist, “Fair.com?” op. cit. p.32.
International Trademark Association (INTA), Internet Committee “The UDRP
by All Accounts Works Effectively. Rebuttal to Analysis
and Conclusions of
Professor Michael Geist in “Fair.com?” and “Fundamentally
Fair.com? International Trademark
Association, May 6, 2002 . P. 2 (INTA -
Fair.com?) Available at:
http://www.inta.org/downloads/tap_udrp_2paper2002.pdf
For examples see:
INTA- Fair.com? Cited above. Available at:
http://www.inta.org/downloads/tap_udrp_2paper2002.pdf International
Association (INTA), Internet Committee / Ned, Branthover, “UDRP-A Success
Story: A Rebuttal to the Analysis and Conclusions
of Professor Milton Mueller
in “Rough Justice” International Trademark Association, May 6, 2002.
Available at: http://www.inta.org/downloads/tap_udrp_1paper2002.pdf
Annette Kur, “UDRP: A Study by the Max-Planck Institute for Foreign and
International Patent, Copyright and Competition Law,
Munich.” See Summary
and Proposals at p. 72. Available at:
http://www.intellecprop.mpg.de/Online-Publikationen/2002/UDRP-study-final-02.pdf
Davis, G. Gervaise, "The ICANN Uniform Domain Name Dispute Policy: The UDRP in
Perspective After Nearly Two Years." provides a some
what lukewarm
endorsement. Available at: http://www.cla.org/ICANN-Gervaise.pdf
Stewart, ”The Best Laid Plans: How Unrestrained Arbitration Decisions Have
Corrupted the Uniform Domain Name Dispute
Resolution Policy,”
Federal Communications Law Journal 509.
Elizabeth G. Thornburg,
“Fast, Cheap, and out of Control: Lessons from the Icann Dispute
Resolution Process,”
(2002) 6 Journal of Small & Emerging Business
Robert A. Badgley, “Improving ICANN in Ten Easy
Steps: Ten Suggestions for ICANN to Improve its Anticybersquatting
Arbitration
(2001) University of Illinois Journal of Law,
Technology & Policy, 109
at pp.127-128.
Douglas Hancock. “An Assessment of ICANN's Mandatory Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy in
Resolving Disputes Over Domain Names”,
2001 (3) The Journal of
Information, Law and Technology (JILT). Para. 12.
http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/01-3/hancock.html
M. Scott Donahey,
“The UDRP - Fundamentally Fair, but Far from Perfect,” (2001) Vol.
6, No. 34 Electronic Commerce &
Law Reports 937 at p 940-941. And also
see Bradley J. Freedman, and J. C. Deane, “The Uniform Domain Name Dispute
Policy: A Practical Guide,” (2002) 1 (1) Canadian Journal of
Law and Technology. Available at:
http://cjlt.dal.ca/vol1_no1/articles/01_01_FreDea_domain.pdf
ICANN, Staff Manager's Issues Report on UDRP Review, 1 August 2003. Available
at: http://www.icann.org/gnso/issue-reports/udrp-review-report-01aug03.htm
ICANN, Staff Manager's Issues Report on UDRP Review, 1 August 2003. Available
at: http://www.icann.org/gnso/issue-reports/udrp-review-report-01aug03.htm
Having a three person panel where each party pick a panellist and the two
selected arbitrators pick the third would go quite a way
in preventing bias,
whether actual or perceived on the part of a single decision maker.
Generic Names Supporting Organisation which as superseded the DNSO, ranked the
top five issues form the Staff Managers Report in
order are: 9, 1, 10, (4, 5, 2,
3), (11, 15). See UDRP Issue table 24 September 2003. Available at:
http://gnso.icann.org/issues/udrp/table-udrp-issue.shtml
Komaitis, K,
'ICANN: Guilty as Charged?', 2003 (1) The Journal of Information, Law and
Technology (JILT). http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/03-1/komaitis.html
Apart from Roseann T Mitchell, “Resolving Domain
Name-Trademark Disputes: A New System of Alternative Dispute Resolution is
Needed in Cyberspace,”
(1998) 14 Ohio State Journal on Dispute
Resolution, 157
, which was before the UDRP, there does not appear to
be an analysis of the UDRP from the perspective of ADR systems design in the
existing literature.
Conbere, John P. "Theory Building for Conflict
Management System Design" (2001) 19 Conflict Resolution Quarterly, pp. 215 -
William Ury, J. M. Brett, and S.B. Goldberg. Getting Disputes
Resolved: Designing Systems to Cut the Costs of Conflict. (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1988). Costantino, C.A., and C.S. Merchant. Designing
Conflict Management Systems: A Guide to Creating Productive
and Healthy
Organizations, (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1996) Slaikeu, Karl A.,
and Ralph H. Hasson. Controlling the Costs
of Conflict: How to Design a System
for Your Organization, (San Francisco, Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1998).
Ury, William, J.M. Brett, and S.B. Goldberg. Getting Disputes Resolved:
Designing Systems to Cut the Costs of Conflict (San Francisco,
Jossey-Bass
Publishers, 1988). pp. 3-19.
Costantino and
Merchant. op. cit. p. 32.
Ibid. preface p. xv.
Ibid, pp 121 -
Conbere, op. cit. p. 225. For a chart
comparing the various conflict resolution design systems, see Table 1, pp. 228 -
ICANN, Staff Manager's Issues Report on UDRP Review, 1 August 2003.
at: http://www.icann.org/gnso/issue-reports/udrp-review-report-01aug03.htm
Colin Rule, Online Dispute Resolution for Business: For E-Commerce, B2B,
Consumer, Employment, Insurance, and Other Commercial Conflicts
Francisco, Jossey-Bass, 2002) p55.
See Ethan Katsh and Janet Rifkin,
Online Dispute Resolution: Resolving Conflicts in Cyberspace (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 2001)
for an overview of ODR.
Froomkin, A. Michael,
“ICANN’S “Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy” - Causes
and (Partial) Cures,”
(2002) 67 Brooklyn Law Review, 605.
at: http://www.law.miami.edu/~froomkin/articles/udrp.pdf
Hörnle, Online Dispute Resolution in John Tackaberry and Marriott, Arthur
Bernstein's Handbook of Arbitration and Dispute
Resolution Practice 4th
Edition. (London. Sweet & Maxwell. 2002). Chapter 11, paragraphs 11-62 to
INTA Internet Committee “The UDRP by All Accounts Works
Effectively Rebuttal to Analysis and Conclusions of Professor Michael
in “Fair.com?” and “Fundamentally Fair.com? International
Trademark Association, May 6, 2002 . p. 3. Available
http://www.inta.org/downloads/tap_udrp_2paper2002.pdf
Freedman and J. C. Deane, “The Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Policy: A Practical Guide,” (2002) 1
(1) Canadian Journal of Law and
Technology. Available at:
http://cjlt.dal.ca/vol1_no1/articles/01_01_FreDea_domain.pdf
G. Thornburg, “Fast, Cheap, and out of Control: Lessons from the ICANN
Dispute Resolution Process”,
(2002) 6 Journal of Small & Emerging
Business Law 191.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter