URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dreyfus, Mark --- "Melbourne Journal of International Law 25th Volume Celebration" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 1; (2024) 25(1) Melbourne Journal of International Law i
I ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
II INTRODUCTION
III INTERNATIONAL LAW, AUSTRALIA AND THE INTERNATIONAL RULES-BASED ORDER
A Mabo and the Implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
B Tasmanian Dams Case
IV AUSTRALIA’S INVOLVEMENT IN INTERNATIONAL CASES
A Nuclear Tests Cases
B Whaling in the Antarctic Case
C Climate Change Advisory Opinions
D Flight MH17 International Civil Aviation Organisation Council Proceedings
E Intervention in Ukraine v Russia International Court of Justice Case
V CONCLUSION
MELBOURNE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
VOLUME CELEBRATION
Territorial Disputes in the South China Sea
I ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is a pleasure to be
invited to give the address at the annual dinner of the
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
and to do so
— in celebration of
volume, a silver
anniversary.
I acknowledge the
Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung and Bunurong People of the Kulin Nations on whose lands
we are gathered tonight and pay
my respects to their Elders, past and present. I
extend that respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples here
As an alumnus of Melbourne Law School, I am particularly pleased to have the
opportunity to speak with you this evening. I thank the
editors — Megan Stevens, Joseph Zivny and Felix Geake-Ransome — for
extending the kind invitation. I would also
like to congratulate Professor
Michelle Foster on her recent appointment as Dean of Melbourne Law School and
acknowledge outgoing
Interim Dean, Professor Alison Duxbury. I also acknowledge
members of the Melbourne Law School faculty, members of the
’s Editorial and Advisory Boards and, of course,
contributors past, present and perhaps future here tonight.
II INTRODUCTION
In 2000, in their preface to the inaugural volume of the
founding editors set the new journal a challenge: that its ‘continuance
[would] be determined by whether its contents
continue to make meaningful
contributions to the understanding and development of international
Christopher G Weeramantry, a former Vice-President of the International Court
of Justice (‘ICJ’), penned the foreword
to that first volume. He
expressed confidence that the
would rise to the challenge. It
would provide, in particular, young Australian lawyers a new forum in which to
shape the discipline.
Since that first volume, the
has cemented itself as one of the
pre-eminent generalist international law journals in the Southeast Asian region.
Importantly, it
continues as a student-run organisation providing
Australia’s next generation of public international lawyers the
opportunity
to, as Judge Weeramantry hoped, contribute to the field.
When one looks through the
’s 25-volume archive, it is
striking how international law is as consistent as it is changing, even in the
face of the last
quarter century’s evolving challenges. The first volume
published articles which continue to be of great relevance today: underwater
cultural heritage,
and the ever-increasing
interaction between public and private international
Now, in its 25
volume, the
continues to rise to the challenge set by its
founding editors at the turn of the millennium. The new volume spans the
advisory opinion on the
Legal Consequences of the Separation of
the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in
multilateral responses to
forced human displacement,
self-defence in response to cyber
and deep-sea mining in the
South China Sea.
These are all
contributions to critical and challenging conversations and I look forward to
reading them.
III INTERNATIONAL LAW,
AUSTRALIA AND THE INTERNATIONAL RULES-BASED ORDER
Much like the recurring international law themes and questions that the
’s 25 volumes have consistently grappled with, international
law itself has played and continues to play a consistent and important
Australia. As Hilary Charlesworth, Madelaine Chiam, Devika Hovell and George
Williams proposed in their 2006 book
No Country is an Island: Australia and
International Law
, although at times international law does not seem
immediately relevant to domestic Australian politics and law, let alone to our
everyday lives, ‘no country is an island, set apart from the developing
body of international
This evening, I want to reflect on the fundamental role international law has
played in the development of Australia’s domestic
law and in achieving
justice and reform here at home, as well as how Australia engages constructively
with international legal institutions
and processes in support of the
international rules-based order.
Mabo and the
Implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination
In October 1966, Australia signed the
International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
However, it would not be until 1975 when Prime Minister Gough Whitlam and
Attorney-General Lionel Murphy enacted the
Racial Discrimination Act
Racial Discrimination Act
Australia’s first substantial human rights legislation — that
Australia would ratify the
Convention.
In 1982, a High Court challenge to the legislation in
Bjelke-Petersen
By a narrow majority
of four to three, the Court found that the
Racial Discrimination Act
within the Commonwealth’s external affairs power under
Constitution
, though the precise scope of that power remained far from
A decade after the
Racial Discrimination Act
passed, in a bid to
pre-empt and purportedly extinguish the Meriam peoples’ claim to native
title over the Murray Islands,
Queensland passed the
Queensland Coast
Islands Declaratory Act 1985
Coast Islands Act
Nevertheless, in their High Court challenge in
Mabo v Queensland [No 1]
Mabo [No 1]
’), the Meriam people successfully argued
Coast Islands Act
It was inconsistent
with the Commonwealth’s
Racial Discrimination Act
which the High
Court had already found to be constitutionally
The path was then clear for the 1992 decision in
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
There, the High Court famously rejected the legal doctrine that Australia was
terra nullius and held that the common law recognised
a form of native
Mabo [No 2]
rightly, considered a leading example of the use of international law to
influence the development of the common law in Australia.
In his Honour’s
leading judgment, Brennan J quoted extensively from the ICJ’s advisory
Western Sahara
and concluded:
The common law does not necessarily conform with international law, but
international law is a legitimate and important influence
on the development of
the common law, especially when international law declares the existence of
universal human rights. A common
law doctrine founded on unjust discrimination
in the enjoyment of civil and political rights demands
reconsideration.
Notwithstanding the importance of this conclusion and other critical
conclusions reached by the High Court in
Mabo [No 2]
, the preceding steps
Mabo [No 1]
demonstrate the important role
Australia’s international treaty obligations can have in shaping
Australia’s domestic law,
especially the domestic protection of human
rights. Just as it safeguarded equality before the law for the Meriam people in
Mabo [No 1]
, paving the way for the momentous outcomes that followed, the
ratification and implementation of
continues to play an important
role for advancing the rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
in Australian law.
Tasmanian Dams
Similarly, the High Court’s landmark 1983 decision in
Commonwealth v
Tasmanian Dams Case
further clarified
the external affairs power and again demonstrated how international law can be
an impetus for domestic law
In the late 1970s, the Tasmanian Government proposed the construction of the
Franklin Dam on the Gordon
The dam would have flooded an area in south-west Tasmania which in 1982 —
the same year the Tasmanian Parliament passed laws
to allow construction to
continue — was declared a World Heritage Site by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation.
During the 1983
federal election, Bob Hawke promised to intervene and prevent the construction
of the dam.
After winning that
election, he passed the
World Heritage Properties Conservation Act 1983
World Heritage Act
’), allowing the Government to
stop clearing, excavation and other activities that would damage the heritage
After the Tasmanian
Government refused to halt construction, the Commonwealth commenced proceedings
in the High Court.
The central question before the High Court was essentially the same as in
: whether the Commonwealth had constitutional power to make laws
to fulfil its obligations under an international
— here, the
Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural
World Heritage
three, the High Court held that the relevant provisions of the
World Heritage
were indeed supported by the external affairs
Whilst legal debate over
the precise contours of the power would continue for another decade, it was now
clear that under s 51(xxix),
the Commonwealth could enact legislation to fulfil
Australia’s international treaty obligations regardless of whether the
reflected a matter of ‘international
The decision not only halted the construction of the Franklin Dam and
protected a World Heritage Site; it provided the critical constitutional
precedent for several new laws being enacted to protect Australia’s
environmental heritage and
biodiversity.
Domestic implementation of Australia’s international treaty obligations
continues to account for many of the Commonwealth’s
statutes. As
Attorney-General, I have a particular role to play in Australia’s
treaty-making process by considering whether
we have domestic legislation and
other measures in place to enable Australia’s ratification of, and
compliance with, our treaty
obligations.
IV AUSTRALIA’S
INVOLVEMENT IN INTERNATIONAL CASES
As much as international law has had a fundamental impact on Australian
domestic law, Australia has often played a leading role in
the constructive use
of peaceful dispute settlement to shape international law and to uphold the
international rules-based order.
Nuclear Tests
Nuclear Tests
cases were Australia’s first encounter with
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, France conducted 46 atmospheric tests at Moruroa
and Fangataufa atolls, some 8,700 km from mainland
In his iconic
‘It’s Time’ election speech in 1972, Gough Whitlam pledged:
‘We will take the question of French
nuclear tests to the International
Court of Justice to get an injunction against further
And, in May 1973, Australia and New Zealand each instituted proceedings
As detailed in a 2021 article in the
by Richard Rowe, former
Senior Legal Adviser in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the final
decision by Prime Minister
Whitlam to institute these proceedings was only taken
after sustained Australian diplomatic efforts over a decade had been
France, considering
the ICJ lacked jurisdiction, refrained from appearing at the public hearings or
filing any pleadings.
request of Australia and New Zealand, the ICJ awarded provisional measures
requiring France to avoid nuclear tests causing
radioactive fallout on
Australian or New Zealand
significant outcome not only for Australia and New Zealand but also for states
in the Pacific who were strongly opposed
to the nuclear
At the merits phase, the ICJ found that the applications no longer had any
object, or were moot.
considered that the ultimate objective of Australia and New Zealand had been
France, in various
public statements, including by its President, had announced its intention to
not carry out any further atmospheric
nuclear tests following the 1974
In the ICJ’s view,
these statements amounted to binding unilateral obligations assumed by
Nuclear Tests
are a testament to Australia’s
longstanding commitment to the international regime for nuclear
nonproliferation. They also revealed
Australia to be a courageous state unafraid
of using peaceful dispute settlement to uphold the international rules-based
order, even
against states that are close allies.
Whaling in the
Antarctic Case
Decades later, in
2010, Australia would again turn to the ICJ to hold Japan accountable for
violations of its obligations under the
International Convention for the
Regulation of Whaling
in connection with
its JARPA II whaling program.
I appeared before the ICJ as Attorney-General alongside a formidable legal
team comprised of our Agent, Bill Campbell QC, then General
Counsel of the
Office of International Law; Justin Gleeson SC, then Solicitor-General of the
Commonwealth; the late James Crawford
SC, at the time the Whewell Professor of
International Law at Cambridge; Henry Burmester QC, Special Counsel at the
Australian Government
Solicitor; Philippe Sands QC; and Professor Laurence
Boisson de Chazournes.
In a resounding victory for Australia, the ICJ decided by twelve votes to
four that the special permits granted by Japan for killing,
taking and treating
whales were not ‘for purposes of scientific
whaling by Japan in the Southern Ocean Sanctuary was subject to the specific
substantive regulations and obligations enshrined
in the schedule annexed to the
The ICJ concluded
that Japan had violated a range of these obligations and ordered Japan to revoke
any extant authorisation, permit
or licences and refrain from granting any
further permits.
Our case before the ICJ, combined with our sustained efforts through the
International Whaling Commission, has contributed to a whaling-free
Ocean and a decline in commercial whaling around the world. Since the case,
Australia has continued to lead international
efforts opposing commercial
whaling and advocating for whale
conservation.
At the next
meeting of the International Whaling Commission in September, Dr Nick Gales
— Australia’s Whales Commissioner
and key expert witness in
Whaling in the Antarctic
— will be nominated to become the next
Chair of the organisation. This is a powerful demonstration of Australia’s
to the International Whaling Commission as the global authority for
the conservation and management of whales.
The significance of the ICJ’s decision in
Whaling in the
is not limited to the regulation of international whaling. It
continues to be a vital precedent in assessing states’ claims
that certain
measures are justified as part of a scientific programme — an exemption
contained in a multitude of other international
environmental
agreements.
It also continues to
be an important case study in how the ICJ handles scientific evidence, along
with the use and cross-examination
And it was, of course, also the first time Judge Charlesworth was appointed a
Judge ad hoc by Australia before being elected to the
ICJ in 2021 to fill the
seat of the late James Crawford on the bench. Judge Charlesworth is the first
Australian woman and only the
fifth woman ever elected to the
I was immensely proud to
support Judge Charlesworth’s re-election to the ICJ in 2023. Judge
Charlesworth, an alumna of Melbourne
Law School, represents the best of
Australia’s commitment to international law and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. She
has already established herself as a committed, principled,
rigorous and fair-minded judge.
Climate Change
Advisory Opinions
Australia’s leadership in using international law to achieve important
environmental outcomes in our neighbourhood — be
it in the Southern Ocean
or in the Pacific — is not a new phenomenon, as the
Nuclear Tests
Whaling in the Antarctic
cases illustrate. Australia continues to
engage constructively with current efforts to seek clarity from international
tribunals on states’ international legal obligations with
respect to climate change.
Climate change is an urgent global challenge, representing the greatest
shared threat to all countries. It is also the single greatest
threat to the
livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the Pacific and
disproportionately impacts our First Nations
Australia was therefore proud to participate in proceedings before the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (‘ITLOS’)
the obligations of states to preserve the marine environment and protect it from
the impacts of climate change. In May
2024, ITLOS delivered its advisory
opinion, which the Government is now considering
Australia was also a proud co-sponsor alongside 131 others of the Vanuatu-led
UN General Assembly resolution requesting an advisory
opinion from the ICJ on
the obligations of states in respect of climate
The campaign of course
has its origins in the efforts of a group of law students studying at the
University of the South Pacific.
Australia filed its first-round written statement in March
Australia’s written
statement highlights Australia’s resolute commitment to the
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
as the primary source of states’ obligations under
international law concerning the protection of the climate system from
anthropogenic
emissions of greenhouse
Flight MH17
International Civil Aviation Organisation Council Proceedings
Finally, I want to turn to two current but distinct proceedings in which
Australia is committed to holding Russia to account and through
which we seek to
uphold the international rules-based order.
The first is Australia’s efforts to pursue truth, justice and
accountability for the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17
over Ukraine ten
years ago. This horrific act of violence resulted in the death of all 298 people
on board, including 38 who called
In July this year, I
travelled to the Netherlands to attend a commemoration marking the ten-year
anniversary of this senseless act
Since 2022, Australia and the Netherlands have been working together to
pursue a case against Russia in the Council of the International
Civil Aviation
Organisation (‘ICAO’) for its role in the downing of Flight
Our key submission is that
Russia is responsible for the downing of Flight MH17 and has breached art 3
Convention on International Civil Aviation
prohibits the use of weapons against civil aircraft in
In March 2023, the ICAO Council decided that it had jurisdiction to hear our
In June this year, the
ICAO Council held the first hearing on the merits of our
This is a significant
milestone for Australia and the Netherlands in our pursuit of truth, justice and
accountability for the victims
and their next of kin. It is also a milestone for
the ICAO Council itself, being the first time that a dispute brought before the
Council has proceeded to a hearing on the merits.
At the first hearing, Australia and the Netherlands presented compelling
evidence of Russia’s responsibility for the downing
and responded to
questions from Council Members on this issue. That evidence is the product of
international cooperation that supported
two rigorous investigations — a
technical investigation led by the Dutch Safety Board and a criminal
investigation conducted
by the Joint Investigation Team comprising police,
prosecutors and officials from the Netherlands, Malaysia, Belgium, Ukraine and
Russia’s regrettable withdrawal from the ICAO proceedings only one day
prior to the hearing, the case will continue
in accordance with the
Council’s rules.
Australia and the Netherlands will deliver our legal submissions in October
and we will continue to work closely with the Netherlands
in calling upon the
ICAO Council to decide in favour of our claim.
Intervention in
Ukraine v Russia International Court of Justice Case
Second, I wanted to conclude with Australia’s involvement in ongoing
efforts to ensure that Russia is held to account for its
continuing illegal and
immoral invasion of Ukraine. Australia strongly supports efforts to hold Russia
to account for these actions
and has worked with like-minded States to pursue
this through a range of legal mechanisms. In September last year, Australia
an unprecedented 31 other countries intervening before the ICJ in support
of Ukraine’s case against Russia at the preliminary
objections phase of
The ICJ has decided it
has jurisdiction to hear Ukraine’s case that Russia falsely claimed
Ukraine committed genocide in violation
Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
Australia will continue to intervene in Ukraine’s case against Russia
in the ICJ. We have just recently filed an adjusted declaration
of intervention
for the merits phase of the
proceeding.
Our intervention
continues to demonstrate our tireless pursuit of international accountability
and our commitment to upholding fundamental
rules of international law and the
integrity of the
Genocide Convention
V CONCLUSION
No country is an island, even one girt by sea. International law has had, and
continues to have, a critical role in shaping Australia’s
domestic law.
Without it, some of the most important milestones in our protection of human
rights and the environment would not have
been possible. Australia is not a
passive recipient of international law — it has engaged and will continue
to engage constructively
with international legal institutions and processes. In
pursuit of the international rules-based order, our efforts before international
courts and tribunals shape and develop the law and call for accountability for
breaches of it. As I said in my submissions before
Whaling in the
‘[c]ompliance with international obligations is
central to upholding the rule of
Of course, even the most devout of international law audiences — such
as the audience in this room — can recognise international
imperfections. But as James Crawford concluded in his famed Hague Academy
Chance, Order, Change
: ‘It has many weaknesses, faces many
difficulties, is changing and needs to change further. But in the race for
order, it is
part of our common heritage, and a vital
International law is a vital part of Australia’s heritage, no less its
future. As hoped by its founding editors, I am confident
continue to play a critical role in this future. Its articles will no doubt
shape debates, prompt change and propose solutions
to some of our most pressing
collective challenges.
Congratulations on reaching the significant milestone of 25 volumes of the
. Here’s to the next 25.
THE HON MARK DREYFUS KC MP
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia
The Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth of Australia, the Hon Mark Dreyfus KC MP, delivered the address at
Melbourne Journal of International
Volume Celebration. The Celebration was held on 28 August 2024 at the State
Library of Victoria. An edited version of the address
is published in print as a
foreword in this volume of the
. An unedited version of the
address is published online as a speech on the Attorney-General’s media
centre: Mark Dreyfus, ‘Melbourne
Journal of International Law
Volume Celebration’ (Speech, State Library of Victoria, 28
August 2024) <
https://ministers.ag.gov.au/media-centre/speeches/melbourne-journal-international-law-25th-volume-celebration-28-08-2024
archived at <
https://perma.cc/L5FA-QZ6X
Suzan Davies et al,
‘From the Editors’ (2000) 1(1)
Melbourne Journal of International
Christopher G Weeramantry,
‘Foreword’ (2000) 1(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Constance Johnson, ‘For
Keeping or for Keeps? An Australian Perspective on Challenges Facing the
Development of a Regime for
the Protection of Underwater Cultural
(2000) 1(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
David Begg, ‘Poverty and
Human Rights in Bangladesh’
(2000) 1(1)
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
Dianne Otto,
‘Handmaidens, Hierarchies and Crossing the Public-Private Divide in the
Teaching of International Law’
(2000) 1(1)
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
Tom Frost and CRG Murray,
‘The Mists of Time: Intertemporality and Self-Determination’s
Territorial Integrity Rule in
Chagos Advisory
[2024] MelbJlIntLaw 3
(2024) 25(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965 (Advisory Opinion)
[2019] ICJ Rep 95.
Samuel Berhanu Woldemariam,
Amy Maguire and Jason von Meding, ‘A Centenary of Multilateral Response to
Forced Human Displacement:
Legacies, Limitations and the Future’
[2024] MelbJlIntLaw 6
Melbourne Journal of International Law
‘Reinterpreting the Legality of Forcible Self-Defence in Response to
Non-Kinetic Cyber Attacks’
[2024] MelbJlIntLaw 4
(2024) 25(1)
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
Alison McCook and Donald R
Rothwell, ‘Territorial Disputes and Deep-Sea Mining in the South China
[2024] MelbJlIntLaw 5
(2024) 25(1)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Hilary Charlesworth et al,
No Country Is an Island: Australia and International Law
(University of
New South Wales Press, 2006) 160.
International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
for signature 7 March
1966, 660 UNTS 195
(entered into force 4 January
[1982] HCA 27
(1982) 153 CLR 168.
Ibid 221 (Stephen J), 234
(Mason J), 242 (Murphy J), 261 (Brennan J).
[1988] HCA 69
(1988) 166 CLR 186.
Ibid 219 (Brennan, Toohey
and Gaudron JJ), 233 (Deane J).
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Mabo [No 2]
Ibid 41–3, 57, 75
(Brennan J, Mason CJ and McHugh J agreeing at 15), 86, 108–9 (Deane and
Gaudron JJ), 182, 216 (Toohey
See, eg, ibid 40–1
(Brennan J), quoting
Western Sahara (Advisory Opinion)
[1975] ICJ Rep
Mabo [No 2]
) 42 (Brennan J).
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
Tasmanian Dams Case
‘Franklin Dam and the
National Museum Australia
(Web Page, October 2022) <
https://www.nma.gov.au/defining-moments/resources/franklin-dam-greens
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7R3C-BRA2
Tasmanian Dams Case
) 62 (Gibbs CJ); World Heritage
Committee, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation,
Report of the Rapporteur
sess, UNESCO Doc
CLT-82/CH/CONF.015/8 (17 January 1983) 5, 6;
Gordon River Hydro-Electric
Power Development Act 1982
Bob Hawke, ‘Policy
Speech’ (Speech, Sydney Opera House Opera Theatre, 16 February 1983)
World Heritage
Properties Conservation Act 1983
‘Franklin Dam and the
Tasmanian Dams Case
) 70 (Gibbs CJ).
Convention concerning
the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage
, opened for
signature 16 November
1972, 1037 UNTS 151
(entered into force 17 December 1975)
World Heritage Convention
Tasmanian Dams Case
) 160 (Mason J), 183 (Murphy J),
249–50 (Brennan J), 294–5 (Deane J).
Commonwealth
(1996) 187 CLR 416, 484–5 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, Gaudron,
McHugh and Gummow JJ).
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(Cth). See also Jacqueline
Peel and Lee Godden, ‘Australian Environmental Management: A
“Dams” Story’
[2005] UNSWLawJl 41
(2005) 28(3)
University of New South Wales
Law Journal
Nuclear Tests
(Australia v France) (Judgment)
[1974] ICJ Rep 253 (‘
Tests (Australia v France) (Judgment)
Nuclear Tests (New Zealand
v France) (Judgment)
[1974] ICJ Rep 457 (‘
Nuclear Tests (New
Zealand v France) (Judgment)
’) (together, ‘
Nuclear Tests
‘Moruroa Files:
Investigation into French Nuclear Tests in the Pacific’,
(Web Page) <
https://moruroa-files.org/en/investigation/moruroa-files
archived at <
https://perma.cc/84XK-U5S7
Gough Whitlam,
‘It’s Time’ (Speech, Blacktown, 13 November 1972) <
https://electionspeeches.moadoph.gov.au/speeches/1972-gough-whitlam
archived at <
https://perma.cc/69BL-E538
Richard Rowe, ‘The
Diplomatic Dimension: Australia and the
Nuclear Tests
[2021] MelbJlIntLaw 3
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Nuclear Tests (Australia
v France) (Provisional Measures)
[1973] ICJ Rep 99, 106;
Nuclear Tests
(New Zealand v France) (Provisional Measures)
[1973] ICJ Rep 135, 142.
Nuclear Tests (Australia
v France) (Judgment)
Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France) (Judgment)
Nuclear Tests (Australia
v France) (Judgment)
Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France) (Judgment)
) 476 [58].
Nuclear Tests (Australia
v France) (Judgment)
263–7 [32]–[41];
Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France) (Judgment)
) 472 [44].
Nuclear Tests (Australia
v France) (Judgment)
269–70 [51];
Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France) (Judgment)
) 474–5 [53].
International Convention
for the Regulation of Whaling
, opened for signature 2 December
(entered into force 10 November 1948) (‘
‘Application Instituting Proceedings’,
Whaling in the Antarctic
(Australia v Japan)
(International Court of Justice, General List No 148, 31
May 2010) 2.
Whaling in the Antarctic
(Australia v Japan) (Judgment)
[2014] ICJ Rep 226, 231 (‘
the Antarctic
Ibid 294 [229], 299.
Ibid 294 [230].
Ibid 298 [245].
Tanya Plibersek,
‘Australia Opposes All Forms of Commercial Whaling’ (Press Release,
1 August 2024) <
https://minister.dcceew.gov.au/plibersek/media-releases/australia-opposes-all-forms-commercial-whaling
archived at <
https://perma.cc/XVZ7-DDJ5
See, eg, James Harrison,
‘Exceptions in Multilateral Environmental Agreements’ in Lorand
Bartels and Federica Paddeu
Exceptions in International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2020) 328, 329–30.
See, eg, Makane Moïse
Mbengue, ‘Scientific Fact-Finding at the International Court of Justice:
An Appraisal in the Aftermath
(2016) 29(2)
Leiden Journal of International Law
‘MLS Laureate
Professor First Australian Woman to Be Elected to International Court of
Melbourne Law School
(Web Page, 8 November 2021) <
https://law.unimelb.edu.au/news/MLS/mls-laureate-professor-first-australian-woman-to-be-elected-to-international-court-of-justice
archived at <
https://perma.cc/L39T-ZZ2L
Request for an Advisory
Opinion Submitted by the Commission of Small Island States on Climate Change and
International Law (Advisory
(International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, Case No 31, 21 May 2024).
Request for an Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Obligations of States in
Respect of Climate Change
, GA Res 77/276, UN GAOR, 77
Agenda Item 70, UN Doc A/RES/77/276 (4 April 2023).
‘USP Students Succeed
in Campaign Taking Climate Change to the World’s Highest Court’,
University of the South Pacific
(Web Page, 27 March 2023) <
https://www.usp.ac.fj/news/usp-students-succeed-in-campaign-taking-climate-change-to-the-worlds-highest-court/>,
archived at <
https://perma.cc/Y4NZ-H7VU
‘Written Statement
of Australia’,
Obligations of States in Respect of Climate
Change (Advisory Opinion)
(International Court of Justice, General List
No 187, 22 March 2024).
United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
, opened for signature 4 June
1771 UNTS 107
(entered into force 21 March 1994);
Paris Agreement
for signature 22 April
2016, 3156 UNTS 79
(entered into force 4 November
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 30 September 2014, 10715
(Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs).
Penny Wong and Mark
Dreyfus, ‘10 Years since Downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17’
(Media Release, 17 July 2024)
https://www.foreignminister.gov.au/minister/penny-wong/media-release/10-years-downing-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh17
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3W6D-HCVV
Marise Payne, Scott
Morrison and Michaelia Cash, ‘Australia and the Netherlands Initiate MH17
Legal Proceedings’ (Media
Release, 14 March 2022) <
https://www.foreignminister.gov.au/minister/marise-payne/media-release/australia-and-netherlands-initiate-mh17-legal-proceedings
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3QG5-YVPE
Protocol Relating to an
Amendment to the Convention on International Civil Aviation (Article 3 bis)
signed 10 May
1984, 2122 UNTS 337
(entered into force 1 October 1998);
Convention on International Civil Aviation
, opened for signature 7
1944, 15 UNTS 295
(entered into force 4 April 1947).
Penny Wong and Mark
Dreyfus, ‘ICAO Council Decision on Jurisdiction in MH17 Legal
Proceedings’ (Media Release, 18 March
https://www.foreignminister.gov.au/minister/penny-wong/media-release/icao-council-decision-jurisdiction-mh17-legal-proceedings
archived at <
https://perma.cc/SAF8-U2FQ
Meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council’,
Australian Embassy and Permanent Mission to the United Nations
(Statement, 18 July 2024) <
https://austria.embassy.gov.au/vien/OSCEPC1483_2024.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9T29-9RVD
Dutch Safety Board,
Crash of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17
(Report, October 2015); ‘The
Criminal Investigation by the Joint Investigation Team (JIT)’,
Netherlands Public Prosecution Service
(Web Page) <
https://www.prosecutionservice.nl/topics/mh17-plane-crash/criminal-investigation-jit-mh17
archived at <
https://perma.cc/K6YB-J2EN
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 4 July 2024, 1–2
(Mark Dreyfus, Attorney-General).
Mark Dreyfus,
‘Australia Supports Ukraine in the International Court of Justice’
(Press Release, 20 September 2023) <
https://ministers.ag.gov.au/media-centre/australia-supports-ukraine-international-court-justice-20-09-2023
archived at <
https://perma.cc/NS3Z-J9K5
Allegations of Genocide
under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(Ukraine v Russia) (Preliminary
Objections)
(International Court of Justice,
General List No 182, 2 February 2024) 56–7 [149];
Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
, opened for signature 9
1948, 78 UNTS 277
(entered into force 12 January 1951).
‘Declaration of
Intervention of the Government of Australia (Adjusted)’,
Allegations of
Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (Ukraine v Russia)
(International Court of Justice, General List No
182, 1 August 2024).
Whaling in the Antarctic
(Australia v Japan)
(International Court of Justice, General List No 148, 9 July 2013) 14 [3] (Mark
Dreyfus QC).
James Crawford,
Order, Change: The Course of International Law
(Hague Academy of
International Law, 2014) 506.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (378 KB)
PDF format (378 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter