URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2018/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Page, Mikaylie --- "Public Trustee (WA) v Mack: An Uncertain Future for the Forfeiture Rule in Elder Abuse Cases?" [2018] MqLawJl 10; (2018) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 137
PUBLIC TRUSTEE (WA) V MACK: AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE FOR THE FORFEITURE RULE IN ELDER ABUSE CASES?
I THE FACTS
II THE OPERATION OF THE FORFEITURE RULE IN AUSTRALIA
III THE DECISION
IV IMPACT ON CURRENT LAW
V POSSIBILITIES FOR THE FORFEITURE RULE IN CASES OF ELDER ABUSE
VI CONCLUSION
PUBLIC TRUSTEE (WA) V MACK
: AN UNCERTAIN
FUTURE FOR THE FORFEITURE RULE IN ELDER ABUSE CASES?
MIKAYLIE PAGE*
I THE FACTS
In 2012, Brent Mack (‘Mack’) was found guilty of the 2008 murder
of his mother Ah Bee Mack. Following his conviction,
the court ordered that the
operation of the forfeiture rule precluded Mack from inheriting any part of his
mother’s estate,
and instead ruled that her estate would pass to her only
other son Adrian Mack.
Adrian Mack died intestate in 2014 and, as a result, the Public Trustee of
Western Australia, acting as the Administrator
of Ah Bee Mack’s estate,
brought an action to prevent Mack from indirectly inheriting any part of his
mother’s estate
through the estate of his
There had been no
suggestion that Mack was involved in his brother’s
The forfeiture rule is a common law rule that developed to prevent those
convicted of murder from inheriting directly from their
This rule is based on the
principle that a person should not be able to receive the benefits that stem
from their wrongful actions,
strictly enforced at common law against those who are convicted of
The operation of the
forfeiture rule had already prevented Mack from directly inheriting any of his
mother’s estate after being
convicted for her
However, the question
before the court was whether this rule should be extended beyond simply
precluding Mack from inheriting from
his mother, and should prevent him from
inheriting anything from his mother’s estate through his brother
This would represent an
extension of the forfeiture rule so that it would operate not only operated to
prevent direct inheritance
from victims, but also to prevent indirect
inheritance of a victim’s property.
II THE OPERATION OF THE FORFEITURE RULE IN
The forfeiture rule in Australia relies on the principle that one should not
benefit from their wrongdoing. This principle is a well-established
interpretive
principle that assumes that Parliament could not have intended that any benefit
conferred by statute would be awarded
as the result of an unlawful
On this basis, the forfeiture
rule can be justified with reference to these public policy concerns, which
override the usual laws
of succession and inheritance set out in statute. It is
considered against public policy to allow a person who is culpable for the
of another to benefit from their wrongful actions by inheriting any part of the
victim’s estate.
the basis of these public policy concerns that the operation of the forfeiture
rule was extended to prevent those convicted
of manslaughter, not only those
convicted of murder, from inheriting from
These principles that
underpin the rule clearly also apply to a situation where someone is convicted
of manslaughter. Where a person
has committed manslaughter, there remains a high
level of moral culpability that should also preclude them from benefiting from
wrongdoing by preventing their inheritance of the victim’s
Although the forfeiture rule was established at common law, there have been
significant statutory inroads into its operation in both
NSW and the
In these jurisdictions
there is now considerable scope for judicial discretion in the application of
the rule. In the 1980s and 1990s,
case law began to suggest that equity provided
a basis for introducing judicial discretion into the otherwise strictly applied
of the forfeiture
In response, the NSW Court
of Appeal firmly upheld that the rule from the High Court in
Helton v Allen
was to be strictly applied against anyone found culpable for
Following this
decision, NSW introduced the
which mirrored
similar statutes already enacted in England in
and the ACT in
These statutes allow
courts to amend the application of the rule for reasons relating to public
policy, or to avoid unduly harsh
These statutory inroads
into the forfeiture rule mean that there is a disparity between the application
of the rule in states where
the strict common law operates, and where statute
has superseded the common law and allowed for increased judicial discretion.
III THE DECISION
Master Sanderson held that the forfeiture rule, previously used only to
preclude those convicted of murder from inheriting directly
from their victims,
could be extended to prevent Mack from inheriting that part of his
brother’s estate that was made up of
Ah Bee Mack’s
Master Sanderson focused
his analysis on the construction of the forfeiture rule outlined in
where the High Court described the principle as meaning ‘that a man
should not slay his benefactor and thereby take his
He tracked the
development of the rule in Australian law and held that the application of the
forfeiture rule is founded on the jurisprudential
position stated in
. Noting that there were no Australian cases on point relating to
the indirect inheritance of property as a result of murder, Master
looked to decisions from the United States to support his ruling that Mack
should not inherit from his mother’s estate
through the estate of his
The forfeiture rule, referred to as the ‘slayer rule’ in the
United States, similarly applies to those culpable of murder
or manslaughter and
prevents them from directly inheriting from their
Further, the American
‘slayer rule’ has been extended to prohibit those found guilty of
murder or manslaughter from indirectly
inheriting from victims such as in the
current case.
The primary
justification for Master Sanderson’s extension of the forfeiture rule is
derived from his treatment of the American
wherein the court
upheld the extended rule by reason of the common law maxim that ‘no one
shall be permitted to acquire property
Master Sanderson
found that because the principle underpinning the decision in
was significantly similar to the Australian position, the rule should
similarly be extended in relation to Mack.
Examining various applications of the extended forfeiture rule in the United
States, Master Sanderson cited
In Re Estate of
grandson, found responsible for murdering his grandmother, was prevented from
indirectly inheriting any part of her estate
through the estate of his
Similarly, he also
In Re Estate of
where the court was
in a similar position. In this case, there was also no precedent in the state of
New York for determining the
question of indirect inheritance. Without a case on
point, the court held that the principle in
Riggs v Palmer
basis for ruling that one cannot indirectly inherit any part of a victim’s
estate, even if it is being inherited
from someone other than the victim. This,
Master Sanderson opined, pointed to a well-established principle in the United
States that
a person is unable to
inherit from a victim if
that person is morally culpable for the victim’s death. Drawing on the
similarities between the principles
found in the Australian case of
and the American case of
Riggs v Palmer
, Master Sanderson concluded
that the extended rule should also apply in Australia.
While the decision of the court represents a significant development of the
forfeiture rule in Australian common law, such an extended
interpretation of the
rule creates considerable uncertainty as to the rule’s operation. Master
Sanderson’s decision was
practically possibly largely because the estate
of Ah Bee Mack remained almost completely unchanged since it had been inherited
Adrian Mack.
However, there
is now uncertainty about how this extended rule will operate in circumstances
where the property is no longer clearly
defined or has merged with other
IV IMPACT ON CURRENT LAW
The extension of the forfeiture rule not only complicates what was previously
a clearly expressed common law doctrine, but also complicates
the operation of
the rule which has, until now, been strictly applied in common law
rule in Western Australia,
a state that still relies on the common law to dictate the rule’s
is significant
because it remains unclear whether this extended forfeiture rule will be
enforced with the same rigidity. If it is
not to be strictly applied, then this
would represent a significant departure from the formulation of the rule that
the common law
has applied to
However, strict
enforcement of the extended forfeiture rule would cause significant complexities
for courts where property is not
as clearly defined as it was in this
Further, the increasing
distance between the moral culpability of the offender, and the benefit obtained
as a result, diminishes
the weight to be given to the public policy
justification for the extended forfeiture rule. This is especially true in
where the extended forfeiture rule interferes with an innocent
beneficiary’s ability to freely dispose of property. This represents
particular problem in circumstances where the innocent beneficiary has been able
to consider the wrongdoing of the offender before
their death, and nevertheless
wills them property which has come into their possession from the victim.
As there was no Australian authority on point, this decision has the
potential to establish a precedent for the operation of the rule
Australia, except in NSW and the ACT where the rule is found in statute rather
than at common law. In this way, Master Sanderson’s
decision has inserted
considerable uncertainty about the continued operation of the rule in most state
Thus, this case has transformed the forfeiture
rule from a clearly defined doctrine to a more expansive but less defined
that has the potential to complicate the law if it is not
Given the significance of the decision and the lack of in-depth analysis of
its effects in the Australian context, an appeal to the
Western Australian Court
of Appeal is likely. However, the fact that the estate of Ah Bee Mack remained
almost completely discrete
and identifiable from Adrian Mack’s estate
means that it is unlikely that the decision will be overturned. Nevertheless, an
appeal would allow the court to consider issues relating to the operation of the
forfeiture rule that stem from this decision. Due
to the unique circumstances of
this case, it is likely that, even with an appeal, significant questions as to
the future operation
of the forfeiture rule would remain outstanding until
further case law on the issue is developed.
V POSSIBILITIES FOR THE FORFEITURE RULE IN CASES OF
ELDER ABUSE
The extension of the forfeiture rule, particularly in light of Master
Sanderson’s reliance on the extended rule found in the
United States, has
prompted at least one commentator to consider the possibility of further
expansion of the forfeiture
Significant debate on this
issue in the United States has prompted some states to use the forfeiture rule
as a means of deterring
elder abuse by extending the rule to prevent those who
have perpetrated elder abuse from inheriting from their
However, as discussions
elder abuse is a
difficult issue to define, and this impacts the effectiveness of this technique
as a means of deterrence.
Further, the adoption of this kind of expansion in Australia has been
discouraged by the Australian Law Reform Commission (‘ALRC’)
favour of exploring other strategies for responding to elder
Although the ALRC has not
explicitly stated that the forfeiture rule should not be expanded to disinherit
abusers of the elderly,
it has highlighted a number of major concerns that arise
in relation to expanding the rule in this
Firstly, the expanded
forfeiture rule in the United States exists in the context of specific criminal
laws that prohibit elder abuse.
As the ALRC has previously recommended against the introduction of specific
criminal legislation to deal with elder abuse, introducing
a forfeiture rule
would be particularly difficult without the existence of clear criminal statute
that could determine when abuse
perpetrated.
Additionally, the
ALRC has discouraged the rule’s expansion because of the operation of
family law provisions that affect the
distribution of
Thus, introducing an
expansion of the forfeiture rule that prohibited abusers from inheriting would
be particularly complex in the
Australian legal framework. However, this
expansion in the United States highlights the potential for the forfeiture rule
in a way that can be used as a deterrent in other areas of the law.
Extending the forfeiture rule can be considered a contentious issue that
delves into the debate between testamentary freedom and public
Although prohibiting
named beneficiaries from inheriting property does significantly interfere with
freedom to dispose of property,
this is not a concept that is unheard of in the
legal context.
The law has made
substantial inroads into testamentary freedom for the provision of property in
relation to family provisions,
and therefore further inroads into testamentary freedom for the purpose of
preventing elder abuse is arguably equally justified.
In relation to
testamentary freedom and the forfeiture rule, the public policy benefit of
prohibiting those convicted of killing
from profiting from their crim is clearly
beneficial. However, when extending the reach of testamentary interference to
abusers from benefiting from their victims, one must consider the
balance between upholding the wishes of a deceased, and deterring
elder abuse by
ensuring that one cannot benefit from their abuse
Further, this area
cannot be clearly explored while we still lack a definition of elder
Trends towards expanding the use of the forfeiture rule in countries such as
the United States suggest that further development in
this area of the law is
likely with new cases. However, while Master Sanderson’s decision
indicates a move in the direction
of expansion, it remains unclear how this
extended forfeiture rule will operate in Australia.
VI CONCLUSION
Under current law, there is no crime in any Australian jurisdiction that
specifically relates to abuse of the
There is an increasing
recognition of the need for the law to protect elderly individuals from abuse
where that abuse occurs as a
result of their vulnerability. One of the
difficulties in conceiving a framework for the dignified protection of the
elderly, compared
to those frameworks designed to protect other vulnerable
groups such as children, is that the consequences of ageing are unpredictable
and widely inconsistent. On the one hand, legislative frameworks devised to
protect the elderly from harm can be an effective way
to ensure against abuse,
particularly because much elder abuse occurs within the private family
On the other hand,
excessive intervention in the lives of the elderly suggests that society
disregards the autonomy and dignity of
elderly people in favour of paternalistic
policies and legislation. Extending the forfeiture rule to disinherit those who
have subjected
elderly people to abuse could help protect those who are
vulnerable in the community. However, adopting a paternalistic approach
interferes with testamentary capacity may disregard the need to uphold the
dignity and autonomy of the elderly. This is a difficult
balance for the law,
particularly when there continues to be no clear legal definition about what
constitutes an act of elder
The ruling in this case
represents an interesting opportunity to examine how existing laws can impact
elderly Australians. Further,
it presents an opportunity for the law to expand
in ways that could better protect elderly people in society. However, the
definitional
issues relating to the concept of elder abuse, and continuing
tension between protection and autonomy, present significant challenges
area of the law.
* Law and Arts student, Student Editor,
Macquarie Law Journal
Public Trustee (WA) v Mack
[2017] WASC 325
Helton v Allen
[1940] HCA 20
Troja v Troja
Public Trustee (WA) v
[2017] WASC 325
F A R Bennion,
Interpretation
, (Lexis Nexis, 5
ed, 2008) 1141.
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 CLR
Forfeiture Act 1995
Forfeiture Act 1991
Public Trustee v Evans
(1985) 2 NSWLR 188
Public Trustee v Fraser
(1987) 9 NSWLR 433
[1992] VicRp 38
[1992] 1 VR 583.
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 CLR 691.
Troja v Troja
33 NSWLR 269
Forfeiture Act 1995
Forfeiture Act 1982
Forfeiture Act 1991
Public Trustee (WA) v
[2017] WASC 325
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 CLR
Riggs v Palmer
, 511 (1889).
Re Estate of
259 Ill App 3d 350 (Ct
App, 1994).
Re Estate of
259 Ill App 3d 350 (Ct
App, 1994).
Ibid 354–55.
Re Estate of Macaro
182 Misc 2d 625 (NY
Public Trustee (WA) v
[2017] WASC 325
Andrew Hemming,
‘Killing the Goose and Keeping the Golden Nest Egg’
[2008] QUTLawJJl 19
(2008) 8(2)
Queensland University of Technology Law and Justice Journal
Troja v Troja
33 NSWLR 269
Public Trustee (WA) v
[2017] WASC 325
Karen J Sneddon,
‘Should Cain’s Children Inherit Abel’s Property? Wading into
the Extended Slayer Rule Quagmire’
(2007) 76(1)
University of
Kansas City Law Review
Barbara Hamilton, ‘Be
Nice to your Parents: or Else!’
Elder Law Review
Jennifer Piel,
‘Expanding Slayer Statutes to Elder Abuse’
(2015) 43(3)
of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law
Hamilton, above n 35, 8.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse
, Discussion Paper No 83 (2016) 165–66.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Elder Abuse—A National Legal Response
, Report No 131
(2017) 17, 280–81.
Rosalind F Croucher,
‘How Free is Free? Testamentary Freedom and the Battle Between
“Family” and “Property”’
Journal of Legal Philosophy
Succession Act 2006
(NSW) ch 3.
Croucher, above n 44,
Piel, above n 36.
Australian Law Reform
Commission, above n 39, 364.
Piel, above n 36, 371.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (241 KB)
PDF format (149 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter