URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrecedentAULA/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:29:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alati, John --- "Ethical Dilemmas, Standards and Conduct Rules for Young and Not So Young Lawyers" [2024] PrecedentAULA 3; (2024) 180 Precedent 4
Ethical dilemmas, standards and conduct rules
for young and not so young lawyers
By John Alati
As lawyers, we are bound by a strict code of conduct broadly known as
‘ethics’. Our personal moral compass may be guided
by our upbringing
or other factors, but regardless of where your moral compass points, you are
bound by the conduct rules in your
regulate the profession. Ethical behaviour runs the full gamut, from not
stealing money from
trust accounts to appropriate behaviour in the workplace and
The law is one of the few professions where your behaviour before you enter
the profession, and your behaviour outside of your professional
practice, can
impact on your professional
You have to be a
‘fit and proper’ person to be admitted, and you have to stay that
There are very specific duties in the
Australian Solicitors Conduct Rules
), such as that found at r19.6, which requires solicitors to
inform the court of adverse
and there are much
broader ones that have to be interpreted in context, such as the broad duty to
act in the best interests of the
Any case or situation I’ve referred to in this article is for
illustrative purposes only and no criticism is intended of any
individual.
THE SOURCES OF ETHICAL DUTIES
Our ethical duties stem from the general law, statute and the professional
Our duties are primarily spelled out in the
and the equivalent
rules in each jurisdiction. The Australian legal profession is regulated on a
state and territory level, although
most of the rules are more or less uniform
across jurisdictions.
In summary, we have a paramount duty to the court and the administration of
justice. After that, we have a duty to act in the best
interests of our client.
This means that we must be honest and courteous, deliver legal services
competently, diligently and as promptly
as possible, and act independently.
In general, contract, torts and equity are the backdrop of relationships with
clients. The solicitor-client relationship is basically
contractual, and we have
a duty of care to our clients based in tort.
The duty of confidentiality is based in equity. Most private lawyers will
also have responsibilities under the relevant consumer legislation.
Beyond the rules, there is a great deal of case law interpreting and
expanding on our duties. There is too much to go into here but
do be aware that
the case law is an abundant source of guidance. For example, the rules state
that you have a duty to be
But one person’s
discourtesy is another person’s ‘no nonsense approach’. Often
things you may think or say
spontaneously can look particularly unsavoury in
writing, including text messages. See for example
Amirbeaggi v NSW Legal
Services Commissioner
Failure to comply with the ethical standards and the various conduct rules of
the profession can result in adverse findings, including
a reprimand, caution,
fines, conditions on practice, suspension from practice and ultimately removal
of a lawyer’s name from
It’s aimed mostly at the administration of justice, and protecting the
public and our clients, whoever they may be.
SPEAKING OF CLIENTS
I am constantly surprised that law schools don’t spend more time
engaging students with the topic of clients. Where would we
be without them? And
it is to them that we owe many of our ethical duties.
Clients can be anything from disadvantaged individuals to government agencies
or extremely sophisticated corporate entities. We must
treat them all with
courtesy and respect, even when we don’t feel like it. In my work I often
see disadvantaged people treated
poorly in the community. Yes, the wealthy tend
to get better treatment everywhere they go, from hotels to law firms. But I am
often heartened by the generosity of lawyers quietly assisting
disadvantaged people on a pro-bono basis. Very few professions have
(or even a word) for assisting people free of charge.
Clients aren’t always easy to work with, but they don’t always
have easy lives. I’ve seen an experienced lawyer
cry as he watched his
night in Canberra.
We often have to manage client expectations. In extreme circumstances, we may
even have to terminate our relationship with them. But
in my experience lawyers
are remarkably generous people who rarely terminate their relationship with a
client except where it is
absolutely necessary to maintain their professional
Our relationship with clients is generally intimate, professionally speaking.
We learn a lot about them. They confide in us and they
need to trust us. In many
ways, it’s like a doctor/patient relationship. It’s a fiduciary
relationship as well –
one of the utmost trust and confidence.
Whether they are an individual, a government agency or a corporate entity,
clients are the focus of our work. For most of us, they
are why we got into this
profession in the first place. And that’s why I think law students should
learn more about them before
going out into the profession.
LAWYERS UNDER PRESSURE
Working under pressure is normal in law. In one famous case from the early
1990s, the NSW Court of Appeal noted:
‘At the time, the solicitor was ... living a “hermit-like”
life, isolated within the practice and without much personal
emotional support.
Some of the evidence suggests that [the solicitor] was in a state close to a
nervous breakdown.’
In this case, the misconduct was extreme. The lawyer had falsified documents
in relation to billing a client, then perjured herself
in court about the event.
Even after all that, she was in denial about the gravity of her actions and gave
some very unexpected responses
when asked about her behaviour in court. One can
only assume she was in a very stressed state. We mustn’t forget the
she was under from the firm she worked for, including pressure to meet
a budget. Hopefully this doesn’t apply to you, but the
Court, while
sympathetic, did express a view that is a lesson for us all:
‘Her conduct is not to be excused for the reason of the pressure placed
upon her. All legal practitioners must act with honesty,
whatever the pressure
that tests them.’
The pressure, while crushing, is no excuse for inappropriate behaviour.
Pressure can be long term and wear you down or it can be ‘on the
spot’ type pressure, where a document has to be filed
by a certain time,
or some other commitment met.
While it can be tempting to let the rules slide just to get things done,
think about the consequences. Is it worth it?
If you are under immense pressure, think about where this is likely to lead
and whether you can exert a bit more control over your
workload. I am not going
to try to hold back an ambitious lawyer headed for the top by working ridiculous
hours. Everyone has different
thresholds, but it is often at the high-pressure
end of one’s career that problems occur. My review of disciplinary cases
reveals that the lawyer concerned was under some type of unreasonable
pressure. In my view, there is a pattern.
As with any job, you have to manage your workflow. But lawyers have a duty to
deliver legal services ‘competently, diligently
and as promptly as
reasonably possible’.
means not taking on more than you can reasonably handle.
THE IN-HOUSE LAWYER
It’s not just law firms that face ethical dilemmas. Other professional
firms, companies, government agencies and entities who
have in-house lawyers can
face serious ethical challenges, often because the senior people are not lawyers
and may, unfortunately,
even have contempt for lawyers. Of course, it’s
not just lawyers who may be misunderstood but our decisions tend to bear
significant
risk, and we are usually seen as the ‘moral compass’ of
the organisation, so we have to be much more careful about buckling
pressures common in the corporate sphere.
The in-house lawyer is a servant of the law and a servant of their employer.
You may also be an officer of the company, such as company
secretary. Those are
competing interests. But the same ethical standards apply and your paramount
obligation is to uphold the law
as an officer of the court.
If you are an in-house lawyer working predominantly with non-lawyers, you may
have a lot of challenges. I empathise because I’ve
been there. But my
ethical standards have served me well.
I have been asked to provide legal advice that arrives at a particular
conclusion (‘write an advice that states...’) before
had a chance to look at the issue. Lawyers find that unthinkable. Others often
just don’t understand that we
don’t work that way.
If you are asked to do that, I recommend that you politely ignore that
instruction and do it the lawyers’ way: analyse the issue
and come to the
conclusion that your legal analysis leads you to. Remember you are ultimately
responsible for that legal advice and
it may come under scrutiny. Your advice to
your client must be independent.
Another issue I have experienced in the in-house environment is that of staff
members, my colleagues, coming to me for legal advice
when they had issues with
the employer. Of course, the normal conflict rules apply. The employer is your
client. As sympathetic as
you may be, you can’t advise staff members on
their personal or professional issues.
I’ve also experienced staff members attempting to actively block
nothing relevant here’ (actually there was) and, to my horror, evincing an
intention to destroy documents.
Again, you have to be firm in these situations. Your legal obligations come
first. Remember, ‘a practitioner is not a mere
agent and mouthpiece for
his client, but a professional exercising independent judgment
SOME AREAS TO BE CAREFUL OF
Witnessing documents
This gets quite a few lawyers into trouble. See for example
Legal Services
Commissioner v Huggett
my experience, non-lawyers often do not understand the gravity of witnessing
documents. They may say it’s ‘just a
signature’. But it is
much more than that for lawyers notarising documents: our reputation, our
professional standing and our
competence are under scrutiny.
If someone comes to you in a rush and asks you to ‘sign this’,
take a step back. Don’t let their haste cloud your
All documents are different but, as a general rule, if someone asks you to
witness a document, even if you know them well, read the
document very carefully
and ensure that you are in a position to witness it truthfully.
Some documents require you to certify that you have given legal advice on a
particular matter and unless you have, you cannot sign
to that effect.
Don’t be hesitant to check a person’s identity, even if
they’re someone you know. And do not hesitate
to decline if you are not
absolutely certain you can witness a document
truthfully.
Being an unwitting accomplice – money laundering
It may not be something that you regularly turn your mind to, but lawyers are
prime targets for money laundering. As the Law Council
‘Money laundering and terrorism financing are serious crimes with
devastating consequences ... serious and organised crime groups
are increasingly
turning to the professions to exploit specialist knowledge and skills to launder
profits within complex and globalised
The report prepared for the Law Council on vulnerabilities of the profession
to money laundering and terrorism financing is interesting
although beyond the
scope of this article. Remember that lawyers are required to report cash
transactions over $10,000 to
Confidentiality and conflict
‘The need for the client to be confident that a lawyer will not
disclose his secrets, no matter how appalling, is thought necessary
client to be completely candid with the lawyer and the lawyer’s case
preparation; and so for the administration of
adversarial
Strict confidentiality becomes a natural part of the way most lawyers work
and that’s probably a good thing. You owe an ongoing
confidentiality to current and former clients. Even small things need your
attention. Are you going to represent more than
one person injured in the same
incident? Are you going to handle both sides of that conveyance?
Think carefully about alternatives. Wherever possible, exercise them.
There isn’t always a clear answer
The conduct rules don’t always provide an answer. Sometimes they just
provide guidance. For example, how to deal with potential
conflict with former
clients is set out in r10 of the
Basically it provides that you must not act for a client where you are in
possession of information which is confidential to a former
client and that
information may be material and detrimental to the interests of the former
client. It doesn’t set out a time
frame in which any potential conflict
can be dismissed, nor does it set out what information may be material in the
relevant sense.
This is where you must carefully consider your obligations and how to apply
the rules to your situation. To make things even more
complicated, different
lawyers may give a different response in any given situation. It’s wise to
make comprehensive notes
situation where conferring with a trusted senior colleague will be very
You can’t borrow money from a
but the rules on lending
money to clients are vaguer. Consider the client’s interests and your
professional independence, and
your own personal interests.
There’s nothing specific in the rules that says you can’t have a
romantic relationship with a client but consider your
duty to act in the
client’s best interests. I imagine that billing a client in those
circumstances would be very awkward indeed.
Your employer may also have policies
in this regard. Compare this with the strict prohibitions of such relationships
in the code
that doctors are bound
Just because something is
theoretically possible, doesn’t mean it’s a good idea.
I’m also impressed that doctors have strict guidelines about being
honest in their curriculum
There should be more of
WHAT TO DO IF SOMETHING IS NOT RIGHT
It can be difficult to challenge the culture of your workplace when things
don’t look right.
Recent examples of decision making that may have been less than stellar have
come about in situations such as the Robodebt scheme,
a disastrous and unlawful
automated debt collection scheme implemented by government against the advice of
many, including lawyers,
big accounting firm scandal, where a firm put itself in a position of conflict
by advising government on designing tougher
multinational tax laws, while also
advising its commercial clients on the same laws. It seems that the root of the
situation went
back several years, and that confidential details of a complex
tax plan were shared inappropriately for marketing purposes with great
Those situations are complex and no judgement or criticism is intended of any
person involved. But they are certainly illustrative
of the complex range of
decisions lawyers may have to face.
As a junior lawyer, what do you do if you see something that doesn’t
feel quite right? It’s easy enough to say ‘speak
up’. However,
it’s no secret that whistleblowers don’t have an easy time in this
country. You can also rationalise
certain behaviours with thoughts like:
‘not my problem’, ‘that’s how they do it here’,
figure it out eventually’ etc. But it is your problem
and they may not figure it out until it’s too late.
It’s advisable to say something, but be careful who you confide in. I
hesitate to give that advice but it’s something
you need to keep in mind.
Old alliances can run deep, and when you’re relatively new to the
workplace, you may not know exactly
how they work. Often people external to your
immediate employment can be more objective because they don’t have a stake
the outcome of a situation.
Responding with confidence
If you’ve carefully considered the situation and still feel that
something isn’t right, it’s time to speak up. This
won’t be easy. You may not always have time to ponder your options, make
calls and flip through reference books. Ethical
dilemmas often come up on the
spur of the moment, during a phone conversation, a meeting, or a moment when you
realise something
may not have been done correctly.
The best thing you can do is clarify your facts, check the law, and come to a
conclusion based on the information you have. You can
put any doubts you have as
a question aimed at opening up a discussion. Rather than: ‘Don’t
file that yet!’, you
could start with: ‘Should we be filing this
document? I’ve noticed something about it that doesn’t seem quite
Put everything in writing. Don’t accuse or make people defensive. Think
importantly, how
you’re going to say it.
It’s a good idea to nurture relationships with more senior people
outside of your workplace to run ideas by. You can do this
by de-identifying a
matter, or you can in fact disclose confidential information in a confidential
setting for the purposes of obtaining
advice on your ethical
obligations.
WHERE TO GET HELP
The code of conduct in your jurisdiction is a good starting point. Always
have it available and familiarise yourself with it. There
are several good books
out there too, including reference books that are useful to have, such Simon
Selected Materials on Lawyers, Justice and
If you have doubts, call the law society in your jurisdiction. They can
generally discuss ethical dilemmas with you. Develop ‘phone
friend’ relationships with more experienced lawyers. Lawyers are generally
generous with their expertise.
IF SOMETHING GOES WRONG
A wise lawyer once said to me early in my career: ‘all lawyers fluff
one every now and then’. Those words have stayed
with me. Have you met the
lawyer yet who’s never made a mistake? I find that’s usually also
the lawyer who’s never
lost a case. I enjoy fiction as much as anyone, but
it’s not helpful here.
Everyone makes mistakes, from minor administrative errors to more significant
errors of judgment. It’s easy to make scheduling
errors, typos, misread
documents or misread situations. Clients aren’t always frank or
You need to be open and honest if you make a mistake, take full
responsibility and correct the error as soon as possible, including
court or your colleagues. You’re not obliged to correct other
people’s errors,
you’re a prosecutor,
you can’t take unfair advantage of them
I also find that a lawyer’s response to another person’s errors
can speak volumes. Remember, it could be you one day.
I believe we are fortunate to have so much ethical guidance in our
profession. Decades ago I was a high school teacher and there was
profession-based ethical guidance at all. There was wisdom handed down from
older teachers, internal policies and the principal’s
Don’t look at your ethical obligations as a burden. They are a valued
core of consistent behaviour that you and all your colleagues
must abide by. We
know what to expect from our fellow lawyers because of our ethical
obligations.
I find the vast majority of lawyers to be people of outstanding integrity and
courage, despite the lawyer jokes and the very small
minority who stray.
To have a set of standards we can work to and expect all our colleagues to
adhere to, which are being constantly reviewed and updated,
is actually a
comfort and a real privilege.
is the supervising solicitor of the Street Law Program, an
outreach legal service for people experiencing homelessness. He has previously
worked as in-house counsel for a range of organisations. He has also taught law
at the Australian National University for many years.
See, for example,
Profession Act 2006
s387(1)(b).
Law Council of Australia,
Australian Solicitors Conduct Rules
(ASCR) (at 24 August 2015) r19.6.
Ibid, r4.1.1.
If you’re in NSW,
Victoria or WA, the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’
Conduct Rules 2015
apply. Other jurisdictions have a specific set of
, above note 2,
[2023] NSWSC 555
Law Society (NSW) v
[1994] NSWCA 69
[1994] 34 NSWLR 408, (Kirby
, above note 2,
Apart from a general duty to
the administration of justice, see
Legal Profession Regulation 2005
(NSW), reg 177.
Legal Practitioners
Complaints Committee and Fleming
[2006] WASAT 352
[2017] NSWCATOD 67
See, for example,
Services Commissioner v Maddock
[2021] NSWCATOD
Law Council of Australia,
‘Anti-money laundering vulnerabilities analysis’ (9 October 2023)
<https://lawcouncil.au/policy-agenda/regulation-of-the-profession-and-ethics/anti-money-laundering-vulnerabilities-analysis>.
Russ + Associates,
Vulnerabilities Analysis
Money Laundering and Terrorism
Financing: The Australian Legal Profession
(Report, 28 September 2023)
<https://lawcouncil.au/files/web-pdf/Vulnerabilities%20analysis%20-%20money%20laundering%20and%20terrorism%20financing%20-%20the%20Australian%20legal%20profession.pdf>.
‘Solicitors’ (2023)
<https://www.austrac.gov.au/business/your-industry/solicitors>.
R Mortensen,
‘Professional Legal Ethic in Australia’,
Advances in Social
Science, Education and Humanities Research
, Vol 192, 2018, 14
<https://research.usq.edu.au/download/554953cbfe64ec9d75f8ed73bc550de4ec64fc49058245ed28b7f621e067408b/2385006/Professional%20Legal%20Ethics%20in%20Australia.pdf>.
In NSW, for example, see
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules
<https://legislation.nsw.gov.au/view/html/inforce/current/sl-2015-0244#sec.10>.
Society of New South Wales v Harvey
[1976] 2 NSWLR 154.
Medical Board of Australia,
Good Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct for Doctors in Australia,
October 2020, r10.2.2.
Ibid, r10.10.
Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme
(Report, 2023)
<https://robodebt.royalcommission.gov.au/system/files/2023-09/rrc-accessible-full-report.PDF>.
See D Ziffer, ‘A
damning contradiction during questioning of former PwC boss Luke Sayers means
plenty more scrutiny is on the
(16 Oct 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-10-16/luke-sayers-pwc-tax-leak-scandal-senate-inquiry-consultants/102974662>.
Rice, Lawbook Co, Sydney,
, r29.12.1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (47.8 KB)
PDF format (536 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter