URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Anderson, Peter --- "Administrative Law Evolution: Thoughts From a Business Perspective" [2010] AdminRw 8; (2010) 59 Admin Review 50
Administrative law evolution: thoughts from a business perspective
Increasing regulation
Important considerations for business users
Guidelines and other policy materials
Access to review
Reasons for decisions
Grounds of review
The administrative system’s demands on business
Information management
Other factors
Administrative law
evolution: thoughts from a business perspective
Businesses are significant consumers of the system of administrative law. The
core administrative values that individuals expect in
government decision making
are also the values expected by the business community.
For business, regulatory decisions can have far-reaching consequences,
affecting interests well beyond those under immediate consideration.
instances decisions, particularly those of tribunals, can result in the
development or redrafting of company practices or
policies. Poor decision making
can add unnecessary costs, which are unwelcome in a business environment subject
to continuing competitive
Increasing regulation
As the Taskforce on Reducing Regulatory Burdens on Business recently
Like many other developed countries, Australia has undergone a relatively rapid
rise in regulation over the past couple of decades,
in response to a succession
of social, environmental and economic needs and pressures. In our view, business
is justified in protesting
at the compliance and other burdens that this
regulatory inflation has
consequence of this, and of the increased level of administrative decision
making that has ensued, is that the million or so businesses
in Australia are
increasingly consumers and users of administrative law.
The diverse nature of commercial activity, coupled with the extended reach of
regulatory decision making, means that the interaction
between administrative
decision makers and business has extended beyond agencies such as the Australian
Securities and Investments
Commission, the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission and the Australian Taxation Office. In the area of industrial
regulation,
for example, there are multiple decision makers, including ministers
of the Crown (individually or collectively in ministerial councils),
Australian Human Rights Commission, Fair Work Australia, the Office of the Fair
Work Ombudsman and, in some cases, government
departments. Certain treaty
obligations also give authority to or create lines of accountability for
decisions of international bodies
such as the International Labour
Organization.
The increased focus on environmental matters has also meant that many
business activities give rise to questions of environmental
sustainability,
either directly, through environmental legislation, or indirectly, through
planning regulations.
In the face of this increasing level of regulation, it is heartening that the
Commonwealth Attorney-General has said:
One of my key objectives is to help underpin Australia’s economic
prosperity by ensuring that our domestic legal system is
robust, that we reduce
unnecessary costs, and remove impediments for those who need access to justice.
And I know it is an objective
shared by my State and Territory
counterparts.
statement resonates well with the aspirations of business in relation to
Australia’s system of administrative law. For
business, the notion of
justice is as tied up with accessible administrative decision making as it is
with efficient judicial processes.
Important considerations for business users
The following are among the important considerations we identified for
business users of administrative law.
Guidelines and other policy materials
Elsewhere in this edition of
Admin Review
reference is made to the
growth of ‘soft law’ codes, guidelines, circulars, and so on. As a
result of this development
business users are required to comply not only with
‘black letter’ law but also with the additional obligations that
be imposed on them by means of soft law materials.
Business believes that consideration should be given to ensuring an
appropriate level of accountability for the guidelines and other
documents that are being turned to increasingly by regulators and non-government
entities involved in co- and self-regulation
as part of their regulatory
functions. The principles for the development and review of such materials, as
set out in the Council’s
Administrative Accountability in
Business Areas subject to Complex and Specific
are highly pertinent
in this regard.
To increase transparency, business believes government and non-government
regulators would be usefully encouraged to place on their
websites (in a readily
accessible place) all internal policy documents that affect decision-making
Access to review
Administrative review of one sort or another is generally available in
established areas of business interaction. Consideration could,
however, be
given to the establishment of more avenues for internal review of decisions.
Where merits review is available business favours the availability of full de
novo merits review. In the absence of such review a
number of counterproductive
consequences can ensue, including the impetus to provide a ‘greater than
needed’ volume of
material at the primary decision‑making stage in
anticipation of possible review of the decision.
Business users widely accept the role of administrative tribunals in
reviewing decisions that affect business. As a general rule,
tribunal members
exhibit a level of expertise in business areas sufficient to secure the support
and confidence of business users.
The accelerating changes in the nature of doing business in a global economy
mean that continuing professional development among tribunal
essential in order that they stay up to date. This is seen as especially
important in the case of tribunals where long-term
appointments are made or
tenure is provided.
Tribunal members’ ability to act independently of past business
interests or associations is also central to the establishment
of business
confidence in the work of tribunals.
Reasons for decisions
In all cases, reasons for decisions should be cogent and relevant to both
current law and objectively established facts, including
facts drawn from the
manner in which business is conducted in an industry context. Consistency in
decision making is also important
to business users, providing invaluable
guidance on required standards and practices.
Decisions that are too technical diminish the precedent value of a decision
by reducing the business’s capacity to understand
and to apply the
decision more broadly. Elsewhere in this edition of
Admin Review
reference is made to the ‘problematic practice’ of having draft
statements of reasons settled by legal advisers. The
experience of business
users is that this practice can make decisions (and reasons) more complicated,
overly legalistic and technical,
thereby reducing the precedent value of
decisions and limiting the capacity of business users to apply decisions more
Grounds of review
Although business considers that the availability of judicial review under
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) is an
important right, the Act’s grounds of review are generally seen to be too
narrow. The ground of ‘unreasonableness’
is particularly difficult
to establish. Consideration of overseas trends, such as those in the United
Kingdom, would be useful.
The administrative system’s demands on
There is among business users of the system of administrative law an
expectation that administrative decision makers will act efficiently,
professionally and sensitively in relation to commercial information and
business circumstances.
Decision makers also need to adjust their methodologies in response to the
different commercial entities with which they deal. In
the case of larger
businesses, various chains of command might be in operation for approving
particular courses of action. This needs
to be taken into account when seeking
information and materials relevant to an administrative decision-making process.
Account also
needs to be taken of the fact that many small and medium-sized
businesses might not have sufficient internal resources to respond
administrative authorities ‘at the drop of a hat’ when requests are
made for information or attendance at conferences
or interviews.
Information management
Regulators often have multiple educative, advisory, investigative and
prosecutorial roles. In these instances, effective information
strategies are crucial.
Information provided at one time by a business to a regulator seeking
information or advice should not generally be transmitted throughout
authority to investigators or prosecutors at a later time for different
purposes—certainly not without that possibility
having been made clear to
business users at the outset.
These situations arise more frequently when regulatory agencies have a
‘one-stop-shop’ function. Particular attention
to the application of
administrative law values needs to be paid in circumstances where such an
approach to administrative structures
and decision making is adopted.
Potential conflicts of interest that compromise accountability can also arise
when administrative authorities tender out legal services.
Other factors
Traditionally, the Commonwealth Ombudsman has not represented a significant
avenue of redress for businesses aggrieved by poor administrative
making. The reasons for this are uncertain. A review could usefully be carried
out to determine whether greater recourse
by business to the Commonwealth
Ombudsman would be beneficial.
Consideration could also be given to amending the freedom of information
legislation to allow a limited release of information to
a claimant or party,
instead of the world at large, when a clear case for release has been
established and other interests are not
prejudiced by selective release.
The federal Compensation for Detriment Caused by Defective Administration
Scheme is not widely known among business users. Its relevance
(or potential
relevance) to business users should be explored.
Access to the Commonwealth system of administrative law remains paramount for
business users. Importantly, however, to ensure that
this continues to be the
case, periodic review of the qualitative aspects of that system from a business
perspective is strongly
recommended. Continuing vigilance is required, to ensure
that administrative law values are maintained in the face of new and expanded
areas of business regulation.
Peter Anderson LLB (Hons), GDLP
is Chief Executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and was a
member of the Administrative
Review Council from 2005 to 2008. In the
development of this work a reference group was consulted, although the views
expressed are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the reference
group as a whole or its individual members. The work of the reference
warmly acknowledged. The group comprised Tim Capelin, Partner, Australian
Business Lawyers; Richard St John, Professional
Issues Committee Chairman,
Australian Corporate Lawyers Association; Peter Vitale, Principal Associate, CCI
Victoria Legal; Graeme
Johnson, Partner, Regulatory & Government Affairs,
Freehills; Agata Jarbin, Partner, Government Business Mallesons Stephen Jaques;
Richard Calver, National Legal Counsel, Master Builders Australia; and Daniel
Mammone, Senior Adviser Legal and Industrial Affairs,
Australian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry.
Taskforce on Reducing
Regulatory Burdens on Business 2006,
Rethinking Regulation
, Foreword.
http://www.regulationtaskforce.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/69721/regulationtaskforce.pdf
Attorney-General, Hon. Robert
McClelland MP, Address to the Sydney Institute, 30 July 2008.
Administrative Review Council
Administrative Accountability in Business Areas subject to Complex and
Specific Business Regulation
, Report no. 49, ARC, Canberra.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (32 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter