URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Li, Grace --- "The Recent PRC Telco Reform and its Implications to the PRC Telco Market" [2008] MqJlBLaw 14; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 309
The Recent PRC Telco Reform and its Implications to the PRC Telco Market
I Introduction
II The Transformation of the PRC Telco Market
A Fast Industry Development
B Regulatory Changes
Graph 1 – Regulatory Arrangement before 1998
Graph 2 – Regulatory Arrangement after 1998 reform
C Market Reforms
Market Reform I – breakup of the monopoly
Graph 3 – Breaking up monopoly in market reform I
Market Reform II – establishing six SOEs
Graph 4 – Establishing six SOEs in market reform II
Market Reform III – Re-arrange the service areas of the six SOEs
Graph 5 – Re-arrange the service areas of the six SOEs in market reform III
III The Recent Reform
A Regulatory Change – Establishing a Super Ministry
Graph 6 – The regulatory changes in the current reform
B Market Reform – Merger 6 SOEs to 3 super SOEs
Graph 7 – ‘Six to three’ market reshuffle in the current market reform
IV Evaluation of the Recent Reform
A Comment on the Regulatory Change
B Comment on the Market Reform
V Conclusion
Recent PRC Telco Reform and its Implications to the PRC Telco Market
PRC’s telecommunications industry has been through a number of major
reforms in the past two decades, which included two main
restructurings and three significant market reshuffles. As a result, the PRC
Telco industry has developed by an astonishingly
fast speed. In May this year,
the PRC State Council initiated a biggest ever Telco reform in both regulatory
framework and the market
place. This reform has created a super power Telco
regulator and three giant SOEs market players. Against this background, this
discusses the recent reform in detail in line with the various reforms in
the past and argues that - although the current reform
is likely to bring in
some positive impacts on both regulatory framework and market operation, these
impacts would be limited. To
achieve an aimed competitive market in Telco
industry, PRC needs to continue its reforms a step further by creating a better
independence and introducing private forces into its current SOEs
dominated market place.
I Introduction
China, with its enormous population and arguably the biggest telecom market,
has emerged to be the most admired nation among those
new economies in recent
years. By virtue of this fact, China has successfully developed its
telecommunication infrastructure from
one of the least developed into one of the
largest and most sophisticated networks in the world. Within two decades, China
had established
its telecommunications network adopting advanced technologies.
There are a wide range of services provided and extensive
Along with rapid modernisation, the industry has received a lot of attention
from international observers
have been many studies in respect to the driving forces of this momentum
development managed by the PRC
: the finding was nothing
like the regulatory theories by the Western developed economies such as
complete deregulation , and competition.
The real driving forces behind the
industry growth have been mainly
‘political’
addition, the PRC’s legal and regulatory environment in the
telecommunications sector has been weak and, in fact, far under
regulated, which
is putting negative contributions to the sustainability of this industry growth
in the future
In May this year, the PRC State Council initiated a major Telco reform in
both regulatory framework and the market place. This reform
established a new
industry regulator – the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
(MIIT), which replaced the previous
industry regulator Ministry of Information
Industry (MII). This reform also reshuffled the market place by merging previous
market players into three and formed a ground to issue 3G licences in
the near future. This paper discusses this reform in details
and argues the
One, as to the regulatory restructuring, this regulatory reform is likely to
bring some positive changes to the current PRC Telco
regulation. It is however a
good starting point only. More in-depth reforms should be considered in the
future or even immediately
at the completion of the current reform. More
specifically, the newly established MIIT should consider setting up an
independent
telecommunications regulatory agency and the issue of converging
broadcasting and telecommunications will need to be addressed promptly;
Two, as to the market reshuffle, there would be a couple of beneficial
results. Firstly, this reform re-arranged the market into three
major players
(was six previously) and all these three are all-service providers. Therefore,
the competition among them would be
more comprehensive. Secondly, this
‘six to three’ arrangement created a sound ground for issuing 3G
licence in the near
future. However, these three players would still be SOEs and
thus, the competition would still be limited. In addition, two of these
players are running different networks in mobile services, which is likely to
contribute some negative factors to the future
growth of either of these
networks. Moreover, with the uncertainty of the future 3G standard, all of these
three players would be
reluctant to further develop and upgrade their network
and infrastructure in a timely manner.
II The Transformation of the PRC Telco
Fast Industry Development
Generally speaking, the industry growth during the period of
to 1978 was
. The significance of
telecommunications as a key strategic industry was not realised by the
government at that junction in
. This situation was changed by
Deng Xiaoping’s “open-door policy” in late
, In turn, the policy brought
some tremendous changes to the country, as the results, the overall economy in
China had developed at
a high speed and living standards had improved
considerably.
New strategies and policies were also formulated for the country's
telecommunications industry along with a background of massive
economic reforms.
At that time, telecommunications was viewed as part of the resources, and the
principal idea was to mobilize all
resources to boost the development of the
post and telecommunications
. A central regulator,
Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (MPT), was consequently established by
the PRC State Council responsible
for overall planning in the industry and the
international development. The industry legal framework during this period was
simple with the State Council on the top and MPT as a single Ministry deal
with all the issues in its
With the development of the overall economy, the crucial status of
telecommunications as a foundation industry emerged gradually.
In the mid to
late 1980s, the Chinese government came to realise that the underdeveloped
telecommunications infrastructure was an
obstacle to overall economic growth.
Thus, special consideration was consequently granted to the telecommunications
sector, which
then led to an effective sector growth in the following years.
Take a close look, an accelerated expansion period in China’s telecom
industry started from the 1990s with the average per annum
expansion rate
approximately 3.8% since then. The telecom industry has been particularly robust
and well ahead of China’s GDP
growth in the past decade. From 1994 to
2000, the industry maintained a growth rate of about four times faster than GDP
on an average
yearly basis and the proportion of industrial added value
increased gradually in GDP by being one of the fastest growing industries
the best economic result. There are external comments stating that the Chinese
telecom sector has the strongest and fastest
growth in the world in this line of
Similar to many other countries in the world, the PRC Government used to have
a government-owned and controlled telecommunications
monopoly. At that time,
telecom was considered to be a strategic element of the national economic
infrastructure, which is vital
to national
. The sector was
consolidated under a single authority MPT and its provincial branches Provincial
Posts & Telecoms Bureaus
. Apart from certain
telecommunications infrastructure operations delegated to the Ministry of
Electronics Industry (MEI) for defense
purposes and the Chinese People’s
Liberation Army (PLA), which had its own dedicated telecommunications
infrastructure, MPT
and PPTs enjoyed exclusive powers to plan, construct,
operate and regulate the country’s public
. The following graph
demonstrates the regulatory arrangement before 1998.
Graph 1 – Regulatory Arrangement before
With near absolute control there was a temptation to be complacent and
gradually become torpid. By 1980s, MPT’s substandard
performance has
undermined the industry for many years. Public complaints against MPT became
more and more often. In addition, other
Ministries also came to realise that
telecommunication is a very lucrative business. Thus, the pressures to break up
monopoly formed
a strong force.
The State Council, after years of hesitation and behind the scenes
negotiation, acknowledged the importance of the information age
and the need for
the efficient flow of information to enable economic reforms to
In March 1998, whilst
reforming the Chinese bureaucracy, MEI and MPT, the former enemies in the
telecom market, were merged with
State Radio Regulation Commission and formed a
new ministry – Ministry of Information Industry (MII), which became a
regulator of the telecommunications and information industry.
Government news release stated that the purpose of this reform is to
independent regulator and therefore a better competitive
However, the result was
turned to be a compromise of ‘an uncompromised
The regulatory
arrangement after 1998 reform is demonstrated below.
Graph 2 – Regulatory Arrangement after 1998
Market Reforms
Market Reform I – breakup of the
Like many telecommunications markets in the world, the PRC Telco market also
started as a monopoly market. The Directorate-General
of Telecommunications
(DGT) used to serve as an administrative arm of the MPT was separated from the
postal operations of the MPT’s
business and corporatised into a
self-financing operator - China Telecom in mid 1990s, which signified a starting
point of the PRC’s
Telco market reforms. The aim was to establish MPT as
an independent regulator; and, at the same time, corporatise telecom business
part of the socialist market economy reform. The legal framework of the industry
supposed to be the regulator and the policy maker,
MPT, being an independent
referee; and the market player and incumbent, China Telecom, operate as
This initiative was however failed. There were many reasons contributed to
the overall failure. The most important one was that the
new management in China
Telecom had strong personal connections with
, which enabled China Telecom
to retain its dominance and enjoy vast policy privileges. In particular, China
Telecom seemed immune
from public
dissatisfaction.
At the same time, other ministries started to look for ways to get a
‘slice of the cake’. After years of negotiation and
inter-ministries
bargaining, the State Council finally approved new entrants in the market. As
the result of this approval, China
Telecom’s legal monopoly was curtailed.
Those early entrants included JiTong Communications Company (JiTong) and China
which were sponsored primarily by another ministry -
Unfortunately, new entrants did not bring in competition automatically. China
Unicom was such an example. Since MPT embraced both
regulatory and operational
responsibility, Unicom as an entity outside the MPT seemed to encounter many
problems with China Telecom.
In fact, Unicom faced the same problems all new
entrants face against the former monopoly - China Telecom. There were no agreed
for revenue-share or universal service obligation. Unicom lacked vital
resources to develop and was therefore more inclined to look
for overseas
technical partners and finance, reason enough for the MPT to oppose foreign
participation on any terms that might rival
The breaking up monopoly process is demonstrated by the following graph.
Graph 3 – Breaking up monopoly in market reform
Market Reform II – establishing six
After the 1998 regulatory changes, the battle for domination in the
telecommunications sector persisted. During 1999-2000, the newly
established MII
led the market through a complicated restructuring program to accommodate all
other competing interest groups. As
a result, ministries negotiated a new
telecommunications configuration with a total of six SOEs in 2000, breaking up
China Telecom’s
four divisions of services into separate entities.
Consequently, four independent companies were formed. They are responsible for
the fixed line, mobile, paging and satellite communication services,
respectively. The fixed line services retained the name China
Telecom. The new
China Telecom was officially incorporated on 17 May 2000. The mobile service
department of the old China Telecom
became China Mobile, which was established
on 16 May 2000. A new company, China Satellite, which provides satellite
telecommunications
services, was also approved by the State Council. The paging
arm of the old China Telecom was merged with Unicom. In particular,
restructuring the new China Telecom, China Mobile and Unicom were comparable
with each other in size and hence more equal
rivalries were
established.
The following graph demonstrates this process.
Graph 4 – Establishing six SOEs in market
Market Reform III
– Re-arrange the service areas of the six SOEs
As always, the superficial compromise of conflict interests is never a
permanent solution. Not surprisingly, after several years reallocating
share between the various providers the changes were still far from completed.
In May 2002, the PRC State Council created
six multi-functional state-owned
enterprises with a high degree of functional overlap. The market configuration
was reorganised again
to reflect the socialist market economy policies or
another compromise of conflict interests.
In simple, this reform inter-mixed the functions of the market players. Old
China Telecom was separated into two parts – southern
and northern. China
telecom, Northern was permitted to operate mobile telephony and fixed line
services and they operate with China
Netcom. Southern China Telecom became a new
China Telecom and they were permitted to operate a mobile telephony and fixed
line services.
China Mobile remained unchanged as China’s largest operator
in the mobile service market. The New China Netcom combined Northern
Telecom, old China Netcom and Jitong, which remained a strong presence in
northern part of China’s telecom market. China
Unicom remained unchanged
and can provide a full range of telecommunications services with a focus on
mobile telephony. China Railcom
also remained unchanged and can provide a full
range of telecommunications services with a focus on fixed-line telephony.
Not surprisingly, industry observers commented that the current regulatory
framework is more of the result from turf war rather than
the result of a
genuine better regulatory
Although the MII
claimed that the complicated reform was designed with a primary purpose of
improving competition and
, complaints from
other Ministries to the State Council and the involvement and the decision made
by the State Council showed that
the real motivation of these reforms were to
ease the inter-ministry tensions.
The following graph demonstrates this process.
Graph 5 – Re-arrange the service areas of the
six SOEs in market reform III
III The Recent
Change – Establishing a Super Ministry
The PRC State Council announced its Ministerial Reform Plan on
March 2008. The plan includes establishing of five super
Ministries including a Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of
People's Republic of China (MIIT). This newly established Ministry is to replace
the previous Telco regulator
MIIT is established by merging previous MII, The Commission of Science
Technology and Industry for National Defense of the People's
Republic of
China (COSTIND), the State Council Office of Developing Information Society and
some offices of PRC National Development
and Reform Commission (NDRC). The
primary responsibilities of MIIT include: setting strategic planning for
industries, setting industry
policies and standards, monitoring industry
operations, promoting the development of major technological infrastructure and
inventions,
regulating telecommunications sector, supervising and promoting the
establishing of the information society and coordinating with
other agencies to
protect national information
The following graph demonstrates this regulatory re-arrangement.
Graph 6 – The regulatory changes in the
current reform
Reform – Merger 6 SOEs to 3 super SOEs
May 2008, A Notice of Deepening Reform in
Telecommunications Sector was published by MII in conjunction with NDRC and
National Treasury.
specified the new market reform planning, which includes a sale of China
Unicom’s CDMA network to China Telecom,
merge China Unicom with China
Netcom, merge China Satellite basic telecommunication business with China
Telecom, and merge China
Railcom with China
In simple, this reform
plan was to merge the existing six Telco SOEs into three super SOEs. It is
therefore widely referred as the
‘six to three’ reform.
Also on the notice, it is specified that the objective of this reform aims to
set a common competition platform for the major players
telecommunications market by allowing all there players to operate all the
telecommunications services including fixed line
service, mobile service and
Internet service. Commentators observed that this is to set a good ground in
preparation of issuing three
3G licences to these SOEs in the very near
The market reform is demonstrated as below.
Graph 7 – ‘Six to three’ market
reshuffle in the current market reform
IV Evaluation of the Recent Reform
Comment on the Regulatory
There have been controversies regards to this recent Telco regulatory change
– more specifically, the establishment of the super
power regulator, MIIT.
The controversies started immediately after the State Council published its
Ministerial Reform Plan in March
this year and it was intensified after MIIT
officially started its administration on 26 June.
On the one hand, people from industry viewed this regulatory change as a
‘big surprise’.
They argued that this regulatory change can only deliver an unsatisfactory
industry regulation in the future due to the fact that
it was not following the
widely accepted regulatory theories such independent and impartial industry
regulation and separate regulation
telecommunications.
instead of establishing a super power Ministry, the State Council should have
followed the experiences in many developed
countries and set up an independent
regulatory agency, which should be strictly separated from the government and
independent to
the industry.
On the other hand, commentator and industry observers have expressed positive
views about this regulatory change. The Telco Industry
Analyst Xinfeng Zhang
believed that the super power Ministry would make some changes to the current
multi-regulator situation. He
explained that the PRC Telco regulation before
this reform was in fact very messy with MII at one hand acting as the
‘regulator’
and, on the other hand, many other government
departments were active in sharing the ‘slice of the cake’ in the
business. This reform made the new MIIT became a real empowered
regulator who will act as the monopoly figure in Telco regulation.
the regulatory environment in the future would be simpler and easier to
understand, which in turn, will be beneficial
to the market players when seeking
permission or making complaints. The super power Ministry will reduce the
overlapping administrative
procedures as
The independent director
of China Netcom, Mr. Zoning Hou also stated publicly that - “it is a good
thing to see the merge of
the Ministry of Industry and Ministry of Information.
This will be very beneficial to the future of China Telecommunications industry.
The supervision will be stronger after this regulatory
In addition,
Professor Jianqiu Zeng observed that there is no need to set up a separate
regulator in China, regulation and supervision
run by MIIT would be enough for
the industry and the PRC Telco market in the foreseeable
Despite some reservation, it would appear this regulatory reform can bring
some positive changes to the current poor Telco regulation
in PRC. It is however
a good starting point only. More in-depth reforms should be considered in the
near future if it is not immediately.
More specifically, MIIT should consider
setting up an independent telecommunications regulatory agency and the issue of
convergence
broadcasting and telecommunications will need to be addressed in a
timely manner. The following paragraph explains this view in more
Firstly, the regulatory reform can bring some positive changes to the current
Telco regulation. MII, who used to be the major industry
regulator has become
one functional part of the newly established MIIT. Therefore, all the functions
of old MII transferred to the
new MIIT. MIIT is now responsible for the Telco
market, industry operation as well as performing all other MII’s previous
In respective to the regulatory functions, it would be no doubts that
MIIT can fully replace the old MII without concession. There
will not be any
diminishing in performing regulatory functions. What happened in the past would
pretty much be what would happen
in the near future. Moreover, the super power
MIIT can even strengthens its regulatory power. For example, in the past, MII
was responsible
for planning and building of the base telecommunications towers.
However, MII would have to apply for a written approval from NDRC
to commence
any building project. Under the old administrative process, the procedure of
running such project could have been very
lengthy. The situation could get
changed after this reform. This regulatory reform has pooled both NDRC and MII
under the big umbrella
of MIIT. It is therefore fair to expect a quicker and
administrative procedure under the new MIIT regime.
Secondly, this reform is of a starting point only. It does not solve many key
issues in the industry regulation such as independent
regulator, removal of
market entry barriers, and convergence of broadcasting and telecommunications.
For instance, with IPTV and
mobile TV becoming more and more popular, the issue
of converging broadcasting and telecommunications regulation is becoming
Many countries have merged their broadcasting and telecommunications
regulators to reflect the trend of convergence, such as Ofcom
in the UK, ACMA in
Australia, MCMC in Malaysia, Agcom in Italy and Ficora in Finland. In fact, the
convergence of broadcasting and
telecommunications is technically mature in
China as many other places in the world. But PRC is not ready to move on to the
convergence
phase yet with its long standing battles between Ministry of
Broadcasting and the old MII.
This regulatory uncertainty has lagged the development of these technologies for
Although PRC can just
leave this issue aside for the meantime, they will need to address the trend of
convergence and response to
it in the very near future.
the Market Reform
This recent ‘six to three’ Telco market reform has brought PRC a
major market shake up. Six competing Telco SOEs was basically
ordered by the
State Council to merge or take over businesses from each other. There is much to
discuss in this new set up.
First of all, this paper is to comment on the reform plan.
The reform plan was released through a Ministerial notice, the Notice of
Deepening Reform in Telecommunications Sector, which was
published by MII in
conjunction with NDRC and National
This notice clearly
stated the reasons for reform as below:
‘[M]any new situations and new problems have merged in the PRC ICT
industry in the recent years, especially in regards to the
competition framework
and the allocation of telecommunications resources. In particular, an extremely
fast growth of the mobile service
sector and a much slower development in fixed
line service sector has shifted the competition platform to an unbalanced
status, which
has also created a big disparity in terms of competitiveness among
the current market players. All these have presented an urgent
need for a market
reform – a reform to address the new issues and find
As regards to the objectives of this reform, this document stated that:
[T]he aim of this reform is to, by using the opportunity of adopting 3G
technology, allocate the telecommunications resources logically,
realise all
services operations, create an appropriate and healthy competition environment,
which will prevent the monopoly and avoid
excessive building of
infrastructures…
This document also made it very clear that:
[T]his market reform is to be conducted with the consideration of the 3G
licensing arrangement in the near future. 3G licenses are
to be issued after the
completion of this reform.
These statements indicate a strong political will of developing
telecommunications industry in China by the government forces rather
actual market, although the latter is promoted by the government in many other
These statements also
revealed a high hope on the reform to bring in positive changes in the current
unbalanced market competition
in the coming years with the issuing of three 3G
licences in the very near future.
What is the real reason causing the unbalanced market competition? This paper
believes that the answer could be indicated by the recent
Telco reform history
in PRC. Firstly of all, in the 2002 market reform, market players were
restricted as to what services they could
provide, which included granting China
Mobile an exclusive power to run mobile service and granting China Telecom an
exclusive power
to run the fixed line service. This arrangement contributed
positively in promoting the telecommunications development in those days.
however has started to date in the recent years with the global surge of the
mobile service taking up. As expected by various
studies, ‘mobile phone
will exceed fixed line phone in many
are experiencing today is ‘mobile phone has exceed fixed line phone in
some parts of the world’.
Secondly, there has been little promotion of the more advanced deployment of
digital technologies, which led to a slow development
of ADSL broadband
deployment and minimal development in FTTH or FTTN technology in PRC. In turn,
this contributed to a slow development
of the fixed line phone market, which
eventually contributed to the unbalanced positions in market competition. In
addition, in running
its Telco businesses, China Unicom adopted multi-standard
networks (GSM and CDMA) due to some historical
, which now lead to a
situation where China Unicom is facing a lack of resources, low efficiency and a
difficulty of pooling its customers
to serve both of its networks. In simple,
the leads of the current unbalanced competition situation in PRC Telco market is
by a single reason, but a number of contributory factors.
Then, how does one ease the existing unbalanced market competition and can
this recent market reform make changes? The short answer
is – it remain
to be seen in the following years, the reform itself will not bring in
competition automatically due to its
political nature, which limited the reform
and the market within an realm of SOEs. SOEs biggest interests are always the
government.
It is therefore hard to claim a real competitive market place.
However, if the current three full service players can be creative
their special businesses based on their advantages after the reform and further
after receiving their 3G licence, a better
competitive environment (not a real
competitive market) could be achieved. The following analysis is to support this
view by discussing
the three players in details.
Firstly, China Mobile, it owns the best quality GSM network in PRC with the
most number of subscribers. In fact, China Mobile’s
alleged its GSM
network becoming the biggest network in the world in recent
Domestically, it is no
doubt that China Mobile is the ‘big brother’. Internationally, China
Mobile is still a big company
with the biggest number of subscribers, it is
however not the strongest in terms of competitiveness with other international
– it is still sitting outside of the top 10 international Telco
companies on the authoritative global
This reform made China
Railcom merged with China Mobile. Is this a gain or a loss from China
Mobile’s perspective? The answer
is definitely not straightforward. By the
end of 2007, China Mobile had about 390 million
subscribers.
The merge with
China Railcom is comparatively insignificant both in the number of
subscribers
and in the net
. This merge is therefore
not vital to the development of China Mobile. This paper suspects that the real
reason behind this merge
is because of the long time unfavorable operation of
China Railcom, which made it a big burden instead of an asset. When the PRC
State Council considered the issuing of 3G licence and tried to balance the
interests of all the Telco stakeholders as they always
need to, they had no
choice but to find a new home for China Railcom. China Mobile became the
inevitable victim due to its superior
leading position in the RPC market. There
could be a couple of advantages in merging Railcom and Mobile: one is to remove
China Railcom
as an insignificant players with insignificant infrastructure and
insignificant number of subscribers in the market; and, two is
to give China
Mobile some fixed line business and therefore it might want to build its future
network based on it. Nevertheless,
the merger of Mobile and Railcom did not
change the battlefield in a great way, China Mobile is still the biggest
operator in PRC
market and it will probably continue its super power in the
following years.
Secondly, China Telecom, the core business of China Telecom has been its
fixed line service. Although it does have a Personal Hand
Phone System (PHS)
network, the technology that this support PHS network is far less advanced then
the cellular mobile communications
technology.
After a sharp rise
in the number of subscribers in 2003 and 2004 with a peak in
the take up rate of PHS
phone showed a huge decrease in the past two
The direct reason behind
this decrease was the price of using GSM and CDMA mobile was marked down heavily
at the end of 2006 by China
In fact, the number of
PHS subscribers decreased around 6.08 million in 2007 and 5.05 million in first
4 months in 2008.
If this trend
continues, which is highly likely given the fact that this is what happened in
many other places in the world
cellular mobile will take up most of the market in the coming months. Thus, to
effectively compete with other operators in the market,
China Telecom has been
in great need of a permit to provide real mobile services. After the reform,
China Telecom would take over
410 million CDMA subscribers from China Unicom,
plus its existing 2200 million fixed line subscribers and 60 million PHS
subscribers,
China Telecom would be able to compete with China Unicom and China
Mobile in both fixed line and mobile services
However, the price that
China Telecom paid is also high. China Telecom paid RMB110 billion (about AUD$18
billion) to take over China
Unicom’s CDMA
Nevertheless, the
challenge for China Telecom does not ease with the taking over of China
Unicom’s CDMA network. In fact, with
the trend of losing subscribers in
their fixed line services and PHS subscribers, the challenge for China Telecom
still persists.
Moreover, the China Unicom’s CDMA’s network has not
been as reputable as to its GSM network. The future of China Telecom
very uncertain.
Thirdly, China Unicom, it owns two national wide mobile networks (GSM and
CDMA) due to the historical reasons. In 1999, China Unicom
publicly announced
that its GSM resources could only adopt around 80 million subscribers and
therefore they decided to build a CDMA
network, which uses another band of
spectrum, bases on a more advanced technology and brings in ‘green’
mobile phone.
Although the
introduction of a new CDMA network received many critics in those days and MII
also set up a face-to-face forum for
, the final decision was still
made in favor of introducing the new network. The consequence was not only a
very slow CDMA taking
up rate, it also separated the GSM subscribers and lead to
a much slower development of GSM network. The CDMA network had been running
loss until about 2006. All these contributed to the decision of selling the CDMA
network to China Telecom. Nevertheless, this
paper argues that, separating GSM
and CDMA networks could be a short term solution to a number of issues. One,
this separation effectively
granted China Telecom a permit to provide mobile
service; two, it allows China Unicom to concentrate on developing its core GSM
and, three, as indicated by the CEO of China Telecom, this separation
creates a sound ground for issuing 3G licence in the near
Another change that this
reform has brought to China Unicom is the merger with China Netcom. The main
business of China Unicom is
PHS and fixed line services. It has 200 million PHS
subscribers and 110 million fixed line
subscriber.
Both of these
services are however decreasing due to the same reason as seen in the China
Telecom’s situation. If China Unicom
does not effectively retain the China
Netcom’s subscribers and transfer them to the Unicom’s GSM network,
China Unicom
is to face a similar challenge that China Telecom is to face.
Thus, after this ‘six to three’ reform, all three major operators
will be able to provide mobile service and fixed line
service, which would
presumably lead to a better but still limited competition. China Telecom would
face the big challenge of retaining
their user in its fixed line network and PHS
network, and, at the same time, attracting more subscribers to its newly
acquired CDMA
network. China Unicom would be in the situation of trying to
retain or transfer their fixed line and PHS subscribers (these subscribers
from the old China Netcom) to its GSM services. At the same time, as to the
mobile service sector, China Unicom would expect
some level of competition
coming from China Telecom’s CDMA sector. Comparatively, the situation of
the PRC Telco ‘big
brother’ China Mobile is less critical. Although
the merger with China Railcom is not likely to bring many benefits to China
Mobile, the insignificance of China Mobile would unlikely affect the general
operation of China Mobile. In general, this reform significantly
reshuffled the
PRC Telco market place. As to the real result of the reform, it remains to be
seen in the next few years.
Despite the controversies of the current reform in both the regulatory
structure and the market place, this paper further argues that,
the significance
of this reform lies in a real game in the near future – the 3G game. This
current reform is a ‘warming
up’ stage of the real 3G game. The PRC
State Council is trying to set a fair starting point for all the three players.
Unfortunately,
the starting point is hard to be a real equal basis. In addition,
the political will has been playing a vital driving force in the
development of
PRC’s Telco industry for many years. It however could not solve all the
problems such as the under-developed
TD-SCEMA standard and the slow development
of CDMA network.
In conclusion, this current reform is of a beginning of a new arrangement
trialed by the PRC government. The real issue remains in
the post-reform stage
and in fact, the post-3G licensing stage. Who is to win and who is to loss in
the coming 3G battle would be
an interesting thing to see.
* Dr Grace Li is a law lecturer in Faculty of Law, University of Technology,
Sydney (UTS). She can be contracted by
Grace.li@uts.edu.au
The Glory of the Telecom in China's Recent 100
For example: J Ure,
'Telecommunication in China - More than was Bargained For?' (1997) 2
Technology Quarterly
34., L Press et al, 'The Internet in India and China'
Information Technologies and International Development
Li, 'Moving towards the Unsustainability - A Study of Chinese Telecommunications
regulation'
(2008) 1(1)
International Journal of Private Law
G Li, A Lau and A Young,
'Rethinking Telecommunications Corporate Governance and Law in China: The
Theories, Rules and Practices
' (2007)(2)
Australian Compliance and
Regulatory Journal
G Li, 'Moving towards the
Un-sustainability - A Study of Chinese Telecommunications regulation'
International Journal of Private Law
1949 is the year when the
Chinese Communist Party took the office.
Guan, S. Y. (2002). The
Development of Telecommunications Competition in China Retrieved 7 May 2006,
www.innovationlaw.org/lawforum/pages/guan_development_telecommunication.DOC+MII+was+established+1998+state+council&hl=en
He Zhou, 'A History of
Telecommunications in China: Development and Policy Implications' in Paul S N
Telecommunications and Development in China
Liu, G. (1998).
The Life of
the Chinese: Real Life Stories
. Nan Chang: Jiangxi Publish.
Zhou, above, n 8.
Wang, S. (2001).
Development of the Telecom Sector in Modern China.
Hubei Legal Review,
E Sautedé, 'Telecoms
in China: Towards a Post-WTO Shock Therapy' (2002) 45
China Perspectives
L P Chavolla and R
Samarajiva, 'Privatization, Market Liberalization and Regulatory Reform in the
Mexican Telecommunications System
' in D J Ryan (ed),
Privatization and
Competition in Telecommunications
(1997) 150.
K Zita, 'Modernising
China's Telecommunication' (1987) 23
The Economist
Y Wu, 'China: Growth and
reform in telecommunication' (2004)
Telecommunication reform in the
Asia-pacific Region
H Zhou, 'A History of
Telecommunications in China: Development and Policy Implications' in P S N Lee
Telecommuications and Development in China
J Ure, 'Telecommunication
in China - More than was Bargained For' (1997) 2
New Technology Quarterly
H Hong,'Telecom Reforms to
Enhance Competition',
China Daily
(Beijing), 8 January 2002.
W Hui, 'Who is a liar
– the story behind the new reform in telecom sector' (2000) 12
University Law Review
44-88; G Li, 'Moving towards the Unsustainability - A
Study of Chinese Telecommunications regulation'
(2008) 1(1)
International
Journal of Private Law
Y Xu, N Levine and P
Douglas, 'Competition Without Privatization: The Chinese Path' in S Macdonald
and G Madden (eds),
Telecommunication and Socio-Economic Development
(1998) 375-392.
'Telecommunication reforms in China: towards an analytical framework ' (2004)
Telecommunication Policy
Y Wu, 'Growing through
Deregulation: a Study of China's Telecommunication Industry' (Paper presented at
the Telecommunication Reforms
in the Asia-Pacific: can developing countries
benefit from the experience of developed countries, Jakarta.
Z Tan, 'China's Information
Superhighway: What is it and who controls it'
(1995) 19(8)
Telecommunications
J Ure, 'The Chinese
Telecommunications Market' (Paper presented at the Business & Technology
Exchange Forum on Telecommunications,
Hong Kong Industrial Technology Centre
Corporation Tech Centre, Kowloon.
Y Wu, 'Growing through
Deregulation: a Study of China's Telecommunication Industry' (Paper presented at
the Telecommunication Reforms
in the Asia-Pacific: can developing countries
benefit from the experience of developed countries, Jakarta.
H Zhang,'Vicious Domestic
Competition Pushed the Industry ',
People's Daily
(Beijing), 9
W jichuan, 'Breaching the
Monopoly and Separating Chinese Telecommunications Businesses from the
Government Administration',
Hong Kong Financial Review
(Hong Kong), 25
X Wang, 'Reforms in the Key
Sectors and the Impacts on the Current Legal Practice' (2003) 12(2)
University Law Review
The PRC State Council,
The PRC State Council Ministry Institutional Reform Planning
State Council
http://www.gov.cn/2008lh/content_916855.htm
MII, NDRC and N Treasury,
A Notice of Deepening Reform in Telecommunications Sector
www.mii.gov.cn/art/2008/05/24/art_2001_45730.html
> at 25 May
H Wang, 'the Right Reading
of the New Reform in Telco Market' (2008) [22] 45(3)
Telecommunications
J Wang, 'Expect the
Unexpectable - a Study of the Current Regulatory Change in Telco Sector' (2008)
Wuhan University Law Review
What Is the
Effective Telecommunications Regulation
(2008) Sohu
http://xiangligang.blog.sohu.com/
at 27 June 2008.
H Wang, 'Where Is the
Indepence in the Telco Regulation?' (2008) 78(1)
Wuhan University Law
the 3G Market
and the Compitition Behind It
(2008) Sohu
http://digi.it.sohu.com/20080401/n256025661.shtml
(2008) Sina Technology
http://tech.sina.com.cn/t/2008-04-11/20482133534.shtml
Portability Can Not Change the Unbalenced Telecommunications Regulation In China
http://www.cnii.com.cn/20080308/ca473443.htm
Li and Rahaju, 'Regulatory
Multiplicities in Telecommunications Reforms in Indonesia and China' (2005) 2
Macquarie Journal of Business and Law
G Li, A Lau and A Young,
'Rethinking Telecommunications Corporate Governance and Law in China: The
Theories, Rules and Practices
' (2007)(2)
Australian Compliance and
Regulatory Journal
MII, NDRC and N Treasury,
A Notice of Deepening Reform in Telecommunications Sector
www.mii.gov.cn/art/2008/05/24/art_2001_45730.html
> at 25 May
R Chen, 'The Challenges and
Opportunities for 3G Development in China' (Paper presented at the The 4th
Senior Forum on VA ICT Businesses
and Exhibit Beijing, 26 September 2005); J
3G Development in PRC Sould Speed Up
(2008) Sina Technology
http://tech.sina.com.cn/t/2008-04-03/04352117105.shtml
at 2 July 2008; G
Xi, ' 3G in China' (Paper presented at the International ICT Summit Beijing,
September 2005)
www.mii.gov.cn/art/2005/12/12/art_131_3100.html
mobile calls to exceed fixed line
(2008) Telecommunications
http://www.gizmag.com/mobile-calls-to-exceed-fixed-line/8783/
Jones,' Watch This Mobile Advertising Space',
Financial Review
M Castells et al,
communication and society: a global perspective
G Li, A Lau and A Young,
'Rethinking Telecommunications Corporate Governance and Law in China: The
Theories, Rules and Practices
' (2007)(2)
Australian Compliance and
Regulatory Journal
China Mobile Ltd,
Introduction of China Mobile Ltd.
(2007) China Mobile
http://www.chinamobileltd.com/about.php
at 12 July 2008.
Total Telecom,
－ Total Telecom Ranking
China Mobile Limited,
China Mobile Limited 2007 Financial Report
(2007) China Mobile Limited
http://www.chinamobileltd.com/images/pdf/2008/ar/CMHK_ar_2007_e_full.pdf
at 13 June 2008.
The number of subscribers
of China Railcom is about 1/10 of China Mobile. Re Ibid. and China Railcom
The Operation of China Railcom in 2007
(2007) China Railcom
http://www.chinatietong.com/news/index.php3
at 13 June 2008.
the net asset of China Railcom is about
1/10 of China Mobile. Re China Mobile Limited,
China Mobile Limited 2007
Financial Report
(2007) China Mobile Limited
http://www.chinamobileltd.com/images/pdf/2008/ar/CMHK_ar_2007_e_full.pdf
at 13 June 2008. and China Railcom Limited,
The Operation of China Railcom in
(2007) China Railcom Limited
http://www.chinatietong.com/news/index.php3
at 13 June 2008.
encyclopedia of telecommunications
mainly because the policy
did not allow fixed line service provider to provide mobile services in those
days and PHS is a limited
mobile service which was categorised into fixed line
service category
T Hu and J Sha,
'Suggestions to the PRC Mobile E-Commerce ' (2007) 24(5)
F Lu, 'Analysis of China
Telecom's PHS Strategies' (2008) 18(1)
Information Network
X Wang,'Continue Decrease
in Xiao Ling Tong Subscribers',
Market News
(Beijing), 27 Feb, 3.
T Hu and J Sha,
'Suggestions to the PRC Mobile E-Commerce ' (2007) 24(5)
B Lu and Y Xiao,'China
Telecom CEO Xiaochu Wang - High Price Taking Over CDMA Network for Future 3G
Financial Daily
(Beijing), 3 June.
Launch of the
CDMA Network
(1999) China Unicom Pty. <www.chinaunicom.com.hk/en/
tech/mobile/standard/mobileNetwork.html> at 4 Oct 2002.
T Hu and J Sha,
'Suggestions to the PRC Mobile E-Commerce ' (2007) 24(5)
B Lu and Y Xiao,'China
Telecom CEO Xiaochu Wang - High Price Taking Over CDMA Network for Future 3G
Financial Daily
(Beijing), 3 June.
China Netcom Limited,
The Business of China Netcom in 2007
(2008) China Netcom Limited
http://www.chinanetcom.com.cn/2j/dxsc/index.asp
at 14 June 2008.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (57.1 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter