URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:49:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McLinden, Cassie; Barclay, Elaine M --- "Australian Media Portrayals of Domestic Terrorism: The Sydney Siege and Parramatta Shooting" [2018] CICrimJust 2; (2018) 29(3) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 209
Australian Media Portrayals of Domestic Terrorism: The Sydney Siege and
Parramatta Shooting
Cassie McLinden
and Elaine M
Content analysis of two Sydney newspapers’ coverage of two recent
terrorist events in Australia examined the way Australian
media portray domestic
terrorism. The findings revealed the existence of Orientalism (Said 1977) in
Australian media portrayals of
terrorism. This produced an enemy-other frame
evident in the portrayal of the offender, the Muslim community and the wider
of domestic terrorism. This enemy-other frame reinforced a national
identity of what it means to be Australian. Social expectations
employment, economic contribution and values of kindness, loyalty and
multiculturalism underlined the expected behaviours
of individuals, separating
the offenders, and to an extent the broader Muslim community from the collective
Australian identity.
The results affirm that media coverage of domestic
terrorism goes beyond mere reporting of a terrorist event. Rather, the media
multiple discursive frames to establish context and societal
expectations regarding acceptable behaviour, national belonging, criminal
justice procedures, and the role of security agencies.
media – terrorism – orientalism –
othering – national identity – Lindt Cafe – Australia
Introduction
The London bombings in 2005, perpetrated by British citizens, signified a
shift in how Western governments respond to the threat of
Islamic terrorism.
Instead of the threat emanating out of the Middle-East, a new style of terrorist
had emerged and what was once
regarded as transnational, was now recast as
domestic terrorism. The lone-wolf and home-grown terrorist had acted as a
turning focus to domestic policy and research to understand this
seemingly new phenomenon (Crone & Harrow 2011, p. 521). This
examines this phenomenon in Australia.
Media representations of terrorist events shape public understandings which
facilitate law and order debates within public, legal
and political domains and
pressure governments to respond. This article examines how the media frames
domestic terrorism in Australia.
Framing is the way narrative structure
influences human consciousness through written communication (Entman 1993, p.
52). Importantly,
this article is concerned with the nature and extent of
government framing within media reporting; specifically, the tone of language
introduced by government spokespersons to define an issue that suits the current
political agenda (Entman 2003, p. 417).
Two recent events in Australia garnered significant attention in the
Australian media. The first was a siege in Sydney’s city
centre and the
second was the murder of a civilian employee of New South Wales
(‘NSW’) Police Force in Parramatta, a
suburb in Sydney’s west.
New South Wales Police labelled and responded to these incidents as
‘terrorist events’
and were reported as such by the media. This
shaped public response.
On 15 December 2014, Man Haron Monis entered the Lindt Café in the
heart of Sydney’s commercial business district. Producing
branding a flag used by extremist groups such as the Taliban, he ordered
customers and staff be locked in the café
as hostages. In a standoff
lasting 17 hours Tory Johnson, the manager of the café, was killed by
Monis, while Katrina Dawson,
a customer of the café, and Monis were
killed by police bullets and shrapnel when police stormed the building (DPMC
p. 2). Monis was known to police; he had a lengthy criminal history, was
on bail as an accessory to murder and had been found guilty
of sending hate mail
to families of Australian soldiers killed in Afghanistan (‘Soft law and
poor intel’ 2014). The siege
brought NSW bail laws, the effectiveness of
the criminal justice system and the NSW Police response to terrorism to the
of media discourse.
Less than a year later, on 2 October 2015 in Parramatta, NSW Police civilian
employee Curtis Cheng was shot and killed by 15-year-old
Farhad Jabar Mohammad,
who also fired several shots towards Parramatta Police Headquarters before he
was killed by police who responded
to the incident (‘Gunman who shot dead
NSW police employee’, 2015). Contextually, this event reinforced the
growing fear
of youth radicalisation (see Australian Strategic Policy Institute
2015, p. 13).
These events provide insight into modern-day terrorism — public acts of
violence, designed to incite fear, however insubstantially
inspired by groups
such as ISIS or al-Qaeda, that in practice have a more complex domestic origin.
That police defined these events
as ‘terrorism’ is central to this
article, as that shaped media portrayals of what occured. Accordingly, this
adopts a broad definition of home-grown or domestic terrorism as
consisting of offenders who are long-term residents or citizens
of Australia,
radicalised in the West and acting autonomously, with insubstantial ties to any
known terrorism organisation (Mullins
2007, p. 7). This broad definition
allows for a greater understanding of the contemporary threat to Australian
national security
(Mullins 2007, p. 1).
As there has been little academic research into these terrorist attacks in
Sydney, this article provides an analysis of how Australian
media portrayed
these events. The study builds on the work of Colic-Peisker, Mikola and Dekker
(2016) who also analysed media coverage
of the Sydney siege. However, the
present study differs by examining two terrorist events, rather than one. The
aim of the study
was to ascertain the discursive frames used in news
construction, rather than interpreting the effects of media reports on public
reaction. Specifically, the study addressed the following questions:
• What is the nature and extent of government framing of terrorist
events within media reports?
• How are the roles of ‘offender’ and ‘victim’
presented in media reports of terrorist events?
• To what extent does ‘Orientalism’ feature in media
framing of terrorist events?
The findings contribute to academic discourse around media representations of
terrorism by revealing that current media framing goes
beyond presenting the
mere facts of an event to include a wide range of terrorism aspects, such as
social cohesion, emergency response,
and the promotion of Australian identity.
In what follows, the factors that influence media reporting of terrorist
events are discussed. An overview of the theoretical and
methodological approach
to the content analysis of two key Australian newspapers follows. The results
are presented and discussed
according to key themes identified in the analysis
and concludes by considering the contributions of this study to the literature
and recommendations for future research.
Reporting terrorism
When constructing news, journalists can elect to quote those who occupy
positions of authority to present an official version of events
by establishing
the parameters of a discussion and framing an issue in a particular way
(Crelinsten 1989). Known as ‘primary
definers’, these authoritative
individuals include politicians, police or experts in a relevant field
(Crelinsten 1989, p.
318). In terrorism coverage, government frames can be
introduced through politicians emphasising certain rhetoric. This can influence
the media agenda and set the tone for discussion. For example, in covering a
terrorist event, the media can communicate through a
fear-based discourse
(Altheide 2006; Collins 2014; Larson
2006; Lee 2007
; Mythen & Walklate
2006). This rhetoric creates an archetypal ‘criminal other’ that
transcends fear of crime to become
fear of certain groups of people (Larson
2006). The concept of the ‘other’ can be found in the seminal works
(1963), who described outsiders as ‘people who are judged by
others to be deviant and thus to stand outside the circle of
members of the group’ (Becker 1963, p. 19).
Government and the media
Through its ability to freely critique other centres of power such as
governments, the media informs citizens and facilitates democracy.
This ability,
known as ‘the fourth estate’, promotes the media as a government
watchdog, providing the public with information
on certain issues, policies and
events (McGarrity 2011, p. 274). However, those in political power often take
advantage of the media’s
dependence on official sources of information
(Crelinsten 1989; McGarrity 2011). McGarrity (2011) argues that during a
event the government exploits this dependence by determining what
information is released, and how and when it is released to the
The presence of government framing in media coverage of terrorism has been
well established (Altheide 2006; Brinson & Stohl 2012;
Papacharissi & de
Fatima Oliveira 2008). Brinson and Stohl (2012), in examining American and
British media coverage of the London
bombings in 2005, found that framing and
particular language introduced by government spokespersons was replicated in
media reporting
further reinforcing the government’s counter-terrorism
agendas. In American coverage, the American press continually linked
bombings to al Qaeda, corresponding with statements made by President Bush. In
contrast, the British press repeated the
British government’s policy of
labelling the attacks as ‘domestic terrorism’ (Brinson & Stohl
2012, p. 272).
American news, by signalling to the American public that the
London bombings were internationally linked with al Qaeda, reinforced
‘war on terror’ frame, highlighting the threat of Islamic terrorism
as originating out of the Middle-East as opposed
to a domestic threat. In
contrast, the British media portrayed the attacks as isolated and domestic in
nature (Brinson & Stohl
These findings highlight how each respective government’s primary
definers introduced the discursive parameters of the media’s
coverage of
the 2005 London bombings. As the bombings were perpetrated by British citizens
rather than foreign jihadists, the coverage
of this attack in American news is
particularly misleading. Accordingly, the present study sought to determine if
government framing
featured in coverage of the Sydney siege and the Parramatta
Framing the outsider, the other, the non-member
A major focus of academic literature has been the communication of fear and
risk through media coverage of crime and terrorism (Collins
2014; Larson
; Mythen & Walklate 2006). Lee (2007, pp. 187–98) argues that
crime coverage emphasises a culture of fear by consistently
writing through a
framework of threat; that no one is safe and danger is imminent. Collins (2014,
p. 79) posits that, rather than
creating fear, news reports have the potential
to direct fear in that they ‘do not just tell us to be afraid, rather they
us who to be afraid of’.
Altheide (2006) proposed that American newspapers used a discourse of fear,
combining terrorism with nonconformity, deviance and
crime as a threat. This led
to media coverage pointing towards the ‘other, the outsider, the
non-member’ (p. 419). On
the media’s influence in creating a moral
panic Cohen (2011, p. 10) states: ‘Their very reporting of certain facts
be sufficient to generate concern, anxiety, indignation or panic.’
In ‘othering’ a person or group of people, the media separates
them from the rest of the law abiding public and defines
what is and is not
acceptable behaviour in society (Altheide 2006, p. 419; Cohen 2011, p. 11). The
creation of a criminal other as
separate from the rest of society is significant
in assessing the discourse surrounding the portrayal of domestic terrorism. The
present study aimed to identify who is given a voice in setting media agenda and
how certain groups or individual people are portrayed
in the wider context of
terrorism in Australia.
The influence of Orientalism in the framing of the Muslim
The concept of ‘othering’ certain people or groups of people has
been a point of previous Australian studies of media
coverage of terrorism
(Akbarzadeh & Smith 2005; Lewis & de Massi
2007; Manning 2003
2008, 2010). The creation of the ‘Muslim other’ can be seen in the
theoretical underpinnings of
Orientalism
to describe a ‘historical
phenomenon, a way of thought, a contemporary problem, and a material
reality’ as an ‘ineradicable
distinction between Western superiority
and Oriental inferiority’ (Said 1977, pp. 53–5). Gerbner’s
(1992) examination
of how Orientalism is reflected in the media, argued that
Western media employ stereotypes in terrorism coverage. Media reports of
terrorism incident consistently portrayed terrorists as unpredictable and
irrational, symbolising a menace that rational, Western
means cannot reach or
control (Gerbner 1992, p. 96).
A perceived divide between Eastern and Western values and cultures is
prominent in most Australian research on media portrayals of
(Akbarzadeh & Smith
2005; Manning 2003
; Mahony 2008, 2010). Lewis and de
Masi’s (2007) textual analysis of two Melbourne newspapers examined how
dividing discourse
was propagated in coverage of the 2002 and 2005 Bali
bombings. Despite Indonesia’s relative physical proximity to Australia,
the study found that Indonesia was a cultural and linguistic mystery, habitually
viewed with fear and suspicion by the Australian
public (Lewis & de Masi
2007, p. 70). This resulted in the majority of articles attributing blame to a
monolithic Islam without
reference to specific regional, cultural, historical or
political factors that could contribute to terrorism in Indonesia (Lewis
de Masi 2007). Omitting these factors hinders public debate on a range of issues
such as immigration and government intrusion
on civil liberties.
Analysing media coverage of the 2014 Sydney siege, Colic-Peisker et al.
(2016) found that coverage emphasised Australian values of
community, solidarity
and multiculturalism. The promotion of these values within the national identity
placed Muslims on the margin
of acceptance and solidarity. This was achieved by
applying a simplistic binary of good and bad Muslims particularly in media
of the offender (Colic-Peisker et al. 2016). The offender’s
citizenship and his place in the Australia community were questioned,
other ‘good’ Muslims were portrayed as a part of the collective
Australian identity, as ‘people just like
us’ (Colic-Peisker et al.
2016, p. 280). This implies that the collective Muslim community were viewed
through an ‘enemy-other
frame’; distinctly separate from the broader
Australian community and identity.
Colic-Peisker et al’s. (2016) study differs from other research by
focusing on the community and the sense of solidarity that
emerges after a
terror event. Their study combined media articles, political leaders’
media statements, and transcripts of
press conferences to explore the public
reactions to the Sydney siege. However, the study examined only one week of
media outputs.
Such a short time frame may only capture instantaneous and
potentially knee-jerk responses to an event. Nevertheless, their findings
useful for providing a comparison for the content analysis conducted in the
present study. Orientalism was employed to examine
the ‘othering’ of
certain groups within media reporting of terrorist events because the concept is
broader than a mere
east/west divide and encompasses notions of
‘Islamophobia’ and ‘racism’, among others.
The ideal victim
By separating offenders from the rest of society, the media also creates an
archetypal victim. The ‘ideal victim’ is an
individual who, when
wronged by crime, is readily given the complete and legitimate status of being a
victim (Christie 1986, p.18).
Furthermore, ‘the victim is everything the
offender is not ... he is a stranger, she is home-grown, and he is a visible
and she is white’ (Christie cited in Collins 2014, p. 81).
Schissel (2006, p. 51) comments that victim portrayals serve two purposes: to
evoke a passionate response and to create simplistic
and compelling explanations
of victimisation. By mirroring the typical news consumer, media portrayals of
victims can elicit in the
reader the idea ‘that this could be me’
(McShane & Williams 1992, p. 267). This contextualises events for news
They identify with the victim and distance themselves from the
offender. The role of the offender is cast as separate from society,
actions counterproductive to accepted norms, which heightens public empathy for
the victims. Thus the use of this stereotype
provides individualised context to
news consumers by personalising victimisation. This assessment was significant
in the present
analysis of victim and offender portrayals. Aligned with
Colic-Peisker et al’s. (2016) study that emphasised the reinforcement
Australian values in determining good and bad, the portrayal of victims is
important in implementing frames that separate offenders
from the rest of
This study employed a content analysis to examine how the Sydney siege and
Parramatta shooting were reported in two key Australian
newspapers,
Sydney Morning Herald
(‘SMH’) and the
Daily Telegraph
(‘DT’). Content analysis applies a set of procedures to draw valid
inferences from text (Weber 1990, p. 9). It provides
a way to identify the
nature and extent of trends in communication content and audit the content
against objectives. Therefore, content
analysis was appropriate for examining
and quantifying how domestic terrorism was portrayed by Australian media (Weber
Newspapers were chosen over other electronic and digital media platforms
because this research was primarily concerned with the discursive
frames used in
news construction rather than interpreting the effect of discursive frames on
public reaction. Additionally, the use
of print media provided a straightforward
process for analysis that resulted in a deeper qualitative understanding that
otherwise been limited if other digital or electronic media types were
chosen. Compared to platforms such as television or social
media, print media
provided accessible data in an ‘easy-to-read’ format that was ideal
for analysis.
Fairfax’s SMH and News Corp Australia’s DT were chosen as these
papers have the highest readerships in NSW. Both papers
are published in tabloid
format. This is particularly important considering Fairfax changed from a
broadsheet format to tabloid in
2013. Despite the change, the publisher insisted
the editorial tone and style of journalism would remain the same (‘Fairfax
mastheads go compact, not “tabloid”‘, 2013). This was
significant during the analysis for comparing the tone of
each paper’s
coverage of the two terrorist events.
The analysis, conducted over a one-month time frame for each event, examined
articles in two ways to provide a comprehensive investigation
of the nature and
extent of discursive frames of both events. First, key themes present within the
media coverage were identified
and quantified according to the extent they were
used. Second, the tone of specific language used by journalists in articles were
coded as positive, negative, neutral or mixed category. Factiva, a global news
the reliability of results
of a pilot study. A series of search words that generated the most exhaustive
return of articles were
applied. For the Sydney siege, these included,
‘Sydney Siege’ or ‘Man Haron Monis’, ‘Martin
‘Domestic Terrorism’, ‘Tori Johnson’ or
‘Katrina Dawson’. For the Parramatta shooting, the terms
‘Parramatta Shooting’, ‘Domestic Terrorism’,
‘Curtin Cheng’, ‘Farhad Khalil Mohammad Jabar’
‘New South Wales Headquarters’ were used.
A time frame ranging from the day of each event until a month following was
implemented for each Factiva search. Articles that did
not directly relate to
the Sydney siege, Parramatta shooting or a portrayal of domestic terrorism in
general, or articles that appeared
more than once due to later editions, were
excluded from analysis. Only the initial edition of an article was used.
A wide range of article types including news, supplements, opinion pieces,
lifestyle blogs, news reviews and articles from the television
and entertainment
sections of the newspapers were accessed. The inclusion of these sections and
not others, such as letters to the
editor, was based upon the aim of the study
— to analyse discursive frames in news construction rather than examining
reaction to media reports. Furthermore, these article types reflect the
broadest reporting styles of both papers, representing a
conscious decision by
an editor to include various voices and opinions on such a dominant
information-sharing platform.
The analysis coded themes rather than a single word or sentence. This allowed
a broader range of language structures to be analysed
as a theme can be
expressed in a single word, sentence or across an entire article (Holsti 1969,
116). It provided an analysis of
not only what was present in media coverage but
also what had been omitted. The creation of themes was identified through
reading of the source material until no new themes were evident.
Importantly, it was decided that any description of an offender would be
coded as ‘Portrayal of the Offender’ when an
article went beyond a
basic description. This was pertinent for the analysis of the Parramatta
shooting, where the offender was often
described simply as ‘an
offender’. Content was considered in analysis when the offender was
described as a ‘crazed
terrorist’ (McClellan 2015, p. 5) or
‘15-year-old-baby-faced boy’ (Ireland 2015, p. 35) rather than a
common description
such as ‘15-year-old Farhad’ (Davies &
Bagshaw 2015, p. 6). This ensured that the number of times this theme was
was not skewed when comparing frequencies across all codes. While some
understanding could have been gained by analysing an
ordinary description of the
offender, past research has warned against the overuse of racial stereotypes
when describing those accused
of terrorism (Gerbner 1992, 96). By employing this
criterion into the coding scheme, this study assessed whether Orientalism was
present in Australian reporting and how it was depicted through the
‘Portrayal of the Offender’.
To understand the tone of the specific language used by journalists, each
article was then placed (albeit subjectively) into a positive,
negative, neutral
or mixed category based on previous research by Akbarzadeh and Smith (2005) and
Mahony (2008, 2010). Positive reporting
was defined by a focus on the more
socially desirable aspects of a terror event. Outlined in Spencer (2005), these
aspects included
emergency responses, and the defiance and solidarity of victims
and the wider community. To be considered positive, a theme was coded
absence of inflammatory language that incited hate or a stereotypical version of
Islam, refugees and immigration.
Thus, negative articles were characterised by the use of inflammatory
language. Negatively constructed themes also focused on the
negative aspects of
terrorism by linking wider social issues such as crime and immigration to Islam
and the wider Muslim community.
Themes considered negative were generally
reported through an oriental lens and involved the portrayal of non-Western
cultures as
other, alien and distinctly different (Akbarzadeh & Smith 2005,
Neutrally constructed themes portrayed neither positive nor negative
connotations and largely did not express a personal opinion by
the journalist.
As expected, the content of themes placed in this category mainly focused on
stating the facts of each event, rather
than describing it. Mixed categories
combined positive, negative and neutral characteristics in reporting.
Sampling, reliability and validity
The coding scheme and data were piloted prior to the final analysis. Forty
articles, the first and last five from each paper on each
terror event, were
used to test the reliability and validity of the method. Only the study author
was involved in the coding process
which alleviated issues surrounding
inter-coder reliability (Weber 1990, p. 17). While the reproducibility and
accuracy of data may
be limited by the analysis being undertaken by one coder,
the consistency in results of previous Australian research, and the adoption
similar measuring and coding procedures, enhances the reliability of the data
and coding scheme (see Akbarzadeh & Smith 2005;
Lewis & de Masi
Manning, 2003).
To ensure validity in the data, this study was informed by past
studies and a detailed review of the literature to develop a strong
understanding of the source material.
The Factiva search generated a total of 628 articles matching the search
words for the Sydney siege and Parramatta shooting. From
this, 215 were omitted
due to lack of relevance or duplication. The Sydney siege produced significantly
more articles than the Parramatta
shooting with 464 articles and 164 articles
respectively. The variance can be attributed to the differences in each event.
siege lasted 17 hours and involved the taking of hostages. The
Parramatta shooting was over in a matter of minutes. Comparing the
articles between the two newspapers, in both events, the DT produced the highest
number of articles. The DT was also coded
more times across both events (see
Figure 1: Total number of articles published by each paper for each
terrorist event
Repeated reading of the source materials produced 20 distinct themes that
were subsequently coded 589 times in total. The most frequent
‘Portrayal of Offender’, ‘Government Response’,
‘Failing of the Criminal Justice System, Security
Agencies and
Government’, ‘Focus and Portrayal on Victim/s’,
‘Portrayal of Terrorism’, ‘Aftermath’,
Cohesion’ and the Islamic Community Response’ were each identified
more than 30 times (see
Department of Criminology,
School of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, University of New England,
Armidale NSW 2351, Australia.
Email: cmclind2@myune.edu.au.
Department of
Criminology, Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, University of New England,
Armidale NSW 2351, Australia. Email: ebarclay@une.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.38 MB)
PDF format (429 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter