URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUIndigLawRpr/2006/81.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:27:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clements, Christine --- "Office of the State Coroner: Inquest into the Death of Mulrunji - Digest" [2006] AUIndigLawRpr 81; (2006) 10(4) Australian Indigenous Law Reporter 85
Findings of Inquest into the Death of Mulrunji
Introduction
Conclusions from the Evidence
Recommendations
Findings of Inquest into the Death of
Queensland Coroner’s Court: Palm Island and Townsville Sitting
Acting State Coroner Ms Christine Clements
27 September 2006
Introduction
On 27 September 2006 the Queensland State Coroner released her Findings of
Inquest into the death of Mulrunji, an Aboriginal man who
died in custody on
Palm Island on 19 November 2004. The inquest heavily criticised the actions of
the policemen involved in the case
and found that one policeman, Senior Sergeant
Hurley, was directly responsible for causing Mulrunji’s fatal injuries.
The following
passages include extracts of the inquest detailing both the
Coroner’s findings and recommendations.
Conclusions from the Evidence
I find that Mulrunji did punch Senior Sergeant Hurley outside the police
station as he tried to resist being taken into the police
station … Senior
Sergeant Hurley did respond to Mulrunji’s punch by himself punching
I find that both men fell through the entrance door of the police station.
There was a concrete step before the door. The floor was
concrete and covered
with lino. The men had hold of each other before the fall.
I have considered carefully whether or not Senior Sergeant Hurley fell onto
Mulrunji at this time. Senior Sergeant Hurley told Sergeant
Leafe he had not. He
repeated this version to every investigating police officer and the
investigating officer from the Crime and
Misconduct Commission. He told all of
them that he had fallen to his left hand side, with Mulrunji to the right hand
I am not persuaded by Dr Lampe’s opinion that people are not able to
recall exactly what happened in complex events. Senior
Sergeant Hurley was
quite clear on every occasion, until he came to court, that he had not fallen on
Mulrunji. Indeed it would seem
commonplace that anyone would be able to say
whether they had got up from a fall, either removing themselves from on top of
person, or up from a hard, flat, lino covered concrete surface.
In his evidence to this court Senior Sergeant Hurley merely said he must have
fallen on Mulrunji. What has brought this change of
recollection after repeated
adamant accounts that he fell to the left hand side? The reality is that Senior
Sergeant Hurley has become
aware exactly of the nature of Mulrunji’s
injuries causing death. If he had not otherwise caused such injury to Mulrunji,
the injury must be explained in the fall.
In considering the plausibility of this belated recollection and
reinterpretation of what must have happened, I consider the following.
Senior Sergeant Hurley still asserted that he was not put out by the fall and
did not react against Mulrunji – a most unlikely
response from a man who
considered his lawful authority and personal position of power was being
challenged, and in his own police
station. Constable Steadman heard Senior
Sergeant Hurley yelling in an abusive tone to Mulrunji immediately after they
through the door.
From his position outside the door, Steadman then saw Mulrunji’s feet
being dragged along towards the cells. He could only see
feet. He saw no more
and waited for things to ‘settle down’ before entering the police
I find that Roy Bramwell was quite excited in giving his account at the
re-enactment and there is some embellishment, but the basis
of what he saw is
credible given the overall sequence of events and the injury sustained. Despite
a steady demeanour in court, Senior
Sergeant Hurley’s explanation does not
persuade me he was truthful in his account of what happened.
I note Senior Sergeant Hurley’s response to Roy Bramwell’s
allegation of three punches. Roy Bramwell could only see Senior
Hurley’s elbow going up and down three times from where he was seated in
the yellow chair. The photos, (photo 10)
of this view show it was partly
obstructed by the filing cabinet. But Senior Sergeant Hurley is a very large
man. In the re-enactment
tape he dwarfs even the tall Inspector Williams and
makes Inspector Webber look very small. His head nearly touches the doorframe.
He is 200.66 centimetres tall. Roy Bramwell said he could only see
Mulrunji’s feet and part of his legs as he lay on the floor.
Sergeant Hurley’s evidence was that he did not see that Roy Bramwell was
sitting in the yellow chair when he and Mulrunji
fell through the doorway. Mr
Bramwell said Senior Sergeant Hurley was bending over Mulrunji with his elbow
going up and down three
times. He couldn’t see where Senior Sergeant
Hurley’s hand was, relative to Mulrunji’s body. He was led into the
suggestion by police that Mulrunji was being hit in the head. He also referred
at this time to Mulrunji’s shirt being ripped.
And, most significantly he
said these actions were accompanied by Senior Sergeant Hurley saying
‘Do you want more Mr Doomadgee, do you want more?’
Senior Sergeant Hurley’s response was to deny the accusation of
punching and to explain it as an attempt to lift Mulrunji by
the shirt. The
shirt kept ripping, thus causing him to perform a repetitive action which he
says was misinterpreted by Roy Bramwell
as punching. Both men have described in
physical terms the action of the elbow going up and down. The description is
reminiscent
of what is frequently seen in football matches when hot headed
players seemingly grab at shirtfronts, but take the opportunity to
opposition in doing so.
Contrary to his evidence I find that Senior Sergeant Hurley was angry when he
was hit in the jaw by Mulrunji as he came out of the
back of the police van. He
expressed it himself that he was shocked at the challenge to his authority on
Palm Island.
I reject Senior Sergeant Hurley’s account that he then simply got up
from the heavy fall through the doorway and went to assist
the man who had just
punched him and caused him to fall over. I find that he did respond with
physical force against Mulrunji while
Murunji was still on the floor.
I accept Roy Bramwell’s evidence to the extent that he saw Senior
Sergeant Hurley leaning over Mulrunji with his elbow going
up and down three
times. In particular I note that Roy Bramwell’s account to the police
recorded on the re-enactment video
occurred prior to the release of the autopsy
information, whereas Senior Sergeant Hurley’s changed recollection and
reconstruction
of where he had fallen, occurred after he knew exactly what
injury had caused Mulrunji’s death.
Senior Sergeant Hurley’s evidence was that he considered Mulrunji was
still causing him a problem by not getting up. He was
asked to respond to what
Roy Bramwell had told police. Senior Sergeant Hurley explained that he was
lifting Mulrunji and, as he did
so, the shirt was ripping. There is evidence
that indeed the shirt was ripped, but I am not satisfied with Senior Sergeant
account of how this occurred. Critically, there is what Roy
Bramwell alleges he heard Senior Sergeant Hurley say-
‘Do you want
more, Mr Doomadgee. Do you want more?’
I accept that Senior Sergeant
Hurley did say this.
I am satisfied that on the basis of Roy Bramwell’s account of what he
saw and heard, together with the immediately preceding
sequence of events, that
Senior Sergeant Hurley lost his temper and hit Mulrunji after falling to the
I find that Senior Sergeant Hurley’s repeated clear statements that he
fell to the left hand side of Mulrunji are in fact what
I find that Senior Sergeant Hurley hit Mulrunji whilst he was on the floor a
number of times in a direct response to himself having
been hit in the jaw and
then falling to the floor.
I do not necessarily conclude that this force was to Mulrunji’s head as
stated by Mr Bramwell. He could not have been in a position
Mulrunji’s head from where he was seated. Mulrunji’s feet and part
of his legs was all he could see. It is open
on Bramwell’s evidence that
the force was applied to Mulrunji’s body rather then his head. This is
also consistent with
the medical evidence of the injuries that caused
Mulrunji’s death. It is also most likely that it was at this time that
suffered the injury to his right eye.
After this occurred, I find there was no further resistance or indeed any
speech or response from Mulrunji. I conclude that these
actions of Senior
Sergeant Hurley caused the fatal injuries.
Sergeant Leafe returned from opening the cells and Mulrunji was dragged away
and deposited in cell number two. Patrick Bramwell (Roy
Bramwell’s nephew)
was then similarly brought in and dragged to the cells.
There was no attempt whatsoever to check on Mulrunji’s state of health
after the fall and its sequelae. The so called checks
on the two intoxicated
prisoners in the cells was woeful, even excluding the possibility of serious
injury having occurred. Neither
officer remained in the cell for more than
seconds on each occasion they entered to check the prisoner. It was not until
Leafe suspected that Murunji might in fact be dead, that any close
scrutiny was made. No attempt at resuscitation was made by any
police officer
even when there was a degree of uncertainty about whether Mulrunji had died.
I find, in reliance on all the medical evidence and the video tape that
Mulrunji was indeed deceased when Sergeant Leafe checked on
him at the time
recorded by the tape as twenty past eleven that morning.
I find that Senior Sergeant Hurley avoided the issue and sent family members
away from the station after knowing that Mulrunji was
Recommendations
1. The arrest of Mulrunji was not an appropriate exercise of police
discretion. There were a range of alternatives to arrest available
that should
have been preferred. These include giving a caution, issuing a direction or
commencing proceedings by way of notice to
appear or summons.
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
(PPR Act) should be
amended to reflect the principle of arrest as a last resort…
3. The PPR Act should be amended to include an explicit statutory duty to
consider and utilise alternatives to the detention of intoxicated
police cells.
4. The Operational Procedures Manual (OPM) should be amended to instruct
officers to consider arrest as a last resort and consider
all alternatives
before arresting a person, particularly in cases of minor offences.
5. The OPM should be amended to reinforce the need to consider and utilise
alternatives to the detention of intoxicated persons in
police cells.
6. The inappropriate arrest of Mulrunji reflects a lack of awareness of the
legal bases upon which a person may be arrested without
8. The decision to arrest Mulrunji and the evidence of Senior Sergeant Hurley
discloses a lack of awareness of, and a failure to take
into account, the
recommendations of the RCIADIC relating to the arrest of Aboriginal people for
drunkenness and public order offences.
9. The Police Commission should give particular attention to the training of
officers working in Aboriginal communities.
10. Immediate attention should be given by the Queensland Government to the
proper funding and support of the Community Justice Group
on Palm Island.
11. Urgent attention should be given by the Queensland Government to the
establishment of a diversionary centre on Palm Island to
provide an alternative
to police custody for people who come to the attention of police while
intoxicated.
18. There was no assessment of Mulrunji’s health upon being received
into police custody at the Palm Island Watchhouse. There
was no adequate reason
for this failure.
25. Theoretical and practical training in first aid and resuscitation should
be mandatory for all officers who are in charge of a
police watchhouse.
26. People in custody should not be left unmonitored under any circumstances.
27. The involvement in the investigation of Mulrunji’s death of
officers from Townsville and Palm Island was inappropriate and
undermined the
integrity of the investigation.
28. In all deaths in custody, officers investigating the death should be
selected from a region other than that in which the death
34. The OPM should be amended to more clearly state the need for officers
involved in an investigation to consider the impartiality
and the perception of
impartiality in the conduct of the investigation at all times.
39. Difficulties in cross-cultural communication between police and
Aboriginal witnesses may have impaired the effectiveness of the
investigation of
this matter by police. Significant attention should be given by the Police
Commissioner to the training of officers,
particularly those who are working in
or near large Indigenous communities such as Palm Island in relation to
communication with
Indigenous people and the use of support persons and
interpreters. This is a matter that is fundamental to the effective and fair
administration of justice in Queensland.
40. The OPM should be amended to include, as an appendix, Chapter 9 of the
Supreme Court of Queensland Equal Treatment Benchbook on
‘Indigenous
Language and Communication’. The OPM should direct officers to follow and
apply the contents of that chapter
to the greatest extent possible.
These comments will be sent to the Attorney General, the Director General and
Minister of Government with responsibility for police
and the Commissioner for
On 14 December 2006 the Queensland Director of Public Prosecutions,
Leanne Clare, announced that no charges would be laid against
Sergeant Hurley.
At the time of going to press the former Chief Justice of NSW, Sir Laurence
Street, had been appointed to review
the DPP decision not to prosecute Sergeant
Hurley. The full text of the Queensland State Coroner’s findings are
available online
http://www.justice.qld.gov.au/courts/coroner/findings.htm
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (47 KB)
PDF format (474 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter