URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMelbLRS/2016/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kneebone, S --- "Australia as a Powerbroker on Refugee Protection in Southeast Asia: the Relationship with Indonesia" [2016] UMelbLRS 3
Australia as a Powerbroker on Refugee Protection in Southeast Asia: the
Relationship with Indonesia
Using the example of Australian-Indonesian cooperation on deterrence of
asylum seekers in transit through Indonesia to Australia,
this article
challenges the view that Australia is a regional hegemon. It does this through
two main methods. First, it engages
in a close analysis of the shifting
relationship between the two countries on refugee and asylum seeker issues
through different
periods since 2001 to 2016. This demonstrates that the
relationship is in fact more nuanced than previously suggested by other
Secondly, it refers to Thomas Pedersen’s political concept of
‘cooperative hegemony’ which focuses upon
‘ideational-institutional
realism’ as a lens for regional
co-operation. It analyses the institutional nature of the Australian-Indonesian
cooperation
relationship in the Southeast Asian context, to demonstrate that
Australia has not established itself as a model of ‘cooperative
This article explores the relationship between Australia and Indonesia with
respect to issues of refugee protection. Starting from
the position that the
relationship is in fact more nuanced than previously suggested by other
scholars, this article uses Thomas
Pedersen’s theory of ‘cooperative
hegemony’ as a lens through which to explore the facets of regional
cooperation
between Australia and Indonesia in the Southeast Asian context. This
paper finds that the Australian/Indonesian relationship can
be usefully
conceptually separated into time periods, each with a distinct flavour of the
relationship.
Introduction
Although Australia is keen to present itself as a leading power or hegemon
and ‘norm entrepreneur’ on refugee and asylum
seeker issues in the
Asia-Pacific region, I argue that this self-perception is challenged by a close
examination of Indonesia-Australia
cooperation on these issues. There are two
strands to this argument. First, relying upon the legal concept of global
refugee protection,
I argue that Australian-Indonesian cooperation is not
primarily explained by power asymmetry and acquiescence with Australia’s
‘burden-shifting’ measures. Secondly, I refer to Thomas
Pedersen’s political concept of ‘cooperative hegemony’
focuses upon ‘ideational-institutional realism’ as a lens for
regional co-operation.
The regime of global refugee protection is conceived as a ‘global
public good’ under which states share the burden of
protection.
The concept of state
burden or responsibility sharing underlies the Refugee
Convention,
as noted in its
Preamble and Article 35, and assumes ‘an expectation of reciprocity’
between states.
However the
current reality is that the burden of refugee protection is unevenly shared
between states in the global North and South
as most asylum seekers remain in
countries close to their homes. This is largely a consequence of states in the
global North practising
increasingly diverse non-entrée measures. There
is a view that the current global response to refugee protection, which includes
‘cooperative deterrence and non-entrée
‘North-South divide’ in which developed states conscript ‘less
developed countries to act in ways that
provide a critical support to the
developed world’s migration control
This argument
assumes an asymmetry in power relationships, whereby cooperating states are
persuaded to act in the interests of the
developed states through a variety of
mechanisms, including financial incentives, the provision of training or
deployment of officials.
In the case of Australia-Indonesia cooperation it has been argued that the
relationship reflects an ‘incentivised policy
secured through
substantial financial and diplomatic incentives. I argue that the metaphor of
‘incentivised policy transfer’
is an incomplete explanation for
Indonesia’s apparent cooperation with Australia’s deterrent
A second strand of my argument is to focus on the role of states and
institutional structures impacting on the Australia-Indonesia
relationship.
There are two regional institutions which are potential agents of
‘cooperative hegemony’. The first is
the second is the Bali
Process (the
Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and
Related Transnational Crime
Indonesia is a Member State and leading player of ASEAN; Australia has many
trading partnerships and agreements with
but is not a Member State.
On the other hand, Australia and Indonesia co-chair the Bali Process, which also
reflects a bilateral
arrangement between the two countries.
In this article I show that ASEAN’s conflicted response to refugee is
reflected in Indonesia’s national response. As
I have previously argued,
the Bali Process has thus far failed to establish itself as either a leading
regional institution or as
‘norm entrepreneur’ of refugee
protection.
I contend that the
Australia-Indonesia cooperation relationship mirrors the ‘institutional
created by the Bali
Process, rather than being a model of ‘cooperative hegemony’.
To make the argument against Australia’s role as a regional hegemon, I
examine three periods of the Australia-Indonesia relationship:
from 2001-2008
(acquiescence with Australian policies of securitisation of refugee and asylum
seeker issues); 2008-2013 (Indonesian
prevarication in the face of increasingly
aggressive Australian policies); 2013 to the present (Indonesia turns to the
region during
the 2015 Andaman Sea crisis).
Some contextual
First some context for the discussion is needed. Indonesia and Australia
have a shared history in refugee protection arising from
the Comprehensive Plan
of Action (CPA) for Indo-Chinese
which operated for over
two decades from 1975.
to some lasting legacies on refugee policy which can be told briefly. In the
case of Australia it led to a clear preference
for resettlement as a durable
solution over territorial
asylum-seeking.
Indonesia’s role in refugee processing was a reluctant one, nevertheless
it cooperated in the CPA and tolerated the screening
of refugees on Galang
Island under UNHCR supervision.
In particular, a presidential decree recognising the need for refugee protection
was issued in 1979.
article demonstrates, Indonesia’s role in refugee protection is still a
conflicted mixture of tolerance and principled
recognition, although it has
allowed deterrent practices to develop.
There are two important contextual features of the Indonesia’s
situation vis-à-vis refugees. The first is that due to
its geographical
position, in contrast to other countries in the region, Indonesia is largely a
transit country for Australia-bound
refugees. This includes those coming from
Malaysia to Indonesia. The route through Malaysia developed in response to the
introduction
of a stricter visa regime in Indonesia in the 2011 Law (described
below) which in turn led to more smuggling from Malaysia to
Indonesia therefore
has a shared or mutual interest with Australia in controlling both in and
out-bound migration.
Secondly, unlike Malaysia and Thailand (both players with Indonesia in the
Andaman Sea crisis of 2015), Indonesia is not primarily
a destination country
with large protracted refugee populations in need of ‘durable
solutions’. Currently Indonesia
hosts relatively few (approximately
14,000) asylum seekers and refugees, which nevertheless represents a substantial
increase in
the last few years as a result of Australia’s
‘containment’ policies, explained below. Thailand by contrast has
105,935 refugees living in nine long-established refugee camps in four provinces
along the Thai-Myanmar border.
There are urban-based refugees too, albeit in much smaller numbers. At the end
of 2015, UNHCR in Thailand had registered 1,830
In 2015, record
numbers of refugees arrived in Malaysia, mostly as a result of the Andaman Sea
crisis. As of end June 2016, there
were 150,700 refugees and asylum-seekers
registered with UNHCR in
Like Indonesia, neither Malaysia nor Thailand are parties to the Refugee
Convention, and indeed it is suggested they have rejected
the Convention as a
European instrument. A legacy of the CPA (in which all three countries
participated) is that countries in South
East Asia perceive refugee resettlement
as an obligation of the ‘international community’. Within the
region, refugees
overlap with irregular migrant workers and stateless persons.
As a category of forced migrant, the ‘refugee’ is not
understood.
All three countries are part of the Bali Process and Member States of ASEAN.
ASEAN takes a somewhat ambiguous approach to
On the one hand,
refugees are included in the ASEAN Political-Security Community
(‘APSC’) pillar of the ASEAN Community.
The APSC subscribes to
‘a comprehensive approach to security, which acknowledges the interwoven
relationships of political,
economic, social-cultural and environmental
dimensions of
development.’
APSC refugees are constructed, both within a national security paradigm as
‘victims of conflict’, and as
beneficiaries of a ‘human
security’ approach which recognises the risks to regional harmony, arising
from gaps in economic
development.
On the other hand, refugee rights are provided in the ASEAN Human Rights
Declaration (AHRD).
Article 2 provides guarantees for the very freedoms which are at the base of the
need for refugee status in the region,
namely freedom from discrimination on the
basis of ‘race, gender, age, language, religion, political or other
opinion, national
or social origin, economic status, birth, disability or other
status’. Article 14 of the ADHR enshrines the principle of
non-refoulement
when it states without qualification that: ‘No
person shall be subject to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment’. Articles 15 and 16 refer to the right to freedom of
movement and specifically to the right to seek asylum.
As stated, Indonesia’s response to Australia on refugee issues is
largely referenced to its position as a transit country.
However, Indonesia has
long-standing experience with ’forced’ migration as internal
migration and as outward bound labour
migration, which overlaps with the issue
of human trafficking which it has been addressing since at least 2002.
Indonesia is also
considered to be a leading actor within ASEAN, particularly in
the APSC area, due to its strategic location in the Straits of Malacca,
interest in regional and maritime
Within the region, Australia has concluded other bilateral agreements which
extend Australia’s deterrent policies to asylum
seekers to processing in
off-shore sites. This is both a legacy of and the continuation of a policy of
discouraging on-shore or
‘spontaneous’ asylum seekers, which began
from Australia’s experience with the CPA. During the 1990s Australian
policies became increasingly focussed on containing refugees in transit to
Australia in off-shore locations. The ‘Pacific
Strategy’ as it was
initially termed, arose from bilateral relationships recorded in Memoranda of
Understanding (MoUs) between
Australia and Nauru and Australia and Manus Island
(Papua New Guinea). It involved the interdiction and transfer of asylum seekers
by the Australian Navy to so-called ‘safe third countries’ which
were in reality cash-strapped Pacific Islands willing
to enter into arrangements
with Australia. Under these MoUs the Australian government directed and
financed the detention and processing
of asylum seekers in off-shore locations.
In this period Australia ‘externalized’ its border control through
the positioning
of Airline Liaison Officers
in South East Asia and
provision of Australian Federal Police (AFP) training on people
For similar motives,
Australia was developing a relationship with Indonesia, to which I now turn.
Indonesian Pragmatism 2001-2008: Acquiescent protection and
securitisation
Australia’s Pacific Solution I which operated in the period 2001-2008
was a seemingly ad hoc response to the arrival of a Norwegian
container ship, the
, in Australian waters with a cargo of 433
asylum seekers in transit from Indonesia. This staged event which took place in
late August
2001 on the eve of an Australian federal
ensured the
re-election of Prime Minister John Howard and enabled the passage of a suite of
legislation which established off-shore
processing.
Far from being a
spontaneous gesture, the creation of the Pacific Solution was a response to a
spike in boat arrivals from Indonesia
in the 18 month period leading up to early
2001. The majority of these arrivals were part of the ‘Afghan
diaspora’ of
2001 when an estimated 900,000 people fled Afghanistan.
Pacific Solution I was directed at asylum seekers who had made
‘secondary movements’, mainly from Indonesia, although
in the period
incident the numbers were declining and continued to
decline in 2001-2008. Moreover, Australia and Indonesia were in the process
establishing a cooperative arrangement known as the Regional Cooperation Model
2000 (RCM) which was later formalized through the
Bali Process as the Regional
Cooperation Arrangement (RCA).
At the time of the
incident, the apparent unwillingness of then
President Megawati Sukarnoputri to take a phone call from the Australian Prime
provided a snapshot of the relationship between the two states. The
Australian authorities had implied that the asylum seekers were
Indonesia’s responsibility by requesting the captain of the
to return them to Indonesia. At the time Indonesia was coping with
its own internal ‘refugee’ or displaced population
of 1.3 million
The number of persons held under the Pacific Solution I peaked in February
2002 at 1,550. It was originally intended that the asylum
seekers held on Nauru
and Manus Island would be processed within six months of their arrival. But the
processing was painfully slow
as the government waited for the situations in the
countries of origin to stabilise, presumably so that the asylum seekers could
returned home.
However, by May
2005 65.5% of the Pacific Solution I asylum seekers had been resettled (mainly
in Australia and New Zealand) and
Pacific Solution I was wound
The eventual demise of
Pacific Solution I was bound up with the defeat of the Liberal-National Party
Coalition (the Coalition) by
the Rudd Labor government in the November 2007
In February 2008
Pacific Solution I was wound up.
During this period there were two countervailing developments in the
Australia-Indonesia relationship in relation to refugee protection.
was the endorsement of the RCA which cemented refugee protection in Indonesia,
the second was the creation of the Bali
Process which was focused on irregular
migration. At the same time, there were some developments in Indonesia’s
laws in relation
to refugee protection which ran counter to Australia’s
efforts under the Bali Process. These developments suggest a conflicted
approach to refugee protection on Indonesia’s part.
The Regional Cooperative Arrangement and the Bali Process
Australia-Indonesia cooperation on asylum seekers dating from the late 1990s
was formalized through the Bali Process as the Regional
Cooperation Arrangement
(RCA). The RCA also describes the roles of IOM (Intergovernmental Organisation
for Migration) and the UNHCR.
Thus the RCA is a bilateral agreement between two
states which involves a non-state actor (the UNHCR) and an intergovernmental
Under this agreement IOM and UNHCR act in place of the two states,
Australia and Indonesia. That is, Indonesia is willing to delegate
its role to
non-state \ inter-state institutions, namely UNHCR and IOM. Australia on the
other hand has the practical necessity
of Australia to work through IOM.
The RCA requires the Indonesian government to intercept and detain
‘Australia bound’ ‘irregular migrants’,
to notify IOM
which is to provide advice and assistance (particularly about ‘voluntary
return’), and
(if needed) assessment by UNHCR is to take
place. Under the RCA it is envisaged that Indonesian officials will refer
asylum seekers
to IOM for ‘case management and care’ who then refer
them to UNHCR to make asylum claims, if they express a wish to do
this. UNHCR
performs refugee status determinations (RSD) because Indonesia is not a party to
the Refugee Convention. IOM as an
intergovernmental body is funded by
interested governments and in particular by the Australian government in
relation to its activities
in Indonesia.
The RCA prioritises the role of IOM. Within Indonesia IOM has greater
visibility (it has more offices than UNHCR which is often co-located
and arguably more power
because of its role under the RCA as the first port of call. Whereas IOM has
many offices, UNHCR has only
one official office in Jakarta in central Java.
Initially Indonesia tolerated the presence of asylum seekers on its territory
(the RCA itself speaks to that as do the legislative
policies detailed below),
but from 2004 onwards there was an increasing emphasis on detention which
involved IOM and Australian funding.
Initially asylum seekers registered with
UNHCR but falling outside the scope of the RCA were not usually detained but had
whereabouts monitored by
But after the
commencement of the RCA the focus of IOM’s role shifted from
Australian-funded accommodation in five designated
to detention. A second
bilateral arrangement between Indonesia and Australia commenced in 2007. This
was the ‘Management
and Care of Irregular Immigrants Project’
(MCIIP) funded by Australia which led to the creation of more detention
facilities,
managed by IOM.
Further Australia-Indonesian cooperation in this period promoted a
securitised approach to irregular migration. In 2006-07 Australia
supported the
implementation of the ‘enhanced CEKAL system’ – a border alert
system which ‘will assist Indonesia
to detect the movement of terrorists
and other transnational
criminals’.
also concluded an MOU with Indonesia in relation to cooperation on migration and
border control management.
impact of the Bali Process (which formally began in 2002, and which met again in
2003 and then not again until
was mainly in the area of
capacity-building in Indonesia. For example, in a speech made in 2004 by
Caroline Millar, the Australian
‘Ambassador for Smuggling Issues’
under the Bali Process
explained that Australia was assisting Indonesia to draft anti-smuggling laws,
and providing capacity-building ‘to deal
with illegal immigration in areas
such as border management, visa systems and the verification of identity and
nationality’.
The result of this collaboration was the new law which Indonesia introduced
in 2011 – Law 6\2011 ‘Concerning Immigration’
discussed below,
which introduced new anti-smuggling laws. In her speech Millar referred to
Australia’s ‘strong political
support in the region’. She
mentioned that it promoted its agenda ‘through capacity-building
activities and practical
workshops’, and cooperation on addressing people
smuggling and trafficking issues. This speech made it clear that Australia
itself as a hegemonic force in the region, acting through the Bali Process.
However, the evidence suggests that the Bali Process
had limited regional impact
in this period beyond the bilateral
relationship.
Indonesia is a co-chair of the Bali Process, it did not during this period
assert its role. However, at the 2003 meeting
the Indonesian Minister for
Foreign Affairs made a rare statement acknowledging the protection needs of
This statement is
consistent with the RCA and Indonesian legislative policies which recognise the
status of ‘refugee’.
Legislative policies and state responsibility
Indonesia was aware of refugee protection principles from the 1950s. A 1956
Circular Letter recognised the need for protection of
‘political’
Indonesia’s participation in the post-Bandung Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organisation (AALCO) from 1956 (and
in the 2001 reformulation of
its principles) demonstrates its awareness of broader principles of refugee
protection, both as Convention
refugees and under the expanded refugee
definition.
Yet despite
recognition of refugees in its laws and policies, Indonesia has not become a
party to the Refugee Convention, partly
because it fears the ‘pull
factor’ of such a move,
but also because of concerns about the cost of refugee protection.
Some commentators suggest that the CPA experience had some impact on the
Indonesian state, as UNHCR started ‘awareness-raising’
recognise asylum seekers.
Constitution
of the Republic of Indonesia and laws recognise asylum seekers,
although not in the same terms of the Refugee Convention definition.
create two categories of refugees: political and ‘foreign’ refugees.
They are framed under two concepts: those
who have human rights needs and those
who need the protection of another country. The
Constitution
, Article 28G(2),
recognises the right to freedom from torture and to obtain ‘political
asylum from another country’.
Law No 37 of 1999 on Foreign Relations
incorporates three articles relating to ‘foreign refugees’. For
Article 26: The granting of asylum to foreign nationals shall be exercised in
accordance with national legislation taking into account
international law,
custom and practice
. (My emphasis)
Article 27, contains provisions requiring the President to determine policy
with respect to ‘(foreign) refugees’ and to
create a Presidential
Decision. Moreover Law No 39 of 1999 on Human Rights contains the right to
political asylum as set out in
Constitution
Indonesia is a party to the two general human rights instruments which
recognise the right to freedom from torture and inhuman and
Thus it is aware of
international human rights obligations owed to asylum seekers.
The UNHCR’s role under the RCA is recognised in administrative policies
which acknowledge the
non-refoulement
principle, which is contained in
Indonesia’s Constitution and its laws. In 2002 a Circular
‘regarding Procedures regarding
Aliens Expressing Their Desire to Seek
Asylum or Refugee Status’ was
Subsequently the 2010
Directive of the Director General of
Immigration
was issued. Its
purpose is to provide for security of status if UNHCR has affirmed the status of
an asylum seeker through a RSD
procedure. The 2010 Directive ensures that
refugees and asylum‐seekers have access to UNHCR, and allows them to stay
temporarily
in the country until their refugee status can be confirmed and
appropriate solutions can be found for them. It affirms the effect
of the 2002
Circular and the terms of the RCA described above. Although the 2010 Directive
is titled an instrument ‘Regarding
Handling of Irregular Migrants’,
defined as persons who ‘subsequently declare themselves as asylum seekers
and refugee(s)’,
it confirms the
non-refoulement
obligation.
It is clear then that Indonesia was and is well aware of its international
obligations to asylum seekers \ refugees. Although not
a party to the Refugee
Convention, it has long acknowledged underlying international principles and its
obligations in its
Constitution
and its laws. Soeprapto writing in
says that until 2000 the
response of the government to accession to the Refugee Convention was
‘encouraging’.
the current Indonesian government has shelved plans to accede to the Convention,
despite positive indications in the first part
In this period the Indonesian response to Australian intervention was
pragmatic and compliant with securitisation, but this was tempered
by tolerance
and ‘humanitarian’ refugee protection for asylum seekers transiting
through Indonesia. However when Australia
granted asylum to a group of
Indonesian West Papuan refugees in 2006, Indonesia was
This period coincided
with an initial increase and then decline in the number of asylum seekers
transiting to Australia. In the
securitised period from 2008 onwards when
numbers increased once more, a more complex relationship developed.
Indonesian prevarication 2008 – 2013: conflicted state
In the period from 2008 – 2013, in an attempt to stem the increasing
arrival of asylum seekers from Indonesia (and from Sri
Lanka) to Australia,
first the Rudd and then the Gillard Labor governments focussed upon
‘breaking the people smugglers’
With the return
of the Coalition in 2013 and the creation of Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB)
in September of that year, the rhetoric
shifted to ‘stopping the
boats’. Under OSB, in ever increasingly bold unilateral measures that
breach international
law, Australia has exploited its impunity from external
fora. Australia has practised interdictions, turn-back and tow-back policies
dubious legality under international
which have increasingly
angered Indonesian authorities.
There are now many examples of the ‘illegality’ of Australia’s
policies under international
During this period,
diplomatic relations between Australia and Indonesia were strained by incursions
into its waters and revelations
In November 2013
Indonesia suspended cooperation on migrant smuggling as a result of tensions
arising from Australia’s actions.
In other incidents Australian officials
paid Indonesian fishermen to transport asylum seekers back to Indonesian
IOM and UNHCR: challenging roles
In this period as a result of
Australian influence, Indonesia moved to a seemingly less tolerant approach,
framing asylum seekers
as illegal immigrants, and acceding to creation of
detention facilities.
change has impacted on the respective roles of IOM and UNHCR. IOM has been the
recipient of increased funding whereas UNHCR’s
funding has had to stretch
further to cope with increasing numbers of asylum seekers stuck in transit in
Indonesia. This resulted
from the announcement in November 2014 that Australia
would no longer resettle asylum seekers transiting from Indonesia. As there
been substantial increase in the number of asylum seekers in Indonesia, UNHCR
struggles to keep up with the demand for processing
of claims, with waiting
times increasing.
Australia provides funding to both the UNHCR and to IOM but it appears that
IOM receives more funding than UNHCR for its activities
For example during
2008-2009, Australia allocated:
$807,727 to
UNHCR in Indonesia for protection capacity-building activities;
$1,600,000 to
IOM for interpreting services for displaced persons in Indonesia;
$386,000 to IOM
for educational and social services for refugees and irregular migrants in
Australian funded increase in Indonesia’s detention capacity has been
matched by an increased tendency of Indonesian officials
to detain (consistent
with the new laws described below).
In 2014, according to IOM there were
13 Immigration Detention Centres (IDCs) in 13 provinces, operating under
‘arbitrary rules’.
In 2015 UNHCR added that there were 20 further temporary detention facilities
and a total of 4,511 detainees. UNHCR reported that
it had intervened in 856
cases to secure release from detention of vulnerable people (such as pregnant
women and young children).
It also reported that a number of asylum seekers in
the community self-report for detention because they are unable to support
(asylum seekers are not permitted to work). Both IOM and UNHCR
report severe overcrowding in detention facilities in Indonesia.
2010 IOM has been funded by Australia to run Public Information Campaigns (PICs)
which are basically aimed at persuading Indonesian
coastal communities from
becoming involved in people smuggling. The PICs depict asylum seekers as
‘illegals’ and invoke
religious principles and deploy religious
leaders, to conceptualise people smuggling as a
According to an IOM
evaluation of a PIC it led to a ‘radical shift in public opinion regarding
the social and economic impact
of people smuggling ... from one of general
acceptance/tolerance ..., to one of virtually unanimous rejection of people
smuggling’.
alternative view of the effect of the PICs is that they lead to practices which
involve surveillance by members of the community,
that is, state-society
‘border-control’.
Legislative response: the dubious effect of people smuggling laws
The result of the Australia-led capacity building described above was a new
law which Indonesia introduced in 2011 – Law 6\2011
‘Concerning
Immigration’ - which replaced the 1992 law. The 1992 law had justified the
regulation of the ‘traffic
of people’ as ‘one manifestation of
sovereignty as an independent legal state based on the rule of law’. It
a requirement on ‘foreign nationals’ to possess a visa
(Article 6) but made no specific provision for asylum seekers
or refugees. As
Crouch and Missbach point out,
it contained a number of provisions which could and were used against
‘irregular’ migrants and people smugglers.
Indonesia’s Law 6\2011 focuses on irregular migration and the creation
of smuggling offences. The preamble to this new law
acknowledges that:
‘today’s global development drives greater mobility of people in the
world ... protection and promotion
of the human rights are required’. Yet
Law 6\2011, is designed to make asylum seekers ‘irregular’. A
report authored
by the late Graeme Hugo found that 84% of asylum seekers entered
Indonesia illegally because they could not comply with the legal
immigration
requirements.
Thus Australia
‘exported’ its policies of preventing movement of asylum seekers, as
well as detention, to Indonesia.
The deterrent effect of the anti-smuggling laws is however
They have mainly
been used to prosecute ‘low-level’ criminals and that the sentences
imposed have been lenient.
There is evidence that in the Indonesian context of ‘porous
borders’, a range of factors results in ‘less than
efficient border
control’; that the anti-smuggling law leads to practices (as do the PICs)
which involve surveillance by members
Corruption is rife
and the law arguably has a corrupting effect on the rule of law as members of
the community are encouraged to
‘dob in’ irregular migrants. Barker
points out in his report that a number of people convicted for smuggling under
legislation were themselves former asylum seekers ‘drawn into people
smuggling’ whilst in that situation in
It seems that the effect of Australian anti-smuggling policy vis-à-vis
Indonesia has had the effect of ‘commodifying’
refugees \ asylum
through the creation of
a detention ‘industry’ and by putting a price on asylum seekers in
the minds of the community.
This is in conflict with Indonesian laws and
policies on protection of asylum seekers.
2009: a watershed year – revival of the Bali Process and cracks in
the Australia-Indonesia relationship
Whilst Indonesia increasingly securitised its response to asylum seekers and
simultaneously tolerated UNHCR’s protection work
on its soil, the formal
Bali Process lay dormant from 2003. But in April 2009 the Third Bali Regional
Ministerial Conference (BRMC)
was convened in response to increasing tensions in
the region, following an increase in post-conflict asylum seekers from Sri Lanka
and Pakistan. At this time, there was also concern about the treatment of
Rohingyas fleeing from Myanmar.
Following the Third BRMC a Regional Immigration Liaison Network (RILON), and a
Regional Cooperation Framework (RCF) concept was
developed and endorsed by
Ministers at the 4th BRMC in 2011. Simultaneously, the UNHCR and IOM were
incorporated more closely into
the Process, in particular to advance the RCF
concept, and the establishment of a Regional Support Office (RSO) to
and strengthen practical cooperation on refugee
protection’.
Two contemporaneous incidents involving ‘boat people’ in transit
to Australia from Indonesia in late September 2009 show
that Indonesia’s
response at this point is not defined by compliance with Australian policy.
They involved two boatloads of
Sri Lankan asylum seekers detected en route to
Australia from Indonesia. There had been an increased outflow of Sri Lankan
asylum seekers in the region following the cessation of hostilities in
mid-2009. It was claimed at the time that Australian-funded
surveillance at
Colombo airport was partly responsible for the large outflow of Sri Lankan
asylum seekers by boat.
The first boat, the ‘Jaya Lestari 5’ with 255 Sri Lankans was
returned to the Indonesian port of Merak by the Australian
Navy following an
arrangement between Australia’s then Prime Minister Rudd and the
Indonesian President. These asylum seekers
remained on board in Merak port for
six months and refused to enter Indonesia for fear of being detained. In an
interview given
in mid-October 2009, Prime Minister Rudd referred to the fact
that this was one of 81 ‘separate disruptions’ of departing
‘in partnership with our Indonesian
Although the
Australian government promised A$50 million to fund policing and processing of
asylum seekers in Indonesia, the Indonesian
government initially refused to
intervene to forcibly remove the ‘Jaya Lestari 5’
The second boatload of 78 Sri Lankan asylum seekers was rescued by the
Australian Customs Ship the ‘Oceanic Viking’ and
taken to Bintan
Island for processing in an IOM managed detention centre. This move led to a
diplomatic incident: the provincial
governor would not allow the asylum seekers
to disembark and the asylum seekers refused to disembark until given assurances
their claims for refugee status and resettlement would be processed
swiftly. After a stalemate of some weeks the asylum seekers
were disembarked
and were processed rapidly amidst outcries of favoured treatment. Although most
were resettled in Australia a small
percentage were taken by other countries.
The ‘Oceanic Viking’ incident in particular led to political turmoil
Minister Rudd.
Following these incidents, the number of boat people arriving in Australian
waters increased to the extent that by early 2010 Christmas
Island, which was
being used for offshore processing, was at 95% capacity. Over the last
2009-2010 period, 2,727 boat people arrived
in Australian
The off-shore
processing on Christmas Island which was dubbed the ‘Indian Ocean
Solution’ was becoming intractable.
As a consequence of Indonesia’s
recalcitrance the Labor government turned to another solution.
Unintended consequences - the Australia-Malaysia Agreement 2011
contrast to Indonesia’s prevarication in response to Australian pressure
in 2009, the Australia-Malaysia Agreement 2011 which
is described in this
section is an example of an asymmetric power relationship, which frames
Australia as a regional hegemon. The
Arrangement was intended to deter asylum
seekers intending to travel to Australia, but also to alleviate Malaysia’s
problem as the site of one of the largest ‘protracted refugee
situations’ in SEA. Essentially it was a trade in refugees,
intended to
swap refugees under Australia’s control, for some of Malaysia’s
‘protracted’ refugees.
On 25 July 2011 an
Arrangement between the Government of Australia and the Government of
Malaysia on Transfer and Resettlement
(the Arrangement) was concluded by the
Labor government. This bilateral agreement which was made under the Bali
Process, was for
the exchange of 800 asylum seekers arriving
‘irregularly’ by boat in Australian excised territory, with up to
4,000 recognised
refugees awaiting resettlement in Malaysia. By a majority of
6:1 the High Court in
Plaintiffs M70/2011 and
that the declaration was an invalid exercise of power. An important aspect of
this Arrangement was the designated roles of
two institutions, namely IOM and
Under the Arrangement, a transferee from Australia, ‘if
determined to be a refugee ... will be referred to resettlement countries
pursuant to UNHCR’s normal processes and
That is, there
was no expectation created that the asylum seeker would be resettled in
Australia. However, Clause 5 of the Arrangement
specified that up to 4,000
refugees registered with UNHCR in Malaysia would be considered for resettlement
in Australia. Under the
Arrangement, it was intended that IOM and the UNHCR
would have significant roles. Indeed Clause 3 stated:
This Arrangement will proceed on the basis that UNHCR and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) can fulfill [sic] the
roles and functions
envisaged in the Operational Guidelines at Annex A.
The Operational
to the Arrangement
anticipated that the care of asylum seekers in Malaysia would be the
responsibility of IOM and UNHCR. This was
ultimately fatal to the legality of
the declaration of the Minister for Immigration under the Migration Act
when he declared that Malaysia was (effectively) a ‘safe third
country’ for the purpose of implementing the Arrangement.
On the facts,
in light of the then terms of the Migration Act, the High Court decided
(essentially) that the Minister could not
have reasonably made that decision.
In essence the High Court upheld the principle that the refugees from Christmas
Island remained
Australia’s responsibility, which Australia could not
offload to non-state \ inter-state
Moreover if Australia
was to transfer its responsibility to another state, it had to ensure that
‘effective’
protection was
accessible.
This was patently
not the case with Malaysia.
This was a situation where resettlement was
proposed for strategic purposes but in contrasting circumstances to the
Indonesian situation.
Whereas the RCA and other laws and policies acknowledge
the presence and roles of IOM and UNHCR in Indonesia, within Malaysia their
status and role is more precarious. For example, recently the Malaysian
government directed the UNHCR not to register any further
refugees; Malaysia
does not officially recognise IOM. The Malaysia Arrangement was an example of a
regional bilateral agreement
involving the use of superior bargaining power by
The Andaman Sea crisis: Indonesia engages with the
From about 2008, there was an escalation of departures of the Rohingya from
Myanmar and push backs by the Thai
which led to the revival
of the Bali Process in 2009. In 2012 Surin Pitsuwan, a former ASEAN
Secretary-General (2008-12) urged ASEAN
to act collectively, as it had done
during the Indochinese refugee crisis (CPA). However neither ASEAN nor the Bali
Process tackled
the issue at this point. As the crisis escalated, in an
apparent show of independence, in 2013 Indonesia convened with UNHCR, a
Special Conference on Addressing Irregular Movement of People
outside the
Bali Process.
In a statement at
the 2013 conference, Volker Turk expressed UNHCR’s concerns with regional
deterrence and push back practices,
which were modelled on Australian policies.
The ensuing
Jakarta Declaration on
Addressing Irregular Movement of
pledged countries of origin, transit and destination to work
together to address irregular
In this final section I show that a defining moment in the
Australia-Indonesia relationship was the rejection of Australia’s
back policies by regional and international actors (including Indonesia) in
responding to the Rohingya ‘crisis’
in South East Asia in May
Moreover Indonesia
engaged with Malaysia and Thailand to end a stalemate on the crisis. More
recently, Indonesia adhered to its
rejection of push back policies by permitting
a group of Sri Lankan asylum seekers who had failed to reach Australia to land
to be assessed under the
Regional response to the crisis
Estimates differ but some suggest that as many as 6,500 persons departed from
Myanmar and Bangladesh mainly by boat in
In May 2015 the discovery
of 26 bodies in a mass grave of smuggled Rohingya in a trafficking camp in
southern Thailand,
signalled the
urgent need to tackle this situation. This led to attempts to push the
‘blame’ for the crisis onto Thailand
for failing to solve the trade
and ‘trafficking’ of ‘illegal immigrants’. At this
point states in the region
(Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia) continued push
backs of boats carrying the Rohingya people and called for the
countries to settle the refugees.
A couple of ‘circuit breakers’ arose when it became clear that
the international community was not rushing to the rescue.
The first was a
statement by the Philippines government on May 18 that it would not push back
the Rohingya but would shelter up
to 3,000 people. The second was more
symbolic. On May 19, 2015 a group of fishermen from Aceh defied the Indonesian
government’s
push-back policy and rescued a group of ‘boat
migrants’. A tone of moral high-ground also entered the debate when
between Australia’s push-back policy and the regional response
were drawn. One commentator referred to the ‘pernicious
of Australia’s ‘stop the boats’
From that point the three most affected states (Indonesia, Thailand and
Malaysia) began to work cooperatively to broker a solution
to the crisis. The
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand met on 20 May
2015 ahead of an international
meeting on 29 May, to discuss the issue of
‘irregular movement of people’ into Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand. It
was stated that the purpose of the meeting was for: ‘...
finding a solution to the crisis of influx of irregular migrants and
its serious
impact on the national security of the affected
countries.’
statement issued following the meeting of 20 May 2015 asserted that these three
states had taken ‘necessary measures
humanitarian
beyond their international
obligations’
issue cannot be addressed solely by these three countries.’ In their
statement the states appealed to ASEAN
and to the ‘spirit of unity and
solidarity of ASEAN’, to play an active role in addressing the issue.
They asserted
the need to address the ‘root causes’; the Ministers
pledged to uphold their ‘responsibilities and obligations
international law and in accordance with their respective domestic laws,
including the provision of
humanitarian
assistance to .... those 7,000
irregular migrants still at
They agreed to
offer them temporary shelter ‘provided that the resettlement and
repatriation process will be done in one year
by the international
community’. Malaysia and Indonesia invited other countries in the region
‘to join in this endeavour.’
The 17 recommendations in the 29 May statement by states following the
Special Meeting on
endorse those of 20 May. They focus upon preventing irregular migration and
responding to the issue of ‘human trafficking’
and ‘people
smuggling’ rather than lasting solutions. Only the final recommendation
(q) which referred to root causes
and improving livelihoods in ‘at-risk
communities’ made allusion to the protection needs of the Rohingya.
The outcome of the 29 May meeting was condemned by human rights advocates who
pointed to the failure to provide asylum procedures
and durable
The current
situation of the Rohingya refugees supports this critique. A year later a
number of commentators took stock of the
According to a number
of reports, although the regional government of Aceh (Indonesia) took in about
1,000 Rohingya, by early 2016
only about 400 remained. This was attributed to
Aceh’s ‘ad hoc’ response to refugee protection. In
contradiction
to national policy, this cohort of asylum seekers was detained in
camps under various poor conditions. Gradually many moved to Malaysia.
country it is reported that of about 1,100 Rohingya, 50 have been resettled to
third countries, 670 returned home and about
400 remain in detention. The
crisis appears not to have improved protection outcomes or norms in the region.
In April 2016 Thailand
blocked an effort by a private enterprise to continue to
rescue migrants at sea, after it had rescued about 13,000 migrants at
In this context
ASEAN remained passive, but the Bali Process was finally reconvened in March
2016 to formulate an ‘urgent and
collective response’ in the form of
a new Bali Declaration on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related
Transnational
lead up to this meeting a number of commentators urged the Bali Process to
‘step up’ to the challenge of regional
protection.
However the
focus of the 2016 Declaration is upon ‘transnational organised
crime’. For example, it is ingeniously stated
in paragraph 2 that:
[T]he decline in irregular movement of persons in these waters in the second
half of 2015, [is] attributable to the resolute actions
by affected countries to
disrupt smuggling networks, among other factors
Although the 2016
Declaration recognises the need ‘to identify and provide safety and
protection’ and to ‘address
the root causes’, the focus of the
measures is on ‘irregular migrants’ and ‘mixed migratory
movements’.
measures suggested are to ‘enhance safe and orderly migration pathways,
including for migrant workers’, but
for refugees the states are merely
encouraged to:
explore potential temporary protection and local stay arrangements for asylum
seekers and refugees, subject to domestic laws and policies
In this respect
the Declaration acknowledges:
the need for adequate access to irregular migrants wherever they are, by
humanitarian providers especially the UNHCR and the IOM,
appropriate.
Declaration was badged as Australia’s
‘to counter
this terrible trade in human beings’. But Indonesia’s reaction to
it shows the gap between the two
countries. As mentioned above, one consequence
of Australian policies is the increase in asylum seekers in need of resettlement
in Indonesia. In commenting on the Declaration the Indonesian Foreign Minister
Retno Marsudi called for countries to assist with
the resettlement of the more
than 13,000 refugees and asylum seekers registered with the UNHCR in Indonesia.
She said: "Of course
there is hope from Indonesia not only to Australia but to
every country to be more receptive to these migrants who have been waiting
resettlement".
Declaration makes no reference to resettlement.
Conclusions
For the purpose of examining the proposition that Australia is a regional
hegemon on refugee issues, I examined Australian-Indonesian
cooperation over
three periods to demonstrate that it is not primarily explained by power
asymmetry and acquiescence with Australia’s
‘burden-shifting’
measures; the metaphor of ‘incentivised policy transfer’ is an
incomplete explanation for
Indonesia’s apparent cooperation with
Australia’s deterrent policies.
I have shown that in the first period, 2001-2008, the relationship is
characterised by Indonesia’s conflicted response: tolerance
protection is tempered by pragmatic acquiescence to the demand for increasingly
securitised measures by Australia. In
the second period, 2008-2013, the
relationship becomes more complex and Indonesian responses more fragmented, so
that it is indeed
difficult to describe
Indonesian response. This is
because regional, private, non-state and inter-state actors are involved. In
the final period covering
the Rohingya crisis in the region, Indonesia separates
itself from Australian influence and displays more connection with the region
resolution of the crisis. Moreover, it continues, albeit in a shaky way, its
policy of tolerant protection. In this crisis the
consequences of
Australia’s policies on Indonesia’s refugee ‘problem’
and the differences between the needs
of the two countries, become apparent.
Indonesia’s current focus is on its own needs and those of the
Several features of the Indonesia-Australia relationship become clear through
close analysis of their cooperative relationship on
transit refugees. First,
Indonesia does not do Australia’s bidding on all occasions, and when it
does, it is probably as much
motivated by self-interest and other factors which
reflect its geo-political
as by maintaining
good relationships with Australia. Indonesia’s comparatively passive
response to Australian policy contrasts
with its proactive role in ASEAN forums.
As I heard one Indonesian official say at a seminar on human trafficking held in
in November 2012, Indonesia is more interested in policing its northern
waters and trading routes, than in its southern or Australia-oriented
Secondly, although there is Indonesian national law and policy on refugee
protection it is difficult to assume that there
is a united Indonesian response
to refugees or to Australian pressure, as events in 2009 demonstrated. Further,
Aceh’s response
to Rohingya refugees demonstrates the fragmented nature of
the Indonesian state in realist terms. These facts weaken the argument
Australia is a hegemon in the Indonesia-Australia relationship.
Secondly, referring to Thomas Pedersen’s concept of ‘cooperative
hegemony’ which focuses upon ‘ideational-institutional
realism’ and using the example of Indonesia-Australia cooperation on
transit refugees, I have argued against Australia’s
presentation of itself
as a leading power or hegemon and ‘norm entrepreneur’ on refugee and
asylum seeker issues.
The Bali Process is the main institution through which Australia can assert
its role as a regional hegemon and under the Indonesia-Australia
relationship.
But as the 2016 Bali Declaration on People Smuggling demonstrates it appears to
be the facilitator/enabler of Australian
policy focussed on transnational
organised crime and mixed migratory movements rather than on refugee protection.
It represents an
‘institutional gap’ rather than a hegemonic
institution. The recent episode involving Sri Lankan asylum seekers on Aceh
shows the yawning gap between Indonesian and Australian responses to refugees
under the Bali Process. Moreover, on refugee issues
the 2016 Bali Declaration
acknowledges the need to pursue refugee protection through international
non-state and inter-state actors.
This fact is also recognised in the RCA which
governs the Indonesia-Australia cooperation.
Turning to the regional institutional framework and situation, it is clear
that both ASEAN and its Member States failed to promote
lasting solutions during
the Andaman Sea crisis. Despite the promise of the ADHR, the response of states
shows that permanent refugee
protection, at least in the form of resettlement
outcomes is seen to be the responsibility of the international community.
Another important aspect of the situation challenges the idea of
‘cooperative hegemony’ in realist terms. I have demonstrated
increasing tendency for states in the region to pursue refugee protection
through international non-state and inter-state actors.
Rather than being a
model of ‘cooperative hegemony’ the Bali Process reveals through the
2016 Declaration the ‘institutional
which is filled
by the UNHCR and IOM and in the Australia-Indonesia RCA cooperation
relationship.
Pedersen, Thomas,
“Cooperative Hegemony: Power, Ideas and Institutions in Regional
Integration”
Review of International Studies
28.4 (2002):
Betts, Alexander.
Protection by Persuasion: International Cooperation in the Refugee
. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press,
United Nations Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees
1951, 189 U.N.T.S.
Amy Nethery, Amy and Carly
Gordyn, “Australia-Indonesia Cooperation on Asylum Seekers: A Case of
‘Incentivised Policy
Australian Journal of
International Affairs
68.2 (2013): 177-193, 181.
Gammeltoft-Hansen, Thomas and
James C. Hathaway, “Non-Refoulement in a World of Cooperative
Deterrence”
Columbia Journal of Transnational Law
Ibid., 240; Nikolas
Feith Tan, “State Responsibility for international cooperation on
migration control: the case of Australia”
Oxford Monitor of Forced
5.2 (2016): 8-19.
Nethery and Gordyn,
“Australia-Indonesia Cooperation”,
ASEAN (Association of South
East Asia Nations) founded in 1967 originally involved 5 states, Singapore,
Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines,
and Indonesia to promote ‘common
political interests as well as a forum for private business and community-level
interactions’.
The ASEAN Declaration ('Bangkok
Declaration'),
Bangkok, Thailand, 8 August 1967.
http://www.asean.org/news/item/the-asean-declaration-bangkok-declaration
(accessed 4 October 2016). Brunei was added in 1984, Vietnam in 1995, Lao PDR
and Myanmar in 1997 and Cambodia in 1999.
Conference on People
Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime (The Bali
Process) http://www.baliprocess.net.
http://asean.org/asean/external-relations/australia/
Kneebone, Susan. “The
Bali Process and Global Refugee Policy in the Asia-Pacific Region
Journal of Refugee Studies
27.4 (2014):
Curley, Melissa and
Kahlia Vandyk, “The Securitisation of Migrant Smuggling in Australia and
its Consequences for the Bali
Australian Journal of
International Affairs
(2016): 1-21.
–http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10357718.2016.1181149?journalCode=caji20,
International
Conference on Indo-Chinese Refugees, Geneva, 13-14 June 1989: Declaration and
Comprehensive Plan of Action, UN Doc
A/CONF. 148/2, 13 June
Kneebone, Susan and
Felicity Rawlings-Sanaei
(eds), “Old and New Regionalism”,
New Regionalism and Asylum Seekers: Challenges Ahead
Oxford: Berghahn
Books, 2007, 11-18; Kneebone, Susan and Sharon Pickering, “Australia and
the Pacific Region”, in Kneebone
and Rawlings-Sanaei, eds.,
Regionalism and Asylum
Kneebone and
Rawlings-Sanaei, “Old and New
Regionalism”.
Missbach, Antje.
Troubled Transit: Asylum Seekers Stuck in Indonesia
Singapore: ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute, 2015, 29-41.
Presidential decree No
38\1979 regarding Coordination of the Resolution of Issues Related to Vietnamese
Refugees in Vietnam. See
Taylor, Savitri and Bryanna Rafferty-Brown,
“Difficult Journeys: Accessing Refugee Protection in Indonesia”
Monash University Law Review
36 (2010): 138-161, 144,
Barker, Cat. “The
People Smugglers’ Business Model” Parliament of Australia,
Department of Parliamentary Services,
Research Paper No 2. 2012-13 (28 February
United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Thailand.
https://www.unhcr.or.th/en
UNHCR “Global Focus: Thailand”
http://reporting.unhcr.org/node/2552?y=2015#objectives
UNHCR Malaysia
“Figures at a Glance”
http://www.unhcr.org.my/about_us-@-figures_at_a_glance.aspx
Sriprapha Petcharamesree,
“ASEAN and its Approach to Forced Migration Issues’
International Journal of Human Rights
20.2 (2016):
Susan Kneebone,
“ASEAN and the Conceptualisation of Refugee protection” in Ippolito,
Francesca and Ademola Abass (eds),
Regional Approaches to the Protection of
Asylum Seekers: An International Legal Perspective.
Oxford: Routledge, 2014:
ASEAN, “ASEAN
Political Security Bluebrint”, Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat, 2009. Para 9.
http://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/archive/5187-18.pdf
Pomy, Matthew “ASEAN
Adopts Human Rights Declaration” Jurist, 18 November 2012.
http://jurist.org/paperchase/2012/11/asean-adopts-human-rights-declaration.php
Heiduk, Felix. “Indonesia in ASEAN: Regional Leadership between Ambition
and Ambiguity” SWP Research Paper, Berlin,
RP 6, April
Kneebone, Kneebone
“Migration Control at Sea – The Australian Case” in in Ryan,
Bernard and Valsamis Mitsilegas
Extraterritorial Immigration Control:
Legal Challenges.
Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff, 2010: 347-374,
Kneebone, Susan and
Sharon Pickering, “Australia, Indonesia and the Pacific Plan” in
Kneebone and Rawlings-Sanaei (eds),
New Regionalism and Asylum Seekers,
178; Missbach, Troubled Transit, 180.
Kneebone, “Migration
Control at Sea”, 356-360.
Kneebone and Pickering,
“Australia, Indonesia and the Pacific
“Migration Control at Sea”, 361.
Ibid., 362.
Kneebone, Susan. “The
Australian Story: Asylum Seekers Outside the Law” in Kneebone, Susan (ed)
Refugees, Asylum Seekers and the Rule of Law.
Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2009), 171-228, pp195-197.
Kneebone, “Migration
Control at Sea”, 369, n103.
Taylor and Rafferty-Brown,
“Difficult Journeys”: 138-161, n43.
Nethery, Amy,
Rafferty-Brown, Bryanna and Savitri Taylor, “Exporting Detention:
Australia-funded Immigration Detention in
Journal of Refugee
26.1 (2012): 88-109,
Ibid., p95.
Ibid., pp95-97.
Australian Government,
Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Annual Report: 2006-07,
http://www.border.gov.au/ReportsandPublications/Documents/annual-reports/annual-report-2006-07-complete.pdf
Kneebone, “The
Bali Process and Global Refugee Policy”,
Millar, Caroline
“‘Bali Process’ – Building Regional Cooperation to
Combat People Smuggling and Trafficking
in Persons”, Speech by the
Australian Ambassador for People Smuggling Issues at the Institute for the Study
of Global Movements
Monash University, Melbourne, 29 July 2004.
http://dfat.gov.au/news/speeches/Pages/bali-process-building-regional-cooperation-to-combat-people-smuggling-and-trafficking-in-persons.aspx
“The Bali Process and Global Refugee
Ibid., 603.
Circular Letter of the
Prime Minister No 11/R.I/1956 of 1956 on Political Refugees, 7 September 1956.
Kneebone, Susan.
“ASEAN and the Conceptualisation of Refugee protection”.
Mathew, Pene and Tristan
Harley, “Refugee Protection and Regional Cooperation in Southeast Asia: A
Fieldwork Report”
Canberra: Australia National University, March 2014.
http://www.mcrg.ac.in/WC_2015/Reading/D_RefugeeProtection.pdf.
Soeprapto, Enny
”Promotion of Refugee Law in Indonesia”
Indonesian Journal of
International Law
2.1 (2004): 57.
UN Convention Against Torture signed 23 October 1985, ratified 28 October 1998. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ratified 23 February 2006. Entered into force 23 May 2006.
Circular of the Director General of Immigration, Department of Justice, No
F-IL.10-1297, 30 September 2002 regarding Procedures regarding
Aliens Expressing
Their Desire to Seek Asylum or Refugee Status.
Directive of the Director
General of Immigration, regarding Handling of Irregular Migrants, No
IMI-1489.UM.08.05 YEAR 2010.
Soeprapto, ”Promotion
of Refugee Law”: 57.
Dewansyah, Bilal
“Asylum seekers in a Non-Immigrant State and The Absence of Regional
Asylum Seekers Mechanisms: A Case Study
of Rohingya Asylum Seekers in
Aceh” paper presented to 5
AsianSIL Biennial Conference 2015,
Bangkok November 2015, 9.
Neumann, Klaus and Savitri Taylor, “Australia, Indonesia and West Papuan
Refugees, 1962-2009”
International Relations of the Asia-Pacific
10. (2009): 1-31.
“The People Smugglers’ Business Model”.
Klein, Natalie
“Assessing Australia’s Push Back the Boats Policy Under
International Law: Legality and Accountability
for Maritime Interceptions of
Irregular Migrants”,
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Parliament of
Australia, The Senate, Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee,
“Breaches of Indonesian territorial
waters”, March 2014.
Former Prime Minister Tony
Abbott took the position that Australians were ‘sick of being lectured to
by [the] UN’. See
Kozaki, Danuta “Abbott says Australians 'sick of
being lectured to by UN' after scathing report on asylum policies”.
March 2015.
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-09/tony-abbott-hits-out-united-nations-asylum-report/6289892
Troubled Transit
These incidents occurred in
May and November 2015. Amnesty International “By Hook or by Crook:
Australia’s Abuse of Asylum-Seekers
at Sea”. London, Amnesty
International, 2015.
http://www.amnesty.org.au/refugees/comments/38329/.
Nethery, Rafferty-Brown and Taylor, “Exporting Detention”,
In the 2015 report UNHCR
reported that was only funded for 6% of its needs in Indonesia.
http://www.border.gov.au/about/reports-publications/reports/annual/immigration-2014-15.
Australian Government, Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Annual Report:
http://www.border.gov.au/ReportsandPublications/Documents/annual-reports/annual-report-2008-09-complete.pdf
154. See also Missbach,
Troubled Transit
International Organisation
for Migration (IOM) Indonesia, “Alternatives to Detention”.
https://www.iom.int/files/live/sites/iom/files/Country/docs/IOM-Indonesia_Alternatives-to-detention-September-2014.pdf.
See Missbach,
Antje “Doors and Fences: Controlling Indonesia’s Porous Borders and
Policing Asylum Seekers”
Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography
35.2 (2014): 1.
Melissa and Antje Missbach, “Trials of People Smugglers in Indonesia:
2007-2012” CILIS Policy Paper 2013,
http://www.law.unimelb.edu.au/files/dmfile/Crouch_Missbach_web.pdf.
Hugo, Graeme, Tan, George and Caven Jonathan Napitupulu, “Indonesia as a
Transit Country in Irregular Migration to Australia”
Government, Department of Immigration and Border Protection, 2014, 10.
Missbach, Antje, “Sentencing People-Smuggling Offenders in
Indonesia” CILIS Policy Paper, no 12, 2016.
Missbach, “Doors and
“The People Smugglers’ Business Model”. p29.
Gibney, Matthew
“Forced Migration, Engineered Regionalism and Justice Between
States” in Kneebone and Rawlings-Sanaei
New Regionalism
Kneebone, “The
Bali Process and Global Refugee Policy”, 601-602.
The Bali Process.
http://www.baliprocess.net/
Wade, Matt “Australian-funded Cameras Linked to Rise in Boat People to Sri
Lanka”, The Age, 28 October 2009.
Kelly, Paul
“Rudd’s Softer Stance Mugged by Reality”, Weekend Australian,
17-18 October 2009, 11.
asylum seekers were eventually forcibly removed into a detention centre. Some
then voluntarily returned to Sri Lanka (where they
were arrested), while others
stayed in Indonesia on the advice of both IOM and UNHCR. See Refugee Action
Coalition NSW “Media
https://www.greenleft.org.au/node/45634
Editorial comment, The Age, January 7
Plaintiff M70/2011 v.
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
Plaintiff M106 of 2011 v.
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship,
Arrangement Between the
Government of Australia and the Government of Malaysia on Transfer and
Settlement, [Australia-Malaysia Arrangement]
July 25, 2011, accessed September
http://www.kaldorcentre.unsw.edu.au/sites/default/files/arrangement-australia-malaysia-transfer-resettlement.pdf
Annex A to the
Arrangement: Operational Guidelines to Support Transfers and Resettlement
(‘Operational Guidelines’).
Importantly the Migration
Act has been amended to broaden the discretion of the Minister for Immigration
to declare a country as
‘safe’ for the removal of asylum seekers.
Wood, Tamara and Jane
McAdam, “Australian Policy all at Sea: An analysis of Plaintiff M70/2011
v Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship and the Australia- Malaysia
Arrangement
” International and Comparative Law Quarterly
(2012): 274-300.
Susan ‘Comparative Regional Protection Frameworks for Refugees: Norms and
Norm Entrepreneurs’
The International Journal of Human Rights
(2016): 153-172.
“The Bali Process”:
Jakarta Declaration on
Addressing Irregular Movement of Persons, Jakarta, 20 August 2013,
http://www.unhcr.org/5214ae709.pdf
Gordon, Michael, “People smuggling: ‘Step up or step aside,’
Australia and Indonesia warned” The Age, 1 February
http://www.smh.com.au/world/people-smuggling-step-up-or-step-aside-australia-and-indonesia-warned-20160131-gmi1g0.html.
“Asylum Seekers off Aceh to be Assessed”,
, 21 June 2016,
http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2016/06/21/asylum-seekers-aceh-be-assessed
Petcharamesree, Sriprapha,
Hughes, Peter, Wong, Steven, McLeod, Travers, and Tri Nuke Pudjiastuti,
“The Andaman Sea Crisis
a Year On: Is the Region Better Prepared?’
The Conversation
27 May 2016,
https://theconversation.com/the-andaman-sea-refugee-crisis-a-year-on-is-the-region-now-better-prepared-59687
Di Gaetano, Silvia,
“How to Solve Asia’s Refugee Crisis: Steps can and should be taken
to alleviate the plight of Rohingya”
The Diplomat
, September 28,
Davies, Mathew,
‘The Rohingya and our Rule-bending Arrogance’ The Drum 18 May 2015,
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-18/davies-rohingya-and-our-rule-bending-arrogance/6477148
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Malaysia, Press Statement.
http://www.kln.gov.my/web/guest/press-release/-/asset_publisher/t3pS/content/joint-statement:-ministerial-meeting-on-irregular-movement-of-people-in-southeast-asia-english-version-only?redirect=%2Fweb%2Fguest%2Fpress-release
Emphasis added.
Emphasis added.
Summary statement Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Thailand,
http://www.mfa.go.th/main/en/media-center/14/56880-Summary-Special-Meeting-on-Irregular-Migration-in.html
Asia Pacific Refugee Rights Network [APPRN] “APPRN Statement on Maritime
Movements in the Indian Ocean”, 12 October 2015,
http://aprrn.info/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/APRRN-Statement-on-Protection-at-Sea.pdf
See also Joint NGO Statement ahead of the Special Meeting on Irregular Migration
in the Indian Ocean, Bangkok, 29 May 2015,
http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/2015-05/joint-ngo-statement-ahead-special-meeting-irregular-migration-indian-ocean-bangkok-29-may
Petcharamesree et al, “The Andaman Sea Crisis”.
Holmes, Oliver,
“Thailand Disrupts Attempt to Launch Migrant Rescue Ship Operation”
The Guardian 14 April 2016,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/thailand-blocks-migrant-rescue-ships-operations-in-andaman-sea
Bali Declaration on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons, and Related
Transnational Crime [Bali Declaration], 23 March 2016.
Gordon, “People
smuggling: ‘Step Up or Step Aside’”. Petcharamesree,
Sriprapha, Hughes, Peter, Wong, Steven,
McLeod, Travers, and Tri Nuke
Pudjiastuti, ‘The Bali Process Can Do a Lot More to Respond to Forced
Migration in our Region’
The Conversation, 21 March 2016,
https://theconversation.com/the-bali-process-can-do-a-lot-more-to-respond-to-forced-migration-in-our-region-56213
Bali Declaration, Para
Ibid., Para 6.
Topsfield, Jewel,
“Migrant Crisis: Australia to Launch Anti-human Trafficking and Slavery
Strategy’ Sydney Morning Herald,
March 21, 2016,
http://www.smh.com.au/world/migrant-crisis/migrant-crisis-australia-to-launch-antihuman-trafficking-and-slavery-strategy-20160321-gnnm3i.html
Vandyk, “The Securitisation of Migrant Smuggling, 17.
, 155, states that ‘given Indonesia’s significance in the
region Australia needs Indonesia more than Indonesia needs Australia’.
Curley and Vandyk,
“The Securitisation of Migrant Smuggling, 2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (346 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter