URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dellit, Elouise; Kendall, Christopher N --- "Technological Protection Measures and Fair Dealing: Maintaining the Balance Between Copyright Protection and the Right to Access Information" [2003] DigTechLawJl 1; (2003) 4(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 1
Technological Protection Measures and
Fair Dealing: Maintaining the Balance Between Copyright
Protection and
the Right to Access
Information
Elouise Dellit
& Dr Christopher N Kendall
Introduction:
The Challenges and Possibilities of the Digital
Environment
– Can Copyright Cope?
Digital Agenda Act, despite the stated intention of the drafters, has
tilted the balance in
favour of copyright owners.
It is no exaggeration to say that as more
information is available in electronic form only , the shift brought
the Digital Agenda Act has the potential to dramatically
affect access to information by rendering the fair dealing and other
to copyright effectively meaningless… A failure
to strike an
appropriate balance between the rights of copyright owners and
users will have far more dire consequences in the digital age than it
have ever had in the age of print.
digital environment is made up of computers, Digital Video Disk
(“DVD”) players, Compact Disc
players, handheld
devices, video game consoles
and the Internet -- the global network
that connects computers throughout the world.
“Digital” describes electronic technology
generates, stores and processes data
as a string of 0s and 1s.
Previously, electronic transmission
was limited to analog technology which conveys data as electronic
signals of varying frequency
or amplitude that are added to carrier
waves of a given frequency.
Analog technology is now being replaced by digital technology because
digital is faster, more versatile and
of a much higher quality.
The digital world is vastly different to the
print world within which our copyright laws originated. Some of its
It is possible to make an almost
unlimited number of perfect
reproductions;
It is fast, easy and cheap to make
reproductions;
Information can be transmitted
instantaneously to an unlimited number of
destinations throughout the world by way of the Internet
(for example,
the World Wide Web or via email communication);
is fast and easy to locate information on the World Wide Web using
powerful and intuitive search engines (such as
For these reasons, the Internet is one of the
most effective forms of production and distribution of creative works.
However, it is not
without its drawbacks. Once works are published on the World Wide Web
they become highly susceptible
to copyright
infringement.
Due to the nature of the Internet, it
is very difficult to detect copyright infringement and identify the
person responsible for
the infringement.
Information that is produced on a CD or DVD is similarly susceptible to
reproductions of CDs or DVDs is now widely available and relatively
inexpensive.
The fact that millions of individuals
and businesses have access to
technology puts those works at greater risk of infringement that is
difficult to trace.
A fear of widespread copyright infringement has led to the development
of technological protection
measures (“TPMs”).
According to the legal
definition in the
(Cth)”), TPMs
are devices or products that prevent or inhibit the infringement of
to the work is only available by use of an access code or process, or
by controlling copying of the work.
Some examples of TPMs
include password protection, encryption, the
“read-only” technology
used in websites and in eBooks,
and the copy control technology used in
6. Copyright
users have developed ways of getting around these
“digital fences” in order to access and make use of
works locked away behind them. For example, in 1999 a Norwegian
developed a method of circumventing the access control measure
(called CSS) in order to create a DVD player for Linux machines.
Although this
might seem a legitimate reason to
circumvent the access control measure, once it has been circumvented,
the content
of the DVDs may be freely copied. Hence, copyright owners
are concerned that their works will be susceptible to
infringement if the
TPMs are able to be
circumvented.
Circumvention of technological protection measures is a
global problem. Hence,
a global solution is needed. In 1996, the World
Intellectual Property
Organisation (“WIPO”) rose to the challenge and
the WIPO Copyright Treaty.
This Treaty requires member States to provide adequate legal protection
against the circumvention of TPMs that
are used by copyright
owners to protect their works.
regard, the United States introduced anti-circumvention provisions by
Digital Millennium
(“DMCA”). The DMCA is thought to go
far beyond what is required by the WIPO Copyright Treaty.
thereafter, Australia, although not a signatory to the WIPO Copyright
enacted its own anti-circumvention provisions.
The Australian
provisions are slightly weaker than the US provisions in that they do
not cover the act of circumvention itself, whereas
the US provisions do
relation to access control measures). However, both the US and
Australian laws prohibit dealings with circumvention
devices and
many, prohibiting circumvention devices and services seems to be an
appropriate solution to the problem of widespread copyright
infringement in the
digital environment. Copyright owners can at least seek redress against
producing circumvention devices
on a commercial scale and thereby
aiding others in copying works.
However, not everyone who copies a
work infringes copyright. Some copying of works is permitted by the
fair dealing provisions
These provisions were introduced into the
in order to
provide a fair balance between the rights of copyright owners and the
When the anti-circumvention provisions were
introduced into both the US and Australian Copyright Acts the
legislatures
were concerned with carrying forward this bala nce to the
digital environment. This paper will argue that this has not been
in a way that is risk-free. In the digital environment, in
which technological protection measures have been put in place to
dealing of some works and, if recent efforts by the music and
entertainment industries to influence legislative change and judicial
to piracy are a sign of things to come, the question
needs to be asked:
reached the stage where fair use is a thing of the past?
One reason for the demise of fair use (and other reasons will be
throughout this paper) is that TPMs cannot discriminate
infringing and
non-infringing uses of the works. This is best illustrated by way of an
example. Chris, a law professor at
Murdoch University, wishes to read
an article in the Digital Intellectual Property Law Journal
(“DIPLJ”) which is only
available online. He visits
website but finds that a login and password is required to access the
and he can only
obtain a login by subscribing to the journal for $50 a
year. Chris does not think it is worth subscribing to the journal
he only wants to read one article and that article may not even
relevant. Although Chris only intends to use the article for fair
purposes he is prevented from accessing it because there is a
technological protection measure in place (ie. the use of the
(Cth) does not in fact make it
illegal for Chris to circumvent the password protection because the act
of circumvention itself is
prohibited. Rather, the
prohibits dealings with
circumvention devices and services. However, unless Chris is also a
programmer and a “hacker”
(and he can somehow hack
into the system to obtain a password or develop some software that will
password) he has no way
of circumventing the TPM. In fact, even if a
programmer writes software that circumvents the password protection,
is unable to purchase the software because dealings in
circumvention services are prohibited. The fact
that circumvention is permitted
does not help Chris at
14. Previously
(Cth) was only concerned with
activities that do not themselves constitute infringement but
people in infringing copyright. It is irrelevant that the person was
carrying out one of these prohibited activities for a
purpose such as fair dealing.
In this new copyright regime the
balance has arguably tipped in favour of the copyright owners. In this
we will be considering
the rationale for copyright and the fair dealing
provisions in the
(Cth). This will
be followed by an
analysis of the anti-circumvention provisions in both the US and
Australia and the types of technological
protection measures they aim
to protect. We
will consider the effect that the use of TPMs has on the activities of
researchers, academics,
journalists, students and other people who
use copyrighted works for fair dealing purposes. This requires an
analysis of
the emerging case law, the types of people that are being
(Cth) and the message
these prosecutions send to
the public at large about their right to access information in the
will also question whether anti-circumvention laws are
necessary to prevent copyright infringement given that this is in fact
the infringement provisions found in the
We will also
consider whether it is appropriate for the circumvention of TPMs to be
dealt with in the
(Cth) given that
TPMs afford copyright owners much more power than copyright laws and
risk overriding important user rights such as
fair dealing. Finally, we
will argue that increased
surveillance of Internet use and access to copyright materials, while
understandable
as a means of addressing piracy in some circumstances,
does risk leading to a situation where legitimate use is curtailed and
dealing undermined.
While aware of the
need to tackle piracy, this paper calls for a
more cooperative legal and social approach to the problem that does
stifle creativity and intellectual
development.
of Copyright
In Australia, copyright constitutes a bundle of exclusive rights which
vary according to the subject matter of the right. Of necessity,
scope of copyright is continually being
expanded. As Stewart points out: “Both the categories of
protected by copyright
and the number of specific rights which form the
bundle known as the ‘scope’ of copyright have been
over the years as technology has advanced.”
The introduction of the
Agenda) Act 2000
(Cth) has seen copyright law extended so
that works that are in digital format are also afforded copyright
protection. In this regard,
the exclusive right to
“broadcast” the work has
been replaced by the right to “communicate the work to the
so that it encompasses communication over the
Internet and any
other type of electronic transmission.
More importantly, the
(Cth)”) now covers activities which
do not themselves constitute
infringement in copyright, but
assist people
in infringing copyright. Specifically, copyright owners have now been
given rights with
respect to technological protection
(“TPMs”) which protect copyright works, and the
circumvention devices which compromise
those TPMs.
20. In considering
whether the introduction of
these anti-circumvention provisions has upset the delicate balance
between the rights
of copyright owners and copyright users, it is
useful to briefly
consider the nature of copyright and the justifications for copyright
protection.
many ways, copyright is a property right, even though
the subject matter is intangible and incorporeal.
However, unlike property rights,
which last as long as the subject matter of the
rights, copyright is limited in duration. After
a certain period of
passes into the public domain and can be
freely used by anyone.
exclusive right, the copyright owner should arguably be able to
prevent others from copying her or his work.
Indeed, copyright is often
referred to as a monopoly right
because it gives the owner exclusive control over the market for the
it does not prevent other people from competing in the
market by creating their own works.
Monopolies tend to arise
when large companies intentionally engage in anti-competitive
practices, for example by taking over competing
companies or producing
works that are
only compatible with other works sold by that company. Microsoft, which
has been taken to court
many times over its alleged monopolistic and
anti-competitive practices, arguably has a monopoly over certain
software products because
it bundles them together and makes them
incompatible with
software produced by other companies.
It is claimed that it is
Microsoft’s anti-competitive practices which cause the
monopoly to arise, not the fact that Microsoft
has certain exclusive
relation to its software products.
As noted above, the exclusive
rights vary according to the subject matter of the rights. The
(Cth) classifies the subject matter into
and “subject matter other than works”.
“Work” is defined as a literary, dramatic, musical
or artistic work.
The “subject matter other than works” that are
afforded copyright protection are sound recordings, cinematograph
television and sound broadcasts and
published editions of works.
As a result of the amendments
introduced in 1999 and 2000, it is clear that the
now encompasses works in digital format.
For simplicity, we have
referred to all of these types of works and subject matter, whether
digital or otherwise, as “works”
throughout this
24. The one
‘right’ that is common to all types of
works is the right to make a copy of the work (or the right to
the work in a material form” in the case
of literary,
dramatic and musical works). Another right common to all works except
published editions is the right to communicate the work to the public.
Some of the other rights applicable to certain types of works
the right to make a translation, perform the work, publish the work and
the work to be heard or seen in public. Effectively,
(Cth) grants to copyright owners all the exclusive
rights that are
perceived to be necessary to provide an incentive to create and
Rationales for Copyright Protection
25. Broadly,
there are two types of arguments for copyright protection –
economic. Moral justifications include the
need to reward labour, the
author’s right to control what she or he has created and the
discourage theft of property.
Economic justifications include the need
to provide an incentive to create new
works and the need to remunerate for the cost of creating
Justifications
One of the main purposes of copyright law is to
give authors the reward due to them for their contribution to society.
established that authors should be entitled to the fruit of their
Similarly, authors
should be entitled to control the use of their works. This is
consistent with
the notion of copyright as property.
Just as owners of physical
property are
able to sell it or grant a license over it, so should owners of
intellectual
property be
able to do so.
Sterling suggests that another reason why
authors should be able to control use is because the author’s
own creations are
associated with the author’s
personality.
This idea has significantly influenced the copyright
laws of civil law countries.
It is also the foundation of moral rights laws
, which are a fundamental aspect
of the copyright law in civil law countries, but were introduced into
common law countries at a
much later stage.
Moral rights protect
the author’s right to be known as the author of the work,
not to have any
work falsely attributed to her or him,
not to have the work subject to derogatory treatment.
The concept of authors being entitled to protect their
works is entrenched in international law doctrine. Article 27(2) of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
for example,
states: “Everyone has the right to the protection of the
material interests resulting from
scientific, literary or artistic
production of which he is the author.”
Irrespective of
whether or not we believe that the author has property in her or his
creation, Sterling suggests that common principles
of fairness support
the idea that the unauthorised use of something produced by another
should not be socially condoned.
In that regard, he talks of the “condemnation of
theft” as being one of the important justifications of
Not surprisingly, this idea has the support of the US
dominated recording and film industries, which equate piracy with
example, Jack Valenti, the Chief Executive of the Motion Picture
Association of
America and a well-known lobbyist and spokesperson
for the film
industry, has
that: “Brooding over the global reach of the American movie
and its persistent
attracting consumers of every creed, culture and country is
thievery, the theft of our movies in both the analog and digital
31. For Valenti, and
others, piracy is
stealing. In his opinion, the industry has been
“ambushed”, even
“terrorised”
by people downloading and c opying
movies over the
Others have used similar descriptives in
discussing music piracy, particularly in reference to peer to peer file
swapping technologies,
discussed later in this paper. Arguably,
and others, are not concerned about piracy because it is morally wrong
authors should be entitled to protect what they create.
they are concerned about the economic consequences of piracy and
fact that it causes the industry to suffer significant revenue losses.
These industry
leaders, all strong advocates of increased government
intervention into the use of Internet technology, claim that
circumvention provisions are necessary to protect their investment.
Unfortunately, their claims seem to ignore, or at least
diminish, the
of those for whom fair use is an issue worth protecting.
Justifications
The main economic justification for copyright
protection is that which is referred to as the “incentive
explained by Sterling as follows: “Creation of works involves
investment of time, patience, skills, creative endeavour and
Such investment should be protected. If it is not protected, the author
loses the incentive to undertake the project. Production
benefits society. Consequently it is necessary to give authors the
incentive to carry on their work by providing, through
ensure their livelihood.”
34. Clearly, if there
were no copyright laws, authors would be unable to recoup their costs
bec ause anyone would be able to freely
copy their work without having
to remunerate the author.
For example, the first purchaser of a
book could produce multiple copies of the book and sell them at a lower
than the author
because they would only need to cover the cost of
printing the
book. The author would then be discouraged from investing their time
resources in the production of works.
As Ricketson explains,
“copyright is a defence against large-scale free-riders who
wish to benefit from the creation and
distribution
of intellectual works of authorship without bearing a
share of the underlying cost of authorship.”
Now that copying technology has reached the stage where it is
impossible in many cases to distinguish between an authorised and
unauthorised
reproduction, it is even more important that authors be provided with
sufficient incentive to create new works. Copying
technology is
becoming increasingly more available and has substantially dropped in
price. In that
regard, copyright law is necessary
“free-riders” from
copying music CDs, for example, and selling them cheaply so that they
into the profits
of those who own copyright in the music (presumably
recording companies and artists).
One could even argue that Australia’s new anti-circumvention
provisions are necessary to enable the copyright owners to
‘free-riders’ from overcoming any copy protection
that recording companies insert in their CDs
in order to prevent
why recording companies feel that strong copyright protection is
Of course, this does not take into account the fact that not
copying constitutes infringement of copyright. Copying for fair
purposes certainly does not.
some ways, copyright laws may be seen to be in the public interest.
Indeed, one
of the important aims of copyright law is the
encouragement of learning
and the promotion of culture.
authors to create works and release them to the public. This further
us to build upon the ideas and information
available to the public and
contributes to the development of culture.
economy by providing economic incentives and benefits to copyright
Obviously the public benefits from a
society with more information, a more intellectually vibrant culture
a stronger economy.
However, as users of copyright works, copyright laws can also be seen
to impact negatively upon the general
public. Copyright
can, for example, restrict access to information
which should
be freely available to the public.
Since the copyright owner has
the exclusive right to copy and distribute the work, anyone else who
have a copy of that
work must pay for it. Although others may produce
competition with the copyright owner, only the copyright owner can
that particular work, so they are free to charge how ever much
they choose. The copyright owner can (and often does) charge much
than is necessary for them to recoup their costs and have a sufficient
incentive to produce further works. This is evident from
the fact that
technology companies can reduce the price of their products
substantially over time and still make a healthy profit.
The doctrine
of fair dealing, which is explained in detail below, was introduced in
to redress the apparent inequality between
the rights of copyright
owners and copyright users. The fair dealing provisions in the
(Cth) enable use of copyright works for certain
purposes, namely, research or study, criticism or review, reporting
news and the
provision of professional advice. The purpose of the fair
defence is to ensure that certain people are able to make use of
works without needing to remunerate the copyright owner. In this way,
dealing doctrine attempts to maintain
a fair balance between the rights
As noted above, the encouragement of learning and the
sharing of information, knowledge and ideas is an important aim of
law. This is partly achieved by way of the fair dealing
found in the
(Cth). Fair dealing
works to be copied for certain purposes without the copyright
permission provided the
dealing with that material is
The activities of researchers, students, academics, critics, reviewers,
journalists and reporters would be greatly hampered if they
able to copy a reasonable portion of works for inclusion in new works
simply for their own reference.
An increasing number of works are being produced in digital format and
distributed over the Internet. Many of these works are
protected by
technological protection measures (“TPMs”) which
prevent access to and copying of the works, whether that
copying would constitute an infringement or not. Arguably, fair dealing
is in danger of
being overridden by the push for
TPMs, calls for stronger
anti-circumvention
provisions that provide legal protection for TPMs and more legislative
and judicial restrictions
on who can access what, how they can access
(Cth) contains fair dealing provisions which apply to
all categories of copyright materials.
To be considered a “fair
dealing” under the
, the dealing must
be for the purposes of research or study,
criticism or review,
reporting the
judicial proceedings or professional advice.
The scope of the
exception is confined to these four purposes.
does not contain a definition of the term
“fair dealing” because, whether or not a use is
“fair” is something
that needs to
be determined on a case by case basis.
This allows for a
considerable degree of flexibility in the application of the defences.
If the use is
for the purpose of criticism or
review, reporting news, or giving professional advice, the court must
use its discretion
in determining whether the use of copyright material
Dealing for Research or Study
Despite this, the
provide some guidance to the courts in determining whether a use for
the purpose of research or study is fair. Specifically,
the courts must
consider a number of factors, namely, the nature of the work or
adaptation, the possibility of obtaining the work
or adaptation within
a reasonable time at an ordinary commercial price, the effect of the
dealing upon the potential market for,
or value of, the work or
adaptation, and
the amount and substantiality of the part copied in relation to the
whole work or adaptation.
case of copying a work or a periodical publication for the purpose of
research or study the Act provides a degree of certainty.
article from a periodical publication or a “reasonable
portion” of a literary, dramatic or musical work for
purpose of research or study is
deemed to be fair.
The Act does not contain a definition of
“reasonable portion”, except for works contained in
a published
edition that
is 10 pages or longer, in which case a reasonable portion
is 10% of the number of pages of the edition or one chapter.
“Research or study” is not defined in the Act but
the meaning of this phrase has been judicially considered. In the
Court decision of
De Garis v Neville Jeffress Pidler Pty Ltd,
J adopted the Macquarie Dictionary definition of
“research”: “diligent and systematic
enquiry or investigation
into a subject in order to discover
facts or principles.”
Regarding “study”, the Court
highlighted the need for: “(1) application of the mind to the
acquisition of knowledge,
as by reading, investigation or reflection;
(2) the cultivation of a particular branch of learning, science, or
art... (3) a particular
course of effort to acquire knowledge... (5) a
thorough examination and analysis of a particular
, the court held that the
defendant’s photocopying of newspaper articles for sale to
of its news clipping service was
not research or study. It did not
that the clients ma y have used the photocopies for research purposes
because it is the
purpose of the person making the dealing that is
From this decision it would appear that where
the copying is for a commercial purpose, it is not a fair dealing.
This was the
conclusion reached in the New Zealand decision of
New Zealand Ltd v Newsmonitor Services Ltd.
In this case, Justice Blanchard
found that copying material and
passing it onto others for the commercial profit of the copier did
constitute fair dealing.
position is less clear in relation to copying by a commercial
organisation
for the research and development purposes of the
organisation itself.
In the 1993
New Zealand
case, for example, Justice Blanchard suggested
that this would
constitute a fair dealing: “Although I am inclined to think
a corporation can engage in private study, as when its personnel
endeavour to place themselves in a position to be better able to
perform their functions in or related to the corporation,
“research” is even more clearly something of which
organisation is capable… It is ultimately intended
commercial exploitation or is perhaps defensive in character
– to improve a product, for example, and thus avoid loss of
sales or even product liability litigation. Ultimately, the product
the research is likely in some form to be made public. So I conclude
that a fair dealing
for the purposes of research within s
19(1) can be something done with
commercial end in view.
Although this issue has not yet come before an Australian court,
Justice Blanchard’s comments would seem to be equally
to the Australian
legislation.
Fair Dealing for Criticism or
Section 41 permits fair dealing with a literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic work for the purpose of criticism or review of
work or another work, provided that sufficient acknowledgment of the
work is made. This section enables critics and commentators
work of others and include examples of that work.
The fact that
the review is for a commercial purpose does not prohibit the
application
of this section, provided that the use is
case, the defendant also tried to argue
that their conduct constituted fair dealing for the purpose of
criticism and review. The
again deferred to the Macquarie Dictionary, which offered the
following definition of “criticism”:
“...(1) the
act or art of analysing and judging the quality
of the literary or
artistic work, etc... (2) the act of passing judgment as to the
of something... (4) a critical comment, article or essay; a
and the following definition of
“review”: “(1) a critical article or
report, as in a periodical on some literary
work, commonly some work of
appearance; a
critique...”
held that the defendant’s conduct did not constitute a fair
the purpose of criticism and review because
the defendant merely
located and
supplied the material without evaluating it.
From this decision
it is apparent that mere copying of material will not be considered a
fair dealing for the purpose of criticism
and review. Some degree of
or effort on the part of the defendant is also required.
Dealing for Reporting News
A fair dealing
with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work is not an
infringement of the copyright in the work if it is
for the purpose of
the news in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, or by means of
a communication or in a film.
The High Court, in
Commonwealth of Australia v
Fairfax & Sons Ltd,
considered the meaning of “news” and
concluded that
it was not limited to current events.
Rationale Behind Fair
Fair dealing is one of the ways in which copyright law
places limitations on the copyright owner’s ability to
control their
attempting to achieve the optimal balance between the rights of
to exercise their fair dealing rights.
Some of the
justifications for fair dealing are that it enables the public to
information, it encourages the creation of new
works and it limits
owner’s market.
Justifications
public’s right to access and use the ideas of others.
dealing is necessary because it is in the public interest for people to
to access works and the information and ideas
contained within them.
By enabling
access to and use of the ideas of others, people are
encouraged to create new works which incorporate or which draw
previous works.
58. The fair dealing
provisions are of particular significance to educational institutions.
institutions are principally concerned
with the development and
maintenance of
the store of knowledge and the free flow of ideas and
information.
The fair dealing provisions enable academics,
students, librarians and researchers to make copies of works when they
in research or
study. According to the Australian Vice-Chancellor’s
Committee: “It is
essential to have available in
appropriate and convenient ways the
actual texts and forms of knowledge with which scholarship engages. It
the nature of scholarly
endeavour that, in order to examine ideas,
researchers and students be able to authenticate the exact words of
and subject
matter other than works. Fair dealing is basic to scholarly
activity. It is at the very nub of the sharing, extension, and
development
59. News reporters,
journalists, critics and reviewers also rely on the fair dealing
provisions to copy works in order to be able
to present information to
public and inform them of current events.
The activities of these copyright users would be greatly hampered if
the fair dealing provisions were not in place. Academics,
librarians and
researchers would have to purchase a copy of every work they intended
Hence, they would be limited
to the amount of material they could
afford to buy. If they wished to incorporate any of that work into
they would have
to seek the permission of the author, which would be
extremely burdensome. As the Australian Vice-Chancellor’s
Committee states,
it is important that educational institutions are not
encumbered with complex regulatory requirements or unaffordable tariffs
the remuneration of
61. Technological
protection measures pose a particular problem for people who wish to
access or copy works
because they do not explicitly
recognise fair dealing rights.
In particular,
some TPMs prevent access to the works except by
authorised users who have paid a fee. Other TPMs do not allow the
material to be copied by anyone. Neither type of TPM is able to
distinguish between ordinary users and users that are legally entitled
the work for fair dealing
Justifications
One of the justifications of copyright law is that it provides an
incentive to create new works. Copyright should therefore be
that which is necessary to create an incentive for
further acts of creativity.
It should not prevent other people
from creating new works that incorporate or draw upon that work. Fair
dealing limits copyright
protection so that the copyright owner does
acquire a monopoly over the work.
On the other hand, the second
work should not supplant the market for the first work. If the dealing
is for research or study the
court must take into account the
effect of the dealing upon the potential market for, or value of, the
consistent with the idea that fair dealing should not be for commercial
gain. The digital environment has the potential to
greatly impact on the markets of works.
The ability to make an infinite
number of high-quality reproductions of works in a way that
cannot be detected is of great concern
to copyright owners. However,
dealing purposes do not harm the
market for those works. It is the
manufacturers and distributors of circumvention devices and services
the greatest threat
to the copyright industry. Hence, they lobbied
parliament to outlaw dealings in circumvention
Unfortunately, in doing so they have arguably weakened the fair dealing
provisions in the digital environment because copyright
users are not
able to circumvent technological protection measures without
circumvention devices. Although the anti-circumvention
provisions are
only intended to protect the market for works they also risk
preventing fair dealing of the works. This is of particular
when the music and entertainment industries are advocating stronger
restrictions on the ability of Internet users
to access materials now
available on line. This is discussed later in this paper. First,
however, it is worth examining how governments
are dealing with the
concept of fair use and whether, given the now evident push to limit
via TPMs, anti-circumvention legislatio
n and other legal means,
“fair” use is, in fact,
still “fair”.
of the Fair Dealing Provisions in
In recent years, the government has looked at possible ways to reform
digital environment. To date none
of the suggested amendments have been implemented. Nonetheless, it is
useful to look
at the effect these amendments would have on the ability
of users to carry out fair dealing activities in the digital
environment.
Whilst they would simplify the law significantly, the
amendments would not appear to provide much assistance to copyright
65. In 1997,
the Copyright Law Review Committee (“CLRC”)
released five issues papers and invited submissions on how the
simplified.
One of these was entitled “Simplification of the Fair Dealing
Provisions of the
After considering the submissions, the
CLRC put together a report entitled “Simplification of the
66. The report
contains numerous recommendations in relation to
fair dealing, the principal one being that we should adopt an
model similar to the US model (by consolidating the existing seven fair
dealing provisions into a single provision).
The CLRC also recommended that the
factors that are currently considered in relation to dealing with a
work for the purpose of research
or study be applied generally to all
fair dealings.
Obviously this would
automatically be achieved if the fair dealing provisions were
consolidated into a single section. This recommendation
particularly controversial
given that, in practice, courts tend to apply the factors to the other
categories of fair dealing
“open-ended model” recommendation, however,
has received mixed reactions.
The US seems to be the only country
with an open-ended provision.
Under US copyright law, there are
no separate categories of fair use purposes and no different rules for
There is only one provision relating to fair use,
section 107
, which provides that: “...the fair use of a
work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords
other means specified by that section, for
purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching...,
scholarship,
or research, is not an infringement of copyright...”
The US legislation also lists a number of factors that should be
considered in determining whether the use of a particular work
These factors are similar to the factors in
(Cth) except that they apply to all types of fair use,
not just fair use for the purpose of research or study.
practical difference between the US and Australian law is that the US
permits fair use that does not fall within one of
the four categories.
Arguably, the advantage of this approach is that the legislation is
flexible and can adapt to changing
circumstances and new technologies.
enables the court to use discretion in determining
whether a defendant should be entitled to rely on the fair dealing
other hand, critics of the open-ended model feel that it has the
to broaden the scope of exceptions, shifting
the balance in favour of
and that this is not appropriate in the digital environment.
that digital technology, which enables
reproduction and dissemination of works, has the potential to erode the
for copyright material.
They claim that the presumption that fair dealing has only a minimal
impact on the market for copyright work is untrue in the digital
environment because minor
infringements, when multiplied many times, may present a major problem
It is submitted that adopting an open-ended
model would in fact have little effect on the markets for copyright
material and would
not assist users in making fair dealings with works
digital environment. This is evidenced by the fact that academics,
researchers,
students and other fair users in the US are just as
their Australian counterparts.
Broadening the exceptions would not shift the balance in favour of
users because they would still have to
satisfy the “qualitative”
test of fairness. As
Dower points out,
“although digitisation has radically redefined the way
works are stored and
transmitted, it is unlikely to significantly alter
purposes for which such material is used.”
The problem that copyright users face is not that their activities do
fall within the fair dealing provisions because they
are too narrow.
is that more and more works are being locked away behind technological
protection measures. Suggested
amendments to the fair dealing
provisions would not assist users attempting to access and copy works
in the digital environment.
Technological protection measures prevent
users from accessing or copying works regardless of whether they wish
to infringe
in the work or use the work for fair dealing purposes. The
different types of technological protection measures are explained in
Technological Protection Measures
72. The term
“technological protection measure”
(“TPM”) has been
adopted to refer
to the various technologies
that have been developed by copyright
owners to prevent piracy of their works. Some examples of TPMs include
encryption, password
protection, “read-only”
technology and the copy
protection present in some CDs. Some TPMs prevent users from accessing
the works (unless they have paid a fee) while others enable users to
works but do not enable them to copy them. One feature
common to all
TPMs is that they cannot distinguish between legitimate and
non-legitimate uses of the works they protect. Hence, they
accessing works for fair dealing purposes.
Technology to Protect
Digital Works
Digital technology enables information to be
transmitted across the Internet at high speeds and at high quality.
and video games in digital
format are of a much higher quality than those in analogue format and
reproduced with very little
degradation of quality. For this reason,
digital format has now replaced analogue – CDs have replaced
replaced video cassettes and the Internet has become the
method for distributing information.
It is this ability to make high quality reproductions that has rendered
these copyrighted works highly susceptible to infringement,
“piracy” as it is
popularly known. This type of infringement is almost impossible to
trace due to
the nature of the
Internet and the increasingly widespread use of
copying devices such as CD writers and DVD writers in personal
computers. The copyright
law, or at least the copyright infringement
provisions, has not been able to provide much assistance to copyright
75. Copyright
owners have been forced to resort to using technology to protect their
works in what Forsyth refers to as the “encryption
This outcome was
predicted as early as 1995 in a report by the US Department
of Commerce’s Information Infrastructure Taskforce.
report says
that “[t]he ease of infringement and the difficulty of
detection and
enforcement will cause copyright owners
to loo k to technology, as well
as the law, for protection of their works.”
Hence, copyright owners started
to develop technological protection measures to
protect their works.
The Definition of
“Technological Protection
After much debate, the Austra lian legislature
settled on the following definition of technological protection measure
for inclusion
device or product, or a component incorporated into a process, that is
designed, in the ordinary course of its operation,
to prevent or
inhibit the infringement of copyright in a work or
other subject-matter by either or both of the following means: (a)
ensuring that access to the work or other subject matter is available
solely by use of an access code or process (inc luding decryption,
unscrambling or other transformation of the work or other
subject-matter) with the authority of the owner or licensee of the
(b) through a copy control mechanism.”
TPMs may be categorised according to whether they control access to the
are referred to as access control methods and the
latter as copy control methods. Both types come within this definition
technological protection measure – subsectio n (a) refers to
control methods and (b) refers to copy control methods.
No distinction
is made between access control methods and copy control methods in the
(Cth), and all the anti-circumvention provisions apply to
contrast, the US
distinguish between
technological
measures that effectively control access to a work and those that
effectively protect a right
of a copyright owner in a work.
for this distinction is that different anti-c ircumvention
provisions apply to these two types of TPMs (this is explained
paper). However, “TPM” seems to have the same
meaning in the US as
it has in Australia. Although the US
not contain a
definition of “technological measure” it is clear
definition of “circumvent a technological
Act encompasses the same types of technologies as the Australian
Examples of Technological Protection
Access Control Methods
79. As the na me
suggests, access control methods prevent unauthorised users from
accessing protected content. The most obvious access
control method is
password protection to ensure that only authorised users access the
content. Another common method is
encryption or scrambling the content,
which restricts access to authorised users who have the
will decrypt
or unscramble the content.
On its own, access control is a relatively weak method of protection
once a user obtains access to the content, the technology
prevent them from copying or redistributing it.
Therefore, if
an unauthorised user (or “hacker”) illegally
obtains a password
or decrypts or unscrambles the work, the
protected content becomes
freely available.
If that content contains copyrighted works then
those works become susceptible to infringement.
Another type of technology that is often referred to as a technological
protection measure is the use of watermarks and digital
signatures.
involves marking digital works in a way that persistently identifies
Presently, this type of
technology would not appear to fall within the definition of a TPM
does not prevent or inhibit
the infringement of copyright by
controlling access
to the work or preventing copying of the work. Further, it does not
prevent fair
dealings with the work because it does not restrict access
the work or copying of the work. Rather, it merely identifies the
Copy Control Methods
The other type of TPM that is increasingly being used to prevent
copying of digital works is the copy control method. Provided
not able to be
circumvented, copy control methods can prevent copying of the content
that they protect, whether the copying
would constitute copyright
infringement or not. These types of methods allow content owners to
what rights
users will be
83. One type
of copy control method that users of the Internet may frequently
encounter is the “read only” display technology
that does not allow users to copy and distribute the material
that is displayed on a website.
For example, the copy and paste
functions and the printing functions may be disabled so that users can
cut and paste the material
into another application or print it
84. This kind of
technology was used by Adobe in their Acrobat eBook Reader
software at the centre of the Russian
computer programmer case, discussed .
This software is designed to
protect the content of an electronic book
(“eBook”) and allow readers to view the
content on the reader’s computer.
Not only are
users of this software disabled from copying or printing the books,
they are not
able to read the eBook on any computer
other than the one it was first
downloaded on. This effectively means that users cannot loan eBooks to
other people and cannot continue
to use the eBook if
they upgrade the operating system on their computer or purchase a new
85. Another
controversial copy control
method is the technology that prevents the c opying of CDs. This
technology is controversial
because it was secretly introduced into the
market (by recording companies) and because initially it caused a lot
of problems for
One of the early techniques involved inserting digital distortion into
the music that is inaudible when
the CD is played on a CD
player but not when played on a computer.
technology is highly problematic because the CDs that
use this technology do not play on certain CD players and various other
devices on which consumers expect to be able to play their CDs.
causing PC computers to crash and iMac computers to lock up and not
to reboot, thus requiring a trip to the dealer for
More recent technology has overcome these problems but it still
prevents users from copying the content of CDs, even for fair
Interestingly, it was discovered early last year that some
of the copy protection
could be circumvented by simply covering the
outer track of the CD
either a marker pen or electrical tape.
This begs the question, if this
copy protection constitutes a TPM, do the marker pens and
electrical tape constitute a circumvention
device? If so, can we be
criminally prosecuted for selling or distributing marker pens and
tape? The copy protection would
seem to be a TPM but the requirement
the person must have known, or ought reasonably to have known, that the
device would be
used to circumvent, or facilitate the circumvention of,
the TPM would cause problems for anyone attempting to prosecute an
newsagent or hardware store owner.
In fact, although the issue of
using copy protection in CDs has come before the
courts in relation to claims of misleading an d deceptive
conduct, no
anti- circumvention actions have been brought.
and Regional
Coding – TPM or not?
A type of technology that has come before the courts in relation to the
anti- circumvention provisions is the copy protection
that is used in
PlayStations. However, until recently, the Australian and UK courts
diverged on the issue of whether this
TPM. Sony alleged that the access code which is contained within a
each of the CD-ROMs
on which the computer programs are contained
constitutes a TPM. The High Court of the UK found that the technology
did constitute
whereas the Federal
Court of Australia found that it did not.
was recently overturned by the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia, with the Court finding that Sony’s copy protection
indeed constitute a TPM.
88. The reason the
Court at first hearing did not agree that the technology is a TPM is
because Sony PlayStations employ a
technique known as regional coding
or regional playback control which does not directly prevent copyright
infringement. Rather, it
prevents pirated CDs from being able to play
on certain PlayStations in order to deter users from purchasing pirated
CDs. It effectively
divides the world into six regions and prevents CDs
purchased in one region from being played on PlayStation consoles
It is basically directed at preventing users
from purchasing pirated DVDs from countries in which piracy is
widespread. For examp
le, if an Australian was to purchase a pirated
copy of a PlayStation
game in Indonesia they would not be able to play that game on
PlayStation.
technology prevents users from playing legitimate copies of games
purchased overseas and also prevents users from copying
them for fair
purposes. There are unlikely to be many “fair
dealings” of computer games (other than fair dealing
purposes of criticism or review), however, regional coding is also used
in DVDs which
contain films. Movie studios claim
that it is necessary because they
often enter into complicated cross-licensing deals for international
distribution which give different
studios the right to release movies
in different countries and at different times.
However, it
is clearly also directed at preventing copyright piracy.
copying technology used in DVDs is known as content scrambling system
(“CSS”). CSS prevents users from viewing
devices not
authorized by the copyright holder.
It does this by encrypting
the contents of the DVD so that only licensed hardware devices can
To be licensed, a hardware device must not allow copying of the content
Licensed devices include stand-alone DVD players and DVD players for
Microsoft Windows. Like the copying technology in PlayStations,
arguable that CSS does not
infringing copies.
Sony v Stevens
case, discussed later in this
paper, however, it would now seem that the technology in DVDs does
indeed constitute a technological
protection measure, thereby expanding
definition of TPMs and the legality of those devices designed to
circumvent this
technology.
As will be discussed, the court’s analysis in
this regard has also raised concerns about increased access controls
ability of copyright law to deal with the digital
environment.
Technological Protection
Measures and Users’
One of the principal grounds of objection to
the legal enforcement of technological protection measures is that they
protect all
content, whether that content would be entitled to
protection under the
(Cth) or not.
Indeed, they
prevent access to, and in some cases copying of, all the information
they protect. They do not discriminate
between content that is
and that which is not copyrightable.
Similarly, they do not discriminate between a permitted use of a
work and a non-permitted use.
They do not simply protect the copyright owner’s exclusive
rights. They protect whichever rights the copyright owners choose
give themselves, and allow copyright owners to restrict access in ways
not possible in the
print world.
For example, the Adobe eBook Reader enables the
publisher of the eBook to disable or enable various functions such as
copying, printing
and loaning.
In doing so they are preventing
users from using the work for fair dealing purposes.
Effectively, the
only way for users to exerc ise their fair dealing rights and copy
protected by TPMS is to circumvent those
TPMs. However, the new anti-
circumvention provisions outlaw dealings in circumvention devices and
with the result that
circumvention is now extremely difficult, if not
impossible. The anti-circumvention provisions are explained below. An
overview of
these provisions is required in order to determine if the
appropriate balance between copyright users and copyright owners has
Anti-Circumvention Provisions
95. Technological
protection measures (“TPMs”) have been introduced
by copyright
owners in order to prevent infringement
of copyrighted works that are
format and are thus able to be easily reproduced and distributed.
However, many of them
have the side effect of preventing
permitted uses of the works, including fair dealing. In order to
enforce these rights, copyright
users have had to resort to various
circumvention. For example, the only way for users to copy a work that
is contained on
a CD with copy protection is to develop some method of
circumventing the copy protection.
It would, of course, be naive to
think that circumvention is only carried out for the purpose of
exercising fair dealing rights.
TPMs are also, and far too frequently,
circumvented
by people who wish to perform acts which constitute copyright
infringement of
the works that the TPMs seek to protect. Hence, a
conflict has arisen
between copyright owners who want to protect their works from
works for fair
dealing purposes. This conflict was partially
resolved with the
introduction of the
World Intellectual Property
Organisation’s Copyright
(“WIPO Copyright Treaty”) in 1996
which introduced
the concept of “anti-circumvention laws”.
WIPO Copyright Treaty
Circumvention of
Technological Measures
During the negotiations leading up to the
WIPO Copyright Treaty’s introduction, copyright owners sought
technologies
that enabled circumvention of TPMs.
That is, they
wanted to make the circumvention devices illegal, rather than the act
of circumvention.
The initial proposed text prohibited the
importation, manufacture and distribution of protection-defeating
devices or services the
primary purpose or effect of which was to
circumvent any
As expected, the consumer electrics industry strongly objected to this
legislation.
Although the prohibition was only meant to cover “black
that had no legitimate purposes, they argued that it was
so broad it
would encompass many devices that could be used for legitimate
were concerned that the provision would impede lawful uses of works in
the public domain and prevent users making fair use
protected works.
99. Copyright users
objected to the
proposed text for the same reason. They too were concerned that it
enable copyright owners
to prevent any access to a work, including
material that has passed into the public domain, and access for fair
100. The resulting
clause in the WIPO Copyright
Treaty is very broad and does not specifically address any of these
concerns. Article
11 provides as follows: “Contracting
parties shall provide adequate legal protection and effective legal
redress against the
circumvention of effective technological measures
that are used by
authors in connection with the exercise of their rights under
Treaty or the
Berne Convention and that restrict acts, in respect of their works,
which are not authorised by the authors concerned
or permitted by
clause effectively leaves it to the member states to decide how they
wish to protect TPMs.
It simply requires
states to afford legal protection to TPMs. It does not give any
guidance as to how this should be achieved. As
a result, in giving
this clause member states have diverged in the type and degree of
protection they afford TPMs.
Although other countries have generally followed the example set by the
US, there are slight differences in their implementation
of the WIPO
Limitations and Exceptions
102. The WIPO
Treaty also contains a clause concerning the application of the
limitations and exceptions to the digital
environment. Specifically,
provides as follows: “(1) Contracting Parties may, in their
national legislation, provide
for limitations of or exceptions to the
rights granted to authors of literary and artistic works under
this Treaty in certain special
cases that do not conflict with a normal
exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the
interests of the
author. “(2) Contracting Parties shall, when
applying the Berne Convention, confine any limitations of or exceptions
provided for therein to certain special cases that do not
with a normal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably
prejudice the
legitimate interests of the author.”
Agreed Statement Concerning Article 10
this by saying that
10 permits contracting parties to carry forward and appropriately
extend into the digital environment
limitations and exceptions in their
national laws, and devise new exceptions and limitations that are
appropriate in the digital
networked environment.
According to Fitzpatrick, these statements “entrench the role
of doctrines
of fair use and fair dealing, in addition to
other measures which allow
public use of copyrighted materials.”
“entrench” is not the appropriate word here given
that Article
10 is not mandatory and Article 11 is. Article
10 says that contracting
provide for limitations or exceptions
while Article 11
says that contracting parties
adequate legal protection
against the circumvention of TPMs. All this seems to entrench is the
rights prevail over copyright
Implementation – DMCA
In October 1998 the United States gave effect to the WIPO Copyright
Treaty directives by introducing
Digital Millennium Copyright Act
A new chapter
was added to the
(“Copyright
Act (US)”) (Chapter 12) in order to introduce what the
adjuncts to
the exclusive rights granted by copyright law.”
provisions have extended copyright owners’ rights far beyond
the traditional exclusive rights, arguably at the
of users’ rights.
Circumvention
of Copyright Protection
The first section in Chapter 12 of the
(US) and the section that deals with circumvention of
implements the obligation to provide adequate and effective protection
against circumvention of technological measures used
by copyright
owners to protect their works.
It divides TPMs into two categories, those that control access to a
and those that protect a right of a copyright owner
example, by preventing copying of a copyrighted work).
Making or selling devices or services that are used to circumvent
category of TPM is prohibited in certain circumstances.
1201 makes it illegal to “manufacture, import, offer to the
public, provide, or otherwise traffic in any technology,
service or device, component, or part thereof”.
further requirement that the technology must either be
primarily designed or produced for the purpose of circumventing
technological measure, have only a limited commercially significant
use other than to circumvent a TPM, or be marketed
circumventing
The reason for the distinction between access control measures and copy
control measures is
that the act of circumvention is
prohibited only in relation to
access control measures, and not copy c
ontrol measures.
Section 1201(a)(1)(A) provides that “no person shall
circumvent a technological measure that
effectively controls access to
a work”, but there is no
equivalent section
for copy control measures. The following table illustrates this:
Circumventing technological
protection measures
Trafficking in circumvention
devices or services Access control measures Copy control
prohibited by s 1201(a)(1)(A) prohibited by s 1201(a)(2) prohibited by
s 1201(b)(1)
US Copyright Office explains that this distinction was employed
so that the
public would be able to continue to make fair
use of copyright works.
that the fair use doctrine allows some copying
of a work but it is not a defence to the act of gaining unauthorised
This argument is flawed. Specifically, if a person
wishing to make fair use of a copyright work is not able to access that
how can they copy the work? If an access protection measure is
used in conjunction with a copy protection measure (which they often
are), then this provision provides no assistance to those wishing to
make fair use of the work. Copyright laws do not give copyright
the exclusive right to access their work. There is thus no reason why
people wishing to make fair use of a copyrighted work
should not be
able to access the work.
110. The prohibitions
section 1201 are subject to a number of exceptions. These
the activities of
non-profit libraries, archives and educational
institutions;
law enforcement, intelligence and
other government activities;
reverse engineering (to achieve
interoperability of an independently created computer program
with other programs);
encryption research (in order to
identify and analyse flaws and vulnerabilities of encryption
technologies);
security testing.
recognition of the likelihood that section 1201 would impact on the
of many individuals and organisations, the
legislature established an ongoing administrative rule-making procedure
to evaluate the
impact of the prohibition on users of copyrighted works who are likely
to be adversely affected by the prohibition.
rulemakings are made by the Librarian of Congress on the recommendation
Register of Copyrights. The Act sets out a list
of criteria that the
Librarian of Congress must consider.
On 27 October 2000, the
Librarian of Congress made its first rulemaking under this provision,
creating two new classes of works that
are now exempt from the
prohibition.
this is the only rulemaking that has been made.
The exception for “non-profit libraries, archives and
educational institutions” would be of assistance to those
organisations
that wish to make fair use of works. However, these are
not the only
organisations which are entitled to the fair use defence. For
people may wish to rely on the fair use defence in order to access
works for criticism or comment, or for reporting
no specific exception that allows people to circumvent T PMs if it is
fair use purposes. Presumably, this is why the
US legislature thought
necessary to include the fair use saving clause.
Fair Use Saving
Section 1201 contains a saving clause that states that
“nothing in section 1201 shall affect rights, remedies,
limitations,
defences to copyright infringement, including fair use, under this
However, this section does affect fair use rights
and therefore this clause would appear to be mere rhetoric. As I
have explained
above, circumventing an access control measure is
which means that users cannot access works locked away by an access
control measure even if they only wish to access it for fair use
purposes. For
example, if a work is password protected then fair
users has no way of
accessing that work.
Although users are able to circumvent copy control measures, this will
be difficult due to the fact
that dealings with circumvention
devices are prohibited. Unless the
user is technologically sophisticated and can develop a method of
circumventing the work themselves
they will be forced to purchase
circumvention devices and services. However, it is illegal to
manufacture or provide
circumvention
devices to the public so it will be very difficult to
obtain those
circumvention devices and services. Clearly section 1201
fair use rights and therefore this fair use saving clause is rather
pointless. Indeed, the Australian legislature did not see
the need for
such a section in its implementation of the WIPO Copyright
Australian Implementation – Digital Agenda Act
Australia is not a contracting party to the WIPO Copyright Treaty
, Australia
was an “active participant” in the Diplomatic
Conference in December 1996 at which the WIPO Copyright Treaty
(Cth) was introduced in order to bring Australian law in line
with international standards and to “update
Australia’s
in communications technology.”
According to the Explanatory Memorandum for the
(Digital Agenda) Bill 1999
one of the aims of the
amendments is to ensure that the balance between the rights of owners
and rights of users that has applied
in the print environment is
forward to the digital environment. The Explanatory Memorandum predicts
that: “These provisions
will operate to provide copyright
owners and their licensees with an effective means of enforcing their
rights in the online environment
whilst simultaneously allowing for the
operation of some exceptions to the exclusive rights of copyright
owners. In this way, the
provisions are intended to
strike a fair balance between the rights of copyright owners and the
rights of copyright users.”
Digital Agenda Act
is thought to be more
sympathetic to the users of
circumvention of
The DMCA goes far
beyond what is required by the WIPO
It covers dealings with circumvention
devices as well as the act of circumvention itself. In contrast, the
only covers dealings with circumvention
devices. Hence, the focus is more on the preparatory activities than
the circumvention.
This is illustrated below: Access control measures Copy control
Circumventing technological
protection measures
with circumvention
devices or services prohibited by s 116A(1) prohibited by s
reason why the Australian Parliament took this approach is
explained in the
Exposure Draft and Commentary –
: “The Government is
of the view that adequate legal protection against the
circumvention of effective technological protection
measures can only
be afforded if the manufacture and commercial dealings in circumvention
devices are banned. As the proposed EC
notes… it would be
more effective for owners of copyright to be able to seek remedies
against the manufacture and commercial
dealings with devices rather
than seek remedies against individual
users of those devices.”
119. The obvious
difficulty in seeking remedies against the individual users is that it
is difficult, (but not impossible, as recent
cases on peer to peer
file swapping has shown) to identify and locate them. If the
individuals are
located in other jurisdictions
(which is quite possible) then you also
the problems associated with cross-border litigation and enforcement of
addition, commercial dealings in devices pose more of a threat to the
commercial interests of copyright owners.
There is an obvious commercial
advantage in attempting to
recover damages from a large company as opposed to an individual. In
Federal Court of Australia decision of
Sony v Stevens,
for example,
Sony chose to pursue a manufacturer of the mod-chips (the
alleged circumvention device) rather than the multitude of
individuals
used mod-chips to infringe copyright in PlayStation games.
in Relation to Circumvention Devices
As noted above, the
not prohibit the actual use of
circumvention devices, but rather commercial dealings in such devices.
relevant provision
is section 116A.
This section contains three elements that must be satisfied for an
action to succeed. Firstly, the work or other
subject-matter must be
protected by a technological protection measure.
The definition of
“technological protection measure” is discussed
second element is that the person must carry out one of the following
prohibited acts:
circumvention device capable of circumventing the TPM;
selling, hiring, offering for sale or hire, promoting or advertising a
circumv ention device;
distributing a circumvention device for
the purpose
exhibiting a circumvention device
importing a circumvention device into
Australia (for one of the above purposes);
making a circumvention device available online;
providing, promoting, advertising or marketing a circumvention
123. Thirdly, the person must
have known, or
ought reasonably to have known, that the device or service would be
used to circumvent,
or facilitate the circumvention of, the
onus of proof is reversed in relation to this
element. A rebuttable presumption arises that the defendant knew, or
ought reasonably
to have known, that the circumvention device or
service would be used for one of the prohibited purposes.
Gamertsfelder suggests that the reason the onus of proof is
on the defendant is because Parliament assumed that it would be easier
defendant to rebut
the presumption than for copyright owners to prove the
defendant’s knowledge.
It is more logical to require the defendant to adduce evidence
of something that is peculiarly within his or her own knowledge and
or her interest to bring to the attention of the court.
For example,
it would be difficult for a copyright
owner to prove that the defendant had not received a signed declaration
to the supply of a circumvention device or service (and hence
was protected by the “permitted purpose” exception
If a copyright owner can satisfy these three
elements and no exceptions apply, they may be able to bring an action
provides for some exceptions to the
exclusive rights of copyright
owners in order to maintain a fair balance between the rights of
assistance to copyright users who wish to make fair
use of works
protected by
first exception is in relation to anything lawful done for the purposes
enforcement or national security by the Commonwealth
or a State or
The second exception is in relation to the supply of a circumvention
device or service to a
qualified person for a permitted purpose.
This subsection also requires
that the person give the supplier a signed declaration that the device
or service is to be used for
a permitted purpose,
identifying what that permitted purpose is and stating that the work is
not readily available in any other form
not protected by a TPM.
The permitted purposes include reverse engineering, error correction,
security testing, copying by Parliamentary libraries for
members of Parliament, copying by libraries and archives for users,
copying for
preservation and other purposes,
and copying by the
“Qualified person” is defined in the individual
sections that relate to permitted
129. The requirement that the work must
not be readily
available to the person in a form that is not protected by a TPM may
problematic in practice. As Gamertsfelder points out, it is not clear
what is meant by “readily
available”.
How much searching is necessary before the
work is considered readily available? Also, how much cost will need to
be incurred before
something is no longer readily available? It is
difficult to see why Parliament thought it necessary to impose these
onerous obligations
on top of the preconditions to exercising rights
under ss47D, 47E and 47F.
130. Unlike the DMCA,
contains a fair use “saving provision”, the
does not mention fair dealing anywhere in the section
that concerns
circumvention devices. Fair dealing is not one of the permitted
purposes and
the section does not make any provision for fair dealing. Effectively,
means that fair dealing rights will not
apply to works which are
protected by
Given that dealings with circumvention devices are
prohibited in most cases, it will become quite difficult to obtain
Therefore, although the fair dealing defence is technically
still available, people will not be able to exercise their fair dealing
rights if they are not able to obtain circumvention devices which
enable them to access the works that are protected by TPMs. Although
the use of circumvention devices is not prohibited, it might as well be
circumvention devices are unavailable.
The availability of
circumvention devices is inhibited by the fact that the second
exception only applies to the supply of circumvention
“Supply” is
defined as “(a) in relation to a circumvention device
device, let it for
hire, distribute it or make it available online;
and (b) in relation to a circumvention service – provide the
According to Gamertsfelder this means
that: “organisations that are in a position to
circumvention devices
will not be able to exhibit, advertise, promote
or market this fact... This begs the question: how do organisations
communicate the
availability of
circumvention devices and services to copyright users?”
services they will not be able to exercise fair
dealing rights.
Despite claims that the
Digital Agenda Act
“replicate the balance that has been struck in the print
environment
between the rights of owners of copyright and the
the balance seems to have tipped strongly in
favour of copyright owners in the digital environment. Copyright users
will have difficulty
accessing and copying works that are protected by
TPMs. Although they are not prohibited from circumventing the TPMs,
are effectively
prevented from doing so because dealings in
circumvention
devices have been outlawed.
The Copyright
It is well established in copyright law that copyright represents a
delicate balance between the rights of copyright owners and
interests of
It is also a widely held belief that this
balance should be maintained in the digital environment.
this was the view of the Australian Parliament when the
Amendment (Digital Agenda) Act
(Cth) was introduced.
Two years after the introduction of the
anti-circumvention provisions it appears that the existing balance has
not been maintained
in the digital environment. The anti-circumvention
provisions inhibit the activities of those wish ing to use copyright
fair dealing purposes. The fair dealing provisions are a fundamental
aspect of the copyright balance and yet now risk being overridden.
necessary in the digital environment because of the ease with
perfect reproductions can be made and the difficulty in detecting
infringement. Copyright users, on the other hand,
object to the
anti-circumvention provisions because they provide legal protection of
technological protection measures (“TPMs”)
make it very
difficult for them to make use of copyright works.
Stakeholders
– Copyright Owners and Copyright Users
The “copyright owners” referred to throughout this
paper are basically the people who produce and distribute copyrighted
works. This includes those in the film industry, the recording
industry, the multimedia industry and the computer games industry.
These copyright
industries have a strong presence in the US and Europe. Obviously they
favour strong copyright protection because
of the economic threat that
digital piracy poses to
“copyright users” are those people who wish to make
works, in particular, at least for the purposes
of this paper, for
fair dealing purposes. This includes academics, researchers, students,
journalists, critics and reviewers. Rigid
threat of increased legal intervention make it difficult for these
people to use works for fair dealing
purposes. They are, therefore,
wary of the anti-circumvention provisions and the push by some to
the introduction of the anti-circumvention laws in the US. They managed
to persuade the Clinton Administration that a ban on circumvention
devices was necessary to protect their works from piracy in the
networked environment and to induce them to make digital works
available via the Internet.
140. Amongst those
opposed to the anti-circumvention provisions were the
telecommunications companies and online service providers.
according to Samuelson these companies “spent virtually all
of their political capital on the safe harbour provisions”
and therefore did little or no lobbying against the anti-circumvention
provisions.
left the other opponents of the provisions (the copyright users) in a
relatively weak negotiating position. Hence, the anti-circumvention
provisions basically took the form that the copyright industries
Given that the copyright industries did
play such a large role in the formulation of the anti-circumvention
provisions it is useful
to look at what their reasoning for such strong
The Price of
main justification for the anti-circumvention provisions is that they
combating digital piracy. Digital piracy
is a major problem in
Australia and
the US, as it is worldwide. This is partly because copying technology
becoming increasingly
more available, has substantially dropped in
price and is so advanced that it is almost impossible in many cases to
distinguish between
an authorised and unauthorised reproduction.
CD-Recordable (“CD- R”) technology is a good
example of a copying
technology that is now widely available and inexpensive.
$US100,000 to purchase a system that could record onto CDs.
In 2002 the
devices that enable you to record onto CDs (CD- R drives)
are included in almost all personal computers or can be purchased
separately for
around $US100.
Writable CDs (blank CDs that can be recorded
onto using CD- R drives) have also substantially dropped in price over
the last few
years. They have dropped from $20 in 1996
around $1 or 2 in 2002.
is difficult to measure the amount of money that copyright industries
to copyright infringement because a lot of it goes
undetected. However,
MPAA offers the following estimate of the price of piracy in relation
to the motion picture industry: “The
Motion Picture
Association of America (MPAA) and its international counterpart, the
Motion Picture Association (MPA), estimate that
the U.S. motion picture
industry loses in excess of $3 billion annually in potential worldwide
revenue due to piracy. Due to the
difficulty in calculating Internet
piracy losses, these figures are NOT currently included in the overall
estimates. However,
it is safe to assume Internet losses cause untold
additional damages to the industry.”
The $3 billion figure includes piracy of analog technologies such as
videocassettes and laser discs (although laser disc technology
basically obsolete), as well as digital technologies such as DVDs
(digital video
discs) and VCDs (video compact discs). The anti-circumvention
provisions are
not directed at videoc assettes because they do not contain any TPMs to
prevent copyright infringement. Also, the
quality of videocassettes
not compare to that of DVDs and it is not practical to transfer the
videocassettes onto
the Internet. It is the digital technologies that
real threat to the copyright industries.
Digital piracy also affects the recording industry. According to the
Recording Industry Association of America (“RIAA”),
which represents the US recording industry, the sale of pirated
recordings exceeds $4.2 billion
The RIAA recently released statistics on music piracy
in the US which showed that in the first half of 2002 CD shipments
7% while seizures of counterfeit CDs increased by 69.9%.
The total US music shipme nts dropped from $5.93 billion in the first
half of 2001 to $5.43 billion in the first half of
Digital piracy of music is also a problem in Australia,
with the Australian Record Industry Association
(“ARIA”) reporting
that music piracy levels incre ased from 4% to 9% between 1998 and
Computer games piracy is another area of concern. Sony has estimated
games piracy costs the Australian industry $30 million
In fact, the
only type of piracy that is actually decreasing over time is software
piracy. According to a survey conducted by the
Business Software
Alliance, software piracy in Australia decreased from 33% in 2000 to
27% in 2001.
worldwide piracy levels had been steadily decreasing since 1994 (when
the survey began) but in the last two years the levels
increased from
2000 to 40% in 2001.
A State of Panic
Leading to Increased Restrictions?
Lest it be thought that
piracy is not relevant to the issue of fair use, it is worth noting the
public relations and legal
battles now ensuing over what is commonly
referred to as peer to peer music file sharing. The
case, discussed thoroughly by other authors
the scope of this paper, signified the beginning of an all-out assault
by the Recording Industry
Association of America
(RIAA) and others over digital copyright in
peer-to-peer networks. Since then, the case law on this issue has
revealed an undeniable
intertwining of both politics and copyright
There is little doubt that music piracy is an issue in need of
attention, and in this, the digital age, the meaning and effect
piracy, and our ability to deal with it, take on a legal and social
significance not yet seen by governments,
and copyright users.
In submissions before the House of Representatives Standing Committee
Legal and Constitutional Affairs in 1999
, the Music Industry Piracy
Investigations (MIPI) submitted that piracy,
in all its forms, was equivalent to 7% of the identified
music market
in Australia
, while the Australian record industry reported in March 2001 that the
black market in pirated in CDs amounted to $70 million a year.
This total,
MIPI explained, was likely to increase with the rapid rise of
infringement on the
Internet and the emergence of peer-to-peer
networking. As MIPI noted,
the most common forms of this activity consist of the posting of sound
recordings, music and lyrics
and in relation to sound recordings, the most common form of
infringement is committed by the use of what is referred to as the
pervasive is this type of infringement that at any given time, in
300,000 infringing MP3 files are posted on the
contains sound recordings posted without the consent of the copyright
it is possible for more than 3,000,000 pirate
sound recordings to be
downloaded,
worldwide, every 24 hours.
152. In addition,
approximately 70,000 new infringing MP3 files are posted on the
Internet by approximately 500 new infringers each
this, MIPI submitted, resulted in losses in Australia in 1998 in excess
$67,000,000.
This sum may, however, be conservative, because
this amount does not include a number of losses such as those incurred
or publishers; losses in revenue resulting from unpaid
taxation; losses in revenue resulting from diminished earnings to IP
and losses in revenue resulting from diminished earnings to others in
the production/distribution process (such as retailers
providers).
153. In contrast to
these assertions others have queried the actual loss of profits
claimed, citing instead a
number of factors such
as a downturn in the economy, and the fact that
lost revenue statistics are based on the revenue that would have been
person actually purchased a legal product instead of
downloading a pirated copy. Refusing to acknowledge the growing
statistical
that the music industry is losing money as a result of online copyright
infringement, one commentator has even gone so far
as to suggest
that: “[b]ecause of the exceptional brilliance and innovation
evident in today’s pop offerings, discussions
of dwindling
consumer interest in vapid, predictable cliché products
would clearly be out
of place. No, the industry is doing
everything right, so the only
explanation for a loss of revenue has got to be the pestilence of
154. While it would be
naive to deny
the reality of music and other forms of copyright piracy, as Bowrey and
Rimmer explain, the present
debate continues to rage in terms of
opposition.
The record companies claim piracy is forestalling the development of
new talent, as well as damaging the income potential of artists
record companies. Alternatively, peer-to-peer users claim copyright law
acts as the
disempowerment of creative talent, and see
the law as entrenching
corporate greed.
Still others fear that a crackdown on digital access will only serve to
deter legitimate on line use of
materials which clearly do
not offend the very basics of copyright
concerns have not been eased with recent litigation in
both the US and Australia. In recent litigation in the US the RIAA
to remove peer-to- peer networks completely, relying on provisions of
Digital Millennium Copyright Act
1998 (US) (the
DMCA). But even in a
country where legislative controls on Internet access grow more
strident every day, the rights
of copyright holders, those who access
online, and those who provide it, seem at best
Borland notes, in the largest case post-
is suing Grokster
and Streamcast
for copyright infringements in
relation to file sharing networks. In a remarkable reversal of previous
victories for MGM, the Californian
Federal Court recently
handed down summary judgment in favour of the defendants.
Specifically, Wilson J ruled in the Los Angeles Federal Court that
Grokster and Streamcast were not liable for copyright infringements
that took place using their software. This is arguably a big win for
peer-to-peer
networking, although the case will almost certainly
be appealed.
Relevant to Australian copyright watchers, KaZaA has been
joined in the action
of Grokster and Streamcast, although it was not
included in the summary
proceedings. Sha rman, which now owns the key assets of KaZaA, is a
company incorporated in Vanuatu and primarily
run from Australia.
under the DMCA, Wilson J of the District Court California issued an
opinion that denied Sharman Network’s motion
to dismiss for
lack of personal jurisdiction. The
Court held no general jurisdiction but found specific jurisdiction
quantum of commercial contact”.
Significant
in the KaZaA case will be the issue of enforcement
across jurisdictional boundaries.
Despite this setback, the RIAA is
increasing its efforts to shutdown peer-to-peer file sharing by
pursuing users and facilitators
of KaZaA software. In the Washington
District Court, Verizon Internet Services has been ordered to divulge
the name of
subscriber allegedly using the KaZaA software to upload more
than 600 songs while connected to the company’s Internet
. The controversy over the subpoena
provisions is not just over the
revelation of a name, but the legal mechanism used. As one commentator
noted, the DMCA s.512(h) subpoena provisions are “turbo
charged”, cheaper and faster than other methods. Anyone can
now identify users without first filing a lawsuit. Verizon challenged
the order arguing the provision does not apply to ISPs that
a conduit for peer-to-peer users and which are
not hosting potentially infringing material. The court rejected these
159. The main purpose
of the anti-circumvention provisions is to
prevent commercial dealings in circumvention devic es and services
because this
is what poses the greatest threat to the copyright owners. Fair dealing
raised as a defence in the anti-circumvention
cases because the
defendant is not being sued for copyright infringement but for
producing anti-circumvention devices and services.
However, in the US
cases, the fact that the anti-circumvention provisions override fair
dealing has been relied upon as a way of
challenging the
constitutionality of those provisions on the basis that they violate
the First Amendment. Defendants have also relied
upon the fact that the
question prohibits fair dealing and that their circumvention device
fair dealing in order to
prove that they are not liable. It is
therefore useful to consider some of the statements made by the courts
relation to fair
dealing and the anti-circumvention provisions. The
willingness
of both some courts and those who bring these cases to them send an
unsettling message to those concerned about increased restrictions on
the right to fair use and Internet - based information and
technologies.
The DeCSS cases - Universal
v Reimerdes and Universal v
In 1999, Jon Johansen, a 15 year old Norwegian teenager,
developed software that enables users to view DVDs on players that are
not approved players.
This software is known as DeCSS because it circumvents the copy control
measure in DVDs,
the content scrambling system (“CSS”).
Johansen did
this in order
to be able to play DVDs on his Linux machine because the Linux
operating system did not support any licensed
DVD players at the time.
then uploaded the DeCSS program onto the World Wide Web.
January 2002, the Norwegian government, under extreme pressure from the
US entertainment industry, indicted Johansen.
The Motion Picture Association
of America (“MPAA”) was the driving force
behind Johansen’s indictment. The MPAA
became aware of the
in 1999 and subsequently
investigation
into Johansen.
Once he turned 18, Johansen was indicted for
violating a section of the Norwegian Criminal Code which outlaws
into another
person’s locked property to gain access to data
is not entitled to access
(for want of a more appropriate
crime). He could face two years in prison if convicted.
then went after Eric Corley, one of the hundreds of people who had
posted a copy
of DeCSS on their websites, and sought
to make an example of him. He
had written an article on DeCSS, which contained the DeCSS code itself
well as links to other sites
which contained the code, and posted it on
his website, “2600: The Hacker Quarterly”.
Eight motion
picture studios bought an action in the US District Court for the
Southern District of New York seeking injunctive relief
against Corley
Following the trial, the District Court entered a permanent injunction
barring Corley from posting DeCSS on his website or
from knowingly
linking to any other website containing DeCSS.
Corley then
appealed to the United States Court of
Court of Appeals’ Decision
One of Corley’s primary arguments was that the DMCA violates
the First Amendment and the Copyright Clause by unduly obstructing
“fair use” of copyrighted materials.
He tried to
argue that section 1201(c)(1) which provides that “nothing in
this section shall affect
rights, remedies, limitations
or defences to copyright infringement,
including fair use, under this title” permitted the
circumvention of TPMs when the material
would be used for fair use
court disagreed, saying: “[Subsection
1201(c)(1)] clearly and simply clarifies that the DMCA targets the
circumvention
of digital walls guarding copyright material (and trafficking in
circumvention tools), but does not concern itself with the use of
materials. Subsection 1201(c)(1) ensures that the DMCA is not read to
prohibit the “fair use” of information just
that information was obtained in a manner made illegal by the
164. Corley also
argued that fair use is
rooted in and required by both the Copyright Clause and the First
Amendment and that the
DMCA unconstitutionally eliminates fair use of
making fair
use of any copyrighted materials and said that the evidence
as to the impact on fair users was inadequate and failed to address the
The court found that although CSS prevented direct
copying of DVDs, it did not prevent fair users from making a
“variety of
tradit ional fair uses” such as
commenting on their content, quoting excerpts from their screenplays,
and even recording portions
of it by pointing a camera at the screen.
rejected Corley’s argument, stating that the fact that the
resulting copy
is not as perfect or manipulable as a digital copy
provides no basis for a claim of unconstitutional limitation of fair
Corley then appealed to the United States
Supreme Court but dropped the appeal in July of 2002, after realising
that the court
was unlikely to reach a decision in his favour.
Electronic Frontier Foundation, that assisted Corley in
his legal defence, felt that by going ahead with the appeal rather than
waiting for a stronger test case to emerge, they would have risked
precedent that could hurt future challenges to the DMCA.
been argued by some commentators that this decision highlights the
fact that the anti-circumvention laws are not about
infringement. Neither the software developers nor the defendants were
trying to copy DVDs – the software
developers were trying to
DVDs to play on Linux machines and the defendants were trying to
the code so that others
would be able to play DVDs on Linux machines.
But the law is not concerned with whether your intention is to
infringe copyright or
enable DVDs to play on other devices or use the
your activities enable others to infringe copyright. Hence, it
has been argued, the law protects the interests of copyright owners
the expense of copyright users. As Macmillan states, “the
effect of this case is to strengthen considerably the rights of
entertainment corporations over their output and fatally undermine the
cogency of the fair use/fair dealing defences.”
Russian Programmer Case – USA v Elcomsoft and
Obviously the US government could not prosecute a Norwegian programmer
under their own copyright laws while he was in Norway.
pressured the Norwegian government into prosecuting him under Norwegian
laws. Similarly, they could not prosecute a Russian
programmer for
breaching US copyright laws while he was in Russia. Fortunately for the
US government, the Russian programme r decided
to go to the
US for a software hacker convention. Upon his arrival in Las Vegas on
2001, Dmitry Sklyarov was arrested.
arrest caused uproar amongst Internet civil libertarians.
Sklyarov had
written software that overcomes the copyright protection in
Adobe eBooks, an activity which is not illegal in Russia.
He never sold
program to anyone (although his employer did) and his employer never
infringed anyone’s copyright (although
it potentially
others to do so).
He was charged with trafficking in, and offering to the public, a
software program that could circumvent technological protections
Act of 1976
. He was also charged with aiding and abetting his
employer, Russian software development company Elcomsoft.
quickly withdrew support for the prosecution in the face of a
“self-inflicted public relations nightmare”.
August 2001, Sklyarov and Elcomsoft were both indicted with four counts
of circumvention offences and a charge of conspiracy
to traffic in a
circumvention program.
On 13 December 2001,
Sklyarov was released from US custody and allowed to return home to
Russia under
an agreement with the US government
that he would testify in the case
against Elcomsoft.
Elcomsoft’s trial was meant
to commence on 21 October 2002 but Sklyarov and Elcomsoft’s
executive (both crucial
witnesses) were denied US visas.
In January 2002, ElcomSoft’s legal team filed motions
in the US District Court for the Northern District of California
dismiss the
charges against ElcomSoft. The hearings for these motions were held in
March and April of 2002. Judge Ronald Whyte
handed down his decision on
The US District
Court’s Decision
his decision, Judge Ronald Whyte first discussed the technology at the
of this case.
The Adobe eBook Reader enables electronic
books (“eBooks”) to be read on personal computers.
It enables publishers or
distributors of electronic books to limit the
distribution to
those who pay for a copy. It also allows the publisher to grant or
withhold a range of privileges from the consumer, for example, printing
the eBook or lending the eBook to another user.
Elcomsoft developed and sold a produc t known as the Advanced eBook
Processor (“AEBPR”) which allows a user
the restrictions from Adobe Acrobat PDF files and eBooks so
that they can be copied, printed and distributed
electronically.
As Judge Whyte points out, this technology may
be used for both fair use purposes and for copyright
infringement: “The conversion
accomplished by the AEBPR
enables a purchaser of an ebook to engage in “fair
use” of an ebook
without infringing
the copyright laws, for example, by allowing the
owner of an ebook to read it on another computer, to make a back-up
or to print the ebook in paper form. The same technology, however, also
allows a user to engage in copyright infringement by making
distributing unlawful copies of the ebook.”
As in the DeCSS case, the defendant challenged the constitutionality of
DMCA. They argued that the DMCA was unconstitutionally
vague because it
was not clear whether Congress intended to ban all circumvention
devices or only those that would facil itate copyright
infringement.
disagreed, holding that it is clear that the statute imposes a
blanket ban on trafficking in or the marketing of any circumvention
Judge Whyte said that Congress’ intention was to
ban all circumvention devices because most of the time these devices
be used to infringe copyright.
He held that Congress’ intent to preserve fair use was not
inconsistent with a ban on
trafficking in circumvention devices,
even those that could be used for
purposes. He did, however, acknowledge that it would be more difficult
to circumvent TPMs
for the purpose of engaging in fair use if
circumvention devices could not be readily obtained.
The defendant also raised a First Amendment argument, claiming that the
DMCA is unconstitutional because it infringes upon the
First Amendment
of third parties to engage in fair use.
The court did not
agree that the First Amendment protected the right of fair use
and in any event, did not agree that the DMCA eliminated fair use.
Judge Whyte said that although fair use may have become more
not been prohibited.
He said it was still possible to handwrite
or retype the eBook, for example. Quoting from the Corley decision
he said that
a “fair user” did not have a right to
technologically convenient way to engage in fair use.
concluded that the defendant’s motions to dismiss the
indictment on
constitutional grounds should be denied.
Justice Whyte acknowledged many times in his decision that
fair use has been made more difficult as a result of the
anti-circumvention
provisions. He recognised that the
anti-circumvention
provisions do have a serious impact on the ability of users to make
sufficient threat to justify depriving users of these rights.
Specifically, he stated: “The inescapable conclusion from the
statutory language adopted by Congress and the legislative
discussed above is that Congress sought
to ban all circumvention tools because most of the time those tools
used to infringe
a copyright. Thus, while it is not unlawful to
circumvent for
the purpose of engaging in fair use, it is unlawful to traffic in tools
allow fair use circumvention. That is part of the sacrifice Congress
willing to make in order to protect against unlawful
piracy and promote
the development of electronic commerce and the availability of
Australia’s
Lead Precedent - Sony v
The first Australian decision concerning the
anti-circumvention provisions in the
was handed down on 26 July 2002. The technology that this case
concerned was precisely the type that the anti-circumvention
directed at. However, at first instance, Sackville J found that the
did not fall within the provisions,
in a decision that was criticised
as being inconsistent with the legislative intent of the provisions
similar UK High Court decision.
On appeal, the Full Court of the Federal
Court found that the technology did in fact within the provisions,
thereby arguably expanding
the definition of a TPM and further tilting
the copyright balance in favour of copyright holders, like Sony.
The action was brought by Sony, the manufacturer and distributor of
PlayStation consoles and PlayStation computer games. Sony
alleged that
the defendant (Stevens) sold computers games for use in the
PlayStation consoles which contained marks that breached
Sony’s trade
marks and that Stevens had engaged in conduct that constituted a
contravention
Fair Trading Act 1987
(NSW). Sony
also brought an action
for contravention of s 116A of the Copyright Act (Cth) (the
anti-circumvention
provision). Sony
alleged that each of the PlayStation games are
protected by a technological protection measure
(“TPM”) as defined in
s 10(1) of the Copyright Act
(Cth) that comprises the access
code contained within a track on each of the CD-ROMs on which the games
contained and a device in the PlayStation console which ensures that
access to the works is available solely by use of the access
They alleged
that Stevens sold devices having a limited
commercially significant purpose or use, or no such purpose or
than the circumvention or facilitation of the circumvention
the TPM. They claimed that Stevens knew or ought reasonably to have
the devices sold by him would be used to circumvent or facilitate the
circumvention of the TPM.
178. The devices that
Stevens sold are more commonly known as “mod chips”
(“mod” being an abbreviation of
“modification”). When a mod chip is inserted into a
PlayStation
console it enables imported PlayStation games and legitimate
copies to be
The mod chips overcome the copy protection in DVDs
and PlayStation games which use a system known as regional playback
control (or
regional coding). This technology is explained in more detail above. It
effectively prevents consumers fro m purchasing films or
PlayStation
games overseas.
necessary because there are numerous reasons why movies must be
released in
different countries at different times
and because it prevents
consumers from purchasing pirated copies from countries in which
widespread.
main issue in this case was whether the access code stored on the
PlayStation game and the chip on the circuit board of the
PlayStation
console which reads and verifies the access code together constituted a
“technological protection measure”
“designed, in the
ordinary course of its operation, to prevent or inhibit the
infringement
of copyright in a work”.
two main theories as to why the relevant protect ion device was a TPM,
main one being that the device inhibited
the making of infringing
copies of PlayStation games by rendering the exercise pointless. Unless
the protective device could be circumvented,
infringing copies would be
unusable and therefore unsaleable.
They said that the definition of TPM was satisfied
long as the device removed or minimised the incentive for persons to
as a prelude to playing the copies in the console.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Council (AC
CC) disputed the claim that the devices were designed, in the ordinary
of their operation, to prevent or inhibit the infringement of
They argued that the protective devices did not discriminate between
infringing and non-infringing copies.
fact that the device deterred some people from unauthorised copying or
importing of games did not mean the device prevented or
The device merely prevented the consumer using
copies of games in the console, an act which does not itself constitute
infringement
of copyright.
182. Sackville J
therefore had to determine whether it was enough to satisfy the
definition of TPM that the device had the practical
of deterring or discouraging infringement of copyright.
Sackville J
held that Stevens' modchip was not a
circumvention measure in breach of s 116A of the Copyright Act because
no technological protection measure within the meaning of that term in
10(1). This was because all the access code does is discourage
from copying PS2 games because they can't play them on their consoles.
a technological protection measure, his Honour
held, it must be
designed to
function, by its own processes or mechanisms, to prevent or hinder acts
that might ot herwise constitute
an infringement of copyright. His
concluded: “…a “technological protection
measure”, as defined,
must be a device or
product which utilises technological means to deny a person access to a
’s capacity to make
of a work to which access has been gained, and thereby
“physically” prevents or inhibits
the person from
undertaking acts which, if carried out, would or might infringe
is c oncerned
with devices or
products that do not, by their operations, prevent or curtail specific
infringing or facilitating
the infringement of copyright in a work, but
merely have a general deterrent or discouraging effect on those who
might be contemplating
infringing copyright in a class of works, for
example, by making unlawful copies of a CD-ROM.”
His Honour made reference to the legislative history of s
116A of the
(Cth) and said that
although it is not conclusive on the question of construction, there is
nothing to support the
view that “a
technological measure is to receive legal
protection from circumvention devices if the only way in which the
measure prevents or
inhibits the infringement of copyright is by
discouraging infringements of copyright which predate the attempt to
gain access
the work or to copy it.”
He therefore found that
Sony’s claim under s 116A failed.
Had the decision stood, it would have had far reaching implications for
the copyright industry. It effectively legalises mod
chips so that
people may purchase
PlayStation games from overseas and make their own back up copies of
them. The decision would also
have affected manufacturers of DVD
players and DVDs as
well because they too contain copy protection me asures and utilise the
coding system, and it is possible to purchase mod chips for
DVD players.
185. The decision would have had far
reaching implications for
those wishing to use works contained on CDs and DVDs for fair dealing
purposes. Although fair dealing was not mentioned once in this
decision, it was
alluded to by the ACCC which pointed out at trial
that the devices did
not discriminate between infringing and non-infringing uses. The ACCC
not allowed to present arguments on
behalf of the defendant in this
it is highly likely that, had they been allowed to, the doctrine of
fair dealing
been raised. The effect of this decision, had it stood,
been that those wishing to use works for fair dealing purposes
example, legally purchase a mod chip so that they could copy a
“reasonable portion” of a film or computer
contained on a CD or DVD.
Sony immediately appealed it to the
Full Court. After reviewing the legislative history of s 116A, Lindgren
(with whom the
other judges agreed) held that Sackville J was wrong to
limit “access” in the definition of technological
device to “access for the purpose of subsequent
infringement”. His Honour found: “…the
to which I have referred show an intention that the opening
words coupled with par (a) of the definition of "technological
measure" were intended to embrace that inhibition, in the sense of
or discouragement of infringement, which results from
denial of access to, and therefore prevention of use of, a program
infringement of copyright.”
If, as in the present case, the owner of copyright in a computer
program devises a technological measure which has the purpose
infringement of that copyright, the legislature intended that measure
to be protected (subject to any express exception),
even though the
inhibition is indirect and operates prior to the hypothetical attempt
at access and the hypothetical operation of
the circumvention device.
ensuring that access to the program is not available except by use of
Boot ROM, or the access code
embedded in the PlayStation games, or both
in combination, Sony's measure does inhibit the infringement of
games in that way.
next? Peer to
Peer Shut Down and ISP Liability
Some have argued that this
case represents a huge victory for all persons concerned about
query whether the case signals a
towards a more US-styled approach to Internet regulation –
limits innovation
and risks legitimate and fair dealings.
regard, it is worth noting that the tensions now evident in both camps
to increase if recent reports from the
US suggest that Australia will
expected to follow the US approach to copyright piracy. According to
Hayes, writing
The Australian
negotiators are pushing for
Australia to sign up to a tough new copyright regime that could hold
internet service providers
liable for breaches: “The first
round of talks in an Australian-US Free Trade Agreement will
commence in March and the Internet
industry is flagging that ISP
liability for copyright material is on the table as far as the US is
concerned. … The US Digital
Millenium Copyright Act holds
ISPs liable for the transmission of copyright material unless they sign
up to a content management
agreement that requires them to remove
material judged to be in breach of copyright law.”
These tensions have not been helped by the introduction in
2001 by US Senator Fritz Hollings of a Bill which, if passed, would
have required that piracy- detection systems be built into all digital
playback devices, including PCs.
As John Davidson explains,
Security Systems Standards and
Certification Act
, “would silence all types of
electronic devices by making it unlawful to manufacture, import, offer
to the public or otherwise
traffic in any interactive digital device
that does not include and utilise
certified security technologies.”
This, Davidson concludes, at
least in so far as the downloading of music on
the Internet is concerned, has resulted in a value-neutral
value- laden – with those values being the values of big
business: “Instead of rushing into a legal regime
designed to
offer perfect protection to
media companies, often at the expense of long-held consumer rights,
fair use and
free speech, legislators and courts should wait and see
just how much protection copyright holders need, and how much can be
without undermining the public interest.”
There are no easy solutions to what is clearly a source of considerable
frustration and legislative tension, for as one commentator
notes: “At the moment, if you buy a CD, you can lend it to a
friend, play it in your car, and listen to it on a portable player:
same disc will work on any playback device. Extending this ease of use
of music delivered over the Internet, however, is problematic,
ability to transfer music from one device to another opens the door to
piracy. But the alternative, which is to use digital
rights management
technology to lock each track to a particular device, infuriates
consumers. While proponents of DRM claim
it merely helps to keep honest users honest, in fact, argues Cory
Doctorow, of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, it keeps
honest users
in chains.”
192. The question that
needs to be asked by these and other cases now working their way
through the
courts is: can Australia’s
digital copyright legislation deal
emerging technologies? The House of Representatives Standing Committee
inquiry into copyright
piracy expressed serious concerns about the
which our current regime, aimed at dealing with digital-based piracy,
fact cope. The government’s response, released in late June,
respond to most of the Committee’s concerns
and certainly
does not ease
the tensions felt by those who fear they are losing the battle on fair
quote the Attorney General’s
Department: “The
strengthen civil and criminal provisions against piracy. For example,
the burden of proof
in relation to the existence and ownership of
and they emphasise deterrence as a factor in relation to additional
in civil cases. Criminal sanctions have also been broadened to
include advertising the supply of infringing copies of any type of
-protected material. These
legislative initiatives have been welcomed by stakeholders in the
entertainment industry. The
Government has also taken steps to
improve the gathering, sharing and use of intelligence relating to
intellectual
property offences.
The Intellectual Property Enforcement Consultative
Group, led by the Australian Federal Police, assists the exchange of
information
and views to provide practical collaboration in relation to
intellectual property offences. The Government remains committed to
continued provision of Customs staff dedicated to monitoring and
the importation of infringing
concluding, the AG’s Department notes that, “the
package of measures
announced today will help to ensure that
Australia continues to enjoy
an effective, first class copyright regime.”
The question is, will it? Praise for Australia’s
copyrig ht laws are not new and recent statements from the government
Australia can and will stop piracy do little to appease the concerns of
those who, while committed to ending piracy, fear a
state of hysteria
leading to unnecessary restriction.
In that regard, it is worth
noting the government’s recent comments regarding the recent
case of three
students charged
over an alleged Napster-style file- swapping website
clear evidence that “the infringement provisions of the
are an effective tool against the
threats posed by internet piracy.”
The three youths at
the centre of the Government’s showcase were all charged on
23 April 2003
with breaching copyright
by making hundreds of digital music files
available for
downloading at an Internet site known as “MP3 WMA
Australian Federal Police alleged the operation of
the site resulted in potential music industry losses of over $60
million, making
the matter one of Australia’s largest
Simultaneously, Australian
Federal Court proceedings were commenced by Universal Music, EMI and
against University of Melbourne,
Sydney and Tasmania to release
information needed to identify users which have allegedly infringed
2003, Tamberlin J allowed Sony access to the requested Internet files
pursuant to O 15A rr, 3, 6 and 12 of the Federal
Court Rules – that order which allows an aggrieved party to
force a party suspected of holding documents necessary to prove
other party’s case to release those documents for the purpose
197. Despite the
claims of the Government, the question remains: does this latest
scenario spell success
for Australia’s copyright
regime? Or, does it signal the
desire of some
for a shift towards a more US-style approach to Internet control and
Thus far, despite the penalties available under the Act, according
to industry insiders, the number of copyright prosecutions in
has been small and the penalties attached to infringement less than
satisfactory.
198. Many witnesses
before the recent House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs Inquiry into
noted that because of the the difficulty encountered in trying to
evidence needed to prove copyright ownership etc., many
prosecutions
have been discontinued. Others were only dealt with summarily, with the
stating that for the years 1997–98
and 1998–99, of
the 13 successful convictions, “penalties ranged from
non-conviction bonds
to fines of $4,800”.
199. While at first
glance it is easy to attach blame to the courts for not handing down
more severe penalties, as the CDPP notes,
matters are “difficult, highly technical and expensive
prosecutions
with enormous problems in proving ownership of
it is held overseas”.
As such, successful criminal prosecutions are few and far between, with
the penalties attached to
those that do get a hearing inadequate
for reasons that do not
equate with judicial leniency.
This situation has led some to argue for more regulation, more
government funding for investigations
and prosecutions, and even
stricter controls on what can and cannot be
emerging Internet technologies. For others, the lack of any real
concerns that the Australian Government will be encouraged to
adopt a more US -style approach – one which, as outlined
risks holding ISPs liable, allows record industry companies to
tap into the
chat functions of clients run on peer-to-peer networks,
and then serve
users transferring copyrighted material with automatic infringement
, and one which further restricts the use of circumvention devices
(thereby further eroding the right to fair use). All initiatives
it has been argued, are particularly
odd coming from a nation that has tended to dictate the terms of free
and civil liberties generally.
Perhaps, as other recent events seem to indicate, the law alone will
not (and should not) provide the answers needed –
not without the risk of eroding the rights of those who legitimately
use new technologies to advance
communication and understanding.
Without careful analysis, we risk
crossing the line between the need to restrict activity that hinders
and social progress,
and activity that ensures that progress remains
202. In that
regard, it is worth noting that to recover some of the revenue lost to
illegal copying, the Australasia n Performing
Rights Association and Screenrights have been lobbying the Australian
to put a levy on blank CDs and DVDs. At the same
time, as reported in
Australian Financial Review
, Apple Computer
opened an Internet music store featuring 200,000 music tracks, licensed
from all of the major record
labels, available
for legal download for only US99 cents per song. In
first week of operation it sold a million tracks.
203. So where to from
here in this
highly charged atmosphere of good versus bad? The future remains
uncertain. If anything is to be
learned from the peer-to- peer debates
now dominating IP news it is that for any deterrent to be effective,
government agencies,
industry, the courts, the media and the
community all have a role to play in reducing the incidence of
Intellectual
property creation is of benefit to the community and
industry, and
measures to protect intellectual property, including the prevention
piracy, are, as a result, the responsibility of both. The task ahead
poses numerous challenges. What is clear is that an approach
reform that remains unwilling to accommodate legal and social
innovation will
not ensure that this issue is addressed in a
way that is effective and
many seem to ignore is that not everyone who copies
a work, or part of a work, infringes copyright in the work. When asked
respond to concerns that proposed US copyright legislation (the
Hollings Bill) would take away some of the users’ rights,
Jack Valenti, Chief
Executive of the Motion Picture Association of America, said,
“What rights are we talking about?”
then went on to
say, “I’m not trying to be glib. A lot of people
haven’t thought it through believe that
anything on the
Internet is
205. Opponents of
anti-circumvention
do not believe that everything on the Internet
is free, they merely feel that they are entitled
to access and use
the Internet for fair dealing purposes and that technological
should be encouraged, rather
than shut down through legislative
intrusion. The anti- circumvention provisions now in place in Australia
not meant to displace
fair dealing. This is evident from the fact that
“TPM” has been defined to only cover devices which
prevent or inhibit
the infringement of copyright, not devices which
prevent all
access and use of the works.
Therefore, the
anti- circumvention provisions should only be protecting the works from
for fair dealing
problem is that TPMs often prevent or at least
inhibit users from accessing and/or copying those works regardless of
they intend to infringe copyright in the works or use them for
fair dealing purposes. According to a lawyer for Time Warner, there
a simple solution to this
problem: “The technological and legal measures are intended
to protect the
unauthorized
Anyone wanting to
make a ‘fair use’ of a copyrighted work need only
same steps as he or she would
in the absence of technological
protection; buy or rent a copy, subscribe to a transmission thereof or
borrow a copy
from the library.”
solution is impractical. If an academic only wants to read one article
online journal then it is unreasonable to expect
them to pay a fee of
to subscribe to the journal for a year. If copyright users are forced
to pay for works in order to use
them for fair dealing purposes then we
become the “pay per use” society envisioned by
The suggestion that copyright users
should have to go to the library to access the works is also
impractical. Firstly, it places
an unreasonable burden on the library
to subscribe to all
these online services. Even the US Librarian of
Congress has warned that
the anti-circumvention legislation
considerable burdens on the scholarly, academic, and library
communities”.
Secondly, it defeats the purpose of having the material available
online. After all, the whole purpose of the World Wide Web is to
users to access a wealth of information, wherever they are in the
without having to leave their computers.
It is often suggested by
representatives of the copyright industries that people wishing to
access works
for fair dealing purposes
should obtain a hardcopy or printed version
of the work that is not protected by a TPM. In light of the increasing
reliance on the
World Wide Web as a way of distributing and accessing
information, this suggestion is somewhat myopic. Why should people such
academics, students and journalists be denied the use of one of the
most useful research tools ever invented? And why should they
the information that is available in print form? As the Electronic
Frontier Foundation argued in a submission to the
US Copyright Office,
this idea undermines the important role that fair dealing plays in
spreading knowledge and propelling society
There can be no doubt that the new copyright regime risks tipping the
balance in favour of copyright owners. The anti-circumvention
provisions afford copyright owners a lot more power than they had under
previous copyright laws and recent litigation efforts, although
at stopping piracy, risk ensuring that “fair” use
becomes use
“only with permission”.
(Cth) is no longer simply
concerned with copyright infringement. It is now concerned with
preventing manufacturers from producing
devices which may assist others
to infringe copyright but may also
enable people to use works for fair dealing purposes. The founders
law would never have envisaged that copyright law would cover
activities which
are in some ways completely unrelated
to copyright infringement.
Indeed, the
anti-circumvention provisions have now made criminals of software
developers and
who have no intention of infringing copyright. The first
person to find himself in court for violating the US anti-circumvention
provisions, Eric Corley, was a journalist and the second, Dmitry
Sklyarov, was a computer programmer. Neither Corley nor Sklyarov
actually infringed copyright.
Proponents of the anti-circumvention
provisions argue that they are
necessary to prevent copyright infringement. However, copyright
infringers can be
punished under the existing copyright infringement provisions. There is
no need to extend the reach of copyright
so far that it criminalises
innovation and discourages some from using a system of information
sharing that aims to facilitate learning.
Recent litigation efforts
here and in the United States do not bode well for those concerned to
development of new
ideas and the fair use of new
technology.
* LLB(Hons), BSc
(Comp-Sci)(Murdoch);articled clerk, Freehills, Perth, Western
Australia. **
BA(Hons), LLB (Queen’s), LLM,
SJD (Michigan). Associate
Professor and
Dean of Law; Director, Asia Pacific Intellectual Property Law
Murdoch University,
Perth, Western Australia.
A Flahvin and R
“The Digital Agenda Act: How the New Copyright Law (and
Contract) is
Redefining the Relationship Between
Users and Owners of
Cyberspace Law Resources
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/CyberLRes/2001/21/
para 3 (5 May
For example, the Sony PlayStation,
Microsoft’s Xbox and
Nintendo’s GameCube. Litigation surrounding these consoles
significant and is discussed infra. at notes 132 and 291.
whatis?com,
definition of “digital”
http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/0,,sid9_gci211948,00.html
September 2002).
“The Demise of Fair
(2000) 17(4) Copyright Reporter 112
“The Quest for Access in the Digital Era: Copyright and the
Internet” (2001) 1 The Journal of Information,
http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/01-1/waelde.html
Docker, above note 5 at 120.
Waelde, above note
Ibid. at 2.
JR Therien,
“Exorcising the Specter of a
“Pay-Per-Use” Society: Toward Preserving Fair Use
Public Domain
in the Digital Age”
(2001) 16 Berkeley
Technology Law
Journal 979
Universal City Studios, Inc v Corley 2001 WL 1505495 (2d Cir. 2001),
discussed in more detail infra. at note 261.
Article 18 of
Performances and Phonograms Treaty contains almost identical language
Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright
Treaty but applies to different
matter. Therefore, comments made in relation to the WIPO Copyright
Treaty apply
the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty.
WIPO Copyright
Treaty Article 11.
S Fitzpatrick,
“Copyright Imbalance: U.S. and
Australian Responses to the WIPO Digital Copyright Treaty”
Intellectual Property Report 214 at 223.
It is helpful
this stage to clarify the terminology used throughout this paper. In
we refer to “fair dealing”,
whereas in the United
States it is
known as “fair use”. We have used the term
dealing” throughout this
paper, except when discussing US
legislation
or case law. We have also used the terms “anti-circumvention
provisions”
and “anti-circumvention laws”
throughout this
paper. The Australian anti- circumvention provisions are contained in
(Cth) which is entitled “Actions
relation to circumvention devices and electronic rights management
information”.
The US anti- circumvention provisions are
contained in
section 1201 of the
of 1976 which is
entitled “Circumvention of copyright protection
systems”. Finally, the
(Cth) uses the term
“technological
protection measure” whereas the US
of 1976 uses
“technological measure”. They are also referred to
“technical protection measures”,
“technical protection
systems”, “copyright protection systems”,
systems” and a variety
of other terms. We have referred to
technological protection measures (“TPMs”)
throughout this thesis. Technological
protection measures may be
classified into two types –
access control measures and copy control measures; the former
controlling
access to works and the latter controlling copying of the works. These
used on their own or together.
SM Stewart,
International Copyright and
Neighbouring Rights, 2nd ed (London: Butterworths, 1989) at 5.
ss 31(1)(a)(iv)
(1)(b)(iii),
Ibid., s 116A.
Stewart, above
note 18 at 4.
for the duration of copyright in
and other subject matter.
Stewart, above
note 18 at 4.
A Latman et al,
The Michie Company, 1989) at 14.
Information
Microsoft cases is available at the US Department of Justice website,
Antitrust Division, “United States
v Microsoft”
http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/cases/ms_index.htm
(28 October
“Works” are dealt with in
“Subject-matter other than works” are dealt with in
Programs) Act 1999
(Cth) amended the
definition of literary work to include “a computer program or
compilation of computer programs”. The
(Digital Agenda) Act 2000
(Cth) changed the right to
“broadcast”
the work to the more technologically neutral right to
“communicate the
to the public”.
Latman, above
note 25 at 15.
Breyer, “The uneasy case for copyright: a study of copyright
photocopies and computer programs”
(1970) 84 Harvard Law
284-91, cited in S Ricketson and M Richardson, Intellectual Property:
Commentary, 2nd ed (Sydney: Butterworths, 1998)
JA Sterling,
Moral rights
were introduced into UK copyright law by the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988 and into Australian copyright law
Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000
Division 2, Right of attribution of authorship.
, Division 3, Right not to have authorship of work falsely
attributed.
, Division 4, Right of integrity of authorship of a
Sterling, above note 34 at 56.
Ibid. at 55.
Valenti, “A Clear Present and Future Danger: The Potential
America’s Greatest Export Trade Prize”
Release (12 February
http://www.mpaa.org/jack/2002/2002_02_12b.htm
April 2002).
“An end to digital piracy?”, CNET
News.com, 4 April 2002
http://news.com.com/2008-1082- 875394.html
The economic impact of piracy is
addressed later in this paper.
See infra at note __.
Sterling, above
note 34 at 57.
S Ricketson and
M Richardson, Intellectual Property: Cases and Commentary, 2nd ed
Butterworths, 1998) at 71.
Ibid. at 72.
above note 34 at 58.
Ibid. at 61.
Brudenall “The Future of Fair Dealing in Australian Copyright
(1997) 1 The Journal of Information, Law and Technology
http://elj.warwick.ac.uk/jilt/copright/97_1brud/
section 1 (10 June
Australian Copyright Council, Fair
Dealing in the Digital Age,
Bulletin 92, v. 2 (Sydney: ACC, 1998) at 11.
Sections 43
(Cth) 104 permit fair dealings for the
purpose of a
judicial proceeding or for the purpose of giving advice by a legal
practitioner,
patent attorney or trade marks attorney. It is not evident why the
legislature
saw the need for this provision. There is no equivalent
provision in
of 1976, although this ty pe of fair dealing might be
under the fair use provision discussed later in this paper.
above note 54 at 3.1.
(1990) 37 FCR
above note 54 at
(1993) 27 IPR 441.
above note 54 at
Australian Copyright Council,
above note 55 at 15.
Television New
Zealand Ltd v Newsmonitor Services Ltd, above note 69.
Australian Copyright Council, above note 55 at 16.
54 at 3.4.1.
Brudenall, above note 54 at 3.4.1.
[1980] HCA 44
(1980) 147 CLR 39.
“The Digital Agenda
Anti-Circumvention Provisions: A Threat to Fair Use in
Cyberspace”
(2001) 12 Australian Intellectual Property Journal 82
Brudenall, above note 54 at
Australian Copyright
Council, above note 55 at 13.
Ibid. at 12.
Vice-Chancellor’s Committee, Submission to the Copyright Law
Committee, “Simplification of the Fair
Dealing Provisions of
”, 21 March
http://www.avcc.edu.au/policies_activities/information_tech_copyright/standing_committee_information/cl rcfair.doc
(12 June 2002).
above note 10 at 995.
Forsyth, above
note 80 at 84.
above note 54 at 4.2(b).
above note 54 at 4.2(b).
Review Committee,
Simplification of the
: Part One (1998) para
http://law.gov.au/clrc/gen_info/clrc/clrc%20report/ReportHeadings1.html
(13 June 2002).
Ibid. at 2.01.
Ibid. at 2.04.
Dower, “Casting the Net Further: Should Australia Adopt An
Model of Fair Dealing in Copyright”
(2002) 20(1) Copyright
Australian Copyright Council,
above note 55. at 51.
above note 54 at 6.2.1.
Brudenall, above note 54 at 6.2.1.
Dower, above
Ibid. at 9.
“A Riff on Fair
Use in the Digital Millennium
of Pennsylvania Law Review 673
; P Samuelson, “Intellectual
Property and
the Digital Economy: Why the Anti- Circumvention Regulations Need to be
(1999) 14 Berkeley Technology Law Journal 519
Therien, “Exorcising the Specter of a
“Pay-Per-Use”
Society: Towards Preserving Fair Use and the Public Domain
(2001) 16 Berkeley Technology Law Journal 979.
Dower, above
note 97 at 9.
above note 80 at 82.
Department of
Commerce, Information Infrastructure Taskforce, Report of the Working
on Intellectual Property and the National
Information Infrastructure
Forsyth, above note 80 at 93.
of 1976, ss
1201(a)(1)(A) and
of 1976, s 1201(a)(3)(A), defines
“circumvent a technological measure” as
“to descramble a
scrambled work, to decrypt
an encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid,
remove, deactivate, or impair a technological measure, without the
authority of
the copyright owner”.
above note 10 at 987.
Forsyth, above note 80 at 86.
above note 10 at 987.
“electronic rights
management information” and is dealt with
above note 80 at 86.
Association of American Publishers Copyright Committee Position Paper,
Contractual Licensing, Technological Measures and Copyright
<www.publishers.org/abouta/copy/plicens.htm> (4 June
is not the only company to have developed an eBook reader with these
limitations. Microsoft has also developed an eBook Reader
United States v Elcom Ltd. a/k/a
Elcomsoft Co., N.D. Cal., No.
CR 01-20138 RMW, 5/8/02.
Frontier Foundation,
“Frequently Asked Questions (and Answers) About the Dmitry
Elcomsoft Prosecution”,
19 February 2002, located
<www.eff.org/IP/DMCA/US_v_Elcomsoft/us_v_elcomsoft_faq.html>
“Protected CDs quietly slip into
stores”, CNET News.com, 28 July
http://news.com.com/2100-1023-270164.html?legacy=cnet
January 2002).
“Corrupt audio discs, aka
“Copy-Protected CDs””, Campaign for
http://uk.eurorights.org/issues/cd/
Leyden, “Marker pens, sticky tape crack music CD
protection”, The
Register, 14 May
http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/54/25274.html
requirement is found in the
(Cth), s 116A(1)(c).
Computer Entertainment Inc v Edmunds (t/a
Channel Technology)
[2002] EWCA Civ 1724
[2002] All ER (D) 170.
Kaisha Sony
Computer Entertainment v Stevens
[2002] FCA 906
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/federal_ct/2002/906.htm
(11 August 2002). An excellent overview of the decision is found in S.
“Kabushiki Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment
Stevens”, (2002) (September) Intellectual Property Forum 44.
Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment v Stevens
[2003] FCAFC 157
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission, “ACCC
Defends the Rights of Playstation Owners” Media Release 22/02
http://203.6.251.7/accc.internet/digest/view_media.cfm?RecordID=595
(12 March 2002)
al, “DMCA2K: An Analysis of the
Effect of Changes in Copyright Law” (10 June
http://www-cse.stanford.edu/classes/cs201/projects -99-00/dmca-2k/rc.html
(5 June 2002).
Frontier Foundation,
“Comments to the Copyright Office on DMCA
Anti-Circumvention Provisions” 17 February
<www.eff.org/IP/DMCA/20000217_eff_dmca_comments.html> (16
March 2002).
“Content Scrambling System” definition
provided by searchSecurity.com., located at
http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/sDefinition/0,,sid14_gci214575,00.html
(5 June 2002).
above note 44.
above note 10 at
Forsyth, above note 80 at 88.
above note 10 at
Electronic Frontier Foundation,
above note 135 .
“Anti-circumvention: The New Song and Dance
Australian Intellectual Property Journal 199
the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty contains almost identical
to Article 11 of the WIPO Copyright
Treaty but applies to different
matter. Therefore, the comments in relation to the WIPO Copyright
Treaty apply
the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty .
note 6 at 2.3.
Conference on Certain Copyright
and Neighboring Rights Questions, 2-20 December 1996, “Basic
for the Substantive
Provisions of the Treaty on Certain Questions
Concerning the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works to be Considered by the
Conference”, Article 13. Located at
http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/dcom/olia/diplconf/4dc_a13.htm
Consumer Electrics Manufacturers
Association, “Comments on
WIPO Basic Proposals”, 13 September 1996
http://www.hrrc.org./html/shapiro_s__september_13__1996_.html
above note 6 at 2.3.
WIPO Copyright Treaty, Art 11
http://www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo033en.htm
Fitzpatrick, above note 16 at
http://www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo033en.htm
(14 July 2002).
Intellectual Property Organisation, Agreed
Statements Concerning the WIPO Treaty, Concerning Article 10
http://www.wipo.org/eng/diplconf/distrib/96dc.htm#a_10
Fitzpatrick, above note 16 at
The Digital
of 1998, US Copyright Office Summary, December
http://www.loc.gov/copyright/legislation/dmca.pdf
(US), s 1201(a)(1)(A).
s 1201(b)(1)(A).
US Copyright
Office Summary, above note 157 at
(US) ss 1201(a)(2)
and 1201(b)(1).
Ibid. at ss
1201(a)(2)(A-C) and 1201(b)(1)(A-C).
US Copyright
Office Summary, above
note 157 at 4.
is loosely based on Table 1 in D Nimmer,
“A Riff on Fair Use in the Digital Millennium
(2000) 148(3) University of Pennsylvania Law Review 673
(US), s 1201(d).
Ibid. at s 1201(g).
Ibid. at s 1201(a)(1)(B-E).
1201(a)(1)(C).
The two new
classes of works are (1) compilations consisting of lists of websites
filtering software applications; and
(2) literary works, including
programs and databases, protected by access control mechanisms that
permit access
because of malfunction, damage or obsolescence.
A list of the contracting
parties to the WIPO Copyright Treaty is available at
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/documents/english/pdf/s-wct.pdf.
Commonwealth of Australia House of Representatives Parliamentary
(Hansard), (2 September 1999) 9748
http://www.aph.gov.au/hansard/reps/dailys/dr020999.pdf
Ibid. at 9748.
Explanatory
Memorandum –
Amendment (Digital Agenda) Bill 1999
http://www.aph.gov.au/parlinfo/billsnet/1e99173.pdf
Fitzpatrick, above note 16 at
Ibid. at 223.
The European Community Directive
on the Harmonisation
of Certain Aspects of Copyright and Related Rights in the Information
22 May 2001 was introduced by the European Parliament in order to bring
with the WIPO
Treaty and to harmonise copyright law across those countries. It
member states to provide legal
protection against both the act of
circumvention
and the circumvention devices and services themselves. It extends the
of copyright
even further than the Digital Agenda Act, the DMCA and the
Draft and Commentary –
Amendment (Digital Agenda) Bill
http://www.law.gov.au/publications/copyright_enews/digital_agenda/exposure_draft.html
(21 August 2002) at 24.
Coco, above
note 142 at 202.
Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment v Stevens
[2002] FCA 906
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/federal_ct/2002/906.htm
(11 August 2002).
(Cth) s116A(1)(a).
116A(1)(b)(i).
116A(1)(b)(ii).
116A(1)(b)(iii).
116A(1)(b)(iv).
116A(1)(b)(v).
116A(1)(b)(vi).
116A(1)(b)(vii).
116A(1)(c).
L Gamertsfelder, “Digitising Copyright Law - An Australian
Perspective”
(2001) 13 Australian Intellectual Property Law
and L McNamara, “Piracy and the
: Criminal Deterrent or ‘Slap on the
Australian Intellectual Property Journal 121.
(Cth) s 116A(5).
Ibid. at s 116A(3)(b).
Gamertsfelder, above note 199 at
(Cth), s 116A(8).
Gamertsfelder, above note 199 at 132.
Commonwealth of Australia House of Representatives Parliamentary
(Hansard), (2 September 1999) 9748
Reading http://www.aph.gov.au/hansard/reps/dailys/dr020999.pdf.
Lindsay, “A Comparative Analysis of the Law relating to
Technological
Protection Measures”
(2002) 20 Copyright Reporter 118
Ibid. It is worth noting, however, that Lindsay disputes this
challenged” assertion.
Explanatory
Memorandum, above note 181 at 180.
P Samuelson,
“Proceedings of Financial Cryptography 2000
Conference”, located
http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~pam/papers/fincrypt2.doc
Professional” 8(4) April 1995, p20-27 in Current Awareness
http://www.aslib.co.uk/caa/abstracts/open/95-0770.html
September 2002).
According to
Amazon.com the retail price of CD-R Drives
varies from about
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/browse/-/172476/ref=br_bx_c_1_4/104-4914647-5667102
(18 September 2002).
According to
advertisements in the computing
magazine Australian Personal Computer from the November 1996 issue at
According to Amazon.com the
retail price of CD-Rs is $US25 for 50
CDs which equals approximately $AUD1 per CD
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00005A3JA/qid%3D1028080399/br%3D2- 13/ref%3Dbr%5Fts%5Ffull%5Fe/103-7328371-1215808
(13 September 2002).
Picture Association of America,
“Anti-Piracy”,
http://www.mpaa.org/anti-piracy/index.htm
(13 October 2002).
Industry Association of America,
“2001 Physical Anti-Piracy Figures Announced By Recording
Assoc. of America”,
http://www.riaa.org/Protect-Campaign-6.cfm
October 2002).
Industry Association of America, “RIAA
Releases Mid-Year Snapshot of Music Industry”, Media Release
http://riaa.org/PR_story.cfm?id=552
“It looks OK, it sounds OK, but it’s not OK
... it’s another pirated Top 40 CD”, The
7 July 2001
http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/2001/07/07/FFXM6WCUSOC.html
October 2002).
Kendall and
McNamara, above note 200.
Software Alliance website, “Seventh Annual BSA Global
Software Piracy
Study”, June
http://www.bsa.org/resources/2002-06-10.130.pdf
(14 October
generally, Adeep Segkar, “The Napster
Decision and Beyond: A Look at Music Copyright in the Digital
(2003) (June)
Intellectual Property Forum 24.
K Bowrey and
“Rip mix burn: the politics of peer to peer and copyright
July 2002, available from http://www.firstmonday.org/issue7_8/bowrey.
Australia Parliament, House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Constitutional Affairs, Cracking down on copycats:
enforcement of
in Australia (Canberra: The Committee, 2000) at x. The Report and
submissions
are available from
http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/laca/copyrightenforcement/contents.htm.
Music Industry Piracy Investigations, Submission 26 to the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
named”, The Sunday Telegraph, 11 March 2001,
Music Industry Piracy
Investigations, above, note 235 at
Ibid., at 4.
“Music industry blames Net for all
evil”, The Register, 27 August 2002.
K Bowrey and
M Rimmer, above,
“Judge: file swapping tools
are legal”, CNet News, 25 April 2003, available from
http://news.com,
citing Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Studios Inc et al v Grokster Ltd et al CV
and Jerry Leiber et al v Consumer Empowerment BV a/k/a/ Fasttrack et al
United States District Court Central District of California.
http://www.eff.org/IP/P2P/MGM_v_Grokster/20020910_GROKSTER.pdf
above, note 246.
“Court to Decide KaZaA’s US
Liability”, CNet News, 25 November 2002, available from
http://www.new.com.
“District Court on Internet based personal
http://www.techlawjournal.com.
Industry Association of America
v Verizon Internet Services Civil Action 02-MS-0323 United States
Court for the
District of Columbia, available from
http://www.findlaw.com.
Press, “Judge rejects Verizon
challenge in Net music downloading case”, 25 April 2003,
available from
http://www.boston.com/dailyglobe2.
Foundation, “Norway Indicts Teen Who Published Code
DVDs”, 10 January 2002, located
http://www.eff.org/IP/Video/DeCSS_prosecutions/Johansen_DeCSS_case/20020110_eff_pr.html
(9 May 2002).
picture studios determine which DVD players
are licensed DVD players.
frontier Foundation, above, note
“2600: The Hacker Quarterly is
still on the World Wide Web”, located at
http://www.2600.com
City Studios, Inc v Reimerdes,
F.Supp.2d 346 (S.D.N.Y.2000).
City Studios,
Inc v Corley 2001 WL 1505495 (2d Cir. 2001), at 2 [page numbers refer
online version of the decision
http://www.nd.edu/~pbellia/corley.pdf
Ibid. at 24.
I bid at 25.
withdraws Supreme Court appeal in DeCSS case”, The Register,
http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/4/26038.html
“DVD-encryption-cracking case won’t be
appealed”, USA Today, 5 July
http://www.usatoday.com/life/cyber/tech/2002/07/05/dvd-hack.htm
(6 July 2002).
F Macmillan,
“Morpheus in the Undergrowth:
(2002) 49 Intellectual Property Forum 12.
Electronic Frontier Foundation, “US v Elcomsoft &
Sklyarov FAQ”,
19 February
http://www.eff.org/IP/DMCA/US_v_Elcomsoft/us_v_elcomsoft_faq.html
(5 May 2002).
P Waldmeir,
“Locking up the Lock-Pickers”,
Financial Times, 5 September
http://news.ft.com/ft/gx.cgi/ftc?pagename=View & c=Article & cid=FT3QUH9D9RC & live=true
(25 March 2002).
Frontier Foundation, above
J Leyden, “Sklyarov
denied US visas to testify in DMCA
case”, The Register, 16 October
http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/6/27643.html
(22 October
United States v Elcom Ltd., N.
D. Cal., No. CR 01-020138,
indictment 8/28/01.
Frontier Foundation, above note
Leydon, above note 273.
States v Elcom Ltd. a/k/a
Elcomsoft Co., N.D. Cal., No. CR 01-20138 RMW, 5/8/02, p1 [page numbers
the online version
of the decision found
http://1stam.umn.edu/archive/fedctapp/elcom.pdf
Ibid. at 3.
Ibid. at 7.
Ibid. at 11.
Ibid. at 11.
Ibid. at 18.
Ibid. at 18.
Ibid. at 32.
Ibid. at 11.
Gethin, above note 131.
“Sony Loses
Australian PlayStation Suit”, USA Today, 29 July
http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/techpolicy/2002-07-29-sony-playstation_x.htm
(30 July 2002).
Ibid. at 23.
Ibid. at 24.
Competition and Consumer Commission, “ACCC Defends the Rights
Playstation Owners” Media Release 22/02 (8
February 2002),
http://203.6.251.7/accc.internet/digest/view_media.cfm?RecordID=595
(12 March 2002).
studios often enter into complicated
cross-licensing deals for international distribution which give
studios the
right to release movies in different countries and at
times. It is necessary to delay the release of movies in some countries
of print availability, dubbing and subtitling, the rating process,
marketing development, talent availability for promotional
http://www.boxoff.com/shows/showest/2001/global.html
September 2002).
Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment v Stevens
[2002] FCA 906
2002) at para. 169.
Ibid. at at
Ibid. at 111.
Ibid. at 90.
Ibid. at 90.
Ibid. at 92.
Ibid at 115.
S Hayes, “US Tightens
Net Copyright”, The
Australian, 28 January 2002, at 22. See also S Birchall,
Down: The Implications for Australian Internet Service Providers
Free Trade Agreement between Australia and the United States”
2003) 52 Computers and the Law 25.
M Hollands,
“Facing The Music
Over Privacy”, The Australian, 28 January 2003 at 27.
J Davidson,
“Controls Threaten Internet Innovation”, The
Australian Financial
Review, Thursday 28 February 2002, at 40.
Unexpected Accord on Music Piracy”, The Australian, Media
Business, 30
January-5 February 2003 at 12.
News Release
Attorney-General The Hon Daryl Williams AM QC MP, Minister
for Communications, Information Technology and the
Arts, Senator the
Richard Alston and the Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator the
Chris Ellison, dated 26 June 2003.
Attorney-General’s Office,
Press release, 24 April 2003, “Tough action against music
available from http://www.law.gov.au.
As noted in
The Herald Sun, 14 May
2003, available from http://heraldsun.com.au.
showdown begins”, The Australian (IT), 10 April 2003,
available from
http://www.australianit.news.com.au.
Entertainment
(Australia) Limited v University of Tasmania
[2003] FCA 532.
of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts, Submission 52
House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs, 1999 at 8.
Representatives Standing Committee on
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Inquiry into Copyright Piracy,
Cracking Down on
Enforcement of Copyright in Australia (Canberra: The
Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia, November 2000) at x. The Report
submissions
are available from
http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/caca/copyrightenforcement/contens.htm.
Ibid., at 2.
Ibid., at 2.
See also Holder v Searle
(1998) 44 IPR
Anon, “RIAA to file
swappers: let’s chat”, available
from http://www.zeropaid.com/news/articles/auto/04292003a.php.
Davidson, “The day the music died”, The Weekend
Australian Financial
Review, 10–11 May 2003, 22 at 23.
above note 44
interpretation of digital-copyright provision disappoints
scholars”, The
Chronicle of Higher Education,
31 October 2000,
http://chronicle.com/free/2000/10/2000103101t.htm
Digital Future Coalition,
“Copyright Owners Get Green
Light to Roll with Technological Protection Measures at Consumer
http://www.dfc.org/dfc1/Active_Issues/graphic/1201_release.html
(16 March 2002).
Frontier Foundation,
“EFF Post-Hearing Comments Requesting Exemption of DVDs from
Section 1201(a)”,
http://www.eff.org/IP/DMCA/20000623_eff_dmca_dvd_comments.html
(16 March 2002).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter