URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hobbs, Harry --- "Protecting Sacred Sites" [2024] SydLawRw 25; (2024) 46(4) Sydney Law Review 495
I Introduction
II A Discouraging Jurisprudence
III Understanding What Is at Stake
IV Treaty-Making
V Conclusion
Review Essay
Protecting Sacred Sites
Land Is Kin: Sovereignty, Religious Freedom, and Indigenous Sacred
by Dana Lloyd (2023) University Press of Kansas, 224 pp,
ISBN 9780700635894
Harry Hobbs
When Indigenous nations’ sacred and cultural sites are threatened,
legal disputes often frame land in one of two ways: either
land is sacred, or it
is property. In
Land Is Kin
, Dana Lloyd argues that this positioning is
inadequate. Not only does it facilitate the damage and destruction of sacred
it fails to appreciate the familial responsibilities we all have to
Country. In this review essay, I outline Lloyd’s argument
and suggest that
emerging treaty processes in Australia offer one way to ground a deeper
appreciation of land within Australian law
and society.
Introduction
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander sacred and cultural sites are protected
by legislation in Australia.
does not prevent their damage or destruction. In only the last few years,
carvings have been vandalised,
shelters exploded,
undertaken on restricted sites without
permission.
These are just some of
the instances that attract media and other attention. Is this all that we can
Land Is Kin: Sovereignty, Religious Freedom, and Indigenous Sacred
Dana Lloyd examines the legal regime for the protection of Native American
sacred sites in the United States. In outlining and tracing
the unsatisfactory
jurisprudence issued by the Supreme Court, Lloyd argues that protecting sacred
sites requires stepping away from
settler law and reconceptualising how we
— members of non-Indigenous communities — understand land.
Settler colonial states like Australia and the United States were built on
dispossession. Foundational narratives speak of taming
the frontier and
expanding colonial and national settlement. In this context, is it possible to
reconceive our understanding of land,
from economic and civilisational bounty
— from hard-won property — to something else entirely? This essay
argues that
the emerging treaty processes in Australia could augur such a
development in this country. This is because treaties serve both legal
relational goals. On the one hand, an Indigenous–state treaty would
acknowledge that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
nations possess political
and legal authority, carving space within Australian law for Indigenous
communities to manage their responsibility
and obligations to Country. At the
same time, given treaties constitute promises between political communities to
reconcile competing
claims through dialogue and mutual
these concords provide
an opportunity to develop relationships built on trust and respect. Through
these sustained conversations,
treaty-making could prompt a broader and deeper
understanding among all Australians of land and our relationship to Country.
A Discouraging Jurisprudence
In the late 1970s, the United States Forest Service developed plans to
construct a six-mile road in the Six Rivers National Forest
in northern
California to facilitate timber harvesting. The road would traverse an area
known as the High Country,
a site of religious significance and core to the cultural identity of the
Yurok, Karuk and Tolowa nations. Cognisant of the importance
of the site, the
Forest Service commissioned a report to assess the impact of the road. The
report was clear: construction ‘would
cause serious and irreparable damage
to the sacred areas which are an integral and necessary part of the belief
systems and lifeway
of Northwest California Indian
It recommended construction not proceed.
The Forest Service rejected the report’s recommendations and pressed
forward. Several Native American groups, led by the Northwest
Indian Cemetery
Protective Association, and joined by environmentalists and the State of
California, challenged the Forest Service’s
plans. At first instance they
succeeded. In 1983, the US District Court for the Northern District of
California issued a permanent
injunction. Finding that the High Country
‘constitutes the center of the spiritual world’ of the Yurok, Karuk
the Court held
that construction would ‘seriously damage’ the qualities that make
the site sacred.
Service plan thus violated the free exercise clause of the First Amendment,
which holds that ‘Congress shall make
no law respecting an establishment
of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof
The decision was
affirmed on appeal to the Ninth
but the Forest Service pushed on to the Supreme Court.
Lyng v Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective
Association
the Supreme
Court handed down ‘one of the worst Indian cases ever
accepting evidence that the road would ‘virtually destroy the ...
Indians’ ability to practice their
allowed the appeal in a 5:3 decision. Writing for the majority, Justice Sandra
Day O’Connor held that the free exercise
clause only prohibits government
action that either coerces an individual into violating their religious beliefs
or penalises religious
activity by denying a person an equal share of the
rights, benefits and privileges enjoyed by other citizens. On this account,
O’Connor reasoned that a law excluding the Yurok, Karuk and Tolowa
nations from the High Country may violate the
The construction of the
road would not, however, because it neither penalises the Indigenous nations for
expressing their faith,
nor coerces them to violate their
In an incredulous
dissent, Justice William Brennan remarked that the ‘cruelly surreal
result’ means that ‘government
action that will virtually destroy a
religion is nevertheless deemed not to “burden” that
Ultimately, the road was not built. Responding to significant outcry, in 1990
Congress passed the
Smith River National Recreation Area
The Act designated the
proposed road corridor a ‘wilderness’ under the
Wilderness Act of
construction. The designation was a victory for the Yurok, Karuk and Tolowa
nations. As Dana Lloyd draws out in
Land Is Kin
, however, that victory is
incomplete.
remains the law of the land.
case has attracted substantial criticism since it was handed
down over three decades ago.
Much of this scholarship critiques the Supreme Court’s narrow
understanding of the free exercise clause and its application
to Indigenous
peoples’ sacred sites. There is much to critique. Although the Court was
not able to accommodate the place-based
nature of Indigenous religions, many
have wondered whether it would have had the same difficulty preventing proposed
action that
would damage the Wailing Wall in
or the desecration of
the Arlington National Cemetery in Washington
Despite an apparent
constitutional bar on government action that prohibits the free exercise of
religion, government agencies may
damage and destroy Native American cultural
and religious sites on public lands.
Judicial authorities continue to permit such activity on questionable bases.
Navajo Nation v United States Forest Service
, for instance, the
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit applied
dismissed a challenge brought by several Indigenous nations. The Forest Service
had approved a plan to pump 1.5 million gallons
of sewage effluent per day
to manufacture artificial snow on the San Francisco Peaks in Arizona to improve
the economic viability
of a private ski resort. The Court accepted that the
Peaks are ‘the most sacred mountain of southwestern Indian
and that the use of recycled wastewater would ‘spiritually contaminate the
entire mountain and devalue their religious
exercises’,
but because
this neither coerced nor penalised the exercise of their religious beliefs, the
plaintiffs lost.
A legal claim must be prepared in a way that is comprehensible to a court.
While some scholars have suggested that Indigenous nations
seeking protection of
their religious sites on public land should adopt arguments from property
it is understandable that
many will choose to frame their dispute through the lens of religious freedom.
As Lloyd argues, however,
religious freedom ‘and settler law more
generally’ cannot provide the answer that Indigenous communities
This is because the law
positions Native American sacred sites cases within a binary in which they are
predetermined to lose. In
a dispute between an Indigenous community’s
religious freedom and property rights, the courts choose to protect the latter.
The religion–property binary is set out explicitly in these judgments. In
, Justice O’Connor noted that ‘[w]hatever rights the
Indians may have to the use of the area ... those rights do not divest
Government of its right to use what is, after all, its
, the Court characterised the case as concerning ‘whether ...
government-approved use of artificial snow on government-owned
violates’ the law.
rejects this positioning. As she explains, understanding the cases — and
Native American sacred sites — in this
way ‘sets two (ostensibly)
mutually exclusive conceptions of land against each other: either land is sacred
or it is property’.
Lloyd — and for the Indigenous nations in question — land is so much
Understanding What Is at Stake
Land Is Kin
begins by asking ‘what land means — and what
mean — to the different parties involved in Indigenous
sacred sites cases’.
Lloyd notes, reading
and later cases like
Navajo Nation
through the lens of religion or property misses the significance of sacred
sites and how Indigenous nations understand their Country
responsibilities that flow from their relationship to land. It is also for this
reason that Lloyd argues that protecting
the High Country as
‘wilderness’ is only a partial victory. While the designation
precluded the construction of the road
and the consequent destruction of the
sanctity of the High Country, it failed to properly understand and account for
Indigenous peoples’
relationship to
Across five rewarding and
engrossing chapters, Lloyd reads
as revealing five dimensions to
land: land as home, as property, as sacred, as wilderness and, finally, as kin.
By uncovering these
multilayered dimensions, Lloyd seeks to impress upon her
reader an ethic of responsibility and to reconceive our relationships with
more than human world.
Each of these dimensions captures only a small part of the meaning of land.
They may also be inconsistent or even in conflict at
The Yurok, Karuk and
Tolowa nations have managed the High Country and relied on its tranquillity for
meditative and ceremonial religious
practices for thousands of years, but
wilderness implies an untouched and pristine environment free from human
activity. In positioning
their legal claim as one concerning the exercise of
their religion, Indigenous witnesses at trial described the High Country not
merely as a sacred place but as their home. The three nations also characterise
their relationship to the High Country and land in
familial terms, but they have
purchased large areas of their traditional Country. Can you own kin? Lloyd
acknowledges these complications
but argues that the productive tension between
these logics allows us to escape the religion–property
It also allows us to expand our field of vision beyond the judgment. The
sharp words of the majority decision cannot account for the
multilayered
understandings of land, nor for how colonisation has affected the relationship
Indigenous peoples have with their sacred
sites. Neither can the more generous
dissent of Justice William Brennan, which ‘depoliticizes religion and
essentializes
indigeneity’.
skilfully weaves testimony from the first instance trial, where witnesses
compellingly spoke of the centrality of the High
Country to their life and
culture, with broader meditations on colonisation, anthropology and religion. Of
these, colonisation features
most heavily. Indeed, underlying the dispute in all
Indigenous sacred sites cases is colonialism. Only by reading the decision
long histories of state-sanctioned murder and dispossession, of broken
or unratified treaties,
concerted efforts to destroy Indigenous religious practices, can a deeper
picture of the meaning of the High Country and of
land emerge. As Lloyd
persuasively argues, the process by which the High Country became ‘public
land’ is not explored
, even though it should be critical to
assessing whether and how the Yurok, Karuk and Tolowa First Amendment rights to
exercise their
religion can be
Combining a clear understanding of legal doctrine but embedded in humanities
scholarship that emphasises law as storytelling,
Land Is Kin
only demonstrate the complexity of land but outlines a potential path forward.
In the penultimate chapter, Lloyd examines
a 2019 resolution by the Yurok Tribal
Council that extended rights to the We-Roy or Klamath River. Part of an emerging
global approach
that recognises the rights of nature by granting legal
personality to rivers, mountains, and other natural features and ecosystems,
Lloyd identifies the resolution as an assertion of sovereignty, a claim of right
to ‘make decisions about Yurok everyday life
based on traditional
Like the water
protectors challenging the Dakota Access
the Yurok Tribal
Council’s resolution reflects their inherent and continuing sovereignty.
It is also an acknowledgment of ongoing
kinship relations that have not been
severed by colonialism.
Lloyd, this aspect is more important. Indeed, Lloyd acknowledges that it may be
hard to imagine private corporations accepting
Yurok jurisdiction and appearing
before the Tribal Court to answer for their alleged harms, but the resolution
nonetheless articulates
the responsibility we have to the more than human
Uncovering the multidimensional nature of land does not mean that
‘rights’ are unimportant. Lloyd’s emphasis on
the significance
of the Tribal Council’s resolution confirms her argument that broader
notions of kinship and sovereignty should
guide the resolution of these
disputes. In this, Lloyd concurs with scholars of law and religion that see the
fundamental problem
in Indigenous sacred sites cases as their funnelling through
the First Amendment.
challenge for Indigenous nations is that within settler courts this dialogue
inevitably assigns Indigenous peoples ‘a status
at or near the very
response is to recentre jurisdiction to the Yurok themselves, away from the
settler courts. The resolution is one example
of how Indigenous nations across
North America are living sovereignty by assuming jurisdiction and making
decisions to manage their
kinship responsibilities to and for the land.
Treaty-Making
Land Is Kin
is focused entirely on the
case and the way
the High Country — and land more generally — is more than property.
The problem Lloyd identifies, however,
is one common to settler colonial states
and an Australian reader would identify many parallels. Although the
Constitution
protects few rights, it does expressly protect
freedom of religion in similar, albeit narrower, terms to the First Amendment of
United States
Constitution
Section 116
precludes the Commonwealth
Parliament from making laws for establishing any religion, imposing any
religious observance, or prohibiting
the free exercise of any religion. The High
Court of Australia has adopted a strict interpretation of the provision,
including the
free exercise
Commonwealth
, for example, the Court held that a 1918 Ordinance that
forcibly removed Indigenous children from their families did not violate
guarantee in s 116.
because the Ordinance was not enacted for the purpose of prohibiting religious
practices even though it had that effect.
The protection of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander sacred sites in
Australia is also inconsistent. Often such protection is subsumed
beneath other
considerations such as economic use. Infamously, in the 1990s following a
political and legal storm, the Commonwealth
Parliament passed legislation to
facilitate the construction of a bridge to Hindmarsh Island despite concern it
would damage or destroy
sites sacred to Ngarrindjeri
In the course of a High
Court challenge to the legislation, the Commonwealth asserted that it possessed
the power to enact Nazi-style
laws against Indigenous
Even beneficial laws
have significant gaps. In Western Australia, the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
allows land users including mining companies to lodge an application
for permission to damage or destroy a registered Aboriginal
The destruction of the
46,000-year-old sacred rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in May 2020 occurred in
accordance with the State’s
heritage regime. An attempt to revamp and
update that legal framework
leaving sacred and
cultural sites across Western Australia vulnerable.
Constitutional doctrine can sometimes complicate this area. In 2019, Parks
Australia constructed a walkway near Gunlom Falls in Kakadu
National Park. Parks
Australia did so without seeking permission from the Aboriginal Areas Protection
Authority and, after inadvertently
damaging a site sacred to Jawoyn men, was
charged with an offence under the
Northern Territory Aboriginal Sacred Sites
(NT). The Director of National Parks pleaded not guilty, submitting
that, as a government instrumentality, Parks Australia enjoyed
privileges and immunities of the Crown, including immunity from criminal
liability. The argument succeeded in the Supreme
Court of the Northern
but was overturned by
the High Court in May 2024.
In each of these cases we might say that the relevant sacred or cultural site
was not treated with sufficient respect. But this is
really to say that the
relevant Indigenous nation was not treated with respect. Their responsibility to
Country, their obligations
to kin, were not considered or were actively ignored.
Other concerns, be they majoritarian, financial or simple lack of care, took
priority. Australian law facilitated this lack of respect — and almost
allowed the attempt to avoid liability in the case of
Gunlom Falls. There must
be a better way. If we take seriously Lloyd’s call to understand our
relationship with land, these
sorts of cases would begin from a different
starting point. They would commence with the recognition of the legal and
political authority
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities and
nations. Respecting this status would require legislative amendment. Gaps
legal regimes that enable the destruction of sacred and cultural sites would be
filled. It would also require cultural changes
that deepen our understanding of
Country and help to make inadvertent destruction less likely. As generations of
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples have
treaty-making offers a
useful vehicle to promote such change.
In recent years, several governments across Australia have committed to
pursuing treaty negotiations with Aboriginal and Torres Strait
However, the historical
absence of treaty relationships on this continent means many Australians have
little familiarity with the
character and meaning of these agreements. In
Canada, where modern treaty negotiations have been ongoing since the 1970s, it
is recognised
that treaties are complex instruments that serve both legal and
relational goals. These complementary and mutually reinforcing dimensions
Treaties create enforceable legal obligations. They constitute binding
promises by both parties. What sort of promises do they contain?
agreement will differ according to the aspirations of the parties, a treaty
recognises the inherent sovereignty of Indigenous
nations and establishes or
empowers institutions that can exercise self-government powers within the
In Australia, this will
likely include the power to make laws over cultural heritage. For example, the
Parliament of Victoria may
devolve legislative authority to the First
Peoples’ Assembly of Victoria, enabling the Indigenous body to issue
legislative
instruments concerning the protection of sacred and cultural sites
across the state. These instruments will be given the force of
parties, be they public authorities or mining companies, will be required to
engage with the Assembly to understand their
legal obligations when carrying out
work that may impact a protected site. In this way, a treaty carves out space
for self-governance,
empowering Indigenous peoples to protect their heritage in
the form and structure that makes sense to them. It also forces other
acknowledge the political and legal capacity and authority of Indigenous
This is important because political and legal authority within Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander communities and nations is tied
to Country. Indeed, the
complex religious, legal, political and cultural systems that structure and
breathe life into these societies
is intimately connected to place. Often poorly
translated as the ‘Dreaming’, these knowledge systems — the
of the Dharug, the
of the Ngunnawal and Ngarigo
— ‘[encompass] all life as well as the connections that link life
The Dreaming
explains that all life, animate and inanimate, from humans and kangaroos to
rocks and Country itself, is alive and ‘exists
relationship
everything else’.
not occur in isolation from this vision, but ‘weave[s] us all
‘the web of relationships established by the
Ancestors’.
In connecting
the human and non-human world, the Dreamings envision a holistic, interconnected
cosmos built on principles of balance,
respect, symmetry and
Empowering Indigenous
nations with legal decision-making power over their Country should see this
relationship strengthened and recognised
in state law.
Legal certainty is important, but it is the relational nature of treaties and
treaty processes that offer the greater likelihood of
grounding a
reconceptualisation of land. Treaties obtain their legal force through enactment
of legislation in Parliament. Without
constitutional protection, a future
parliament could revoke or rescind any element of a treaty. For this reason, the
moral and political
strength of the instrument is connected to the strength of
the relationship produced through the process of negotiation. In conversations
and dialogue, non-Indigenous Australians may begin to understand the
relationship Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have
with Country; we
may even begin to understand that, by our presence on this continent, we share
those obligations and responsibilities.
Is this realistic? If we put to one side the very real political challenges
to reaching meaningful settlements, another difficulty
emerges. Treaties are
fundamental instruments that constitute promises by diverse political
communities to reconcile competing claims
though dialogue and mutual agreement.
However, colonisation and state formation have ‘domesticated’ these
Indigenous–state treaties will operate within the Australian legal order.
Many Indigenous scholars have wondered whether
a ‘domestic’ treaty
can liberate Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples from colonial
Can such an agreement
catalyse the epistemic change required for non-Indigenous Australians to
reconceptualise our understanding
of and relationship to land and governance?
In the United States, where historic practices of treaty-making grounded
legal recognition of Native American sovereignty and self-government,
challenges persist. Nevertheless, the sort of dialogue and discussion
characteristic of modern treaty-making continues to
occur, albeit with mixed
results. The US Forest Service has broad discretion in determining whether and
how to adopt policies that
may impact sacred sites, but federal law requires the
Service to conduct meaningful consultation with relevant Indigenous nations
the proposed impact may impose a substantial burden on sacred or religious
sites. Todd Allin Morman’s recent empirical
study of these consultations
reveals a nuanced picture where Indigenous nations have sometimes been able to
protect the integrity
of their sacred sites through negotiation and
consultation. The ‘greatest strength of the consultation process’,
explains, is its ability ‘to open communications and bridge
cultural gaps, bringing greater understanding of Indian rights
and concerns to
non-Indian communities’.
As Morman recounts, consultations ensured the Washoe Nation were able to secure
a permanent climbing ban on Cave Rock in Nevada.
Dialogue and discussion can work both ways. After several rounds of
consultation, the Lakota, Cheyenne and Kiowa nations decided to
seek a voluntary
(rather than permanent) ban on climbing their sacred Bear’s Lodge. The
nations came to understand that a voluntary
ban provided an opportunity for
non-Indigenous peoples to demonstrate their care and respect by refraining from
climbing. It appears
this is working; in 2023, the National Park Service
reported an 85% reduction in the number of
A similar voluntary
ban on climbing Uluṟu eventually transformed to a permanent ban once the
number of visitors climbing fell
Consultations do not always produce good outcomes for Indigenous nations.
And, as we have seen, the legal framework within which negotiations
does not provide much support for the protection of sacred sites on public
lands. The same is certainly true in
Nevertheless, as
Marcia Yablon has argued, these processes do encourage flexible compromises that
courts are often unable to
Indigenous sacred and cultural sites do not receive adequate protection in
the United States and Australia. Dana Lloyd’s
Land Is Kin
that this will remain the case so long as disputes frame land as either property
or sacred. Lloyd urges us to centre the protection
of sacred sites on an
understanding that land is kin. By focusing attention on the land itself, Lloyd
calls for a rearticulation
of sovereignty away from notions of jurisdiction and
control. On her account, sovereignty is not ‘the right to decide the fate
of a territory’ but ‘a partnership with the land
Treaty-making
processes in Australia offer one model to develop a similar understanding on
this continent. A treaty could empower
and respect the political and legal
authority of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander nations. Even more
significantly, by providing
a language for citizens within and across political
communities to talk with, engage and understand each other, these processes
ground a deeper appreciation of land among all Australians. Only by
recognising that land is kin can we hope to protect sacred sites.
Please cite this review essay as:
Harry Hobbs, ‘Protecting Sacred Sites’
[2024] SydLawRw 25
(2024) 46(4)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20331
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution.
* Associate Professor, Faculty of Law and Justice, UNSW Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. Email: h.hobbs@unsw.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9903-6908. This essay was written as part of an
Australian Research Council grant entitled ‘A
Made in Australia Model for
Indigenous–State Treaty-Making’ (DE240100454). I thank Steve Young
and the anonymous reviewer
for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act 1984
Keira Proust, ‘Bulgandry
Aboriginal Art Site Vandalised for a Second Time in Brisbane Water National Park
at Kariong’,
(online, 12 January 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/‌2024-01-12/bulgandry-aboriginal-art-site-vandalised-again-nsw-central-coast/103301182>.
Calla Wahlquist, ‘Rio
Tinto Blasts 46,000-year-old Aboriginal Site to Expand Iron Ore Mine’,
Guardian Australia
(online, 26 May 2020)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020/‌may/26/rio-tinto-blasts-46000-year-old-aboriginal-site-to-expand-iron-ore-mine>.
Lorena Allam, ‘Parks
Australia Charged with Damaging Sacred Site in Kakadu National Park’,
Guardian Australia
(online, 15 September 2020)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/‌2020/sep/15/parks-australia-charged-with-allegedly-damaging-sacred-site-in-kakadu-national-park-northern-territory>.
Dana Lloyd,
Land Is Kin:
Sovereignty, Religious Freedom and Indigenous Sacred Sites
(University Press
of Kansas, 2024).
On the constitutional nature of
Indigenous–state treaties in Australia, see Harry Hobbs,
‘Anticipating and Weathering
Storms to Modern Treaties in Australia’
(2024) 35(4)
Public Law Review
(forthcoming).
Lyng v Northwest
Indian Cemetery Protective Association
[1988] USSC 62
(O’Connor J) (1988) (‘
Northwest Indian Cemetery
Protective Association v Peterson
565 F Supp 586
, 594 (Weigel J)
Ibid 594–5.
United States
Constitution
Northwest Indian Cemetery
Protective Association v Peterson
[1986] USCA9 1399
795 F 2d 688
Northwest 1986 Decision
Walter R Echo-Hawk,
the Courts of the Conqueror: The 10 Worst Indian Law Cases Ever Decided
(Fulcrum, 2012) 345.
) 451 (O’Connor J), citing
Northwest 1986 Decision
Pub L No 101-612, 104 Stat
16 USC § 1131.
Lloyd draws substantially on
this literature. The general tenor of the reception of the decision is
identifiable in the titles of
case notes on the judgment. See, for a
representative sample, Donald Falk, ‘
Lyng v Northwest Indian Cemetery
Protective Association
: Bulldozing First Amendment Protection of Indian
Sacred Lands’ (1989) 16(2)
Ecology Law Journal
515; Camala Collins,
‘No More Religious Protection: The Impact of
Lyng v Northwest Indian
Cemetery Protection Ass’n
’ (1990) 38(1)
Journal of Urban and
Contemporary Law
369; W Pemble DeLashmet, ‘The Indian Wars
(1990) 10(1)
Mississippi College Law Review
Robert J Miller,
‘Correcting Supreme Court “Errors”: American Indian Response
Lyng v Northwest Indian Cemetery Protection Association
Environmental Law
Stephanie Hall Barclay and
Michalyn Steele, ‘Rethinking Protections for Indigenous Sacred
(2021) 134(4)
Harvard Law Review
Nation v United States Forest Service
535 F 3d 1058
Cir, 2008) (Fletcher J) (‘
Ibid 1063 (Bea J for the
For a very recent case, see
Apache Stronghold v United States
Cir, No 21-15295, 1
March 2024).
See, eg, Kristen A
Carpenter, ‘A Property Rights Approach to Sacred Sites Cases: Asserting a
Place for Indians as Nonowners’
UCLA Law Review
Patrick E Reidy, ‘Sacred Easements’
(2024) 110(4)
Virginia Law
Navajo Nation
) 1063 (Bea J for the Court).
Ibid 1 (emphasis in
For a similar argument
examining the basis of Indigenous rights claims, see Benedict Kingsbury,
‘Reconciling Five Competing
Conceptual Structures of Indigenous
Peoples’ Claims in International and Comparative Law’
(2001) 34(1)
New York University Journal of International Law and Politics
Eighteen treaties between
California Native American nations and the United States government were
negotiated between 1851 and 1852.
However, in the face of settler opposition,
Congress failed to ratify the treaties: see ‘1851–1852: Eighteen
Treaties between California Indians and the United States’
US Government Treaties and Reports
See, eg, Nick Estes and
Jaskiran Dhillon (eds),
Standing with Standing Rock: Voices from the #NODAPL
(University of Minnesota Press, 2019).
See generally Michael D
Defend the Sacred: Native American Religious Freedom beyond the
First Amendment
(Princeton University Press, 2020).
Lloyd Burton,
Worship and
Wilderness: Culture, Religion, and Law in Public Lands Management
(University of Wisconsin Press, 2002) 292.
Freedom and the Australian
Constitution
: Origins and Future
(Routledge,
Kruger v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 27
(1997) 190 CLR 1.
Hindmarsh Island Bridge
Transcript of Proceedings,
Kartinyeri v Commonwealth
(High Court of Australia, A29/1997,
Brennan CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan JJ, 5 February
1998). See also Megan
Davis, ‘Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Rights’
[2006] JlIndigP 7
Journal of Indigenous Policy
Aboriginal Heritage Act
Sarah Collard and Josh
Butler, ‘WA Premier Roger Cook Axes Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Laws
after Outcry by Landholders’,
Guardian Australia
(online, 8 August
<https://www.theguardian.‌com/australia-news/2023/aug/08/wa-repeals-axes-aboriginal-cultural-heritage-laws-premier-roger-cook>.
Chief Executive Officer,
Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority v Director of National Parks
Chief Executive Officer,
Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority v Director of National Parks
259 LGERA 26.
See, eg, National Aboriginal
Conference, ‘The Makarrata: Some Ways Forward’
Paper, World Council of Indigenous Peoples, May 1981); Treaty 88 Campaign,
‘Aboriginal Sovereignty: Never Ceded’
(1988) 23(91)
Historical Studies
1, 1–2; Michael Mansell, ‘Treaty Proposal:
Aboriginal Sovereignty’
[1989] AboriginalLawB 14
(1989) 1(37)
Aboriginal Law Bulletin
Hannah McGlade (ed),
Treaty: Let’s Get It Right!
(Australian
Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, 2003); Council for
Aboriginal Reconciliation,
Reconciliation: Australia’s Challenge
(Final Report, December 2000) 106;
Uluru Statement from the Heart
(Statement, First Nations National Constitutional Convention, 26 May 2017).
See Harry Hobbs,
‘Taking Stock of Indigenous-State Treaty-Making: Opportunities and
Challenges’
[2024] UNSWLawJl 20
(2024) 47(2)
UNSW Law Journal
Though note that the
failed Voice referendum has complicated these processes.
Harry Hobbs and George
Williams, ‘The Noongar Settlement: Australia’s First Treaty’
[2018] SydLawRw 1
(2018) 40(1)
Sydney Law Review
Blaze Kwaymullina and
Ambelin Kwaymullina, ‘Indigenous Holistic Logic: Aspects, Consequences and
Applications’
(2014) 17(2)
Journal of Australian Indigenous Issues
Ambelin Kwaymullina and
Blaze Kwaymullina, ‘Learning to Read the Signs: Law in an Indigenous
Reality’ (2010) 34(2)
Journal of Australian Studies
(emphasis in original).
The Land Is the
Source of the Law:
A Dialogic Encounter with Indigenous Jurisprudence
(Routledge, 2011) 5.
Ambelin Kwaymullina,
‘Seeing the Light: Aboriginal Law, Learning and Sustainable Living in
[2005] IndigLawB 27
(2005) 6(11)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Deborah Bird Rose,
‘Consciousness and Responsibility in an Australian Aboriginal
Religion’ in WH Edwards (ed),
Traditional Aboriginal Society: A Reader
(Macmillan, 2
ed, 1998) 239, 243.
Miguel Alfonso Martinez,
Special Rapporteur,
Studies on Treaties, Agreements and Other Constructive
Arrangements between States and Indigenous Populations
E/CN.4/Sub.2/‌1999/20 (22 June 1999) [192]; Harry Hobbs and Stephen Young,
‘Modern Treaty Making and the Limits
of the Law’
(2021) 71(2)
University of Toronto Law Journal
Irene Watson,
‘Aboriginal Recognition: Treaties and Colonial Constitutions, “We
Have Been Here Forever ...”’
(2018) 30(1)
Bond Law Review
See also Maurice Agale, ‘Necrology: List of Recently Dead People’
[2002] IndigLawB 70
(2002) 5(21)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
; Bhiamie Williamson,
‘Treaty: All Ship, No Cargo’,
(online, 3 June 2021)
<https://arena.org.au/treaty-all-ship-no-cargo>.
Todd Allin Morman,
Nations under Many Gods: Public Land Management and American Indian Sacred Sites
(University of Oklahoma Press, 2024) 200.
National Park Service (US),
‘Voluntary Climbing Closure in June’ (News Release, 31 May 2023)
<https://www.nps.gov/deto/learn/news/voluntary-climbing-closure-in-june.htm>.
Parks Australia,
‘Uluṟu Climb Closure’,
Uluru–Kata Tjuta National
(Web Page, 2019)
<https://parksaustralia.gov.au/uluru/discover/culture/uluru-climb/>.
Joint Standing Committee on
Northern Australia, Parliament of Australia,
Never Again: Inquiry into the
Destruction of 46,000 year old Caves at the Juukan Gorge in the Pilbara Region
of Western Australia
(Interim Report, December 2020).
Marcia Yablon,
‘Property Rights and Sacred Sites: Federal Regulatory Responses to
American Indian Religious Claims on Public
[2004] YaleLawJl 27
(2004) 113(7)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (117 KB)
PDF format (300 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter