URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Evans, Carolyn; Gaze, Beth --- "Religious Freedom and Non-discrimination Laws" [2007] HRightsDef 13; (2007) 16(2) Human Rights Defender 5
Religious Freedomand Non-discrimination Laws
Religious Freedom in International and Domestic Law
Non-Discrimination in International and Domestic Law
Religious Freedom and Non-discrimination: Scope and Limits
Freedomand Non-discrimination
Carolyn Evans and Beth Gaze
Both religious freedom and non-discrimination principles are
protected in Australian law to some degree. To a large extent these principles
are complementary. For example, the prohibition on religious discrimination
assists religious minorities to maintain their religious
distinctiveness without
being penalised in areas such as employment or accommodation.
In its absolute form however, religious freedom has the capacity to conflict
with non-discrimination principles and vice versa. Many
religions, for example,
require that men and women be treated unequally or given differentiated roles
that are not compatible with
gender equality.
Religious groups or
individuals may also claim that their religions require them to treat people
unequally on bases such as sexual
orientation, caste, race or religious
Some religious individuals or organisations therefore seek
to be excluded from the reach of anti-discrimination laws in a variety
The conflict has recently come into sharper focus as religious organisations
carry out a wider range of functions in society. However,
there has been little
principled consideration of the extent to which secular laws should make space
for religious difference and
whether religious freedom claims or
non-discrimination claims should prevail in cases of conflict. In this article
we give a brief
overview of the laws protecting religious freedom and
non-discrimination before considering some examples which bring out the tensions
between the two.
Religious Freedom in International and Domestic Law
Religious freedom is protected in a number of international treaties. For
Australia’s purposes, the most relevant is the
International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights
’). Of particular
importance is Article 18 which protects freedom of ‘religion or
belief’ (including atheism, agnosticism,
and a range of non-theistic
beliefs) and allows for the manifestation of that religion or belief in
‘practice, teaching, worship
or observance’. The right is given to
individuals but includes the right to practice that religion ‘either
individually
or in community with others’. It is thus clear from both the
treaty and case-law under it that there is some protection of
communities and organizations, in addition to individuals. There is no specific
treaty dealing with religious freedom,
but there is a United Nations General
Assembly Resolution.
The Australian
Constitution
provides some protection for religious
section 116
which prohibits the Commonwealth Parliament (but not the
States) from passing any laws ‘prohibiting the free exercise of any
religion’. There is also statutory protection of religious freedom in the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Victorian Charter
Human Rights Act 2004
Human Rights Act
’); in addition to laws
prohibiting discrimination on the basis of religion (such as the
Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) section 6(j)), and laws against inciting
religious hatred (for example, the
Racial and Religious Tolerance Act 2001
Non-Discrimination in International and Domestic
Non-discrimination is a fundamental principle guaranteed by every
international human rights convention, for example,
article 2(1),
as well as by more specific anti-discrimination treaties.
requires that the rights protected should be enjoyed by all individuals
‘without distinction of any kind, such as race,
colour, sex, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth
or other status’. This
has been the human right which has received the
most widespread legal implementation within Australia through
anti-discrimination
laws and through the
Victorian Charter
Human Rights Act
Discrimination is prohibited by federal and state legislation on a wide range
of grounds including race, sex, disability and age.
Prohibition of religious
discrimination is narrower: all states and territories other than New South
Wales and South Australia prohibit
religious discrimination, but federally the
only coverage is through the prohibition in the
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth) on termination of employment on the ground of religion. The main
areas in which discrimination is prohibited include employment,
provision of goods and services, land and accommodation, and other ‘public
sphere’ activities such as clubs,
sports and local government.
Religious Freedom and Non-discrimination: Scope
Both domestic courts and international law recognise that there are
legitimate limits that may be placed on religious freedom, in
some cases because
of conflict with other fundamental rights. Article 18(3) of the
provides that ‘[f]reedom to manifest one’s religion or beliefs may
be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed
by law and are necessary
to protect public safety, order, health or morals or the fundamental rights and
freedoms of others’.
The High Court has also recognised that freedom of
religion under
section 116
Constitution
may be limited when
Most Australian jurisdictions have specific provisions in their
anti-discrimination laws exempting religious organisations from some
anti-discrimination law, usually in relation to gender and sexual preference,
but also more broadly in some cases. The
exact wording and operation of these
exemptions varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and has not been explicitly
justified or
reviewed for many years. For example,
sections 75
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) exempt actions taken in
relation to selection, training or ordination of religious officials, and
actions taken by religious
organisations and schools that are necessary to avoid
injuring religious susceptibility or are in accordance with the their religious
beliefs or principles. This is among the broadest of similar exemptions in
other states and territories and in the
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth). By contrast, the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) contains no
exemption for racial discrimination by religious bodies.
While both the religious freedom and non-discrimination legal regimes make
room for the recognition of the importance of the other
set of principles, the
way in which conflicts between them should be resolved is a matter of intense
controversy. If some individuals
are deprived of equality in the interests of
others’ freedom of religion, or if religious freedom has to be constricted
promote equality, there is a need to ensure that the restrictions on rights
are adequately justified, the rationale is clear and
that the restrictions are
no broader than justifiable. Yet too often law-making and determinations in
particular cases are ad hoc,
reactive, and may be insensitive to the needs of
vulnerable groups.
Examples of the types of cases that raise this tension are religious
requirements for entry to private schools, dismissal of teachers
in religious
schools for reasons such as unmarried motherhood, and, increasingly, religious
requirements for employment by church-related
organisations delivering community
services. The scope of the legal principles applied in such cases varies from
are to be reconciled have not been clearly stated nor justified.
In relation to religious requirements for entry to private schools run by
religious organisations, an Orthodox Jewish school in Western
Australia was
allowed to treat a non-orthodox student less favourably because the
Opportunity Act 1984
(WA) exempted religious educational institutions acting
in good faith ‘in favour of the adherents of that religion or creed
generally’.
However, a Catholic school in Tasmania will have
to apply for an exemption from the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1998
allow it to limit non-Catholic enrolments to 25 percent of its student body.
Principles and limits pertaining to employment by religious organisations and
associated organisations providing community services
of various types are also
unclear and undefined. In Victoria, a community services agency operated by the
Baptist Church with both
public and private funding was refused a temporary
exemption under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) that would have
allowed it to discriminate on the basis of religion in employing staff. In
Thompson v Catholic College, Wodonga
a teacher dismissed from
a Catholic College for unmarried motherhood was awarded compensation for unfair
dismissal, though not reinstatement.
The legislative context for such a case has
now completely changed.
Religious freedom has a strong claim to trump nondiscrimination with respect
to central aspects of religious worship and practice,
such as the selection of
clergy or the language of religious ritual. But religious institutions are
involved in a wide range of activities
in Australia, including the operation of
schools, welfare organisations, and employment agencies. They are significant
and their policies have the potential to impact on a wide range of
others, such as the school children in their care and those using
them to seek
employment. Many are now also given significant funding or subsidies by
governments in order to carry out these tasks.
The questions that we seek to
answer in our research are to what extent does the State have a legitimate claim
to impose non-discrimination
norms on religious groups against their religious
beliefs and to what extent do religious groups have an entitlement to be
from the non-discrimination laws that apply to everyone else? We
welcome thoughts that others might have on these matters.
Carolyn Evans is Associate Professor in the Faculty of Law at the
University of Melbourne and a Deputy Director of the Centre for
Comparative
Constitutional Studies. Previously a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University,
Carolyn is an internationally recognised expert
on religious freedom and the
relationship between law and religion. She is the author of Religious Freedom
under the European Court
of Human Rights (OUP 2001) and co-editor of Religion
and International Law (1999, Kluwer) and Mixed Blessings: Laws, Religions and
Women’s Rights in the Asia-Pacific Region (2006 Martinus Nijhoff).
Beth Gaze is Associate Professor in the Faculty of Law at the University
of Melbourne. She has degrees from Melbourne and Monash Universities
University of California (Berkeley). She has published widely on Australian
anti-discrimination law and Australian human
rights topics.
Bob Hepple and Tufyal Choudhury,
‘Tackling Religious
Discrimination
Practical Implications For Policy-Makers And Legislators’
Office Research,
Development and Statistics Directorate (UK) (2001).
Courtney Howland (ed)
Religious Fundamentalisms and the Human Rights
Reid Mortensen, ‘
Rendering to God and Caesar: Religion in
Discrimination Law’
(1994-1995) 18 University of Queensland Law
Journal 208.
See especially the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Elimination of
Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Adelaide Company of Jehovah’s Witnesses v Commonwealth
Goldberg v G Korsunski Carmel School,
(2000) EOC 93-074
Opportunity
Tribunal, Western Australia.
(1988) EOC 92-217
Education Service (Catholic Schools) Conciliation and
Arbitration Board (Vic).
See, eg, Mornington Baptist Church Community Caring Inc (Exemption Anti
Discrimination)
[2005] VCAT 2438.
More details of the project including working papers will be available
from the webpage of the Centre for Comparative Constitutional Studies
cccs.law.unimelb.edu.au/> at 31 July 2007.
Religious Freedom
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (33 KB)
PDF format (52.8 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter