URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gallagher, William --- "Sic Itur Ad Astra: The CHM Principle, Celestial Bodies, the Moon Agreement and the Artemis Accords" [2021] CanLawRw 17; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 106
III – THE PRINCIPLE IN ACTION RELATING TO THE DEEP SEA AND THE MOON
Sic Itur Ad Astra: The CHM Principle, Celestial Bodies,
the Moon Agreement and the Artemis Accords
William Gallagher*
This article considers the Common Heritage of Mankind Principle (CHM) in an
exploration of the
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies
and the 2020
Artemis Accord.
Australian perspective, the Moon Agreement is inadequate international law
because of its incapacity in regulating great powers
due to the low rate of
signature on the treaty. As such, signatories are put at an unreasonable
disadvantage. Regulation should develop
for the purpose of international
cooperation and ratification. The article discusses Australia’s interests
and the shape of
regulation that reflects the CHM.
I Introduction
The exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon and other
celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in
the interests of
all countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific
development, and shall be the province of
all mankind.
The above statement is articulated in Article 1 of the
Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of
Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
(herein referred
to as the ‘OST’).
Article 1 of the OST has defined
the way in which space affairs have been conducted since 1967. The
treaty’s primary purpose
is to foster international cooperation in the
peaceful use of outer space. Whilst the OST is not the primary focus of this
Article 1 of the OST highlights an underlying principle known as the
common heritage of mankind principle (herein the ‘CHM
principle’)
which will present a large focus of this article.
The Agreement Governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (herein referred to
as the ‘Moon
predominant piece of international law that elaborates on the common heritage of
mankind principle pertaining to space, as
such this piece will be a primary
feature of this article with a particular focus on Article 11 of the Moon
Agreement which relates
to the exploitation of celestial bodies.
At the time of space laws’ inception, the predominant concern of the
United Nations (UN) and its signatories was the exploitation
of space by state
actors as a consequence of the instability presented by the Cold War. From the
perspective of maintaining international
order, it is logical that regulation
surrounding space mining should develop similarly to deep sea mining due to
their likeness.
Their likeness exists through their common trait of being beyond
national sovereign claims and these area’s use for scientific
and peaceful
purposes. As such, at the time of space law’s inception, it made sense to
create law that would be analogous to
existing law. However, from an Australian
domestic perspective, the Moon Agreement is insufficient as a piece of
international law
because of its incapacity in regulating great powers due to
the low rate of signature on the treaty. As such, signatories are put
unreasonable disadvantage. Regulation should develop for the purpose of
international cooperation and ratification whilst also
Australia’s interests in this space.
Australia is the only state to have signed both the Artemis
and the Moon
Australia must spearhead
the development of international law regulating asteroid mining for this reason.
Australia should seek the
support of member states to the Moon Agreement to
amend the agreement, however, this is highly unlikely and as such it will
require Australia to choose to withdraw from the Moon Agreement.
Whilst extreme, withdrawing support from the Moon Agreement will
allow Australia
to align its’ values with the US and benefit from the eventual
exploitation of celestial bodies. Aligning Australia’s
interests with the
United States will continue to strengthen the two states’ longstanding
positive relationship, as well as
Australia’s relationship with other
signatories such as the United Kingdom, Japan, and the Republic of Korea. Simply
primary considerations of this article are:
a) The common heritage of mankind principle; and
b) The development of regulation concerning deep sea mining; and
c) How the law should develop from an international perspective pertaining to
the common heritage of mankind principle and celestial
body exploitation;
d) How the law pertaining to celestial body exploitation should develop from
an Australian domestic perspective.
This article looks at how the common heritage of mankind principle developed
over the 20
centuries. It will further analyse
events or circumstances that it applies to, the elements of the principle, and
the principle’s
legal status. Through this analysis, it becomes clear that
the meaning of the common heritage of mankind principle is ambiguous despite
use in international law over the past several decades.
As a result, this presents significant challenges when determining how
asteroid mining should be regulated. In combination with this,
Agreement is effectively useless presenting further challenges regarding
enforceability. The Agreement is ineffective because
no powerful state has
agreed to be bound by it such as the United States of America, the Russian
Federation and China.
This article contributes to the evolving area of international space law as
well as Australian domestic legislation. Literature in
this space exists but is
limited in its application to Australia. Due to Australia’s new membership
to the Artemis Accord,
there is next to no literature discussing the complexity
of the relationship between the two. As such, the path for Australia is
be determined. This article contributes to discussion by analysing the strengths
and weaknesses pertaining to international
law with respect to the principle of
the common heritage of mankind and how it currently impacts and will impact the
regulatory schemes
behind global mining industries. In conjunction with this,
Australia’s advanced mining capability is a strength it may choose
exploit to further strengthen its economic prowess through cooperation with the
United States of America.
The exploitation of celestial bodies is the primary focus of this article.
However, in order to aptly analyse the law surrounding
this industry, it is
necessary to analyse deep-sea mining in order to get a complete understanding of
how the law may develop. The
Deep-sea and its exploitation is intrinsically
linked with the exploitation of Outer Space, states such as the United States
refused to ratify the UN Convention on the law of the sea because of this
Moving on, the UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea, the related Implementation Agreement, the Moon Agreement,
and the Artemis Accords
will be the primary pieces of law to be analysed through
this article. The Moon Agreement, different to the Outer Space Treaty, is
5 treaties enacted to regulate the exploration, exploitation, and colonisation
of Space under international law. It is widely
accepted as the least effective
treaty that governs space due to its failure to encourage global powers to be
bound by it. Australia
is one of the few middle powers to have signed the
Agreement, as a result of this, Australia should continue to fulfil its
obligations
under the agreement until such time it chooses to withdraw, or
amendments are made to the Agreement so long as the amendments encourage
superpower states to be bound by them.
The Artemis Accords is an agreement that was signed in November of 2020 by
Australia in conjunction with the United States and several
other states. Many
of the principles found within the Accord are contrary to the Moon Agreement and
as such Australia has found itself
in a precarious position that must be
navigated through. This precarious position is because of conflicting provisions
relating to
celestial body exploitation, which, if not resolved would result in
Australia breaching international law.
This article will also briefly look at Australia’s domestic legislation
to provide an understanding of the country’s current
interests and
approach to space. The main focus of this article is that of celestial body
exploitation. The article will draw analysis
of the law of the sea, specifically
the provisions and regulation presently developing around deep-sea mining in
order to discuss
the difficulties presented by the common heritage of mankind
This article largely uses comparative research methodology by comparing
primary sources such as the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the
(UNCLOS) and the
Moon Agreement
to understand how the law
pertaining to asteroid mining may develop into the future and provide
suggestions for reform and development
by comparing the law that is currently
developing surrounding Deep-Sea mining. It further uses secondary sources to
discuss the relationship
between the Moon Agreement and the Artemis Accords from
an Australian perspective.
This article is comprised of four themed sections. Section 2 begins by laying
out the origins and meanings of the common heritage
of mankind principle over
the past 70 years through reference to Deep Sea mining and the Antarctic treaty,
thus connecting it to
the discussion found in Section 3.
Section 3, in combination with its analysis of the International Seabed
Authority and Deep-Sea mining will look at international law
surrounding
asteroid mining through reference to the Moon agreement and provide comment on
how the law should develop in the interest
of all mankind. This article notes
that to represent the entirety of humankind’s interests is subjective as
perspectives differ
from a variety of factors such as culture, economic
capacity, age demographics and a number of other factors, especially
geopolitical
tensions. The goal of the implementation of any system must focus
itself on fairness. This article looks to make a judgement as to
what is in the
interest of mankind by evaluating the principles primary components that are
referenced in Section 2, specifically
regarding the peaceful purposes clauses,
environmental clauses, and economic benefit.
The fourth section is concerned with the interaction between the Moon
Agreement and the Artemis Accords. It will discuss how Australia’s
position, if it were to act upon either agreement would result in a
contravention of the other agreement. It will discuss
Australia’s
interests and provide suggestions as to how the Moon Agreement should develop
from an Australian perspective. In
the alternative, it will provide reasoning as
to why Australia may wish to withdraw from the Moon Agreement until such time
reasonable amendments are made to encourage global participation in the
Agreement. The article will then conclude, presenting its
findings and
suggestions from both an International, and domestic Australian perspective.
The Common Heritage of Mankind
This section discusses the origins of the common heritage of mankind
principle and provides three examples of its use in modern international
then presents arguments in favour of and against the principle. It will wrap up
by explaining why the principle in its current
form is too ambiguous for it to
be effective in regulating signatories whilst simultaneously serving as a
barrier to encourage global
powers to become signatories.
The CHM Principle is of particular importance to
this article, and moreover, the future of Space Mining when looked at from the
perspective
of the UN and developing nations. It must be understood that in the
principle’s current form in law it is not possible to gather
understanding from any single definition this thesis could present. Rather, an
analysis of each piece of law that contains
the principle would have to take
place. Clearly, this presents difficulty to states and non-state actors alike
due to its inconsistency
in international law. In spite of this, this article
gives credit to, and notes that the original purpose of the principle was
by the father of the law of the sea as:
In ocean space, ... the time has come to recognise as a basic principle of
international law the overriding common interest of mankind
in the preservation
of the quality of the marine environment and in the rational and equitable
development of resources lying beyond
Pardo later elaborated upon his wishes for the concept of the principle as:
[F]irst, the common heritage cannot be appropriated — it could be used
but not owned; second, the use of the common heritage
required a system of
management in which all users must share; third, it implied an active sharing of
benefits, including not only
financial benefits but also benefits derived from
shared management and exchange and transfer of technologies; fourth, the
of common heritage implied eventual reservation for peaceful purposes;
and, finally, it implied transmission of the heritage substantially
to future generations.
The basic pillars of the principle are found within the above quote and
encapsulate the purpose and basic meaning of the principle
from Pardo’s
perspective. This article seeks to provide clarity surrounding the principle by
referring to the principle as
the rational and equitable development of
resources lying beyond national jurisdiction. To provide further clarity, as
in part 2.3, the UN should seek to further clarify what it means when
stating that
resources should be
developed or shared equitably. Consequently, space, planets, asteroids, and
other celestial bodies all fall within
this category. As such, these bodies,
through this article’ understanding ought to be subject to equitable and
rational development
and exploitation. Of further note, whilst the principle was
coined for the purpose of the law of the sea, its first implementation
was in fact the Moon Agreement, which was adopted by the general assembly in
though it did not enter into
force until 1984 whilst the UNCLOS III entered into force in 1982. This is
significant to this article
because it demonstrates the inefficacy of the Moon
Agreement in encouraging participation whereas UNCLOS III may be seen as a
international treaty.
As explained above there is little to no consensus on what the principle
means and what obligations it sets out. Both from an analysis
of the law, and
from the perspective of developing and developed nations which is to be
explained below. The only consensus that
presently exists is that the principle
is a concept for the management of areas that are not within national
it appears that the principle in its present form
sets out a moral undertaking rather than any meaningful legal obligation. If the
principle provided a legal obligation on its own, then any subsequent
provisions, such as those that exist to provide for peaceful
purposes would
become unnecessary. In actuality, it appears that the only obligation, either
legal or moral that exists, is that
mankind, or humankind recognises that the
maintenance of a resource, or a bundle of resources is in the interest of
It may perhaps be wiser to recognise the principle as a bundle of provisions,
rather than any single article.
This article does not seek to understate the importance of moral obligations
such as the principle. However, it does recognise that
in its current form it is
only possible to gather a semblance of understanding of the principle on a
case-by-case basis by analysing
the content of each treaty rather than a single
cohesive definition by which a state, or non-state actor may refer to.
Differing perspectives on the CHM
This article understands that a certain level of ambiguity may at times
encourage inclusion in treaties, however, where it becomes
too ambiguous, its
efficacy becomes no more than that of a political concept, resulting in an idea
rather than any concrete legal
obligation. Due to the nature of the principle as
it stands in the UNCLOS III, the principle seemingly questioned long standing
international
legal principles by shifting away from the centrality of state
sovereignty and national interests to one of global benefits. This
controversial among states that had previously interpreted the ‘freedom of
the high seas’
to use the oceans and seas as they please, resulting in the degradation and
pollution of the oceans and seas with little
to no regard for the environment
nor the economic interests of developing
The creation of the
principle brings this article to its analysis of how it has been included in law
pertaining to Deep-Sea mining,
the Antarctic treaty, and inevitably, the Moon
Agreement to demonstrate its broad use and ambiguity in its application. Of
relevance, Part 2.3. No Man’s Seabed discusses the
interpretation of the term equitably versus equally to demonstrate one of
challenges that is posed by the principle.
No Man’s Seabed
The purpose of the UNCLOS III is stated in its preamble, which among other
things, the primary purpose of the convention prioritising
the creation of a
legal order which will facilitate international communications and the peaceful
use of the sea and that the CHM
principle is developed relating to the seabed
for the purpose of ensuring that any exploration and exploitation of the seabed
carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole.
Whilst a number of other important areas of law are mentioned in the preamble
that are foundational to the convention, the inclusion
of the CHM principle
demonstrates that it was also to be considered as foundational upon
international law. The succeeding paragraphs,
in addition to further discussion
in section 2 will analyse whether UNCLOS III has been effective at implementing
the CHM Principle.
The principle was not a passing thought, it was a central
principle in the convention. Specifically, the convention states that:
‘The United Nations... declared that the area of the seabed and ocean
floor.... (are) beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
as well as its
resources, ... are the common heritage of mankind, the exploration and
exploitation of which shall be carried out
for the benefit of mankind as a
The inclusion of
the principle into the UNCLOS
illustrated through the preamble, is vastly important, and similarly to the Moon
Agreement resulted in much controversy. This
indirectly resulted in the US,
among other states, refusing to become a signatory and instead creating their
own pieces of domestic
law and multilateral agreements by which to regulate
themselves.
Whilst the US
originally declined to become a signatory to the convention, it eventually
signed a complimentary agreement which amended
the convention in 1994. As of
2021 the US has not ratified the Convention nor the agreement. It should also be
noted, that in spite
of the US’ refusal to ratify the convention, it has
yet to provide any licenses to non-state actors that would allow them to
resources outside of their territorial waters. The US was able to be convinced
to sign the 1994 Agreement due to changes
in the way that the International
Seabed Authority (ISA) was to operate, the change in the decision-making system
allows the individual
interests of states to override the interests of mankind.
The US, in its decision to
refuse signing the convention stated that, it was opposed to the original system
as it “unfairly
and unnecessarily granted a disproportionate voice to
developing countries that have little or no investment in seabed mining
operation.”
was echoed by other developed nations.
Excluding the states which have
chosen not to sign or ratify either the Convention or the Agreement, the CHM
principle primarily
concerns itself with the management and access to resources
rather than necessarily the ownership of territory. This is the case
because the
principle deals with international management of resources within a territory
rather than the territory itself.
Under the principle, claims of titles are worthless and
unrecognised,
thus the issue
becomes access. The primary benefit of the principle comes to developing and
landlocked nations, their understanding
as the principle means that any
designated area falls under the jurisdiction of no single sovereign, but instead
to all nations.
This understanding unsurprisingly is of contention to developed
states, which interpret the principle as meaning that ‘any
exploit the natural resources so long as no single nation claims exclusive
Effectively, access is given to all states, whether they choose to, and whether
they have the capacity to exploit that access is
up to them, thus not burdening
developed nations.
A significant issue within the provisions providing for the principle can be
found in Article 140(2) of the convention, particularly,
it governs the rules
for the authority stating that it “shall provide for equitable sharing of
financial and other economic
benefits...”
The issue of
contention is the term equitable, if interpreted literally, equitable sharing
may imply sharing based on contribution
to the exploitation of materials.
Conversely, if equal were to be used, it would imply dividing the benefits
evenly, this, among
other things was part of the reason the United States
refused to become a signatory to begin with. The usage of equitable sharing
also seen in the Moon Agreement. Further, relating to the Moon agreement, it
would be prudent, from an international perspective
to provide further clarity
on the present usage of the term and make necessary amendments to encourage
signature and ratification.
The principle in action will be further discussed in
section 2 where it will analyse the application of the principle relating to
International Seabed Authority and its impact on deep sea mining.
As mentioned above, a subsequent Agreement related to UNCLOS III was adopted
in June 1994 that complemented the convention. This Agreement,
formally known as
Agreement Relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea
(the “Implementation
Agreement”)
number of controversial provisions found in the convention. Among other things,
the Implementation Agreement reduced operating
costs of the International Seabed
Authority, protected intellectual property rights by eliminating obligatory
technology transfers
and changed the way voting was to occur in the ISA. It
further developed the meaning of benefit sharing by developing an economic
assistance fund, which is to be solely financed through payments from
contractors and voluntary contributions. Instead of the division
of resources
that have been exploited, the ISA has come up with an alternate scheme best
understood as a parallel system, effectively,
a parallel system is the division
of an area, not necessarily having common borders, being split into two areas of
equal commercial
value. The parallel system is explained in further detail in
this section. This system will be used as a suggestion as to how the
Nations may be able to encourage the participation by larger states into a
complimentary agreement to the Moon Agreement.
This would have a similar premise
as the Implementing Agreement.
Sovereign Claims on the High Seas
As has been discussed in prior paragraphs, an important part of the principle
is that it restricts and refuses to recognise any sovereign
claim over any area
within. Effectively, part of the principle provides ownership to the entire
world over these areas, but the ownership
only exists in its entirety and cannot
be divided. Articles pertaining to sovereign claims over the high seas are
featured throughout
UNCLOS III. Firstly, it is mentioned in the preamble,
following that it is mentioned in Part VII pertaining to the high seas
and is further mentioned in Article 137 which is the core of the
convention’s position on the principle.
Whilst the Antarctic Treaty does not explicitly contain the CHM Principle,
many of its’ provisions feature similar characteristics
to the effect of
many of the provisions found in the UNCLOS III or Moon Agreement. Articles I-III
all echo many of the provisions
that assist to make up the principle as can be
seen below:
(1) Article I mandates that: Antarctica shall be used for peaceful purposes
only. This concept can be found in UNCLOS III Articles
88 and 141 for example,
Art 141 of UNCLOS specifically governs for the area to be used exclusively for
peaceful purposes and is prescribed
for under the CHM principles.
(2) Article II mandates that: freedom of scientific investigation and
cooperation... shall continue.
(3) Article III mandates that: scientific observations and results from
Antarctica shall be... made freely available.
Whilst this article specifically analyses the principle with respect to
celestial body mining, the Antarctic Treaty demonstrates that
provisions subsequent to the principle within a treaty that empower the
principle, and that its’ exclusion from a
treaty does not expressly remove
the moral obligation to protect a resource, or area of land. In addition to the
Antarctic Treaty,
another agreement, known as the Protocol on Environmental
Protection (the Madrid Protocol)
bans mining in Antarctica indefinitely, rather than economic reasons, the common
heritage of mankind exists through the world’s
interest in maintaining the
environment by banning mining. Whilst this does not alone imply the existence of
the CHM principle in
Antarctica, if it is looked at from a broad perspective, it
can be observed that the principle, or a significant number of components
within the principle can be found in Antarctic international law, and as such,
it is reasonable to consider Antarctic International
law a part of the CHM
The Antarctic territory is presently subject to legitimate territorial claims
from 7 states; however, the Antarctic Treaty has barred
any claim from existing
from 1961 onwards, further, no claim can be enlarged. As such,
Antarctica’s system is quite different
to that of the Moon Agreement or
UNCLOS III. As such, the principle of common heritage stands, albeit with
exceptions due to historical
claims. Noting these exceptions, similarly to the
UNCLOS III, there exists an environmental and economic interest in Antarctica.
These interests are protected by the treaty and the Madrid Protocol in a way
that is not unsimilar to the law of the seas. As such,
many of the core features
found within the CHM principle exists within Antarctica.
CHM Provisions
In summary, the CHM principle retains the following core tenets, an area
beyond claims of national sovereignty, an objective to protect
a resource or
area in the interest of all mankind, the development of an area for scientific
advancement and the interest in maintaining
peace in any area provided for. The
previous paragraph established that the CHM principle can apply without being
explicitly stated.
As such, the CHM principle is best described as a bundle of
provisions rather than any single term, it is present in the Antarctic
and treaty and could continue to exist in the Moon Agreement were Article 11 be
amended or removed in line with the suggestions
provided for in the next
The Moon Agreement
The Moon Agreement was the first piece of international law that included the
CHM principle. Whilst it was the first, it is regarded
as the least impactful
piece of law containing the CHM principle because of its low participation rates
as a result of contentions
surrounding Article 11. Moreover, it is arguably the
least impactful piece of Space law. Due to the Agreement’s low number
signatories, including powerful states such as the USA, the Russian Federation,
and the People’s Republic of China. As such,
the states that are most
likely to achieve celestial body exploitation have not agreed to bind themselves
by this piece of international
law. It is in the interests of developing nations
that the Moon Agreement be amended to encourage developed states to participate.
Whilst the Agreement is not without issue, it is worth analysing the
components found within the Agreement in order to get a fuller
understanding of
the CHM Principle and to demonstrate its versatility in application. The
versatility of the principle demonstrates
significant benefits, in that it
allows for broader interpretation but also provides for significant issues, such
as discussed in
part 2.3. ‘No man’s seabed.’ Moving forward,
the principle is contained in Article 11 stating, that:
1. The moon and its natural resources are the common heritage of mankind,
which finds its expression in the provisions of this Agreement
and in particular
in paragraph 5 or this article.
Paragraph 5 of the same Article states that:
5. States Parties to this Agreement hereby undertake to establish an
international regime, including appropriate procedures, to govern
exploitation of the natural resources of the moon as such exploitation is about
to become feasible.
Effectively, paragraph 1 of Article 11 provides for the CHM principle.
Further, paragraph 5 of the same article enables the creation
of an authority,
similarly to the international seabed authority to in order to provide for the
components that are found within
Agreement’s primary interest relating to the principle is the rational and
equitable sharing of benefits of resources
that are of the common heritage of
mankind. Further, the article also provides that the Moon is not subject to
national appropriation
by any claim of sovereignty, this is in line with how the
principle is presented in the UNCLOS III and the Antarctic Treaties (Madrid
Protocol). However, the equitable sharing of the ‘benefits’ of
resources extracted from the Moon and other celestial
bodies is not reasonable
comparable to that of the sea because of the extreme difficulty and lack of
profitability of space resources
for the foreseeable future.
– THE PRINCIPLE IN ACTION RELATING TO THE DEEP SEA AND THE MOON
This section discusses the impact the principle has had in practise on
international regulation. It will discuss the International
Authority’s contribution to, or lack thereof in its role in the
development to the common heritage of mankind principle
in setting up meaningful
administrative processes to manage the equitable sharing of, and access to
resources. It then proceeds to
discuss how the information discussed pertaining
to the ISA may be applied in relation to celestial body exploitation.
Whilst the principle exists in a variety of pieces of international law,
little has been done in practice to meaningfully manifest
and administer the
principle, as, whilst the Authority has been created, it has not yet had the
chance to exercise its powers beyond
the granting of exploration licences.
Beyond the creation of the International Seabed Authority, the principle exists
solely as a
moral obligation. At present, it would be reasonable to pronounce
the principle as nothing more than an idea, rather than any concrete
which states regulate themselves by. The ISA has developed a framework to enact
the principle, however, significant steps
are yet to have been taken to make the
framework effective. This section will introduce and discuss the role and
functions of the
ISA with a view to provide insight into the strengths and
weaknesses of the authority and how it may or may not be applied to an
international celestial body authority.
The International Seabed Authority
A core development established by the UNCLOS III was the creation of an
intergovernmental body designed to act as an agent for dispensing
good on behalf of mankind. Despite the powerful abilities granted to the
, it has faced various
challenges that have severely impacted its capacity to develop meaningful legal
rules and administrative processes.
The ISA was established as the organ through
which all states party to UNCLOS organise and control all seabed mining related
within an area.
The ISA has three bodies (the Assembly, the Council, and the Secretariat).
These operate through two organs, the Legal and Technical
Commission and the
Finance Committee.
directly relevant to the article, there is an additional organ called the
Enterprise, it was created for the purpose of
overseeing mining, transportation,
processing, and the sale of resources. This was never set up and as such will
not be discussed
The Secretariat
currently performs the role of the Enterprise. Moving on, the ISA effectively
serves as the Legislature and Executive
simultaneously, similar to that of
governments using the Westminster system. This enables them to create rules and
simultaneously
enforce them for the purpose of the protection of the area
(including for environmental purposes) in the interest of the common heritage
This encapsulates the
processes used for executing activities within an area and the equitable sharing
of benefits among other things.
The ISA faces exceedingly complex challenges. There was and continues to be a
need to establish a viable framework which encourages
commercial investment
whilst providing for legal stability for parties to make informed decisions and
mitigating environmental degradation.
As of 2021, there have been
zero exploitation contracts issued by the ISA. However, 31 15-years exploration
contracts for polymetallic
nodule fields containing minerals such as iron and
manganese and other resources have been entered into by the ISA, commercial
and sponsor state
In August 2017, the ISA
issued its’ first set of draft regulations on exploitation of resources in
the deep-sea for public
comment. These regulations were the product of a
four-year consultation process from ISA stakeholders, discussion papers and
workshops. In March of 2018, the Council conducted its’ first
substantive evaluation of the drafts. Since then, from the perspective
ISA there has been little movement occurring beyond further community
consultation and exploration licences granted to commercial
actors. This process
was especially slow as a result of conflicting views on how the authority should
develop, as well as the application
of the equitable division provisions among
As a result of the slow development of the regulation, the nation of Nauru
has recently invoked its right to compel the ISA to allow
seabed mining to go
ahead within two years, thus ensuring that regulation must be finalised by
middle 2023.
This invocation
has brought an end to a 29-year delay between the ISA’s inception and the
implementation of relevant regulation
that will allow for the seabed to be
exploited for mineral resources. Whilst the delay in creating administrative
processes is extreme,
the ISA has faced a number of challenges from various
lobbying groups, with concerns regarding environmental damage,
deals for commercial actors, or for developed or developing
nations., the creation of law that applies to the globe is challenging.
challenges are discussed in the following sections.
Processes In Existence For The Division Of
Seabed Resources
The International Seabed Authority’s current approach to allow for the
‘equitable’ sharing of resources occurs when
an exploration license
is applied for. Every application made for the purpose of exploration by a
developed State must cover a total
area that is sufficient to allow two mining
operations concurrently. At present, the two areas need not be contained within
area, but the applicant is required to divide the total area into two
parts of equal estimated commercial value, which must be substantiated
the provision of survey data. This process, whilst costly and time-consuming
for commercial operators, allows for a ‘fairer’
process than
straight division of wealth on an equal basis. Rather, this process seems to
uphold the understanding of equitable sharing,
though it falls short in
encouraging international cooperation. The concept of fairness is discussed
Fairness in the Parallel System
In an international context, the meaning of fairness is inevitably
subjective. It is this way because fairness is subjective and very
much impacted
by ethnocentrism. Ethnocentrism is the concept of a term being based on a
cultural view rather than being universally
objective. However, as stated by
Franck, who was described as a leading American scholar of international
fairness is decided upon by
consensus, or, by legitimacy and compliance. Legitimacy implies an idea that for
a system of rules to
be fair, “it must be made firmly rooted in a
framework of formal requirements about how rules are made, interpreted and
Distributive
justice on the other hand deals with the substantive value of rules and how they
may challenge existing procedure. Where
these factors exist and are not
inconsistent with another, then, and only then may fairness be determined. Where
they exist, the
rules become valid on the basis that they are voluntarily
complied with by the international legal system. In regard to the parallel
system created by the ISA, its fairness can only be determined by looking at the
community consultation process as well as the figures
surrounding how many
signatories there are within the Convention and Implementation Agreement. By
briefly analysing these numbers,
it provides some level of understanding as to
the fairness of the system in the context of procedural fairness.
Franck elaborated upon distributive justice by referencing the pre-existing
Maximin principle, coined by John Rawls stating that “unequal
distribution
is justifiable only if it narrows, or does not widen, the existing inequality of
persons’ and/or states’
entitlements.’
In his elaboration, Franck
stated that ‘fairness as a destination remains for us always an open
question... we assume that
fairness incorporates an element of equalisation: of
life chances and access to goods.... the issue is not a society’s
of fairness in any particular instance... rather the openness by
which those definitions are reached.’
In simpler terms, distributive
justice concerns itself with change, in furtherance, it concerns itself with
whether the rule is an
appropriate allocation of burdens and benefits and
secured throughout society by the rule or rules themselves.
In this regard, to determine
fairness of the parallel system, it must be determined whether the allocation of
the burden of exploring
two areas and one being placed in reserve is
sufficiently beneficial for the exploring parties. Whilst a state may choose to
legitimacy to a rule, as the state parties that have signed the convention
and the Implementation Agreement have, the rule becomes
fair if, and only if,
the distribution of what the rule concerns is reasonably beneficial or
burdensome.
The next section will use this understanding of fairness to make an impartial
analysis of whether the parallel system is fair. Whilst
there is an intent to
make an impartial analysis, it is worth noting that there are inevitably
subjective elements to the authors
understanding of fairness in this context.
Fairness is to be determined on whether the following factors are present:
and distributive justice.
Legitimacy is to be determined by whether state parties have contributed to,
voluntarily entered into, and ratified a piece of law.
In order to determine
whether these circumstances have occurred it is necessary to look at the numbers
surrounding entrance into
the agreements.
Annex III of the Implementation Agreement establishes the basic conditions
behind the exploration and exploitation of the seabed.
Article 8 of the same
Annex establishes the processes behind the division of land in respect to
placing areas of land in reserve.
The Implementation Agreement has, as of 2021,
79 signatories and 151 parties out of the recognised 193 countries in the world.
results in figures of slightly over three quarters of the world consenting
to be bound by the agreement, and, by proxy, the convention.
Australia is both a
signatory and a party to the agreement. Firstly, it can be argued that given the
Implementation Agreements’
purpose was to elaborate upon existing
principles that firmly rooted in a framework of clearly articulated rules.
Secondly, the manner
of which international law functions, through voluntary
compliance further encourages fairness for all parties involved from the
perspective of legitimacy.
Accordingly the Implementation Agreement itself can be considered legitimate.
Community consultation relating to the work the International
Seabed Authority
has been conducting over the past decade further cements the legitimacy of the
rule of the law of the sea and the
administrative processes behind it. On
multiple occasions, the International Seabed Authority has welcomed input from
stakeholders,
and governments from states both developed and developing.
This process further strengthens
the legitimacy of the ISA’s actions in regulating the exploration and
exploitation of the seabed.
The preceding part has established that the parallel system is fair from the
perspective of legitimacy. This section discusses whether
the distribution of
land in reserve is just in the sense that this process does or does not result
in a widening of equity between
developing and developed states. This system
undoubtedly places a burden upon a license applicant, as the applicant is
required under
their contract to prospect an area, or two areas of equal
commercial value but will only be able to exploit (upon the settling of
rules by the ISA) half of the area they have explored. However, whilst a burden
is placed upon the applicant, the license provides
significant benefit to the
applicant, whilst also ensuring a mutual benefit to the state party that is
allocated the land in reserve.
Whilst an argument of unfairness may be present,
its prospects of succeeding in persuading anyone who may listen are low, in this
scenario, the reasonable conclusion is that the burden placed upon the applicant
is not unjust.
In conclusion, legitimacy and distributive justice are present in the
parallel system, and, as such it is reasonable to say that the
parallel system
is fair when looked at in its’ entirety. Further, the division of
resources is in the interest of mankind.
Now that the processes behind the implementation of the CHM principle have
been discussed relating to deep-sea mining, this article
will proceed to
examining whether the processes may be suitable to be applied to the development
of international law relating to
celestial body exploitation.
Exploitation of Celestial Bodies
As discussed in section I, the Moon Agreement, in its present form contains a
number of provisions that would allow for the creation
of a body that is not
dissimilar to the International Seabed Authority. Through the creation of an
International Celestial Mining
Authority, the body would be able to implement
protocols suited to the exploitation of celestial bodies. To preface this
of the article, the author acknowledges that the exploitation of
celestial resources presents significant scientific and economic
challenges.
Additionally, it is possible that the resources exploited on celestial bodies
into the future will not be returned to
the Earth, but instead be used for the
purpose of ‘setting up’ bases on the Moon and other celestial
bodies. However,
the concept is worthy of discussion in advance of it becoming
technically feasible. This would avoid or mitigate the controversy
surrounding
the long delay in the introduction of regulation due to disagreement on
exploitation of the seabed. Section 3.4 of this
article exists to provide
suggestions on how the Moon Agreement may be reformed to firstly encourage
global participation and how
the processes behind the ISA may be used to advance
the interests of mankind.
To provide suggestions for the amendment of the Moon Agreement it must first
be understood why reform is necessary. The primary reason
that the Moon
Agreement is ineffective in regulating celestial body exploitation is that it
has low participation globally, and,
as of September 2021, it has not been
ratified by any state that engages in self-launched human spaceflight (USA, the
Russian Federation,
or the People’s Republic of China). This has led to
the agreement being widely regarded as the least impactful piece of Space
Low Participation in the
Agreement stems from, among other things uncertainty surrounding the
implementation of the agreement and
CHM Principle.
Another issue is clashing ideologies over commercial interests. This was
illustrated recently when former US President, Donald Trump
signed an Executive
order in 2020 which emphasised that the United States does not view outer space
as a global commons.
interpretation from commercial actors is of course different to that of state
parties, for example the COO of an energy company
argued, when discussing the
interest of human civilisation that:
Benefits come in many ways, it doesn’t necessarily come in sharing of
immediate financial gain, if for example we are able to
build off-world
infrastructure and large space based solar power stations for powering the
earth, creating desalinised water for
billions of people, these are massive
benefits for civilisation.
The above further demonstrates that there exists a number of different, and
often conflicting interpretations of what is in the interest
‘mankind’. Whilst the above quote is not necessarily incorrect, it
stems from the perspective of a commercial actor.
The interests of mankind
cannot be summarised through the perspective of one company or one state,
rather, the interests of mankind
must be a combination of collaboration and
compromise from all interested parties. The best approach to achieve that idea
community consultation and transparency as the relevant agencies
develop substantive processes to abide by. The United Nations may
achieve a fair
system through consultation and transparency that will allow for the creation of
an authority similar to that of the
International Seabed Authority. This is
allowed for currently through Article 11(7) of the Agreement and would serve as
an oversight
body that may allow for a parallel system to exist.
The Parallel System as it exists will not be able to be transferred across
easily to apply to celestial exploitation as a whole. Currently
states have human spaceflight-capable programs, the United States, the Russian
Federation, and the People’s Republic
of China. Whilst this is the case in
2021, commercial actors, such as SpaceX, Virgin Galactic, and Blue Origins are
all likely to
have significant spacefaring capabilities within the decade.
SpaceX is already ahead of the competition and successfully won a contract
the United States government to create lunar-capable
Additionally, the
Chinese and Russian governments announced that they have signed an agreement to
establish a lunar research base
in cooperation. Until such time that other
states, both developing or developed become capable of entering into space
independent
from pre-existing space farers, any celestial exploitation will be
inevitably economically unequitable. As such, what must occur
is to ensure that
the Moon, or other Celestial bodies are used for scientific and peaceful
purposes so that it may benefit mankind
as a whole. Rather than the export of
resources back to Earth, the interest of mankind into the future may be that
precious elements
in these bodies are used to allow for the further exploration
of bodies far from Earth, thus allowing for the potential advancement
species. Evidently, the Space Race to set up ‘territory’ on the Moon
has begun again. Whilst the term ‘celestial
body’ refers to any
Moon, planet, or satellite (asteroid) other than the Earth, it is reasonable to
say that the Moon and perhaps
Mars (when referring to the Moon, please consider
this as including Mars from herein) will become the first bodies in space to be
exploited, and or settled. Exploitation on the Moon could very well be feasible
within the next few decades and as such establishing
regulation is worthwhile so
as to avoid the tardiness associated with the International Seabed Authority and
seabed exploitation.
The size and proximity of the Moon in comparison to other bodies may enable
for a parallel system to be implemented in a manner that
is within the interest
of mankind, whilst the implementation on other celestial bodies presents
significant issues due to the variety
of different challenges, they present in
reaching, dividing, and enforcing any regulation that exists. Further, a process
where significant
resources must be expended in reaching, establishing a base of
operations, and exploiting resources from a body must not be so overregulated
that it may repel the advancement of science, economic development, and the
exploration of outer space. This article argues that
the parallel system may be
applied to the Moon, but not, as it stands, applied to other celestial bodies.
In the case of the Moon,
clear regulation surrounding it is vastly important
because of the Moon’s proximity to the Earth, and as such means that
exploitation
and settlement are but a matter of time. It is more than likely
that the exploitation of resources on the Moon will only be suitable
on the Moon, and as a staging base to further explore the solar system until
such time that the logistical challenges of
bringing resources back to the Earth
are solved. With present and near future technology, the purpose of the CHM
principle must be
to ensure that the Moon is used for peaceful and scientific
purposes. Presently, the concern surrounding the principle should not
division of economic gain, because, as it is and will be into the foreseeable
future, it is unlikely that exploitation will
become profitable beyond
government contracts. As such, the primary way of achieving the interests of
mankind presently is to ensure
that celestial bodies are used for peaceful
purposes, and that any scientific discoveries (that are not subject to
intellectual property
rights) are shared across mankind thus encouraging global
cooperation. One way to provide for the CHM principle in practise may be
Authority of sorts is set up to allow for the subdivision of land within the
Moon and allocated on a case-by-case basis.
In order to maintain the interest of
mankind in doing so and avoiding discriminatory practises that may exist as a
result of sovereign
loyalties, the authority must not have any direct
affiliation with a single state, or group of states. The Authority must ensure
that its’ decision making is transparent and subject to appeals where
wrongful actions may exist. In practise, the agencies
that already exist for
similar purposes allow, to some extent, the replication of the provisions that
are found within the UNCLOS,
reinforced by existing principles found within the
Antarctic Treaty and Moon Agreement requiring that the ‘area’ is
for peaceful purposes. Ultimately, the interest of mankind is peaceful
scientific cooperation as it expands into Space, irrespective
of economic
division, this may be reached through a transparent, and understanding decision
making process to amend the Moon Agreement
to allow for these changes. This
would remove the economic burdens that would be placed on developed nations to
encourage participation
in the Moon Agreement.
IV – AUSTRALIA, THE MOON AGREEMENT AND
THE ARTEMIS ACCORDS
This section discusses the interests of Australia relating to the Moon
Agreement and the more recent Artemis Accords. The Accords
are an American-led
effort to return humans to the Moon by 2024 with the ultimate goal of expanding
outer space exploration. Relevant
to this article, section 10 of the Accords
concerns the exploitation and ownership of outer space resources. This section
how the Accords and Moon Agreement contradict one another and how that
may affect Australia’s ability to navigate into celestial
exploitation. It will conclude by suggesting how Australia may navigate these
challenges in a way that remains in line with
its interests whilst maintaining
Australia’s obligations to international law.
The Artemis Accords
The Artemis Accords (“the Accords”) is a multilateral agreement
stemming from the United States’ interests in the
use of outer space. It
particularly relates to the exploration and use of the Moon, Mars, comets and
asteroids. Many of the provisions
found within the Accords mirror those found in
the Moon Agreement, however, there are also a number of provisions located
that are completely inconsistent with the Moon Agreement. Particularly,
section 10 relates to the exploitation of ‘space resources’
that the ‘extraction of space resources does not inherently constitute
national appropriation.’
Article II of the OST states that Outer space... is not subject to national
appropriation by claim of
sovereignty..
Effectively, the
treaty concerns itself with claims of sovereignty and does not expressly
reference the extraction or exploitation
of space resource. The United States is
a party to the OST but not the Moon Agreement, as such, Section 10 only takes
into account
Article II of the OST but not the Moon Agreement’s Article
11. As a result of the United States’ position, section 10
is directly in
contravention of article 11 of the Moon Agreement, this Article states that
“neither the surface... nor any...
natural resources in place shall become
property of any state.. non-governmental entity or natural person... “
and as such provides for
significant issues for Australia going forward.
Australia’s signature to the Artemis Accords is to be expected.
Following World War II, Australia has cooperated with the United
government in almost all aspects of foreign policy. In relation to Space,
Australia first cooperated with the United States
in 1960 through its signature
of a bilateral agreement pertaining to space vehicle tracking. This agreement
eventually led to the
establishment of NASA’s first deep-tracking station
outside of the United States in South Australia.
Australia continues to act on
behalf of NASA in monitoring its’ property. Australia’s interests
both economically and
miliarily have over the past 75 years often aligned with
that of the United States. Further examples outside of the Space Sector
demonstrate Australia’s interest in cooperating with the United states,
for example. The existence of multilateral
alliances such as
and more recently the
establishment of AUKUS
evidence of Australia’s interest in the United States, additionally,
Australia’s signing on to the Artemis Accords
clearly demonstrates
Australia’s contemporary interest in the United States’ space
The Moon Agreement and Australia
The preceeding sections discussed the important provisions found in the Moon
Agreement relating to the common heritage of mankind
principle. This section
will provide suggestions in relation to Australia’s interests. In order to
provide reasonable suggestions
on what Australia ought to do relating to the
Moon Agreement, the motives behind signing the Agreement in the first instance
be established. Australia did not become a party to the Moon Agreement
until 1986, despite the Agreement entering into force in 1984.
Despite this
considerable delay in signature, it appears that there was little to no
meaningful consideration by the then Australian
government of the agreement
beyond its provisions relating to nuclear disarmament.
Dr Storr of the Law Faculty of the University of Technology Sydney has
discussed the reasoning behind Australia’s signature
in considerable
detail. Much of Storr’s points stem from her analysis of the archival
record of cabinet delibrations relating
to the agreement. Of relevance to this
article is the narrow-minded view the Hawke government seemingly took in their
approach to
nuclear disarmament.
The decision to sign the Agreement came from a time of increasing pressure
surrounding nuclear policy in Australia. As a proponent
of both nuclear-energy
and non-proliferation, Hawke’s government was forced to tread a difficult
line. Despite an initial hardline
approach from the Labor party, banning uranium
mining altogether, there was an eventual loosening of the rules allowing for
mining to take off once again. This led to a split in the labor-left and
the rise of the Nuclear Disarmament Party. In 1984, the
NDP became a threat to
the stability of the Hawke government, at this stage the labor government
decided to explore all options relating
to nuclear disarmament, a move that
eventually resulted in the accession of Australia to the Moon Agreement where an
electoral loss
appeared increasingly likely.
Storr effectively argues that the implications of the common heritage for
mankind principle in relation to outerspace resources were
overlooked, yet, lead
to Australia remaining formally bound to perform its obligations in good
It does not appear that
the Hawke government had any significant interest in the oversight of outer
space resource by an international
body. Whilst these obligations, and by proxy,
inconsistencies currently continue to exist, it is in Australia’s
interests to
figure out a way to move forward. To further elaborate, Section 10
of the Accords is in direct conflict with Article 11 and subsections
due to the contradictory
views relating to the ownership of natural resources in outer space, Article 11
seeks to ban the extraction
of resources until an authority is created whilst
section 10 of the Accords seeks to allow for and encourage the extraction and
exploitation
of space resources.
A Way Forward
Australia’s position on the the Moon Agreement and Artemis Accords is
yet to be defined by any agency, department or government
official.. This
article provides suggestions as to why Australia needs to find a way to navigate
this path in the near future, and
how it may achieve this. Throughout this
section, this article has established that Australia’s interests have
historically,
and will continue to remain in line for the foreseable future with
the United States of America and the United Kingdom among others.
It has also
established that Australia’s consideration of the legal implications of
the Moon Agreement in relation to asteroid
mining was poor at best, and almost
entirely done for the furtherance of electoral success in the 1980s.
Australia’s priorities
have shifted away from Nuclear disarmament. Whilst
resolving the conflicting provisions found within the Agreement and the Accords
may not be a necessity in the coming years, Australia will need to clarify its
position at some stage. It is better that it resolves
its position now so that
it may better plan, and implement statutory provisions and administrative
processes in advance of it becoming
an issue of contention when Australia
reaches the Moon.
There is one practical approach to Australia’s predicament and one
idealistic approach. In an ideal world, in line with the
interest of mankind,
the Moon Agreement would be amended to prescribe what was suggested in section
3, that being the removal of
reference to economic inequity in Article 11 of the
Agreement. This would hopefully encourage participation on a global scale
parties to the Artemis Accord, without conflict occuring. However, the
likelihood of this occuring, especially in the current political
climate because
of the geopolitical tensions such as the relationship between the US and China
or Australia and China. In practice,
the only reasonable approach Australia can
take is to choose to leave the Moon Agreement or Accords. However, noting
Australia’s
interest in lining up with the interests of US, it should take
the steps to remove itself from being bound by the Moon Agreement
any longer.
Exiting the Agreement
In order to lawfully withdraw from the Agreement Australia must abide by the
Articles found within the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(“the Vienna Convention”). Whilst it is not presently necessary to
withdraw from the Agreement, it is important
to note the steps required to do so
when it does become necessary. If the goals of the Accords in reaching, and
establishing a base
on the Moon by 2024 are realised, then it will be within
Australia’s interests to resolve the conflicting relationship between
Accords and the Agreement. Articles 42 to 45 and 54 to 64 of the Vienna
Convention provide a number of grounds to denounce or
withdraw from an Agreement
or Treaty. Articles 65 through to 72 then specify the relevant procedures that
must be taken to exit from
an Agreement and the consequences of doing so.
Relevant to Australia’s potential withdrawal from the Agreement is Article
where a party may withdraw from an Agreement so long as it is:
(a) in conformity with the provisions of the treaty; or
(b) at any time by consent of all the parties after consultation with the
other contracting States.
Paragraph (a) of Article 54 allows for the withdrawal from a treaty so long
as it confirms with the relevant provisions, conveniently,
the Agreement
provides for, under Article 20 that:
Any State Party to this Agreement may give notice of its withdrawal from the
Agreement one year after its entry into force by written
notification to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Such withdrawal shall take effect one
year from the date of receipt
of this notification.
The Agreement entered into force in July 1984, with Australia depositing the
Agreement in 7 July 1986. As such, the first part of
the Article, requiring a
member to remain a party until one year after it was written into force is
satisfied. Whilst Australia should
begin to take steps to withdraw from the Moon
Agreement, there will clearly need to be substantial consultation with the space
academics, State Parties and parties to the Accords.
4.5 Australia’s Place in the
Australia’s economic and strategic interests align with the United
States, however, whilst US support exists for Australia,
Australia should aim to
exercise independence in Space rather than be solely reliant upon the US and
other parties to the Accords
for support entering, exploring, and exploiting
Space and its resources. As such, it is important that Australia continues to
and fund the space sector domestically. Fortunately, Australia’s
space sector has been growing drastically over the past decade.
With the recent
(2018) founding of the Australian Space Agency, an agency which will coordinate
domestic space Activities for Australia,
Australia’s domestic space
capability has begun to grow. Further, launch licences have been granted to two
non-governmental
organisations within Australia, demonstrating the re-emergence
of Australia’s interests in becoming a hub for space
activities.
Australia regulates
domestic space industry through a number of statutory pieces, most significant
Space (Launches and Returns) Act 2018
, this provides licenses and
requirements for the following:
• launching a space object from Australia
• returning a space object to Australia
• launching a space object overseas (for Australian nationals with an
ownership interest)
• returning a space object overseas (for Australian nationals with an
ownership interest)
• operating a launch facility in
Australia’s licencing system is in depth and covers many Space
Activities, it does currently provide for licencing requirements
of celestial
body exploitation. This is currently in line with the Moon Agreement, however,
upon Australia’s withdrawal, or
change of interests, the legislation will
need to be amended to provide for the lawfulness of celestial body exploitation
and ownership
under Australia’s domestic law. It is worth noting that
there is currently nothing stopping Australia legislating upon the
exploitation
of celestial resources, however, ownership of said resources would be contrary
to the Moon Agreement.
Australia’s Space Capabilities in 2021
Australia’s space industry is currently small; however it is growing at
a rate that significantly outstrips its international
peers, the United
Kingdom’s space sector from 2016-2017 grew approximately 3%, whilst
Canada, a nation most comparable to Australia
had a growth of only 1%. Australia
vastly outstrips these states with a growth of 17% per year since 2016. As of
2019, Australia’s
space sector was worth approximately $4.8 billion
dollars, or 0.25% of its total GDP for the financial year of 2018-2019. For
comparison,
whilst the financial amount is small on the face of it,
Australia’s overall economic rate of growth for the same period was
Whilst Australia’s space sector is growing fast, it still has considerable
lengths to go before it can legitimately be
considered a competitor in the Space
Despite its small size,
Australia has encouraged foreign investment and has granted launch licences to a
number of companies, one
such example is that of a Taiwanese space company
called ‘TiSpace’ which it granted a licence to in August of
This is in conjunction
with another company that was granted a launch facility permit named
‘Southern Launch’ which is
an Australian owned and operated company.
Additionally, Australian
universities launched a number of satellites from the United States in January
of 2021, these were called
the YUSAT and the IDEASSat CubeSat.
Australia certainly has a place
in the space sector, and while its size in the sector is yet to be determined,
the field is receiving
investment from the government and private industry and
is something for Australians to be excited about. In this context, it is
for the government to continue to explore its position in relation to celestial
exploitation.
V CONCLUSION
The law of space is an immensely complex area and like much of the
international law surrounding the common heritage principle, a
mess of competing
interests and ideologies that has resulted in a useless Agreement. The Moon
Agreement is at best aspirational and
at its worst downright burdensome through
Article 11 for any of the few states that are signatories. Ultimately, whilst
the purpose
of the Moon Agreement is important, it is a failure because of its
vague terms, lack of participation and overall burden on participating
This article has provided suggestions as to how the Moon Agreement may be
amended to encourage participation in it. These suggestions
are to strip the
Agreement of reference to economic inequity and inequality, to change the rules
surrounding extraction so that they
reflect the Outer Space Treaty, and to
ensure that the common heritage of mankind principle exists within the Agreement
to encourage
the use of the Moon and other Celestial bodies for the purpose of
human prosperity through peaceful and scientific advancement.
The exploitation of natural resources on the Moon likely will not create
profit within the lifetime of the author of this article
and certainly not
within the lifetime of the creators of the Agreement. The Moon Agreement was
clearly mistaken in its statement
that the exploitation of the Moon was
“about to become
Almost 40 years
later there has been no such exploitation occurring in space and as such the
proactive nature of the Agreement is
more burdensome in its application of
Article 11 than it has or ever will be
beneficial.
To reach the
‘final frontier’ is an accomplishment that only a few states have
achieved, it is economically detrimental,
to reach space is incredibly expensive
and currently not profitable, moreover, this obligation to set up an authority
to divide the
benefits of resources has resulted in less than 10% of United
Nations members agreeing to be bound by it. As discussed earlier, no
is independently capable of launching and exploiting space is a party to it.
The Agreement as it stands is arguably an ineffective piece of international
law, however, with amendments and clarification as to
what the interest of
mankind translates to it may amount to a more significant treaty. Firstly, as
mentioned above the division of
‘economic benefit’ is presently not
a viable solution as there is and likely will not be any potential for economic
from resource extraction in the foreseeable future due to technological
constraints, as such, any obligation requiring the division
of resources, or
revenue stands only as a barrier to humankind’s advancement. The article
argues that the economic barrier
is the core reason so few states have decided
to become bound by the Agreement. Secondly, upon the removal of the economic
all parties should proceed to in the creation of an Implementation
Agreement that provides for an authority that could act similarly
to the ISA.
This would serve as an oversight board where mining activities are recorded for
transparency. Rather than claiming sovereignty
over land, the authority should
be granted the right to inspect and lease land to corporations or states to the
extent that they
can exploit it, but the claim to the land remains with the
authority that represents the interests of mankind. The Authority would
have a duty to ensure that the Moon and other celestial bodies were not
weaponised and were used exclusively for scientific
and peaceful purposes.
Ultimately the above recommendations are idealistic and may face practical
barriers and difficulties. Implementation will be difficult
because of the
splintered, albeit unsurprising divergence of the United States’ Artemis
Accords, and the People’s Republic
of China and the Russian
Federation’s “International Lunar Research Station” it is
unlikely that these three superpowers
will cooperate in the Author’s
lifetime to the extent required to encourage them to agree to be bound by the
Moon Agreement
because of the extreme geopolitical tensions that presently exist
between the states. Still, these amendments are worthwhile discussing
middle powers may be encouraged to cooperate in the creation of an authority.
With the creation of the authority, the removal
of economic division and the
clarification of the CHM principle, multilateral agreements like the Accords are
not inherently in contravention
of the Agreement. If the United States, China,
or Russia do not sign the Agreement, they may continue to abide by the interests
mankind through the inception of complementary treaties and agreements in
place, perhaps the interests of mankind can continue through
science and peace.
Section IV discussed Australia’s position between the Artemis Accords
and the Moon Agreement. It ultimately argued that Australia
should withdraw
itself from the Moon Agreement. Australia’s position is unique, no other
state is a party to both pieces of
law and as such there is no clear path
Australia should take based on precedent. However, the Agreement, as illustrated
the article is a failure and as it exists currently places a burden
on all of its member states. The Artemis Accords however, whilst
primarily in
the interest of the United States allows Australia to benefit from the success
of the US. Australia’s interests
have aligned with the United States since
century and continue to do so in 2021 and likely will into
the future. Australia does not need to immediately withdraw from the Agreement,
it has time to consider its position going forward and present an argument to
other Agreement member states to amend the Agreement,
were Australia to argue
for the amendments that have been presented in
, it would be in a
position to abide by obligations found in both agreements.
Australia has not yet defined its place in space and the following decades
are imperative to decide what path it is to take. Australia
launched its first
space object in 1967, becoming the third nation ever to design and launch a
satellite to orbit the Earth. Its’
history is long but has stagnated
considerably up until recently with the grant of a number of launch facility
permits and launch
licences to Australian companies. The developments of the
country’s space capabilities are exciting but without necessary funding
and government support it may stagnate once again. Australia can become a
leading nation in outer space with a combination of foreign
cooperation and
domestic innovation. The ultimate recommendation for this article is that
Australia must consider its position in
international law and make a decision
within the next decade, further, Australia’s government and commercial
actors should
continue to fund and support Australia’s growth in space.
Australia is a mineral rich, economically wealthy and is in a geographically
advantageous position to launch rockets into space. Additionally, it is a
world-leading state in relation to mining on Earth, this
combination of
advantages present a fact that whilst a middle power, Australia and citizens
stand to benefit significantly from space
and its resources.
* William Gallagher is a Canberra Law School graduate. Sic itur ad astra
(Thus, one journeys to the stars) is voiced in Virgil, Aeneid
by Apollo to Aeneas's young son Iulus
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial
opened for signature 27 January
1967, 610 UNTS 205
(entered into
force 10 October 1967), art 1.
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984).
The Artemis Accords:
Principles For Cooperation In The Civil Exploration And Use Of The Moon, Mars,
Comets, And Asteroids For Peaceful
signed 13 October 2020, entered
into force 13 October 2020,
section 10.
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984). Australia acceded to this Agreement in
K Wong "Rumsfeld still opposes
Law of Sea Treaty."
The Washington Times
, 14 June 2012.
Heritage; Selected Papers on Oceans and World Order 1967–1974
University Press, 1975), 176
A. Pardo and C. Christol,
‘The common Interest: Tension Between the Whole of the Parts’ in
MacDonald and Johnston (eds)
The Structure and Process of International Law:
Essays in Legal Philosophy Doctrine and Theory
Article 140, UNCLOS;
see also Agreement governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies
, New York, United States of America, opened for signature 5
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984), Article 11(7)(d)
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984), Article 11.
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984), Article 11; see also Articles 136 –
Please see Article 87 of
UNCLOS III.
J A Jiru, Comment, Star Wars
and Space Malls: When the Paint Chips Off a Treaty's Golden Handcuffs,
TEX. L. Rev.
United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,
opened for signature 10 December
1982, UNTS 1833
1834, 1835 (entered into force 16 November 1994) Preamble.
United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,
opened for signature 10 December
1982, UNTS 1833
1834, 1835 (entered into force 16 November 1994) Art 136.
The Deep Seabed Hard
Mineral Resources Act
: 30 U.S.C. §§ 1441 – 1444 (1980);
states such as Germany, France, the UK, Japan and the then Soviet Union also
their own law, most of these states excluding the USA have since
ratified the convention.
E Guntrip (2003). The common
Heritage of Mankind: An Adequate Regime for Managing the Deep Seabed?
Melbourne Journal of International Law,
376 4(2) 392
M Harry, ‘The Deep
Seabed: The common Heritage of Mankind or Arena for Unilateral
Exploitation?’
Naval Law Review
C Joyner, The Concept of the
common Heritage of Mankind in International Law’
International Law Review
C R Buxton, P’roperty
in Outer Space: The common Heritage of Mankind Principle vs. the First in Time,
First in Right, Rule
of Property’ (2004) 69
Journal of Air Law &
689, 692 (2004).
M E. Schwind, Open Stars: An
Examination of the United States Push to Privatize International
Telecommunications Satellites, 10
Suffolk Transnatl L. Rev
United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,
opened for signature 10 December
1982, UNTS 1833
1834, 1835 (entered into force 16 November 1994) Art 140 (2); a number of
additional articles exist pertaining to the principle.
Please see, Articles 137
(non-appropriation principle) 139 (state responsibility), 141 (use for peaceful
purposes), 143 (scientific
research for the benefit of mankind), 145
(environmental protection), 148 (promotion of cooperation, particularly
developing states)
and articles 156-185 (management of the area through the ISA,
discussed in section 2) for further reference.
Agreement Relating to
the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
opened for signature 28 July 1994, entered into force 16 November
United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,
opened for signature 10 December
1982, UNTS 1833
1834, 1835 (entered into force 16 November 1994) Art 137.
The Antarctic Treaty,
opened for signature 1 December 1959 (entered into force 23 June 1961)
Articles I-III.
The Protocol on
Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty,
opened for signature 4
October 1991 (entered into force 14 January 1998) Art 7.
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984), Article 11 (1) & (5).
Agreement Relating to the
Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
opened for signature 28 July 1994, entered into force 16 November 1994,
Annex, ss 1-9.
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
signature 10 December 198
, UNTS 1833, 1834,
1835 (entered into force 16 November 1994) Art 156 & 157;
Relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea,
opened for signature 28 July 1994 (entered into force 16
November 1994) Annex, s 1.
United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea,
opened for signature 10 December
1982, UNTS 1833
1834, 1835 (entered into force 16 November 1994) Art 163;
Agreement Relating
to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
opened for signature 28 July 1994 (entered into force 16 November
1994) Annex, s 1(4).
Agreement Relating to the
Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
opened for signature 28 July 1994, entered into force 16 November 1994,
Annex, s 2.
UNCLOS, art.145
C G Brown (2018).
“Mining at 2,500 Fathoms under the Sea: Thoughts on an Emerging Regulatory
Framework.”
Ocean Science Journal
287 53(2) 288.
International Seabed
Authority “Exploration Contracts” Our Work (viewed 29 October 2021)
(webpage) < https://www.isa.org.jm/exploration-contracts>
Agreement Relating to the
Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
opened for signature 28 July 1994, entered into force 16 November 1994,
Annex, s 1(15).
H Dennis (May 30, 2009).
"Thomas Franck, Who Advised Countries on Law, Dies at 77".
The New York
T M Franck,
Fairness in
International Law and Institutions
(1995), at 8.
T M Franck,
Fairness in
International Law and Institutions
(1995), at 18; see also J.Rawls,
Theory of Justice
(rev.edn, 1999), at 266.
Ibid at 83.
I Scobbie (2002) “Tom
Franck’s Fairness”
Edinburgh Journal of International Law
13(4) 909, 910.
See for example: Responses
to the HLAP Public Consultation:
https://www.isa.org.jm/responses-hlap-public-consultation
and “Government of Australia’s comments on the International Seabed
Authority’s report on the draft framework
for the regulation of
exploitation activities in the Area.”
https://isa.org.jm/files/austgovt.pdf
J S Koch (2018).
"Institutional Framework for the Province of all Mankind: Lessons from the
International Seabed Authority for the
Governance of Commercial Space Mining."
Astropolitics
Ibid 7; Clashing ideologies
and conflicting interests over commercial endeavours also led to the failure of
the agreement to encourage
participation.
The Executive Order on
“Encouraging International Support for the Recovery and Use of Space
Resources”. Sec 1.
JS Koch (2018).
"Institutional Framework for the Province of all Mankind: Lessons from the
International Seabed Authority for the
Governance of Commercial Space Mining."
Astropolitics
(1): 15; from his personal correspondence
with Shackelton Energy Company, COO Jim Keravala.
C Davenport (2021)
”Elon Musk’s SpaceX wins contract to develop spacecraft to land
astronauts on the moon” Washington
Post (Webpage) <
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2021/04/16/nasa-lunar-lander-contract-spacex/
other companies such as Boeing have also won contracts with the US government.
The Artemis Accords:
Principles For Cooperation In The Civil Exploration And Use Of The Moon, Mars,
Comets, And Asteroids For Peaceful
signed 13 October 2020, entered
into force 13 October 2020, section 10.
Article II – Outer
Space Treaty.
An explanation of Article 11
can be found in section I, part 2.6 of this article.
Tronchetti and Liu (2021)
“Australia Between the Moon Agreement and the Artemis Accords.”
Australian Institute of International
Affairs; see also Tronchetti and Liu
‘Australia’s signing of the Artemis Accords: a positive development
or a controversial
(2021) 75(3)
Australian Journal of
International Affairs
Australia, New Zealand,
United States Security Treaty
The QUAD refers to the
Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, this is a strategic dialogue between Australia,
the United States, Japan
Five Eyes (FVEY) is an
Intelligence sharing alliance comprising Australia, The United States, New
Zealand, Canada, and the United
This is a trilateral
agreement and alliance comprising Australia, the United States and the United
Kingdom. It was announced on 15
September 2021 and encourages Australia’s
development into nuclear powered submarines.
C Storr (2021) “Why
did Australia sign the Moon Treaty?” Lowy Institute (Webpage)
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/why-did-australia-sign-moon-treaty
C Storr (2021) “Why
did Australia sign the Moon Treaty?” Lowy Institute (Webpage)
https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/why-did-australia-sign-moon-treaty
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984), Art 11(3)(5).
The Artemis Accords:
Principles For Cooperation In The Civil Exploration And Use Of The Moon, Mars,
Comets, And Asteroids For Peaceful
signed 13 October 2020, entered
into force 13 October 2020, section 10(1).
Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties
(1969) Vienna, Austria, opened for signature 23 May
(entered into force 27 January 1980) Art 54.
C. Porter MP & D Tehan
MP “Commercial rocket launch permit granted for South Australia”
Australian Government, Department of Industry, Science and Technology
https://www.minister.industry.gov.au/ministers/porter/media-releases/commercial-rocket-launch-permit-granted-south-australia
see also: Australian Space Agency “Notice of Minister decisions about
space activities”
Australian Government, Department of Industry,
Science and Technology
(accessed 11 October 2021).
https://www.industry.gov.au/regulations-and-standards/regulating-australian-space-activities/notice-of-minister-decisions-about-space-activities
Part 3 ss 10-46Y
(Launches and Returns) Act 2018
; see also:
Space (Launches and
Returns) (General) Rules 2019; Space (Launches and Returns)(High Power Rocket)
Rules 2019; and Space (Launches
and Returns)(Insurance) Rules 2019.
Alpha Beta,
The economic
contribution of Australia’s space sector in 2018-19
(Report, February
2021) 19-20
<https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-02/the-economic-contribution-of-australias-space-sector-in-2018-19.pdf
C. Porter MP & D Tehan
MP “Commercial rocket launch permit granted for South Australia”
Australian Government, Department of Industry, Science and Technology
<https://www.minister.industry.gov.au/ministers/porter/media-releases/commercial-rocket-launch-permit-granted-south-australia
A. Alamalhodaei
“Taiwan Innovative Space will conduct a test launch of its Hapith I rocket
in Australia later this year”
(Webpage, 24 August 2021)
<https://techcrunch.com/2021/08/23/taiwan-innovative-space-will-conduct-a-test-launch-of-its-hapith-i-rocket-in-australia-later-this-year/>
Agreement governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, New York,
United States of America, opened for signature 5 December
1979, UNTS 1363
(entered into force 11 July 1984), Article 11 (5).
Article 11 concerns the
extraction of resources from outer space among other things.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (541 KB)
PDF format (504 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter