URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Coper, Michael --- "Search for the Nations Capital - but where is the 'Seat of Government'" [2010] ALRS 2
Supreme and Federal Court Judges’ Conference
The Hyatt, Canberra, Tuesday 26 January 2010
where is the ‘Seat of
Government’?
Good afternoon everyone, and welcome to the nation's capital.
I should say first that I am here somewhat under false pretences. The problem
is that Richard
exceptionally generous man. Whenever I ask him to do anything for the ANU, he
invariably says yes. So when he first approached
me to speak to you at this
conference, I had no choice but to say yes. The fact that I knew almost nothing
of the proposed topic — the founding of Canberra
— seemed a hopelessly inadequate reason to decline.
But I had a cunning plan. Get someone in who does know something about the
topic. Dazzle the audience with a bit of archival footage.
And so it fell into
place. I am delighted that David
co-presenter today. David is an authority, and indeed an aficionado, of the
history of Canberra, but not only that, he is also
a great populariser. I do not
know if his television documentaries have been shown outside Canberra, but he
has done a wonderful
5-part series called ‘The Battle of the Sites —
In Search of an Australian Capital City’. This resonates beautifully
our topic today, ‘Search for the Nation’s Capital’. And how
appropriate is that on Australia Day!
So David is the main game today, and I am only the warm-up act. I just want
to put the fascinating story of the founding of Canberra
into a bit of a legal
context, and to raise with you — as legal interpretation is your bread and
butter — some tantalizing
issues of interpretation.
This paragraph omitted from oral presentation on ground of gratuitous
self-indulgence)
[Can I just say first that, although I am a
first-generation Australian — my father was a refugee from Nazi Germany,
mother was from the unitary state of New Zealand, where there is no sense
of the labyrinthine complexities of a federal system —
I feel very
connected to Australian constitutional history. I was born on the
anniversary of the death of Sir Henry
commissioner at the Inter-State
late 1980s was the grandson of Sir George Reid; and I even wanted to call my
first daughter Lucinda, after the Queensland
steamer on which the first words of
Constitution
were penned on the Hawkesbury River on the Easter weekend of
(however, my
wife put a stop to that). I am also honoured to hold the Robert Garran Chair of
Law at the ANU, named after one of the
most iconic figures in our constitutional
history, that grand old man of Canberra in the 1940s and 1950s, who, as a young
the late 19
century, was present at the
drafting of the
Constitution
, and who, some 50 years later, was, amongst other
things, one of the founders of the
Welcome to the seat of government...
So let me go back to the
beginning and say again, good afternoon everyone, and welcome to the
nation’s capital — or, to
put it slightly differently, welcome to
section 125
Constitution
describes as ‘the seat of Government
of the Commonwealth’.
...but where is it?
But what is the ‘seat of
government’, and precisely where is
Is it synonymous
with the Australian Capital Territory? Is it the City of Canberra? Is it the
Parliamentary Triangle within the City
of Canberra? Is it, more narrowly,
Parliament House and its precinct, now on Capital Hill? Or does the seat of
government refer even
more narrowly to where executive functions are to be
carried out, bringing into play all of the complexities of responsible
and the relationship between the Governor-General and his or her
Somewhat shockingly, there is no answer to these questions.
The constitutional framework
Let me first remind you of the text of
section 125
Constitution
Section 125
The seat of Government of the Commonwealth shall be determined by the
Parliament, and shall be within territory which shall have been
granted to or
acquired by the Commonwealth, and shall be vested in and belong to the
Commonwealth, and shall be in the State of New
South Wales and be distant not
less than one hundred miles from Sydney.
Such territory shall contain an area of not less than one hundred square
miles, and such portion thereof as shall consist of Crown
lands shall be granted
to the Commonwealth without any payment therefor.
The Parliament shall sit at Melbourne until it meet at the seat of
Government.
Writing in 1900, Quick and Garran immediately saw problems with this section.
The phraseology of this section, and its involved grammatical construction,
raise several difficult questions of interpretation. How
is the seat of
Government to be acquired by the Commonwealth? What is the effect of its
acquisition? And what is to happen pending
the determination of the seat of
Government? These and other questions must be answered; though the obscurity of
the section makes
it impossible, in the absence of judicial interpretation, to
answer them with absolute
confidence.
I do not have time to go into these fascinating questions, including whether,
in the light of other sections of the
Constitution
concurrence of New South Wales was necessary to the establishment by the
Commonwealth of the seat of
government.
let me mention two interesting issues.
First, Quick and Garran thought that the requirement that the territory
contain an area of not less than 100 square miles carried
an implication that it
not be significantly
than 100 square
turned out, the Australian Capital Territory is around 900 square miles.
Secondly, Quick and Garran express the opinion that the distance of 100 miles
from Sydney is to be measured in a straight
Nothing remarkable about that, you might think. But I think it is interesting
for two reasons.
First, the then
Interpretation Act
of New South Wales provided that distances
were to be measured by the nearest road. The
Constitution
being embedded in an
enactment of the Parliament of the UK, Quick and Garran relied instead on the
Imperial Interpretation Act
This raises
nice questions of whether it was ever really appropriate to rely on the UK
Interpretation Act to interpret our
Constitution
, and, if so, just when and how
inappropriate.
Secondly, the issue of how you measure distance has a special resonance for
me because of my involvement over 20 years ago in the
in the High Court of
which grew out of a criminal prosecution in Tasmania on a charge of being in
possession of undersized crayfish. My predecessor as
the lawyer member of the
Inter-State Commission in the mid-1980s, the late Justice Mervyn Everett, told
me that, in his youth at
the Tasmanian Bar, he had successfully defended people
on this charge by arguing that if you measured the crayfish, not in a straight
line, but taking into account the humps and ridges, it was not actually
undersized. Needless to say, his success provoked a change
in the law in
But where is the seat of government? Let me return to this burning issue.
The legislative determination
section 125
Constitution
, this is to be ‘determined by the Parliament’, and it
is to be ‘within’ territory — not coterminous
‘within’ territory granted to or acquired by the Commonwealth. So
what did Parliament determine?
Seat of Government Act 1904
provided that the seat of government
shall, within a territory of not less than 900 square
‘within 17 miles of
small town in the south of New South Wales on the Snowy River. This was repealed
in 1908 by a new Act, which I believe is still
in force. The
Government Act 1908
provided that the seat of government shall be ‘in
the district of
Yass-Canberra’.
Following agreement with, and a surrender of territory by, New South Wales, the
Seat of Government Acceptance Act 1909
determined that the seat of
government ‘shall be in the Territory described in the Second
which is the territory now known as the Australian Capital Territory.
None of this legislation fixed the place within the territory at which the
seat of government would be.
Selection of the site for the nation's capital, the story that David Headon
will take up in a moment, was rather a matter of executive
action, culminating
on 12 March 1913, at 12.00 noon precisely in a ceremony on Capital Hill, in the
declaration by Lady Denman, in
her clear English voice, and with a dramatic
revelation worthy of the modern day
name the capital of Australia “Canberra”’ (to which she then
famously added: ‘...and the accent
Does the indeterminacy matter?
So, unfortunately, we do not know
exactly what and where our seat of government is. It has never been determined.
Perhaps it is not
a geographical location at all, but more of a metaphysical
concept — or even just a
any of this matter?
Probably not — although my esteemed former colleagues Tony Blackshield
and Francesca Dominello, noting that the seat of the
High Court is now required
legislatively to be at the seat of government, observed in their entry on the
seat of the Court in
The Oxford Companion to the High Court
that, on one
interpretation, the High Court might have been built in the wrong
More seriously, the issue could arise in a number of contexts. One that comes
to mind is the implied constitutional freedom of access
to the seat of
government, relied on by Griffith CJ and Barton J in 1912 in
R v Smithers; Ex
parte Benson
and adverted to by Dixon CJ in 1958 in
Pioneer Express Pty Ltd v
might be important in that context to identify precisely what and where the seat
of government is.
Broader issues
I guess it is enough for our purposes simply to say
that the seat of government is in Canberra, but that just raises in my mind a
whole raft of issues I would love to raise with you if we had time. What is the
role and function of a nation’s capital? Is
it more than
a parallel with the role of a Chief Justice within an otherwise non-hierarchical
court? But these issues are for another
day. I pause only to observe that there
is no richer constitutional environment in which to live in Australia than a
federal territory,
especially the federal territory within which —
somewhere! — is the seat of government. One has all these additional
layers of complexity, as we seek to work out, for example, which of those
constitutional constraints applicable to the Commonwealth
in its capacity as a
body of limited power vis-à-vis the States are applicable to the
Commonwealth in its capacity as a body
of plenary power vis-à-vis the
territories, particularly in relation to the requirements for territorial
too is for another day.
Let me finish, and
segué into Dave’s presentation, by saying just a little about the
actual choice of Canberra as our
nation’s capital. It is a long and
complicated story,
but a number of aspects of it fascinate me.
The candidates
First of all, an astonishing range of places were
considered or promoted, first during the Convention debates, before the
of New South Wales was agreed, with suggestions ranging from St Kilda
to Mt Gambier to ‘somewhere in
and later, when that constraint was accepted, within New South Wales. Without
being comprehensive, the possible sites included Albury,
Armidale, Bathurst,
Bombala, Dalgety, Lake George, Lyndhurst, Tumut, and Yass. Moreover, public
consultation yielded nearly a thousand
new suggested names for the national
capital, including — and I will just give you a taste of them —
Marsupiala, Fisherburra,
Eucalypta, Democratia, Wheatwoolgold (one word!),
Boomerang City, and
The climate
Secondly, I love the idea that lay behind much of the
debate, and which no doubt stemmed from the natural affinity of the white
Australians
of those days with European history, that the height of human
achievement and intellectual endeavour can be reached only in a cold
The Queenslanders here might have something to say about that, and perhaps, if
the theory is right, we should be even more
concerned about climate change. It
is interesting, though, that, at the end of the day, Dalgety, which as I said is
in the Snowy
Mountains, was thought to be just a little too cold!
The anthropomorphism
Thirdly, it is of interest to me how the term
‘Canberra’ has, over the years, acquired a usage that sees it as
for the federal government, and generally in the context of criticism.
It irritates the locals no end, and it would be interesting
to trace the origins
of the practice, to which other national capitals around the world have
obviously also succumbed.
The topography
But none of this detracts from the physical beauty
of Canberra and the region, itself a factor in the final choice of the site for
the nation’s capital. Aldo Giurgola, the renowned Italian architect of our
present Parliament House, loved Canberra so much
that he retired here. I once
heard him articulate what it was about the topography that he found so alluring.
It is a city, he said,
ringed by the Brindabellas, that are at once not so high
and imposing as to be threatening, but are high enough to give a coherent
of place and a feeling of protection.
I do not know whether this was in the minds of our
forbears, consciously or unconsciously — perhaps it was — let's
it was! — but I am going to hand over now to the real expert on the
history of Canberra, David Headon.
Taken from the
title of JQ Ewens’ famous 1951 article, below n9.
Dean of Law and
Robert Garran Professor of Law, ANU College of Law, Australian National
University,
Richard Refshauge, ACT Supreme Court; Adjunct Professor, ANU College of
Headon, cultural consultant and historian, Adviser on the Centenary of Canberra
to the Chief Minister’s Department,
ACT Government.
Constitution
; Michael Coper, ‘The Second Coming of the Fourth
Arm: The Role and Functions of the Inter-State Commission’
Australian Law Journal
; Michael Coper, ‘The Untold Story of the
Inter-State Commission in Four Minutes and Thirty-three Seconds (with apologies
John Cage)’ (1993) 75
Canberra Bulletin of Public Administration
131; Andrew Bell, ‘The Missing Constitutional Cog: the Omission of the
Inter-State Commission’,
, The Journal of the NSW Bar
Association, Summer 2009-2010,
Encounters with the Australian
Constitution
Helen Irving,
‘Garran, Robert Randolph’ in Tony Blackshield, Michael Coper and
George Williams,
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of Australia
(2001) 292; Noel Francis,
The Gifted Knight
(1983); Leslie Zines,
‘Sir Robert Garran’ in Kay Walsh (ed),
Experiments
, Lectures in the Senate Occasional Lecture Series 2006, Papers
on Parliament No. 44 (2006); Robert Garran,
Prosper the Commonwealth
‘Where is the Seat of Government?’
Australian Law
; Bernard Sugerman, ‘The Seat of Government of the
Commonwealth’
Australian Law Journal
Quick and Robert Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
Australian Commonwealth
Parliament of a State may surrender part of a State to the
Commonwealth.
Parliament of the Commonwealth may alter of the limits of a State, with the
consent of the Parliament of the State and the approval
of a majority of the
electors in the
Paterson v O’Brien
[1978] HCA 2
(1978) 138 CLR 276
, the High Court rejected out
of hand an argument that the carving of the Northern Territory out of South
Australia and the carving
of the ACT out of New South Wales needed the approval
of the electors of those
n10 at 981. The argument was that the area be reasonably appropriate to the
purpose, and that it could not have been intended
that a huge area be carved out
of NSW that was superfluous to the
preliminary search, I have been unable to find any significant judicial or
academic discussion of this
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR
Acknowledged and confirmed in
Spratt v Hermes
[1965] HCA 66
(1965) 114 CLR 226
Svikart v Stewart
[1994] HCA 62
(1994) 181 CLR 548
Re Governor, Goulburn
Correctional Centre; Ex parte Eastman
(1999) 200 CLR 322. This seems to be
at odds with the situation in the US (Constitution Article 1, section 8:
‘such district...as
may...become the seat of government’) and Canada
(British North America Act 1867 (UK): the seat of government ‘shall
Section 3, which also provided that the territory should have ‘access to
Lady Denman, wife of the Governor-General Lord Denman, drew out of a gold
cigarette case a card with the hitherto unrevealed name
of Canberra as the name
of Australia’s capital city: Lionel Wigmore,
The Long View: A History
of Canberra, Australia’s National Capital
Governor, Goulburn Correctional Centre; Ex parte Eastman
[1999] HCA Trans 67
(25 March 1999) per Kirby J
Blackshield and Francesca Dominello, ‘Seat of Court’ in Blackshield,
Coper and Williams, above n8, 614,
[1912] HCA 96
, following the US case of
Crandall v Nevada
(1868) 73 US
[1867] USSC 15
[1958] HCA 45
The Symbolic Role of the National Capital
‘There are few constitutional problems in Australia more vexing than
these. Few have led to answers so intellectually unsatisfying.
Few have produced
results so bizarre. Few have given rise to so many judicial regrets about the
lack of a coherent doctrine and the
consequent “disunity in the judicial
system of Australia” which “arises from the separation of federal,
territorial jurisdictions”’: per Kirby J in
Governor, Goulburn Correctional Centre; Ex parte Eastman
(1999) 200 CLR
Roger Pegrum,
The Bush Capital: How Australia Chose Canberra as its
(1983, rev 2008); David Headon, ‘Wanted: Treasure
House of a Nation’s Heart: The Search for an Australian Capital City
1891-1908’ in Kay Walsh (ed),
Parliament, Politics and Power
Lectures in the Senate Occasional Lecture Series 2008, Papers on Parliament No.
50 (2009) 51; various articles in the
Canberra Historical Journal
Series No. 61, December
and Garran, above n10,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (112 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter