URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/36.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jacobson, Susannah Sage --- "Elder law, elder abuse and housing" [2009] ALRCRefJl 36; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 31
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 31–33 of the original
Elder law, elder abuse and housing
By Susannah Sage Jacobson*
Access to housing is a basic human right. For older Australians, secure
accommodation, both in terms of personal security and tenure,
is particularly
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) the number of
Australians aged 65 or older will reach 26% of the population
by 2051. In real
figures this will mean nearly eight million older Australians, more than double
the current demographic.
is increasingly important that legal policy makers specifically consider the
relevance of elder law and the impact on
older persons of all law reform
initiatives.
Housing law and policy are of particular relevance to older people, but the
law reform priorities are perhaps different than one may
think. Contrary to
views that issues around aged-care accommodation and retirement village
regulation are of central concern, statistics
released earlier this decade on
living arrangements for older Australians tell a different story. The reality is
that in Australia
77% of older people live in private dwellings in the
community, with 20% of these living in family households incorporating children,
other relatives or friends, and only 6% living in assistance
accommodation.
These figures
suggest that quite different issues regarding housing security are of paramount
concern to older Australians.
This article sets out these priorities and highlights the strong link between
elder law, elder abuse and housing.
Housing and accommodation security
The legal issues commonly arising for older Australians in relation to
housing may be summarised by reference to their personal accommodation
situations.
Those older people in the community lucky enough to own their own home are
unfortunately not immune to housing related legal issues.
The vast majority of
older people living in private dwellings in the community face the predicament
of being asset rich and cash
poor and struggle to maintain their financial
independence. Over the past 10 years, a modest home in many Australian capital
has become a significant asset in financial terms, however this has not
translated to disposable income for most older Australians.
The financial burden
of maintenance and rates on their homes, as well as the need for services such
as home care have resulted in
the increased need for older people to become
involved in complex financial arrangements such as reverse mortgages or family
agreements.
Overall, financial hardship also limits access to legal advice and
assistance should problems arise. Home ownership also often results
people sharing accommodation with dependent adult family members, often giving
rise to grandparenting issues and the risk
of elder abuse.
Retirement villages and owners’ corporations
Similarly, older persons resident in private retirement villages or
properties managed by owners’ corporations may face similar
concerns to
those in private independent dwellings. The buy-in costs, depreciation and
maintenance issues and potential for complex
management arrangements compound
the financial hardship. The potential for neighbourhood disputes and harassment
in these accommodation
options is also increased, particularly where residents
may be managing age-related health disorders—such as dementia or
depression—that
can result in anti-social behaviours.
Rental, shared accommodation and non-private dwellings
Older people face tenancy issues similar to all tenants who may be disabled,
disadvantaged or in financial hardship. Older people
resident in boarding and
rooming houses or caravan parks may be particularly vulnerable to financial
exploitation, sub-standard services,
eviction and co-tenant disputes and
harassment.
Public and community housing
Similar to residents in retirement villages and owners’ corporations,
public and community housing tenants face issues relating
to high-density living
for older people. Notably at the 2001 Census, older tenants comprised
approximately 29% of all public housing
tenancies, with 48% of these tenants
being 75 years of age and older. Commonly these residents may face increased
financial hardship
and higher incidence of neighbourhood disputes and
harassment.
Aged care and independent living units
Residents in aged-care accommodation face particular issues at entry, such as
the need to navigate complex agreements and ongoing
costs that can give rise to
financial hardship. Although there is regulation of this
residents may also face
vulnerability to elder abuse and sub-standards services, particularly if they
reside in independent living
Finally, it has been estimated that 250,000 people across Australia over the
age of 60 are homeless or at risk of
There are a number of
risk factors for homelessness among older people in our community including:
• lack of suitable housing and housing stress;
• financial pressures;
• inadequate income support;
• poor physical and mental health;
• major life changes such as death of a partner;
• family relationship breakdowns; and
• elder abuse.
In summary, across all the living arrangements and accommodation options
listed above, all older people face vulnerability to financial
hardship and the
risk of elder abuse.
Elder abuse
Elder abuse, as defined by the World Health Organisation, is ‘a single
or repeated act or lack of appropriate action, occurring
within any relationship
where there is an expectation of trust which causes harm or distress to an older
As such, elder abuse
may constitute any knowing, intentional, or negligent act by a caregiver or any
other person that causes harm
(physical, psychological, financial or social) or
a serious risk of harm to an older person, where the older person and the
perpetrator
are in a relationship involving trust, dependency or
Although is it difficult to establish meaningful figures regarding the rate
of elder abuse in the community, ABS data shows that one
in five people
experiencing physical abuse within an intimate partnership are over
This figure is reflected in
studies conducted both in Australia and overseas which have found that
4–10% of people referred
to aged-care services are victims of some form of
There are further estimates
which indicate that 3–5% of all people over the age of 65 who are living
in the community suffer
from some form of
The most prevalent form
of elder abuse is that of financial abuse. This form of elder abuse arguably has
the greatest potential to
impact on an older person’s living
arrangements.
There are some legal remedies available to older people who have experienced
incidents of elder abuse, but older people are often
not able to access legal
assistance for financial reasons or choose not to pursue these avenues of
assistance for a range of social
and cultural reasons. The reasons for this lack
of action are complex and varied. However, it may often be that the older person
is reliant on the perpetrator for care and assistance and may not want to upset
the relationship.
As such the
older person may see greater value in maintaining the status quo than facing the
possibility of damaging the relationship
or displacement where accommodation is
Research has shown that 90% of elder abuse is committed by family members.
There are significant indicators of financial dependency
as well as dependency
in relation to housing, transport and care. A significant number of perpetrators
of abuse have similar issues
regarding social isolation or lack of community
support to the older person and are also often under severe financial stress.
Overwhelmingly,
the consequences of elder abuse for the victim are extremely
serious, placing their living arrangements, personal circumstances,
physical and mental health in jeopardy. It is for this reason that victims of
elder abuse are also at significant risk
of accommodation insecurity or even
Law reform priorities
Efforts to address the issue of elder abuse are actively being undertaken
across all levels of government at both the state and federal
level as well as
by the not-for-profit sector. Many of these measures centre around community
education campaigns on elder abuse
and the rights of older people and also
support for increased access to specialised legal services for older
Human rights law has
also been identified as a potential tool for combating elder abuse in
has been enacted, such as Victoria.
Submissions to the recent National Human Rights Consultation have highlighted
the benefits of
a Commonwealth Human Rights Act in protecting older people from
elder abuse.
The 2007 Commonwealth Parliamentary Report on
Older People and the Law
identified law reform priorities in the areas of guardianship and
administration and discrimination law and retirement village regulation
protect vulnerable older people, and recommended reducing the barriers to
accessing legal services.
Commonwealth has not yet responded to the recommendations in this report.
At the state level, some initiatives in these areas of law are being taken.
For example, in Victoria the laws surrounding powers of
attorney and
guardianship and administration are being reviewed with a view to ensuring
vulnerable older people are adequately protected
and that adequate remedies are
available against perpetrators of elder
This article has sought to highlight the link between housing and
accommodation security for older people and elder abuse in our community.
only are the housing arrangements of older people a causal indicator of elder
abuse, but the identification and recognition of
elder abuse necessarily
involves consideration of the impacts on accommodation. The strength of this
relationship means that the
law reform priorities for ensuring older people
maintain secure housing are similar to measures suggested to prevent and address
elder abuse. In addition to the basic need to alleviate financial hardship, and
increase access to legal services among older people,
strengthening human
rights, power of attorney, guardianship and administration law to protect
vulnerable older people are all measures
that ultimately also strengthen their
housing security.
* Susannah Sage Jacobson is the Manager/Principal Lawyer of the Seniors
Rights Legal Clinic, Public Interest Law Clearing House (Vic).
The author thanks Dahni Houseman, Seniors Rights Policy Officer, for
assistance in drafting this article.
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
People and the Law
, 2007, [7.1].
C Adler & S Sage Jacobson,
‘Seniors Rights Victoria: Working to Stop Abuse of the Elderly’,
B Herd, ‘The Family Agreement: A
Collision Between Love and the Law?’
Aged Care Act 1997
C Adler & S Sage Jacobson,
‘Seniors Rights Victoria: Working to Stop Abuse of the Elderly’,
World Health Organisation,
Response to Elder Abuse and Neglect
, 2008, Geneva.
D Houseman,
Recognising the Rights of
Older Australians: Submission to the National Human Rights Consultation
Seniors Rights Victoria, [7.3.2].
C Adler & S Sage Jacobson,
‘Seniors Rights Victoria: Working to Stop Abuse of the Elderly’,
R Munro, ‘Elder Abuse and Legal
Remedies: Practical Realities?’
For example for further information on
initiatives in Victoria, see <www.seniorsrights.org.au>.
House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, Parliament of Australia,
People and the Law,
See information on the Victorian Law
Reform Commission’s Guardianship Inquiry, which commenced on 19 June 2009,
at <www.lawreform.vic.gov.au>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter