URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2019/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Langlois, Anthony J --- "The Snake, The Rope And The Fishbowl" [2019] UNSWLawJlF 4; (2019) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 4
THE SNAKE, THE ROPE AND THE FISHBOWL
Gender, Alterity and Human Rights: Freedom in a
(Ratna Kapur, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018, ISBN
9781788112529)
Opening this book, we find ourselves looking out over the foothills of the
Himalayas from the study window of a home within the Doon
‘wistful haze’ from dispersed mountain cloud diffracts the light,
and while we sense the ‘clamour and
clatter’ of the nearby city, we
experience calm and peace – until becoming aware of an undulating motion
in the hallway,
a flattening wave, the body of a creature seeking a way out from
an enclosed space.
The snake in Ratna Kapur’s prologue is a majestic creature: powerful,
beautiful, elegant. While potentially dangerous, she is
now interested only in
finding a way out, in securing her freedom. With no exit at ground level she
emerges and raises herself, the
length of her body coming to rest on her tail as
she stands on its tip to appraise her options – an extraordinary spectacle
– before spiralling back down, and eventually exiting through a nearby
window opened by the author to facilitate escape and
The snake’s need for freedom and Kapur’s full telling of this
story puts us in the imaginative space for the challenge
of Kapur’s book:
a way out of accounts of freedom which are restrictive, closed-in or illegible
to many; accounts of freedom
within a liberal episteme. The snake, alien and
other, is depicted empathetically, setting the scene for the subsequent process
‘centring and examining articulations of freedom available in
non-liberal, alternative
epistemologies’.
Kapur has another snake story; one which does more analytical work than the
tale of her unexpected and glorious visitor. In this second
story, drawn from
, we find ourselves reacting fearfully to a snake when we are
in fact looking at our
. We mistake the object of our perception and
react accordingly; but there is in fact no threat. It is our perception that is
problem, one we must use introspection, self-scrutiny and subjective
reflection to rectify. Kapur applies this to the ways in which
we commonly
misperceive liberalism and human rights as emancipatory when in fact, she
argues, they constrain and control us. One
suspects this story needs a slight
retelling, in that most see a rope where, according to Kapur (and I largely
agree), there
is in fact a snake
– we find ourselves suffering from
bites and poison without understanding what is going on, perceiving only a
tangle in our
rope, and wondering at our inability to unknot it – as the
poison sets in and we sink into a torpor brought on by repeated
humanitarian
crises and the endlessly deferred hope that human rights might emancipate the
world. If we were able to understand our
misperception – were able to
see what is not, in what is
– we might have a chance at breaking
the morbid cycles of cruel optimism and humane pessimism that mark the human
rights movement
in our time.
More broadly, Kapur suggests that the inward turn represented by the
non-dualistic tradition of
from which the snake-rope tale comes,
is a critical component in the non-liberal accounts of freedom which she enjoins
us to engage.
These, she suggests, might prevent us from ending up trapped and
defeated, as her first snake would be if forced to live out its
days in the
unnatural environment of her home.
This entrapment is picked up by the final metaphor which structures
Kapur’s book: the fishbowl. The fishbowl ‘represents
the liberal
constellation that shapes and disseminates mainstream human rights advocacy and
scholarship, as well as particular understandings
Critically,
‘fishbowl knowledge and
certitudes’
predisposition of fear and mistrust toward non-liberal epistemological
approaches to understanding the world – approaches
which Kapur
determinedly incorporates into her analyses throughout, and makes the heart of
the later chapters of the book. Kapur
uses this analysis to challenge what she
sees as the two common assumptions of liberalism: ‘that freedom is a
progressive,
external pursuit, which is owned or possessed’, and,
‘that freedom originates or is accessed through the consciously
will of a finite, thinking, individual
While the later
part of the book engages in the task of providing alternatives to these ways of
understanding freedom, the earlier
part of the book sets out to demonstrate how
it is that liberalism, rather than making people free, in fact makes them
To do this, Kapur scrutinises the way in which liberal freedom is
translated into the discourse and mechanism of human rights within
international, and then forcefully challenges the conventional take: that human
rights are emancipatory and oriented toward freedom.
This is where we are seeing a rope, when we should be perceiving the snake.
Human rights, says Kapur, ‘are techniques of governance
which discipline
and regulate the subject of human rights, and where practices of self-discipline
and self-governance become normalized
and experienced as
Human rights as a
liberal freedom project is unpersuasive to the mass of people who experience it
as a global export of pernicious,
destructive violence and uncontained
suffering: ‘liberal interventionism’ and the impetus to maintain a
based international order’.
For others, liberal freedoms may not come in the form of bombs or drones but
via the imposition of social and legal frameworks which
regulate, discipline,
and manage lives and bodies.
Frequently, these systems lock in the use of neoliberal market based mechanisms
as the means for the pursuit of freedom, or the grounds
within which such
pursuit will take place. Even when affectively experienced as freedom (by the
lucky), such framings allow global
capital to permeate ‘
modalities of human
relations’.
Rather than
providing for
liberation,
Kapur argues, this instantiation of human
rights is a set of governance techniques which align with global capital against
the wellbeing
of the global disenfranchised.
Kapur provides a reading of rights advocacy, especially around the work of
feminist, women’s rights and sexual rights advocates,
‘to illuminate
how these engagements constitute and inscribe the subject into specific ways of
being free – ways that
are aligned with a neoliberal, wealth-producing,
heteronormative, reproductivist framework, as well as with sexual, cultural,
and religious
prescriptions’.
She comments,
‘in this guise, human rights appear incapable of delivering on their
promise of freedom’.
argues, ‘the real project of human rights today is not its assumed
salvific, benevolent, altruistic, universalist substrate
but its constitutive,
regulatory, exclusionary agenda that continues to produce and privilege certain
“free” subjects/subjectivities
over a multitude of unfree/less free
In the initial chapters of the book, Kapur walks us through this critical
analysis of human rights by examining the experience of
human rights within
three related areas: the experience of queers and international lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender (‘LGBT’)
rights advocacy, violence against
women and the sexual security regime, and engagement with the veil in human
rights advocacy. These
rich and dynamic chapters each end in a similar way, with
the subjects for whom human rights are supposed to bring meaningful freedom
finding themselves merely transposed into a different regulatory regime. For
some, this transposition
provide real and concrete benefits, but the
costs are not insignificant, and the overall outcome or trajectory is clearly
not experienced
as the ‘freedom’ that the grand political project of
human rights trumpets.
Rather, recognition of humanity and the acquisition of rights leads to
incorporation into normative orders which then constrain how
we may or may not
be as bearers of rights in the world – whether as queers who must now
become respectable, as women who are
the perpetual victims of sexual violence
and must always require saving and empowerment, or as wearers of the veil who
are thereby
necessarily oppressed and could not possibly be wearing it on their
own terms. In each of these analyses human rights do not bring
vaunted freedom to their target constituency. Rather, Kapur establishes that the
great optimism generated by the (usually
eventual and much delayed) application
of human rights to the people and issues at the centre of each chapter routinely
to be, in Lauren Berlant’s terms, a ‘cruel
optimism’: both a false promise, but also one the continued pursuit
which only has the effect of further forestalling true human flourishing or
As she articulates this on behalf of the queers who have recently been
normalised in various constituencies through rights politics
(especially in the
context of the application of rights to intimate relationships through the
discourse of marriage):
The assimilative pull of human rights has decanted an entitled, legible,
respectable, desirable queer subject while simultaneously
producing its opposite
– the unsuccessful sexual subaltern/non-subject; the silent or vocal queer
dissident navigating the
existential pressures of stigmatized criminal deviance,
unable/unwilling to comply with the prescriptions of freedom in a fishbowl,
aspires to equality, legibility and grievability but does not/cannot participate
in the frameworks that bring about recognition
through this set of
arrangements.
Appearances notwithstanding, Kapur is not seeking to trash human rights
– paraphrasing Spivak as others have done, she argues
that we cannot
want human rights, even though they won’t give us what we seek:
While emphasising that
human rights are not illusory, and that they
protect people,
bring material benefits,
empower people, she emphasises that they
do so preferentially, partially, and via processes (such as those of the
neo-liberal market
economy) which carry their own costs to freedom.
Her answer is that rather than trying to re-boot the human rights project on
rejuvenated liberal terms, we should look for freedom
in other philosophical
traditions: ‘the liberal discourse of rights does
solutions to injustice and inequity; rather, it is part of the
self-scrutiny and discernment that is the heart of the rope-snake metaphor
requires us to abandon the illusion of human rights
as a harbinger of freedom.
Being ‘thoroughly and incontrovertibly implicated in structures and
methods of governance and
normativity’,
human rights
bring freedom, whatever else they might bring.
How then do we get to meaningful freedom? The rope-snake metaphor starts us
on the road by enjoining discernment of illusion through
self-scrutiny, an
inward subjective turn. Kapur asks, in the first of several chapters where she
seeks to start answering this question,
whether the crisis in human rights might
be ‘a rare moment of ideological stasis, when we can turn to non-liberal,
not illiberal,
ways of being that are more closely attuned to what we want
– namely, freedom – and that do not slip into the trap of
relativism’?
From this point, Kapur’s volume explores a range of non-Western
conceptions of freedom which operate in quite different registers
to those in
which human rights function as a prescription for or pathway toward freedom.
There is a very strong subjective and inward
turn, often providing great
illumination about how to think of ourselves in relation to freedom differently,
but less often showing
how this might address social and political organization.
Discussions of Eve Sedgwick’s turn to Buddhism and Michel Foucault’s
political spirituality help us understand our theoretical impasse with human
rights, but it is less clear how they show us a way
to transform the rights that
we cannot not want from governance frameworks into a freedom politics. The
potential illegibility of
these registers to one another is highlighted in a
section where Kapur discusses a work of contemporary Iranian-born New York based
artist Shirin Neshat, who in a video installation titled
explores the
incommensurability between formal freedoms adjudicated by courts, and ‘the
expression of freedom through the act
of reciting creative works associated with
the freedom of
transcendence’.
comments, ‘
is about the experience of freedom that
becomes possible only when one is free
the prescribed legal space; it
is not about the aspiration to procure freedom
this finite
The following two chapters pursue such a freedom – one that is not
external, pursuable by claiming rights and actionable by
forms of governance and
regulation, but that is internal, formed by a different episteme. At the same
time, Kapur wants this freedom
‘to reshape the social meaning of
emancipation’.
There are a
large set of unresolved questions here about the relationship between the
mystical, transcendent, artistic, subjective
and deeply personal picture of
freedom that emerges from Kapur’s discussion of various non-liberal
examples, and her continued
desire for this freedom to shape our collective
political and social lives.
Kapur’s way through this is to de-link freedom from rights:
‘efforts towards procuring rights
necessary, but they should be
delinked from their connection with
And freedom
itself is to be understood differently, with one such understanding being
through the sub-continental non-dualistic episteme
again, the snake-rope metaphor is utilised to talk us through the ways in which
misperception produces fear, which feeds into
our very human habit of othering
those not like us, the consequences of which can be seen in many human rights
projects ostensibly
proceeding under the banner of increased freedom. But
freedom in the non-dualistic episteme of
different from liberal freedom, and while the snake-rope metaphor is useful for
human rights politics, it is not made
clear how this alternative freedom will help us address the problems we see when
come to perceive human rights as a governance project rather than a
freedom project.
Kapur’s persuasive critique of human rights will motivate readers to
want to do rights politics differently. But when it comes
to the question of
, there is a problem. The register of freedom that Kapur advocates
under the banner of non-dualism is not one of action, intervention,
creating or
doing. Knowledge of the self through subjective reflection is the ultimate means
to freedom; emancipation is found in
the intimate knowledge of the self
‘despite the cleavages that seem to abound in the world around
Indeed, in the
context of one of her examples, she says ‘the material, social and
political exclusion of marginalized subjects,
their consequent suffering and the
very parameters of self-understanding are all relinquished in the tradition of
non-dualism’.
not seem very helpful to the human rights project in any form – indeed,
Kapur says, ‘this paradox appears
resolution’.
An ungenerous
reader might see quiteism here, in the face of injustice.
In the epilogue, Kapur relates four narratives from the subcontinent, four
stories of freedom which seek to ‘expand the optic’
through which we
approach gender and alterity. Here ‘freedom is not conceptualized in terms
of identity-based recognition and
empowerment, but invoked as the experience of
clearly discerning and understanding the relationship of the self to others and
the world in which one engages
interior and intimate experience, secured through
self-reflection’.
same time, Kapur expresses the hope that the non-liberal epistemes that these
narratives witness will produce ‘a more
mindful and thoughtful politics in
human rights
interventions’,
interventions we are told we must continue despite the apparent impossibility of
them delivering what we desire. While Kapur is frank
(‘I have not sought tidy outcomes and
resolutions’),
clear to me that she
identify how freedom in a different register
will assist us with the continued engagement with human rights which she also
is required of us. Her powerful account of a different kind of
freedom, rich and suggestive as it is, and enormously productive at
to and through critical conjunctures for human rights, nonetheless does not in
its articulation here manage to plug us
back into the human rights project with
a clear vision of how to do it differently, if we must continue to do it. How
emancipation,
found in freedom achieved by intimate inward knowledge of the
self, translates into social and political emancipation in the altogether
different realm of our shared collective existence, remains unresolved. This
reader eagerly awaits the next instalment of Kapur’s
‘different kind
of conversation on
in the hope of
more insight into these questions.
* Associate Professor & Government Teaching Program Director, College of
Business, Government and Law, Flinders University.
Ratna Kapur,
Gender, Alterity and
Human Rights: Freedom in a Fishbowl
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018) 1.
Ibid 8 (emphasis in original).
Ibid 12–13.
Lauren Berlant,
Cruel Optimism
(Duke University Press, 2011), cited in Kapur (n 1) 170.
Kapur (n 1) 79.
Gayatri Spivak,
Outside in the
Teaching Machine
(Routledge, 2009) 47–51, cited in Kapur (n 1)
Kapur (n 1)
(Directed by Shirin
Neshat, 2012), cited in Kapur (n 1) 200.
Kapur (n 1) 200.
Ibid 200 (emphasis in original).
Ibid 230 (emphasis in original).
Ibid 232–3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (67.3 KB)
PDF format (153 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter