URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Calbert, Emily --- "The Forgotten Victims: Addressing the Inhumane Treatment of Persons with Disability Under International Humanitarian Law" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 19; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-19
THE FORGOTTEN VICTIMS: ADDRESSING THE INHUMANE TREATMENT OF
PERSONS WITH DISABILITY UNDER INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
EMILY CALBERT
In all wars and disasters, it is persons with
disabilities that are first to die ... [and] the last to get resources and
when they are handed
I INTRODUCTION
The cornerstone principle of international humanitarian law
(‘IHL’) is to provide protection to civilians during armed
‘without any adverse distinction founded on race, colour, religion or
faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any similar
Despite being far
from inclusive, the non-exhaustive scope of this definition highlights how IHL
is to apply without prejudice to
persons with disabilities (‘PWD’).
PWDs are among the most vulnerable civilians in armed conflict, considering how
situation exacerbates the difficulties they experience in
and creates greater
barriers to upholding their safety, security and dignity. These significant
difficulties lead to what should
be guaranteed for all civilians, such as
accessing basic resources for survival and fleeing danger, becoming arduous, if
not impossible,
for PWDs during
armed conflict. As such, disability is a risk-enhancing factor in conflict
situations which increases these civilians’
risk of experiencing serious
PWDs being reduced to a class of civilians protected under ‘any similar
criteria’ is reflective of how IHL has been slow
to address considerations
of disability. While the past two decades have seen greater legal obligations
placed upon States to better
understand how conflict impacts differently upon
PWDs, practically there has been minimal, if any, tangible change. This article
will critique how the underlying ableist assumptions in IHL have caused PWDs to
invariably remain the ‘forgotten victims’
In neglecting to
properly understand the lived experiences of PWDs, the protections under IHL
blind to considerations of disability
rather inflict unnecessary suffering upon
these civilians.
This article will first explore the history of the legal protections afforded
to PWDs under IHL and considers how, in theory, the
current legal framework is
not entirely blind to considerations of disability. The practical shortcomings
of IHL in protecting PWDs
will then be discussed, focusing upon lived
experiences of PWDs in Gaza and the difficulties experienced in relation to
and accessibility. These sections will draw particular attention to
how the barriers experienced by PWDs mean they are invariably
to die’ when fleeing danger and deprioritised when it comes to resources.
Part V will subsequently propose
recommendations for how the general obligations
to all civilians under the current legal framework can be translated into
to best protect the safety, security and dignity of PWDs.
Considerations of disability within armed conflict are ultimately important
upholding this class of civilians’ protection under both IHL and human
rights law.
II DISABILITY UNDER THE IHL FRAMEWORK
While there is a lack of reliable data regarding the number of PWDs amid
armed conflict, it is estimated that between 15–30%
of a population
impacted by hostilities will be
PWDs have proven to be
disproportionately affected during armed conflict, tracing back to Nazi Germany
where individuals perceived
to have mental or physical disabilities were among
the first victims of the Holocaust, deemed ‘life unworthy of
and persecuted using
involuntary euthanasia. Although PWDs can be directly targeted during armed
conflict, seen in Nazi Germany alongside
targeted killings during armed
conflicts in Cambodia, Colombia and the Rwandan
often they are indirectly
impacted and placed at an increased risk of harm through their disabilities and
abandonment rendering them
unable to protect
themselves.
As IHL prohibits adverse distinction and must protect all citizens
irrespective of status, the rules of IHL could prima facie be considered,
minimum, disability neutral. However, legal protection was not explicitly
granted to PWDs until
Additional Protocol I
with article 8 adding ‘physical or mental disorder or disability’ to
the definitions of the terms ‘wounded’
and ‘sick’ within
Geneva Conventions
In this respect, these treaties are evidently a product of their context,
approaching disability through the Medical Model of Disability.
The Medical
Model frames an individual’s impairment as the central issue requiring
fixing, overlooking the environmental and
social factors that contribute to
disabling conditions.
this dominant understanding of disability as an impairment needing
‘fixing’, PWDs have been nonetheless recognised
as civilians that
‘shall be the object of particular protection and
This provision
suggests that following the introduction of
, the protections under
IHL were intended to be implemented consistent with the lived experiences of
Contrarily, the discourse surrounding the obligations of IHL to protect and
respect PWDs remained static until the ratification of
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
’) three decades later. Nowadays enjoying
near-universal ratification by 191
signified a paradigm shift in the visibility of PWDs within IHL by applying a
human rights approach to reframe understandings of
disability. This approach
recognises how the definition of disability is ‘evolving’ and arises
from the interaction between
‘persons with impairments...and environmental
barriers that hinder their full ...
participation’.
accordingly transformed the protections accorded to PWDs under IHL
into ‘rights’.
Article 11 specifically reinforces states’ obligations under IHL to take
all necessary measures to ensure the protection and
safety of persons with
disabilities in ‘situations of risk’, including armed conflict. This
Article builds upon how IHL,
despite obliging that all civilians be treated
humanely, does not define what constitutes ‘humane treatment’. The
of definition indicates that this obligation is inherently
and is to be considered
on a case-by-case basis alongside the prohibition on adverse distinction when
applied to PWDs. Moreover,
benefits from a non-derogation
prohibiting state
parties from suspending their obligations under the
is therefore a powerful tool for advancing the visibility of PWDs within IHL
and, in turn, allowing IHL to become cognisant of PWDs’
lived experiences
during armed conflicts.
Although the adoption of the
marked significant progress in
increasing the visibility of PWDs, IHL in practice has remained seemingly
uninfluenced by these obligations.
No active efforts have been made to integrate
a disability perspective into monitoring mechanisms for
instead invariably
relegating protection of these rights to soft law. Serious concern over the
inhumane treatment of PWDs culminated
in the United Nations Security Council
(‘UNSC’) unanimously passing
Resolution 2475
the first resolution
entirely dedicated to improving the treatment of PWDs in armed
Resolution 2475
calls upon States parties to fulfil their obligations under the
Conventions
, eliminating discrimination against PWDs by
facilitating their unimpeded access to both basic services and humanitarian
assistance.
Notwithstanding how
Resolution 2475
prioritised the interaction between IHL and human rights
on the international agenda, its implementation has been
The lack of active
protection of PWDs’ rights, and the subsequent accountability void for
States parties, has maintained PWDs’
status as a disproportionately
impacted class of civilians across all phases of conflict, from pre-attack to
post-conflict.
III EVACUATION
Parties to armed conflicts have an obligation to give effective advance
warning prior to an attack that may impact the civilian
population.
The effectiveness of
this warning must be assessed from the perspective of the entire civilian
population potentially impacted by
the attack. Only relying upon one method of
communication increases the chance that PWDs will not receive the
thereby compromising
their safety. For instance, auditory messages – should advance warning be
given – or the sounds
of bombing – as PWDs’ lived experiences
suggest is the more likely indicator of danger – will not be heard by
with hearing impairments. This was the case with 21-year-old Odai in
Gaza, whose hearing impairment prevented him from hearing shelling
closing in as
he worked outside on the family’s farm. Not knowing he was in danger and
needed to flee, a rocket landed near
Odai, throwing him five metres onto his
back and leaving him paralysed.
For IHL to be truly disability-inclusive, the warnings must be delivered in a
variety of auditory and visual
which recognise the
diversity of impairments experienced by PWDs. There is a tendency in the limited
discussions surrounding PWDs
during armed conflicts to focus on
‘visible’ physical
disabilities
that may prevent a
civilian from fleeing danger. Nonetheless, a civilian’s intellectual
disability likewise exposes them to
danger as they may not be aware of the
events occurring in their environment. Additionally, persons with
‘invisible’
disabilities are particularly ill-protected under IHL,
with fewer services being available for those with intellectual disabilities
are practically invisible compared to civilians with physical and sensory
disabilities.
The need for disability-inclusive warnings to best protect all civilians
extends to pre-strike assessments, a precautionary measure
essential to
upholding the principle of
distinction
and ensuring that
civilians are not subject to unnecessary suffering. A disability analysis must
consider how ‘typical’
civilian patterns of life may differ for
PWDs. For example, strikes on residential areas during the daytime on the basis
that civilians
will be at work or school is blind to how PWDs may be at
as it is often the only
infrastructure able to sufficiently accommodate their disability. Such lack of
consideration within IHL enhances
the risk and ultimately statistics of PWDs
invariably being the ‘first to die’ within armed conflicts. In Gaza,
the absence
of accessible warnings combined with the destruction of
communication networks has led to widespread extreme distress among PWDs
expect to be the ‘first and next’ to be killed – despite
Israel, as the occupying party in Gaza, being a state
party to the
Further, the disparity of harm experienced by PWDs arises from IHL being
blind to how PWDs may require more time to evacuate an area
or may not be able
to flee an area at all.
telephone warnings have been given in Gaza, it has been reported that the
Israeli military gives civilians three to five minutes
a timeframe
insufficient for many PWDs who require assistance from either family members or
assistive devices to evacuate. On average,
PWDs take almost twice as long as
fellow non-disabled civilians to flee their
Evacuation may also
not be a feasible possibility for all, such as for PWDs who live in inaccessible
infrastructure or, as was the
case in Northern Gaza in 2020, orphanages unable
to evacuate due to the high support needs of the children with disabilities who
live there.
While PWDs must be prioritised in evacuations under
it has been frequently
reported that PWDs have been denied access to evacuation transport, often due to
the evacuation vehicle not
being adaptive to PWDs’ specific care
Families subsequently
often bear the burden of assisting their family members who are unable to flee
independently, forcing them
to choose between risking their own lives to help
their relative or leaving them behind. The independence of PWDs in evacuating
using resources is a key component of disability-inclusivity, with
accessibility that depends on the goodwill of family members contravening
definition of accessibility within the
IHL must oblige
that parties to an armed conflict consider the safety of PWDs with respect to
their own abilities when partaking
in and responding to armed conflict.
IV ACCESSIBILITY
IHL is additionally blind to considerations of disability when it comes to
accessibility. Prohibited under IHL, the destruction of
infrastructure essential
to civilian survival, particularly hospitals, is often reported as having
devastating impacts on individuals
injured in the armed conflict. Attention must
also be drawn to how the lack of access to medical care, medicines and assistive
resulting from armed conflict likewise aggravates pre-existing
disability.
In Yemen, a father
has shared his inability to access medication for his four-year-old daughter
with cerebral palsy and epilepsy
crucial for regulating her epileptic seizures
to once every two weeks. Without the medication, she experiences seizures twice
Gaza has long suffered from a general lack of assistive devices including
wheelchairs, crutches and prosthetics, amplified by the
military bombardment of
Gaza and Israel’s blocking of humanitarian aid to the
Further, chronic power
outages make it difficult for PWDs to properly use any devices powered by
electricity, such as electric scooters
and hearing aids, while there is a lack
of expertise in Gaza to repair damaged
IHL is particularly
blind to children with disabilities, with child assistive devices often not
being appropriate for their age or,
in prosthetics, not being tailored to each
individual’s needs as they grow. This lack of resources has a domino
effect, with
some children with physical disabilities without access to
prosthetics no longer going to school out of fear of not being able to
safety should an attack
Perhaps the most innovative aspect of the
pertaining to
accessibility is how reasonable accommodation is enforced as a standalone
‘necessary and appropriate
modification’
However, this tool of substantive equality has not been practically implemented
in displacement camps and emergency shelters.
PWDs able to evacuate, or rather
forcefully displaced from, their homes often dread having to leave their
‘safe place’
accommodation which facilitate their accessibility and
adaptability requirements.
instance, evacuation zones often are not constructed for wheelchair users,
lacking ramps, grab bars and other
and featuring squat
toilets completely inaccessible to these PWDs. For PWDs able to flee their homes
to safety, their assistive devices
are often left behind, compounding the
hardship faced in displacement camps. PWDs have reported that without their
assistive devices,
coupled with the inaccessible designs of emergency
accommodation, the situation is desire insofar they must crawl on the floor to
reach the toilet.
humanitarian aid is provided to these zones, it is conducted in a manner blind
to considerations of disability, especially
more ‘invisible’
disabilities. The UN Office for the Coordination of Human Affairs
(‘OCHA’) reported that
deliveries of food did not meet the needs of
individuals with dysphagia, with these swallowing difficulties affecting people
with a diverse range of
disabilities.
article 11 notably only covers ‘situations of risk and
emergency’ and does not explicitly distinguish displacement as
‘situation of risk’. This is a significant shortcoming in a
Convention seeking to drive meaningful changes in the lived
experiences of PWDs
during armed conflict, especially considering how PWDs often remain displaced in
camps for much longer compared
to most non-disabled
accessibility
to appropriate
facilities and essential resources is pivotal to enhancing the visibility of
disability within IHL.
V RECOMMENDATIONS
The lived experiences of PWDs during evacuation and regarding issues with
accessibility highlight that despite the strong framework
IHL remains blind to considerations of disability. Much more work towards
implementation is required to enact tangible change, ensuring
the safety and
protection of these ‘forgotten victims’ disproportionately impacted
by armed conflict.
Obligations of state parties under the
to truly understand the
impact that disability has on a civilian’s enjoyment of their fundamental
human rights is twofold.
Firstly, states must identify and remove barriers
experienced by PWDs throughout the entire conflict phase, ranging from
to humanitarian responses. The current phrasing of
‘protection’ from ‘situations of risk’ in article 11 is
ambiguous, not clearly distinguishing the myriad of risks PWDs can encounter
– where essential infrastructure, pursuant to
the principle of
proportionality, for PWDs can include facilities such as psychiatric
how restricted
access to assistive devices and medical resources can be a matter of life or
death; and how even displacement camps
can be rendered a ‘situation of
risk’ due to their inaccessibility. A significant challenge to enhancing
the visibility
of PWDs within IHL is thus clarifying the diversity of
impairments and subsequent barriers
experienced,
then tailoring
practical applications which address all these considerations.
The most effective means to develop a granular understanding of these
barriers, and the second key responsibility placed upon states
is enabling PWDs to actively contribute to shaping IHL
While about protection,
embraces the agency of PWDs, with article 4.3 calling for states
to closely consult and actively involve PWDs or their representatives
decision-making processes that affect them, including
implementation.
Neglecting to
consider PWDs’ lived experiences will only perpetuate the ableist system
of protections that inadequately protects
these ‘forgotten victims’.
Resolution 2475
likewise promotes the shift of power to PWDs through a
focus on meaningful participation and
representation.
However, in the
past five years since
Resolution 2475
has been adopted, there has been
little engagement of PWDs in the work of the UNSC. Inviting briefers with
disabilities to actively
participate in UNSC
will increase
PWDs’ meaningful participation in the process of enhancing visibility in
Despite IHL suggesting that PWDs should be afforded ‘special’
protections,
acknowledged that integrating a disability perspective into IHL does not involve
creating ‘special’ rights
or prioritising PWDs over other
Rather, implementing
and applying accessible measures is necessary for permitting the full and equal
enjoyment of PWDs’ basic
human rights and preserving their safety,
security and dignity to the greatest extent possible during armed conflict.
VI CONCLUSION
Although identified as being disproportionately impacted by armed conflict,
PWDs are often deprived of protections under IHL. The
strong frameworks of both
Resolution 2475
highlight how promoting the
disability-inclusivity of IHL has been prioritised on the international agenda.
However, in practice,
IHL continues to be blind to the needs and difficulties
experienced by PWDs throughout armed conflict, denying their basic human
and their safety, security and dignity.
The dynamic nature of IHL, combined with the obligations on state parties to
, provide ample flexibility to consider the lived experiences of
PWD. Much more work towards application and implementation is required
disability-inclusive promises of article 11 to be
the strongest
recommendation for achieving tangible change being actively facilitating the
involvement or representation of PWDs
in decision-making processes where the
outcome will directly impact them. Factoring considerations of disability into
the interpretation
and application of IHL is critical to improving the
visibility of PWDs – the disproportionately impacted albeit
victims’ – and ultimately contributing to a greater
sense of justice amid the destruction of armed conflict.
Telephone interview with Chris
Stubbs, Founder of MENCAFEP (Mentally Handicapped Children and Families Project)
(Sri Lanka, 25 October
2007) cited in Women’s Refugee Commission,
‘Disabilities among Refugees and Conflict-Affected Populations’
(Discussion
Paper, Women’s Refugee Commission, June 2008) 6.
Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the
, opened for signature 12 August
1949, 75 UNTS 31
(entered into force
21 October 1950) (‘
Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed
Forces at Sea
, opened for signature 12 August
1949, 75 UNTS 85
(entered into
force 21 October 1950) (‘
Convention Relative to the Treatment of
Prisoners of War
, opened for signature 12 August
1949, 75 UNTS 135
into force 21 October 1950) (‘
Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War
, opened for signature 12 August
(entered into force 21 October 1950) (‘
Sara Le Vecchia, ‘The Protection of Women and
Girls with Disabilities in Armed Conflict: Adopting a Gender-, Age- and
Disability-Inclusive
Approach to Select IHL Provisions’
(2023) 105(922)
International Review of the Red Cross
Robert Mardini, ‘Persons with Disabilities in
Armed Conflicts: From Invisibility to Visibility’,
(2023) 105(922)
International Review of the Red Cross
Alice Priddy, ‘Disability and Armed
Conflict’ (Academy Briefing No 14, Geneva Academy of International
Humanitarian Law
and Human Rights, April 2019) 14.
Gerard Quinn,
Report of the
Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities in the Context
of Armed Conflict
A/76/146, 19 July 2021), cited
in Janet E Lord,
‘Accounting for Disability in International Humanitarian Law’
International Review of the Red Cross
Amanda Tink, ‘Disabled People Were Holocaust
Victims, Too: They were Excluded from German Society and Murdered by Nazi
The Conversation
(online, 27 January 2023) <
https://theconversation.com/disabled-people-were-holocaust-victims-too-they-were-excluded-from-german-society-and-murdered-by-nazi-programs-198298
Hezzy Smith, ‘War Crime and No
Punishment?’,
Harvard Law School Project on Disability
(Blog Post,
16 December 2022) <
https://hpod.law.harvard.edu/news/entry/war-crime-and-no-punishment
Bogna Ruminowicz, ‘Advancing Towards
Inclusive Peace and Security: Persons with Disabilities and Security Council
(2023) 105(922)
International Review of the Red
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed
(Protocol I)
opened for signature 8 June
1977, 1125 UNTS 3
(entered into force 7 December 1978) (‘
Lord (n 6) 66.
Alexander Breitegger, ‘Increasing Visibility
of Persons with Disabilities in Armed Conflicts: Implications for Interpreting
and Applying IHL’
(2023) 105(922)
International Review of the Red
Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS
(entered into force 3 May 2008) (‘
, A/RES/61/106 (13 December 2006,
adopted 13 December 2006) preambular para (e).
Naomi Hart et al, ‘Making Every Life Count:
Ensuring Equality and Protection for Persons with Disabilities in Armed
[2014] MonashULawRw 9
(2014) 40(1)
Monash University Law Review
Breitegger (n 12) 116.
William I Pons, Janet E Lord and Michael Ashley
Stein, ‘Addressing the Accountability Void: War Crimes Against Persons
Disabilities’
(2023) 105(922)
International Review of the Red
SC Res 2475
S/RES/2475 (20 June 2019) (‘
Resolution 2475
Ruminowicz (n 9) 455.
Emina Ćerimović, ‘A Call to Protect
People with Disabilities in Armed Conflict’,
Human Rights Watch
(online, 10 December 2020) <
https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/12/10/call-protect-people-disabilities-armed-conflict
Lord (n 6) 73.
‘As the Bombing Started, Odai Couldn’t
Hear the Danger’,
Humanity & Inclusion
(online, 7 October 2015)
https://www.hi-us.org/en/news/as-the-bombing-started-odai-couldn-t-hear-the-danger
Lord (n 6) 72.
Brigitte Rohwerder, ‘Intellectual
Disabilities, Violent Conflict and Humanitarian Assistance: Advocacy of the
(2013) 28(6)
Disability and Society
Women’s Refugee
Commission, ‘Disabilities among Refugees and Conflict-Affected
Populations’ (Discussion Paper,
Women’s Refugee Commission, June
Lord (n 6) 75.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, ‘Gaza: Palestinians with Disabilities Fear Being Killed
says UN Committee’ (Press Release, 27 May 2024) <
https://www.ohchr.org/en/press-releases/2024/05/gaza-palestinians-disabilities-fear-being-killed-first-says-un-committee
Ahmed Al-Dawoody and William I Pons,
‘Protection of Persons with Disabilities in Armed Conflict under
International Humanitarian
Law and Islamic Law’
(2023) 105(922)
International Review of the Red Cross
Human Rights Watch,
‘Gaza: Israeli Attacks, Blockade Devastating for People with
Disabilities’,
Human Rights Watch
(online, 1 November 2023) <
https://www.hrw.org/news/2023/11/01/gaza-israeli-attacks-blockade-devastating-people-disabilities
Maria Kett and Jean-François Trani,
‘Vulnerability and Disability in Darfur’ (2010) (35)
Migration Review
Human Rights Watch, ‘Gaza: Israeli Attacks,
Blockade Devastating for People with Disabilities’ (n 34).
Kate McInnes, ‘Seeking Victim-Centred
Accountability for Violence Against Persons with Disabilities at the United
Nations Independent
International Commission of Inquiry for Ukraine’
Leiden Journal of International Law
Lord (n 6) 72.
Human Rights Watch, ‘UN: High Risk in
Conflicts for Children with Disabilities’,
Human Rights Watch
(online, 2 February 2022) <
https://www.hrw.org/news/2022/02/02/un-high-risk-conflicts-children-disabilities
Human Rights Watch,
‘Gaza: Israeli Attacks, Blockade Devastating for People with
Disabilities’ (n 34).
Human Rights Watch,
‘UN: High Risk in Conflicts for Children with Disabilities’ (n
Diakonia IHL Centre, ‘IHL and the Protection
of People with Disabilities’ (Panel Discussion, Diakonia IHL Centre, 16
February 2022).
Priddy (n 5) 29.
Human Rights Watch,
‘Gaza: Israeli Attacks, Blockade Devastating for People with
Disabilities’ (n 34).
Human Rights Watch, ‘Central African
Republic: People with Disabilities at High Risk’,
Human Rights
(online, 21 June 2017) <
https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/06/21/central-african-republic-people-disabilities-high-risk
Helen Durham and Gerard Quinn, ‘Lifting the
Cloak of Invisibility: Civilians with Disabilities in Armed Conflict’,
Humanitarian Law and Policy
(Blog Post, 21 April 2022) <
https://blogs.icrc.org/law-and-policy/2022/04/21/civilians-disabilities-armed-conflict/
Human Rights Watch,
‘Gaza: Israeli Attacks, Blockade Devastating for People with
Disabilities’ (n 34).
Rohwerder (n 28) 14.
Lord (n 6) 75.
Breitegger (n 13) 112.
Durham and Quinn (n
United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy,
‘Consulting Persons with Disabilities’ (Guidelines, United Nations,
https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/un_disability-inclusive_consultation_guidelines.pdf
Resolution 2475
(n 20) art 6.
Ruminowicz (n 9) 458.
Lord (n 6) 67.
Pons, Lord and Stein (n 19)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.4 KB)
PDF format (259 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter