URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Frost, Tom; Murray, CRG --- "The Mists of Time: Intertemporality and Self-Determination's Territorial Integrity Rule in the ICJ's Chagos Advisory Opinion" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 3; (2024) 25(1) Melbourne Journal of International Law 21
I Introduction
II The Chagos Dispute(s)
III The Intertemporal Challenge in the Chagos Advisory Opinion
IV The Chagos Archives and the Intertemporal Problem
V Implications and Aftermath
VI Conclusion
THE MISTS OF TIME:
INTERTEMPORALITY AND SELF-DETERMINATION’S TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY RULE
IN THE ICJ’S
ADVISORY OPINION
The Mists of Time
Tom Frost and CRG
The United Kingdom’s critique of the International Court of
Justice’s Chagos Advisory Opinion has focused upon the Court’s
approach to the norms of international law applicable at the time of the British
Indian Ocean Territory’s (‘BIOT’)
creation, which involved the
excision of territories from two of its then colonies, Mauritius and the
Seychelles. The decision turned
on whether norms of self-determination relating
to the territorial integrity of colonised territories had crystallised as
international law before the BIOT was created in November 1965, a
proposition the UK continues to publicly reject. This is a dispute
temporality and the development of customary international law. This article
interrogates the UK’s claims by reviewing
the holdings of the UK National
Archives, which detail how Ministers, legal advisers and officials understood
the norms of self-determination
applicable to the BIOT. They demonstrate that
the UK government was acutely aware of the implications of these rules for the
colony’s creation and sought to distract United Nations organs from
the relevant legal questions. They therefore provide a
window into how certain
voices have long been prioritised over others in the processes by which
customary international law
I Introduction
During the 1960s, at the height of the Cold War, the United Kingdom sought to
maintain a strategic position in the Indian Ocean in
the face of the exorbitant
costs of maintaining a military presence “East of Suez” and the
accelerating pressure upon
it to decolonise. To square this circle, it assessed
which islands that formed part of its remaining colonies could support military
bases and offered the United States the opportunity (and the costs) of
developing these. The British Indian Ocean Territory (‘BIOT’)
be created by severing a collection of island groups from the colonies of
Mauritius and the Seychelles prior to their independence.
In the summer of 1964,
the US chose Diego Garcia as its preferred site for its base, enabling it to
project its military power across
the Indian Ocean. Even as the details were
left to be settled, and before the new colony was even created, preparations
expel and exclude the Chagos Archipelago’s inhabitants. This
article explores the UK government’s active efforts to downplay
these essential features of its BIOT policy and how they continue to influence
the resultant legal
In 2019, the International Court of Justice (‘ICJ’) accepted that
it had jurisdiction to issue an advisory opinion on
the legality of the
BIOT’s creation. The Court considered that the UK had failed to complete
Mauritius’ decolonisation
because the BIOT’s creation involved
dismembering the existing colony in violation of its territorial
has thereafter faced international pressure to return the Chagos Archipelago to
prevaricated over its response, highlighting the opinion’s status as
merely advisory and rejecting its legal premise.
For all that the UK is
‘generally supportive’ of the ICJ, this case illustrates its
resistance to the Court’s advisory
role when its legal interests are
challenged.
Ministers have maintained that the UK’s actions were not a breach of
international law as it existed at the time the BIOT was
created: ‘We have
concluded that the approach set out in the Advisory Opinion failed to give due
regard to material facts and
legal issues that the UK government explained in
detail in our submissions to the ICJ’.
Not only have Ministers refused to accept the substance of the opinion, they
allege that Mauritius had ‘circumvented the principle
that the ICJ should
consider bilateral disputes only with the consent of the
In summary, the UK government
insists that it did not receive a fair hearing given that the ‘emotive
theme of decolonisation’
was at issue.
This marks a concerted effort to paint the Court as being so eager to distance
itself from a legacy of effectively sustaining colonialism
that it is now
willing to play fast and loose with its reasoning.
This article confronts these efforts to undermine the ICJ’s advisory
opinion. We begin by providing an overview of the Chagos
dispute and the
ICJ’s advisory opinion. Much of the ICJ’s jurisprudence relating to
colonisation in the 1960s and 1970s,
particularly the
South West Africa
subject to intense criticism from newly independent
The subsequent development of the
Court’s jurisprudence on self-determination would seesaw through the
Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in
(South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276
might be tempting to suggest that, having taken advantage of judgments which
reflected the interests of colonial powers for so
long, and through them the
‘reproduction of problematic ontological assumptions’, it ill befits
the UK to complain that
the shoe is now on the other
all, the identification of the relevant law at issue at the time of a dispute is
particularly complicated where the contested
post-1945 development of the law of
self-determination as customary international law, applicable
is at issue. That, however, would sidestep whether there are any merits in the
UK’s complaints that this dispute has seen
international tribunals reach
decisions upon the historic actions of the UK by judging these actions against
contemporary standards.
Fundamental to the UK’s critique of the ICJ, which, as we will explore,
has been maintained even as the UK undertook negotiations
with Mauritius over
the sovereignty of the Chagos Archipelago between 2022 and 2023, is a clash
between different accounts of the
development of the rule of territorial
integrity in the context of self-determination. Steven Wheatley has already
explored the interplay
between the concepts of temporality at work in the Chagos
intertemporal problem overshadowing the advisory opinion on the
Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
Chagos Advisory
’) is not resolved by the
ICJ drawing together a timeline or a history of the dispute. Rather, it lies in
the shifting accounts
of core concepts of self-determination between the
BIOT’s creation and the point at which the Court came to assess these
over half a century which reshaped the law and language of
decolonisation.
We therefore contextualise
the UK’s actions in the 1960s through the extensive materials held by the
UK National Archives detailing
the creation of the BIOT and the UK’s
subsequent justifications for its actions. Although many of the materials
relating to
the Chagossians’ treatment have been discussed in cases before
the UK’s domestic courts, this paper addresses the neglected
deliberations
between UK policymakers over the legality of the dismemberment of the colony of
Mauritius. These materials indicate
that, although the Court’s reasoning
could have been more expansive, there is no justification for efforts to present
its conclusions
as ahistorical.
Our approach, in historicising the development of the self-determination
norms, might be thought to fit squarely within international
“turn to history”.
to the extent that we seek to situate these developments in time and place by
using archival method to understand how
the UK, as a colonial power, conceived
of these norms between 1965 to 1968 in the context of the BIOT and reflected
upon them in
response to challenges. But we also prioritise ‘a more
time-sensitive point of view’ towards the dispute when the UK
employ intertemporal issues to delegitimate the
Chagos Advisory
This use of archival method
highlights how the ICJ’s approach to decolonisation in the 1960s and
1970s, and the leeway it gave
to colonising states, generated a false impression
of the quiescence of international tribunals in the corridors of Whitehall. We
explore how that confidence gradually crumbled and how these archive sources
provide no succour to the UK government’s bombastic
rejection of the
ICJ’s advisory opinion. By the early 1980s, Margaret Thatcher’s
Attorney-General accepted, on both the
issues of ‘dismemberment’ of
the existing colony of Mauritius and the Chagossians’ ‘expulsion and
exclusion’,
‘a not implausible case could be made out against
the privacy of internal communications, the sanitised language of the Chagos
Archipelago’s separation and the relocation
of the islanders is stripped
away. We recount how those concerns about BIOT policy, frequently acknowledged,
came to be realised,
even as the UK continues to contest them.
II The Chagos
The legal dispute over the UK’s activity in the Chagos Archipelago is
really two disputes, one by which the Chagos islanders
have challenged their
expulsion and exclusion from the islands and the other involving Mauritius
challenging the UK’s claims
to sovereignty over the Archipelago. The
Chagossians have conducted a decades-long campaign in the London courts, with
judges coming
to accept that ‘their treatment by the [UK] Government is
important and troubling’.
islanders have found many of these challenges thwarted by a combination of
obscure public law doctrines, limitation periods,
the extent of prerogative
powers, and the limitations to concepts of citizenship and belonging in what
remains of the law applicable
to the British
Mauritius’ activity on the
international stage has, however, dealt more significant blows to the UK’s
BIOT policy.
In 2011, Mauritius initiated arbitration proceedings under art 287 and annex
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
challenging
the UK’s designation of a marine protected area (‘MPA’) around
Archipelago.
Leaked cables had indicated the UK’s confidence that this scheme would
‘put paid to the resettlement claims of the archipelago’s
residents’.
This marked the point at which the two Chagos disputes became decisively
intertwined; the UK’s efforts to stymie the Chagossians’
resettlement campaign through the establishment of the MPA impinged on the
commitments the UK had made to Mauritius on the creation
of the BIOT and thus
precipitated the
arbitration.
The tribunal found that existing commitments obliged the UK to return the Chagos
Archipelago to Mauritius when it was no longer required
for defence purposes,
thereby giving Mauritius an interest in any decisions which affected the
islands’ future which had not
been addressed in the UK’s unilateral,
and thus unlawful, designation of the MPA.
Judges Kateka and Wolfrum were prepared to go further, finding that improper
motive spurred the MPA’s development and that
in creating the BIOT, the UK
had shown ‘complete disregard’ for Mauritius’ territorial
They were referring to events surrounding the Lancaster House Conference in
September 1965. Alongside the main Conference, the UK
Prime Minister, Harold
Wilson, met privately with the Premier of Mauritius, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam,
to ‘frighten’
him, using delays to independence, into being
‘sensible’ and accepting that the Chagos Archipelago would be
excised from
Mauritius to form part of the UK’s new BIOT
Ramgoolam was aware this ultimatum
was coming; colonial officials had earlier broached the issue of the detachment
and found him
He was, however, in little position to negotiate. Faced with the difficulties of
a monocrop dependent economy, a fractious independence
movement and the dominant
economic interests of a small minority in Mauritian society, the Chagos
Archipelago did not rank amongst
his immediate
priorities.
The UK, moreover, had
considerable experience of exploiting the unequal bargaining position inherent
in decolonisation talks to protect
Wilson started the meeting by
holding out the prize; both administrations should work towards realising
Mauritius’ independence
‘as soon as
‘[T]he detachment of
Diego Garcia’, which was not publicly ‘bound up with the question of
Independence’,
nonetheless needed to be addressed first, being ‘a
very important matter for the British position East of
Ramgoolam suggested the possibility of the US leasing Diego Garcia as part of
an agreement to buy sugar at a guaranteed price and
provide Mauritius with wheat
and rice in exchange.
Wilson, however,
would not be swayed, and that afternoon, Ramgoolam formally conceded to the
Two months later, an Order in
Council was passed establishing the BIOT,
with the UK thereafter agreeing to a 50-year lease with the US to enable it to
establish a base on Diego Garcia.
paid £3 million to Mauritius as compensation for the detachment and made
commitments to restore the islands to Mauritius
when they were no longer
required for defence
Ramgoolam also secured fishing rights which would not only prove practically
valuable to post-independence Mauritius but which would,
decades later, provide
a basis for the challenge to the UK’s creation of an
For Judges Kateka and Wolfrum, the
UK’s ‘threat that Ramgoolam could return home without
independence’ was nothing
The concept of duress, under
customary law, is not, however, necessary to challenge the UK’s activity
if self-determination
provides the legal framework by which to assess the events
Under the rubric of
self-determination, the key issue is, instead, the extent to which the people of
the then-colony had an effective
role in the decolonisation process. As we
explore below, United Nations General Assembly (‘UNGA’)
Resolution 1541
had, in 1960, elucidated the principles of popular
authorisation for the introduction of new arrangements, short of full
independence,
in non-self-governing
territories.
If this Resolution, and
related measures, reflected binding norms by the time of the BIOT’s
creation, then ‘a full [sic]
informed, free and genuine choice’ by
the people of Mauritius would have been required to legally break up the colony
independence.
In 2016, the UK extended the US’ lease over the Diego Garcia base for a
Mauritius thereafter tabled a resolution at the UNGA, referring the issue to the
ICJ for an advisory
Resolution 71/292
was adopted by 94 votes to 15, with 65
abstentions.
The Resolution emphasised the
UNGA’s role in overseeing the process of decolonisation, with the
implication being that the
ICJ was not being asked to resolve a bilateral
territorial dispute without the consent of one of the states
Instead, the Court was asked to
address two questions. First, whether the decolonisation of Mauritius had been
lawfully completed
when Mauritius became independent in 1968 given the prior
separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius. The Chagos
Archipelago’s
status as part of Mauritius prior to 1965 was beyond
States administering
non-self-governing territories, moreover, are subject to an obligation under the
Charter of the United Nations
promote to the utmost ... the well-being of the inhabitants of these
territories’,
which was arguably
engaged by the separation of the Chagos Archipelago and the displacement of its
inhabitants.
Second, the ICJ was asked to
consider the consequences of an incomplete decolonisation for the UK’s
ongoing administration
of the Chagos Archipelago, which prevented Mauritian
citizens, including the Chagossians, from settling on the Archipelago.
These questions are significant for the bilateral dispute regarding
sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago. The UK thus invoked the
principle that
bilateral disputes may only be adjudicated on the basis of
and noted that its Optional Clause
Declaration
accepting compulsory ICJ
Commonwealth
Court accepted that the UNGA had granted it jurisdiction to issue its opinion as
part of its role in advancing decolonisation
and did not attempt to disentangle
the dispute over sovereignty from questions relating to the status of customary
international
law of self-determination at the time of Mauritius’
decolonisation.
There was no effort in the advisory opinion proceedings to dispute that the
right of peoples to self-determination provided some current
norms within international law.
however, insisted that the Chagos Archipelago’s detachment from Mauritius
in 1965 did not engage these rules because
at that time self-determination was
merely a general
focus of the substantive legal argument lay in determining the legal status of
self-determination in the period 1965 to 1968,
between the removal of the
territories making up the BIOT from the UK’s existing colonies of
Mauritius and the Seychelles and
the independence of Mauritius. The UK was
essentially postulating that the ICJ would not, at that time, have found its
have breached international law.
Looking to that era, it is the case that within months of the BIOT’s
creation, the ICJ refused to examine the legality of South
extension of the policy of apartheid to the trust territory of South West
Africa, which suggests the limits to self-determination’s
operation at the
Philippe Sands comments:
The South West Africa judgements plunged the Court into an abyss of
disrepute, from which it would not emerge for two decades. In
decolonisation, the judges were seen to strike a blow for colonial rule, leaving
apartheid and discrimination in place.
The government of South Africa celebrated
as others bemoaned the Court for dispensing justice ‘according to a
Much as it would be impolitic to directly remind the Court of these
calumnies, the UK was insistent that it was only in the 1970s,
relating to South
Africa’s continued presence in Namibia, that the ICJ recognised the right
of peoples to self-determination
as part of customary international law, drawing
Resolution 2625 (XXV)
Declaration
There was thus, for the UK, nothing prior to this jurisprudence to indicate that
the separation of the Chagos Archipelago breached
international law. This
account treats the UNGA’s subsequent confirmation of the existence of the
self-determination norm in
1970 as irrelevant to the question of its disputed
status between 1965 and 1968. Instead, law internal to the British Empire
independence and questions of self-government, excluding these from the
ambit of UN organs.
This account, moreover,
privileges the UK’s active and protracted efforts to deny any legal status
to self-determination in
the 1950s and
Mauritius countered that the customary international law relating to
self-determination and the dismemberment of colonies by colonising
coalesced prior to the BIOT’s creation, placing emphasis on UNGA
Resolution 1514 (XV)
Declaration
Such resolutions are non-binding, but they have played an important role in
multiple ICJ decisions, including with regard to the
self-determination of
regard to the development of customary international law, the necessary
opinio juris
can be reflected in a UNGA resolution or a series of
resolutions. The institutionalised nature of the UNGA means that resolutions
tend to be passed as part of a series, and a common mechanism for enforcing
significant resolutions is to establish committees whose
functions include the
adoption of further resolutions. The Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples (‘Committee of 24’) was
established
in 1961 to implement the
Declaration
Declaration
, and its supporting UN organs, undermined assertions that the
organisation of colonies was an issue purely internal to the law of
the British
Mauritius’ position was that
subsequent developments, and in particular the
1970 Declaration
merely the confirmation of a pre-existing period of custom formation and that
the self-determination norm crystallised with
the adoption of the
Declaration
; in short, that ‘[t]he [1970] Declaration
customary international law — it did not
III The Intertemporal
Challenge in the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
The intertemporal problem arises when parties to a dispute contest the date
of a change in the applicable law
potentially live in circumstances in which the law has changed between the
events in question and a court’s
deliberations.
As Wheatley has unpacked in
the context of the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
, temporal issues can dominate
territorial disputes under international law. In such cases, the relevant
practice can span centuries,
and tribunals are little aided by bare incantations
of the general doctrine that the legality of events (like the detachment of the
Chagos Archipelago) is to be judged against the rules in force when they
Few decisions dwell upon these
challenges. In
Western Sahara
, for example, the ICJ confirmed that the
validity of the acquisition of the territory was to be determined by reference
in force ‘at the time’ of its colonisation by
Historic assertions of this
doctrine, however, recognise that international tribunals can consider changes
to the applicable law
in the intervening period; ‘a distinction must be
made between the creation of rights and the existence of
The limitations of the general doctrine are, moreover, acute where an
emergent norm of customary international law is at
In such cases, the intertemporal
challenge is concealed in the familiar assertion that the determination of the
existence, scope
and content of a customary norm requires both evidence of
general practice and evidence of
opinio juris
indicating a belief that
the practice is required by international
mantra is hardly ‘open and attentive’ to the temporal challenges
involved in the task of establishing, with sufficient
certainty, whether
applicable norms have developed.
however, teases out two approaches to establishing state practice and
at the relevant juncture.
can treat events as moving through time, from the past, through the present and
on to the future (which Wheatley, drawing
on the work of John
labels the ‘A-series’ conception of
The ICJ’s task is to
establish, ‘from the privileged position of “now”’, the
juncture at which there
is sufficient evidence that change has occurred, and it
must apply the new rule to any acts occurring after the moment of
crystallisation.
Such linear narratives of
time are, however, increasingly critiqued as being intertwined with Western
conceptions of progress.
Alternately,
judges could reject any reliance on the concept of the passage of time as an
objective reality and instead focus on
the timeline of events, which can be
described in terms of being ‘later than’, ‘earlier than’
or ‘simultaneous
with’ each other (which Wheatley labels the
‘B-series’ of time).
B-series reasoning, when the law has changed from an old rule to a new rule, the
judicial function ‘is to determine which
iteration [was]
“simultaneous with” the relevant
Later developments are
irrelevant to understanding the law at that juncture. Notwithstanding the
critique of A-series reasoning as
involving the imposition of a Western
conception of time, the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
saw the UK arguing for a
B-series account of the state of the norms of self-determination in the
mid-1960s, unmoored from their development
in the interim and any consequent
allusions to historical progress.
The outcome of the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
thus turned upon how the
ICJ applied intertemporal doctrine to the question of whether the right to
self-determination had crystallised
as a customary norm in the years 1965 to
Court’s analysis proceeded from art 1(2) of the
emphasises, as one of the UN’s purposes, ‘respect for the principle
of equal rights and self-determination of
Article 1(2) relates to
non-state actors, the right of self-determination being held by peoples. The
purposes of the
provide the basis for the organisation’s
legal powers under the principle of
speciality.
The Court has accepted, from
onwards, that self-determination is a ‘principle’
which generates a range of binding
obligations in the context
of decolonisation.
Article 1(2) and ch XI
, however, have generally been recognised as being
insufficient in and of themselves to establish a legal right to
self-determination
reflected that it was significant for the UK’s case that, at the time of
the events at issue in the
Advisory Opinion
‘international lawyers, with the notable, but solitary, exception of
Rosalyn Higgins, did not accept the customary status
of the right of peoples to
self-determination’.
This observation
only holds true, however, if it excludes a range of scholarship by the
intellectual forebears to TWAIL
scholarship,
which had emphatically
asserted the existence of a right by the start of the
nonetheless remains the case that, before the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
issued, other scholars continued to doubt whether binding norms of customary
international law had developed by the
The Court therefore repeated the established formulation in the
Continental Shelf
cases that the existence of customary international law
depended upon the interlinked elements of ‘a settled practice’
‘evidence of a belief that this practice is ... obligatory’, and set
It cited three instruments that
contributed to the development of a right of self-determination in the 1950s:
Resolution 637 (VII)
of 1952, UNGA
Resolution 738 (VIII)
1953 and UNGA
Resolution 1188 (XII)
These Resolutions were presented as
evidence that the ‘General Assembly had affirmed on several occasions the
right to self-determination’
prior to the
Declaration
These were staging posts
in the process by which states in the developing world, in a process which
accelerated following the focal
point of the Bandung Conference in 1955, had
achieved considerable success in ‘overcoming the ambiguities of the United
to establish the principle of self-determination for
According to the ICJ, a right of peoples to self-determination crystallised on
14 December 1960 with the adoption of the
1960 Declaration
represented ‘a defining moment in the consolidation of State practice on
decolonization’.
The Court found that
‘[t]he wording used in resolution 1514 (XV) has a normative character, in
so far as it affirms that “(a)ll
peoples have the right to
self-determination”’.
Declaration
, for example, stated that ‘[a]ny
attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and the
territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the
Charter of the United Nations
’. For Summers,
‘[t]his was the most significant provision’ for determining these
questions because it addressed
the extent to which ‘respect for their
territorial integrity’ formed part of the right of the peoples of
non-self-governing
territories to
self-determination.
It was because this
self-determination norm applied to a non-self-governing territory in its
entirety that the UK’s subsequent
detachment of the Chagos Archipelago
from Mauritius was unlawful.
Examples of subsequent practice in which territorial boundaries were redrawn
as part of decolonisation processes could, moreover,
be distinguished from the
creation of the BIOT on the basis of the purpose of the
1960 Declaration
to advance the end of colonisation, for in no other instance were such changes
effected ‘for the purpose of maintaining it
[the territory] under its [the
administering power’s] colonial
Declaration
, although formally not legally binding, became a significant way
marker which can only be properly understood in the context of the
‘trajectory’ of the concepts it contains and how they were
subsequently built upon.
2019’s standpoint, the ICJ was able to determine that the relevant norms
had crystallised with the adoption of the
1960 Declaration
, which had
made self-determination ‘a realisable part of international
The ICJ could thus be said to be judging the issue with the benefit of
hindsight, secure in the knowledge that the UNGA would thereafter
confirm the
existence of the self-determination
Because it could observe the
trajectory of the law’s development, it could be more confident than
contemporary jurists in concluding
that the norm had crystallised in the
The Court’s adoption of an A-series arc of relevant developments is
further reflected in its approach to the
1970 Declaration
recapitulating the
Declaration
Principle 5(8) of the
1970 Declaration
, in particular, repeated the terms of territorial
integrity stated under para 6 of the
Declaration
This element of the
advisory opinion could have benefitted from additional development because the
proposition that the
1970 Declaration
reaffirmed customary law as
expressed in the
1960 Declaration
is called into question by aspects of
1970 Declaration
’s drafting. During that process, it was
specifically proposed that the
1970 Declaration
should reaffirm the
Declaration
as an authority, but this proposal was not
accepted, and some states, including the UK, thereafter used this fact to
downplay the
legal significance of the earlier
declaration.
To address this issue, the
Court could have emphasised that the
Declaration
was regarded
at the time as ‘a capstone to the UN’s attempt to supervise colonial
It noted the
significance of the extension of the UNGA’s ‘enforcement role’
in a roundabout way,
highlighting the
three UNGA resolutions that derived authority from the
1960 Declaration
and amounted to condemnations of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Wheatley therefore concludes
that the ICJ was correct to premise its
Chagos Advisory Opinion
understanding that the passage of time was real because customary international
law forms part of a complex system which has
developed as a ‘result of
contingent decisions taken by component
The Court’s refusal
to spell out these connections directly, however, opened up a potential avenue
for the UK to dispute its
Having concluded that decolonisation was not lawfully completed in 1968, the
ICJ turned to the consequences of this conclusion for
the UK’s activities.
In response to the UNGA’s second question, the Court decided that the
UK’s continuing administration
of the Chagos Archipelago constituted an
internationally wrongful act for which the UK bears
responsibility.
The UK has the
international law obligation to terminate the administration of the Chagos
Archipelago as speedily as possible, and
all states must cooperate with the UN
to complete the decolonisation of
The ICJ thus concluded that
the process of decolonisation of Mauritius had not been lawfully completed on
Mauritius’ independence
and that the UK is therefore obliged to end its
administration of the Chagos Archipelago as rapidly as
It also, in a speculative
element of the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
, referred the resettlement of
Chagossians of Mauritian origin to the UNGA as an issue to be addressed during
the process of the completion
of the decolonisation of
In May 2019, three months
after the advisory opinion, the UNGA endorsed it and insisted — by 116
votes to 6, with 56 abstentions
— that the UK must withdraw
unconditionally from the Chagos Archipelago within six months, a time frame
which stretched until
22 November 2019.
In his October 2019 address to the UNGA, the ICJ President, Judge Abdulqawi A
Yusuf, gave an overview of the
He concluded that ‘[e]ven with the most seemingly intractable disputes, a
ruling of the Court can signal the starting-point
for a new era in bilateral
relations between disputing
This new era was not
immediately apparent, however, given the UK’s refusal to take steps in
line with the advisory opinion.
The UK insisted that the advisory opinion was
not a binding decision
and reasserted
its sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago:
The UK has no doubt as to our sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean
Territory (BIOT), which has been under continuous British
sovereignty since
1814. Mauritius has never held sovereignty over the BIOT and the UK does not
recognise its claim.
In support of its sovereignty claim, the UK maintained that the 1965
Lancaster House Agreement concerning the detachment of the Chagos
Archipelago
had been found to be legally binding by the
arbitral tribunal in
2015, a misinterpretation of the tribunal’s specific finding that it was
the UK’s undertakings towards
Mauritius, therein and subsequent, which
were binding.
But the most significant
of its objections was that the ICJ’s advisory opinion was ill-founded. In
Gino Naldi’s summary
of its position, the UK government
considered that
Resolution 1514 (XV)
neither reflected nor generated
customary law in 1960, nor in its immediate aftermath, taking the position that
it was not couched
in legal terminology and that the requisite
was lacking as a result of the differing attitudes of
Our account now turns to the extent to which the archival record of the UK
government’s deliberations on the detachment of the
Chagos Archipelago
sustains this position.
IV The Chagos Archives and
the Intertemporal Problem
As much of the analysis of the advisory opinion has recognised, the ICJ could
have gone further in justifying its finding that self-determination
crystallised as a norm by the start of the
Stephen Allen, moreover, has
expressed considerable scepticism as to whether a tribunal can achieve an
objective account of customary
international law’s crystallisation under
what Wheatley termed the A-series approach to the intertemporal
However, given Allen’s
doubts over the mid-1960s development of the relevant norms before the advisory
opinion was issued,
his scepticism over this key aspect of the Court’s
account is perhaps unsurprising.
Archival method nonetheless provides a means of addressing these concerns in a
case in which the relevant facts took place many decades
ago. The UK National
Archives’ holdings on the BIOT’s formation provide a window into
official thinking over public policy
in the relevant period. Later materials
held within the UK National Archives provide a further window onto how official
and justifications for BIOT policy developed, especially as Mauritius
began to challenge the UK’s sovereignty over the Chagos
Archipelago in the
early 1980s.
We undertook an extensive
review of hundreds of archived files. Most of these provided the overarching
context of the UK’s
BIOT policy, but the following analysis draws directly
upon a dozen of these files which address the legality under international
of the detachment of the Chagos Archipelago from the colony of Mauritius.
Archived official documents, of course, do not provide a neutral record of
the past but a mediated representation.
Where an issue is sufficiently sensitive, the documents which are retained
within a state’s archival record are frequently
curated, providing a
skewed account of policymaking.
documents can be withheld from the public record for extended periods, and many
documents relating to the BIOT’s creation
have yet to be made public or
have been extensively redacted because they remain sensitive for the conduct of
the UK’s foreign
this challenge is the possibility that selective cherry picking of those
materials which are accessible in the archives
can skew the picture of official
discussions of these issues.
Although it
is impossible to exclude a level of subjectivity from our account of these
sources, these dual issues with archival research
can be mitigated where these
sources are used to address a sufficiently specific question. The UK’s
central allegation against
the ICJ’s account of the substantive basis for
Mauritius’ sovereignty claim is that, at half a century’s remove,
the Court used an account of the law of self-determination which did not apply
at the BIOT’s creation. But insofar as the archived
files indicate that
earlier generations of UK policymakers flagged issues of self-determination, it
undermines any contention that
the Court was applying law out of time, in a
manner that those Ministers and officials could not have foreseen.
Notwithstanding the potential shortcomings of archival method, archived
sources are thus particularly useful in the context of the
Advisory Opinion
in assessing whether UK policymakers acknowledged that
there was sufficient certainty around the existence of the territorial integrity
rule between 1965 and 1968, either at that time or when the issue first became a
live source of bilateral dispute in the early 1980s.
They effectively provide a
“best case” account of how UK policymakers perceived their legal
obligations with regard to
the BIOT’s creation. These materials admittedly
sit on the margins of the International Law Commission’s account of the
evidence for determining
Some of the most important
available sources come within the scope of law officer opinions or relate to
conduct in connection with
resolutions adopted by international organisations,
which are listed. This list is, however, not exhaustive, and many of the sources
considered below contextualise the positions adopted by the UK’s law
officers or the UK’s responses to UN organs. This
context is essential to
understanding the motivations of state actors in circumstances in which the
state’s activity has deliberately
sought to stymie the development of
obligations. If, as Stephen Allen acknowledges, a persistent problem with
relying on state practice
in the creation of customary international law is that
states ‘rarely make their intentions explicit and their decisions are
usually motivated by a mixture of legal and non-legal
considerations’,
the archival
record provides a means to test the basis of the UK government’s claims
obligations.
Mauritius’ written
submissions before the ICJ relied extensively upon the internal discussions of
UK Ministers and officials,
in contrast to the limited use of such materials in
the UK’s own submissions.
contrast is marked but, as we shall see, not entirely surprising in light of the
content of the archival holdings.
The first thing to note about the UK government’s internal
deliberations over the BIOT’s status between the 1960s and
1980s is that
they are consistently grounded in an account of the weakness of legal processes
in international law and a confidence
in the advantages that the UK enjoyed over
its former colonies within the international order. When the issue was referred
Attorney-General, Michael Havers, for consideration in the early 1980s,
when both Mauritius and the Chagossians were becoming increasingly
vocal about
the wrongs inflicted as part of the UK’s dismemberment and depopulation
policy, he foreshortened his account of
the substantive legal issues because he
was so confident the issues could not be adjudicated:
The Attorney-General ... sees no possible way in which the Mauritius
Government could take us, against our will, before an international
tribunal ... In these circumstances it is not strictly necessary for him to
advise on our prospects before such a tribunal,
if it did somehow have
The UK’s dissatisfaction with the ICJ proceedings is less about the
application of temporally appropriate law, than with its
thwarted expectation
that the exception to its Optional Clause Declaration with regard to former
colonies would insulate it against
any legal action relating to the BIOT’s
The archival record demonstrates that the law on self-determination did not
materially change subsequent to the BIOT’s creation,
but rather that the
UK’s understandings of that law both at the time of the dismemberment of
the existing colonies and after
were often defective. The Foreign and
Commonwealth Office’s (‘FCO’) express position was that there
was no international
law constraint upon its restructuring of the territories it
had colonised in 1965:
[I]n international law we had sovereignty over Mauritius (and Seychelles) at
the relevant time and accordingly, as an attribute of
sovereignty, were entitled
to so arrange the territorial limits of the areas under our sovereignty as we
might think
This position was restated, in almost identical terms, by Sir Michael Wood
representing the UK before the Permanent Court of Arbitration
Mauritius v
United Kingdom
This general refusal
to engage with the requirements of self-determination, however, rested on weak
foundations. It was intertwined
with the expectation that the operability of the
territorial integrity rule within customary international law did not really
because the UK was, for all practical purposes, shielded from judicial
reproach. The possibility of an advisory opinion was not even
entertained by
successive generations of FCO legal advisers, with the greatest concern being
perceived to be that ‘legal arguments
might be presented in some
non-judicial
The 1966 refusal of the ICJ to consider the merits of the
cases might have come as a ‘shock and surprise’ to many
at the time,
but it was a most useful
one for the FCO. Even as the contest over representation on the ICJ bench became
more intense,
the outcomes of the
South West Africa
cases lulled the FCO’s legal advisers into
expecting the Court’s continued quiescence on matters connected to
decolonisation.
Dame Rosalyn Higgins was sharply critical of the Judgment at the
time and has since described it as an
‘aberration’,
immediate aftermath she recognised that ‘evangelism for use of the Court
is likely to wane sharply’ amongst
This was the narrative that
the FCO internalised. It was only with the judgment in
Military and
Paramilitary Activities in and against
that perceptions of the
ICJ amongst developing countries underwent a ‘significant’
The ‘rejuvenation’ of
the Court’s advisory function was also unforeseen in discussions over the
BIOT’s status
into the 1980s and would also take many decades to be
Although surveys of the UK’s colonial possessions in the Indian Ocean
had been conducted in the summer of 1964 with a view to
the establishment of new
military bases, this potential new investment sat at variance both with Harold
Wilson’s newly elected
Labour government’s plans to draw back the
UK’s military commitments “East of Suez” and its commitments
rapid decolonisation.
It was only in
early January 1965, when there was finally a commitment for the US to shoulder
the cost of establishing new facilities,
that plans could be set in
The outline of the plan was
promptly leaked to
The Economist
, with a well-informed article noting the
attendant ‘political hazards’ in the context of decolonisation and
that the selected islands ‘would need to be detached [from the
existing colonies] ... to make the investment of putting runways
installations on them seem a reasonable
Within a few weeks, the US
confirmed that its position was that ‘full detachment now might more
effectively assure that Mauritian
political attention, including any recovery
pressure, is diverted from Diego Garcia over the long
Even at this stage in
planning the new facilities, strategies for averting the UN’s attention
were at the forefront of US-UK
discussions. Nigel Trench, of the UK Embassy in
Washington, summarised US thinking in these scoping discussions. The threat
by the UN was downplayed on the dubious basis that there was a possibility
that renewal of the Committee of 24’s mandate could
be delayed, creating a
window of time when it would be in ‘suspended
animation’.
The US State
Department’s Jeff Kitchen also suggested emphasising the value of Indian
Ocean installations as a support to UN
peacekeeping operations ‘to soothe
any savage beasts’.
ongoing suspicions and strains generated by UN Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjöld’s plane crash a few years earlier,
the meeting concluded
that such claims would likely be met by
scepticism.
If the problem with UN
opposition to the BIOT’s creation had readily been identified, these
efforts to find a solution would
have been utterly speculative. Shortly after
these discussions, the UK’s Colonial Secretary, Anthony Greenwood, sent a
note explicitly warning the Foreign Secretary ‘of the difficulties
inherent in this project (particularly in the United
From the outset of the plan to establish military facilities on Diego Garcia,
the UK and the US were acutely aware that UN organs
would not regard this as a
matter purely internal to the law of the British Empire. There were subsequent
official efforts to reorganise
this secret history of the colonies’
dismemberment into something more acceptable by presenting Mauritius as having
to the carve out of the islands:
Because it [Mauritius] was not fully self-governing, there was no
constitutional requirement on the part of HMG to obtain the consent
Mauritius Council of Ministers to the proposed detachment. This was sought for
essentially political reasons, and only at
the insistence of the then Colonial
Secretary, Mr Greenwood.
Under this account of the law in effect within the British Empire, all that
was legally required to effect the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from
Mauritius was the modification of the statutory instrument listing its
dependencies.
It remained commonplace,
in this period, for the most prominent scholars of the British Empire to
continue to present decolonisation
processes as entirely a matter for the
Empire’s own legal order.
explanation of the BIOT’s detachment sought to downplay Greenwood’s
preoccupation with providing a basis for separating
territories from existing
colonies which would bind Mauritian Ministers into the dismemberment and thereby
fend off criticisms at
the UN by creating a veneer of
This, by the early 1980s, had
become an inconvenient element in the process of creating the BIOT because it
contained within it a
recognition that such consent was necessary, and a
subsequent generation of Mauritian leaders now actively denied that the consent
which had been given was valid.
in short, sought to slip between alternative narratives about the break-up of
the existing colony depending on how they played
at particular times and with
particular audiences.
Even before the fateful Lancaster House Conference in September 1965,
Ramgoolam’s political opponents in Mauritius had been
swift to turn to the
UN as part of their opposition to the nascent UK and US plans. And this ability
to turn to UN organs, including
those operative under the
Declaration
, illustrated the extent to which the territorial integrity of
existing colonies was no longer, as Greenwood had appreciated, a matter
internal to imperial law. From 1964 onwards, soon after word of the surveys for
island bases began to circulate, the Mauritius
People’s Progressive Party
(‘MPPP’) lobbied the UN Committee of 24. In August 1965, it
presented an extensive memorandum
to the Committee of 24 detailing its concerns
The Anglo-American plan is to buy the islands from the relevant authorities,
remove the indigenous inhabitants, transfer the administrative
[sic] of these
islands to the Americans and then construct the claim of Anglo-American military
facilities.
Although senior UK Ministers remained confident that ‘[w]ith the full
support of the United States Government, we should be
able to withstand this
criticism’,
these efforts fed into
Resolution 2066
of December 1965, which asserted that the UK should
‘take no action which would ... violate [Mauritius’] territorial
integrity’.
The prospective language of
Resolution 2066
, notwithstanding that it
was issued a month after the BIOT’s creation, reflected the UK’s
efforts to obscure the changes
affecting Mauritius’ territory; UN organs
and delegations belatedly ‘tumbled to the
fait accompli
separation’.
A year later UK officials continued to note how effectively this tactic was
working given that
Resolution 2066
had ‘dealt with B.I.O.T.
in the general context of
Mauritius’.
The UK’s UN delegation did everything it could to keep the issue off the
table, including not submitting any return for the
BIOT under art 73(e) of the
regarding the governance of populated colonies which are not
self-governing, even at the risk of attracting
Efforts by Mauritian
politicians to keep the issue live within UN organs nonetheless continued, with
the MPPP sending a representative,
AH Dorghoty, to the 1967 meeting of the
Committee of 24 in Dar es
resolution was agreed objecting to the colony’s dismemberment, with the
Committee Chair accepting that the official position
of the UN was that
‘the Chagos Archipelago was still part of
Mauritius’.
UK diplomats appeared
satisfied that these observations were buried in the weeds of the Committee of
24 discussions and that much
of the discussion was in ‘critical but not
extreme terms’.
All of these endeavours to disguise the UK’s BIOT policy are difficult
to explain if those involved were indeed confident that
the concept of
territorial integrity as part of self-determination had no legal weight. UK
officials would subsequently struggle
to explain the basis of the pledge to
return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius once it no longer served defence
purposes in a way
which did not also recognise the absence of the all-important
‘informed, free and voluntary’ decision to break up the
behalf of the people of Mauritius.
denial of Mauritius’ underlying legal claim to the territory became even
more difficult to sustain after parts of the BIOT
were returned to the
Seychelles in the 1970s. The US position was that the disconnect between these
positions could not be wished
The Americans’ main fear is that the return of the three islands to the
Seychelles would stimulate a Mauritian desire to get
back the Chagos Archipelago
... they wonder if he [Ramgoolam] could maintain the line that Mauritius has no
claim to sovereignty
in the Chagos if an Independent Seychelles got back
Desroches, Farquhar and Aldabra. They also point out that Sir S Ramgoolam will
not live for ever [sic] and are considering whether it is possible to forecast
the attitude of a successor
government.
Notwithstanding the inaccurate expectation, which apparently underpins this
statement, that Ramgoolam would be Prime Minister for
life, he would remain in
office until June 1982. This was long enough to circumvent any immediate
response from Mauritius to the
return of some of the BIOT islands to the
Seychelles, and Ramgoolam would only succumb to increasing domestic pressure to
the detachment of the Chagos Archipelago towards the end of his
premiership.
When Michael Havers reviewed the case as Attorney-General in response to this
change in the Mauritian government’s position,
Ramgoolam’s agreement
to the BIOT’s creation was all he considered to be necessary as a basis
for the UK’s response
to the substantive legal issue:
[E]stoppel ... might also be available in reply to a complaint based on the
alleged wrongful dismemberment of the territory of Mauritius,
since that, too,
was something to which the Mauritius Government agreed in advance and for which
it was compensated.
The ill-considered nature of this response is evident in its throw-away
reliance upon the equitable concept of estoppel, rather than
any effort to apply
the rules of self-determination under international law. Much as the principle
exists within international law
would indeed play a role in Mauritius’ litigation over the
here it was acting to displace any
detailed analysis of the requirements of self-determination. And it was not
simply that the nuances
of the relevant international law were beyond the
competence of a generalist Attorney-General. Not long after this statement, an
official at the FCO’s UN Department chuntered that
‘[s]elf-determination is one of those issues where UN lawyers can
merit or fault in any case’.
fact, diplomats within the UK’s Mission to the UN were warning, within
weeks of the BIOT’s creation, that ‘it
would not be difficult for
our critics to develop the arguable thesis that detachment by itself was a
But even they were predisposed against probing potential weaknesses in the
UK’s claim over the BIOT too vigorously; the deed
was done and the
consequences of the detachment and the fate of the Chagossians becoming a
cause célèbre
were simply too ‘bleak’ to
contemplate.
Once again, these records
undercut the UK’s contention that there was not sufficient certainty
around the norms of self-determination
in the 1960s. Moreover, even under a
B-series account of time, these records indicate that there was internal
recognition of the
implications of self-determination norms within the UK
government prior to Mauritius’ independence.
A further problem for UK policy was that, years after the BIOT was
established, the Chagos Archipelago remained populated. As such,
even though the
BIOT fell squarely within the Committee of 24’s
the Foreign Office’s
Steering Committee on International Organisations, which was responsible for
formulating the presentation
of UK policy at the UN, acknowledged that ‘we
could not accept that the interests of the inhabitants were paramount and that
we should develop self-government
Officials nonetheless
became increasingly aware that the islanders’ ‘eventual departure
— not to say removal —
... may well attract considerable
attention’.
The euphemistic use of
the language of evacuation or departure
became an important part of UK efforts to disguise the forced removals of the
Chagossians.
In this context, the ongoing UN objections to the detachment of islands from
Mauritius and the Seychelles to enable the BIOT’s
creation began to serve
as a useful distraction from these forced removals. As officials briefed
Ministers on ongoing legal disputes
over the Chagos Archipelago in 1982, the
UN’s focus on the dismemberment of the existing colonial territories had
been preferable
to the alternative of the UN organs having addressed the
UK’s treatment of the Chagossians in greater depth. Their language
revelatory of the deficiencies in the UK’s position on self-determination
that the final version of this memorandum remains
redacted on the grounds of the
risk it poses to the UK’s international
These efforts at concealment
were, however, clumsy; those responsible for the redaction missed the draft text
held in other records,
enabling this excerpt to be
reconstructed:
Fortunately for the UK attention in the UN focussed not on the inhabitants of
BIOT but on its detachment from Mauritius, with the
result that the UN has
refused to recognise its existence as a separate territory. This fact, together
with the government’s
undertaking to return BIOT to Mauritius when it is
no longer required for defence purposes, could yet prove useful in the UN
The UN organs’ consistent refusal to accept the detachment of the BIOT
islands because of the self-determination issues that
it raised was thus
acknowledged by the UK into the 1980s. Far from being immediately problematic
for UK policy at the time, however,
it was regarded as advantageous. It had
distracted the UN from the UK’s depopulation of the islands and was not
provide Mauritius with an immediate outlet for legal pressure.
Between the 1960s and the 1980s, successive UK governments’ internal
deliberations over the Chagos Archipelago had thus recognised
that there were
costs inherent in the UNGA’s and the Committee of 24’s denunciation
of the BIOT’s creation. Ministers
and officials nonetheless remained
confident that in the Cold War context there was little that these bodies could
or would do to
push the matter towards legal determination. In short, the
dismemberment and depopulation of the colony were thought to allow the
the US a freer hand with regard to the management of the BIOT than the colony
having non-military inhabitants and therefore
coming under the auspices of the
Committee of 24 on a continuing basis. Such oversight would have created
‘opportunities for
UN intervention and mischief-making by member
This approach was also
regarded by the UK as far preferable to the Chagos Archipelago remaining part of
Mauritius and the circumstances
of the base lease having to be managed between
Mauritius and the US. In such a scenario, Mauritius’ decolonisation would
the UK out of the equation, and the UK government firmly intended to remain
indispensable to defence
‘cooperation’.
Even after all of the refinements to the UK government’s internal
position between the 1960s and the 1980s, the only plausible
response it makes
to the charge that Mauritius had not been fully decolonised is that the BIOT was
created as a non-self-governing
colony in 1965 by ‘agreement’ with
Mauritius’ pre-independence
administration.
This, however, would
mean that the Chagossians, as the BIOT’s people, enjoyed their own right
to self-determination. This outcome
was, of course, so unacceptable for BIOT
policy that the UK had sought to avoid it by the enforced expulsion and
exclusion of the
Chagossians. It would take decades for UK legislation to
recognise some Chagossians’ citizenship entitlements in 2002, and
they remained excluded from the Chagos
Archipelago.
The archives nonetheless
demonstrate successive UK governments’ efforts to play off these threats
to the BIOT, from Mauritius
and the Chagossians, against one another.
These efforts were only ever partially successful because, as we discussed
above, the Committee of 24 did consider the 1965 dismemberment
of the existing
colonies and subsequent depopulation of the BIOT islands. It repeatedly refused
to recognise the legality of the
BIOT’s creation and would continue to
censure the UK in the context of its reporting on the Seychelles, which remained
until 1976. The following Committee of 24 statement was issued in 1972,
following campaigning by Matthew Servina of the Seychelles
The Special Committee reiterates its concern over the continued refusal of
the administering Power to restore the territorial integrity
of the Seychelles
which was violated by the detachment, in 1965, of three islands from the
Seychelles to form, together with islands
detached from Mauritius, the so-called
“British Indian Ocean Territory” without prior consultation with the
the Territory.
The BIOT islands which had been detached from the Seychelles were ultimately
restored to the colony alongside its
independence.
Still populated, they had
become surplus to military requirements as a result of the expansion of the
Diego Garcia base.
UK officials
characterised the return of these islands as ‘a sop to the UN Committee of
This conclusion acknowledges
the effectiveness of this UN organ as a pressure point for as long as a
territory remained a populated
colony. The UK’s eagerness to circumvent
the Committee of 24’s oversight exposes the deep lack of confidence in the
of the dismemberments involved in the BIOT’s creation. The lack
of consideration of the implications of this development for
territorial claims to the Chagos Archipelago, however, also demonstrates the
level of disconnect which came into
the UK government’s BIOT policy
through its attempts to firefight challenges as they emerged.
As a result of these interventions by the Committee of 24, UK officials were
obliged to accept, at the point that Mauritius was becoming
more assertive of
its claims to the Chagos Archipelago in the early 1980s, that ‘the UN has
refused to recognise its [the BIOT’s]
existence as a separate
territory’.
Far from being
chastened by this repeated censure, FCO officials maintained that the Committee
of 24’s refusal to accept the
legality of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius ‘was lucky for HMG for we wished above all to
being classified as a non-self-governing territory falling within the
scope of Chapter XI of the UN
This was less
luck than sheer great-power grift; the UK repeatedly played off the wrongs it
had committed against Mauritius and the
Chagossians to achieve the outcomes
least damaging to its interests in the circumstances.
The UK’s success with this ploy would have a devastating impact upon
the Chagossians for it shielded the ongoing removals from
the islands from
international attention:
Until completion of the evacuation of the inhabitants of the islands,
however, we realised that ... any argument we might put forward
denying the applicability to the BIOT of Chapter XI on the grounds that it had
no permanent population would be flawed:
we knew that some of the population
were at least second-generation
inhabitants.
In terms of the BIOT’s future, these memoranda essentially regarded the
inherent acknowledgement of Mauritius’ claims
as being less of a risk than
any intervention which would recognise the rights of the Chagossians. The
ICJ’s advisory opinion
thus appeared to mark the point at which, after so
long, the UK government’s efforts to use its dismemberment of Mauritius
deflect attention from its forced expulsion of the Chagossians ran out of road.
It remained to be seen, however, if the recognition
that the detachment of the
Chagos Archipelago in 1965 breached norms of self-determination would have any
substantive impact on the
de facto control over the islands or the position of
the islanders.
V Implications and
The archival record presents a stark reality for the underpinnings of the
UK’s BIOT policy. The situation is not one in which
the international law
applicable to self-determination underwent a materially significant shift a
decade after the
1960 Declaration
, meaning that the UK’s activities
between 1965 and 1968 in dismembering existing colonies and establishing the
BIOT came to
be adjudged against ahistorical standards in the
Chagos Advisory
. Instead, UK policymakers in the 1960s could not countenance the
implications of customary international law regarding self-determination
policy in the Indian Ocean. They therefore assuaged themselves with the repeated
insistence that the security demands of the
Cold War justified the means,
supported by an unshakable confidence that the question would never be formally
adjudicated and simultaneously
took active steps to prevent the application of
international law to their activities. Ministers, law officers and officials
such extensive efforts to deflect UN organs from engaging with the BIOT
that some of them might even have come to believe that international
their side, but if they did, this position was bound up in a belief that the
structures of international law operated
primarily for the benefit of the UK in
a dispute such as this. The
Chagos Advisory Opinion
is thus the
confutation of an ongoing manifestation of great-power hubris; the expectation
that these rules would not, or at least
could not effectively, be applied to the
UK’s conduct regarding the BIOT.
Much as the UK vociferously complained in the wake of the advisory opinion
and denied that the legal position with regard to the Chagos
Archipelago had
changed as a result of it, its entry into talks with Mauritius over the
sovereignty of the Archipelago in late 2022
appeared to indicate the degree to
which the geopolitics of the Indian Ocean has changed in recent
The Mauritian dependency of
Agaléga, once ironically considered for inclusion in the BIOT and briefly
the focus of a UK government
plan to resettle the Chagossians after
Mauritius’ independence,
being used for Indian facilities,
India had been one of the loudest objectors to the militarisation of the region
in the 1960s.
In 2021, an International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (‘ITLOS’) Special Chamber heaped
pressure on the UK when it
recognised that the ICJ’s
Advisory Opinion
rendered UK sovereignty claims over the BIOT a
‘mere assertion’.
November 2022 the UK Foreign Secretary, James Cleverly, informed the House of
Commons that the UK’s negotiations with Mauritius
sought to ‘resolve
all outstanding issues, including those relating to the former inhabitants of
the Chagos Archipelago’.
the remaining BIOT islands to Mauritius, on the basis that the joint UK-US
facilities on Diego Garcia are maintained, appeared
to have become the
preferable route out of this persistent foreign policy headache for the
These talks, however, faltered over how any arrangement between the UK and
Mauritius would accommodate the Chagossians. Their distinct
status and rights
have posed a running challenge for the UK government since the creation of the
BIOT, with their forcible removal
being in part undertaken to exclude oversight
of the new colony by the Committee of 24. For long periods, however, Mauritius
diffident towards the Chagossian position. As the British High Commission in
Mauritius reported as the expulsions gained pace, ‘the
Government ... has so far made no distinction between Mono Mauritians and Ilois,
and of course we are most anxious to maintain
More recently,
Mauritius has sought to harness the wrongs done to the Chagossians, and the
islanders’ protracted campaign to
draw attention to those wrongs, to
strengthen its own claims. The testimony of Liseby Elysé, as a Chagossian
woman, before
the ICJ during the advisory opinion proceedings, and her
conveyance of the Chagossians’ fury at what was inflicted upon them
judges, were significant elements of Philippe Sands’ litigation strategy
on behalf of Mauritius.
Even in Judge Yusuf’s ‘new
however, the ICJ did not
have a compelling answer to the Chagossians’ claims; it merely suggested
that the UNGA should investigate
their resettlement as a matter of human rights
protection.
This judicial reticence
might have been thought to create a space for the dispute to be resolved as a
purely interstate matter, but
any such hopes appear to have been thwarted.
Following multiple inconclusive rounds of negotiations, the UK government
that ‘we are very conscious of the Chagossian communities and
will keep them in the forefront of our minds throughout this
negotiating
an almost incredible
position given decades of UK government stonewalling over the Chagossian claims.
Asked directly about the resettlement
of the Chagossians on the islands while
the UK remained in control of them, Lord Cameron declared that it was ‘not
This very much suggests
that history is repeating itself, with the UK pursuing yet another effort to
play the interests of the Chagossians
off against those of
VI Conclusion
An analysis of the archival record transforms the nature of the dispute both
within and about the ICJ’s
Chagos Advisory Opinion
. The ICJ’s
construction of the norms of self-determination as they existed in the mid-1960s
was based on a narrow range of
sources, taking little cognisance of how UK
decision-makers understood their obligations at the time. This approach likely
from significant concerns that any such analysis of curated archival
holdings would necessarily privilege the colonising state’s
international law; judicial fact construction must guard against the false
impressions generated by carefully curated
archives. In this instance, however,
the archival record undermines the UK’s accusations that the Court was
applying legal
rules in a manner unforeseeable at the time of the BIOT’s
creation and its subsequent refusal to recognise Mauritius’
claims. The
repeated refrain that ‘Mauritius has never held sovereignty over the
is little more than an
obfuscation when the precise issue is the dismemberment of a colony prior to
decolonisation. Those archived
deliberations, moreover, reveal the profound
misunderstandings of international law which dogged UK policy towards its
colonies in the latter part of the twentieth century. The UK
maintained a misplaced confidence in the firewalls that it had erected
legal recourse by former colonies before international tribunals. It was willing
to brazen out whatever censure that its
policies of dismemberment of existing
colonies and depopulation of the Chagos Archipelago managed to bypass its
concerted efforts
to thwart scrutiny in other international fora.
The law of self-determination did not change in such a way as to alter the
legality of the events in question during the relevant
time period; instead, the
change was to the UNGA’s willingness to seek an advisory opinion and the
ICJ’s willingness
to accept such proceedings in relation to events
relating to a previous period of colonisation. For all of the breezy confidence
of successive UK legal advisers that no claim would ever be entertained by the
ICJ, this account reveals that officials were frequently
much more circumspect
around the substance of the UK position. Arthur Watts, FCO legal adviser, fully
appreciated the weakness of
the UK’s account of self-determination in the
early 1980s: ‘[T]here must be a serious risk that a tribunal such as the
International Court would (in view of its composition) be inclined to give
greater legal significance to ...
Resolutions 1514
we would concede to them’.
ICJ’s position in the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
did not come as a
bolt out of the blue; it was a “serious risk” to the UK’s
claims over the BIOT that generations
of UK policymakers had acknowledged but
long sought to downplay or avoid.
* Senior Lecturer, Kent Law School, and Professor, Newcastle Law School. Our
thanks to Kathryn McNeilly (Queen&#82
University Belfast) and Aoife O’Donoghue (Queen’s University
Belfast) for their comments. Any errors remain our own.
Paper updated and
hyperlinks last accessed on 30 July 2024.
See, eg, Stephen Allen,
Islanders and International Law
(Hart Publishing, 2014); David Vine,
Island of Shame: The Secret History of the US Military Base on Diego
(Princeton University Press, 2009); Philippe Sands,
Colony: A Tale of Exile, Justice and Britain’s Colonial Legacy
(Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 2022).
Legal Consequences of the Separation
of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (Advisory Opinion)
ICJ Rep 95, 137 [174] (‘
Chagos Advisory Opinion
For an account of some of this subsequent
pressure through United Nations organs, see David Snoxell, ‘Prospect of
Advisory Opinion and the Subsequent UN General Assembly
Resolution Helping to Resolve the Future of the Chagos Archipelago and Its
Former Inhabitants: A Political Perspective’ in Thomas Burri and Jamie
Trinidad (eds),
The International Court of Justice and Decolonisation: New
Directions from the Chagos Advisory Opinion
(Cambridge University Press,
2021) 262, 277–9 (‘
Prospect of Chagos Advisory
Philippa Webb, ‘The United Kingdom
and the Chagos Archipelago
Advisory Opinion: Engagement and
Resistance’
[2021] MelbJlIntLaw 11
(2021) 21(3)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
House of Commons, 3 July 2019, vol 662, col 585WH (Alan
South West Africa (Ethiopia v South
Africa) (Preliminary Objections)
[1962] ICJ Rep 319;
South West Africa
(Ethiopia v South Africa) (Second Phase)
[1966] ICJ Rep 6 (together,
South West Africa
cases’). See John Dugard,
West Africa / Namibia Dispute:
Documents and Scholarly Writings on the
Controversy between South Africa and the United Nations
(University of
California Press, 1973).
See generally Georges Abi-Saab,
‘The International Court as a World Court’ in Vaughan Lowe and
Malgosia Fitzmaurice (eds),
Fifty Years of the International Court of
Justice: Essays in Honour of Sir Robert Jennings
(Cambridge University
Press, 1996) 3, 5.
Legal Consequences for States of
the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa)
notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276
[1971] ICJ Rep 16 (‘
Western Sahara (Advisory
[1975] ICJ Rep 12 (‘
Western Sahara
See Ingo Venzke, ‘The
International Court of Justice during the Battle for International Law
(1955–1975): Colonial Imprints
and Possibilities for Change’ in
Jochen von Bernstorff and Philipp Dann (eds),
The Battle for International
Law: South-North Perspectives on the Decolonization Era
(Oxford University
Press, 2019) 235, 253–5.
Katharina Hunfeld, ‘The
Coloniality of Time in the Global Justice Debate: De-Centring Western Linear
Temporality’ (2022)
Journal of Global Ethics
Steven Wheatley, ‘Revisiting the
Doctrine of Intertemporal Law’
(2021) 41(2)
Oxford Journal of Legal
See Julian Wyatt,
Intertemporal
Linguistics in International Law: Beyond Contemporaneous and Evolutionary Treaty
Interpretation
(Hart Publishing, 2020) 1–2.
See Martti Koskenniemi,
Civilizer of Nations: The Rise and Fall of International Law 1870–1960
(Cambridge University Press, 2002); George Rodrigo Bandeira Galindo,
‘Martti Koskenniemi and the Historiographical Turn in
International
(2005) 16(3)
European Journal of International Law
Frederic Bloom, ‘The Law’s
(2015) 104(1)
Georgetown Law Journal
Letter from Henry Steel to Arthur D
Watts, 22 October 1981 (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3057) [4] (‘Letter
from Henry Steel’).
R (Hoareau) v Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
[2019] EWHC 221
[2019] 1 WLR 4105
, 4128 [85] (Singh LJ
and Carr J).
R (Bancoult) v Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (No 2)
[2008] UKHL 61
[2009] 1 AC 453
Islanders v A-G
[2004] EWCA Civ 997.
United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea
, opened for signature 10 December
1982, 1833 UNTS 396
(entered into force 16 November 1994) (‘
Chagos Marine Protected Area
(Mauritius v United Kingdom) (Award)
(2015) 31 RIAA 359 (‘
v United Kingdom
Tom Frost and CRG Murray, ‘The
Chagos Islands Cases: The Empire Strikes Back’
(2015) 66(3)
Ireland Legal Quarterly
, 282–3, citing ‘US Embassy Cables:
Foreign Office Does Not Regret Evicting Chagos Islanders’
(online, 15 May 2009) <
https://www.theguardian.com/world/us-embassy-cables-documents/207149
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4BAX-3CFJ
For an account of these commitments,
Mauritius v United Kingdom
) 392–8 [77].
Ibid 487 [298].
Ibid 604–5 [91] (Judge Kateka
and Judge Wolfrum). See also 604 [89].
Colonial Office (UK), ‘Note for
the Prime Minister’s Meeting with Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, Premier of
(Note, 22 September 1965) (National Archives (UK), PREM
Foreign Secretary and Defence
Secretary (UK), ‘Defence Interests in the Indian Ocean: Draft Memorandum
by the Foreign Secretary
and the Defence Secretary’ (Draft Memorandum, 22
March 1965) (National Archives (UK), FO 371/184522) [4]. See also Telegram
Anthony Greenwood to Governors of Mauritius and Seychelles, 19 July 1965
(National Archives (UK), CO 1036/1343) [8] (‘Telegram
from Anthony
Greenwood’).
See Seewoosagur Ramgoolam,
Struggle: 20
Century Mauritius
(Vision Books, 1982). See also
Jocelyn Chan Low, ‘The Making of the Chagos Affair: Myths and
Reality’ in Sandra JTM Evers
and Marry Kooy (eds),
Eviction from the
Chagos Islands: Displacement and Struggle for Identity against Two World
(Brill, 2011) 61, 75–9.
See D George Boyce,
Decolonisation
and the British Empire, 1775–1997
(Macmillan Press, 1999); Kojo Koram,
Uncommon Wealth: Britain and the Aftermath of Empire
(John Murray, 2022).
‘Record of a Conversation
between the Prime Minister and the Premier of Mauritius, Sir Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam, at No 10, Downing
Street, at 10 am on Thursday, September 23,
1965’ (Record, 23 September 1965) (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3054).
‘Record of a Meeting Held in
Lancaster House at 2:30 pm on Thursday 23 September: Mauritius Defence
Matters’ (Record,
23 September 1965) (National Archives (UK), CO
1036/1253) [23].
British Indian Ocean Territory
(UK) SI 1965/1920, ord 3.
Exchange of Notes Constituting an
Agreement concerning the Availability for Defense Purposes of the British Indian
Ocean Territory
(with Annexes)
, United Kingdom–United States of
603 UNTS 273
(signed and entered into force 30 December 1966) 278.
See SA de Smith, ‘Mauritius:
Constitutionalism in a Plural Society’ (1968) 31(6)
601, 609; Snoxell,
Prospect of the Chagos Advisory Opinion
Mauritius v United Kingdom
) 550–1 [453]–[455].
Ibid 602 [77] (Judge Kateka and Judge
Wolfrum). See Douglas Guilfoyle, ‘The Chagos Archipelago before
International Tribunals:
Strategic Litigation and the Production of Historical
[2021] MelbJlIntLaw 12
(2021) 21(3)
Melbourne Journal of International
The relevant customary international
law was thereafter reflected in the
Vienna Convention on the Law of
, opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
(entered into
force 27 January 1980) arts 51–2.
Principles Which Should Guide
Members in Determining Whether or Not an Obligation Exists to Transmit the
Information Called for under
Article 73(e) of the Charter
, GA Res 1541 (XV),
UN Doc A/RES/1541(XV) (15 December 1960) annex, Principle VII.
Robert McCorquodale, Jennifer Robinson
and Nicola Peart, ‘Territorial Integrity and Consent in the Chagos
Advisory Opinion’
(2020) 69(1)
International and Comparative Law
, 236. See also Morsen Mosses, ‘Revisiting the Matthew
and Hunter Islands Dispute in Light of the Recent Chagos Advisory Opinion
Some Other Relevant Cases: An Evaluation of Vanuatu’s Claims relating to
the Right to Self-Determination, Territorial Integrity,
Unlawful Occupation and
State Responsibility under International Law’
(2019) 66(3)
Netherlands
International Law Review
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 17 November 2016, vol 617, col 387–8 (Alan
Duncan). See also CRG Murray and Tom Frost, ‘The Chagossians’
Struggle and the Last Bastions of Imperial Constitutionalism’ in Stephen
Allen and Chris Monaghan (eds),
Fifty Years of the British Indian Ocean
Territory: Legal Perspectives
(Springer, 2018) 147, 171–2.
See Douglas Guilfoyle,
‘Litigation as Statecraft: Small States and the Law of the Sea’
British Yearbook of International Law
Request for an Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice on the Legal Consequences of the Separation
of the Chagos Archipelago
from Mauritius in 1965
, GA Res 71/292,
plen mtg, Agenda Item 87, UN Doc
A/RES/71/292 (22 June 2017). See Thomas Burri and Jamie Trinidad,
‘Introduction’ in
Thomas Burri and Jamie Trinidad (eds),
International Court of Justice and Decolonisation: New Directions from the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
(Cambridge University Press, 2021) 1, 4.
On the UNGA’s treatment of the
issue of consent to adjudication, see Zeno C Reghizzi, ‘The Chagos
Advisory Opinion and
the Principle of Consent to Adjudication’ in Thomas
Burri and Jamie Trinidad (eds),
The International Court of Justice and
Decolonisation: New Directions from the Chagos Advisory Opinion
University Press, 2021) 51, 56–9.
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 108 [29].
Charter of the United Nations
Mauritius v United Kingdom
) 601 [75] (Judge Kateka and
Judge Wolfrum); Allen,
The Chagos Islanders and International Law
Western Sahara
) 24–5 [32]–[33];
Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory (Advisory Opinion)
[2004] ICJ Rep 136, 157–8 [47].
‘Declarations Recognizing as
Compulsory the Jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice under Article
36, Paragraph
2, of the Statute of the Court: United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland’,
United Nations Treaty Collection
https://treaties.un.org/pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=I-4&chapter=
1&clang=_en
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/YJQ8-Q3LQ
‘Written Statement: The United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland’,
Legal Consequences of
the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
(International Court of Justice, General List No 169, 15 February 2018)
81–4 [5.19] (‘Written Statement of the UK’).
Stephen Allen, ‘Introductory
Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965
(2019) 58(3)
International Legal
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 139 [180].
‘Written Statement of the
[8.47]–[8.77].
[8.76]–[8.77].
South West Africa
‘Written Statement of the
143–4 [8.75]–[8.77], citing
) 31 [52], discussing
Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-Operation
among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations
2625 (XXV), UN GAOR, 6
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/2625(XXV) (24 October 1970)
1970 Declaration
Charter of the United
art 2(7). See also Josef L Kunz, ‘Chapter XI of the United
Nations Charter in Action’
(1954) 48(1)
American Journal of
International Law
, 107; Inis L Claude Jr, ‘Domestic Jurisdiction
and Colonialism’ in Martin Kilson (ed),
New States in the Modern World
(Harvard University Press, 1975) 121, 122.
See Robert McCorquodale,
‘Negotiating Sovereignty: The Practice of the United Kingdom in Regard to
the Right of Self-Determination’
(1995) 66(1)
British Yearbook of
International Law
‘Written Statement of the
Republic of Mauritius’,
Legal Consequences of the Separation of the
Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
(International Court of Justice,
General List No 169, 1 March 2018) 136–7 [4.24]–[4.25], discussing
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
, GA Res 1514 (XV), UN GAOR, 4
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/1514(XV) (14 December 1960)
1960 Declaration
Legality of the Threat or Use of
Nuclear Weapons (Advisory Opinion)
[1996] ICJ Rep 226, 254–5 [70]. See
James Summers, ‘Chagos, Custom and the Interpretation of UN General
Assembly Resolutions’
in Thomas Burri and Jamie Trinidad (eds),
International Court of Justice and Decolonisation: New Directions from the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
(Cambridge University Press, 2021) 9.
The Situation with Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
, GA Res 1654 (XVI), UN GAOR, 1066
mtg, UN Doc A/RES/1654(XVI) (27 November 1961).
See generally Yassin El-Ayouty,
United Nations and Decolonization: The Role of Afro-Asia
(Martinus Nijhoff,
1971) 208–15.
‘Verbatim Record’,
Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius
(International Court of Justice, General List No 169, 3 September
2018) 46–7 [8]–[10] (emphasis in original).
Sovereignty over Pedra Branca/Pulau
Batu Puteh, Middle Rocks and South Ledge (Malaysia v Singapore)
) [2008] ICJ Rep 12, 128–32 (Judge Bennouna).
See TO Elias, ‘The Doctrine of
Intertemporal Law’
(1980) 74(2)
American Journal of International
Wheatley (n
Western Sahara
Island of Palmas (Netherlands v
United States of America) (Award)
(1928) 2 RIAA 829, 845. See Rosalyn
Higgins, ‘Time and the Law: International Perspectives on an Old
(1997) 46(3)
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
See, eg, Michael Byers,
Power and the Power of Rules: International Relations and Customary
International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2009) ch 8; Paola Gaeta,
Jorge E Viñuales and Salvatore Zappalà,
International Law
(Oxford University Press, 3
North Sea Continental Shelf
(Federal Republic of Germany v Denmark)
[1969] ICJ Rep 3,
Fisheries Jurisdiction (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland v Iceland) (Merits)
[1974] ICJ Rep 3, 19–20 [40]. See also
Frederic L Kirgis Jr, ‘Custom on a Sliding Scale’
(1987) 81(1)
American Journal of International Law
Christos Marneros, ‘Against the
Eternal Law(s) of Human Rights: Towards a Becoming-Chaotic of Time’ in
Kathryn McNeilly
and Ben Warwick (eds),
The Times and Temporalities of
International Human Rights Law
(Hart Publishing, 2022) 179, 193.
For an expansive account of the
‘adjudicative temporalities’ involved in such judicial fact
construction, see Tanzil
Time, Temporality and Legal Judgment
(Routledge, 2020) ch 2.
See J Ellis McTaggart, ‘The
Unreality of Time’ (1908) 17(68)
Wheatley (n
See Tommaso Soave, ‘The Politics
of Time in Domestic and International Lawmaking’ in Klara Polackova Van
der Ploeg, Luca
Pasquet and León Castellanos-Jankiewicz (eds),
International Law and Time: Narratives and Techniques
(Springer, 2022)
153, 165–6.
Wheatley (n
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 131 [148]. See Stephen Allen,
‘Self-Determination, the Chagos Advisory Opinion and the
Chagossians’
(2020) 69(1)
International and Comparative Law
, 208; Victor Kattan, ‘Self-Determination as Ideology:
The Cold War, the End of Empire, and the Making of UN General Assembly
Resolution 1514 (14 December 1960)’ in Klara Polackova Van der Ploeg, Luca
Pasquet and León Castellanos-Jankiewicz (eds),
International Law and
Time: Narratives and Techniques
(Springer, 2022) 441.
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 131 [146].
Frontier Dispute (Burkina
Faso v Republic of Mali) (Judgment)
[1986] ICJ Rep 554, 567 [25]. See Allen,
The Chagos Islanders and International Law
See James R Crawford,
The Creation
of States in International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2
2007) 108–12; Rosalyn Higgins,
Problems and Process: International Law
and How We Use It
(Oxford University Press, 1995) 111–12.
Wheatley (n
) 499. See Rosalyn Higgins
Development of International Law through the Political Organs of the United
(Oxford University Press, 1963) 100–4.
See Obiora Chinedu Okafor,
‘Newness, Imperialism, and International Legal Reform in Our Time: A Twail
Perspective’
(2005) 43(1/2)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
Georges M Abi-Saab, ‘The Newly
Independent States and the Rules of International Law: An Outline’
Howard Law Journal
; Jorge Castañeda, ‘The
Underdeveloped Nations and the Development of International Law’ (1961)
International Organization
38. In later scholarship, see also R P
New States and International Law
(Vikas Publishing House, 1972);
Africa and the Development of International Law
Nijhoff Publishers, 1988).
The Chagos Islanders and
International Law
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 121–2 [149], citing
Continental Shelf
The Right of Peoples and Nations to
Self-Determination
, GA Res 637 (VII), UN GAOR, 7
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/637(VII) (16 December 1952);
Right of Peoples and Nations to Self-Determination
, GA Res 738 (VIII), UN
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/738(VIII) (28
November 1953);
Recommendations concerning International Respect for the
Right of Peoples and Nations to Self-Determination
, GA Res 1188 (XII), UN
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/1188(XII)
(11 December 1957).
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 132 [150].
Antony Anghie, ‘Rethinking
International Law: A TWAIL Retrospective’
(2023) 34(1)
European Journal
of International Law
, 58. See also Luis Eslava, Michael Fakhri and Vasuki
Nesiah (eds),
Bandung, Global History, and International Law: Critical Pasts
and Pending Futures
(Cambridge University Press, 2017).
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 132 [150].
Ibid 132 [153].
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 138–9 [177].
Ibid 134 [160]. See also Summers (n
Kathryn McNeilly, ‘Documents
and Time in International Human Rights Law Monitoring: Artefacts, Objects,
Things’ in Kathryn
McNeilly and Ben Warwick (eds),
The Times and
Temporalities of International Human Rights Law
(Hart Publishing, 2022) 85,
Rita Augestad Knudsen,
Over Freedom in 20
-Century International
Discourse: Moments of ‘Self-Determination’
(Palgrave Macmillan,
2020) 152. See also Victor Kattan, ‘Self-Determination during the Cold
War: UN General Assembly Resolution
1514 (1960), the Prohibition of Partition,
and the Establishment of the British Indian Ocean Territory (1965)’
Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 130 [142]. See also Wheatley (n
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 133 [155].
See Summers (n
Harold Karan Jacobson, ‘The
United Nations and Colonialism: A Tentative Appraisal’ (1962) 16(1)
International Organization
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 135 [165]–[166].
Wheatley (n
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 138–9 [177].
Ibid. See also
The Barcelona
Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v Spain)
) [1970] ICJ Rep 3, 32 [33]–[34].
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 137 [174].
Ibid 139 [181].
Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the Legal Consequences of the Separation of
the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965
, GA Res 73/295, UN GAOR,
plen mtg, Agenda Item 88, UN Doc
A/RES/73/295 (22 May 2019) para 3; Webb (n
Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf,
‘Speech by HE Mr Abdulqawi A Yusuf, the President of the International
Court of Justice, on the Occasion
of the Seventy-Fourth Session of the United
Nations General Assembly’ (Speech, General Assembly, 30 October 2019) 1,
Guilfoyle, ‘Litigation as
Statecraft: Small States and the Law of the Sea’ (n
). This stance, as Guilfoyle notes, has
‘unfortunate echoes’ of apartheid-era South Africa’s response
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 5 November 2019, vol 667, col 84WS (Christopher
Richard P Dunne, ‘Chagos
Dispute: Is the 1965 Lancaster House Agreement Legally Binding under
International Law?’,
The Chagos Archipelago: Sovereignty Disputes
(Web Article, November 2019) <
https://sites.google.com/site/thechagosarchipelagofacts/home/sovereignty-disputes?authuser=0
archived at <
https://perma.cc/QQG6-4XSA
Gino J Naldi,
‘Self-Determination in Light of the International Court of Justice’s
Opinion in the Chagos Case’
(2020) 7(2)
Groningen Journal of
International Law
Ibid 226. The weight attributed to
an advisory opinion is frequently connected to the quality of the ICJ’s
reasoning: Michla
Pomerance, ‘The ICJ’s Advisory Jurisdiction and
the Crumbling Wall between the Political and the Judicial’
(2005) 99(1)
American Journal of International Law
‘Self-Determination, the Chagos Advisory Opinion and the
Chagossians’ (n
The Chagos Islanders and
International Law
See Snoxell,
Prospect of the
Chagos Advisory Opinion
This is analogous to the ICJ’s own approach to legal instruments which
postdated the 1965–68 period and which it
was willing to draw upon where
their effect was to ‘confirm or interpret pre-existing rules or
principles’:
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 130 [143].
Thomas Skouteris, ‘Engaging
History in International Law’ in José María Beneyto and
David Kennedy (eds),
New Approaches to International Law: The European and
American Experiences
(TMC Asser Press, 2012) 99, 112.
See Matilda Arvidsson and Miriam
Bac McKenna, ‘The Turn to History in International Law and the Sources
Doctrine: Critical
Approaches and Methodological Imaginaries’
(2020) 33(1)
Leiden Journal of International Law
Freedom of Information Act
(UK) s 27(1).
See Wendy M Duff and Catherine A
Johnson, ‘Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking Behavior of
Historians in Archives’
(2002) 72(4)
Library Quarterly: Information,
Community, Policy
472, 494–5.
Report of the International Law
Commission: Sixty-Eighth Session (2 May–10 June and 4 July–12 August
, UN GAOR, 68
sess, Supp No 10, UN Doc A/71/10 (2016) 77.
See Omri Sender and Michael Wood, ‘A Mystery No Longer? Opinio Juris and
Theoretical Controversies Associated with Customary International
(2017) 50(3)
Israel Law Review
The Chagos Islanders and
International Law
As Karen Knop has highlighted,
overreliance on official records, and the state-centric narrative it generates,
brings with it significant
blind spots in many instances: Karen Knop,
Diversity and Self-Determination in International Law
University Press, 2002) 42–4.
‘Written Comments of the
Republic of Mauritius’,
Legal Consequences of the Separation of the
Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
(International Court of Justice,
General List No 169, 15 May 2018) 14–24 [1.24]–[1.31].
‘Letter from Henry
Letter from Arthur D Watts to Henry
Steel, 28 August 1981 (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3057) [9] (‘Letter
from Arthur D
‘Arbitration under Annex VII
of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: Hearing
Mauritius v United Kingdom
Court of Arbitration, 2011-03, 30 April 2014) 537.
‘Letter from Arthur D
Rosalyn Higgins,
Theories: Selected Essays, Speeches, and Writings in International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2009) 1071.
Rosalyn Higgins, ‘The
International Court and South West Africa: The Implications of the
Judgment’ (1966) 42(4)
International Affairs
Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v United States of America)
[1986] ICJ Rep 14.
See Monique Law, ‘The Chagos
Request: Does It Herald a Rejuvenation of the International Court of
Justice’s Advisory
Function?’ (2018) 9
Queen Mary Law Journal
25; Julia Wagner, ‘The Chagos Request and the Role of the Consent
Principle in the ICJ’s Advisory Jurisdiction, or: What
Opportunity Knocks’ (2018) 55
Questions of International Law:
See Frost and Murray, ‘The
Chagos Islands Cases: The Empire Strikes Back’ (n
MR Moreland, ‘Indian Ocean
Bases’ (Memorandum, 12 January 1965) (National Archives (UK), FO
371/184522) [1]. The US commitment
would take several years to fully realise
given the need to secure Congressional approval: Vine (n
‘Strategies West and
The Economist
(Washington DC, 16 January 1965).
Letter from the US Embassy in
London to Sir Geoffrey G Arthur, 10 February 1965 (National Archives (UK), FO
371/184522).
Letter from Nigel CC Trench to EH
Peck, 15 January 1965 (National Archives (UK), FO 371/184522) [6]. On the impact
of Hammarskjöld’s
death on the UN’s approach to peacekeeping
and engagement with decolonisation, see generally Paul B Rich, ‘The Death
of Dag Hammarskjöld, the Congolese Civil War, and Decolonisation in Africa,
(2012) 23(2)
Small Wars and Insurgencies
Letter from Anthony Greenwood to
Michael Stewart, 30 January 1965 (National Archives (UK), FO 371/184522) [7].
Margaret Walawalkar, ‘The
Background to the BIOT’ (Research Department, 3 December 1982) (National
Archives (UK), FCO
31/3464) [3].
Mauritius (Constitution)
See, eg, KC Wheare, ‘Great
Britain: First among Equals’
(1953) 25(148)
Current History
See also ‘Telegram from
Anthony Greenwood’ (n
See ‘Written Statement of
the Republic of Mauritius’ (n
123–4 [4.9].
T Sibsurun,
Petition from Mr T
Sibsurun, Secretary General of the Mauritius People’s Progressive Party,
concerning Mauritius
, UN GAOR, UN Doc A/AC.109/PET.378/Add.1 (15 September
Foreign Secretary and Defence
Secretary (UK) (n
Question of Mauritius
Res 2066, UN GAOR, 4
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/2066 (16 December 1965) para 4.
Foreign Office Steering Committee
on International Organisations (UK), ‘Presentation of British Indian Ocean
Territory in the
United Nations’ (Presentation, 8 September 1966)
(National Archives (UK), FCO 141/1415) [13] (emphasis in original).
Ibid (emphasis in original).
Letter from BL Barder to EG
Donohoe, 8 August 1967 (National Archives (UK), FCO 141/1428) [3] (‘Letter
from BL Barder’).
Ibid [4]. See
Report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and
UN GAOR, 22
sess, Agenda Item 23, UN Doc
A/6700/Rev.1 (5 December 1967) 37 [322].
‘Letter from BL Barder’
‘Mechanisms of the Exercise
of the Right of Self-Determination by the Non-Self-Governing Territories: Letter
to the Chairman
of the Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Countries and Peoples’ [1997]
United Nations Juridical Yearbook
448, 449. See also McCorquodale, Robinson and Peart (n
Telegram from P Ramsbotham to
Foreign and Commonwealth Office (UK), 15 October 1974 (National Archives (UK),
FCO 141/1405) [2] (‘Telegram
from P Ramsbotham’).
See ‘Written Statement of the
Republic of Mauritius’ (n
121–2 [4.5]. See also Snoxell,
Prospect of the Chagos Advisory
‘Letter from Henry
Temple of Preah Vihear
(Cambodia v Thailand) (Merits)
[1962] ICJ Rep 6, 143–4 (Judge
Mauritius v United Kingdom
) 178 [447].
Letter from PJ Roberts to WN
Wenban-Smith, 29 September 1982 (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3464) [2].
Letter from Brian Barder to
Christopher G Eastwood, 2 February 1966 (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3057)
[11] (‘Letter from
Brian Barder’). See also ibid [3]–[4].
‘Letter from Brian
of the United
art 73(e); Foreign Office Steering Committee on International
Organisations (UK) (n
Foreign Office Steering Committee
on International Organisations (UK) (n
Letter from AS Papadopoulos to JDB
Shaw, 28 August 1970 (National Archives (UK), FCO 141/1428) [2].
See, eg, Foreign Office Steering
Committee on International Organisations (UK) (n
See Tom Frost and CRG Murray,
‘Homeland: Reconceptualising the Chagossians’ Litigation’
(2020) 40(4)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
See Letter from WN Wenban-Smith, 11
October 1982 (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3464) [6(i)].
This failure to redact the
documents thoroughly is reflected in other incriminating revelations from the
Chagos archives: see Murray
and Frost (n
Letter from WN Wenban-Smith, 29
September 1982 (National Archives (UK), FCO 31/3462) [6(i)] (‘Letter from
WN Wenban-Smith’).
‘Letter from WN
Wenban-Smith’ (n
Foreign Office Steering Committee
on International Organisations (UK) (n
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 10 November 1965, vol 720, col 2W (Anthony
Greenwood). See ‘Written Statement of the UK’ (n
) 126–7 [8.22]–[8.23].
See Frost and Murray,
‘Homeland: Reconceptualising the Chagossians’ Litigation’ (n
) 773–4. After decades of
campaigning, the UK government recognised not only the Chagossians’
general right to claim British
citizenship but also British overseas territory
citizenship:
Nationality and Borders Act 2022
Special Committee on
Decolonisation,
Conclusions and Recommendations Adopted by the Special
Committee at Its 876
Meeting, on 1 August 1972
mtg (1 August 1972) [6].
See David Snoxell, ‘Expulsion
from Chagos: Regaining Paradise’ (2008) 36(1)
Journal of Imperial and
Commonwealth History
‘Telegram from P
Ramsbotham’ (n
Hong Kong and Indian Ocean
Department, ‘The Implications of Seychelles Independence for BIOT’
(25 June 1974) (National
Archives (UK), FCO 141/1405) [9].
‘Letter from WN
Wenban-Smith’ (n
M Walawalkar, ‘Question of
the British Indian Ocean Territory at the UN, 1964–1976’ (9 October
1981) (National
Archives (UK), FCO 31/3057) [4].
See Gail Lythgoe,
‘Asymmetrical International Law and Its Role in Constituting Empires: The
ICJ Chagos Advisory Opinion’
(2020) 71(2)
Northern Ireland Legal
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 7 December 2022, vol 724, col 164WH (Anne-Marie
Trevelyan).
Letter from B Greatbatch to Foreign
and Commonwealth Office, 25 November 1971 (National Archive (UK), FCO 141/1417)
See Samuel Bashfield and Alexander
Lee, ‘Biting the “Cherry of Detachment”:
Agaléga’s Cold War Decolonisation’
(2023) 45(3)
International History Review
535, 546–7.
Telegram from New Delhi, 24 August
1965 (National Archive (UK), FCO 141/1406) [1].
Delimitation of the Maritime
Boundary between Mauritius and Maldives in the Indian Ocean (Mauritius v
(Preliminary Objections)
(International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, Case No 28, 28 January 2021) [243]. See Guilfoyle,
‘Litigation as Statecraft:
Small States and the Law of the Sea’ (n
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 3 November 2022, vol 721, col 27WS (James
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 13 June 2023, vol 734, col 150 (James Cleverly).
Letter from Keith R Whitnall to
John R Todd, 8 August 1969 (National Archives (UK), FCO 141/1416) [3]. See Laura
Chagos Islanders in Mauritius and the UK: Forced Displacement and
Onward Migration
(Manchester University Press, 2011) ch 1.
Chagos Advisory Opinion
) 139 [181]. See also Allen,
‘Self-Determination, the Chagos Advisory Opinion and the
Chagossians’ (n
United Kingdom,
Parliamentary
, House of Commons, 13 June 2023, vol 734, col 151 (James Cleverly).
Foreign Affairs Committee (UK),
Oral Evidence: Work of the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
(HC 325, 9 January 2024) [Q694].
This approach, of course, allows
the UK to remain part of the security relationships centred upon Diego Garcia:
Samuel Bashfield
and Elena Katselli Proukaki, ‘The Rules-Based Order,
International Law and the British Indian Ocean Territory: Do as I Say,
(2022) 23(5)
German Law Journal
See United Kingdom,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Commons, 5 November 2019, vol 667,
col 642 (Dominic Raab).
‘Letter from Arthur D
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (245 KB)
PDF format (617 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter