URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sarre, Rick --- "Sentencing those convicted of industrial manslaughter" [2010] ALRS 1
Sentencing those convicted of industrial manslaughter
Presented at the Sentencing Conference 2010, convened by
the ANU School of Law and the National Judicial College of Australia, February
6, 2010, Canberra.
Introduction
In 1949, American sociologist Edwin Sutherland
published a watershed monograph on the subject of white collar
In doing so,
he introduced the world to an idea that he had been pondering for a decade; that
society should not ignore crimes committed
by people enjoying an elevated social
But for many years, criminologists did ignore these crimes. A common view
prevailed that ‘white collar’ crimes should
not be seen as
crimes, and the perpetrators should not be deemed
criminals because, it was said, there were no
Inconsistency in enforcement, confusion in legal definition, and inter-agency
rivalry in regulation led to conflicting
messages being sent about the
pervasiveness and seriousness of white collar crime generally. For decades,
white collar criminals
continued to escape the full processes of law. Academic
research recorded the trends. Some years ago Michael Levi tracked the sentences
given to social security and tax fraudsters in the UK (identified as being from
the blue collar workforce) with the sentences meted
out to entrepreneurs who had
committed securities fraud. He found that the latter category of offender was
more likely than the former
category to be diverted from the criminal justice
system into the regulatory
conclusions were reached in Australia by John Braithwaite and Toni Makkai,
namely that the higher social status of white
collar offenders not only
permitted them greater opportunity to commit fraud, but also served to shelter
them from more serious
punishments.
Sentencing patterns have changed dramatically since then. The most recent
high profile reminder was the imprisonment in April 2005
of former HIH directors
Ray Williams and Rodney Adler for convictions related to their part in the
collapse of the insurance giant.
Both received sentences of four and a half
years, although Mr Williams’ non-parole period (two years and nine months)
months longer than Mr Adler’s.
The principal ‘white collar’ regulator in Australia is the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC). Its
lawyers can, and
regularly do, ask the courts to consider lengthy terms of imprisonment for those
who breach the corporate laws of
this land. Its enforcement activities have been
actively monitored by legal academic Michael Adams. Professor Adams takes an
count of those convicted of corporate offences in Australia. He reports
that, for the decade 1996 to 2005, on average 6.8 people
per year were sentenced
to between two and four years imprisonment, while an average of 4.8 people were
sentenced to between four
and eight years jail. On average, 0.9 people were
sentenced to between eight and 10 years, and 0.4 were given sentences of more
10 years. Thus a total of almost 130 Australian corporate directors and
managers served significant periods behind bars over the
difficult to say how many of Australia’s current 27,000 or so prisoners
fall into this category, as the statistics that
report “most serious
offence” speak of “deception offences” of which white-collar
fraud is but one. For the
record, around seven per cent of prisoners are in
prison for “deception”
Speaking generally, then, prison is no longer simply the home of the blue
collar felon. Nowadays, those who are caught, prosecuted
and convicted of white
collar offences cannot assume with any confidence that their sentence will be
served in a non-custodial environment.
With this background in mind, this paper looks not at deception offences but
another type of white collar criminal activity: causing
death in the workplace.
Specifically it discusses the current debate surrounding the new
‘industrial manslaughter’ laws
that now apply in the Australian
Capital Territory. ‘Industrial manslaughter’ is a new offence that
came into being in
2004 (as described below) to deal with deaths in the
workplace at the hands of corporations that were not being captured either by
the current corporate manslaughter provisions of the general criminal law nor by
occupational health and safety laws. Under the industrial
manslaughter laws, the
potential for corporate executives to be sent to prison for the death of a
worker, notwithstanding their lack
culpability, is now much
greater in the ACT than in other jurisdictions. What needs to be proven in order
for this to happen? Will
it lead to more executives heading to jail? Will the
potential for more terms of imprisonment being meted out to corporate managers
make any difference to rates of workplace death? Is this a legal trend that
should be commended?
Before answering these questions, it is important to review the law on death
in the workplace as it stood in the ACT prior to 2004
and as it still stands in
the rest of Australia. The standard response to a death is to charge the
executives with ‘corporate
manslaughter.’
‘Corporate manslaughter’ as a means of responding to workplace
Corporate manslaughter prosecutions may be brought when any person is killed
in an activity carried out by a corporation. They have
rarely met with any level
of success.
notable early case of a prosecution alleging corporate manslaughter in Australia
R v Denbo Pty
Ltd was prosecuted when one of its drivers was killed when his truck’s
brakes failed. Upon examination, prosecutors
found that the company’s
vehicle service record was appalling. The company (through its directors)
pleaded guilty and was fined
$80,000. At the time of its conviction, however,
Denbo Pty Ltd was in liquidation. The company was wound up six months before
and never paid the fine. Later it was reborn as another company, and
recommenced operations. The successor company did not pay the
Internationally, the success rate (measured by a guilty verdict) in
manslaughter prosecutions against corporations and individual
officers is very
poor indeed.
Jim Gobert and Maurice Punch explain:
[The] criminal law was not developed with companies in mind. Concepts such as
, which make perfectly good sense when
applied to individuals, do not translate easily to an inanimate fictional entity
corporation. Trying to apply these concepts to companies is a bit like
trying to squeeze a square peg into a round
In the case of corporate employers, with many individuals filling particular
roles, it is rare indeed that a prosecutor will be able
to establish a
conjunction of the
of multiple
individuals.
That is not to say that manslaughter convictions are impossible. In July
2009, prosecutors successfully secured manslaughter by omission
convictions that
led to the sentencing of Australian boat-builder, Alex Cittadini, to a term of
imprisonment. A fifteen metre racing
The Excalibur,
built by Mr
Cittadini, had overturned off Port Stephens, New South Wales, in September 2002
after its keel snapped in high winds.
Four of the six crew drowned. When the
yacht was salvaged, it was discovered that the keel had been cut and
insufficiently re-welded
during a reconstruction. The cut had then been covered
up by someone polishing across the weld line. It was alleged at trial that
Cittadini’s company, Applied Alloy Yachts, had not employed high-level
quality assurance checks, partly because it would
have required more paperwork
and added time and cost to the project.
In April 2009 Mr Cittadini was found to have been criminally negligent in
allowing the delivery of the yacht with a major fault. Judge
Stephen Norrish
concluded that there was an ‘element of inexperience’ in Mr
Cittadini’s employees when it came
to making yachts. Four manslaughter
convictions were entered notwithstanding that the trial judge accepted evidence
that Mr Cittadini
was unaware of the cut, and that the secret had been kept from
him. The trial judge concluded, nevertheless, that even if the accused
known about the cutting of the keel, he should have known and had in place a
reasonable system to detect and prevent any
variation to the design. The judge
sentenced Mr Cittadini to three years
December 2009, however, the NSW Court of Criminal Appeal quashed the convictions
and directed verdicts of acquittal, determining
that the lower court verdict was
“unreasonable” and the Crown Prosecutor’s final address had
caused “a miscarriage
Corporate manslaughter prosecutions, therefore, are difficult to prosecute,
to the disappointment, often, of victims and their families.
consistent call for reform each time it appears that ‘justice’ has
not been seen to be done. Indeed, in the
aftermath of the Cittadini verdict, a
survivor of the
incident, Mr Brian McDermott, expressed his
disappointment that, ultimately, no one had been held accountable for the four
The death of Lydia Carter provides another tragic example. In October 2006,
Ms Carter died after crashing her go-kart into a barrier
while at a work
function at a go-kart track in Port Melbourne,
wearing a seatbelt that did not fit properly, and safety barriers on the track
were incorrectly installed. Judge Duncan Allen
convicted and fined the parent
company AAA Auscarts Imports Pty Ltd a record $1.4 million in May 2009, but the
company had already
gone into liquidation and will never pay the fine. Despite
the finding that the company showed a gross disregard for the safety of
employees and the public, no person was ever held to account for the death of Ms
Experimenting with ‘industrial manslaughter’
Some commentators have been expressing their
dissatisfaction with the lack of deterrent effect of the current law, and have
been pushing
further for the incorporation into legislation of an offence of
‘industrial
manslaughter’
designed to punish corporations by making their higher level employees
criminally responsible for outcomes regardless of the direct
complicity of these
debate is not new, but it has recently acquired, in Australia and around the
world, a greater level of academic and political
Underpinning the industrial manslaughter legislation in Australia is the idea
that corporations are to be treated as if they were
natural persons; that is,
fault lies with, and is attributable to, the corporations themselves rather than
with specific individuals
who work for a corporation. Moreover, where the law
for the joining of liability of any individuals who may have been part of a
‘web of decisions’ that led to
the action that eventually caused the
harm in question.
This is known as ‘aggregation’.
A theory of aggregation arguably better captures the nature of corporate
fault than a theory which imputes to the company a crime
of a particular
individual. There are times when, as a result of employee negligence, victims
are seriously injured. Negligence,
however, is generally not deemed sufficient
to warrant imposing criminal liability on an individual and therefore also
insufficient
... to hold a company liable for the agent’s
The naissance of the Australian developments are found in the
Code Act 1995
of the Code expands the notion of corporate criminal
allowing for the attribution of recklessness and negligence to a corporation.
Indeed, by virtue of the Act, corporations may be
found guilty of any offence
that is punishable by imprisonment. Harm caused by employees acting within the
scope of their employment
is considered to be harm caused by the body
allows for the
element of manslaughter to be attributed to a
body corporate where the actions involved were engaged in by more than one
who may or may not have met the requirement of being the ‘guiding
mind’ of the corporation.
Regarding the attribution of a mental element to a body corporate, the Code
provides several alternatives. The first is manslaughter
by gross negligence.
Tort lawyers know that it is difficult to attribute negligence to corporations
at common law. Thus, the Code
specifically extends negligence to corporations
aggregation.
Negligence may exist on the part of the body corporate, says the
if the body
corporate’s conduct is negligent when viewed as a whole, that is, by
adding together the conduct of any number
of its employees, agents or
A requisite mental element other than negligence can be attributed to a body
corporate if it expressly, tacitly or impliedly authorised
or permitted the
commission of the
the ways in which this authorisation or permission may be established are
through the actual state of mind of either the
board of directors or other
“high managerial agents” within the body
virtue of what is referred to specifically as the body corporate’s
‘corporate culture’. “Corporate
culture” is defined as
an “attitude, policy, rule, course of conduct or practice existing within
the body corporate
generally...”
While this definition has not yet been judicially interpreted, there are have
been some attempts to put flesh on its bones, so to
speak. Jonathan Clough puts
it as follows:
This ‘corporate personality’ or ‘corporate culture’
is seen both formally, in the company’s policies
and procedures, but also
informally. It is a dynamic process with the corporate culture affecting the
actions of individuals, and
the actions of individuals affecting the corporate
personality. Corporate culture may exist independently of individual employees
or officers and may continue to exist despite changes in personnel. ... For
example, while a corporation may outwardly claim to be
concerned with
occupational health and safety, if the pressure on individual managers is to
meet unrealistic financial or time pressures,
then there may be a temptation for
corners to be cut and worker safety
compromised.
In other words, the body corporate could be deemed criminally liable for a
workplace death or injury if it displayed a corporate culture
that actively or
passively allowed non-compliance with the law and this non-compliance led to the
death of the
legislation was thus designed to catch situations where, despite the existence
of documentation appearing to require compliance,
the reality was that
non-compliance was not unusual, or was tacitly authorised by the company as a
In sum, then, the Code introduced a new basis for liability, one that is
based upon attribution, aggregation and the inchoate concept
of ‘corporate
culture’. Under the Code, and indeed under the UK equivalent, the
Corporate Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act (UK)
mental and physical elements of the offence can be attributed to corporations
as entities
. But then the Australian Code goes one step further.
Corporate principals can be prosecuted and punished both individually and
collectively
by their association with the corporation if the culture over which
they preside is one that encourages, tolerates or leads to non-compliance
with a poor ‘corporate culture’ may be considered as culpable for
its intentional or reckless conduct as individual
directors (or ‘high
managerial agents’) might be under the existing common law. Importantly,
prosecutors can aggregate
the requisite carelessness or ‘risk
denial’ potentially scape-goating ‘high managerial agents’ who
imprisoned in the most egregious of cases.
Finally, corporations convicted of manslaughter under the Code can be
subjected to heavier fines than apply under occupational health
Industrial manslaughter prosecutions, then, are thus markedly different from
those pursued under the common law, or from those prosecuted
under occupational
health and safety
legislation.
There is a major difficulty, however, for those wishing to use the
Criminal Code Act
to prosecute such conduct in Australia. The
Code only applies to Commonwealth offences, and manslaughter is not a
Commonwealth
order to give effect to these particular provisions, States and Territories need
to adopt similar sections in their criminal
codes or, in the case of the common
law States,
criminal legislation. To date, the Australian Capital Territory is the only
industrial manslaughter and rejected
nothing else, therefore, on the horizon, legislatively speaking, in Australia.
It is to the Australian Capital Territory,
then, that we now turn.
The Australian Capital Territory experiment with industrial manslaughter
The Australian Capital Territory (ACT), in 2004, became the first (and only)
industrial manslaughter.
This was done via the
Crimes (Industrial Manslaughter) Act 2003
to a new Part 2.5 (sections 49-55) being added to their Criminal Code. According
to the companion
, “industrial
manslaughter” is defined as causing the death of a worker while either
being reckless about causing serious
harm to that worker or any other worker, or
being negligent about causing the death of that or any other
Section 49C
“An employer commits an offence
(a) a worker of the employer—
(i) dies in the course of
employment by, or providing services to, or in relation to, the employer; or
(ii) is injured in the course of employment by, or providing services to, or
in relation to, the employer and later dies; and
(b) the employer’s conduct causes the death of the worker; and
(c) the employer is—
(i) reckless about causing serious harm to the worker, or any other worker of
the employer, by the conduct; or
(ii) negligent about causing the death of the worker, or any other worker of
the employer, by the conduct.”
Moreover, the ACT legislation now provides for both employer and
“senior officer”
industrial manslaughter, with maximum penalties being a combination of
significant fines and terms of imprisonment.
Chapter 2 of the Criminal Code incorporates the Commonwealth Criminal Code
Act notions of ‘corporate culture’. The key
to the ACT Code is
section 51:
51. (1) In deciding whether the fault element of intention, knowledge or
recklessness exists for an offence in relation to a corporation,
element is taken to exist if the corporation expressly, tacitly or impliedly
authorises or permits the commission of the
(2) The ways in which authorisation or permission may be established
(a) proving that the corporation’s board of directors intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly engaged in the conduct or expressly,
impliedly authorised or permitted the commission of the offence; or
(b) proving that a high managerial agent of the corporation intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly engaged in the conduct or expressly,
impliedly authorised or permitted the commission of the offence; or
(c) proving that a corporate culture existed within the corporation that
directed, encouraged, tolerated or led to noncompliance with
the contravened
(d) proving that the corporation failed to create and maintain a corporate
culture requiring compliance with the contravened law.
(3) Subsection (2) (b) does not apply if the corporation proves that it
exercised appropriate diligence to prevent the conduct, or
the authorisation or
permission.
Significantly, like the provisions of the Commonwealth Code, negligence of a
corporation can be attributed by
aggregation,
similarly, the physical element of the offence (causing death either by an act
or by omission) is not only attributable by the
conduct of officers, but also by
agents or employees of the
corporation.
One needs to acknowledge a limitation, however. The Australian Capital
Territory is home to only 1.5 per cent of the Australian population,
it has a healthy light industry quota, it has no heavy industry. Most of its
employers and employees are government departments
and public servants
respectively. Indeed, the Australian government moved quickly in response to the
Crimes (Industrial Manslaughter) Act (ACT) 2003
, and introduced (in 2004)
a Commonwealth law that exempts Commonwealth of Australia employers and
employees from its provisions.
This political act (a snub for the legislators of
the ACT by their more conservative national masters) grants exemptions in the
of approximately 80 per cent of employers in that jurisdiction).
Australian academics await a test case to determine the effectiveness (or,
indeed, workability) of these new provisions. There have
been no prosecutions to
date under this law.
Given the persistence of deaths and injuries in
Australian workplaces notwithstanding an increasingly punitive occupational
and safety regime, there is good reason to believe that occupational
health and safety law is, on its own, an inadequate deterrent
against workplace
harm. There is thus growing support for the view that deterrence could be
bolstered if directors and managers of
companies were to be personally (and
criminally) liable in circumstances where the potential harm is great, the risk
obvious and
the precautionary work
where conduct “conspicuously fail[s] to observe the standards laid down by
are some who believe, in addition, that the deterrent factor would be enhanced
if the penalties prescribed for the above conduct
were to include terms of
imprisonment for senior managers even in the absence of their
culpability.
From a sentencing policy point of view, a key question quickly emerges. Is
there any evidence to suggest that the placing of these
presumably deterrent
factors in legislation will make managers more likely to inculcate a culture of
safety in their workplaces?
One could safely assume that the inclusion of the
‘corporate culture’ provisions, such as those found in the ACT
legislation,
will make prosecutions more likely as it is probably easier to
prove a poor culture than a manager’s (or string of managers’)
culpability.
certainly the possibility of imprisonment of managers sends a strong message to
the community that culpable conduct will not
be tolerated, even if it means
targeting individuals who may have been but one of a number of guilty parties.
But what evidence is there of the usefulness of the notion of corporate
culture (indeed, an enhanced prosecution likelihood) as a
tool of deterrence?
Gretley mine disaster in November 1996. Four miners had
drowned in a mining
shaft 150 metres underground after they accidentally drilled into a flooded and
disused shaft at Gretley, owned
and operated by a Hunter Valley (NSW)
four years later, in August 2004, the Newcastle Wallsend Coal Company, its
parent company Oakbridge, the mine’s surveyor
and two managers were found
guilty of breaching the
Occupational Health and Safety Act
Five other under-managers at the mine had charges against them dismissed.
Dr Hopkins concluded, on the basis of his interviews with relevant managers,
that there are a number of direct effects (including
deterrence) of
prosecutorial threats over and above a general moral censuring.
threat of prosecution leads to thoughts of self-protection, namely it keeps a
manager’s mind firmly on safety;
threat of prosecution gives rise to an increased tendency for managers to write
things down; and
threat of prosecution leads managers to discipline employees who engage in
violations of the rules.
His conclusions are
corroborated by the work of Dorothy Thornton, Neil Guningham and Robert Kagan.
On the basis of their review of
environmental law enforcement practices in eight
have a deterrent effect, manifested in both a reminder and reassurance
function. The threat of prosecution reminds managers that
they should review
their compliance status regularly, while at the same time reassuring them that
their competitors who cheat are
unlikely to get away with
These conclusions, however, could relate to
prosecutions, not just
those inspired by a poor ‘corporate culture.’ The logic of those who
would praise the addition
of the ‘corporate culture’ provisions is
that the deterrent effect of the law is enhanced because these prosecutions
easier to mount and thus more likely to proceed and succeed. In the absence of
direct evidence that this would be the case, however,
we can only rely upon
speculation.
More potent, perhaps, is the argument that the deterrent effect is bolstered
if there is a likelihood of attracting a prison sentence
in the event of a
finding of guilt. Imprisonment, one assumes, is a far greater deterrent than
non-imprisonment. This argument is
only valid, of course, if we can rely upon
two assumptions, firstly, that the presence of the ‘corporate
culture’ provisions
will make it more likely that a defendant will face a
jail term and, secondly, that the threat of that happening will change potential
offenders’ attitudes away from law-breaking and towards compliance.
Neither of these assumptions, however, is necessarily sound.
Firstly, despite what Professor Adams says about the growing rate of
corporate executives being given custodial sentences, it is still
the case that
corporate defendants are well-positioned to defend themselves and thus less
likely to go to jail than non white-collar
offenders who are convicted of
offences that attract terms of imprisonment.
Large companies are able to hire the best lawyers, secure
‘professional’ expert witnesses, and engage in delaying tactics
will outlast the political pressure that prompted the government to initiate a
prosecution in the first place ... The lesson
seems to be that the criminal
justice system, as presently constituted, is simply not a viable forum for
tackling corporate
wrongdoing.
Indeed, white collar offenders typically hold a number of cards that bode
well for a non-custodial sentence. They rarely have previous
convictions. Their
standing in the community is usually very high. Their remorse is often well
expressed. As their character witnesses
will always attest, the professional
shame that they have suffered could be seen as a punishment in itself. Their
conduct has also
dramatically reduced their ability to ever be able to work in
their chosen profession again, and so forth.
Secondly, deterrence theory is notoriously unreliable. The best that can be
said about the threat of imprisonment is that some people
may be deterred from
some conduct some of the time by the threat of more serious consequences. The
evidence in deterrence theory
points to the threat of being caught as a far
greater deterrent than the consequences of being caught. Moreover, an
over-reliance
upon prison as a crime reduction strategy comes at a significant
financial cost, and is applied inconsistently, primarily affecting
cannot muster the resources, financial and personal, to aid in an acquittal or a
plea in mitigation of penalty.
Putting to one side the ‘corporate culture’ issue for a moment,
it should be noted that there are many critics of the
whole thrust of industrial
manslaughter laws who suggest that they are not the best response to cases
involving corporate killing.
For example, it has been pointed out that the
imprisonment provisions do not apply to senior officers of non-corporations
partnerships and sole traders), transnational corporations and
government-owned
enterprises.
Furthermore, it may be too harsh to expect one or two persons to take full blame
for the tragic consequences of a chain of errors,
even in a work environment
which is not properly
safety-minded.
If the new provisions (attribution, aggregation, culture and the threat of
imprisonment) have their short-comings as deterrents, are
there other options
for the punishment of companies that have engaged in unacceptable practices?
Commentators have suggested that
the deterrent power of divestment of company
equity, adverse publicity, corporate probation (with remedial and rehabilitative
conditions),
disqualifications from certain commercial activities, receiverships
(or ordering someone else to run the company), and the threat
of the loss of
limited liability are, arguably, equally potent deterrents, and have thus
encouraged their
deployment.
This discussion underlines the argument that industrial manslaughter laws
cannot, by themselves, lower workplace death rates unless
they directly affect
corporate or individual employees’ perceptions of risk. Thus, there needs
to be embedded within corporate
entities a variety of control mechanisms, be
they classified as ‘carrot’ or
that is, non-prosecutorial options
that reinforce the potential value of a multi-faceted approach to sentencing
corporations in the
event of grossly culpable
trick is to determine how best to encourage such attitudes and behaviours with
and without the threat of legal sanction.
Finally, is there not an argument for industrial manslaughter prosecutions on
the basis of desert? What is the
function of the law? Is there
not an important interest to be served in seeing that ‘justice’ is
done when serious harm
has been caused? Paul Almond puts the issue as
High-profile work-related fatality cases, whether or not they result in
prosecution, communicate messages about the risks arising
from corporate
activity. It is this
communicative
function that accounts for the degree
of public concern provoked by fatality cases, which cannot simply be dismissed
as a form of
moral panic over an emotive issue, because it reflects the
cognitive evaluation of socially grounded
Public perceptions are indeed
is a perception amongst those who monitor ‘law and order’ politics
that there is a latter-day preference for retributive
sanctioning and a
heightened intolerance of offending generally. There does appear to be a shift
in public attitudes towards white
collar offenders; a public that is now more
likely to have a financial stake in corporate Australia and who see themselves
correctly – as indirect, if not direct, potential victims of
others’ malfeasance. That being the case, we may be less
inclined to have
qualms about sending a former pillar of society to prison.
However, Dr Almond concludes that this does not necessarily translate into
punitive attitudes to sentencing following corporate killings.
In a survey based
upon readers responding to a series of vignettes, he concluded that
although personal decisions about liability and punishment were made on
essentially moral grounds, this did not translate into the
outrage’ and demands for vengeance that characterize accounts of populist
punitiveness.
the respondents’ punishment preferences were rational and reasoned, and
the emotive aspects of their attitudes were primarily
regretful rather than
vengeful ... there were signs that the desire to express condemnation and
disapproval of offenders’ conduct
was counterbalanced by recognition of
the need for humane and just penal
This conclusion is an important consideration in the debate over the adoption
of industrial manslaughter legislation. If, as Dr Almond
points out, the demand
by the public in the face of a work-related death is more focused on the control
of underlying social risks
rather than the vilification of an offender
(representing a company) through his or her punishment, then the argument for
manslaughter legislation (and using the ‘corporate
culture’ provisions to bolster it) is greatly diminished. If, however,
deterrent factor grows stronger by virtue of the threat of an industrial
manslaughter prosecution, namely by its ability to motivate
corporate executives
to take active measures to control serious risks, then the legislation may have
more value than its detractors
may be prepared to admit.
The debate over the value or otherwise of industrial manslaughter laws will
continue to feature strongly in corporate boardrooms,
parliaments and criminal
law circles. Discussion to date has been hampered by the multi-layered
complexities and political tensions
involved in drafting laws designed to bring
responsible persons to account while remaining faithful to basic precepts of
criminal responsibility, fairness and public sympathy.
In the absence of persuasive evidence that attributing human offences to
corporate entities, aggregating negligent minds and actions,
locating criminal
liability in poor ‘corporate cultures’, and allowing for the
possibility of imprisonment in some cases
will reduce or eliminate deaths and
injuries from the corporate workplace, changes to the
of the Australian Capital Territory) are unlikely in Australia in the
foreseeable future. Indeed, every other State has
rejected the
regarding it as an ineffective and potentially counterproductive
addressing corporate killing.
This is not to deny that ‘corporate culture’ prosecutions may
nevertheless have a symbolic effect, setting risk management
higher in the
corporate management priority list, and showing the world that the law does take
seriously the need for public rebuke
in the most egregious of cases. Without
this legislation, it is possible that more cases like those of
continue to come before the courts yet simply exit them without further
consequence. That possibility remains unacceptable to
many victims and observers
Professor of Law
and Criminal Justice, University of South Australia.
Sutherland, E.
(1949/1983) White-Collar Crime: The Uncut Version, New Haven: Yale University
Press, 7. The term ‘white-collar
crime’ was first used in
Sutherland’s 1939 address to the American Sociological Society, published
the following year
as ‘White Collar Criminality’
Sociological Review
Sarre, R. (2007) ‘White Collar Crime and Prosecution for “Industrial
Manslaughter” as a Means to Reduce
Workplace Deaths’ in Pontell, H
and Geis, G (eds)
International Handbook on White Collar Crime
, New York,
NY: Springer,
(1993) The Investigation, Prosecution, and Trial of Serious Fraud,
Commission on Criminal Justice Research Study
No.14, London:
Braithwaite, J. and Makkai, T (1994) ‘Trust and Compliance’,
Policing and Society
, 4, 1-12. Also see Makkai, T and Braithwaite, J
(1994) ‘The Dialectics of Corporate Deterrence’,
Research in Crime and Delinquency
M. ‘Australian Corporate Governance: Lessons from HIH Insurance’
[2005] ALRS 1.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2008) 4512.0
Corrective Services,
Wells, C (2001) ‘Corporate Criminal Liability: Developments in Europe and
Beyond’ 39(7)
Law Society Journal
(1994) 6 VIR
Chesterton, S (1994) ‘The Corporate Veil, Crime and Punishment: The Queen
v Denbo Pty Ltd and Timothy Ian Nadenbousch’
[1994] MelbULawRw 25
Melbourne University
‘White Collar Crime and Prosecution for “Industrial
Manslaughter” as a Means to Reduce Workplace Deaths’
in Pontell, H.
and Geis, G. (eds)
International Handbook on White Collar Crime
York, NY: Springer, 2007,
Gobert, J. and Punch, M. (2003)
Rethinking Corporate Crime
and Richards, J. (2005) ‘Responding to Culpable Corporate Behaviour:
Current developments in the industrial manslaughter
Journal of Law Reform
‘Boatbuiler jailing may spark new case’
The Weekend
Australian,
11-12/7/2009, p
‘Appeal win on boat deaths’
The Weekend Australian,
18-19/12/2009, p
‘Appeal win on boat deaths’
The Weekend Australian,
18-19/12/2009, p
convicted over gokart death’, by Daniel Fogarty,
www.news.com.au
go-kart centre called Auscarts Racing still operates at the same venue, owned
now by Port Melbourne Go-Karts Pty
confused with ‘corporate manslaughter’ or ‘corporate
homicide’ which are applicable more generally
to corporate killing.
Industrial manslaughter must have occurred at work involving the death of a
SA independent MLC Mr Nick Xenophon (now Senator Xenophon) introduced in 2004
into the South Australian parliament an amendment
Occupational Health,
Safety and Welfare Act 1986
(SA) that provided for a specific offence of
industrial manslaughter. His Bill applied to a situation where an employer or a
officer” of the employer is either negligent about causing
death or “recklessly indifferent about seriously endangering
the health or
safety of [an] employee or any other person at work.” It also applied to
omissions, deeming omitting to act an
offence “if it is an omission to
perform a duty to avoid or prevent danger to the life, safety or health of
Under the Bill, the danger may arise from either the act or
undertaking of that person or, significantly, “anything in the
person’s possession or control.” The Bill later
Writings in this area go back almost two decades; for example, Polk, K, Haines,
F and Perrone, S (1993) “Homicide, Negligence
and Work Death: The Need for
Legal Change,” in M. Quinlan (ed),
Work and Health: The Origins,
Management and Regulation of Occupational Illness.
discussed below, it is only found in the Australian Capital
Tomasic, R. (2005) ‘>From White-Collar to Corporate Crime and
Beyond’ in Duncan Chappell and Paul Wilson (eds)
Issues in Australian
Crime and Criminal Justice,
Chatswood NSW: LexisNexis Butterworths, p 264.
Gobert, J and
Punch, M. (2003)
Rethinking Corporate Crime,
applies to all Australians. Most Australian criminal law is the responsibility
of the States or Territories and these laws
are only applicable within the
Part 2.5, Division 12. For a useful discussion of this Part, see Woolf, T (1997)
‘The Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) –
Towards a Realist Vision of
Corporate Criminal Liability’, 21(5)
Criminal Law Journal
a discussion of the English equivalent, see Almond, P. ‘Regulation Crisis:
Evaluating the Potential Legitimizing Effects
of “Corporate
Manslaughter” Cases,’
Law and Policy,
29(3), 2007, 285-310 at
12.1 and 12.2.
Section 12.3(2) (a) and
Clough, J (2005) ‘Will the punishment fit the crime? Corporate
manslaughter and the problem of sanctions’,
Flinders Journal of Law
8(1), 113-131 at
12.3(2) (c) and
12.3(2) (d).
See generally Gobert, J (2005) ‘The Politics of Corporate Manslaughter
– the British Experience,’
Flinders Journal of Law Reform,
Act refers to the notion of corporate culture but does so only as an evidentiary
factor, not as a basis for
This is not to say that the OH&S penalties are trifling; see Catanzariti, J
(2004) ‘Higher and novel penalties for serious
safety breaches,’
Law Society Journal,
There is a philosophical issue alive here as well. Health and safety law may be
regarded as a lesser form of proscription, as liability
under OH&S attaches
to a breach of duty (a guard rail was left open), rather than the outcome (a
person died because the guard
rail was open). The criminal law is thus more
‘ends-driven’ and less ‘regulatory,’ and thus possesses
legitimatory power than OH&S prosecutions which may be regarded as
simply the end result of a routine enforcement activity. See
‘Regulation Crisis: Evaluating the Potential Legitimizing Effects of
“Corporate Manslaughter” Cases,’
Law and Policy,
2007, 285-310 at 290 and
of 2004, Greens Senator Kerry Nettle introduced into the Australian parliament
the Criminal Code Amendment (Workplace Death
and Serious Injury) Bill 2004,
which was designed specifically to incorporate industrial manslaughter offences
into the Commonwealth
Criminal Code. The Bill has
are, confusingly, different approaches taken to criminal laws amongst the States
and Territories. Three States (Queensland,
Western Australia and Tasmania, plus
the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory) have codified their
criminal laws.
South Australia, New South Wales and Victoria still use the
common law.
Sarre, R. and Richards, J. ‘Criminal manslaughter in the workplace: what
options for legislators?’
Law Institute Journal,
78, (1-2), 58-61,
. Confusingly the offence of manslaughter is
proscribed in this Act while the requisites of criminal responsibility are found
Criminal Code (2002). The two pieces of legislation, therefore, need to
be read together. The
Crimes Act 1900
does this specifically by
linking the specific
provisions.
Section 49D
penalty: 2 000 penalty units, imprisonment for 20 years or
Code 2002 (ACT) s
Code 2002 (ACT) s
and Punch, M.
Rethinking Corporate Crime
(2003), 96, referring to
Ashworth, A.
Principles of Criminal Law
ed, 1999) 199.
Per Cummins J,
DPP v Esso (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2001] VSC 296 (Unreported
Supreme Court of Victoria, Justice Cummins, 30 May 2001) [para 4]. For an
insight into that prosecution, see Wheelwright, K (2002)
Liability for Workplace Deaths and Injuries – Reflecting on
Victoria’s Laws in the Light of the Esso
Longford Explosion,” 7(2)
Deakin Law Review
Anecdotally, it has been said that the sight of executives in handcuffs being
led out of the building of failed US giant corporation
Enron probably did more
towards restoring public confidence in the justice system in the wake of that
corporate malfeasance than
be better able to make that judgement once there have been some judicial
interpretations of the rather vague terms found
in the legislation such as
“culture”, “attitude” and
“maintain”.
See also Phillips, K. (2006)
The Politics of a Tragedy: The Gretley Mine
Disaster and the dangerous state of work safety laws in New South Wales,
Institute of Public Affairs, Work Reform
Lessons from Gretley,
2007, at page
D., Gunningham, N. and Kagan, R. ‘General Deterrence and Corporate
Environmental Behavior’
(2005) 27(2)
Law and Policy
Gobert, J and Punch, M (2003)
Rethinking Corporate Crime
LexisNexis Butterworths,
(2001) ‘Risk Management and Regulatory Weakness’ in Ian Ramsay (ed)
Collapse Incorporated: Tales, Safeguards and Responsibilities of Corporate
, Sydney, CCH,
Discussed in Sarre, R. ‘White Collar Crime and Prosecution for
“Industrial Manslaughter” as a Means to Reduce Workplace
Deaths’ in Pontell, H. and Geis, G. (eds)
International Handbook on
White Collar Crime
, New York, NY: Springer, 2007,
Moreover, there is the possibility that the mere mention of ‘industrial
manslaughter,’ ‘aggregation,’ or
culture’ prosecutions will raise the likelihood that collaboration between
employers and employees will break
down, and that would be to the detriment of
health and safety in the workplace generally. See former NSW Industrial
Relations Minister
John Della Bosca as cited by, and reported in, ‘NSW:
Govt to introduce tougher laws for negligent employers’ (AAP, 27
Sarre, R. ‘Responding to Corporate Collapses: is there a role for
corporate social responsibility?’
Deakin Law Review
, 7(1), 1-19,
(1990) “Sentencing Options Against Corporations,” 1(2)
R (2005) “From White-Collar to Corporate Crime and Beyond” in Duncan
Chappell and Paul Wilson (eds)
Issues in Australian Crime and Criminal
Chatswood NSW: LexisNexis Butterworths, at
P. ‘Regulation Crisis: Evaluating the Potential Legitimizing Effects of
“Corporate Manslaughter” Cases,’
Law and Policy,
2007, 285-310 at 293. (Emphasis in the
Monterosso, S. ‘Punitive Criminal Justice and Policy in Contemporary
QUT Law and Justice Journal
, 9(1), 13-25,
P, ‘Public Perceptions of Work-Related Fatality Cases: Reaching the Outer
Limits of ‘Populist Punitiveness’?’
British Journal of
Criminology,
48, 448-467, 2008 at
P, ‘Public Perceptions of Work-Related Fatality Cases: Reaching the Outer
Limits of ‘Populist Punitiveness’?’
British Journal of
Criminology,
48, 448-467, 2008 at
is contained in Sarre, R. and Richards, J. (2005) ‘Responding to Culpable
Corporate Behaviour: Current developments
in the industrial manslaughter
Flinders Journal of Law Reform
Cittadini and AAA Auscarts cases did not involve employees being killed, rather
members of the public, hence the industrial manslaughter
laws would not apply
even if they had been adopted in NSW (Cittadini) and Victoria (AAA Auscarts).
But should those States adopt
the provisions of the Commonwealth Criminal Code
Act, then there would be a heightened chance of a conviction and sentence of
imprisonment
in each of these cases.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (274 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter