URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2019/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Croft, Penny; Vogl, Anthea --- "Dehumanized and demonized refugees, zombies and World War Z" [2019] UTSLRS 6; (2019) 13(1) Law and Humanities 29
Dehumanized and Demonized Refugees, Zombies and
This paper explores
inhuman/human constructions that feature in state responses to refugees. We
move beyond straightforward normative
claims that dehumanizing or demonizing
refugees is unfair, unjust or bad to ask: what kind of inhuman monsters are
refugees characterized
as when they are ‘demonised’; and, what are
the consequences of such a characterization? Our argument is that reading
demonised refugee as the contemporary zombie monster and inversely, reading the
resurgence of the zombie monster through the
prism of the so-called refugee and
migrant crisis, reveals the precise anxieties brought about by refugees and
asylum seekers. In
particular, we claim that both figures represent the
transgression of borders, as well as the failure of containment, borders and
border walls as a response to crisis. We also argue that the contemporary
zombie, as a race-less catchall monster figure, mirrors
the erasure of colonial
histories, race and race relations in the casting of refugees as dehistoricized,
invading and disorderly
bodies. We analyse these themes through the 2013
blockbuster film
World War Z
(dir. Marc Foster). In the
the United Nations, US Navy, World Health Organisation, and
Gerry Lane (a former UN employee) combine to fight a global zombie war.
Key words: refugees; zombies; migrant crisis; border control;
bare life; monsters
Introduction
In the Australian context,
and internationally, it is almost passé to observe that refugees are
dehumanized and demonized.
In 2011, for example, the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the Pacific called on Australian political leaders to break
‘ingrained political habit’ of ‘demonising
and in 2017,
Amnesty International’s annual Global Report found that the
‘politics of demonisation’ surrounding
refugee and migrants was
creating a ‘divided and dangerous world’ and breeding division and
We begin with these
observations not so much to critique the exclusion of refugees and asylum
seekers from the category of human,
but to ask: what kind of inhuman monsters
are refugees characterized as when they are ‘demonised’; and, what
possibilities and consequences of such a
characterization?
Bringing our focus to the precise kind of demon or
non-human figure that is ascribed to the refugee allows us to identify the
threats believed to be posed by the mobile asylum-seeking subject. Our
argument is that reading the demon(ised), monstrous refugee
as the contemporary
zombie monster and inversely, reading the resurgence of the zombie monster
through the prism of the so-called
refugee and migrant crises, reveals the
precise anxieties brought about by refugees and asylum seekers. We show that the
connected to and generated by refugee movement reflect the monstrous
qualities of the zombie. In particular, we claim that both figures
represent the
transgression of borders, including borders between the human and inhuman and
the dead and undead, as well as the failure
of containment, borders and border
walls as a response to crisis. We also argue that the contemporary zombie, as a
race-less catchall
monster figure, mirrors the erasure of race and race
relations in the casting of refugees as dehistoricized, invading and disorderly
Tracing the refugee-as-zombie trope is productive as it moves us beyond
straightforward normative claims that dehumanizing or demonizing
refugees is
unfair, unjust or bad. It allows us to ask what the implication of such
processes are and indeed, what can then be
to the dehumanised
subject, to the refugee or zombie-as-contaminant or threat. This reflects
Cole’s insight that the label
of monstrous wickedness is instrumental and
serves a narrative purpose of justifying and requiring extreme
In each section we
analyze state responses to refugee populations seeking protection through the
depiction of the undead in the 2013
We argue that even though
the film itself may primarily be, as MacNeil has argued, an empty vehicle for
‘Hollywood himbo’
Brad Pitt to once again save the
in its depiction of the
zombie war it cannot help but both represent and critique fears that refugee
populations will contaminate
systems of national order, as well as unsettling
present day responses – of containment and securitization – to the
refugee crisis.
After introducing the film, we analyze three
intersections of monster and zombie theory with representations and responses to
movement. They are the transgression of borders between the
human/inhuman and the dead/undead; the irrelevance and breakdown of the
geopolitical, territorial state; and the erasure of colonial histories, global
inequality and race in narrating the ‘origin’
of the refugee crisis
and of the zombie war/virus. Finally, we examine the ‘other’ refugee
story presented in
World War Z
and zombie texts more generally
that of the uninfected – which is represented in the film by the story
of Gerry Lane and his white, American family.
World War Z’s Zombies and Border-Crossing
World War Z
and resulting film, and their commercial successes, are part of the zombie
World War Z: An Oral History of the Zombie War
apocalyptic horror novel written by Max
The book provides a series
of personal accounts of the impacts of the devastating global conflict against a
zombie plague. Brooks
used the novel to critique US isolationism and government
ineptitude.
The novel was a
commercial hit and was praised by most
A film, with the same name
as the novel, was released in 2013, directed by Marc Forster and starring Brad
Pitt as the main character,
Gerry Lane, a former UN investigator who must travel
the world to find a way to stop the zombie pandemic. The film departed greatly
from the book’s premise, to the extent that a critic asserted it had
‘cannibalised’ the
focusing on the present and
making it more of an action
The film watered down some
of the book’s explicitly political undertones to produce a commercially
successful summer
blockbuster.
The film was
a commercial success, grossing over USD540 million, becoming the highest
grossing zombie film of all time. Critical responses
to the film were mixed. On
the one hand critics labelled it as a ‘punchy, if conventional action
other as ‘an anemic actioner that fosters excitement like dead limbs as it
lumbers towards a
conclusion’
‘no heart to be found among the
Even though this
was an intentionally depoliticized
we argue that its
outwardly sanitized storyline and imagery still (cannot help but) provide
insight into state-driven anxieties about
migrants along the border and the
failure of securitized responses to refugees. The politics of the apparently
less controversial
adaptation of the book reveal how the erasure of colonial
histories, of responsibility, and of race relations frame the so-called
crisis in the same way they frame the fictional zombie war.
i. The Border between the Human/Non-Human and the Breach of
State Borders
According to Foucault,
each age has its ‘privileged monster’ – the bestial human in
the Middle Ages, Siamese or
conjoined twins in the Renaissance and the
hermaphrodite in the Classical
Based on the sheer number
of popular television series, films, video games, graphic novels and literature,
it is arguable that zombies
are a privileged monster in contemporary
As one film critic put
World War Z’s
release, ‘[t]his has already been a
heady century for cinema's
This resurgence
in zombies has likewise been reflected in academic literature, analyzing the
various cultural anxieties and challenges
that the zombie
represents,
such as invasion,
contagion, terror and/or the consequences of consumption and
consumerism.
the construction of the monstrous in the horror genre is the transgression of
the borders of humanity – a disturbance
of the ‘natural
The specific
border changes from story to story, but the function of the monster remains the
same – ‘to bring about an
encounter between the symbolic order and
that which threatens its
stability’.
Monsters are
‘categorically contradictory, incomplete, or
apart the ‘either/or’ syllogistic logic with a kind of reasoning
closer to ‘and/neither’. The
zombies, depicted in
, are monsters that transgress the border of the living and the dead
– they are neither/both dead nor/and alive. Zombies generate
fascination because they not only break rules and cross borders, but because
they also challenge the border itself, by being
both and neither one thing and
another. They embody and unleash the chaos that exists on the other side of
cultural and categorical
boundaries.
Zombies as the living/dead has
resonated in academic literature analyzing undocumented
Where academics have
engaged with zombie fiction it has predominantly been to gain insight into the
characterization of refugees
through the prism of the living-dead, connecting
the zombie figure to Agamben’s conception of
Like the encamped
political refugee, zombies have been theorized as embodiments of bare life since
zombies are neither human or inhuman
but necessarily ‘stripped of
political status ... wholly reduced to bare
They can be killed
but not sacrificed, since they are outside the normal legal order, but their
exclusion or ‘inclusive exclusion’
constitutes a state or space of
exception that structures the very relation of all life to
(political life). Theorists have pointed to the ways in which:
[l]ives lived on the margins of social, political, cultural, economic and
geographical borders are lives half lived. Denied access
to legal, economic and
political redress, these lives exist in a limbo-like state that is largely
preoccupied with acquiring and
sustaining the essentials of
Humans who are
precariously positioned legally as bare life, can then be characterized and
treated in ways that are similar to those
of zombies – as fundamentally
threatening to the living, or political life, in their quest for
Stratton has argued
that the same rhetoric is used for displaced people and zombies as a means of
articulating and exploring the
relationship between bare life and the modern
Rather than focus
on the zombie as bare life or as in limbo between death and (political) life, in
this section we draw attention
to how the key visual cues and narrative
functions of zombies – that they travel in unbounded and undifferentiated
are constantly on the move, and are always seeking new life/brains to
sustain life – mirror the ways in which certain groups
and images are
encoded as refugees, and in turn how those groups are characterized as dangerous
and unwelcome. The border crossing,
hungry zombie is the unlawful, job-seeking
economic refugee and vice versa.
World War Z
depicts the ways in
which zombie monsters transgress not only symbolic or natural borders but also
state borders. We were originally
inspired to consider the portrayal of refugees
through the prism of
World War Z
because of the awesome spectacle in the
novel and film of the Israeli cordon sanitaire around Jerusalem, and the
breaching of this
wall by a seething mass of
Israel/Palestine
(called the New Palestine in the novel) is one of the only countries to have
successfully kept the zombies out and
protected its territory, via the
Israel/Palestine wall.
novel, Israel only admits uninfected Jews and Palestinians within its
In the film, the New
Palestine is more international – with Mossad chief Warmbrunn stating
‘Every human being we save
is one less zombie to fight’. This
reflects the division of the world into us and them – and they are trying
to eat ‘us’
– the living. When Gerry arrives in Israel he is
impressed by the international flavor of the New Palestine, humans united
against the threat of zombies. People who have taken refuge in the walled city
start loudly singing, literally living in harmony.
The zombies are attracted to
noise and start climbing over each other to breach the walls. Within minutes,
the city is overrun by
The portrayal of the zombies – as a
heaving undifferentiated mass of dangerous border-crossers – with
potential to take
over a city if they gain access – mirrors and directly
calls up metaphors and images used to describe and depict refugee
The scenes of an
infected mass breaching the new border wall directly references (and willfully
exaggerates) the usually placeless
images of masses of refugees and migrants in
transit, at sea or climbing over the top of border fences. Most recently, images
the 2015/6 ‘refugee crisis’ consistently showed masses of
people, mainly Syrians, breaching border fortifications from
Syria into Turkey,
from Serbia and Croatia into Hungary, and from Hungary into
In her analysis of how
Austrian newspapers write about asylum seekers, Elizabeth El Refaie quotes an
article that writes of ‘new
hordes of applicants for asylum’. Whilst
‘horde’ suggests an irrational mass, El Refaie states:
In other articles, the ‘war’ metaphor is also evoked by verbs,
which describe the refugees as ‘forcing their way’
) over the border into Europe, of ‘invading’
) Germany and of ‘storming’ (
Fortress Europe.
metaphors of ‘war’ have similarly been invoked in Australia’s
response to refugee arrivals. For example, Australia’s
Department of Home
Affairs oversees Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB), which the Department
describes as ‘a military-led border
security operation aimed at combating
maritime people smuggling and protecting Australia’s
Since 2013 the
primary focus of this ‘militaristic joint agency task force’ has
been the interception and turning back
of asylum-seeker boats. Most of its work
is kept secret on the grounds of national security, though monthly
‘operational updates’
provide cursory, warlike summaries of activity
for the relevant ‘reporting
, the very title of the novel and film makes it clear that the zombie
pandemic is regarded as a war between the living and the living-dead.
zombies are portrayed as a mindless throng threatening the destruction of order,
prosperity, security, and the very existence
, the zombies almost always travel in mobs (leaving aside the zombie
doctors in the laboratory at the end who are isolated from each
security doors).
It is very rare
for the film to portray a zombie as an individual – and when this does
occur, it is usually a close up to show
infection and then the film moves on
without any follow up of what happened to that particular
Likewise, refugees,
except in certain circumstances or in death, are presented or discussed as a
collective and, for the most part,
not even as a specific national or ethnic
group. Usually, like the zombies in
World War Z
, refugees and
‘illegal’ migrants are represented as a group crossing or attempting
to cross borders. As Mountz and Hyndman
note, in the process of conflating
public discourse ‘about terrorists, refugees, economic migrants, human
smuggling and others
on the move’, individual people are stripped of their
identities and re-subjectified as groups – and as threatening groups
Arguably, the most
well-known ‘fact’ about the migrants and refugees arriving in Europe
in the last few years, and especially
in 2015, is the scale of their arrival -
namely that over 1 million migrants reached Europe that year, and that over
800,000 reached
Greek territory by
In the context of the
so-called ‘refugee crisis’, descriptions are prefaced with a vague
numerical reference: 100s or
1000s or millions. As Manderson explains in regard
to refugees travelling by boat, we are presented with ‘abject bodies of
mainly unidentifiable refugees’ who are positioned
(quoting Ruskin) on ‘the deathfulness of the open, deep, illimitable
For asylum seekers
who are depicted as ‘anonymous, impotent, barely human’, there is
not a demand for
as might belong to the human-citizen - but at
best and following Arendt, a ‘plea for
Further, as
Justine Poon has argued in relation to so-called ‘boat arrivals’ in
Australia, asylum seekers become disembodied
and unwelcome ‘boats’
in Australian political
She writes that these
metaphors have played a central role, in complicity with law, in enacting the
disappearing of the actual asylum
seekers and constructing an emptied legal
subject whose presence is registered just enough by the law in order to capture
a system of state coercion, movement, and detention.
been repeated and careful critiques of the usually water-based metaphors use to
describe refugees, such as floods, swamps,
deluges, waves, tsunamis, pipelines,
flows and streams. What connects these metaphors, alongside the recurring theme
of refugee arrival
as natural disasters, is that these disaster or weather
events are generally limitless and uncontainable. Walls or geographic borders
are either vulnerable or entirely redundant in the face of natural disasters.
Critiquing these metaphors and coded language, Lani
Kainz argues that human
beings cannot flood, flow or
By contrast, in the
World War Z
cordon sanitaire breach scene, the zombies
flood. In their many thousands, they quite literally spill over the wall and
flood the city, exemplifying and parodying anti-immigrant
In reading the
refugee mass as a zombie mass, though, there is no plea for justice or mercy for
the zombies - only
the danger and threat posed to the no-longer-secure
nation state. Calls for empathy or sympathy towards the zombies in
are absent. However, as the zombies breach the wall and infect the humans,
there is no longer a clear boundary between ‘us’
‘them’ (though we return to and critique this claim below). There is
no capacity to contain the monstrous hordes,
which leaves a distinct sense of
unease at the extrajudicial murder of the human-inhuman zombies who are entirely
disposable and
yet not entirely separate from the citizen-human within.
ii. Border Failure, the Territorial Nation State and
Immigration Control
In the securitized
state, borders do not just denote the boundaries of the territorial state but
are cast as key sites from which
the safety and security of the nation can and
should be guaranteed and protected. A conception of the nation-state as a
which serves to clearly differentiate one polity from another,
orders national identity and security around concepts such as
territoriality, geographical limits, entries, and
Governments present
territorial borders and their regulation as central to national security, and
preventing the arrival and potential
arrival of undocumented migrants is one of
the key objectives of border control and
protection.
As a result,
national security has come to mean controlling who enters the State and on what
terms, as well as affording the State
summary powers to expel
, the hero, Gerry, originally visits Israel/Palestine as it is considered
to be the only state to be ‘winning’ the zombie
war via its (to
parody Trump) ‘beautiful wall’ and perfection of containment and
protection of its citizens. Gerry is
still on a quest to head to India to find
the original virus. The Chief of Mossad points out that finding the origin of
is pointless, telling him, ‘India is a black hole, forget about
Patient zero’, but Gerry retorts, ‘I can’t
do that, it’s
too late for me to build a wall’.
In the same scene we described
above of the breach of New Palestine’s cordon sanitaire, and in the images
of boundaries throughout
the film, the wall is at first presented as an
ingenious and foresighted ‘solution’ to the crisis for the citizens
New Palestine, and as a safe barrier between citizen/non-citizen or
zombie/human. It is a jarringly familiar form of immigration
Gerry’s visit to the New Palestine and sanctuary behind the wall provides
a reprieve for him and for viewers: at
last, some humans are safe. However, the
profound breach of the wall – and impressive scenes of zombies hurtling
headlong over the top of the wall – is a visual representation
of the critiques of the global securitization of migration,
of border walls, and
of the inside/outside dyad as a means of ‘securing’ the
Following Gerry’s
lament that it is too late for him to build a wall, we watch the irreversible
failure of the wall to protect
or seal off those taking shelter within. Once the
zombies arrive, no one is protected from infection. The wall that was protecting
the living now entraps them. The film zooms in on member after member of the
Israeli Defence Force (and former border guards) getting
bitten and becoming the
Monsters stalk, threaten and wreak havoc until the bitter end of
horror stories and often beyond, allowing for
World War Z
shows that deploying ordinary measures or tactics against monsters will not
succeed. The zombies in
World War Z
cannot just be killed – their
heads must be destroyed. The rotting dead cannot be restored to reason or
reasoned with. Walls,
like that around Jerusalem, will not keep the zombie
plague out. In
World War Z,
Gerry proposes an extreme but unsustainable
solution towards the end of the film of infecting the living with a mortal
disease because
the zombies avoid anyone who is already sick or dying. The
effect of constructing refugees as monstrous is similar. Extreme measures
justified and required in response to the ‘threat’ of refugees.
Under international refugee law, asylum seekers cannot
simply be expelled using
‘ordinary’ state tactics of deportation, since they have a unique
right of entry without invitation
or the permission of the host state. Dauvergne
has highlighted that, as a result, refugees are the only subjects who interrupt
notion that the sovereign state has complete control over its borders and
may finally determine who enters and on what
Beyond this if they are
found to be refugees, asylum seekers possess the right of
non-refoulement
they have a right of non-return, such that even if they are
assessed as
security threats to the host state they may not be returned to their country of
origin. In this sense, as with monsters,
the standard response to the threat of
the non-citizen - that is, expulsion - is ineffective and unavailable. While
refugees can
be interned, they cannot be entirely contained. The threat they
represent is that they cannot be stopped at the border, fully contained
expelled once inside the territorial state.
The zombie, who has been
described as a ‘transnational’ figure, unsettles geopolitical and
cultural attempts at insulation,
as well as the ‘cultural and political
walls’ separating the West from postcolonial and less-developed
The zombie genre tends
to portray an apocalyptic world involving the breakdown of the geo-political
state and a resulting interrogation
of legal rights that are increasingly seen
as luxuries or non-existent.
World War Z
, the zombie reveals the ‘porous geopolitical structure
of global society’ so completely that we are left without any
place, state or nation.
response to the failure of the nation-state, images and references to the global
and the transnational recur throughout the film
as sites and symbols of safety,
as well as a kind of strategic response. The hero of the film, Gerry, supposedly
represents the United
Nations in a global zombie war. Indeed, the UN is the body
leading the fight against the zombie pandemic. Just like the film’s
‘good guys’, the safe places are cast as ‘international’
zones and the absolute safest place in the film
is on a naval boat on the
Atlantic sea – a clear inversion of the boat and the ocean as a site of
danger and death for migrants
on the move.
As well, in a critique of the
hermetic, sealed off nation state as the paragon of safety, the viewer
experiences a sense of constant
movement and flight across vast spaces and
territory. This constant movement comes across as an ethos, and impediments to
usually result in death. At one point, Gerry patronizingly explains to
a Mexican family too scared to leave their home and seeking
to barricade
themselves in: ‘I worked in dangerous places. Those who moved survived,
those who stayed didn’t’.
This is followed by the almost
parable-like phrase ‘movement is life’ (to the same Mexican family,
as if they didn’t
know). As well as movement across territory as life,
national references, such as the ‘Belarus Air’ plane that Gerry
to escape a zombie encounter, are presented as almost quaint and things of the
past, since the present is ‘just survival.’
Each time Gerry arrives
in a new place, the audience is carefully advised of its location via
militaristic subtitles – but
each time he departs an area, zombies are in
the process of taking it over and geopolitical distinctions have
Finally, the cinematography of the film is saturated with
aerial shots that flatten and denationalize territory. Most shots focus
carpets of zombies spread across territory and, in the case of the New
Palestine, on both sides of the now-redundant border wall.
As with so many
images of refugees and migrants in transit, the zombie images are rarely
‘located’ and the zombies are
presented as a denationalized and
hostile mass. The threat is generalized and borderless – and
is marked by the collapse of borders in a post-apocalyptic
World War Z’s
film production itself traversed
international boundaries, with filming in Malta, Scotland, England and Hungary
and aboard a Royal
Fleet Auxiliary ship. Production was consistent with the
theme of breach of international borders, with Glasgow, Scotland made to
as a financial district in Philadelphia, and with an original aim to present
Budapest as Moscow. In addition, film makers
were charged with breaching customs
laws in Budapest, Hungary. The film-set was raided by the Hungarian Counter
Terrorism Centre
because the 85 assault rifles, sniper rifles and handguns that
had been flown into Budapest had not been cleared by the Hungary’s
Anti-Terrorist Unit. The importation documentation indicated that the weapons
had been disabled, but they were fully functional.
Criminal charges were dropped
in February 2012, as investigators were unable to establish who had ownership
rights and therefore
responsible.
iii. Origins of the Monster/Refugee: Where does the monster
A key plot device and
theme in the horror genre is the question of the origin of the
This reflects a
question of philosophy and theology – from whence does evil
The historical zombie is a
figure associated with imperialism and slavery, and in particular with black
bodies ‘raised from
the dead to labor [sic] in the
The term itself
is rooted in slavery, stemming from Haitian lore and introduced into Anglophone
texts to describe a soulless figure,
raised by voodoo from the dead to work as
alienated, enslaved
In the early
century, zombies were racially marked as Haitian
and as undead and
soulless bodies emblematizing how slavery reduced person to
As Morrell observes,
mechanical men and the living dead have ‘long been working together in US
literature of the nineteenth
and early-twentieth centuries to embody the
dehumanizing effects of racial oppression and relatedly labour
exploitation’.
contrast, late 20
and certainly 21
century American
films have morphed the zombie ‘into a convenient bogeyman representing
various social concerns’.
Many more recent zombie films like
World War Z
have combined zombie
narratives with fears of contagion, contamination and plague such that the
threat – like the threat of
floods of refugees – becomes
generalized, denationalized and dehistoricized. This ‘zombie
apocalypse’ trope is
characterized by entire communities, whole countries
and ‘even the world’ being ‘subject to destruction by
numbers of zombies that appear from nowhere, often originating as a
consequence of radiation from outer space – that is, if
any rationale for
their existence is
proffered’.
Pokornowski argues, the post 9/11 zombie was remoulded by Western society as a
biomedical, denationalized, ‘foreign’
monster that threatened
‘the racial and sexual purity of the West—especially the
The racialised
threat of the refugee-zombie is also the precise subject of an art series
created by Australian academic and artist
Safdar Ahmed. Ahmed argues that as a
figment of paranoia and revulsion, ‘the zombie is about more than our
current fear of
terrorism. It is a looking glass for all the weird dreams and
vivid hallucinations of modern Islamophobia’ and with them, conceptions
‘Muslim barbarism and lack of moral
fabulous propaganda-style posters include images of blood hungry refugees on
overcrowded boats captioned, ‘Zombie
Boat People: They Jump Queues to Jump
You’; in another image, ‘Muslim Zombies’ dressed as clerics
and eating dismembered
hands warn viewers of ‘Creeping Sharia’,
framed by the words ‘more theft... more
Significantly,
World War Z,
with the destruction and increasing irrelevance of the
nation states comes a flattening of past global relations, of the uneven
distribution
of resources, and of histories of colonialism and racial and social
inequalities. In the zombie war, everyone or every human is apparently
and equal in danger. While the book functions as an explicit critique of US
hegemony and exploitation of postcolonial states
the issue of
economics, race and responsibility for the zombie war is at best sidestepped or
erased altogether in the film. One reason
for this is certainly the political
economy and general crappiness of blockbuster films. For example, it was
reported, but later
denied, that Paramount had cut the scene where characters
speculate that the zombie outbreak originated in mainland China in hopes
landing a distribution deal with that
A long battle scene
against the zombies on Russian territory was also removed to ensure the film
remained a friendly summer
All the same, in
the novel, although the exact origin of the plague is unknown, a young boy from
a village in (exotic, fetid) China
is identified as patient zero. In the film,
the zombies themselves are not raced and if anything they are white or
white-ish. The
zombies’ origin is difficult to determine since, once
zombified, their skin is green, decayed and decrepit. Most of the zombies
the film zooms in on are not noticeably raced beyond their zombie status, and
the same can be said for the zombie hordes. The
Hollywood film’s
colonizing of the zombie figure and the threat it presents not only erases race
but takes a figure that represented
of colonization, slavery
and racial oppression to express white, colonial anxieties about racialized
remarkably clear parallels between the contemporary zombie film presenting the
zombie threat as one that is generalized,
detached from economics, race,
politics, culture and history; and the representation of the ‘migrant
crisis’ as a general
threat to a beleaguered, innocent Europe. Europe and
other ‘refugee destination’ states are at best called upon to act
humanely or in a humanitarian manner towards refugee arrivals. They are
certainly not required to contextualize and take responsibility
for their own
part in the arrival of refugees and migrants at their borders or on their
Danewid and others have compellingly critiqued the discourse of
‘hospitality’ and the fetishization of the stranger, as
well as the
shift from politics to ethics, when discussing the European response to
migrants, via the concept of the ‘Black
Mediterranean’. As Danewid
The term ‘Black Mediterranean’ has recently started to surface
amongst academics, artists, and activists to describe the
history of racial
subordination in the Mediterranean region. Inspired by Paul Gilroy’s Black
Atlantic, the ‘Black Mediterranean’
invites us to place the
contemporary migrant crisis in the context of Europe’s constitutive
history of empire, colonial conquest,
and transatlantic slavery. As [Saucier and
Woods] explain, the Mediterranean ‘has been an ongoing crisis for black
the better part of the past and present millenniums
argues that the Mediterranean crisis should not be viewed ‘as a moment of
exception or as a discrete event in time but,
rather, as a late consequence of
Europe’s violent encounter with the Global
This reading
highlights the fact that history of European modernism has long been based on
designating who is human/inhuman and whose
life (and death) is human life and
counted as such. In mounting this critique, Danewid also interrogates and
rejects the ‘new
humanism’, in particular Butler’s
Grievable Life
, as the basis for political engagement. As she puts it,
focussing on abstract as opposed to historical humanity – and in
on bodily vulnerability, loss and mourning –
contributes:
to an ideological formation that disconnects connected histories and turns
questions of responsibility, guilt, restitution, repentance,
and structural
reform into matters of empathy, generosity, and hospitality. The result is a
colonial and patronising fantasy of the
white man’s burden – based
on the desire to protect and offer political resistance
others – which ultimately does little to challenge established
interpretations that see Europe as the bastion of
democracy, liberty, and
impressive critique of both Butler’s and Levinasian responses to the
migrant other maps onto the evacuation
of race from the film version of
. While in the film the head of the UN, Thierry Umutoni, is a person of
colour, there is essentially no reference to race relations
except in the fall
of Jerusalem scenes, in which Israel has miraculously allowed the entry of all
Palestinians, and conceded the
territory as the New Palestine, where everyone is
living in harmony (which, as noted, is their
In Australia, too,
refugee arrivals and asylum seekers are spoken about in general, dehistoricized
terms. Reference is seldom made
to the history of Australian colonialism in the
states now hosting Australia’s ignominious offshore refugee processing
Nauru and Papua New Guinea. Behrooz Boochani, an Iranian journalist,
writer and refugee who has been imprisoned on Manus Island for
over four years,
has persistently critiqued this dehistorcized approach, writing that:
Only a meta-historical and transhistorical approach can unpack the
peculiarities associated with the issue of Manus [in Papua New
Guinea] and
Nauru. Only a rigorous analysis of a colonial presence in Australia and its
tactics in the region can disclose the reality
of violence in these island
prisons.... This form of affliction, inflicted on people in similarly vulnerable
situations, has always
existed in the history of modern Australia. Pain and
suffering systematically inflicted on defenceless and vulnerable
While the film
critiques the securitization of migration more generally, the refusal to
historicize the zombie crisis or the contagion
that comes with it, means that
the film falls well short of the novel, which directly links the spread of the
virus as a result of
US imperialism, due to the trafficking of organs and
migrants into the Global North. The film also falls short of critical approaches
to the unresolvable deadness and aliveness of the zombies, with its primary
orientation being towards Gerry Lane, his family, and
anyone who is not
infected, as opposed to interrogating the line between human/inhuman. The film
shows a willingness to sacrifice
characters, such as the academic who is
key to saving the world, however this is usually done too quickly for us to
care for them at all and used mainly as a plot device
to highlight the
impossibility of Gerry’s quest.
Throughout the film we of course
know that white, American, saviour Brad Pitt (Gerry Lane)
and is never really at risk. As with the purported lottery of citizenship, the
film repeats the hollowness of the ‘there
but for the grace of god’
approach as a basis for empathy – because we
that Brad Pitt is
at risk, but he is called upon to ‘save’ those who
The zombie apocalypse may be indiscriminate and disregard
national borders, but inevitably its effects will be felt more acutely in
parts of the world than others, depending on the level of development and the
ability to adapt.
World War Z’s ‘Other’ Refugees: Gerry and his
While we have focused on
echoes of contemporary refugees and refugee ‘crises’ in the zombie
World War Z
, we argue that the film presents an additional,
alternative refugee narrative. The first refugee group, the zombies, are those
do not care about and from whom we need protection since they are soulless,
mindless and lack the capacity for thought or
However, there is a
second, powerful refugee narrative in
World War Z
and the zombie genre
generally – that of the uninfected. These are the survivors, people such
as Gerry and his family, who
are trying to escape the zombie menace. This
reflects and reinforces the fear of zombies analyzed above: in disrupting and
transgressing
borders, the zombies themselves are refugee-producing and
destabilize the boundaries between the safe and the infected.
begins and ends with Gerry’s family. Despite the collapse of
states, geo-political boundaries, economic systems and much social
infrastructure, the ‘family’ retains its talismanic
The film starts in
Gerry’s home in the marital bed with his wife Karen, with their two
daughters soon jumping into bed with
them. The film can be read as a quest for
Gerry to keep his family safe by migrating away from danger to places of
perceived safety.
We do not recognize these bodies in flight as refugees since
they are from the Global North rather than
seeking entry to it –
even though a state of emergency is now the global norm. Yet the Lane family are
clearly seeking refuge.
On the safe UN Command Ship on the Atlantic Ocean, the
family is only granted sanctuary on the condition that Gerry leaves them to
the world. The family is warned ‘there is no room for non-essential
personnel’. The threat is shown to be real when
other families on the ship
are sent away for ‘immediate relocation’. The film provides
depersonalized shots of the families
being relocated, so we are not particularly
encouraged to identify with or care for even these families. Only Gerry and his
generate emotional investment by the audience.
As the plot
unfolds, the Lane family begin to live like refugees: ‘life is denied its
political quality as the ‘bare essentials’
for species survival take
precedence’.
They are not
made welcome on the UN Command Ship. When lining up for food in the mess-hall
they are pointedly told by a soldier that
‘there are too many people on
this ship’. They are given sanctuary but this is at best precarious.
Within 14 hours of
Gerry being believed dead, his family are unceremoniously
dispatched to the ‘Freeport Safe Zone Refugee Camp’ in Nova
However, in contrast with the hordes of undifferentiated refugees/zombies, these
are characters who are forced into migration
and whose survival we actually are
positioned to care about. This is a story of refugees that differs from the
official state story.
The Freeport Zone Refugee Camp is explicitly depicted as a
place of danger. When he hears of his family’s transfer to the Safe
Gerry states unequivocally that ‘they’re not safe’. By
implication, no one else in the camp is safe, but
the Lane family both deserve
and will be afforded safer conditions.
In contrast with other refugee
stories (and the absence of any ‘individualized’ stories available
to the public), Gerry’s
motives are completely understandable. His primary
focus throughout the film is upon his family. When he thinks he is going to die
he holds up a sign to the laboratory camera that reads, ‘Tell my family I
love them’. In addition, Gerry is not disempowered
as a refugee. His phone
is provided by the UN and seems capable of working and maintaining contact
despite the collapse of infrastructure
in most of the places that he visits.
People die to save him – including after an unfortunately timed phone call
by his wife
‘wakes’ the zombies. He also has the power to demand
resources. He is escorted out of Israel even as it is collapsing.
successfully demands a change of flight path on a commercial flight, and
achieves entry into the quarantined Centre for Communicable
Gerry and his family are exceptional refugees. We sympathize
with their motives and their need to seek protection. This is at odds
common representations of ‘bogus’ refugees or ‘queue
jumping’ migrants, who are presented as opportunistic,
selfish and
unprincipled in their quest for ‘better’ lives. Consistent with the
portrayal of monsters, refugee motives
are either incomprehensible (they cannot
be understood by us),
presented as driven by an unacceptable desire for material wealth,
capitalism’s riches or pure, untrammeled consumption.
theme of zombie films is consumption. After all, zombies are the ultimate
consumers – their only drive is to consume.
Whilst the novel gestured
toward global consumption – including illegal organ transplants – as
an explanation for the
apocalypse,
these suggestions
were removed from the film. However, the film does retain a classic narrative of
consumption in the quest for security
and sustenance by the Lane family. Like
zombies, the refugees generated by a zombie apocalypse need to consume to
survive. In the
zombie genre the living frequently take refuge in and/or visit
shopping malls for safety and
sustenance.
In an early scene in
World War Z
, the family visit a supermarket to get essential supplies
including medication. Although the zombie infection has only just begun,
supermarket is a center of chaos and danger – Gerry’s wife is almost
raped in front of one of their daughters, and
Gerry uses a gun to steal a car
from the parking lot. The zombie genre portrays a post-apocalyptic society in
which there are insufficient
and dwindling resources available. Consumption is
integral to survival – of both the zombies and the
The foregrounding
and problematization of consumption in the zombie genre parallels rhetoric of
political and legal constructions
of refugees and migrants. In the contradictory
and overlapping discourses on the undesirability of refugee entrants, asylum
are cast as impatient, unwanted ‘queue jumpers’. Asylum
seekers at the border are counterpoints to humanitarian entrants,
passively and patiently encamped in ‘developing’ countries until
invited into host states. However, worse yet
are ‘pure economic
migrants’ who are the counterpoint to ‘good’ and genuine
refugee entrants and whose primary
offence is seeking access to the (apparent)
wealth and comforts of life in the West. The casting of asylum seekers as mere
and unwelcome
economic migrants has dominated political rhetoric in Australia.
Infamously, in 2017 Australian Immigration Minister Peter Dutton
claimed that refugees held in Australia’s offshore camps were all
undeserving economic migrants, but that they were
‘Armani refugees’
with ‘the world's biggest collection of Armani jeans and
Relevantly, an
‘economic’ and material motive for migration is self-evidently
illegitimate and reprehensible, with no
further explanation required.
The flight of Gerry and his white family is presented as both rational
and relatable. By contrast, we are not positioned to spare
even a thought for
the ‘plight’ of the zombies. Even at the end of the film, when a
temporary solution in the form of
an anti-zombie vaccine has been discovered,
the response to the zombie masses, whom we see being rounded up and firebombed,
less extreme. As one film critic put it, the
World War Z
are ‘allowed no moments of pathos’ and, unlike in other zombie
texts, Pitt is ‘excused the anguish of confronting
his affinity with the
estranged’.
The experience
of the damned isn't dwelled on, as it doesn't
Ironically, the Lane
family would not necessarily meet the Refugee Convention definition of who
qualifies for protection. Under international
law, the Lane family would not be
characterized as refugees, as ‘no matter how devastating may be the
epidemic, natural disaster
or famine, a person fleeing them is not a refugee
with the terms of the
Convention’.
film encourages us to sympathize with the Lanes’
the Refugee Convention
protection does not, in the absence of individualized persecution, extend to
people in pursuit of better living
conditions or victims of natural disasters.
This is the case ‘even when the home state is unable to provide
assistance’.
Although this
has led some to argue we need an expanded definition of a refugee, which extends
beyond the liberal and individualized
categories prioritized by the 1951
Convention drafters,
positions us to see that with the ‘end’ of the nation
state comes the end of both international refugee law and indeed
of a clear line
between the worthy uninfected human and infected zombie. Since there is no
remaining order of sovereign states to
provide the basis for either refugee
status or any responsibility to protect, the question of the
‘genuine’ individual
refugee in contrast with the undifferentiated
masses seeking safety falls away.
Agamben’s idea of
‘bare life’ has been insightfully applied to refugees, and academics
have extended this idea to
the commonalities of the bare life of refugees and
zombies. This article has taken the labelling of refugees as dehumanized
and has considered the ways in which the label is applied and the
implications of characterizing refugees as zombies. It has analyzed
refugees and
governmental responses to the never-ending ‘crisis’ through the
World War Z
and monster
World War Z
other zombie texts provide a means to both represent contemporary anxieties
to critique ‘dead
end’ Government responses to such fears, including fortifying the
territorial state as a means of combatting
or controlling the zombie
Key to the characterization of refugees as zombies is the
transgression of borders. The horror genre is a meditation on the horror
which breaches boundaries. Zombies, as de-identified and displaced masses, who
collectively disregard and cross borders to
find ‘new life’, are a
privileged monster in contemporary society.
World War Z
depicts the worst
fears of border breaches with the spectacular collapse and consequent
irrelevance of the geopolitical, territorial
state. The label of monster (or
monstrous wickedness) is instrumental, as it justifies and requires extreme
World War Z
does not convey any sadness at the extermination of
the zombies. Slaying them, through destruction of their heads, is the only
The horror genre attracts its consumers by trafficking in the
sorts of things that cause disquiet, displeasure and
Monsters enact and
perform that which we would normally repress – the abject, disorderly,
undecided and/or uncanny
and in the process demonstrate the radical and sickening permeability of
Much state refugee
policy is geared toward the silencing, repression or denial of the horrors of
migration. The horror genre provides
‘a safely distanced and stylised
means of making sense of and coming to terms with phenomena and potentialities
of experience
which under normal (i.e. functional) conditions would be found too
threatening and
disturbing’.
its intentional depoliticization in order to sell as a blockbuster film,
World War Z
depicts some of that which is intended to remain secret and
hidden away. In its erasure of colonial histories and global inequalities
narrating the ‘origin’ of the zombie war and the refugee crisis,
World War Z
mirrors the erasure of race and race relations in the casting
of refugees as invading and disorderly hordes. The film, in accordance
of the zombie genre, gives an alternative narrative of refugees whom we actually
care about – that of Gerry and his
family – and shows disparities of
treatment not only amongst the infected and uninfected, but also the useful and
the ‘non-essential’
uninfected, and in the process, reveals the
limitations of existing national and international protocols.
examining the refugee crisis through the war on zombies in
World War Z
we agree with MacNeil’s argument (in reading
The Walking Dead
World War Z
) that the stakes are high in zombie
fiction because it forces us to rethink our law and society; or
(law and norms) and
(home/ household/
The choice is not,
as MacNeil points out, to give ourselves over to the zombie apocalypse or to
old world order. Rather we need to accept the
‘both/and’ or the ‘dead and undead’ formulation of the
as undermining the failed categories of citizen/non-citizen or
‘authorised/unauthorised’ and of course,
‘zombie/human.’
K Needham, ‘Stop
demonising refugees, says UN’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
28 September
https://www.smh.com.au/national/stop-demonising-refugees-says-un-20110927-1kvh4.html
(accessed 22 May 2018).
‘Politics of demonization’ breeding division and fear’,
Amnesty International, 27 February 2017,
https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2017/02/amnesty-international-annual-report-201617/
(accessed 22 May 2018); see also Amnesty International,
The State of the
World’s Human Rights
The Myth of Evil
(Edinburgh University Press Ltd, Edinburgh 2006)
World War Z
W Macneil, 'The
Litigating Dead: Zombie Jurisprudence in Contemporary Popular Culture' (2017) 14
NoFo: An interdisciplinary journal of law and justice
World War Z:
An Oral History of the Zombie War
(Crown, USA
Interview: Max Brooks on World War Z’,
eatmybrains
, 20 October
http://www.eatmybrains.com/showfeature.php?id=55
(accessed 14 May 2018).
novel spent four weeks on the
New York Times Best Seller List
‘BEST SELLERS: October 15, 2006’,
New York Times,
https://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C0DEEDA1530F936A25753C1A9609C8B63
(accessed 28 November 2017).
J Neumaier, ‘‘World
War Z’ review: Brad Pitt’s pit against zombies, but star can’t
breathe life into
predictable
NY Daily News,
18 June 2013,
http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/one-star-review-world
war-zzzzzz-article-1.1375665
(accessed 28 November
In 2012, Brooks
stated that the film now had nothing in common with the novel other than the
‘Brad Pitt:
‘World War Z bogged down in politics’’,
March 2013,
http://www.yorkpress.co.uk/leisure/showbiz/10323267.Brad_Pitt___World_War_Z_bogged_down_in_politics_/
(accessed 28 November 2017).
H Barnes, ‘World War Z - first look review’,
The Guardian
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/07/world-war-z-review?INTCMP=SRCH
(accessed 28 November 2017).
Neumaier (n 9).
‘World War Z, review’,
The Telegraph
, 19 June 2013,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/10095159/World-War-Z-review.html
(accessed 28 November 2017).
Although see the critique by Hertzberg who criticizes the politics of the film
as ‘threatening to eat our brains’: H
Hertzberg, 'World War
Z-Z-Z-Zion?',
The New Yorker
, 23 June 2013,
https://www.newyorker.com/news/hendrik-hertzberg/world-war-z-z-z-zion
(accessed 22 May 2018).
Abnormal: Lectures at the College De France 1974-1975
New York 2003) 64-65. Sharpe disputes Foucault’s assertion of a linear
development in monsters and notes that hermaphrodites
were not part of the
monster category in English common law: A Sharpe,
Foucault's Monsters and the
Challenge of Law
(Routledge, London and New York
Literature includes M
The Zombie Survival Guide: Complete Protection from the Living
(Penguin, London 2003); M Brooks,
World War Z: An Oral History of
the Zombie War
(Random House, New York 2006); S Jones,
Apocalypse! Fightback
(Little Brown Book Group, London 2012); S
Grahame-Smith,
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies
(Quirk Books, United
States2009). Films include
28 Days Later
Resident Evil
Dawn of the Dead
Shaun of the Dead
Day of the Dead
Diary of the Dead
(2006). The film
(2016) involves
rich tourists shooting zombies at a resort, which renews its stock by turning
refugees into zombies. Series include
The Walking Dead
(2004) (now in
Fear the Walking Dead (2015) (now in season 4)
Ash vs Evil
Dead (2015)
(now in season 3),
From Dusk Till Dawn (2014),
Dead Set (2008)
For further information see the zombie movie
http://www.zmdb.org
(accessed 8 March
2018). Zombies have also infiltrated video games.
Resident Evil
released originally for Sony Playstation in 1996 and by 2004 had sold more than
25 million units and then led to the film series
Resident Evil
D Cox, ‘World War Z
unleashes an unedifying breed of zombie’,
The Guardian,
https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jun/17/world-war-z-zombies-brad-pitt
(accessed 22 May 2018)
Tudor notes that some theorists provide an ideographic justification for the
appeal of horror movies. For example, Jancovich asserts
that alien horror movies
of the 1950s reflect implementation of corporate or Fordist modes of
organisation in post-war era and are
thus responses to a growing anxiety about
the technocratic regulation of American society: M Jancovich,
(Batsford, London 1992) 62. Many films and series focus on what survives in the
event of a zombie apocalypse: K Bishop, 'Dead Man
Still Walking: Explaining the
Zombie Renaissance' (2009) 37(1)
Journal of Popular Film and Television
16-25; P Crofts, 'Killing to Survive: The Walking Dead, Police Slayings and
Medieval Malice' (forthcoming)
Law Culture
and A Thompson (eds.),
But If a Zombie Apocalypse Did Occur (Contributions to
Zombie Studies)
(McFarland, Jefferson 2015); R Greene and S Mohammed (eds.),
Zombies, Vampires, and Philosophy: New Life for the Undead
(Open Court,
Chicago 2010); S McGlotten and S Jones (eds.),
Zombies and Sexuality: Essays
on Desire and the Living Dead
(McFarland, Jefferson 2014); T Platts,
'Locating Zombies in the Sociology of Popular Culture' (2013) 7
547; in the Australian context see also S. Ahmed, Islamophobia:
Night of the Muslim Zombie An Art Series and Essay (2015).
The Philosophy
of Horror or Paradoxes of the Heart
(Routledge, New York 1990)
B Creed, 'Horror and the
Monstrous Feminine: An Imaginary Abjection' in B Keith (ed.),
The Dread of
Difference: Gender and the Horror Film
(University of Texas Press, Austin
1996) 35-63. In some stories, the monstrous is produced at the border between
life and death (vampire
and zombie stories), the normal and the supernatural
The Exorcist (
, The Nightmare on Elm
Stranger Things (
2016)), between human and beast
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde (1941)
N Carroll, 'The Nature of
Horror' (1987) 46(1)
The journal of aesthetics and art criticism
W Schinkel,
‘“Illegal Aliens” and the State, or: Bare Bodies v the
Zombie’ (2009) 24
International Sociology
779; K Slotwinska,
‘The Rising Multitudes: Zombie Invasion and the Problem of Biopolitics in
World War Z
Polish Journal for American
S Pokornowski, ‘Vulnerable Life: Zombies, Global
Biopolitics, and the Reproduction of Structural Violence’ (2016) 5(71)
Humanities 12; J Stratton, ‘Zombie trouble: Zombie texts, bare life and
displaced people’ (2011) 14(3)
European Journal of Cultural Studies
26; J Comaroff and J Comaroff, ‘Alien Nations: Zombies, Immigrants and
Millennial Capitalism’ (2002) 101(4) The South
Atlantic Quarterly 779; L
Fiske, ‘Human Rights and Refugee Protest against Immigration Detention:
Refugees’ Struggles
for Recognition as Human’ (2016) 32(1)
See especially J
Stratton, 'Zombie Trouble: Zombie Texts, Bare Life and Displaced People' (2011a)
European Journal of Cultural Studies
of Exception
, (University of Chicago, Chicago 2005) 4, trans K Attell; G
Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life
(Stanford University
Press, Palo Alto 1998) trans D
Heller-Roazen.
'Zones of Indistinction: Giorgio Agamben’s Bare Life and the Politics of
Aesthetics' (2009) 223(2)
J Stratton, 'Zombie
Trouble: Zombie Texts, Bare Life and Displaced People' (2011b) 14(3)
Journal of Cultural Studies
265, 267; J Stratton, 'The Trouble with Zombies:
Muselmanner
and Displaced People' (2011a) 1(1)
Somatechnics
J Stratton, 'Zombie Trouble:
Zombie Texts, Bare Life and Displaced People' (2011b) 14(3)
European Journal
Cultural Studies
This scene is a set
piece in the film and featured in advertising for the film. When we presented
this paper at the
Australasian Society of Law, Literature and Humanities
(Melbourne, December 2017) we were asked if the film presented Israel as the
hero state. The question of whether the film was pro-Israel
was also raised in
the media as a consequence of the featuring of the Jerusalem wall in all
advertisements for the film. See also
Israel’s Nightmares:
Palestinian and Muslim Zombies Haunting Israel
(Strategic Book Publishing
and Rights Co, USA 2015).
The other country to have
successfully survived the zombie onslaught is North Korea – by removing
the teeth of
the all its citizens. Hertzberg commented that this results in a curious
political pairing of North Korea surviving due
to its dictatorship and Israel by building a wall: Hertzberg (n
In the novel, after an
initial civil war started by Israel’s ultra-orthodox zealots who rise in
rebellion, Israel and Palestine
join forces to contain the
have become phantasmal stand-ins for Islamic terrorists, illegal immigrants,
carriers of foreign contagions and
other dangerous border crossers’: R
Saunders, 'Undead Spaces: Fear, Globalization, and the Popular Geo-Politics of
Geopolitics
A Hartocollis,
‘Traveling in Europe’s River of Migrants’,
The New York
, 5 September 2015,
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/projects/cp/reporters-notebook/migrants/hungary-treatment-refugees
22 May 2018).
Refaie, 'Metaphors We Discriminate By: Naturalised Themes in Austrian Newspaper
Articles About Asylum Seekers' (2001) 5(3)
Journal of Sociolinguistics
352, 364-65, cited in J Stratton, 'Zombie Trouble: Zombie Texts, Bare Life and
Displaced People' (2011b) 14(3)
European Journal of Cultural Studies
and S Pickering, 'Common Sense and Original Deviancy: News Discourses and Asylum
Seekers in Australia'
(2001) 14(2)
Journal of Refugee Studies
Sovereign Borders’,
Department of Home Affairs,
18 September 2013,
http://osb.homeaffairs.gov.au/
(accessed 22 May 2018).
‘Newsroom: Operation
Sovereign Borders’, Australian Border Force,
http://newsroom.border.gov.au/channels/Operation-Sovereign-Borders
(accessed 22 May 2018).
Saunders, 'Undead Spaces: Fear, Globalization, and the Popular Geo-Politics of
Zombiism' (2012) 17(1)
Geopolitics
The genre usually
includes ‘dead kindred’ i.e. the known dead to increase the
emotional resonance through recognition
of the zombie and the requirement of
resolution, that is, the killing of a zombie who is still recognizable as a
former loved one.
R. H. W. Dillard, '
Night of the Living Dead
Not Just Like a Wind That’s Passing Through', in G Waller (ed.),
American Horrors
(University of Illinois Press, Illinois 1987) 15. In
World War Z
, Gerry only needs to circumnavigate the zombie doctors. There
is no requirement of painful resolution.
The majority of the genre
(leaving aside zombie rom-coms) presents zombies as an undifferentiated mass.
Notable exceptions include
S.G. Browne,
Breathers: A Zombie’s
(Three Rivers Press, USA 2009), M.R. Carey
The Girl with all the
(Little, Brown & Company, New York 2015) and
Shaun of the Dead
J Hyndman and A
Mountz, "Another Brick in the Wall? Neo-Refoulement and the Externalization of
Asylum by Australia and Europe" (2008)
Government and opposition
Migrant, Refugee Arrivals in Europe Top One Million in 2015: IOM’,
, 22 December 2015,
https://www.iom.int/news/irregular-migrant-refugee-arrivals-europe-top-one-million-2015-iom
(accessed 22 May 2018).
Manderson, ‘Bodies in the Water: On Reading Images More Sensibly’
(2015) 27(2)
Law and Literature
J Poon, ‘How a
body becomes a Boat: The Asylum Seeker in Law and Images’
(2018) 30(1)
Law and Literature
‘People Can’t Flood, Flow or Stream: Diverting Dominant Media
Discourses on Migration’, 8 February 2016,
https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/research-subject-groups/centre-criminology/centreborder-criminologies/blog/2016/02/people-can%E2%80%99t
(accessed 22 May 2018).
I Heilikmann, 'Escaping the Sea of Zombies: Lessons Learned from Climate Change
(2016) 14(1)
Canberra Law Review
Human Flow,
‘Security and Immigration: Toward a Critique of the Governmentality of
Unease’ (2002) 27 (Issue 1 Supplement)
Alternatives
63, 65; see
also A Vogl, 'Over the Borderline: A Critical Inquiry into the Geography of
Territorial Excision and the Securitisation
of the Australian Border'
(2014)38(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
C Dauvergne,
‘Security and Migration Law in a Less Brave New World’
Social and Legal Studies
See L Boon Kuo,
Policing Undocumented Migrants: Law, Violence and Responsibility
& Francis, London 2017).
Bishop made this comment in relation to
Land of the Dead
(2005), in which
Dennis Hopman’s character Kaufman constructs the world’s most
‘extreme border security’,
with fences, blown up bridges, guards and
an apparently impassable river. To state the obvious, this border security is
Land of the Dead
: K Bishop, 'Dead Man Still Walking' (2009)
Journal of Popular Film and Television
See D Bigo,
‘Security and Immigration: Toward a Critique of the Governmentality of
Unease’ (2002) 27 (Issue 1 Supplement)
Alternatives
After all, if monsters were
defeated at the beginning there would be no horror story. They are only defeated
all), at the end with extreme measures – which then in and of itself
has the potential to undermine the humanity of
the hero/ine. ‘He who fights with monsters should look to it that he
himself does not become a monster. And if you
gaze long into an abyss, the abyss also gazes into you.’: F Nietzsche,
Beyond Good and Evil
[1886] (Allen &
Unwin, UK 1967) 46, trans H Zimmern.
C Dauvergne,
People Illegal: What Globalization Means for Migration and Law
Press, Cambridge 2008).
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (adopted 28 July 1951, entered
into force 22 April
1954) 189 UNTS 137 (Refugee
Convention);
Relating to the Status of Refugees
(adopted 31 January 1967, entered into
force 4 October
1967) 606 UNTS 267 (Protocol).
K Slotwinska, ‘The
Rising Multitudes: Zombie Invasion and the Problem of Biopolitics in Max
Polish Journal for American Studies
B Arnold, 'Is the Zombie My
Neighbour: The Zombie Apocalypse as a Lens for Understanding Legal
Personhood'
(2016) 14(1)
Canberra Law Review
Slotwinska (n
‘Counter-terrorism police seize World War Z machine guns’,
news.com.au,
11 October 2011,
http://www.news.com.au/entertainment/movies/counter-terrorism-police-seize-machine-guns-from-world-war-z-set/news-story/a416e1559e38b9ef00348ba893945ebd
(accessed 28 November 2017); Z Johnson, ‘SWAT Team Raids Brad Pitt’s
World War Z Set’,
Us Magazine
, 10 October 2011,
https://www.usmagazine.com/entertainment/news/swat-team-raids-brad-pitts-world-war-z-set-20111010/
(accessed 28 November 2017).
Sometimes the backstory or explanation of a monster is not given at all. This
lack of explanation can also be terrifying. For example,
(2014), no explanation is given for the monster at all. It just
A religious perspective
labels this as a problem of evil. If evil and suffering exist, then God is
either not omnipotent, not omniscient,
or not perfectly good. A classic
explanation for this is that evil is not a positive presence, but an absence of
grace or distance
from God. See for example, T Aquinas,
(Oxford University Press, New York 2003). This kind of classic, negative model
of wickedness is rarely if ever portrayed in
horror – as it lacks the
magisterial, entertaining character of a positive, mythical, monstrous
wickedness. See further, M
Wickedness: A Philosophical Essay
[1984] (Routledge, New York 2001)
S J Lauro and K Embry,
‘A Zombie Manifesto: The Nonhuman Condition in the Era of Advanced
Capitalism’ (2008) 2
85, 87. And see H W Ackermann and J
Gauthier, ‘The Ways and Nature of the Zombie’ (1991) 104
Journal of American Folklore
‘Zombies, Robots, Race, and Modern Labour’ (2015) 2(2)
Affirmations: of the Modern
) 101. Certain early
century American depictions located the origin of the zombie in
sinister or ‘evil Haitian religions (
White Zombie (1932); I Walked with
a Zombie (1943))
: see Slotwinska (n 58). The anthropologist Joan Dayan
argues that ‘the zombie tells the story of colonization: the reduction
human into thing for the ends of capital. For the Haitian no fate is to be more
feared.’ For Dayan, the zombie provides
an explanation of the destruction
of Haitian culture by American colonialism disguised as development: J Dayan,
'Vodoun, or the Voice
of the Gods', in M Fernandez Olmos and L Paravisini-Gebert
Sacred Possessions: Vodou, Santeria, Obeah, and the Caribbean
(Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick 1997) 33. Though note that Morrell
argues that the figures resembling the mindless, mechanical
living dead appeared
in American texts well before the zombie was
introduced.
C Kee, 'Good
Girls Don’t Date Dead Boys: Toying with Miscegenation in Zombie Films'
(2013) 42(4)
Journal of Popular Film and Television
176. See also W
The Magic Island
[1929] (Lancer, New York
‘Zombies, Robots, Race, and Modern Labour’ (2015) 2(2)
Affirmations: of the Modern
S J Lauro and K
Embry, ‘A Zombie Manifesto: The Nonhuman Condition in the Era of Advanced
Capitalism’ (2008) 2
85, 87. For example, Kee argues that
zombie rom-com films such as
White Zombie
My Boyfriend’s
Warm Bodies
(2013) ‘toy with fantasies of
miscegenation’: C Kee, 'Good Girls Don’t Date Dead Boys: Toying with
Miscegenation
in Zombie Films' (2013) 42(4)
Journal of Popular Film and
Stratton, ‘Zombie trouble: Zombie texts, bare life and displaced
people’ (2011) 14(3)
European Journal of Cultural Studies
S Pokornowski,
‘Vulnerable Life: Zombies, Global Biopolitics, and the Reproduction of
Structural Violence’ (2016) 5(3)
S. Ahmed, Zombie Boat
People (water colour on gauche, 2012) and Stop Creeping Sharia! (digital image,
https://safdarahmed.com/artworks/muslim-zombies/
(accessed 14 November 2017).
Not all critics are persuaded by the political critique of
World War Z: An
oral history of the zombie war
. Lanzendorfer regards the novel as a
demonstration of the limits of a progressive liberal imagination, with many of
the underlying
structures that caused the apocalypse remaining in place at the
novel’s conclusion: T Lanzendorfer, 'Max Brooks’s
World War Z: An
Oral History of the Zombie War
: Conservative Armageddon and Liberal
Post-Apocalypse' (2014) 41
Literature in North Queensland
L Shaw, ‘Fearing
Chinese Censors, Paramount Changes ‘World War Z’ (Exclusive)’,
, 31 March 2013,
https://www.thewrap.com/fearing-chinese-censors-paramount-changes-world-war-z-exclusive-83316/
(accessed 28 November 2017); L Shaw and S Waxman, ‘Insider: China Censors
Rejected Brad Pitt’s ‘World War Z’
(Exclusive)’, 3 June
https://www.thewrap.com/brad-pitt-world-war-z-china-rejecting-zombie-apocalypse-95051/
(accessed 28 November 2017).
The film also opened the
Moscow International Film Festival. MacNeil also points out Brad
Pitt’s production company bought the rights to the book, and
Pitt was one
of the film’s producers: MacNeil (n
While, as Morrell
observes the idea of the zombie as a soulless slave may have receded in
Hollywood and the global north, it has
gained strength in in the so-called
developing world experiencing new forms of millennial capitalism and alienated
labor: S Morrell,
‘Zombies, Robots, Race, and Modern Labour’ (2015)
Affirmations: of the Modern
) 101. See also J Comaroff
and J Comaroff ‘Alien-Nation: Zombies, Immigrants, and Millennial
Capitalism’ (2002) 101(4)
The South Atlantic Quarterly
‘White innocence in the Black Mediterranean: hospitality and the erasure
of history’
(2017) 38(7)
Third World Quarterly
The collapse of
Jerusalem in the film implies that if only the walls had remained firmly shut
Jerusalem would have survived. Herzberg
states that this was not the
filmmakers’ intentions, suggesting instead that they probably wanted to
give a boost to the battered
ideals of internationalism: Hertzberg (n
B Boochani, ‘I
write from Manus Island as a duty to history’,
The Guardian
December 2017,
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/dec/06/i-write-from-manus-island-as-a-duty-to-history
(accessed 22 May 2018).
Heilikmann makes this point in relation to the effects of both climate change
and the zombie apocalypse: I Heilikmann (n 49)
There is irony here,
since the historical raced and enslaved zombie as it was presented in American
century texts functioned precisely to express ‘the denial
or loss of self experienced by slaves, workers and victims of racial
oppression’: S Morrell, ‘Zombies, Robots, Race, and Modern
Labour’ (2015) 2(2)
Affirmations: of the Modern
Admittedly the film
does portray an expanded concept of the family by allowing the son of the
immigrants to remain with the Lane
family. If the UN was truly doing what was
necessary, he should have been sent from the ship
straightaway.
'Foucault's Legacy: Security War and Violence in the 21st Century' (2010) 41(4)
Security Dialogue
The Myth of
(Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh 2006); P Crofts, 'Monstrous
Wickedness and the Judgment of Knight'
(2012) 21(1)
Griffith Law Review
Lanzendorfer criticizes
the novel for failing to fully criticize the totalizing, global economic
structure: T Lanzendorfer, 'Max
World War Z: An Oral History
of the Zombie War
: Conservative Armageddon and Liberal Post-Apocalypse'
Literature in North Queensland
Dawn of the Dead
(1978, 2004), the four survivors play in the shopping mall in scenes of
‘consumerism gone mad’: D Skal,
The Monster Show
(Faber, New
York 1993) 309. See also
Land of the Dead
(2005), in which the wealthy
elite live in a gated community protected from the zombies and the lower
28 Weeks Later
begins with the premise that the majority of zombies depicted in
28 Days Later (2002)
have starved, thus permitting
resettlement.
‘'Armani refugees': Peter Dutton accused of undermining US deal with
'extraordinarily irresponsible' critique’,
Sydney Morning Herald
29 September 2017,
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/armani-refugees-peter-dutton-accused-of-undermining-us-deal-with-extraordinarily-irresponsible-critique-20170928-gyqidd.html
(accessed 22 May 2018).
D Cox, ‘World War Z
unleashes an unedifying breed of zombie’,
The Guardian
https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jun/17/world-war-z-zombies-brad-pitt
(accessed 22 May 2018).
Applicant A
v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1997] HCA 4
; (1997) 190 CLR
225, 248 (Dawson J).
film does not really encourage empathy for many other characters. When other
passengers are unceremoniously ejected from the
ship, the film’s primary
concern is whether or not the Lane family will also be
Canada (Attorney
General) v Ward
[1993] 2 SCR 689
, 732; J McAdam,
Climate Change, Forced
Migration, and International Law
(Oxford University Press, Oxford
K Musalo et al,
Refugee Law and Policy: A comparative and international approach
(Carolina Academic Press, North Carolina 2007) 36; Heilikmann (n
Sassen argues that
rather than characterizing refugees as a crisis, we should deal with refugees as
we would with education or health.
The characterization of refugees as a
‘crisis’ (and we would argue as zombies) justifies extreme and
urgent policy. See
S Sassen, ‘Migration Policy: From Control to
Governance,
openDemocracy
, 12 July 2006,
http://www.opendemocracy.net/people-migrationeurope/militarising_borders_3735.jsp
(accessed 22 May 2018).; S Sassen,
Losing Control? Sovereignty in an Age of
Globalization
(Columbia University, New York
Philosophy of Horror: Or, Paradoxes of the Heart
(Taylor & Francis,
London 1990) 158.
The Uncanny
(Penguin Books, New York 2003)
C Valier, 'Punishment,
Border Crossings and the Powers of Horror'
(2002) 6(3)
Theoretical
Criminology
Terrors of Uncertainty: The Cultural Contexts of Horror Fiction
(Routledge, London and New York 1989)
MacNeil (n 2)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (339 KB)
PDF format (1.63 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter