URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2000/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lea, Gary --- "The Revolution That Never Was: A Cynic's Eye View of the Software, Business and E-Commerce Method Patenting Controversy in the Wake of State Street" [2000] DigTechLawJl 4; (2000) 2(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 4
Revolution That Never Was: A Cynic's Eye View of the Software, Business
E-Commerce Method Patenting Controversy in the Wake
this piece, the author disputes the view
that patentability of software related inventions or business methods
and he also disputes the view that such patents, if granted,
are harmful
to the software industry and commerce. Starting with the
accounts of
the various supposed 'bars' to patentability of software and business
inventions are given in order
to show them in their true and proper
whilst overviews of developments in the UK, Japan and the EPO are also
Introduction
wake of the
decision of the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ('CAFC') in
Street Bank v Signature Financial
State Street
the US patent system has been wide
open to applicants seeking to patent software related inventions
business method
related inventions ('BRIs') or their combination
e-commerce related inventions ('ERIs')
Some commentators
have reacted as though
represents an
abandonment of long-cherished and well-grounded legal principles that
BRIs and ERIs are unpatentable with a result
not far away from the
equivalent of Armageddon. It is the intention of this author to show
represented no real break with the past and that,
instead, it merely
puts patent law and practice back to the position it started
which it should have stayed at.
of the above,
it is strongly arguable that, whilst there are undoubtedly some genuine
around SRI, BRI and ERI patents
as granted, these should not relate to
philosophical concerns over patentable subject matter but the more
mundane, issues of novelty and inventive step; in other words, it is
author's contention that many criticisms of the so-called
no more than a rehash of that old avian cliché, "the sky is
falling, the
sky is falling".
limits of patentability: initial
considerations
argue that,
in any rational patent system, some things should not be patentable: at
very least, one needs some basic
indication of what actually
constitutes an
'invention' for the purposes of applying for a patent.
the courts,
in particular the Supreme Court, have been responsible for drawing the
between patentable and non-patentable
subject matter: the sequence of
Acts, culminating with the current Patents Act 1952 as amended
('USPA'), merely
draws a broad
framework for the classification of subject matter. At
therefore, section 101 USPA simply states that patentable subject
comprises any " ... [new and useful] process, machine, manufacture, or
composition of matter, or any ... improvement thereof".
the US courts
drawn their lines traditionally? In a long line of decisions stretching
Brother Seed v Kalo Innoculant
the Supreme Court repeatedly declared that laws of nature, natural
mathematical formulae and mere abstract ideas were
not patentable per
was a very limited list and it was not entirely condemnatory: the Court
went on to emphasise that
if an inventor devised something which
utilised or
applied any item(s) on the barred list then, subject to meeting the
patentability
criteria, that thing was patentable
The baseline standard for
'invention', therefore, appeared
to be the identification of something artificial
and actively functional
had been carried forward without any gloss or extrinsic pressure, where
it have left SRI, BRI and, later, ERI patent
applications? The mere
they almost certainly would have included ideas or mathematical
formulae would
not have automatically
barred them from patentability. So why was there
problem and a later reaction? In the case of SRIs, four factors are
considered:
the mutual misunderstanding of judges and the USPTO, a widespread
understand software technology, an unnecessary judicial
obsession with
correct classification under the USPA section 101 framework and
overly-ambitious claiming by applicants. In the
case of BRIs and ERIs,
two factors also apply but, in addition, we see specific factors such
relationship of business
to technology also coming into play.
outside the US? One can point to specific statutory bars on
patentability of
subject matter comprising part or whole
of SRI, BRI and ERI patent
applications
or patents in the laws of a number of countries; surely this proves
something 'wrong'
with patenting such 'inventions'. Below, the author
indicate that the origin and nature of these bars has been
misunderstood
that, in fact, that there is often little substantial difference
between the
position of the US and other industrially significant
course of this
piece, consideration will be given to the patentability of SRIs, BRIs
this will be primarily in relation
to the US but with some
consideration of
matters arising in the UK, in Japan and under the EPC
régime: mention will also
made of various EC and TRIPS issues arising. However, before
examining the
various twists of patent law and policy dealing with the
inventions in
question, it is necessary to describe some of the technical issues at
with a view to setting benchmarks against
which the progress made can
An appreciation
Introduction
related invention' is, by comparison to the others under investigation,
broad and vague. Furthermore, a lack
of proper understanding of
technologies on the part of lawyers and judges in particular has had
repercussions for
the proper development of patent protection
Start at the beginning: what is
industry, a distinction is frequently drawn between hardware and
hardware refers the physical parts of a
computer whilst software is
'everything
else'; within that miscellaneous category, one finds computer programs,
instruction materials,
design materials and the like. However, software
engineers will tell us that, strictly speaking, the miscellany does not
items such as disks for storing programs or paper for
instruction
manuals, but the intangible elements of instruction, data and
information:
present purposes, therefore, software will take a more restrictive
synonymous with computer program.
imaginary patent system in which we leave aside what we know of the
development
of patent law for a moment, and we
know only the Funk standard
described above:
any mention of instruction/data/information by a software engineer
might raise
a suspicion
that, perhaps, this sort of subject matter does cross the
unpatentable idea or mathematical formula. However, the point
mind is this: a computer program is a polymorphic entity i.e. it is
taking on different forms
In source code form, it is informational and static in nature: in
binary object
code form, it is dynamic and functional - in plain
English, it makes a
active functionality as the touchstone for patentable subject matter in
imaginary patent system, it stands
to reason that
elements of some
manifestations
of computer programs should, hypothetically,
be patentable;
however, on the other hand, it is equally clear something that is, or
amounts, to the idea of doing something - a mere plan, a mere scheme
more - should not be patentable. The difficult
part thereafter lies in
drawing of the dividing line. In order to make the required
distinction, it is
worth considering what
the object code version of a computer program
does when it is loaded into a computer and run: the short answer is
directing it to perform a task or task it causes the logic circuits of
machine to be reconfigured in a particular way. The
reconfiguration is
in effect, the programs are standing in for hard-wired links between
of logic circuits in
the machine; this means that programs 'stand in'
hardware and, indeed, the two are, in fact, interchangeable
software/hardware
equivalence gives rise to another intriguing possibility: if hardware
simulated in software and vice
versa, might is not be possible to claim
same program functionality either as a process or, if embodied, as
In principle,
yes and, furthermore, we might also entertain claims to
'computer-as-programmed' as a 'new' machine. What, then, is the cut-off
Under our hypothetical patentability standard, programming techniques,
algorithms,
design elements or the like but then
only to the extent that
things do not make a computer do something. The key distinction,
therefore, is
between the purely informational and the functional.
‘natural’ approach to SRIs?
imaginary patent system, it is important to note that that the patent
a major industrialised nation,
left largely untouched by external
pressure, did
indeed manage to reach exactly the same conclusions set out above
without any
of the ill consequences currently being trumpeted: the UK patent
prior to entry into force of the Patents Act 1977. Under
Patents Act
1949, the UK system functioned somewhat like the US: although, unlike
there was no rigid categorisation
as between process, product and so
left to the courts to determine what constituted patentable subject
general rubric of 'manner of new manufacture'
How did this work in the case of
computer programs? The distinction between the informational and the
was recognised in
Slee & Harris' Appn
where the applicants were seeking a patent for a linear
function solution program, claimed in just those terms. The application
refused on the basis that it did not disclose a physical effect which
to manner of new manufacture
and went to an Office Hearing at which it was held that, although the
the program per se were unacceptable, it would be
possible to submit
drafted in terms of "methods of controlling data processing
machinery".
in February 1969, the UK Patent Office issued a practice note in which
stated that whilst it held that computer programs as such
patentable,
it would accept applications for methods of programming a computer to
in a certain way, for computers
so programmed or media bearing programs
controlled the operation of a computer in a stated way. Furthermore, no
objection would be raised in relation to applications relating
computer-controlled manufacturing or testing of computer equipment.
point, the Patent Appeal Tribunal and the courts dealt with a series of
decisions in which what appeared to be at stake
was usually more a
drafting than substantive issues of lack of 'physical effect'
Inc.'s Appn.
patent application for a method of computer-assisted plant design,
claimed partly by relation to the program and partly
by the method of
rejected by the Office for lack of patentable subject matter, use of
apparatus and use of known technique.
On appeal to the PAT, the
applications
was remitted to the Office for consideration with revised claims
directed to a
"process for
conditioning the operation of a computer and plotter of
of process claim became standard.
a patent application
for a trade mark indexing program, originally claimed partly in
relation to the
program and partly in relation
to the computer upon which used, was
grounds of lack of patentable subject matter, use of known apparatus
known technique. On appeal to the PAT, it was held that the claims
worded and directed properly, and that, more importantly,
program on a carrier
patentable in the same way that a machine part which could condition
operation of a known machine might be.
(Perkins') Appn.
a slight but significant shift occurred; this application involved a
communicating data between a central computer and
intelligent
terminals and, on appeal to the PAT, it
was held that the Patent Office's distinctions between the
(unpatentable)
programming of
a computer and (patentable) controlling its operations
artificial. The claims were, therefore, acceptable as they were.
Furthermore,
it was held that any residual reliance on older, restrictive test for
patentable subject matter was to cease: once a computer
program had
form, either on a carrier or in a computer-as-programmed, such that
it could be realised in practice, it
should no longer be regarded as a
conception for it has found a practical embodiment."
breakthrough under the 'old' 1949 Act came in
IBM Corp.'s
in this action, IBM applied
for revocation of a patent relating to a data handling system for
market price
matching in fungibles;
this was done on a number of grounds relating to
matter, known method and known machinery. The court rejected all the
for revocation, holding that the mode of claiming used - pure computer
claims - was wholly irrelevant; the substance of the
invention was
and, although a combination of known technique, machinery and other
it was, when taken together
and as claimed, novel.
additional point of
interest in
is the evident admixture of a
method of doing business;
this did not cause a problem because, when implemented by the computer
it was not just mere paper scheme or rule or method, but an active,
component of a virtual market.
An appreciation
of BRIs and ERIs
Introduction
conceptually
simpler than SRIs, the range of inventions covered by the acronyms BRI
and ERI does
warrant some further investigation.
In the case of BRIs in particular,
will turn on the issue of which business related activity is the
subject of the
application
or patent in question. For present purposes, BRIs are taken
cover 'methods for doing business'
in the broad areas of
advertising, marketing and
accounting whilst ERIs are taken to cover the same things over computer
Information v. function
hypothetical patents system for a moment and consider the following:
Smith wishes to obtain a patent
for some "method of market
management". If, as before, we take the requirements of artificiality
active functionality as our
starting point then it might be possible
to obtain her patent provided that an examiner could be persuaded that
method in question was more than a mere idea or formula: the
line would lie, for example, between a method for conducting
sales so as
to lower transaction costs (patentable) and a method for the quick
calculation
of transaction costs within the
share system (unpatentable)
hypothetical patent system, as with SRIs, we find that there is no
rule excluding BRIs or, by extension
from both, ERIs: it will all
determining the precise nature of the invention in question. Indeed, in
case of ERIs there
is one interesting additional point to consider:
hypothetical system of patentability determination, an invention that
unpatentable BRI may well acquire potentially patentable status as an
automated: the transaction cost formula could
be used as part of an
system for tallying and deducting transaction costs (patentable). It is
to remember, however,
that this only relates to subject matter status:
equally be the case that it would be "obvious" to automate
transaction cost
processing as described above, in which case a patent
not be granted.
to the real
world, one of the great difficulties for BRI and ERI patents to
overcome is the
sentiment, often translated
into patent policy, that the patent system
concerned with matters scientific and not matters commercial; in truth,
of this is correct only in so far as it relates to
science and, more crucially, the exclusion cannot be axiomatically
derived from
the inclusion. Fuelling
rightly points out that the service industries involve as much
'technological
art' as the traditional manufacturing industries
and, in light of that, there is
no more reason to reject
BRIs and ERIs as unpatentable
SRIs: the U.S.
Initial SRI patenting problems
in the U.S: 1966-1970
patent system
could adapt to software technology, what went wrong in the US? The
began not in the courts but at
the USPTO and for purely administrative
Until the first half of 1966, the Office had accepted a few SRI patent
applications
and, in August, released its first set of draft
"Guidelines
to the Examination of Programs" which allowed programs to be claimed
expressed as devices for controlling a computer. Worryingly, perhaps,
went on to say that process-types claims would
not be accepted since
analogous to mere mental steps or ideas
this, as we have seen, above was
illogical nonsense and a
sad triumph of claim form over inventive substance - if, as they were,
and software were interchangeable, it did not matter how the claims
expressed since they related to the same thing.
event, the USPTO
did not even get a chance to make the device/process mistake because,
December 1966, the draft had been
withdrawn; the main reason for this
publication of the Commission Report on the Patents System
which called for a bar on patentability
of computer programs. The reasons offered up in the Report had little
with subject
matter arguments but, instead, pointed out that the USPTO
already up to 4 years behind with patents applications, that there
experienced staff and that there was very little prior art to search
that was held within or available to the Office.
thereafter, the
USPTO underwent a Pauline conversion to a restrictive approach, seeking
statutory bar on patentability in
a 1967 amending Bill and, when that
dropped, issued a set of extremely restrictive Guidelines in 1968;
excluded any computer
process that could be carried out by mental
however, the 'mental steps' test as described by the Office, was so
it covered any operation of a computer program that could be tracked by
background,
though, was the start of a simmering institutional argument: the Court
Customs and Patent Appeals ('CCPA'),
a body with special jurisdiction
patent system
already committed itself to a relatively liberal approach to SRI
starting with
Prater & Wei
, it upheld SRI
patent applications containing machine and, also, process claims,
stating that the mental steps doctrine
did not extend to everything
be tracked by mental steps and, ultimately, forcing the USPTO to
withdraw its
1968 Guidelines
Benson application and its aftermath:
argument between
CCPA and USPTO took on a new dimension with the involvement of the
Court in the case of
Gottschalk v Benson
Benson's application related to an algorithm for transforming binary
decimal numbers (BCD) into pure binary; the computing
significance of
the enhanced ability to convert quickly from decimal, used by humans,
to an intermediate
stage and then
to binary used in computers such as 53 to 0101 0011 (5
coded in binary) to 110101 in pure binary. The two main claims were
algorithm (a) applied using a piece of hardware called a re-entrant
and (b) recited as a method
rejected the
application but, on appeal, the CCPA upheld it as disclosing patentable
matter: whilst the applicant
was prepared to admit that the
hardware-based
claim did not really relate to any specific apparatus, the court took
the claims could be construed as being limited to use on computer
since they could only be deployed practically in that way
unusual move, the
Supreme Court allowed an appeal and quashed CCPA's decision; in the
part of the
judgment most often cited,
it said that the main claims amounted to
more than a sham pre-emption of a mathematical formula that was
unpatentable
These words were taken to mean
by many that SRIs were not patentable and that other forms of program
protection had to be sought.
However, what is usually missed is that
primary concern of the Supreme Court was the scope of the claims as
so " ... so abstract and sweeping as to cover both known and
unknown uses of BCD to pure binary conversion"
. Secondly, the court itself was
at pains to say that the
decision was not a denial of the patentability of program elements in
immediate and
regrettable side-effect of
was a diversion
of effort by many
lawyers and lobbyists into seeking 'strong copyright' protection rather
looking properly at
the effect of the
decision and its progeny:
following alterations to the
1980 to accommodate
software products, the race was on to try to stretch copyright to
cover, first,
program structure
and, later, functional
aspects of program code and user interface
charted elsewhere
to the task set for it; although admirably suited to protecting static,
informational material such as that
found in source code, instruction
and the like, it showed itself to be manifestly unsuitable for
functionality
the thing which software
producers prized above all else. However, it was only with the 2nd
Court of Appeals decision in
Computer Associates v Altai
and the later 1st Circuit Court of Appeals decision in
v Borland International
courts finally halted the distortion of copyright, recognising the
problem and
restricting scope accordingly; in the former
case, it was memorably and
observed that putting program functionality under copyright's
protection was
like trying to put
a square peg in a round hole.
A war of nerves: 1972-1982
wake of Benson,
CCPA did not hesitate from playing 'tug-of-war' over SRI patents: in
Benson and the two Supreme Court
decisions listed below, CCPA kept
liberal line on patentability issues with the result that, in many
cases, those
SRI patent applications that reached CCPA were granted
because of the incredible rarity of Supreme Court
intervention
From a practical
viewpoint, therefore, SRI patenting continued much as before, albeit at
level, not so much because of any
real bar but the perception of one
by overly-broad readings of the Benson decision; nevertheless, it is
even in the 'low ebb' period of 1972-1981, more than 2,000 SRI
were granted, with 4,000 pending in 1980 alone
the Supreme
Court handed down another decision which seemed, at first glance, to
'bar' which Benson had supposedly
Parker v Flook
it rejected a method for calculating and updating alarm
limits in hydrocarbon chemical processing as unpatentable in that, when
dissected, the invention supposedly embedded in the claims was revealed
nothing more than a mathematical formula dressed up in
an algorithm
(confusingly
described as a 'mathematical algorithm') with post-solution activity
algorithm being merely 'token'
for lack of definition and
substantiality.
decision was
immediately taken to mean that computer-tested or computer-controlled
and processes were unpatentable:
again, however, the court had been at
explain that it was not shutting the door entirely
Moreover, when looked at from the point of the scope of the claims as
and presented, the application in question was undoubtedly
there was no detail at all on what alarm systems would be used, how
be linked to the hardware on which
the program ran and, most
significantly,
what range of trigger values would be used.
the judicial
tide in the Supreme Court finally turned; naturally, this was heralded
significant but, given what the CCPA
had been doing with USPTO Board of
decisions for the last ten years, it did not have as much impact as
thought. In
Diamond v Diehr
applicant had used a known mathematical formula, the so-called
equation', as the basis for automated moulding and
curing of rubber.
The program
which the applicant had written improved on existing manual uses of the
equation in that it took information
from sensors in the mould to
real-time update of numeric variables; the equation was repeatedly
through with revised
variables to determine the precise moment at which
mould should be released.
decision, the
court acknowledged the flaws in the
'dissective'
approach and,
having properly taken the claims
acknowledged them to
represent patentable subject matter within section 101; the mere
inclusion of
program and hardware elements
did not render the subject matter
unpatentable.
The court also limited the meaning of mathematical algorithm by analogy
mathematical
formula. In broad factual terms, it is difficult to
but the answer lies in the
wording of the claims: the
thumbnail description of the invention given above, drawn from the
shows that US patent attorneys had learnt their drafting lessons as the
claims were much more narrowly drawn than in
and they were clearly
directed to the physical to ensure that there was an easily
identifiable
functional element to the process
From CCPA to CAFC: 1982-1996
onwards, the
Supreme Court did not intervene in the subject matter conflict and
left to preserve the crumbling
remains of the SRI patentability 'bar'
face of an ever-growing body of liberal CCPA decisions. Immediately
its dissolution
in 1982, CCPA gave judgement in a quartet of cases that
out what it regarded as the boundaries for SRI patentability:
In re Taner
In re Abele
In re Meyer
successor, the
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ('CAFC'), was established on
October 1982 but did not deal with
any significant SRI patentability
, the USPTO had put promulgated a new
set of Guidelines for
examinations of applications involving SRIs; they attempted to bring
the whole of CCPA's and the Supreme Court's reasoning in the area and
relied on a two step approach called the
Freeman/Walter/Abele
part of the
test relied on seeing whether the claims recited a mathematical
cautioning that although it would be easy
to detect these in process form, it would be more difficult where
claims were
apparatus form and, in any event, claims should be treated
carefully in
light of supporting disclosure. If the claims did recite
a mathematical
algorithm, the second question asked was whether it was applied in any
to physical elements or process steps;
if so, it was patentable subject
just after the
USPTO created its friendlier Guidelines, CAFC promptly extended the
which claims could be framed,
thereby widening the gateway of
opportunity for
SRI patent applicants still further. In
the validity of 'means for' claiming was highlighted.
Hitherto, SRI patent claims had usually been framed in terms of method
process but this, both inevitably and wrongly, had tainted many of them
the whiff of mathematical formula or mere idea. Here,
the applicant had
a valuable historical lesson about hardware/software equivalence and
its invention for signal autocorrelation
not as a method but as
machine as follows:
'means for' apparatus claims
hardware element comprising
a Read Only Memory with a look-up table of square values; and
on claims linked to
detailed description such that it was clear that the invention was "for
in a computer for improved
voice recognition".
enthusiastically endorsed the approach, saying that although an
algorithm was
plainly involved, it had been physically implemented
and this gave it
subject matter status. Subsequently, 'means for' was used to railroad
SRI patents relating to heart
monitoring software in
and even software for
removing jagged edges from digital oscilloscope traces
('anti-aliasing') in
decision, the
was treated as the 'gold
standard' for patentability of SRIs
main independent claim in the application, Claim 15, read as follows:
rasterizer for converting vector list
data representing sample magnitudes of an input waveform into
anti-aliased
pixel illumination
intensity data to be displayed on a display means
comprising:
determining the vertical
distance between the endpoints of each of the vectors in the data list;
determining the elevation
of a row of pixels that is spanned by the vector;
nomalising the vertical
distance and elevation; and
outputting illumination
intensity data as a predetermined function of the normalised vertical
and elevation".
specification
disclosed an electronic circuit but the claims 'means for' format
deployment in software. The Examiner
rejected the application for
nothing more than an algorithm whilst a Board of Appeal accepted that
referred to a machine (whether real or virtual). A Full
Appeal upheld the Examiner's decision on the narrower ground that,
section 112(6) meant that 'means for claims' covered any and every
extended to the interpretation of this claim
as a disguised process
an unpatentable mathematical algorithm. On appeal to CAFC, it was held
language used in
the specification clearly disclosed a machine (albeit
which could be constructed in software) and, in light of this, the
claims were suitably conditioned. Moreover, the invention was not
unpatentable in
any guise because it represented the application
of an idea and not
idea itself.
slight pauses
in the opening up of SRI patenting came in 1994 and 1995 when CAFC was
with claims which, because of
the invention, could not be directed to
of post-solution activity i.e. pure program claims. In
the court rejected a method of
calculating competitive bids on a series of related items; this was
done on the
back of CCPA's older
tests but, interestingly, the dissenting judgment
Newman J. formed the basis for the new reasoning in
somewhat more reticent panel than usual, in
the CAFC rejected its much-loved 'means for' claims, this
time covering an SRI which calculated the optimum path between two
by reference to stated parameters such as time, cost, capacity and
the post-solution activity here was confined
to on-screen display and,
the claims were transparently directed towards the program. In language
reminiscent of
the three judges on the initial
appeal panel held the apparatus claims to be a mere 'guise' covering an
unpatentable mathematical
push forward,
albeit on a different front, came in 1995 with the decisions in
. Lowry related to a data
structure for organisation and
use of data stored in computer memory and the USPTO rejected by analogy
minor exception to patentability relating to printed material; on
CAFC, the applicability of this exclusion was rejected.
However, the
significance of the decision did not become clear until
here, the USPTO had rejected claims to a computer program on a carrier
same basis as
and, having learnt, late of the
CAFC decision,
promptly withdrew. Thus a computer program on a carrier could be
patentable as
according to CCPA rulings starting with
ending with
, most SRIs were easily
patentable; where
they related to otherwise unpatentable subject matter, if claims were
towards production
of a useful, tangible or concrete result then that
sufficient. Claims could be framed in terms of (virtual) machines,
stored on media or, if necessary, by reference to processes. The USPTO
in considerable difficulties as it produced draft
after draft of
Guidelines to
before finally publishing in
February 1996.
were drafted with
Freeman/Walter/Abele
mind but with the
overall emphasis on finding utility rather than trying to find some
transformation or effect;
this effectively widened protection to the
demanded by
. In addition, when considering
classification of
data structures, a form of SRI recognised in
and computer
programs as machine, process, etc., it was permissible to look at
medium as grounding for a machine claim per
BRIs and ERIs: the U.S. experience
BRIs: an odd path
discussed the
bias against BRIs above, it is interesting to note that, in the US,
cases cited
against patentability were often
decided on other grounds, a point
emphasised strongly in
State Street
in other words, there seemed to be misdirection rather than a 'bar'.
early decisions such as
Munson v City of New York
US Credit System Co. v American Credit Indemnity
the issue of patentability was clouded by
the issue of refusal of patents to 'printed materials' to avoid
reduplication
of protection
with copyright. However, even in the two cases most often
for the proposition that "methods of doing business are
unpatentable",
the decisions were actually made on other grounds.
Checking Co. v Lorraine Co.
held that means for avoiding employee theft by use of a
specially-printed
receipt slip was not patentable: although the court
stated that "... a
system of transacting business disconnected from the means for carrying
system is not [patentable]" was
a specific comment on the means for
in question rather than a general ground for disposal, it was treated
in reality,
the court decided the case on lack of novelty.
the claims related to a process for
selling commodities by offering them for sale at remote points. Again,
court decided the
issue on the question of novelty and, indeed,
specifically
stated that it did not have to decide on the issue to dispose of
patentability to dispose of the appeal.
shifted to ERI patent applications, there were some indications that
would consider BRI claims: in
an application to patent a method of operating a system of factories
produced products from raw materials having a plurality
of market costs
allowed to proceed by CCPA; in its judgment, it avoided the issue at
saying that the invention was not
a method of doing business.
ERIs: a helping combination?
the extent that
the business method exception ever had any substance, it seemed that
of unpatentable subject matter
to create a functional marketing,
accounting or advertising
system could disclose patentable subject matter just as in the UK
and within our hypothetical patent system: in
a system for automated cheque clearance was held to be
patentable subject matter (though the patent application failed for
obviousness)
Paine, Webber, Jackson &
Curtis v Merrill Lynch,
Pierce, Fenner and Smith
, a trading
system incorporating automated cash management functions was held to be
subject of a valid patent on the basis that
that the claims were
directed to
methods of operating a computer for actual market activities rather
doing business per se.
State Street:
the final push
content with its
previous handiwork, CCPA moved again in 1998. Two years before, two
mutual fund
companies, State Street and Signature
Financial Group, had been
negotiating
over use of business management software; the latter owned a patent on
aspects of the
software in question. Relations broke down and, seeking
pre-empt an infringement action, State Street sought a declaratory
non-infringement based on lack of patentable subject matter through the
District Court for the District of Massachusetts.
patent, US patent
number 5,193,056 was entitled 'Data processing system for Hub and Spoke
Financial Services Configuration' and
was issued on 9 March 1993; its
independent claim was as follows:
data processing system for managing a
financial services configuration of a portfolio established as a
partnership,
each partner
being one of a plurality of funds comprising:
processor means for
processing data;
means for storing data on a
storage medium;
means for initializing the
storage medium;
means for processing data
regarding assets in the portfolio and each of the funds from previous
data regarding increases
or decreases in each of the fund's assets and
allocating the percentage share that each fund holds in the portfolio;
means for processing data
regarding daily incremental income, expenses, and net realized gain or
the portfolio, and
for allocating data among each fund; and
means for processing data
regarding daily net unrealized gain or loss for the portfolio and
such data among each
means for processing data
regarding aggregate year-end income, expenses and capital gain or loss
portfolio and each
of the funds."
instance, the
District court held that the patent was invalid for lack of patentable
matter, under both the mathematical
algorithm and business method
exceptions.
The case went on appeal to CAFC: here was the perfect chance to resolve
BRI and ERI
matters for once and for all.
The ‘mathematical
algorithm’ exclusion
District court had
treated the 'means for' claims as process claims and then promptly
declared them
poisoned by the algorithmic
taint. CAFC stated that the claims had to
as machine claims, directed, as per the specification, towards a
more importantly, in any event it did not matter which of the
categories at section 101 the inventions fell into since the test
patentability was the same for each. The test to be deployed was a
narrow one:
given that Congress had intended "everything under
the sun made by man
be patentable", the language of section 101 was wide; any exclusion to
patentability had to be clearly justified
in light of this and also
narrowly. Accordingly, classification did not matter: if one could
practical utility
and satisfy the other conditions of the Act, that was
Mathematical algorithm and the search for post-solution activity were
The ‘business
method’ exclusion
held that the
origin of the business method exception could be traced in its modern
Security Checking v Lorraine
which a system for preventing tip fraud by waiters was rejected as
unpatentable
However, as CAFC noted, neither of these
decisions relied on the purported exception in making a finding of
and, in any
event, such discussion as there was related to mere ideas:
was no disclosed separate exception to patentability. Therefore,
business method claim fell within the limited boundaries of mere ideas,
could disclose patentable subject matter.
State Street:
the aftermath
Supreme Court denied certiorari proceedings, thereby tacitly accepting
approach. In a later case,
AT&T v Excel
the court emphasised that, in addition to categorisation, it no longer
what claim format was used, the wide test applied
and was the same for
formats; here, too, Supreme Court certiorari was denied. In short,
despite the
softly whispered reservations
of the USPTO
the system had changed: whilst others may regard it as a revolution,
history set out above, the author would argue that
it was nothing more
year ride in full circle.
International,
regional and national approaches
International and regional
true nature of bars to patentability relevant to SRIs, BRIs and ERIs
found in international laws and agreements,
specifically TRIPS, EC law
Patent Co-operation Treaty 1970 ('PCT'). In addition, it should be
that there is ever
increasing co-ordination of approach as encouraged
mechanisms such as the Trilateral Review
and the meetings of the heads of the patent offices of certain
case of TRIPS,
attention has been directed towards Article 27(1) which provides that
patents shall be available for all
inventions, whether products or
in all fields of technology, provided they are new, involve and
inventive step
capable of industrial application". Articles 27(2) and (3)
for limited exceptions but computer programs are not listed therein
fact that the exclusions are so limited is intriguing: is it possible
taking up TRIPS obligations, signatories risk
breach simply by virtue
restrictions on patentability of programs? Bearing in mind that
countries which
have signed up
to the EPC have included such restrictions, this is a
possibility. Schiuma has examined this problem by trying to find the
international law meaning of the provisions and seeing how they work in
relation to the German Patent Act, one of the EPC-modelled
Having concluded that, on any proper interpretation,
software must be regarded as an invention in a field of technology, it
seem that German law is, indeed, at variance with TRIPs requirements
the country's declaration to the contrary
notwithstanding
the more complicated
position of the EPO is considered below.
TRIPs, the European Commission recognised the problem with SRI
protection and
proposed a harmonisation Directive
for patent protection within the
this is likely to be implemented
in 2001/2002 and it is widely predicted will approximate the threshold
protection to that available
in the US as a result of
Indeed, to the extent that Member States
form the majority of EPC signatories, they will be obliged to push for
harmonisation as
between the national, EPC and projected Community
in the case of
the PCT, it is interesting to note that, whilst the Treaty does not
directly with the scope of patentable
subject matter, in relation to
computer programs,
Rules 39 and 67 only bar search or examination to the extent that the
International
Preliminary
Examining Authority are not equipped to search the prior art
this adds weight to the contention that, having been born
out of administrative inconvenience rather than any great principle,
restrictions
on patentability of programs should be limited to the
possible extent.
practice under the EPC
USPA, Article 52
of the European Patent Convention 1973 expressly lists certain things
not to be regarded as patentable
inventions: in ad+dition to
discoveries and
mathematical formulae, schemes, rules or methods for doing business,
act and computer programs are mentioned, as is the
presentation of
information. However, the restrictions are said to apply only
early years of
the European Patent Office's operation, much more attention was paid to
exclusion than the proviso: as a
result, the original 1978 examination
Guidelines set a threshold that SRIs, BRIs and ERIs would find
difficult to
with the result that the EPO acquired
a continuing reputation as a place through which such inventions could
patented. In
1985, however, the Guidelines were changed to take account
industry concerns; although tied to claiming the program when loaded
computer, they did at least allow that if a technical (in the sense of
"technological") contribution was made to the known
invention, patentability should not be denied merely because it was
implemented
in a computer program.
Vicom/Image
, the EPO's Boards of
Appeal slowly began to sketch the boundaries between, on the one hand,
computer program as such and, on the
other, an invention making a
contribution albeit that it was implemented in software; however, the
trend was to
place the marker ever further in favour of the latter at
expense of the former
a revised claim to a method of "digitally processing images in the form
a two dimensional array" was allowed because the
image was a physical
entity and it was directed towards a technical process affecting it.
on from the straight physical
effect test applied in
the EPO also
began to accept applications where the invention overcame a technical
this might involve maintaining or improving
the operation of hardware
software as in
IBM/Data Processor Network Appn.
whittled down, significant obstacles remained: claims other than to a
as programmed were severely limited
and, by virtue of unfortunately
terminology and concepts, issues of technical contribution tended to
into issues
of novelty and obviousness. In a pair of decisions handed
Technical Board of Appeal in 1998 and 1999, a determined effort
bring clarity to the matter and to assimilate practice as far as
possible with
international norms (including TRIPS):
IBM/Computer
IBM/Computer programs II
were to set the 'gold standard'
around software operations: in the first, the claims, both to methods
apparatus, related to a system for detecting
overlaps of windows on
screens and preventing the obscuring of information by causing display
elsewhere whilst, in the second,
they related to a system for recovery
memory and other resources including procedural failsafes in the event
non-recovery.
In addition to the acceptable claim forms, the applicant
included claims to program stored 'on medium'.
explained in
both instances that the mere fact of alteration of current flow in the
by loading the program was
insufficient to show 'technical character',
replacement test requirement for 'technical contribution', of the sort
exclusion of programs as such. Instead, the point at which
invention should
be considered should be that at which the program was
executed to
'further effects'; whether inside the machine or out was irrelevant,
hardware or software was irrelevant
provided such further effects could
found. The effect was to limit the computer program as such limitation
lowest possible
despite the
change in standard, the Board recognised that its new approach would
leave 'on media' claims of the
high and dry; recognising
the illogicality of having something with the potential to have further
technical effect left as unpatentable,
it accepted that such claims
assimilated and accepted. In addition, in
IBM/Computer
programs II
particular, the Board acknowledged that Article 27 TRIPS was an issue.
it held that since the EPO was neither a party
to nor otherwise bound
all that it could and should do was to acknowledge it as something to
account when interpreting
Article 52.
ERIs, the EPO has had some dealings with the latter but, in view of
requirements of 'technical contribution' and,
latterly, 'technical
character',
some applications have fallen. However, there are two successful
applications which
show that, where
suitable technical character can be identified, the
method bar is not absolute.
Sohei/General
purpose management system
apparatus and method claims were made for a system of administrative
management task handling via a common booking slip for
data storage and
processing; as amended, the Board of Appeal characterised as relating
interface rather than a computer
program as such, a method of doing
business as
such and/or a presentation of information as such.
Pettersson/Queuing
a system for determining
the queue sequence for customer service at a plurality of service
points was said
to be a method for doing
business. However, the Board held that the
main claim,
Claim 1, related to apparatus, specifically a turn-number allocation
not any method of use as such.
Ultimately,
as with the
discussion of the US situation, the point should be made that, in
many SRI and ERI applications
are being accepted without subject matter
objections; Cohen
notes that by 1999,
approximately 100 out of 15,000 applications had been rejected in this
or, put another way, 99.33% overcame
the subject matter threshold.
following concerns in the 1990s
practitioners are taking the view that difference between the EPO and
SRI patentability is negligible but, with ERIs, care
still must be
drafting to identify some genuine and relevant 'technical effect'
Law and practice in the U.K.
case of the UK,
it is ironic to note that after the entry into force of the Patents Act
working from the same exclusions
the courts and, perforce, the Patent Office have developed limits on
patentability of SRIs, BRIs and ERIs which are recognised as
than their Continental counterparts
this is so despite the relaxed approach previously taken under the 1949
hint of the
problem came with
Merrill Lynch Inc's. Appn.
in which an application directly corresponding to the US
trading system application noted above
was rejected. Although the Court of Appeal rejected a dissective
approach to
claims analysis, it held that the invention as characterised
a method of doing business. Although the reasoning of the analogous
under the 1949 Act was raised, the court declined to follow it, failing
recognise the difference between business schemes,
rules or plans and
realisation and the technical effect inherent in the virtual
marketplace that
the software created. However,
it is worth noting that in the event, a
set of apparatus claims was allowed to stand
case of SRIs,
whilst few doubted the correct decision had been reached by the Court
Gale's Appn.
in which the mode
of storage of a program was held to be irrelevant to the patentability
invention as claimed, a quartet of
later applications
were refused on the basis that
they related to computer
programs as such and/or schemes, rules or methods for performing a
as such; the latter objection is highly questionable on the basis that
judges and examiners concerned seem to have entirely
overlooked the "as
such" qualifier to section 1(2) in relation to it and the point that
subject matter
could not be carried out
approach which the UK Patent Office was obliged to follow was a source
concern during the 1990s
though, when
actual output of the Office was compared in terms of applications
proceeding to
grant, the comparisons with the US,
Germany and Japan were less
However, with the two pronged assault
of TRIPS and the EC harmonisation Directive on the horizon, there
should be no
future and, even in the interim, the Patent Office has
examination Guideline indicating its recognition of the recent IBM
decisions in
the EPO and its allowance of
-style claims
this has particular advantages since the protection
afforded to processes under the 1977 Act is much more limited than that
to products
case of BRIs and
ERIs, the situation is still not so clear: under the 1949 Act, some BRI
applications were rejected as disclosing
either mere schemes, rules or
and/or on the basis of the printed
matter exception
Although the
transition to the new Act meant that many old authorities were treated
of doubtful relevance
, BRI patent
applications have continued to be treated with suspicion: on a broad
construction of business, a corporal punishment
scheme was rejected
In light of the change in relation to
SRIs and the shift to ERI patent applications, in the immediate future,
Patent Office
is likely to take its cue from decisions such as
practice in Japan
contrast to both US
and EPC rules, Japanese patent law is marked out by a positive and
specific approach to the definition
of invention: Article 2, Patent Law
that an invention is "the highly advanced creation of technical ideas
which a law of
nature is utilised"
However, from this starting point, there is rapid convergence.
concerned, the JPO's Guidelines
should be taken as a whole
when considering the issue of invention;
a law of nature in
information processing by software is patentable;
a law of nature in
hardware resources is patentable; and
determining patentability, it is
irrelevant whether the invention is claimed as a process or product.
to set the patentability
threshold at approximately the same level as the U.S.
and it is considered unlikely
that the Tokyo High Court
will set any different standard in deciding future cases
particularly in view of the fact that Japan has one of
the largest sets of SRI patents and applications in the world.
ERIs, although the JPO's Guidelines, currently under review
are relatively generous towards BRIs and, by extension,
to ERIs, there is, by contrast, a distinct shortage of patents granted
compared to the US; the reason for this appears to be a reluctance on
of the relevant commercial players to apply
The real problem with SRIs, BRIs and ERIs
Novelty, obviousness and utility
greatest irony in
this all is that the practical reasons proffered by the 1966 Commission
on the US patent system for restricting
SRI patenting has continued to
true: a lack of experienced examining staff, time and prior art
resources has
meant that the
quality of many US patents granted has been very suspect
notorious example in recent time has been Compton's multimedia patent,
5,242,671; this related to a database
graphical and textual entry paths and the width of the claims was such
make any multimedia
when Compton's began demanding 1-3% royalties on multimedia database
the industry at large
problem with
Compton's patent was that since the time of the development of
hypertext in the
1960s, such systems had been
known and there was relevant prior art in
engineering journals which showed virtually identical systems fully
operational
by 1986. Unfortunately, this had not been noticed by the USPTO which
had proceeded
to grant in August 1993.
industry was so great that the then-Commissioner for Patents, Bruce
took the rare step of calling the patent
back in for re-examination: on
March 1994, in light of the voluminous prior art, all 41 claims were
In the aftermath,
it was promised that examination would be improved by
tighter internal quality controls and more, better-qualified staff.
problem has
been that this has not happened: in March 1999, the USPTO was forced to
statement assuring all concerned
that SRI, BRI and ERI handling would
improved and that new staff would be taken on
Has this change of handling worked well? Judging by the state of US
6,041,310 for a system of selling cars via a computerised
probably not.
The chilling
effect of patents
of the 'new'
approach to SRI, BRI and ERI patents which disturbs some critics is the
possibility of 'chilling' or retardation
of innovation in the relevant
technical or commercial field; a recent case, often cited in this
Inc. v Barnesandnoble.com Inc.
which Amazon's patent for a method and system of 'one click' Internet
once the product to be ordered is displayed to
the consumer came under
microscope; it was found to be valid and infringed but, subsequently,
founder of Amazon, Mr Jeff
Bezos, gave a speech in which he
acknowledged that
he was worried about the possible slowing down of e-commerce spread
his company's patent
exuded by Mr Bezos was pleasant but, it is submitted, not relevant: it
subject to exclusive dealing agreements,
remains possible for Amazon to
the technology out. Furthermore, assuming that the court was right to
the patent as
valid, it also follows that there is no chilling issue:
the infringer was trying to get a free technical and/or commercial
all patent infringers seek to do. Similarly, although claims
interpretation and
infringement issues do arise in this
case, this is equally true in any
field. However, it must be acknowledged that in the case of 'bad'
patents i.e.
those granted
without proper, strict examination as to novelty,
obviousness and
utility/industrial applicability, a genuine chilling issue does
conclusion, Patent
Offices around the world must sharpen up examination procedure as much
possible to see that rogue SRI, BRI
and ERI patents are not granted;
is possible to challenge for invalidity, the cost and uncertainty of
still hangs
over others in the field and, here, the chilling effect is
Examiners, particularly those in the US must use all information
available to them - including the Internet - and not just rely on
application or patent documents
However, with real effort, the
quality of software patents can
be improved and those critics who continue to object to the 'new'
examination and fee-related issues
can ultimately be consoled.
Fellow, Queen Mary Intellectual Property Research Institute, University
[1998] USCAFED 107
149 F.3d 1368 (Fed.
cert. denied
119 S. Ct. 85
See Kang et al., " A
practitioner's
approach to strategic enforcement and analysis of business method
the post-State Street
40 Idea 226
E.g. Raskind, "The State
Street Bank
decision: the bad business of unlimited patent protection for methods
10 Fordham Intell. Prop., Media & Ent. LJ 61
56 US 62 (1853) - Morse's
telegraph patent.
Claim 8 as filed claimed the concept of electronic communications
as to apparatus; this was, unsurprisingly, rejected.
[1948] USSC 22
Claims to a mixture of
strains of bacteria used in plant inoculation.
Thus, absent any novelty,
obviousness or
utility problems, whilst X-rays were not patentable, a machine for
taking X-ray
photographs
I.e. non-natural, the result
of human intervention
- later sonorously described by Congressional Reports accompanying USPA
under the sun made by the hand of man': see OTA, "Finding a
balance: computer software, intellectual property and the challenge of
technological change" US Govt. Printing Office, Washington DC, 1992 at
I.e. X-rays simply are whilst
an x-ray machine
A point examined in
relation to the JPO and EPO
rules examined below: for an Australian practitioner's view that the
Australian, Japanese,
US and EPO practice on software patenting was,
essentially, harmonised by mid-1999, see McFarlane, "How to patent
software" 113 PW
See Beresford, "Patenting
software under
the European Patent Convention", Sweet & Maxwell, London, 2000
See Appleton, "What is
2CL&P 82 (1986).
See von Hellfeld, "Hardware,
firmware, software"
Section 101, 1949 Act; this
imported the traditional phrasing from the Statute of Monopolies
[1966] RPC 194.
i.e. under the broad test then
taking root in the wake of
NRDC's Appn.
134 (Aus.).
See Molyneaux, "A history of
patenting software related inventions in the United Kingdom" [1996]
[1970] RPC 36.
[1970] RPC 91.
Here, cardboard punchcards.
[1974] RPC 147.
I.e. those with advanced
communications functions.
Judgment at 158.
[1980] FSR 564.
As opposed to 'methods used in
business', a term which may encompass virtually any invention.
See, further, for real world
considerations, Fuelling, "Manufacturing, selling and accounting:
patenting business methods"
76 JPTOS 471
(1994) at p477.
See n25 above.
Ibid. at p476; this point was
by the US Court of Customs and Patent Appeals in
, 1974), rev'd on other grounds sub nom
See Jacobs, "Computer
technology (hardware and software): some legal implications for
J Comp Tech & L 50 (1970).
See "To Promote the Useful
Arts" S. Doc. No. 5, 90th Congress, 1st Sess. (1967).
See Kayton, "Patent
protectability of software: background and current law"
8 Jurimetrics
The CCPA handled not just
from inferior courts but also the Boards of Appeal of the USPTO.
415 F.2d 1378
415 F.2d 1393
(1969) (method of spectrographic analysis utilising linear equations
general purpose digital computer). On rehearing, CCPA
'computer-as-programmed' machine claims in the application but rejected
process claims as lacking limitation to machine
implementation as
417 F.2d 1395
(1969) (method
plotting 3D objects on planar surface utilising transformation
equations solved
by general purpose digital computer).
'Computer-as-programmed' machine
See, on similar grounds,
431 F.2d 882 (CCPA
, 1970) (method of
signal generation and
correction) and
421 F.2d 742 (CCPA
(method of bit stream
synchronisation).
[1972] USSC 223
441 F.2d 682
Judgment at 71.
Judgment at 68.
Judgment at 71.
Associates Inc. v Jaslow Dental Laboratory Inc.
[1986] USCA3 976
Cf. the first instance
decision in
Development Corp. v Paperback Software International
See Lea, "Software protection
trends in the 1990s"
7 Ent. LR 276
Something, ironically,
predicted by
Commissioner Hershey when filing a dissent from the CONTU Report which
the way for the
1980 copyright amending legislation.
20 USPQ 2d 1641
34 USPQ 2d 1014
See, for example,
545 F.2d 141 (CCPA
, 1974) (apparatus claims for
graphics display
upheld) and
575 F.2d 872 (CCPA
(machine translation).
Peterson et al., "Patenting software"
31 Idea 181
(1990). Apart from
the cases listed below, only in
Dann v Johnston
[1976] USSC 53
the Supreme Court encounter an SRI patent; interestingly, it dealt with
case on grounds of obviousness under s103
and did not deal with any of
patentable subject matter arguments in s101.
See Soma & Smith,
"Software trends: who's getting what of how many?"
69 JPTOS 415
[51]437 US 584.
Judgment at 595.
[1981] USSC 40
See Schmidt,
"Legal proprietary interests in computer programs: the American
experience"
21 Jurimetrics 345
684 F.2d 912 (CCPA
converting computer to parallel processing under compiler control; this
characterised as an active control
component of program execution
rather than
an unpatentable algorithm).
681 F.2d 787 (CCPA
of simulating seismic waves by summing signals of conventional waves;
characterised as a physical conversion
of summed signals and was,
therefore, a
patentable process).
684 F.2d 902 (CCPA
method of CAT scanning; mere inclusion of computer program did not
invention unpatentable).
688 F.2d 789 (CCPA
(method and
machine for storing and comparing medical test results; not applied to
elements or process steps and,
therefore, unpatentable).
[1989] USCAFED 625
888 F.2d 835 (Fed.
Cir., 1989)
(method for automated diagnosis from clinical test results; gathering
summation of data as disclosed did not amount
to patentable process).
Derived cumulatively
573 F.2d 1237 (CCPA
In re Walter
F.2d 758 (CCPA
In re Abele
684 F.2d 902 (CCPA
"Patentability of computer related inventions in the USPTO"
I.e. in the
[1989] USCAFED 628
888 F.2d 1370 (Fed.
Cir., 1989).
Permitted by s112,
958 F.2d 1053
[1994] USCAFED 665
33 F.3d 1526
See, though, for a
critical view, Stern, "Patenting algorithms: the Gordian Knot
retwisted" [1995] CTLR 13.
[1994] USCAFED 373
22 F.3d 290
36 F.3d 1376
Subsequently, some
amelioration was later gained in an en banc hearing.
32 F.3d 1579 (1994).
[1995] USCAFED 610
53 F.3d 1583
See Laurenson,
"Computer software 'article of manufacture' patents"
77 JPTOS 811
See Trzyna, "Patent protection
for computer programs: scientific wisdom of US law turnabout tolls the
the world" 77 PW 13
See, for details of the
changes in policy, Stewart, "Patenting of software - proposed
and the magic dividing line
that disappeared"
77 JPTOS 681
Gregory et al., "The US Patent Office Guidelines for
computer-implemented
inventions"
[1996] EIPR 56.
See Section 6.02 below.
[1888] USSC 69
Cir., 1908).
24 USPQ 88 (CCPA
193 USPQ 645 (CCPA
See nn. 29 and 47 above.
218 USPQ 212 (D.
Del., 1983).
"Abort, retry, fail: protection for software-related inventions in the
wake of State Street Bank & Trust Co v Signature
Group, Inc"
85 Corn. L R 1118 (2000).
See Section 5.01 above.
See Thomas, "An
epistemology of appropriation: patentable subject matter after State
[2000] IPQ 27.
176 F.3d 1352.
"Patent eligibility in view of State Street and AT&T v Excel
Communication"
81 JPTOS 671
See details of this
EPO/USPTO/JPO
consortium at
http://www.uspto.gov/web/tws/index.html.
See notes of the Second
http://www.patent.gov.uk/snews/notices/meeting.html.
"TRIPS and the exclusion of
"as such" from patentability" 31 IIC 36 (2000).
Ibid., p45.
Ibid., p43.
See para. 3.3,
"Promoting innovation through patents: the follow up to the Green
http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/en/intprop/indprop/8682en.pdf.
See Beresford, op.
In the case of SRIs,
for example, the Guidelines stated that claims should be rejected if
contribution to the known art resided
solely in a computer program,
as to how presented in the claims.
[1987] EPOR 74.
To trace the progression over
relatively short time, see Newman, "The patentability of computer
inventions in Europe"
[1997] EIPR 701
, Davies, "Computer program
claims: the final frontier for software inventions"
[1998] EIPR 429
Lakkonen & Whaite, "The EPO simplifies software patenting"
[1990] OJ EPO 5
[2000] EPOR 219.
[1996] EPOR 255.
[1996] EPOR 1.
"The patenting of
[1999] EIPR 607.
See Harris, "Report on Union
Round Table at the EPO" CIPA Feb. 1998, p107.
See Godar, "Who's been
patenting your business method" 21 BLR 66 (2000) and Dagg, "How to
recognise when a software innovation or
method of doing business is
in Europe: Part I" (1999) 11 JIBFL 477.
Compare s1(2) PA 1977 to Art.
and 52(3), EPC.
See Davis, "Patentability of
programs" 149(6916) NLJ 1872 (1999).
A point noted by Blakemore,
"Patent protection in UK and Europe for computer program related
inventions" 77 PW 21 (1995).
[1989] RPC 561
See Section 5.02.
See Molyneaux,
"Patenting software-related inventions in the UK: Part II" [1996]
CTLR 51 at p53.
[1991] RPC 305
Inc's. Appn.
(apparatus claims to expert system treated as claims to program
Hitachi Ltd's Appn.
[1991] RPC 415
claims to mixed
vector/scalar program compilation treated as claims to program as
[1993] RPC 427
(method and apparatus claims to
automated ship
silhouette recognition system treated as claims to scheme, rule or
mental act) and
Fujitsu Ltd's Appn.
[1997] EWCA Civ 1174
and apparatus for synthetic crystalline CAM unpatentable).
I.e. the characterisation of
inventions was too abstract; restricting this would have meant the
between patentability
and unpatentability in the
cases (n. above), in the latter case because the claim that
the application
did not relate to a program as such was upheld on appeal.
this latter
point was welcomed as an advance by many practitioners: see Chahil,
"Software patents: has Fujitsu taken us
any further forward?" 95 PW
See Blakemore, "The UK Patent
Office Forum: legal protection for software related invention" 69 PW 39
(1995): for a more sanguine
view of slightly later vintage, see
"The patenting of software in Europe and the UK" 91 PW 14 (1997).
A point raised by Deputy
Haselden, "Patents for software: the view from the British Patent
Office" 105 PW 33 (1998).
This is dated 19th April 1999
it is available at
http://www.patent.gov.uk.
See, in particular, s60(1).
& Larson's Appn.
[1965] RPC 596
(method and
apparatus for passenger
journey tracking).
Johnsons' Appn.
(1902) (apparatus for business correspondence).
See para. 1.21, Patent Office
Melia's Appn.
(SRIS O/153/92).
Law No. 121 of
13th April 1959 as amended.
Chapter I, published February
See Mashima,
"Examination of
the interrelationship among Japanese IP protection for software, the
industry and keiretsu"
82 JPTOS 50
The court, in effect, operates
supervisory jurisdiction over the JPO roughly analogous to the CAFC's
respect of the USPTO.
See press announcement for
http://www.jpo-miti.go.jp.
See Tennesohn and Yamamoto,
"Exporting State Street"
See Rebeiro, "Compton's
multimedia patent: should the patent system be used to protect
[1995] CTLR 81.
See USPTO White Paper,
"Automated financial or management data processing (business
methods)" 19th July 2000 at
http://www.uspto.gov/web/menu/busmethp/index.html.
53 USPQ 2d 1115 (WD
Wa., 1999).
"Another Amazon patent furor" at
http://www.wirednews.com/news/print/0,1294,34670,00.html
See, for more on examination
practices in the US, Frome, "Prosecuting cyberspace patents" (1999)
http://www.uiowa.edu/~cyberlaw/cls99/sempaper/fitzg331.html
See, for example, Grover,
"Software patents - damage limitation" 16 CLSR 39 (2000).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter