URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Caruso, David; Legg, Michael; Phoustanis, Jordan --- "The Automation Paradox in Litigation: The Inadequacy of Procedure and Evidence Law to Manage Electronic Evidence Generated by the Internet of Things in Civil Disputes" [2019] MqLawJl 8; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 157
I INTRODUCTION
II THE INTERNET OF THINGS
A Third Wave eObjects
B ESI generated by the IoT
2 Volatility and vulnerability
III DISCLOSURE OF IOT-DERIVED ESI IN LITIGATION
A ESI and Documents
B ESI Relevant to Issues in the Proceedings
C Control of IoT Data
D Finding the ESI Needle in the IoT Haystack
E Lawyer Competence
F Privacy and Discovery
IV IOT-DERIVED ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE UNDER THE UNIFORM LAW: HEARSAY
A Documentary form
B Previous representation made by a person
C Passively-generated representations
V IOT-DERIVED ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE UNDER THE UNIFORM LAW: AUTHENTICATION
A The Humanity of Authentication
B Traditional authentication
C Unknowing acceptance
D Determining authenticity
E The adequacy of authentication provisions
V CONCLUSION
THE AUTOMATION PARADOX IN LITIGATION:
THE INADEQUACY OF PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE LAW TO MANAGE
ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE GENERATED BY THE ‘INTERNET OF THINGS’ IN CIVIL
DAVID CARUSO,
MICHAEL LEGG,** JORDAN PHOUSTANIS***
Recent advances in technology and a collective appetite for technological
integration have resulted in the design of many ‘everyday’
devices, machines, and buildings that incorporate data gathering, handling and
transmission technology, commonly referred
to as the Internet of Things. This
article examines the procedural and evidential implications and challenges of
collecting and exchanging
electronically stored information gathered by these
everyday objects. In particular, the article examines the discovery of that data
in the context of court proceedings, and highlights the novel challenges
presented by the format and location of the data. The article
also considers the
way in which this data is presented in court and issues relating to the
admissibility and proper weight of evidence
extracted from the Internet of
Things. In particular, the article focuses on the circumstances in which the
hearsay rule may affect
the furnishing of such data, and how issues of identity
and provenance are affected by the unique format and character of the evidence.
I INTRODUCTION
Advances in technology and a collective appetite for technological
integration have resulted in the design of many ‘every-day’
devices, machines and buildings that incorporate data gathering, handling and
transmission technology. These things have
not previously been computerised or
connected to an information exchange network. The technology, capable of
continuously perceiving,
monitoring, recording and transmitting information,
represents a substantial advancement in both the function and pervasiveness of
technology in daily private and professional life. Technology that automatically
gathers and records data from the external environment
has and will continue to
increase the volume of multiplatform information that would previously have been
unobserved, unmeasured
and unrecorded. The advent of autonomous technology which
is interlinked to human need by network has been referred to as
‘ubiquitous
computing’ and ‘ambient
intelligence’.
It has also
been recognised as the ‘third wave’ of computing. A consequence of
the advent of the third wave of computing
is that the volume of information that
is recorded and stored is increasing. Furthermore, the proportion of available
information
that is recorded and stored as data is also increasing, resulting in
the availability of more contemporaneous evidence to issues
in question. It has
been estimated that data generated by these objects, devices, machines and
buildings – often collectively
referred to as the ‘Internet of
Things’ (‘IoT’) – will account for about 10 percent of
the data on
Earth by 2020.
Our focus is the consequence of third wave computing for litigation. In Part
II, we explain the third wave of computing and the manner
in which the IoT
operates. Part III examines the retrieval, handling and discovery of that data
in the context of court proceedings,
and highlights the novel challenges
presented by the format and location of the data. We then consider the
presentation of IoT-derived
electronic evidence in court and issues relating to
its admissibility. In Part IV, we consider the circumstances in which the
rule may affect the furnishing of such data, and Part V examines how
issues of identity and provenance are affected by the unique
character of the evidence. We conclude that IoT-derived evidence presents
significant challenges to present legal tests
and methods for its
authentication.
II THE INTERNET OF THINGS
Third Wave eObjects
The ‘third wave’ of computing involves the insertion of intuitive
devices into our everyday devices and surrounds. This
technology is intuitive in
that it independently responds to and monitors our daily needs. The broader
effect of this third wave
is the embedding of data gathering, handling and
transmission devices in a variety of objects, devices, machines, buildings and
environments
that previously were neither computerised nor connected to the
internet or local information exchange
An epitomical example is a
Fitbit, a fitness tracking watch, which monitors and records the wearer’s
heart rate and geolocation
and transmits this information via Bluetooth
technology to another mobile device, and to the internet, via remote server.
obviously not the traditional analogue function of the watch.
Third wave devices have sensory technology with the capacity to transmit, via
network, data gathered by the device to other devices
or storage platforms.
These devices are commonly referred to as enhanced objects
(‘eObjects’). An eObject has been defined
as an ‘object that
is not inherently computerised, but into which has been embedded one or more
computer processors with data-collection,
data-handling and data-communication
capabilities’.
The IoT provides a collective term for eObjects. The IoT may be understood as
a network connecting eObjects. The network, usually
the internet, facilitates
the transmission of data gathered by eObjects to other devices, which are often
also eObjects or data storage
devices such as servers, mobile telephones, and
hard drives. Those devices retain their ‘traditional’ or
functionality and are embedded with electronics, software,
sensors, and network connectivity that enables them to collect, record
communicate data (which may concern or relate to the function or performance of
the device).
To illustrate, many
of the appliances within a typical residential apartment may be eObjects,
including the air-conditioner, lights,
refrigerator, and robotic vacuum cleaner.
The electronically stored information (‘ESI’), generated by
eObjects, which
are connected by the IoT, is a database regarding, for example,
the lifestyle conditions and habits of the occupants of the residence.
The IoT progresses network computing beyond two-way person-to-person
interactions to exchanges between persons and machines, and machine-to-machine
interactions.
The IoT has
significance for the commercial applications that it can facilitate. It also
provides ‘unprecedented visibility
into people, the physical world they
occupy and the interaction between the
This database – the ESI – is the information trove for discovery
and the trial. Enhanced objects are the means to that
value. In the following
discussion, we examine the ESI generated from eObjects in the context of
information gathering as part of
the pre-trial process, namely through the use
of court discovery and subpoena processes in the Federal Court of
and, with respect to its
admissibility, under the Australian Uniform Evidence Law
ESI generated by the IoT
ESI is an elastic term in the digital age where new and varied devices are
increasingly capacitated to produce and store electronic
data. ESI may be
divided into three categories. First, data resulting from active human input to
an electronic device, for example,
emails, text messages and like messages,
digital scale or speed camera read outs. Second, data resulting from passive
human input
to an electronic device, for example, data on geographic location
collected by carrying a mobile phone, or heartrate and personal
vitals collected
by a wrist-worn fitness monitor. Third, data resulting from operation of
pre-programmed automated devices, which
operate independently of human input,
for example, temperature data gathered by a computerised air conditioner or
refrigerator. An
eObject pre-programmed to gather data in the manner of the
third category may, however, be overridden by active human input. For
persons may change or interrupt programmed settings.
The first category of ESI, which is generated by active human input and
operation of devices, is familiar to courts (and society generally)
category of data produced from the use of technology. The human plays an active
and direct role in producing and transmitting
the data. The technology provides
a conversion and delivery method for the human input, as in the case of sending
an email, or the
technology may perform more readily
discernible,
functions as a result of human command, as in the case of digital scales or
speed cameras. In either example, the ESI
that may be later sourced is data that
was produced by direct and deliberate human operation of the device.
The second and third categories of ESI have the shared characteristic of
being recorded without direct or active human input to generate
the particular
data. ESI gathered by the passive operation of technology is the purview of
eObjects. Assuming a power source, the
eObject is programmed to capture data of
particular types without the need for ongoing or direct human input. The passive
involvement
of the human element in eObjects dramatically expands the
circumstances and environments through which eObjects can capture data.
accounts for their (i) mobility, (ii) volatility and vulnerability, and (iii)
autonomy in ways unique from first and second
These aspects are
elaborated on below.
Mobility is a characteristic of many eObjects. The commercial attraction
of the eObject system often relates to its mobility for the
consumer. Mobility
is assisted by the expansion of wireless networks which allow the eObject to
remain connected, for example, in
outdoor settings or even in flight, which the
need for hard-line internet connections previously excluded from network access.
miniaturisation of eObjects, especially as compared to the computing devices
of the first wave, also enables their portability. The
result is a pervasive
network and portable eObjects that can remain operational and connected without
interruption. Indeed, the primary
reason for the interruption of many eObjects
is the need for them to be recharged, and even this need is diminishing with the
development
of inexpensive portable charging devices. The data amassable from
the uninterrupted recording and connectivity of eObjects, regardless
environment, can increasingly provide a complete data set with respect to the
matters the eObject is designed to capture,
as well as, perhaps, matters that it
was not designed to observe or capture. As technology improves, so too will the
quality of the
data captured, but the importance at present is the capacity of
the eObject to capture a comprehensive and uninterrupted data set,
owing to the
mobility of the device.
Volatility and vulnerability
The observations made in respect of mobility require stable operational
environments both for the eObject and the network to which
it is connected.
Ordinary experience dictates that networks, regardless of size (eg, home or
office) or environment of operation
(eg, indoor or outdoor), may function
haphazardly and, accordingly, so too might the technology of the eObject itself.
lessen as technology advances but, still, the operation of eObjects is
potentially volatile. This volatility is more probable as
a result of mobility.
Mobility more readily permits changes in the circumstances and environment of
the human user, the eObject,
and the IoT environment in which the eObject may be
operating. The consequence is that their operation and captured data may be
to flux and the changes that result may not be traceable or recorded.
This can render the records of eObjects uncertain and raise
evidential questions
regarding the reliability of presented data to accurately demonstrate a state of
affairs at a given time.
The result of this volatility is that it may provide a basis for questioning
the integrity of the data captured through an eObject.
The eObject is, of
course, also potentially vulnerable to direct and intentional interference or
manipulation. Vulnerability and
security concerns are heightened for
eObjects, as they are typically less secure than analogue or immobile devices.
They are more
likely to be lost or stolen, or used by an unauthorised or
unidentified operator in a physical sense (ie physical interference).
also open to remote hacking and interference as a corollary of their network
connectivity.
This direct
potential for interference is the complement to the potential for indirect
interference provided by mere mobility and
raises the same questions,
evidentially, for the integrity of the eObject-produced record.
Autonomy is the capability of eObjects to make decisions and initiate
operation absent direct human operation or instruction to perform
tasks. Autonomy is an increasingly prevalent characteristic of ambient
technologies. The level of autonomy may be regarded
as a continuum from, at the
rudimentary level, the capacity to record and communicate data absent human
instructions to do so, to,
at the advanced level, the operation of the eObject
itself based on programming, stimulus and/or independent data processing and
decision-making.
The autonomous
function of the eObject is governed, macroscopically, by source code. The source
code is a set of instructions which
the eObject effectively communicates to
itself to take actions. The eObject tells various components of itself to take
action based
on the programming or sensory data captured by other parts of its
constituent componentry and code. This gives rise to issues as
to whether the
ESI of eObjects ought to be subject to hearsay or analogous principles in the
same way as human testimony, on account
of the ESI being the testimony of the
eObject, which may be based on other source code level communications of the
eObject. There
are questions as to whether further analogous principles need to
be developed to manage these ‘black box’ dangers, but
this is beyond
the scope of this article.
Technologically, eObjects are an advancement in the mobility of ambient
networked devices capable of producing ESI. Enhanced objects,
themselves, may be
regarded as physical evidence. The eObject itself, however, is rarely the end
but rather the start of an evidential
interrogation. The coding of the eObject
is pertinent to consideration of the ESI it records. For present purposes, we
assume verified
or verifiable source code. Our concerns are the procedural and
evidential responses that should be taken to the uncertainty arising
volatility and vulnerability inherent in the mobilised use of autonomous
eObjects, which are discussed in detail below.
We commence with the procedural
III DISCLOSURE OF IOT-DERIVED ESI IN LITIGATION
The civil procedures of discovery and subpoenas are permitted in civil
litigation because they increase the likelihood that a judgment
or settlement
will be correct and fair by facilitating knowledge of the facts. The ability to
inspect an opponent’s documents
places parties on an equal footing and
avoids ‘trial by
Despite the
compelling arguments for discovery, it also necessitates cost and delay. In
particular, approaches to discovery that
leave ‘no stone left
unturned’ can be oppressive and undermine the justice that discovery was
meant to facilitate.
The ESI generated from an eObject places the above competing views of
discovery in stark relief, because the ESI provides increased
visibility into
the interaction between people and with the physical world they
This added visibility
can provide data, and as discussed below, evidence, that can be crucial to
accurate fact-finding and justice.
However, the volume of ESI can also
substantially increase the cost and burden of
This section of the article examines the application of the procedures for
discovery, and to a lesser extent subpoenas, to the ESI
generated by eObjects
that form part of the IoT. The third wave of computing generates substantial
challenges for civil procedure,
but those challenges are not as great as they
might have been. This is because courts have previously had to grapple with the
wave of computing, or Web 2.0, when the internet went from providing
static pages to providing two-way communication, most notably
through social
The main focus of the
analysis will be the rules and procedure of the Federal Court of Australia.
ESI and Documents
The threshold question is whether ESI generated by eObjects is discoverable
and, if so, what regimes or rules apply. Australian court
rules dealing with
discovery have typically focused on ‘documents’. While historically
the documents in issue were paper-based,
the court rules have moved with the
times and ESI will meet the definition of a
In the Federal Court
of Australia, ‘document’ is defined in the Dictionary in Schedule 1
of the court rules as including:
(a) any record of information mentioned in the definition of document in Pt 1
of the Dictionary to the
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth); and (b) any other
material, data or information stored or recorded by mechanical or electronic
Evidence Act
definition is discussed below in relation to the UEL.
However, data stored or recorded by electronic means would capture ESI created
by an eObject.
ESI Relevant to Issues in the Proceedings
While ESI is subject to discovery, the more specific question is when ESI
from an eObject may be sufficiently relevant to an issue
in proceedings that an
order for discovery would be
Many courts have refined
the general approach of requiring relevance by imposing stricter standards so
that litigation is conducted
in a manner that reduces cost and
In the Federal Court,
‘standard’ discovery may be obtained for documents that are
‘directly relevant to the issues
raised by the pleadings or in the
affidavits’.
requirement is discussed further below. Similarly, ESI may be the subject of a
subpoena provided the data being sought is both
relevant to the proceedings and
sufficiently described.
So how might IoT data be used in litigation so that it might be subject to
discovery, or a subpoena? Data from personal devices, cars
and homes could be
used to determine the location of a person. Most modern cars are equipped with a
‘global positioning system’
(‘GPS’). Cell towers record
the time that a mobile phone user passes
The thermostat in a house
can record the presence of a person in specific rooms in their home, thus
creating a record of occupancy.
The radio-frequency identification (‘RFID’) tags on inventory,
assets and even employees’ identification badges
can be tracked to
determine location.
Vehicle data could also be used to determine if an accident was due to a
mechanical fault, driver error or fatigue. Data from residential
and commercial
buildings may be used to detect whether windows and doors were locked or opened
at a particular time so as to assist
in insurance claims. Data from an
internet-connected refrigerator might provide evidence about the condition of a
comestible suspected
of causing food
Similarly, in
logistics, monitoring of shipping conditions could detect if items such as food
become too hot or too cold at any
The IoT could allow for a home monitoring system for elderly care which
combines monitoring of medication and a patient’s vital
signs with an
ability to communicate so as to order more medication when needed or, alert
doctors or family members to a health
If that medication were
subsequently found to have side-effects, depending on the dosage, the IoT data
would provide proof not only
of consumption of the medication but of the dose
administered. While old prescriptions or over-the-counter purchase receipts are
discarded, the data proving consumption could still exist.
The IoT can also be used by utilities. The ‘smart grid’ for
electricity involves each device on the network being given
sensors to gather
data (power meters, voltage sensors, fault detectors, etc) and being equipped
with two-way digital communication
between the device in the field and the
utility’s network operations
In the Kilmore East
Bushfire class action in the Supreme Court of Victoria, one of the main
allegations concerned the cause of a
IoT data may record
events causing powerline fatigue and the actions taken by the utility to address
powerline failure, which could
assist in determining causation.
Similarly, a water network can use devices to ensure the quality of drinking
water. Between 1 July and 30 September 1998, increased
levels of the parasites
Cryptosporidium and Giardia were detected in Sydney’s water supply. As a
result, Sydney Water Corporation
issued a series of ‘boil water
The so-called
Sydney Water Crisis of 1998 led to a government inquiry and two class actions.
IoT data, in addition to generating
real-time measures of water quality to allow
for corrective action, may be available to prove the existence of
contaminants.
Lastly, the data from wearables such as a Fitbit could provide important
information about a person’s wellbeing before or after
a personal injury.
A law firm in Canada sought to use a client’s Fitbit history in a personal
injury claim. The client was
a personal trainer who wanted to show that her
activity levels had fallen below baseline for someone of her age and profession,
thus, she was entitled to
compensation.
In a criminal
context, Fitbit data has been used against a person as a basis for establishing
perjury. The person claimed that they
had been sleeping when they were sexually
assaulted. However, the Fitbit data showed that the person ‘had been awake
and walking
around the entire night, not sleeping as she had
In the Federal
Circuit Court of Australia, in a matter dealing with parenting arrangements the
ESI from a Fitbit worn by a child
was unsuccessfully relied upon to demonstrate
that the child’s sleep problems were linked to contact with the
The above examples demonstrate the numerous and wide-ranging situations in
which ESI from eObjects may be relevant to a civil dispute.
necessitates consideration of who or what to approach in order to obtain that
Control of IoT Data
Obtaining IoT data for litigation requires consideration of the appropriate
person or entity from whom to request the data generated
by an eObject. This
raises in turn issues about ownership of the data and who has access to it. In
the Federal Court, standard discovery
refers to documents ‘that are, or
have been, in the party’s control’.
is defined in the
Dictionary to the rules to mean, in relation to a document, ‘possession,
custody or power’.
typically refers to ownership,
to the physical holding of the document (even if there is no
ownership) and
to an enforceable right to obtain
possession.
ESI from an eObject may be within the control of a number of entities. The
user of the device, the manufacturer of the device, the
retailer/provider of the
device, the entity that operates the network, the entity that collects and
manages the data produced by
the device, or some combination of these may all
exercise control. The entities that hold the data, if they become parties to
litigation,
may be required to provide discovery. Even if not a party, they may
be required to produce the ESI through the use of a subpoena.
However, a person
to whom a subpoena is directed is not required to seek out documents not in the
person’s own possession and
power in order to produce them to the
The extent of the obligation imposed in relation to a discovery order and the
accessibility of ESI is illustrated by a Victorian decision,
Hanks v Johnston
which dealt with the
discovery in a defamation claim of text messages that were thought to have been
lost when an Apple iPhone was
replaced. Although not addressing IoT as such,
Dixon J was satisfied that any iCloud backup of text messages that could be
employing particular computer software was within the
‘power’ of the plaintiff in the relevant sense. Importantly, for
plaintiff to access the backup data in his iCloud, all that was needed was his
user ID and password and the relevant software.
Permission or assistance from
Apple were not needed in order to gain
Similarly, ESI from an
eObject that a party can access, even if in the cloud, will be discoverable.
In any particular case it will be a matter of fact as to whether a party to
the litigation has the power, or not, to access ESI generated
eObjects. For some eObjects, such as a Fitbit, the owner will be able to
download data, as access to the data is part
of the functionality that the user
requires. However, for ESI from eObjects where access to the data may not be
needed, such as the
temperatures recorded by a thermostat in determining whether
to heat or cool a room, it may not be in the possession, custody or
power of the
However, even where a party or third party has the requisite control over the
ESI, for discovery or a subpoena to be effective the
data must be maintained and
accessible. An entity may routinely destroy ESI as part of its usual business
operations. As a result,
a number of further crucial questions arise: what ESI
is tracked or stored, and for how long is the data retained? As explained above,
some eObjects record on a continuous basis and amass large volumes of data, but
as a result that data may not be stored for very
In others, the data may
exist but its preservation may be complicated by issues of cost, burden and
contractual obligations.
Hanks v Johnston (No 3),
the ability to access ESI depended on it
having been retained by Apple in the iCloud, which in turn, depended on both
contractual
obligations and the operation of the device. Dixon J observed that
there is uncertainty about the timing of iCloud backups. Automatic iCloud
backups occur periodically when the device is screen-locked,
connected to a
power source and connected to the Internet via a WiFi network. The terms of use
state that the last three backups
will be stored in the iCloud but space is
limited and backup will be subject to other use of the available
Access to ESI created by an eObject may also turn on being able to access the
eObject. If the ESI has not been transmitted via the
internet to a storage
device, such as a server, then the data may have to be downloaded from the
eObject. For example, in a US personal
injury action by a car driver against the
manufacturer of the tyres used on the car, the defendant sought access to the
Airbag Control
Module (‘ACM’). The ACM may have recorded relevant
information such as vehicle speed, the driver’s braking, and
whether the
seatbelt was being worn. Usually the data in the ACM is only accessed
periodically by a mechanic when the airbag is subject
to some form of
maintenance. Consequently, the ACM held the relevant data, as it had not been
downloaded at the time of the accident.
However, the ACM along with the vehicle
were not retained by the plaintiff as they were delivered to a salvage yard
which destroyed
them. In response, the defendant sought an adverse inference
instruction be given to the
In this case the judge
accepted that the crash investigators would have known that the ACM might have
contained important information.
However, the concern with both eObjects and the
ESI that they generate is that a party may not appreciate that they have
‘documents’ that are subject to discovery obligations.
In Australia the intentional destruction of documents may result in various
sanctions, including dismissal of proceedings, the striking
out of a defence or
adverse inferences being drawn.
However, here the greater concern is with the inadvertent destruction of
documents due to a lack of comprehension as to what and
how ESI is created by an
eObject. In such a situation a party might unwittingly fail to comply with the
court orders made in relation
to discovery. This would result in the party being
in default of a court order, which would then allow further orders such as an
award of costs, dismissal of proceedings and the entry of
There is no
requirement of ‘intentional default or contumelious conduct’ for an
order to be made, although the circumstances
of the default will be important in
the Court’s weighing of the proper exercise of the discretion conferred by
Contempt orders would
also be available, although they are unlikely to be readily made for an
inadvertent contravention.
Nonetheless, the growth in the existence of ESI from the IoT will impact on a
party’s preservation obligations.
Finding the ESI Needle in the IoT
As explained in the introduction, IoT will account for about 10 percent of
the data on Earth by 2020. Although courts have sought
to limit discovery
through altering court rules and actively crafting discovery orders as part of
case management, there will clearly
be situations where the growth in ESI
impacts the discovery process.
ESI may be relevant to issues in dispute as argued above, but the volume of data
may make finding the relevant data costly and onerous.
In particular, the nature
of the ESI generated by eObjects as part of the IoT is that a massive amount of
data is generated but only
a small amount of that data may be relevant to the
particular dispute.
The issue may be illustrated by two examples. A six-hour flight on a Boeing
737 from New York to Los Angeles generates 120 terabytes
of data that is stored
on the plane.
Depending on the
nature of the dispute only some of the eObjects on the plane and only some of
the data recorded may be relevant.
Another example is that in 2013 the average
household with two teenage children owned 10 internet connected devices, but by
it is estimated the same household will own roughly 50 internet-connected
Those devices are
eObjects and depending on the dispute may have generated valuable information,
but it will be necessary to determine
which devices and which data are relevant,
and where the date is stored.
The parties and the courts need to ‘navigate a path between providing
discovery so as to assist efficient resolution of disputes
on the merits, and
avoiding discovery abuse that harms parties and other court users’ with
increased costs and delay.
tools for navigating that path are a combination of court rules, practice notes,
active case management, lawyer competence and
technology solutions.
Standard discovery in the
Federal Court Rules
seeks to keep a tight rein on
the documents subject to discovery through the combination of direct relevance,
reasonable search and
Further, the rules
allow for ‘non-standard and more extensive
However, all discovery
is subject to court control. The increase in ESI generated by the second wave of
computing and social media
was addressed by the courts via a focus on relevance,
necessity and proportionality.
The last of these factors may be particularly important in an IoT world.
Proportionality is reflected in Federal Court practice
10.7 A Request must be proportionate to the nature, size and complexity of
the case – ie, the Request should not amount to an
unreasonable economic
or administrative burden on the Discovery Respondent.
10.8 If the Court approves a Request, a Discovery Respondent's search for and
production of documents pursuant to a Request must be:
made in good faith,
uninfluenced by any negative impact on the Discovery Respondent (other than
legitimate considerations such as
genuine legal professional privilege or
commercial confidentiality), and should be comprehensive, but
proportionate.
A court is required to balance the time, cost and burden of providing
discovery of the relevant ESI against the possibility that relevant
information
will be found.
Both defendants
and plaintiffs should be encouraged to use proportionality arguments offensively
and defensively to control the cost,
delay, and burden of overbroad discovery
The unrestrained
collection and production of IoT data could be ‘costly, wasteful, and much
of the data could be of little
However, for the
court and the parties to perform their roles it is essential that they
understand the underlying technology and
what is involved in accessing the
relevant ESI.
An important part of the above equation is knowledge of the available
technology solutions for accessing and retrieving the relevant
data from the
eObject or the data storage locations to which the ESI was transmitted. Past
experience with technology creating large
volumes of data to search, such as
with the proliferation of email, was that technology also provided solutions
such as technology
assisted review (‘TAR’), which uses supervised
machine learning to rapidly review large volumes of data. TAR reviews
documents that are in electronic form by identifying patterns in the data. The
program is provided with a set of documents
referred to as a ‘seed
set’ that has been reviewed by a human (lawyer) and labelled as
‘relevant, not relevant,
privileged, or not
privileged’.
Using this information, the program codes the documents that may be
discoverable. The lawyer reviews a sample of these documents
and identifies any
errors which are then fed back to the program. This process continues until the
program is sufficiently accurate.
From the lawyer’s seed set and
corrections, the software creates ‘a predictive model, a kind of
of the different
classifications of other documents
Ultimately, the
program generates a probability that a particular item is relevant or not
relevant. TAR has been found to be more
accurate than human review, as well as
quicker and cheaper.
Where the ESI from the IoT is text, then TAR may be able to be employed.
However, for many eObjects the ESI may not be words or phrases
language, but rather numerous measurements of physical characteristics such as
temperature, speed or location –
in short, numbers. As pointed out above,
the function of some eObjects will necessitate easy user access to their ESI.
Even commercial
uses, such as the Onboard Network System on the Boeing 737 are
designed to facilitate ease of access, with the collected ESI being
available to flight, cabin and maintenance teams for both onboard functions and
offboard analytics.
other eObjects like embedded sensors detect changes in environmental factors
with a view to facilitating some action, such
as turning lights or heating on or
off, but the ESI is not readily accessible by the user. In such a situation
resort may need to
be made to an expert in IoT forensics.
The IoT creates a number of challenges for traditional digital forensics due
to the heterogeneous infrastructure of the IoT. Enhanced
objects employ diverse
proprietary formats. There is limited visibility and a short survival period for
the ESI unless it is transferred
to some form of data storage. ESI in the IoT
environment is spread across multiple platforms including device, communications
and in the cloud. There is uncertainty as to what, where and how ESI is
As a result, research
has been undertaken to develop digital forensics techniques, models and
methodologies for use in the IoT
context. As ESI can reside in multiple
locations or architecture layers, different areas of digital forensics’
expertise and
tools, such as for smart phones, servers or the cloud, may need to
be employed.
The court, the parties and the lawyers will need to weigh what is technically
possible and at what cost, with the expected significance
of the ESI to the
dispute so as to ensure discovery is ‘comprehensive, but
proportionate’.
Lawyer Competence
A majority of US States have introduced a requirement that lawyers be
technologically competent, following a change to the American
Association’s Model Rule 1.1 in 2012. The Comment to the rule specifies
that ‘a lawyer should keep abreast of changes
in the law and its practice,
including the benefits and risks associated with relevant
technology’.
express requirement currently exists in any Australian jurisdiction. However,
the Uniform Solicitors Rules provide that lawyers
should ‘deliver legal
services competently, diligently and as promptly as reasonably
For a lawyer
dealing with discovery that involves ESI generated by an eObject, competence
with technology is necessary to be able
to comply with court rules, practice
notes and orders. The need for lawyers to have technology competence is
illustrated by the Federal
Court practice note which states:
10.10 Where a Request has been approved by the Court, a Discovery Respondent
must, if requested to do so by a Discovery Applicant,
provide a brief
description of the steps taken by the Discovery Respondent to conduct a good
faith proportionate search to locate
discoverable documents, such as what
records have been searched for, what search criteria or terms have been used, or
what databases
have been searched.
10.11 Where a Discovery Respondent asserts that documents are unavailable or
burdensome to access and discover, the Discovery Respondent
must clarify to the
Discovery Applicant (unless there is demonstrably no need to do so), how the
Discovery Respondent manages, stores,
accesses, destroys and disposes of
documents. The Court may require a Discovery Respondent to depose to such
information.
The Discovery Respondent will require the assistance of their lawyer to be
able to describe how the search to locate documents was
undertaken in a good
faith and proportionate manner. Further, legal assistance will be part of
explaining how documents are managed,
stored, accessed and destroyed, especially
as the explanation may need to be given to the court.
However, the level of competence required is more difficult to specify in the
abstract given the diverse nature of eObjects and the
ESI they generate. The
lawyer must have a basic understanding of how the underlying technology works,
what ESI is created and where
the ESI may be stored. In addition, the lawyer
must comprehend any technology solution such as TAR or IoT forensics to be able
defend what was, or was not found, during the discovery process. However, the
lawyer does not need to have the competence of an expert
in the area of the IoT
or its constituent parts.
Users of social media who found themselves in litigation were surprised to
find that their social media posts or tweets that were
relevant to the
litigation had to be disclosed and were not able to remain private. Similarly,
ESI from an eObject can be required
to be disclosed regardless of privacy.
Access to private records for litigation recognises the particular position of
courts as an
arm of the state charged with resolving disputes by reference to
evidence to arrive at correct results. For example, in
Lowery v Insurance
Australia Ltd
, Basten JA stated that ‘the ultimate justification for
compulsory production and disclosure of information which might otherwise
confidential, is the legitimate furtherance of judicial
proceedings’.
Yet the courts do have powers and procedures for limiting the disclosure of
private information. Where documents or information are
required to be disclosed
as part of court proceedings, the party obtaining the material cannot, without
leave of the court, use it
for any purpose other than the litigation, at least
until the material is admitted into
Courts are also able
to assess the need for privacy or confidentiality by weighing it against open
justice, and if the former prevails,
making orders to prevent the publication or
disclosure of information.
diverse nature of eObjects and the data they collect mandates that careful
attention be given to whether private or confidential
information may exist in
the ESI and requires protection beyond that provided by the ‘implied
undertaking’.
IoT-derived ESI has been shown to be potentially subject to the court’s
discovery and subpoena powers as part of the pre-trial
steps in civil
litigation. The article now turns to examine that ESI in the context of
evidence for trial.
IV IOT-DERIVED ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE UNDER THE UNIFORM
LAW: HEARSAY
Documentary form
As earlier indicated, we approach our analysis on the premise that the
electronic evidence derived from the IoT is to be furnished
to the court in
documentary form. This premise is not critical to the points we make regarding
issues of hearsay and authentication.
That is, our points hold if the relevant
evidence is to be adduced in electronic form. We take the premise of documentary
form because
it is the typical form in which electronic evidence is presented
and because it allows our critique of the UEL provisions to be housed
the familiar framework of documentary evidence.
The UEL defines a ‘document’
as ‘any record of
information’
and inclusively provides for ‘anything on
which there is writing’,
‘anything on which there are
marks, figures, symbols or perforations having a meaning for persons qualified
to interpret them’
‘anything from which sounds,
images or writings can be reproduced with or without the aid of anything
This definition, no
doubt, includes ESI.
The contents of a document, including an electronic record or data, may be
admitted into evidence through the tender of that document
or one of a number of
alternative means specified in s 48 of the UEL, including tendering a copy of
the evidence or:
if the document in question is an article or thing on or in which information
is stored in such a way that it cannot be used by the
court unless a device is
used to retrieve, produce or collate it—tendering a document that was or
purports to have been produced
by use of the
held that closed circuit television footage is clearly a document capable of
reproduction using an appropriate device to reproduce
By analogy, data may be
converted by a device with the appropriate software into a comprehensible format
and therefore may be admitted
through s 48(1)(d) of the UEL. The data extraction
and transformation process may need to be supported by the expert testimony of
the forensic computer technician who performed the work. The Australian Law
Reform Commission explained that the purpose behind this
provision is to enable
admission of secondary evidence of the contents of modern information storage
media and, in particular, data
and electronic information in a comprehensible
form, such as through a printout or via the display of the information using
A party wishing to adduce evidence of the contents of a computer record may
do so by way of a hard copy document, including by tendering
the printout of
some electronic file where
appropriate.
The abolition of
the ‘best evidence rule’ conveniently allows electronic evidence to
be tendered absent debate over originality,
as the concept of and distinction
between ‘copy’ and ‘original’ is not a straightforward
The simplicity and
feasibility of doing so depends on the nature of the data or electronic record
to be adduced; a digital photograph
can be easily printed or displayed in a
graphic form, whereas some gathered data, such as the geolocation data from a
fitness tracker,
may not so easily be reproduced without active data processing
and presentation.
Previous representation made by a person
Relevant documentary evidence without an original use is hearsay. Documents
are traditionally scribed by a person and vulnerable to
inaccuracy.
Acknowledging the raft of exceptions that are tantamount to hearsay being a rule
of re-inclusion, the UEL hearsay rule
purports to prevent unreliable evidence of
intended previous representations by precluding the admission of representations
cannot be challenged for
Section 59 acknowledges
the fallibility of representations made by people, whether that be a result of a
self-held or pressured motive
to record untruths, poor recollection, or an
inability to recall with precision. Traditional documentary evidence may contain
representations
of fact adduced to prove the truth of those facts. The
introduction of autonomous data-generating technology, such as that integrated
into eObjects, has introduced a new species of documentary evidence that is,
arguably, not subject to the perils of paper documents
prepared by
IoT-derived evidence is not directly generated by a person. It is produced as
a result of encoding written by a human, but assuming
the verifiable and proper
function of that code, the IoT evidence objectively records in accordance with
the code. It is unaffected,
at the point of its ambient recording, by human
error, bias or motivations; again, other than those deliberately or unwittingly
part of the program as a result of the originating source code of the
Some familiar territory
that cross examination would demand be traversed in respect of such statements,
hence the application of
the hearsay rule, need not be trodden in the case of
ESI produced from the proper function of an eObject. Concerns about
recollection,
dishonesty, deceitfulness and fabrication, interpretation of
information, understanding of events or observations, bias or prejudice,
lost in transmission and the dangers of inaccuracy in
are averted in the
absence of human involvement in the generation of the electronic evidence
distilled as a document.
This evaluation rests on the rationale of the hearsay rule restricting it to
representations made by persons. Section 59(1) of the
UEL provides:
(1) Evidence of a previous representation made by a person is not
admissible to prove the existence of a fact that it can reasonably
be supposed
that the person intended to assert by the representation.
The electronic evidence derived from IoT that is adduced to prove facts
asserted by its representations may be regarded as exempt
from the hearsay rule
depending on the scope of ‘made’ for the purposes of s 59.
The compilation of ESI that is wholly generated by the operation of an
eObject can be regarded as outside hearsay and need not be
subject to any
exceptional admission
requirement.
To what extent can
second and third category generations of electronic evidence, as we have
outlined those categories, be regarded
as not ‘made’ by a
Passively-generated representations
Second and third category eObjects record data, which would constitute
previous representations for the purpose of s 59 if later reduced
to tangible
output in the form of documentary evidence, without direct command or
instruction from a person for that data to be recorded.
Second category eObjects require a direct computer-human interaction.
Examples of these eObjects include a car that gathers, records
and transmits
data about automotive performance and geolocation, or an electric toothbrush
that tracks and transmits data on battery
life and usage. These devices record
data (representations) as a result of their operation by a person. Those
representations are
not however, commanded, instructed or the result of the
person directing the eObject to produce a particular record. The data is
causally created by human operation of the eObject but the causative effect is
with respect to the eObject operating – the
human does not cause any
particular data to be recorded. The recording of the data is a consequence of
the operation of the eObject.
The content of the data recorded is caused by the
source code of the eObject, which operates by derivative rather than direct
of the usage of the eObject by a person. To illustrate using a
non-technological example: Person A sets fire to a house in the view
B. Person B shouts “fire, fire!”. A feat of Romanian gymnastics is
required with the meaning of causation to
allow a conclusion that A has made B
make the representation of “fire, fire!” The representation of B
derived from what
A did, but the representation was made by B, it was not made
by A. Absent a direct input from a person to produce a particular data
that the technology may be regarded as a mere medium (ie the sending of texts or
emails) it is difficult to conclude that
that data is made by a person.
It might be argued that the operation of second category eObjects results in
the person indirectly making the representations recorded
as data. This would
capture the recording of data by eObjects where that data was recorded as a
derivative result of the operation
of the eObject by a person. That approach
would require the meaning of ‘made’ in s 59(1) to include
representations directly
or indirectly made by a person. Where direct or
indirect inference or cause is pertinent to the test, the UEL provides for that
‘direct or indirect’ to be expressly stated (see, eg, s
55). In the absence of such language, indirect causation can
be regarded as
outside the scope of ‘made’ for the purposes of s 59(1). This
position against indirect scope of the provision
is supported by the restriction
of the hearsay prohibition to intentional, as opposed to unintentional,
assertions.
Third category eObjects are more readily detached from human input. These
eObjects, as we have defined, record data according to programming
that is built
into the autonomous function of the device. Provided there is power to the
device and it is ‘on’, the device
records data regarding ambient
conditions irrespective of any human input, indeed, for as long as the power is
connected. Persons
may affect the recording of a third category eObject. For
example, leaving the windows open or closed will affect air control temperature
readings on air conditioners, as will the number of foodstuffs placed in a
refrigerator. These human activities, however, could not
be regarded as
sufficiently proximate to the data recorded by the eObject such that they
‘make’ the representations.
It appears that the greater the automation of the technological (eObject)
device, and the more passive the human input, the more irrefutable
the data recorded will not be subject to hearsay restriction, to the extent that
the data provides relevant
representations.
inapplicability of a fundamental evidential safeguard against unreliable
evidence, the hearsay rule, to a burgeoning source of
evidence, namely third
wave technology, should be of concern. The bases of those concerns may be
centred around the difficulties
inherent in authentication of IoT-derived
electronic evidence.
An example introduces the problem. Revert to the exemption of third category
eObjects from the hearsay rule as recording representations
not made by persons.
That presumes persons were passive with respect to the source data from which
the eObject records. As observed
in describing the three categories, the third
category (just as the second) may be overridden by direct human input. Taking
to deliberately increase the temperature of a room or appliance will, of
course, alter the data autonomously recorded by the sensory
capacities of the
eObject. In that case, the present answer on the hearsay prohibition may be
turned around: the data recorded by
the eObject reflects representations that
may be attributed to a person and regarded as being made by them. If Person A
fire and then threatens to harm Person B unless Person B yells,
“fire, fire!” it can far more readily be concluded that
representation was made by Person A, at least causatively. Similarly, if a room
is heated or cooled, the person doing that may
be regarded as making the
representations of high or low temperatures the eObject in the air conditioner
records. The point is that
in these examples, as a matter of principle, the
hearsay rule has work to do because the ambivalence of technology which grounds
our exclusion of its data from the rationale of hearsay, is replaced with an
appreciation that the eObject, like Person B, has been
the vehicle for the
making of representations of another person. The response to all this may be, of
course, that it is a matter
of evidence in each case as to whether admissibility
rules will apply. The retort to that tautologous criticism is how will we know
or detect if the autonomously operating eObject has been altered or manipulated?
V IOT-DERIVED ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE UNDER THE UNIFORM
LAW: AUTHENTICATION
The Humanity of Authentication
The authentication of evidence traditionally introduces two critical aspects
of evidence to the court: its identity and its provenance.
Doctrinally,
authentication requires that a party adducing evidence prove that the evidence
is what the party claims it to be, by
identifying what it is, its authorship,
its provenance, the chain of custody or possession and, in the case of
electronic evidence,
the proper functioning of the device that generated the
evidence. In the case of documentary evidence, authentication is typically
the testimonial evidence of the author of or someone with personal knowledge
How is ESI produced from an eObject within the IoT authenticated? The
inclination would be to treat IoT-derived evidence like any
other electronic
evidence. It looks the same as other pre-third wave evidence when presented to
court – it is being adduced
as a document. The provenance may also be
neatly explained as a print out from the relevant device, for example, a FitBit
But, if IoT-derived electronic evidence has been changed, deliberately
or accidentally as discussed earlier, its very authenticity
is called into
question in a manner that may not be addressed, in like fashion to situations
where manipulation concerns involve
non-electronic-derived or first category
electronic-derived forms of real evidence. The critical difference is the
absence of human
input in the ordinary functioning of the device.
The absence of human input denies the traditional, ubiquitous means by which
courts sought to establish the authenticity of evidence
and give confidence and
credence to their decisions regarding real evidence – namely, human
testimony. In 1999, Bryson J enumerated
the traditional bases on which the
authenticity of evidence was established, all of which relied on human input.
His Honour said:
...the authenticity of a document may be proved by the evidence of the person
who made it or one of the persons who made it, or a
person who was present when
it was made, or in the case of a business record, a person who participates in
the conduct of the business
and compiled the document, or found it among the
business's records, or can recognise it as one of the records of the
Bryson J laid emphasis to the essentiality of human input into the
determination of authentication. He said:
The Court acts almost always on narrations which must have a human
origin...For the Court to feel confident that it should act on
any narration it
is very important to have a human witness who has pledged, by oath or
affirmation, that the narration is true: someone
who is responsible for
In the context of electronic evidence, this requires the party to prove that
the evidence is what it purports to be, requiring that
its identity, manner of
generation, origin, provenance and handling history are proved. In relation to
traditional, first category
computer-generated evidence, denoted by active human
input, this required that the proper or ordinary function of the computer or
device, at the time the evidence was generated, be
Authentication could,
in most cases, be achieved through the admission of an affidavit by a person
who, at the time when the evidence
was generated or afterward, had
responsibility for the creation or keeping of the
On this, the 20
anniversary of these remarks, the courts are
faced with a dramatically increased, and increasing, amount of electronic
The third wave challenge of electronic evidence is the removal of
human input from the operation of the technology capturing the
evidence. Previous technology produced outputs which, whilst calculated and
compiled by machine, did so at points in time
which were set and commanded by
human input. This provided for a human connectivity to the chronology of the
generation of electronic
evidence. Autonomous recording, storage and transfer
removes human direction or oversight of the data. Accessing IoT-derived
evidence is a distillation of intangible evidence, the recording of
which may not have been commanded or visited by a human being
until the point of
download. Autonomous computing relocates the human element to a retrospective
point of access, where previous
waves of computing required point of capture by
human input.
The absence of human input removes the IoT-derived evidence from the purview
of the hearsay rule because the automation of recording
eliminates the potential
human foibles and infractions against which hearsay guards. The paradox is that
this pathway to admissible
use relies on the very divorce of the IoT from human
input, monitoring or awareness that derogates from the capacity of the
human-centric
trial to authenticate IoT-derived electronic evidence. This
derogation is likely to become more significant as future waves of autonomous
technology decreasingly rely on human input; whilst humans increasingly rely on
these technologies.
The automatic paradox in litigation is consistent with, and an extension of
the general, or workforce, automation
The workforce paradox
finds the need for human labour contributions increases as automation of
workforce tasks increases; even if
the human contributions required are
different in type from previous labour tasks, which have been tasked to
technology. The paradox
is that the increase in automated tasking does not
decrease the need for human tasking. This is consistent with the automation
in litigation which depends on human input to authenticate outputs of
autonomous technology. The workforce paradox sees the increasing
need for human
input to perform tasks derivative from increased automation. The litigation
paradox shares the same quality of requiring
human input when the autonomous
operation of the technology should seemingly suggest the capitulation of human
involvement.
The unique problems in authenticating IoT-derived evidence may be illustrated
by comparison to authenticating traditional forms of
real evidence. Take, for
the knife produced by
the Crown on a violence charge where it is said to be the relevant weapon. If
the knife is shown to have been
collected from the scene, there is a prima
basis for its authentication. If counter arguments suggest the
knife has not been kept according to chain of custody rules, has been
or has otherwise been the subject of tampering, the court may exclude the knife
from evidence altogether as not being the
evidence it purports to be (which may
result in the
nolle prosequi
of the prosecution case). It is more likely
that this contest will be left to the course of trial and affect the weight to
be accorded
the knife as a piece of evidence. We note that the point at which
authentication arises for consideration is unsettled. One line
of authority
suggests it is a pre-condition to admissibility, another line of authority
indicates it is a matter for the tribunal
of fact going to the weight of the
evidence. We discuss this below. Presently, the point is that, regardless of the
line of authority
followed, the authentication of the knife is an argument that
is within the structure of the UEL and the tenets of the adversarial
resolve because its provenance is almost certainly a contest of human testimony.
Take, for further example, the document in a civil dispute that the plaintiff
claims to be genuine and the defendant claims to be
forged. Support for their
respective arguments may involve allegations that certain machines were used to
produce a signature; they
may rely on expert evidence regarding technological
processes that could have imitated a signature. The reliance on technology in
these supposed contentions still locates the use of technology as an extension
of direct human input. Whether technological devices
were used to produce the
signature, just as in cases where the claim is forged handwriting, the evidence
regarding the contentions
is dependent on human input and direct human
involvement.
In the case of second and third category eObjects forming the IoT, the human
input is absent. The ESI is reduced to a tangible form
at a later point in time
than its capture. The human who downloaded and produced (printed) the data may
be able to speak to that
process, but for IoT-derived evidence the point of
capture, storage and network transfers have all occurred without human command,
or even awareness. In the inverse situation, where deliberate manipulation is
involved, the autonomous eObject is not able to produce
a record or metadata
that would indicate any particular interference.
The circumstances in which electronic evidence derived from eObjects may be
susceptible to undetected and even undetectable (depending
self-diagnostic programs and capacity of the eObject) alteration are increased
from earlier, immobile technology. The mobility
of eObjects, and the
consequential volatility and vulnerability that result, provides a myriad of
circumstances in which their initial
or transferred capture of data could be
changed. We outline a non-exhaustive list.
First, electronic evidence is liable to be unalterably and untraceably
manipulated, intercepted and/or modified. This is especially
for eObjects which
by virtue of their mobility frequently transmit over networks that may be
private or public with different security
protocols in place. Security concerns
may be divided into two deliberate forms: those relating to human or automated
cyber-attack
on the IoT, and those relating to physical (real-world)
intervention with a data storage medium. In the latter case, signs of
interference
may be more readily detectable but the effect of that interference
on intangible electronic data may remain inscrutable.
Secondly, electronic evidence from eObjects may be similarly altered by
inadvertent or accidental actions. For example, placing cold
or hot objects,
insulation or conducting materials around eObjects taking temperature readings
may manipulate the data in unintended
ways. Whilst these extrinsic matters could
themselves be the subject of evidence, akin to whether an eyewitness is wearing
spectacles, in the case of electronic evidence the occurrence or
otherwise of the extrinsic matters affects the output electronic
evidence such
that uncertainty arises with respect to whether it is what it purports to be.
The same is not true of tangible forms
of evidence that human sensory capacity
(sight, for most evidence) can adjudge as at least meeting the threshold
provenance requirement
of authentication.
Thirdly, electronic evidence may mislead or misrepresent on account of
ineffectual or intermittent use by humans. For example, a motion
sensor may be
incorrectly orientated towards a nearby wall or closed area rather than toward
an open area that it ostensibly monitors,
resulting in data that may
misrepresent activity in the open space. Similarly, a wearable fitness tracker
may be worn at some times
and not others, or may be worn by several persons at
various times. Absent testimony, these differentiations may be inscrutable and,
in such a case, the authenticity of the electronic evidence is linked to human
testimony in such a way that there is no independent
basis for the electronic
evidence to assert its own provenance. This is contrary to the general approach
to machine generated evidence
as being what it purports to be.
Finally, eObject-derived electronic evidence must be stored and extracted,
and may need to be processed, in order to be presented
in a comprehensible form
as evidence. The integrity of each of these processes is vital to ensuring the
tangible form purports the
intangible form, and each process is susceptible.
ESI is unique, in the sense that the intangible data, being information
itself, is evidence, as opposed to some tangible storage medium
containing the
information. The authenticity of the digital media must be examined by reference
to the information itself. It has
been suggested that the identity of the
information (that is, what it purports to be) and its constancy (that is, that
been altered or modified without a precise record of that alteration
or modification) are the key characteristics of authenticity
and the notions of
‘immutability’ or ‘integrity’ encompassed by
authentication.
The integrity of
electronic evidence depends largely on the authorship and authenticity of the
enabling technology. This traditionally
depended on the proper operation of the
device that created the ESI, and required that the electronic record had been
extracted and
handled without altering or omitting any
information.
The authenticity of
the evidence, in particular, is determined by whether the ESI has been altered
or modified since its creation
(and whether any such modification has been
recorded precisely).
Electronic evidence must be what it purports to be. No matter where this task
is assigned in the trial process, discussed below, it
is made difficult on
account of electronic evidence being a reduction of the intangible to the
tangible. This reduction has been
problematic for all generations of
technology-derived evidence, including the traditional non-autonomous
technologies dependent on
human input. Determining the origin, provenance and
vulnerability to contamination of data generated and transmitted by IoT linked
eObjects is especially challenging, given the absence of human input, and so
therefore are the resulting lacunae that can arise in
testimony of commands,
chronology and visual confirmation regarding data.
Traditional authentication
It has been suggested that the court will use two criteria to measure the
weight of electronic evidence. One, probative value, which
takes heed of the
authorship, authenticity, correct operation of a device and reliability of the
evidence (and the device that generated
it). Two, whether the evidence has been
properly extracted and handled (and if necessary, transformed into
comprehensible format).
authenticity of electronic evidence may be disputed through challenging the
provenance and historic handling of the ESI. Challenges
focus on exposing
uncertainties over how the electronic evidence came into existence and its
treatment since then, including any
transformations, alterations or
adulterations. Examples include: scrutiny over the identity of the operator of
the relevant device;
scrutiny over the reliability of the relevant computer
software; a claim that the ESI was altered, manipulated or damaged between
creation of the ESI and the commencement of proceedings; or a claim that the ESI
was altered, manipulated or damaged when it
was extracted for the purpose of the
proceedings.
We have outlined the significance of the authentication problem for
IoT-derived electronic evidence compared with traditional approaches
authentication of tangible and human input-derived computer evidence. We
explained the particular authentication points for ESI
derived from eObjects in
consequence of outlining how the mobility of many eObjects promotes
authentication issues arising from their
volatility and vulnerability. The
uniform law nonetheless provides that evidence is admissible if it is
‘relevant in [the]
proceeding’ and is not excluded by provisions of
Evidence is relevant
where ‘if it were accepted, [it] could rationally affect (directly or
indirectly) the assessment of the
probability of the existence of a fact in
issue in the
proceeding’.
The law is unsettled with respect to whether challenges to authentication are
matters of law or matters of fact under the UEL. If
they are the former, they
rightly arise for the tribunal of law to determine in consideration of the
admissibility of evidence. This
view was espoused by Bryson J in the New South
Wales Supreme Court.
authentication is not a question going to admissibility but rather a matter left
to determinations of fact and assessments of
the probative value of evidence,
questions of authentication do not independently arise in determining
admissibility and are matters
of fact to be left to the tribunal of fact. This
view was advanced by Perram J in the Federal
in rejection of the
Bryson J view. The relevant debate is about whether a challenge to the
authenticity of evidence is a question
of law, for the tribunal of law to
determine as a prerequisite to admissibility and as a separate and independent
question from that
of relevance, or, whether it is a question of fact such that
authentication does not arise as a requirement of admissibility. The
that debate ultimately pertains to who should determine an authentication
question and at which point/s of trial. That
outcome does not, and does not
purport to, address how challenges to authentication can be adequately resolved
given the significance
and novelty of authentication issues that can arise with
respect to electronic evidence deriving from eObjects in the IoT.
In circumstances where data is generated by a device or computer, it is
possible that no such person is available, or exists, to provide
testimonial evidence. For data generated while an eObject is being used or
operated by a human, the human can give evidence
the device but not about the data generated concurrently by the device. For
evidence generated autonomously
by the ordinary independent operation of the
eObject, an expert may provide evidence on the processes by which the ESI was
as was recently the case in Canada in respect of data extracted from
a wearable fitness tracker.
The expert however, is limited to testimony of the same type as given for first
category technology – testimony regarding ordinary
process and function.
It has been suggested that the authentication of electronic evidence is a
‘trivial showing’ and
a formality subordinate to the substantive
interrogation of the proper function of the system, software or device that
the evidence.
Conventionally, the admissibility of electronic evidence has been determined by
the question of whether the device that generated
the evidence was functioning
correctly, or as it would be expected to operate, at the time the evidence was
This inquiry is facilitated by the presumptions contained in ss 146 and 147
of the UEL, which are rebuttable upon furnishing evidence
that the device
malfunctioned or functioned in an unexpected way when generating the evidence.
The operation and significance of
these provisions is discussed later. The ESI
gathered by action of eObjects in passivity of human input defies human
sensitivity
or awareness of its timing and manner of collection. Electronic
evidence is typically authenticated by methods which are limited
to analysis of
computer coding to determine if the machine functions according to its code.
Putting aside issues regarding the accessibility
and assuming the code
is verifiable, the examples we have given earlier indicate that the proper
functioning of the technology can
be an incomplete answer to the authenticity of
the electronic evidence produced. This owes to the reduction of the intangible
the tangible and the absence of human activity in the point of information
collection, which would otherwise serve as a check and
The authentication problem for IoT-derived evidence is that of knowing what
we are accepting. Returning to earlier examples, even
if a dispute arises, we
know the knife is a knife, even if there is a problem in its handling; we know
the forged document is a document
disclosing some contract or bequest, even if
it does so fraudulently. How do you authenticate something the provenance of
not traceable to the time of its creation but only the time of its
output? What is the reference point? Whether it is a legal or
factual criterion,
the question is: what is being prima facie accepted?
Unknowing acceptance
The following example illustrates the point. We first frame the example using
output from a first category device, a mobile phone.
The example is true and, as
will be apparent, may be familiar. Person X flies from Sydney to Paris. Upon
landing in Paris, X turns
off ‘flight mode’ on their smartphone and
takes a photo from the plane window of a ‘Welcome to Paris’ sign
affixed to the terminal building. Person X returns the phone to their pocket,
disembarks, collects baggage and departs for their
hotel. Following a rest, X
retrieves their phone and sends the photo via MMS to a friend at home, in
Sydney. The friend replies by
text, ‘that is an odd sign to see in
Sydney...’ Person X, momentarily confused, looks again at the photo just
now observes it is geotagged and time-stamped as taken in Sydney,
Australia at 22.03 (22.05 was the departure time of the flight
from Sydney to
Paris and it was close to if not at this time that X recalls switching the phone
to ‘flight mode’). Unrecognised
and unknown to X, at the time of
taking the photograph aboard the landed plane, the phone’s settings had
not updated, given
the switch from flight mode and the change of continent, and
the photo was logged with a Sydney geolocation and Australian timestamp.
Consider if this photo was to be adduced in court proceedings to establish
place or time of its generation by X, or any other matter
referrable to its
recording of time and place. In our example, of course, there would be evidence
to negate the authenticity of the
photograph as being taken at the time and
place recorded. There is the visual content of the photo itself (‘Welcome
to Paris’);
the associated response from the friend expressing surprise;
the flight itinerary showing X had a booked flight to Paris and the
evidence of
Person X indicating the circumstances in which the photograph was taken.
Authentication is often established through
testimonial evidence but can also be
shown through circumstantial evidence. All this evidence permits of a finding,
in contradiction
of the metadata of time and place, that the photo is not
authentic, that is, it is not a photo taken in Sydney at 22.03 local time,
purports. The point however, is that that finding is entirely dependent on
evidence directly from or deriving from human oversight
and input into the
making of the photo.
Assume the photo had not included the welcome sign. Rather, the eager tourist
X had simply taken a ‘touchdown photo’ of
the runway and other
nondescript surrounds. There would be no visual alert in the output photo to
query the authenticity of the metadata
for the photo; it could be a runway in
Australia. Assume the photo was not sent by X to a friend, but that X simply
took the photo
for posterity. Assume X does not look at the photo until some
distant time in the future, months or years, in chance reminiscing.
input that could indicate the dubious provenance of the photo would not exist
or, likely, be significantly eroded by memory.
There would not be anything
revealed by the metadata itself, or the encoding of the photo feature of the
smartphone, to suggest error
with respect to the metadata. In the United Kingdom
and the United States, metadata accompanying files has been successfully
as a means of authenticating
More importantly, why
would the metadata be checked in the first place? For instance, the photo could
be shown as not taken in Sydney
by certified photos of runways in Sydney
airport, but why would such a survey of airports be undertaken? The photo,
retrieved at
a point sometime after its creation, would appear in all respects
as it purports, a photo taken in Sydney at the recorded time, and
there would be
a dearth of material to suspect, let alone from which reasonable inferences
could point,
In the modified example, there would be little if anything from the photo
itself, its associated metadata or the smartphone device
to suggest it was other
than a photo taken in Sydney. This is possible in situations where the
electronic evidence is produced by
first category technology that remains
controlled by active human input. The potential for second and third category
technology,
passive eObjects, to record erroneous data is palpable given their
recording of information at times and places autonomously from
human awareness
or command. The advent and proliferation of autonomous technology demonstrate
the difficulty in forcing their authentication
into traditional approaches that
rely on the tangible form of the evidence and the safeguard of human input.
Determining
authenticity
As we have discussed, the admissibility of electronic evidence is often dealt
with by reference to whether the device functioned properly
at the time the
evidence was generated. The rebuttable presumptions contained in ss 146 and 147
of the UEL are relevant to the inquiry.
Section 146 provides that:
(1) This section applies to a document or thing:
(a) that is produced wholly or partly by a device or process;
(b) that is tendered by a party who
asserts that, in producing the document or thing, the device or process has
produced a particular
(2) If it is reasonably open to find that the device or process is one
that, or is of a kind that, if properly used, ordinarily produces
that outcome,
it is presumed (unless evidence sufficient to raise doubt about the presumption
is adduced) that, in producing the
document or thing on the occasion in
question, the device or process produced that outcome.
Section 147 provides a similar presumption for documents (only) in the
context of the production of business records (applying a similar
test to the
business records hearsay exception).
The presumption in s 146 of the UEL relates to documents (which itself is
broadly defined) and ‘things’. In
Sydney Leagues’ Club Ltd v Synergy Protection Pty
Beazley JA, with
whom MacFarlan and Whealy JJA agreed, said:
... does not declare the presumed fact to be the fact. Rather, the Court
first needs to be satisfied, viz ‘[i]f it is reasonably
find’ that the device is of a certain kind and performs a certain function
before the presumption operates. The presumption
will not arise if there is
evidence that raises a doubt about the presumption. Evidence that raises 'a
doubt' does not need to be
of the same quality or of the same probative strength
as evidence that is required to satisfy the civil
The presumption weighs in favour of evidence generated by technology being
generally reliable and trustworthy and eliminates the need
to prove the working
accuracy or proper function of the device. The primary issue addressed by the
provision is the inefficiency
in proving the provenance, accuracy and
genuineness of every photocopy, copied media storage device, tape recording or
of evidence produced in the normal course of a device’s
operation. Of course, the presumption is rebuttable by evidence sufficient
raise doubt about the proper operation of the relevant device. That evidence
need not meet the same quality as would be required
under the civil standard of
proof. A party opposing the admission of the evidence bears the burden of
furnishing sufficient evidence
that the document has been produced by the device
in accordance with the usual functioning and output of that device. While the
of proof shifts, by operation of the statutory presumption, the party
opposing the admission of the evidence need only provide sufficient
evidence to
raise doubt. This, says the court, is a substantially less onerous burden than
the civil standard,
the party need not prove that the contrary is true.
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) now provides a like test to
that of the UEL, although the South Australian provision removes any
probabilistic comparison as
it only requires ‘evidence to the
contrary’ of the presumptive positions to displace the presumption. The
previous, now
repealed, s 59B of the South Australian evidence law provided for
the following incremented test:
(1) Subject to this section, computer output shall be admissible as
evidence in any civil or criminal proceedings.
(2) The court must be satisfied—
(a) that the computer is correctly programmed and regularly used to
produce output of the same kind as that tendered in evidence
pursuant to this
section; and
(b) that the data from which the output is produced by the computer is
systematically prepared upon the basis of information that
would normally be
acceptable in a court of law as evidence of the statements or representations
contained in or constituted by the
output; and
(c) that, in the case of the output tendered in evidence, there is,
upon the evidence before the court, no reasonable cause to suspect
any departure
from the system, or any error in the preparation of the data; and
(d) that the computer has not, during a period extending from the time
of the introduction of the data to that of the production
of the output, been
subject to a malfunction that might reasonably be expected to affect the
accuracy of the output; and
(e) that during that period there have been no alterations to the
mechanism or processes of the computer that might reasonably be
adversely to affect the accuracy of the output; and
(f) that records have been kept by a responsible person in charge of
the computer of alterations to the mechanism and processes of
the computer
during that period; and
(g) that there is no reasonable cause to believe that the accuracy or
validity of the output has been adversely affected by the use
of any improper
process or procedure or by inadequate safeguards in the use of the computer.
The factors listed are a ‘checklist’ concerning the production,
storage and communication of ESI that are relevant to
its reliability and
provenance. The factors remain based on authentication of machine output being
human-centric. As technology records,
stores and transfers data independent of
human input or monitoring, these legal provisions, regardless of their extent
and descriptiveness,
become decreasingly fit for purpose because the questions
they are asking and the inquiries they permit to be made will decreasingly
reveal any basis to query or doubt the operation and output of the autonomous
technology. Enhanced objects connected to the IoT are
part of a networked
autonomous evidence gathering system which, excluding the provision of power
supply, remains largely and increasingly
uninterrupted or commanded by human
input. The notable involvement of human input is to retrieve prior recorded and
stored data.
The adequacy of authentication provisions
The presumptions concerning both the admissibility and the authenticity of
computer-generated evidence in the UEL do not expressly
address (a) the security
around the device that generated the relevant data, (b) security over the data
during transmission and in
storage, (c) the authenticity of the ESI itself, as
opposed to the reliability and authenticity of the process or device that
Issues (a) and (b) are of particular concern, as data is, once obtained, so
easily and irreversibly modified, often with little trace
of the alteration if
the alteration is affected by an expert hand, without the author or user of that
data being aware of the alteration.
This is particularly the case in
circumstances where an eObject is connected to a network such as the internet,
and data can be intercepted
and modified intra or post transmission. In a
submission to the Australian Law Reform Commission, the Law Society of New South
submitted that s 146 envisages application to machine-produced evidence
such as photocopies and other simple processes, which are
not applicable to far
more sophisticated processes such as the generation of data by computers,
especially in light of the facts
that such data can be affected by
‘bugs’ and inherent software infirmities, or may be carefully and
untraceably manipulated
and accessed by powerful viruses and
Issue (c) appears to have been addressed in Canada through the imposition of
the following burden on a party seeking to adduce electronic
[T]he person seeking to introduce an electronic record [in any legal
proceeding] has the burden of proving its authenticity by evidence
supporting a finding that the electronic record is what the person claims it to
This places the emphasis on proving the identity and integrity of the ESI
itself, as opposed to the system that generated it, although
whether this is
practically achieved is doubted by some
proponents.
The provision
performs the task of allocating burdens and standards with respect to the
presentation of electronic evidence. That
is an entirely helpful and appropriate
function for evidence law. Regarding the substance of what is to be achieved,
the provision
can be attacked as trite and, thereby, otiose. For as long as
trials are conducted according to principles of rational verdicts,
it is trite
to suggest a party leading evidence needs to establish the evidence is what the
party claims.
A party seeking
to establish their case knows this is necessary as a matter of the plausibility
of their case, and it is otiose to
tell them so. Such criticisms may be returned
to the other as, in one sense, most if not all the rules of evidence may be
as trite to the protagonist seeking to persuade a rational deliberative
process by the presentation of probative evidence. The important
present purposes is that, as we have discussed, particularly apropos acceptance,
the person seeking to introduce the electronic
record, as well as those to whom
it is presented, may have no reason to think it is other than that which it
purports to be, notwithstanding
it is not at all what it purports. The law is
trite and thereby unhelpful if it merely asserts the requirement of provenance
age of trials adjudged by IoT-derived evidence.
Similar issues arise whether the presumptions do not apply or have been
rebutted. The ordinary means of authentication of machine-generated
evidence is
by proving that the machine was functioning correctly at the time that the
evidence was generated, which may be achieved
by way of lay testimony by
somebody operating the relevant machine or by an expert who is able to examine
its historical performance.
This may involve the use of metadata or an operation
log, or evidence from a specialist in ‘computer forensics’, which
an emerging discipline relating to the identification, preservation, analysis
and presentation of ESI.
Indeed, a forensic data-handling expert may also be involved in the storage,
extraction and ‘translation’ of ESI in order
to copy, process and
present the ESI. In such a circumstance, they may be required to provide
evidence about how they handled the
evidence and preserved its evidentiary
However, this
inquiry fails to account for how the data was created and collected, what data
was and was not recorded that could
have been, the provenance of the data from
the time it was recorded to the time it was extracted or collected for the
the proceeding, and the security of the data during transmission and
storage. The proper function of the device that generated evidence
is merely one
aspect of the identity and authenticity inquiry that must be undertaken to
justify the admission of the evidence, or
at least, to justify a substantial
weighting being accorded to the evidence. It does not address the quality and
completeness of
the ESI, the storage and security of the ESI, or the constancy
or integrity of the ESI itself. As such, these provisions may be critiqued
inadequate or incomplete to deal with authenticity of computer-generated
Stephen Mason suggests that the authenticity of electronic evidence ought to
be assessed according to five criteria. First, whether
the data itself has
changed since it was created, and if so, whether there is an accurate and
reliable method of recording the changes.
Secondly, whether the data can be
demonstrated to have been continuously secure and unaltered between the time it
was obtained for
legal proceedings and its submission into evidence. Thirdly,
whether techniques used to obtain and process the data can be tested.
whether the data is proven to have been generated by the purported device.
Fifthly, whether technical evidence of the data’s
integrity as being
trustworthy and reliable has been
This approach is
reminiscent of the repealed s 59B in South Australian evidence law. The starting
criterion remains problematic for
the reasons we have discussed. How is
‘whether the data itself has changed since it was created’ to be
questioned and
evidenced? In cases of fraud or like actions, retrieval of data
or computer images may evidence the alteration or destruction of
records from that which purportedly appear on current searches of the stored
Those cases rely on the
manipulation being deliberate and the product of human input. The growth of
autonomous methods of amassing
electronic evidence present a significant
hindrance to the content or presentation of ‘change’ in the
electronic record.
The issue of authentication is not necessarily that there has
been alteration but that the original record is erroneous. A matter
absence of human oversight makes difficult to detect or even pinpoint to an
origin for analysis.
We acknowledge our criticisms of existing and proposed authentication
provisions and methods, without providing a framework for their
replacement. Our
purpose is to identify the lacunae in the existing law with respect to
authentication that, principally, results
from a human-centric paradigm for the
authentication and rationalisation of evidence. That paradigm must shift as
evidence is increasingly
presented from autonomous technological functions.
Regarding how authentication might be better achieved in third and future wave
autonomous technology is, we suggest, a question for computational science and
its associated engineering disciplines. With respect
to the shift needed in the
law, the question to be confronted is whether there is need and merit to
distinguish between evidence
generated by computational processes based on the
ordinary level and requirement of human input. This bedrock question may inform
safeguards the law puts in place with respect to accepting the provenance and
use of certain types of electronic evidence.
V CONCLUSION
The unique character of IoT-derived ESI, relative to traditional documentary
evidence, and the volume that is and will continue to
be (increasingly)
generated, necessitate careful consideration of whether pre-trial litigation
procedures and intra-trial evidentiary
rules sufficiently deal with the unique
character of this ESI. First, issues relating to the obtaining of ESI arise,
including how
and from where or whom the relevant data may be obtained. This
turns on whether the possessor of the data is a party to the litigation,
and where the data is stored. Much of the data generated by eObjects is stored
on the cloud and is discoverable by anyone
with access to that data through the
relevant eObject or through other means. Once the identity, availability, and
possession of
the ESI are determined, the question turns to whether discovery
(or production by different means, such as by way of subpoena or
produce) is justified, and how it may be put into effect so as to minimise the
cost and delay of litigation. This may require
the court, the legal
representatives and the parties to carefully consider the necessity and utility
of the discovery of IoT-derived
information, and how discovery orders can be
crafted in either a restrictive or prescriptive way. The volume of data may
necessitate
a creative or technology-assisted solution, to ensure
proportionality between the possible utility of the process and its cost.
We argued that IoT-derived evidence is not subject to the hearsay rule. The
inapplicability of this evidential safeguard is magnified
by the difficulties
inherent in the authentication of IoT-derived electronic evidence. Despite being
the output of largely or wholly
autonomous technology operating absent human
input or intervention, this IoT-derived ESI requires or relies on humans to
authenticate
it. The more divorced the data generation is from human input, the
greater the need to verify its identity, integrity, provenance
and authenticity.
Putting pragmatic difficulties aside, the very nature of IoT-derived electronic
evidence, and the eObjects that
generate it, necessitates especial attention to
addressing integrity and authenticity, as (i) electronic evidence is liable to
unalterably and untraceably manipulated, intercepted or or modified; (ii)
electronic evidence from eObjects may be altered by inadvertent
or accidental
actions; and (iii) electronic evidence may mislead or misrepresent on account of
ineffectual or intermittent use by
humans. The UEL does not provide mechanisms
that are apposite to these foibles of IoT-derived ESI.
We have discussed why certain legislative presumptions concerning relevance
and authenticity prescribed by the UEL fall short of addressing
crucial concerns
around the security of the eObject that generated the relevant data, the
security of the data during transmission
and storage, and the authenticity of
the ESI itself, as opposed to the reliability and authenticity of the process or
device that
generated it. The absence of a robust and prescriptive process or
legislative test for the authentication of such evidence raises
concerns about
whether IoT-derived electronic evidence falls into an evidentiary fissure that
lacks sufficient prophylactic measures
to properly regulate its admission and
assessment. A doctrinal safeguard ought to be the subject of further discourse
and, perhaps,
Director, Litigation Law Unit,
University of Adelaide; Senior Lecturer, Adelaide Law School.
Professor, UNSW Law and Director of the Law Society of New
South Wales Future of Law and Innovation in the Profession (FLIP) research
stream at UNSW Law.
Solicitor, Herbert Smith Freehills.
See Kayleen Manwaring and
Roger Clarke, ‘Surfing the Third Wave of Computing: A Framework for
Research Into eObjects’
(2015) 31(5)
Computer Law and Security
; Kayleen Manwaring, ‘Kickstarting Reconnection: An Approach
to Legal Problems Arising from Emerging Technologies’
[2017] DeakinLawRw 3
Anthony Adshead, ‘Data
set to grow 10-fold by 2020 as internet of things takes off’,
ComputerWeekly.com
(online, 9 April 2014)
<https://www.computerweekly.com/news/2240217788/data-set-to-grow-10-fold-by-2020-as-internet-of-things-takes-off>.
Texas Instruments Inc has
classified eObjects and applications into six categories: wearables, health
care, building and home automation,
smart manufacturing, smart cities and
automotive: Texas Instruments, ‘Internet of Things’, (Web Page)
http://www.ti.com/ww/en/internet_of_things/iot-applications.html
Kayleen Manwaring and Roger
Clarke, ‘Surfing the Third Wave of Computing: A Framework for Research
Into eObjects’
(2015) 31(5)
Computer Law and Security Review
International
Telecommunications Union,
Overview of the Internet of Things –
Recommendation ITU-T Y.2060
(06/2012); Telstra Corporation Limited,
Millennials, Mobiles and Money
Andrew Whitmore, Anurag
Agarway and Li Da Xu, ‘The Internet of Things – A Survey of Topics
and Trends’ (2015)
Information Systems Frontiers
Telstra Corporation Limited,
Millennials, Mobiles and Money
Federal Court of Australia
Federal Court Rules 2011
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act 2008
Evidence Act 2001
(Tas). All sections of law referenced herein are to the
UEL, unless otherwise stated.
Encoding obviously performs
programmed, calculated functions to deliver even the most basic human to
computer commands, such as
converting type touches to electronic text, but
because the keyboard letter touched appears directly on the visual platform, the
computerised calculations are less discernible than technology which calculates
unknown commands.
Kayleen Manwaring,
‘Kickstarting Reconnection: An Approach to Legal Problems Arising from
Emerging Technologies’
[2017] DeakinLawRw 3
Deakin Law Review
For a comprehensive
consideration see, Andrea Roth, ‘Machine Testimony’ (2017) 126(6)
Yale Law Review
1972. For specified forensic applications, see also,
Edward J Imwinkelried, ‘Computer Source Code: A Source of the Growing
Controversy Over the Reliability of Automated Forensic Techniques’
DePaul Law Review
Michael Legg,
‘Discovery – A Comparative Approach to Reform’ in Miiko Kumar
and Michael Legg (eds),
Ten Years of the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(Thomson Reuters, 1
ed, 2015) 99.
Expense Reduction
Analysts Group Pty Ltd v Armstrong Strategic Management and Marketing Pty
[2013] HCA 46
(2013) 250 CLR 303
Palavi v Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 264
Telstra Corporation Limited
Australian Rugby Union
Limited v Canterbury International (Australia) Pty Ltd (No 1)
Whitmore, Agarway and Xu (n
Bernard Cairns,
Australian Civil Procedure
(Thomson Reuters, 11
Federal Court Rules
sch 1 (definition of ‘document’).
Cairns (n 21)
[10.100]-[10.130].
See Legg (n 16) 104-109
discussing the scope of discovery in Australia, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America.
Directly relevant is further defined as meaning that the document meets at least
one of the following criteria: (a) the
documents are those on which the party
intends to rely; (b) the documents adversely affect the party’s own case;
(c) the documents
support another party’s case; (d) the documents
adversely affect another party’s case.
Miiko Kumar, Michael Legg
and Ilija Vickovich,
Civil Procedure in New South Wales
(Thomson Reuters,
3rd ed, 2016) [12.390].
Samuel Greengard,
Internet of Things
(MIT Press, 1
ed, 2015) 60-61.
Dennis Kennedy,
‘Preparing for the “Internet of Things”
, 1 July 2014.
Greengard (n 27) 62. RFID
uses electromagnetic fields to automatically identify and track tags attached to
objects. Passive tags
collect energy from a nearby RFID reader's interrogating
radio waves. Active tags have a local power source (such as a battery) and
operate hundreds of meters from the RFID reader.
Kennedy (n 28).
‘Maersk — Reinventing the Shipping Industry Using IoT
and Blockchain’,
HBS Digital Initiative
(online, 28 June 2018).
In August 2015, Google and
Dexcom (a company that produces continuous glucose monitoring systems) announced
plans to produce a dime-sized,
cloud-based disposable monitor that communicates
the glucose values of diabetes patients in real-time, directly to parents and
providers: Peter Lefkowitz, ‘Making Sense of the Internet of
Boston Bar Journal
, 25. Another example is
the GlowCap, a “smart pill-bottle cap” produced by Vitality (and
connected to the AT&T mobile
broadband network) that contains a wireless
chip which can text or phone a patient a reminder if they have forgotten to take
medication.
It also has a button that, when pressed, sends a
refill request to a person’s local pharmacy. See Robin Kester,
‘Demystifying
the Internet of Things: Industry Impact, Standardization
Problem, and Legal Considerations’
(2016) 8(1)
Elon Law Review
Greengard (n 27) 70-72.
Matthews v AusNet
Electricity Services Pty Ltd
[2014] VSC 663
See PL Stein, “The
Great Sydney Water Crisis of 1998” (2000) 123
Water, Air, and Soil
419; Stewart Smith,
The Quality of Sydney's Drinking Water:
Current Issues
, NSW Parliamentary Library Research Service, Briefing Paper
No. 16/1998.
Kate Crawford, ‘When
Fitbit is the Expert Witness’,
The Atlantic
(online, 19 November
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/11/when-fitbit-is-the-expert-witness/382936/>.
Nicole Chauriye,
‘Wearable Devices as Admissible Evidence: Technology is Killing our
Opportunities to Lie’ (2016) 24(2)
Catholic University Journal of Law
and Technology
495, 509-510.
Oster v Houli
Cairns (n 21) [10.140].
Air Pacific Ltd v
Transport Workers Union of Australia
(1993) 40 FCR 1.
[2016] VSC 629.
Hanks v Johnston (No
[2016] VSC 629
Ibrar Yaqoob et al,
‘Internet of things forensics: Recent advances, taxonomy, requirements,
and open challenges’ (2019)
Future Generation Computer Systems
Ignatius Grande and Mark
Michels, ‘The Internet of Things: "You Ain't Seen Nothin' Yet"’,
Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP
(online, October 2014) 11
<https://www.hugheshubbard.com/news/the-internet-of-things-you-aint-seen-nothin-yet>.
Hanks v Johnston (No
[2016] VSC 629
Below v Yokohama Tire
Corporation
, 15 CV 529 (WD Wisc, 2017). For an Australian example see Luke
Mortimer, ‘Tiny data recorder in your car could have big impact’,
Daily Mercury
(online, 25 November 2017)
<https://www.dailymercury.com.au/news/tiny-data-recorder-in-your-car-could-have-big-impa/3274389/>.
Palavi v Radio
2UE Sydney Pty Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 264
, [70]-[71], [93]-[95].
r 5.22, 5.23,
Speedo Holdings BV v Evans (No 2)
[2011] FCA 1227.
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC
(Advances) Ltd
[1990] FCA 520
(1990) 27 FCR 388.
Paul Matthews and Hodge
(Sweet & Maxwell, 5
[17.31]-[17.33].
City of Swan v
McGraw-Hill Companies Inc
[2014] FCA 1271
Greengard (n 27) 56.
Building Blocks
for Smart Networks - OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 215
(OECD Publishing,
2013) 4. The report also estimates that by 2022 there will be 14 billion
connected devices in the OECD, compared
to 1.7 million at the time the report
was written.
Legg (n 16) 100.
Ibid r 20.15.
Chief Justice T F Bathurst,
‘Tweeters, Posters and Grammers Beware: Discovery and Social Media
Evidence’(Tenth Information
Governance and EDiscovery Summit, 21 June
2016) [17], [24].
Federal Court of Australia,
Central Practice Note: National Court Framework and Case Management
, 25 October 2016, [10.7]-[10.8]. See also Federal Court of
General Practice Note: Technology and the Court
, 25 October
2016, [3.1]-[3.5].
Slick v Westpac Banking
Corporation (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1712
, [41]-[43].
Brian Morris, ‘The
2015 Proposals to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure: Preparing for the Future
of Discovery’
Northern Kentucky Law Review
Christopher Suarez,
‘Forensics and Electronic Discovery in an IoT Era’,
(online, 25 April 2018)
<https://www.americanbar.org/groups/young_lawyers/publications/tyl/topics/resources-technology/forensics-and-electronic-discovery-an-iot-era/>.
Matthew Paulbeck, 'The
Ethics of Predictive Coding: Transparency and Judgment-Formed Seed Sets'
Georgetown Journal of Legal Ethics
Kevin D Ashley,
Artificial Intelligence and Legal Analytics: New Tools for Law Practice in
the Digital Age
(Cambridge University Press, 1
ed, 2017) 241.
Shannon Brown,
‘Peeking Inside the Black Box: A Preliminary Survey of Technology Assisted
Review (TAR) and Predictive Coding
Algorithms for Ediscovery’
Suffolk Journal of Trial & Appellate Advocacy
, [2.1] (see
generally for a comprehensive technical overview of the TAR process).
Victoria Wilk and Tri Phan,
‘737 MAX Advanced Onboard Network System’ (2014) 55 (3)
Aero Magazine
Maxim Chernyshev et al,
‘Internet of Things Forensics – The Need, Process Models, and Open
Issues’ (2018) 20(3)
IT Professional
40, 41-42; Yaqoob et al (n 43)
Chernyshev et al (n 67)
43-45; Yaqoob et al (n 43) 269-272.
Central Practice Note:
National Court Framework and Case Management
(n 59) [10.8].
American Bar
Association,
Model Rules of Professional Conduct
(2015) Comment 8 to Rule
Legal Profession Uniform
Law Australian Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
(at 1 July 2015) r
Central Practice Note:
National Court Framework and Case Management
(n 59) [10.10]-[10.11]. See
rr 20.16, 20.17 which requires a list of documents not searched
for or that was in the party’s control but no longer is.
Lowery v Insurance
Australia Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 303
(2015) 90 NSWLR 320
, [10] (Basten JA).
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
(2008) 235 CLR 125
, 154-155 [96] (Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ). The principle
is often referred to as the “implied undertaking” or the
“Harman undertaking” after
Harman v Secretary of State for Home
[1983] 1 AC 280.
It is an obligation of substantive law that
applies to the parties to litigation and to third parties, including lawyers,
witnesses and any other person who comes into possession of the material
knowing it to have been obtained by way of court process.
See, for example,
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(definition of
‘document’).
See, for example,
Music Entertainment (Australia) Ltd v University of Tasmania
[2003] FCA 532
(2003) 129 FCR
[2014] VSCA 13
(2014) 41 VR 434
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Evidence (Interim)
(Report No 26, 1985) vol 1, 26 [651]; see
also Stephen Odgers,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Thomson Reuters,
ed , 2018) 272.
Justice Peter Brereton,
'Evidence In Civil Proceedings: An Australian Perspective On Documentary And
Electronic Evidence’
(Speech, National Judges College of the Supreme
People’s Court of The People’s Republic of China, September
Allison Rebecca Stanfield,
‘The Authentication of Electronic Evidence’ (Doctoral Thesis,
Queensland University of Technology,
See discussion below
concerning ‘black box’ issues and the analogous concerns relating
uniquely to electronic evidence.
In a related context, see,
Peter B Imrey and A Philip Dawid, ‘A Commentary on Statistical Assessment
of Violence Recidivism
Risk’ (2015) 2(1)
Statistics and Public
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Uniform Evidence Law
(Report No 102, February 2006), [7],
See the reasoning in
decisions such as
Mehesz v Redman (No 2)
(1980) 26 SASR 244
concerning computer analysis and record generation.
Odgers (n 81) 364-5.
Cf the position in the USA,
in which metadata has been used as a means to authenticate electronic evidence:
Lorraine v Markel
241 FRD 534 (D.
National Australia Bank
[1999] NSWSC 539
(1999) 47 NSWLR 309
Odgers (n 81) 349.
UEL ss 170, 171.
See, eg, James Bessen,
‘The Automation Paradox’,
The Atlantic
(online, January 19
https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/01/automation-paradox/424437/>.
Noting that while an
example from the criminal trial perspective has been selected as particularly
memorable, the same principles
apply in the civil trial context.
George L. Paul,
Foundations of Digital Evidence
(American Bar Association, 1
ed, 2008), 36.
See Stanfield (n 83) 11;
see also Yatan Dahiya and Sunita Sangwan, 'Developing and Enhancing the Security
of Digital Evidence Bag'
(2014) 1(2)
International Journal of Research
Studies in Computer Science and Engineering
14-25. See also Paul (n 95)
Stanfield (n 83) 11.
Stanfield (n 83) 11; see
also Dahiya and Sangwan (n 96) 14-25; see also Paul (n 95) 36.
Stanfield (n 83)
Competition and Consumer Commission v Air New Zealand Limited (No 1)
Parmy Olsen,
‘Fitbit Data Now Being Used in the Courtroom’,
(online, 16 November 2014)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2014/11/16/fitbit-data-court-room-personal-injury-claim/#762ecff97379>.
Stanfield (n 83)12.
See, eg, Imwinkelried (n
Greene v Associated
[2004] EWCA Crim 454
[2005] QB 972
Lorraine v Markel
(2007) 241 FRD 534
[2012] NSWCA 168
(2012) 83 NSWLR 710.
[2012] NSWCA 168
(2012) 83 NSWLR 710
[60]; see also Odgers (n 81) 1287; Australian Law Reform Commission,
, (Report No 26, 1985) vol 1, 26 [705].
Odgers (n 81) 1286;
North Sydney Leagues' Club Ltd v Synergy Protection Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 168
See Stanfield (n 83) 38;
see also Emmanuel Laryea, ‘The Evidential Status of Electronic Data’
National Law Review
Litigation Law and
Practice Committee of the Law Society of New South Wales, Submission E 103, 22
September 2005, 173; Stanfield
Evidence Act
(1998) (Can) s 3.
Ken Chasse, ‘The
Admissibility of Electronic Business Records’
(2011) 8(2)
Journal of Law and Technology
Whether a question of
law or fact, evidence must be authenticated at some point (if not multiple
points) in the trial, cf, above
re Bryson and Perram JJ positions.
Stanfield (n 83)
Ibid 125-126.
See ibid 191.
Stephen Mason (ed),
Electronic Evidence
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 3
[5.01]-[5.37].
This case strategy is
often underpinned by seeking pre-action orders, such as Anton Piller or
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (433 KB)
PDF format (1.07 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter