URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 11 - The Development of the Law Relating to Medical Treatment of Incapable People" [2011] SydUPLawBk 13; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
11. 1. Introduction
11. 2. The common law develops
11. 2. 1. The recognition of patient autonomy
11. 2. 2. The emergence of advance directives
11. 2. 3. The right of a competent person to refuse medical treatment
11. 2. 4. The rights of incompetent persons to refuse life-sustaining medical treatment – how to give effect to this right
11. 2. 5. Removal of life-sustaining treatment for those who have never been competent or who have never expressed views concerning
such treatment
11. 2. 6. A summary of the US common law
11. 2. 7. The English common law
11. 3. The differences between the US and English common law
11. 4. Developments in the Australian law 2009
11. 5. Assisted suicide and euthanasia
Chapter 11 - The Development of the Law Relating to Medical Treatment of Incapable People
11. 1. Introduction
Australia and the common law world generally are still formulating their
approach to substitute consent to medical and dental treatment,
directives, end of life decision-making and similar issues. Because of advances
in public health, nutrition, standards of
living and medical science, people can
live for many years after losing mental capacity or lead a long life without
ever having had
mental capacity. With projected increases in
, there will be an
increasing number of people who have lost capacity to make decisions about their
own medical treatment. Medical
technology can keep our bodies functioning for
periods even when our brains have ceased to carry out their basic functions. In
to these advances, the late 19
century and the
century saw the growth of societal expectations of patient
autonomy, informed decision making and control over the dying process.
The issues that are thrown up by these developments require responses from
the community, health care professionals, lawyers and ethicists.
In Australia,
all States and Territories have some legislation to deal with some of these
issues. However, the common law applies
where there is either no relevant
legislation or gaps in that legislation. The common law has continued to develop
in this field
as applications are made to the courts and the judges deal with
them, often as part of their parens patriae jurisdiction.
This has occurred particularly in the United States of America, but also in
the United Kingdom and Canada. This chapter will refer
to key aspects of the
development of the common law in those countries. The relevant developments in
the Australian common law and
legislation as well as in the appropriate health
policies and medical treatment practices will be taken up in the separate
dealing in detail with substitute consent to medical and dental
treatment, advance directives and care and decision-making at the
end of life.
11. 2. The common law develops
11. 2. 1. The recognition of patient
As Rich shows, by the early 20
the requirement of consent to
medical treatment based on patient autonomy was established in the common law of
the United States
of America, based on judicial statements such as:
Under a free government, at least, the free citizen’s first and greatest
right … the right to inviolability of the person
…necessarily
forbids a physician or surgeon, no matter how skillful or eminent, … to
violate, without permission, the
bodily integrity of his
The patient must be the final arbiter as to whether he will take his chances
with the operation, or take his chances without it.
Such is the natural right of
the individual, which the law recognizes as a legal
The most famous judicial statement of patient autonomy which shows the right
of a competent adult to refuse medical treatment was
made by Cardozo J in 1914
Schloendorff v Society of New York Hospital
Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what
shall be done with his own body; and a surgeon who
performs an operation without
his patient’s consent commits an assault, for which he is liable in
Rich goes on to trace the development of the requirement of consent into a
requirement of informed consent and of respect for patient
autonomy into
including respect for patient prospective autonomy in the form of advance
directives.
While the courts were
beginning to recognize advance directives and order that they be given effect
to, they continued to support
the right of competent people to refuse treatment,
even without requiring them to give a reason for doing so.
The 2009 Australian cases confirming that the (Australian) common law
recognises a competent adult’s right to autonomy or self-determination
dealt with below at 11. 4.
11. 2. 2. The emergence of advance
The credit for proposing formal advance directives is given to an Illinois
lawyer, Luis Kutner.
In 1965, in an
article in the Indiana Law Review, he noted that the law recognises that adult
patients have the right to refuse to
be treated, even when “in
extremis” provided they have the capacity to give or refuse consent to
He went on to note that
when patients undergo surgery or other radical treatment in hospitals, they are
required to sign a statement
indicating their consent to the treatment and
suggested that competent patients append to such a document a statement saying
if their condition became incurable or they go into a permanently
vegetative state, their consent to further treatment would be terminated.
suggested that if either of those events happened, the result would be that the
treating doctors would be precluded from prescribing
further surgery, radiation,
drugs or the running of resuscitating and other machinery and that the patients
would be permitted to
die by virtue of the doctors’
He then went on to
describe what should be included in such a document, how it should be formalised
and how it should be dealt with
by the hospital to which it was
The claimed first use of a “formal” living will, which was
subsequently upheld by the courts, was in Florida in 1981 when
a terminally ill
man was taken to the John F Kennedy Memorial Hospital in
Within two days of being
admitted to the hospital, the man was unable to breathe on his own and doctors
placed him on a ventilator.
His doctor told his wife that he had no hope of
recovery. She then handed over a paper entitled “Mercy Will and Last
written out and signed by her husband in the presence of two
witnesses six years before. As recently as two months before he entered
hospital, his wife had promised him that should he be hospitalised, she would
make his “mercy will” part of his medical
record. She was appointed
his guardian by the probate court and immediately asked the hospital to turn off
all life support systems.
The hospital then sought a declaratory judgment as to
its obligations in these circumstances. The man died but the court was willing
to hear the case.
In 1984 the Supreme Court of Florida recognised that “terminally
incompetent persons being sustained only through use of extraordinary
means have the same right to refuse to be held on the threshold of death as
terminally ill competent
The court also
stated that this right could be exercised by the person’s close relatives
or an appointed guardian and that
the decision to cease the use of artificial
life supports should normally be made in the patient-doctor-family
relationship.
Doctors, in consultation with close family members are in the best position to
make these decisions. The focal point of such decisions
should be whether there
is a reasonable medical expectation of the patient’s return to cognitive
life as distinguished from
the forced continuance of a vegetative
John F Kennedy Inc v Bludworth
may have been the first case in
which a “formal” living will made by a patient was a crucial factor
in the decision to
terminate artificial life support, the court did not rely on
the living will itself.
the court applied the common law “doctrine” of “substituted
judgment” stating that:
Under this doctrine close family members or legal guardians substitute their
judgment for what they believe the terminally incompetent
persons, if competent,
would have done under these circumstances. If such a person, while competent,
had executed a so-called “living”
or “mercy” will, that
will would be persuasive evidence of that incompetent person’s intention
and it should be
given great weight by the person or persons who substitute
their judgment on behalf of the terminally ill
incompetent.
The court held that the right of a patient who is in an irreversibly comatose
and essentially vegetative state to refuse extraordinary
life-sustaining
measures may be exercised by either their close family members or by a guardian
of the person of the patient appointed
by a court with appropriate jurisdiction.
There was no need to obtain the consent of a court before terminating such
In both Canada and the United Kingdom the courts began to recognise less
formal kinds of advance directives. In June 1979 in Canada,
Mrs Malette was
involved in a motor vehicle accident which killed her husband. She was rushed to
hospital arriving semi-conscious
and bleeding. An emergency department nurse
found Mrs Malette’s purse which contained a card which stated: “No
Transfusion. As one of Jehovah’s witnesses with firm religious
convictions, I request that no blood or blood products be administered
any circumstances….”.Even though he was informed of the card and
what it said, Dr Shulman administered blood
to her. She recovered from her
injuries and sued Dr Shulman, the hospital and others for damages for battery.
The Ontario High Court,
in 1987, found Dr Shulman guilty of battery and awarded
Mrs Malette damages of $20,000 for mental distress against him
The matter went on appeal to the Ontario Court of Appeal. That Court
dismissed the appeal in 1990 noting that while there was a state
interest in
protecting and preserving the lives and health of citizens which could override
an individual’s right to self-determination,
for example to require a
person to receive treatment to eliminate a health threat to the community.
However, normally that interest
gave way to a competent patient’s stronger
interest in directing the course of their own
The Court noted that Mrs
Malette’s rejection of blood transfusions was based on the firm belief
held by Jehovah’s Witnesses,
founded on their interpretation of the
Scriptures, that the acceptance of blood will result in a forfeiture of their
opportunity
for resurrection and eternal salvation and went on to state that,
Mrs Malette “was entitled to reject in advance of any emergency
procedure inimical to her religious
The 1992 decision of the English Court of Appeal,
, appears to
have been accepted as authority for the proposition that the English common law
recognises advance directives, or at
least anticipatory refusals of medical
These are treated as
binding on doctors if they are clearly established, applicable to the current
circumstances and made without
undue pressure from
However, it does not
follow that if a person makes an advance directive to the effect that they are
to be kept alive through active
treatment and be given nutrition and hydration
until they die of natural causes, that as a matter of law they must be kept
In 2005 the Court of Appeal stated referring to the
While a number of their Lordships indicated that an advance directive that the
patient should not be kept alive in a PVS should be
respected, we do not read
that decision as requiring such a patient to be kept alive simply because he has
made an advance directive
11. 2. 3. The right of a competent person to
refuse medical treatment
In that case,
, the English Court of Appeal asserted the common
law right of every adult with capacity to decide whether or not to accept
Butler-Sloss
A man or woman of full age and sound understanding may choose to reject medical
advice and medical or surgical treatment either partially
or in its entirety. A
decision to refuse medical treatment by a patient capable of making the decision
does not have to be sensible,
rational or well
considered.
Lord Donaldson MR put the matter as follows:
This right of choice is not limited to decisions which others might regard as
sensible. It exists notwithstanding that the reasons
for making the choice are
rational, irrational, unknown or even
non-existent.
The case involved a 20 year old pregnant woman who had been brought up as a
Jehovah’s Witness and was subsequently injured in
a car accident. On
admission to hospital after spending time alone with her mother she refused a
blood transfusion. After giving
birth to a stillborn child, her condition
became critical and her father and boyfriend applied for a court order that it
be unlawful to administer a transfusion without her consent. The court
held that the effect of her condition, together with misinformation
mother’s influence, rendered her refusal of consent ineffective.
Notwithstanding the outcome for patient T, several
principles of law relating to
informed consent and advance treatment were affirmed in this
Lord Donaldson MR stated:
Doctors faced with a refusal of consent have to give very careful and detailed
consideration to the patient’s capacity to decide
at the time when the
decision was made….
What matters is that the doctors should consider whether at that time he had a
capacity which was commensurate with the gravity of
the decision which he
purported to make. The more serious the decision, the greater the capacity
required. If the patient had the
requisite capacity, they are bound by this
decision. If not, they are free to treat him in what they believe to be his best
In that case Lord Donaldson also noted a view in the medical profession that,
even in emergency circumstances, the next of kin should
be asked to consent to
medical treatment on behalf of the patient if the patient was incapable of
giving a valid consent to the treatment.
He said; “This is a misconception
because the next of kin has no legal right to consent or refuse
However, he
went on to suggest that it was appropriate to wait for the arrival of the next
of kin in circumstances in which the
patient would not be adversely affected by
the delay, because:
[C]ontact with the next of kin may reveal that the patient has made an
anticipatory choice which, if clearly established and applicable
circumstances – two big ‘ifs’ – would bind the (medical)
practitioner.
Also in 1992, in Canada a 25 year old woman suffering from Guillian-Barre
syndrome, an incurable neurological disorder which left
her unable to move and
able to breathe only through the assistance of a respirator, was granted an
injunction requiring the hospital
and her doctors to comply with her decision to
refuse treatment.
In the English High Court’s Family Division in 1993, in the case
, a man was held to meet the test for capacity to make a decision about
whether or not to consent to the amputation of one of his
legs because of
gangrene, despite his paranoid schizophrenia. The court was prepared to make a
declaration that he was capable of
refusing the proposed treatment beyond the
present to future
circumstances.
In 2002 the then President of the Family Division, Dame Elizabeth
Butler-Sloss, gave guidance on the right of a competent person to
refuse medical
treatment. The case involved a 41 year old woman whose decision-making capacity
was beyond question.
suffered a haemorrhage of the spinal column in her neck and became paralysed
from the neck down and entirely dependent on a ventilator.
She formally advised
that she wanted artificial ventilation removed even though she realised that
this would almost certainly result
in her death. The President upheld her
request and made a number of points as guidance including the following:
(i) There is a presumption that a patient has the medical capacity to make
decisions whether to consent to or refuse medical or surgical
treatment offered
to him/her.
(ii) If mental capacity is not an issue and the patient, having been given
the relevant information and offered available options,
chooses to refuse
treatment, that decision has to be respected by the doctors. Considerations that
the best interests of the patient
would indicate that the decision should be to
consent to the treatment are irrelevant.
(viii) If there is no disagreement about competence but the doctors are for
any reason unable to carry out the wishes of the patient,
their duty is to find
other doctors who will do
To summarise, these cases show the common law recognising the right of
competent adults to refuse continuing treatment, including
life maintaining
treatment, without having to explain why, as well as their right to make advance
directives in the form of verbal
anticipatory refusals and for “blood
cards” sometimes carried by Jehovah’s Witnesses to be recognized and
This issue was dealt with in an Australian case in 2009. See below at 11. 4.
11. 2. 4. The rights of incompetent persons to
refuse life-sustaining medical treatment – how to give effect to this
In the 1970s in the US Karen Quinlan, who at 21 lost consciousness and went
into a persistent vegetative state, was kept alive for
years through artificial
nutrition and hydration despite the efforts of her parents to be allowed to let
her die. Her fate led to
a demand for legislation, which many States enacted, to
allow advance directives.
Quinlan Case
did not go beyond the New Jersey Supreme Court;
however the case of Nancy Cruzan did. When driving around midnight in the
in January 1983, the recently divorced Nancy Cruzan lost control of her
car and finished up face-down in a water-filled ditch. Her
heart had stopped
before she received assistance from the paramedics who restarted her heart. She
was in a persistent vegetative
state from that time until her death seven years
later. Her existence was sustained by a feeding tube. Her parents wanted the
tube removed and permission was granted by the Missouri probate court.
However, the Missouri Supreme Court held that before medical
support could be
withdrawn from an incompetent person there had to be clear and convincing
evidence of their wish for this to happen.
This is a higher standard of proof
than the usual civil standard of the balance of probabilities (called in the US
the preponderance
of the evidence). As the Court held that the evidence in this
case did not meet that higher standard, Ms Cruzan’s feeding tube
be removed.
The matter went to the US Supreme Court on the question of whether the US
Constitution
forbids a State from requiring clear and convincing evidence of a
person’s expressed decision, while competent, to have hydration
nutrition withdrawn in such a way as to cause
The Supreme Court, by a
majority of five to four, held that the
Constitution
did not prohibit this court
imposed requirement. The majority referred to the state interest in protection
and preservation of human
life as a basis for making this heightened evidentiary
requirement legitimate.
In dissent Brennan J noted the majority’s view that an erroneous
decision to terminate life-support is irrevocable while an
erroneous decision
not to terminate results in the maintenance of the status quo and continued:
But from the point of view of the patient, an erroneous decision to terminate
artificial nutrition and hydration, to be sure, will
lead to the failure of the
last remnant of physiological life, the brain stem, and result in complete brain
death. An erroneous decision
not to terminate life-support, however robs a
patient of the very qualities protected by the right to avoid unwanted medical
His own degraded existence is perpetuated: his family’s
suffering is perpetuated: the memory he leaves behind becomes more
Five months after the Supreme Court’s decision, Ms Cruzan’s
feeding tube was removed because friends of hers who knew
her by her married
name, Nancy Davis, came forward and offered new evidence which State court held
met the clear and convincing standard
It has been noted that the Supreme Court in the Cruzan Case ignored doctors.
It never discussed the doctor-patient relationship or
whether it matters if the
patient’s doctor had a long-standing relationship with them and understood
what treatment the patient
Also in that case one of the majority, O’Connor J, wrote a concurring
judgment in which she specifically noted that:
[T]he liberty guaranteed by the Due Process Clause must protect, if it protects
anything, an individual’s deeply personal
decision to reject medical
treatment, including artificial delivery of food and
She went on to suggest that there was a duty in the States:
[T]o protect the patient’s liberty interest in refusing treatment. Few
individuals provide explicit oral or written instructions
regarding their intent
to refuse medical treatment should they become incompetent. States which decline
to consider any evidence
other than such instructions may frequently fail to
honour a patient’s intent.
After the false start in the
cases, the US
courts have established and repeatedly restated that the right of a person to
refuse medical treatment is not lost
if they lose their capacity to give a valid
consent to their own medical treatment and were thus considered incompetent to
refuse consent to such
The assertion of
that right, particularly when the treatment is life-sustaining, gives rise to a
series of difficult questions that
the US courts have dealt with. These include,
who can give consent to the carrying out of or to the refusal of such treatment?
the substitute decision-makers have to carry out the wishes of the person
they are making the substitute decision for? If so, what
degree of certainty do
they have to have about the person’s wishes do they have to have before
they can act? Can they make
the decision in the person’s best interests?
If so what degree of certainty do they have to have about the person’s
interests before they make the decision? Are there differences in the
substitute’s decision-making options arising from whether
the person is
comatose or in a persistent vegetative state or whether the person has some
degree consciousness? A range of US cases
deal with these and other related
issues. The decisions made in these cases are not necessarily consistent with
one another, nor
do they reflect all relevant considerations as they result from
court hearings in which non-legal perspectives on how to deal with
the matters
to be decided were given little account. Nevertheless, they raise issues and
considerations that are relevant to any
discussion of how the statute and
judge-make law in Australia should continue to develop in this ethically
difficult field.
As already noted, by 1984 in the USA the Supreme Court of Florida at least
had recognized that the right of a patient who is in an
irreversibly comatose
and essentially vegetative state to refuse extraordinary life-sustaining
measures could be exercised by either
their close family members or by a
guardian of the person of the patient appointed by a court with appropriate
was no need to obtain the consent of a court before
terminating such treatment.
In 1985, at the age of 85, Mrs Browning executed a declaration stating that
if she had a terminal condition from which there could
be no recovery she
directed that life-prolonging procedures be withheld or withdrawn. In addition
she did not want nutrition or hydration
provided by gastric tube or
intravenously. A year later she suffered a stroke involving a massive brain
haemorrhage. As she was unable
to swallow, a gastronomy (PEG) tube was inserted.
Mrs Browning went to a nursing home where she was bedridden and required total
care. Her only relative, an elderly woman herself, was appointed her guardian.
Almost two years after Mrs Browning’s stoke
her guardian applied for a
court order to terminate Mrs Browning’s feeding based on her declaration.
There was also evidence
of Mrs Browning expressing views consistent with her
declaration. The medical evidence was that her brain damage was major and
and that there was virtually no chance of recovery. The Supreme Court
of Florida took the view that before the guardian could exercise
Browning’s right to forgo treatment, the guardian had to be able to
support that decision with clear and convincing evidence
that satisfied the
following conditions that the guardian:
1. was satisfied that Mrs Browning had executed her declaration knowingly,
willingly and without undue influence and that the evidence
of her orally
expressed views was reliable;
2. was assured that Mrs Browning did not have a reasonable probability of
recovering competency so that she could exercise her right
to refuse treatment;
3. considered any limitations and conditions in the declaration or given
orally by Mrs Browning and that they had been
In 1991 the Supreme Court of Michigan dealt with the case of a Mr
Mr Martin had a serious
motor vehicle accident which left him unable to walk or talk. He had minimal
cognition and essentially no
ability to communicate. He had a colostomy bag for
defecation and had to be fed through a PEG tube. Five years after his accident,
when he was being treated for an obstructed bowel, his wife approached the
hospital’s bioethics committee. After consultation
and consideration the
committee reported that withdrawal of the PEG tube was both medically and
ethically appropriate. Mrs Martin
sought and obtained court authority to remove
the tube but Mr Martin’s mother and sister took the matter up.
The Supreme Court of Michigan held that there had to be clear and convincing
evidence that the person would have refused the treatment
in the circumstances
involved. The evidence had to be so clear, direct, weighty and convincing as to
enable the fact finder to come
to a clear conviction, without hesitancy, of the
truth of the precise facts in
The majority took the
view that while Mr Martin said he did not wish to live like a vegetable, he was
not in vegetative state and
was “not suffering from the type of
incapacitation referenced in his expression of a desire not to continue
life-sustaining
treatment”.
This case represents perhaps the highest level of certainty about the
evidence required under the clear and convincing evidence test.
The fact that Mr
Martin was not formally in a persistent vegetative state seems to have been
relevant to the majority even though,
as the dissenting judge pointed out, the
bioethics committee had concluded that the persistence of Mr Martin’s
condition and
his level of functioning was the equivalent of being in a
persistent vegetative state for the purposes of considering removing nutrition
It was clear that Mr
Martin was totally dependent on others for all activities of daily living and
all other aspects of his life.
The Supreme Court of Michigan was not willing to apply a best interests test
on the facts of this case noting that such a test lets
others make
determinations about a patient’s quality of life, “thereby
undermining the foundation of self-determination
and inviolability of the person
upon which the right to refuse medical treatment
The Court went on
to note a distinction between a best interests test grounded in the
state’s parens patriae power and the
subjective test based on the common
law right to self-determination. The Court suggested that the best interests
test had been used
in cases in which the patient had been comatose or in a
persistent vegetative which the majority considered was not the case in relation
to Mr Martin.
In 2001, the Supreme Court of California made a similar decision in similar
circumstances and made use of the decision in
In that case Mr
Wendland suffered brain injuries in a motor vehicle accident. Two years later
his wife, who had been appointed his
conservator, requested authority to
withhold artificial nutrition and hydration. The evidence showed that Mr
Wendland had “severe
cognitive impairments, maladaptive behaviour
characterised by agitation, aggressiveness and non-compliance, severe paralysis
right and moderate paralysis on the left, severely impaired communication
without compensatory augmentative communication system,
severe swallowing
dysfunction, dependent on enteric feeding for nutrition and hydration,
incontinence of bowel and bladder, moderate
spasticity, mild to moderate
contractures, general dysphoria, recurrent medical illnesses, including
pneumonia, bladder infections,
sinusitis and some dental issues”.
Mr Wendland’s wife, brother and daughter gave evidence of statements he
had made about his attitude towards life-sustaining
health care prior to his
accident. The trial court found that Mrs Wendland, as conservator, had not shown
by clear and convincing
evidence that Mr Wendland, who was neither in a
permanent vegetative state nor suffering from a terminal illness, would, under
circumstances, want to die.
The Supreme Court of California upheld this finding. It went on to note that
In re Martin
“is most like the case before us” and
subsequently to note that the clear and convincing evidence test “requires
a finding of high probability, based on evidence so clear as to leave no
substantial doubt and sufficiently strong to command the
unhesitating assent of
every reasonable
The trial court also found that Mrs Wendland had not established that the
withdrawal of artificially delivered nutrition and hydration
was commensurate
with her husband’s best interests. The Supreme Court of California held
that a conservator had prove by clear
and convincing evidence that it was in the
best interests of a conscious but incompetent person to terminate nutrition and
artificially delivered to them before the court would give a
conservator permission to do so.
The court was at pains to point out that its decision was limited to those who
although incompetent were conscious and went on to
state that the decision,
“does not affect permanently unconscious patients, including those who are
comatose or in a persistent
Perhaps the best known case dealing with these issues is that about Terri
Schiavo who in 1990, at the age of 26, experienced respiratory
and cardiac
arrest at home and spent the next 15 years in a persistent vegetative state
until her death in 2005. Her husband, Michael,
was appointed her guardian. In
1998 he applied to the circuit court in Florida to remove the PEG tube through
which she received
nutrition and hydration. His application was opposed by Mrs
Schiavo’s parents, Mr and Mrs Schindler. Judge Greer of the circuit
applied the tests laid down by the Supreme Court of Florida in the case
the estate of Browning
found that beyond all doubt that Mrs Schiavo was in a persistent vegetative
state. Mrs Schiavo made no written declarations about
how she wanted to be
treated if she fell into a persistent vegetative state. Judge Greer heard the
evidence of five witnesses. The
evidence of two of these, including Mrs
Schindler, the judge found related to statements she made at the age of 11 or 12
did not truly reflect her intention about treatment when in a
persistent vegetative state. However he did find that she had made
statements to
her husband, brother-in-law and sister-in-law which he found to be both
creditable and reliable and amounting to clear
and convincing evidence that she
would not want life-sustaining treatment if she went into a persistent
vegetative state. As a consequence,
Judge Greer ordered that Mr Schiavo could
direct that the artificial life support to his wife be
discontinued.
This decision led to 14 appeals and numerous motions, petitions and hearings
in the Florida courts, five suits in the US Federal District
Court, Florida
legislation that was struck down as unconstitutional for breaching the strict
separation of powers in the Florida
Constitution
, legislation being rushed
through the US Congress, refusal by the US Supreme Court to become involved on
four different occasions
and the intervention of the Governor of Florida, Jeb
Bush, and his brother, the President of the United States of America, George
Bush. This was despite the fact that, as Gostin has pointed out, the Federal and
State courts in the USA have reached a broad consensus
on death and dying since
the seminal cases of
All Greer J did
was apply the established law in Florida and took account of evidence that he
considered was creditable and reliable
and met the clear and convincing evidence
test to find that Mrs Schiavo would not have wanted life-sustaining treatment if
into a persistent vegetative state and then made the appropriate
consequential orders.
11. 2. 5. Removal of life-sustaining treatment
for those who have never been competent or who have never expressed views
such treatment
In 1992 the Supreme Court of Wisconsin had dealt with the case of a person in
a persistent vegetative state who had never expressed
views about
life-sustaining treatment and who may have never been competent to do
Even though the man in
question had died, the court dealt with the matter noting that the issues it
raised were of great public importance
and were likely to arise again. The court
saw an obligation to guide trial courts and to avoid
uncertainty.
The facts upon which the case was decided were that in May 1989 LW was placed
under the guardianship of a non-profit organization.
He was a 79 year old man
who had a long history of undifferentiated schizophrenia. He had been
institutionalized since 1951. He had
no close relatives or friends and had never
indicated his wishes concerning life-sustaining medical treatment to anyone. The
indicated that he may never have been competent. Six days after being
placed under guardianship, LW had a cardiac arrest in a nursing
hospital. His treating doctors informed his guardian that LW was in a chronic,
persistent vegetative state and advised
that if LW did not improve in the
following four weeks, they would ask the guardian to consent to the withdrawal
of all life-sustaining
medical treatment, including all artificial nutrition and
hydration, thus occasion LW’s
A week after LW’s cardiac arrest, his guardian petitioned the circuit
court for a declaratory judgment to determine whether
the guardian or the court
could consent to such withdrawal. The trial court held that a guardian has
authority to consent to the
withdrawal of all life-sustaining treatment,
including artificial nutrition and hydration, without prior court order or
if the guardian determines that withdrawal is in the person’s
best interests. The matter was appealed to the Supreme Court
of Wisconsin which
upheld the trial court’s decision, but added to it. LW died in February
1991 while the appeal was still
The Supreme Court of Wisconsin specifically disagreed with the argument that
a court must require clear and convincing evidence of
an individual’s
wishes while competent concerning life-sustaining care before such treatment
could be withheld. The court noted
Relatively few individuals provide explicit written or oral instructions
concerning their treatment preferences should they become
incompetent. The
reasons for this are undoubtedly myriad: ignorance, superstition, carelessness,
sloth, procrastination or the simple
refusal to believe it could happen to
oneself. This failure to act is not a decision to accept all treatment, nor
should society’s
increasing ability to delay the dying process make it
one. To adopt a clear and convincing standard would doom many individuals to
prolonged vegetative state sustained in a life form by unwanted, perhaps
detrimental, means that are contrary to the person’s
The court stated that in some circumstances it may well be that in the
person’s best interests to have treatment withdrawn or
withheld and
A dignified and natural death may outweigh the interest of maintaining a
physiological life as long as medically possible. Therefore,
where it is in the
best interests of an incompetent person in a persistent vegetative state to
refuse life-sustaining medical treatment,
his or her right to refuse must be
exercised by a surrogate decision-maker.
The court refused to adopt a substituted judgment test when an
incompetent’s right to refuse treatment is to be exercised noting
In this case, where L.W. did not execute a living will or power of attorney for
health care instrument, and never expressed his wishes
regarding life-sustaining
medical treatment, and in all probability never had the competency to do so, the
guardian must decide whether
it is in the patient’s best interests to have
life-sustaining medical treatment withheld or
The court pointed out that unlike the substituted judgment standard which
necessarily involves consideration of a person’s past
wishes, values,
feelings and beliefs, the best interests standard focuses solely on what is the
currently in the person’s best
The court then went on to set out its specific guidance on the matter. The
majority stated:
In conclusion then we hold that a guardian may consent to the withholding or
withdrawal of life-sustaining medical treatment on behalf
of one who has never
been competent, or a once competent person whose conduct was never of a kind
from which one could draw a reasonable
inference upon which to make a
substituted judgment when:
1. the incompetent patient’s attending physician, together with two
independent neurologists or physicians, determine with reasonable
certainty that the patient is in a persistent vegetative state and has no
reasonable chance of recovery to a cognitive and
sentient life; and
2. the guardian determines in good faith that the withholding or withdrawal
of treatment is in the ward’s best interests, according
to the objective
factors outlined below.
In making the best interests determination, the guardian must begin with a
presumption that continued life is in the best interests
of the ward. Whether
that presumption may be overcome depends on a good faith assessment by the
guardian of several objective factors.
The objective factors the guardian may consider
The degree of humiliation, dependence and loss of dignity resulting from the
condition and treatment; the various treatment options;
and the risks, side
effects, and benefits of each of these options.
Steinmetz J dissented on a range of grounds including that the case was moot
because LW had died, the withholding of life-sustaining
health care should be
decided by the legislature following significant input and that LW was diagnosed
as being in a persistent vegetative
state within four weeks of his cardiac
arrest when for accuracy such a diagnosis should not be made in less than three
11. 2. 6. A summary of the US common
The US common law is contributed to not only by the US Supreme Court and the
other Federal courts but also the Supreme and other courts
of the 50 states. In
addition the US
Constitution
and the constitutions of the States and relevant
legislation all have an impact on the shape of that common law. Nevertheless,
following matters appear to be key elements in the broad consensus about
this area of the common law referred to by
1. A person’s right to refuse medical treatment continues even when the
person becomes incapable of exercising that right themselves.
exercise that right on their behalf, subject to them being satisfied as to
certain matters by clear and convincing evidence.
2. The matters they have to be satisfied about to that level of proof by
creditable and reliable evidence are:
a) that the incapable person, by making an advance directive or other formal
declaration, or through informal statements has expressed
views about how they
would like to be treated in certain situations. If these expressions of view can
be proved when one of those
situations arises, then their views will be given
effect to through the substituted judgment of others, including court appointed
guardians. Life-sustaining treatment could be withheld or withdrawn in these
circumstances.
b) if the person has not expressed views or has not been capable of
expressing views, then others may make the decision that it is
person’s best interests for life-sustaining treatment to continue.
However, they cannot do this unless they are
also satisfied by clear and
convincing evidence that;
i. the person’s attending physician, together with two independent
neurologists or physicians, determine with reasonable medical
certainty that the
person is in a persistent vegetative state and has no reasonable chance of
recovery to a cognitive and sentient
ii. the guardian determines in good faith that the withholding or withdrawal
of treatment is in the person’s best interests,
according to the objective
factors including the degree of humiliation, dependence and loss of dignity
resulting from the condition
and treatment; the various treatment options; and
the risks, side effects, and benefits of each of these options.
3. There appears to be a difference in attitude as to whether life-sustaining
treatment can be withheld or withdrawn depending on
whether the person is
comatose or in a persistent vegetative state, or has a form of consciousness.
There is a greater reluctance
in the US courts to allow treatment to be withheld
or withdrawn if the person has some level of
consciousness.
4. In the US these principles may be applied without the need for a court
order. It is assumed that they are regularly applied where
family members, any
significant others and treating doctors all agree that life-sustaining treatment
be withdrawn. Where there are
differences of view among family members, as a
number of the cases show, the courts can be approached to hear the evidence and
determine the facts and make appropriate orders arising from their
11. 2. 7. The English common law
The common law in England and elsewhere in the United Kingdom has developed
some different approaches and rules from those developed
in the USA. The key
case in English law is
Airedale NHS Trust v Bland
which, like the
cases, arose out of a
11. 2. 7. 1. The “best interests” test and those in a
persistent vegetative state
Anthony Bland was 17 when he was seriously injured in the collapse of the
stand at the Hillsborough soccer ground in April 1989. He
went into a persistent
vegetative state. Soon medical opinion was unanimous that there was no hope of
any improvement in his condition
or of recovery. Unsurprisingly, Anthony Bland
had not indicated his wishes should he find himself in this condition. In 1992,
the support of Anthony Bland’s family, the consultant in charge of
his case and independent physicians, the Airedale NHS Trust
applied to the High
Court of Justice in England for a declaration that it was lawful to discontinue
life-sustaining treatment to
The matter went quickly from the Family Division to the Court of Appeal and
on to the House of Lords which, in February 1993, took
the view that the object
of medical treatment and care was to benefit the patient. However, because he
was in a persistent vegetative
state, there was no benefit to Anthony Bland.
Also, because the principle of the sanctity of life was not absolute, treatment
which Anthony Bland had not consented could be terminated. The substituted
judgment approach used in the US was rejected as not part
of English law and the
best interests test was used to determine whether or not to make a declaration
that the withdrawal of treatment
The House of Lords also stated that until a body of law and practice had been
built up, applications should be made to the High Court
to obtain approval to
withdraw treatment. This case was followed in
The approval of the Family Division of the High Court has to be sought by way
of an application for a declaration. This is because,
in 1990, the House of
Lords decided that the parens patriae jurisdiction of the High Court had been
swept away by legislation and
the revocation of the relevant royal
This is not a problem
in Australia. As has been noted in Chapter 8. 2 and elsewhere in Chapter 8, the
parens patriae jurisdiction
can be exercised by the State and Territory Supreme
Courts in Australia to deal with matters relating to incompetent adults.
However, in a 2005 case, the Court of Appeal noted that each year
approximately 50,000 patients are admitted to intensive care units
in the United
Kingdom and of those 30% died in the unit or on the wards before hospital
discharge. Most died because treatment was
withdrawn or limited, albeit in
circumstances where the clinicians concluded that such treatment was likely
merely to prolong the
process of dying. The court also noted that there is not
always agreement on the part of all concerned as to the withdrawal of treatment
and that that was hardly surprising as grief stricken relatives may not be able
to accept that the patient is beyond saving (because
they are dying). The Court
of Appeal noted that if the criteria for bringing matters to court set out in
the judgment appealed from
were upheld approximately 10 applications per day
would have to be made to the courts for declarations that withholding or
withdrawing
treatment in particular cases would be lawful.
On this question the court concluded
Good practice may require medical practitioners to seek such a declaration where
the legality of proposed treatment is in doubt.
This is not, however, something
that they are required to do as a matter of law.
Nevertheless, as will be seen in this section and elsewhere in this chapter,
cases involving those in a persistent vegetative state,
still have to be, and
other cases continue to be, brought to the courts for declarations.
As already noted, in the case
, the English Court of Appeal
asserted the common law right of every adult with capacity to decide whether or
not to accept medical
This right, including the right of a competent person to refuse treatment,
however unreasonably, was considered established in English
common law by Lord
Goff of Chieveley who gave the leading judgment in the
The principles of the
have been applied in a number of
cases in the Family Division where the person did not meet all of the criteria
formulated by the
Royal College of Physicians for being in a persistent
vegetative state. As a result of a road traffic accident in 1989 when he was
aged 22, and further brain damage from an unknown cause in 1995, a Mr D was in
an irrevocable vegetative state and fed through a
PEG tube. In 1997, Mr
D’s condition met all but one of the Royal College of Physicians criteria
for persistent vegetative state
and the then President of the Family Division,
Sir Stephen Brown, was satisfied that the evidence showed that Mr D had no
and no meaningful life whatsoever. The judge was satisfied that it was
not in Mr D’s best interests to keep his body alive
and granted the
declaration allowing his PEG tube to be
In 2000 the then President of the Family Division, Dame Elizabeth
Butler-Sloss, considered together the cases of two women in persistent
vegetative states and fed through PEG tubes. One had suffered hypoxic brain
damage as a result of a cardio-respiratory arrest while
under a general
anaesthetic, the other had anoxic brain damage as a result of an asystolic
cardiac arrest. There was no evidence
of their views about treatment if they
were in this state, but their families and those treating them all supported the
of artificial nutrition and hydration. The judge made declarations
following the principles in the
She also considered
whether making such declarations would breach the relevant articles of the
European Convention of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms 1950, incorporated
into United Kingdom law as Schedule 1of the
Human Rights Act
, and decided that it would
Another year 2000 case involved another Mr D who, because of a congenital
deformity of his brain, had at 40 had gone into “a
deeper level of
vegetative state than that of Tony
brothers and parents all said he should be allowed to die and that he would not
like to continue living in this condition.
There was no evidence of Mr D having
expressed views about being in this condition. Johnson J noted that Mr D could
no longer be
properly fed and that he was effectively starving to death. Johnson
J continued:
Mr D is a patient who, whatever is done for him, will die quite shortly. The
issue is whether the period of his dying should be extended
by continuing the
hydration. It is plain on the evidence that that would be contrary to his best
A 2001 decision of the Family Division shows some of the difficulties arising
from the House of Lords requiring applications being
made to the Family Division
for declarations allowing artificial nutrition and hydration to be withdrawn
from an incapable person.
This has effectively placed the responsibility for
making such applications on the hospitals involved resulting in them being
to make such applications only in very clear cases, sometimes keeping
people alive without hope of recovery for long periods. In
NHS Trust A v
, Mrs H who was born in 1927 suffered a stroke aged 60 in 1987. In February
1993 she had further brain haemorrhages and became
unconscious.
She had been
unconscious ever since and had been fed through a PEG tube which had been
replaced in both 1997 and 2000. Her condition
remained unchanged for nearly
eight years before an application was made to the court.
Since 1995, if not before, her son and daughter had thought it was not
appropriate for her to have been kept alive through artificial
means. In June
2000 a consultant neurologist formed the view that Mrs H was in a minimally
conscious as different from a permanent
vegetative state. This was based on his
observation and on the observation of a nurse that she had a degree of visual
tracking and
a degree of response to menace.
The hospital was already being cautious. Faced with this difficulty it sought
advice from a leading expert in the field who advised
that Mrs H was
unresponsive to any approaches of any sort to cognitive thinking. The expert
gave evidence that Mrs H’s case
was not one of minimal consciousness but
one of permanent vegetative state. While there was evidence of fragments of
cortical activity,
there was no evidence of a “working
Butler-Sloss P
proceeded to make the declaration sought noting that:
It is painfully clear that this patient has been kept alive for many years by
devoted care, nursing and artificial treatment. There
can be no question of her
ever recovering. She is in a situation which has been expressed in the House of
Lords as “a living
death”. It is very sad for her. It is extremely
distressing for her family. I can see no advantage to her in continuing to
artificially provided with nutrition and hydration. In my judgment it is
entirely proper that the PEG tube should not be replaced
and indeed that that
artificial nutrition and hydration should be brought to an end and that she
should be permitted to die
peacefully….
In 2001 eight years and many cases after the
a new practice
note was issued by the Official Solicitor dealing with permanent vegetative
state cases.
The practice note
confirmed that applications are to be made to the Family Division of the High
Court. It stated that it was futile
to provide medical treatment, including
artificial nutrition and hydration, to a patient who had no awareness of self or
environment
and no prospect of recovery. It noted that the court’s concern
is whether there is any awareness whatsoever or any possibility
The Practice Note also
suggests that a diagnosis of permanent vegetative state should not be made until
a patient has been in a continuing
vegetative state following head injury for 12
months or following other causes of brain damage for six months. It also advises
to who should give the medical
As to other evidence,
evidence of the views of the family are encouraged, but there is no reference to
evidence of the views of the
In accordance with the Practice Note applications continue to be made to the
Family Division. In October 2001 the court gave a declaration
to allow the
withdrawal of nutrition and hydration from a 45 year old woman, Mrs G, who had
suffered extremely severe brain damage
as a result of complications after minor
surgery in September 2000 and who had no prospect of
Butler-Sloss P dealt
with the fact that Mrs G had expressed a strong view during her life that
“if she was found in this situation
she should not be kept alive
regardless” as a reason why Mrs G’s family unanimously supported the
order rather than as
a reason in itself for granting the declaration.
11. 2. 7. 2. The “best interests” test and those for whom
treatment is intrusive and hazardous and will not bring about
In the Bland Case, Lord Goff of Chieveley recognized that there were
different kinds of cases in which the courts had to consider
the best interests
of an incompetent patient. There were the cases of those who were unconscious
with no prospect of recovery and
those cases “in which having regard to
all of the circumstances (including, for example, the very intrusive nature of
the treatment,
the hazards involved in it, and the very poor quality of the life
which may be prolonged for the patient if the treatment is successful),
be judged not to be in the best interests of the patient to initiate or continue
life-prolonging
treatment”.
One of latter kinds of case occurred in England in
An 86 year old man, Mr A,
who was originally from Pakistan but who had settled in Scotland and who had
already had a coronary bypass
and a number of mini strokes fell seriously ill
while visiting his home country. He had a heart attack, developed acute chronic
failure, peripheral edema and total lack of urine production. He was flown
to Scotland and was
admitted to hospital close to death. He had another cardiac arrest in hospital
but was resuscitated. He could
not be weaned off either respiratory or renal
support. He was fed through a naso-gastric tube and had a number of invasive
inserted in him to so he could be monitored and provided with drugs.
Within a short period the assessment of his treating doctors
was that there was
little likelihood of his recovery. They believed that the treatment he was
receiving would not change the outcome
of his illness and that, if it continued,
it would subject him to both psychological and physical distress. They concluded
was in his best interests to withdraw all but palliative care.
On the one hand, Mr A’s family opposed the proposals to withdraw
life-sustaining treatment They believed that there was some
hope of recovery and
that Mr A was not suffering any pain. They were all practicing Muslims and they
had been advised by at least
one Iman that to discontinue Mr A’s treatment
regime was contrary to the Islamic faith and belief system. On the other hand,
because of the nature of the treatment and the need to insert new lines and
naso-gastric tubes and replace those that Mr A pulled
out, those treating him
considered their treatment was an assault on him.
Lawyers became involved. Experts examined Mr A either directly or by more
distant observation. All but one were of the view, particularly
progressed, that the treatment was intrusive, put Mr A through considerable
discomfort with the chances of it producing any
reasonable quality of life being
very low. They were of the view that that it was not in Mr A’s best
interests to be put through
this considerable discomfort and that palliative
care would allow him to die peacefully and with dignity.
Within two months of Mr A’s return to England, the Family Division had
given a declaration that only palliative care need be
given to Mr A and the
Court of Appeal had upheld that decision.
While the Court of Appeal placed great reliance on the evidence of the
medical experts, it is clear it is the view of that court that
in cases like
this it is for the judges and not the doctors to decide what is in the best
interests of the patient.
This is not just an assertion of the role of judges, it is based on the idea
that the judicial decision will not only take account
of the circumstances of
the case from a medical point of view, but will also incorporate broader
ethical, social, moral and welfare
considerations.
11. 2. 7. 3. The standard of proof – a high degree of probability
that it is in the person’s best interests that life-sustaining
not continue
The Court of Appeal held that a judge had to be satisfied to a high degree of
probability by the evidence before they could make a
declaration allowing the
withdrawal of life-sustaining
While the medical
evidence is given great weight, the views of the person and their family are
somewhat discounted. In Mr A’s
Case, Waller LJ was rather dismissive. He
I can say straightaway that when one examines the law, one finds obviously that
views, if one can interpret them, of what the patient
might be and the views of
the family are highly material factors. At the end of the day they are not
however the governing factors
when considering best
11. 2. 7. 4. The court determines best interests in England, not the
person or their family
Coleridge J of the Family Division took a similar view but put it more gently
NHS Trust v Ms D
In that case Ms D was 32 when she went into a vegetative state in 2005. She had
the terminal condition mitochondrial cytopathy which
attacked her brain and
caused her to have continuous epileptic seizures. The medical evidence was that
she probably had no awareness
of any kind and that there was no hope of
recovery. Her treating doctors took the view that it was not in her best
interests to try
and prolong her life if, for example, either her breathing
failed or she suffered cardiac arrest or contracted a potentially life
threatening infection which would normally be treated by antibiotics. The NHS
Trust asked the court to declare that it is not in
Ms D's interests to take
these, and other invasive steps, given her current condition.
Ms D's parents, seven of her other
relatives and her partner disagreed. They opposed the doctors doing or declining
to do anything
which might not prolong her life for as long as possible. They
said that Ms D had some awareness and that on occasions she recognized
communicated with them by blinking or the squeezing of her hand or similar
signs. They said she was a fighter and that miracles
The doctors' response was that the movements they saw
were reflex actions and not true signs of awareness and that to intervene beyond
providing the best possible nursing and palliative care is to do no more than
prolong Ms D’s dying process for Ms D for no
discernable purpose and for
probably no more than an extra six to twelve months.
Coleridge J granted the declaration that it was not in Ms D’s best
interests that she receive active treatments, but that she
be given palliative
care. In relation to the family’s view he said:
From the family's point of view, of course, every extra
day is worth fighting for and, given what they have had to face in the past
years, no one can have anything but the profoundest sympathy for them in their
hope for the arrival of a miracle. But my focus
must be on the patient's best
interests and not on the family best interests.
In my judgment Ms D's best interests demand that she
should not be subjected to more than the minimum necessary to allow her to die
peacefully and with dignity.
The English courts have been clear that their view of what is in
the patient’s best interests can override the views of the
family. Their power to override the views of the patient has been more
controversial, but was asserted in the Court
of Appeal in
That power to override
must however be exercised with great caution and only on the basis of well
substantiated, but not necessarily
uncontradicted evidence, from appropriately
qualified and experienced doctors.
In 2005 Mr Burke was 45 years of age. He suffered from a congenital
degenerative brain condition known as spino-cerebellar ataxia,
which confined
him to a wheelchair. His movements were uncoordinated. His condition affected
his speech, but his mental ability was
not impaired. Nevertheless, because of
his condition there would come a time when he would be entirely dependent on
others for his
care and his very survival. In particular, he would lose the
ability to swallow and would require artificial nutrition and hydration
to survive.
The medical evidence was that he was likely to retain full cognitive
faculties even during the end stage of his disease. He was unlikely
to lose his
capacity to make decisions for himself and was likely to be able to communicate
his wishes until his death was imminent.
He was likely to retain, almost until
the end, insight and awareness of the pain, discomfort and extreme distress that
would result
from malnutrition and dehydration. If food and water were to be
withheld he would die of dehydration after some two to three weeks.
Mr Burke wanted to be fed and provided with appropriate hydration until he
died of natural causes. He does not want artificial nutrition
and hydration to
be withdrawn. He did not want to die of thirst. He did not want a decision to be
taken by doctors that his life
is no longer worth living. In order to ensure
that his wishes would be given effect to, he sought judicial review of the
issued in 2002 by the General Medical Council “Withholding and
Withdrawing Life-prolonging Treatments: Good Practice in Decision-making”.
Permission to proceed with this application was given and Munby J made a series
of declarations. The Court of Appeal set aside these
declarations, but made a
number of statements about the law as it related to Mr Burke’s
circumstances and his wishes.
In a single judgment, the court made it clear that fact that a patient when
competent made it plain that they wished to be kept alive
by artificial
nutrition and hydration was not the source of the duty to provide such
treatment. The court stated that once a patient
had been accepted into a
hospital, the medical staff came under a positive duty at common law to care for
the patient, including
a duty to take such steps as are reasonable to keep the
patient alive. Where artificial nutrition and hydration was necessary to
the patient alive, the duty of care would normally require the doctors to supply
this. However, this duty did not override the
competent patient's wish not to
receive artificial nutrition and
The court took the view that while the common law has recognised that the
duty to keep a patient alive by administering artificial
nutrition and hydration
or other life-prolonging treatment is not absolute, the exceptions to that duty
were restricted to where
a competent patient refuses to receive artificial
nutrition and hydration and where a patient is not competent and it is not
to be in their best interests that they be kept alive
artificially.
The English courts have accepted that where life involves an extreme degree
of pain, discomfort or indignity to a patient, who is
sentient but not competent
and who has manifested no wish to be kept alive, such circumstances may absolve
the doctors of the positive
duty to keep the patient alive. Equally the courts
have recognised that there may be no duty to keep alive a patient who is in a
persistent vegetative state.
In an attempt to put Mr Burke at ease the Court of Appeal stated that, in a
situation in which a competent patient made it plain that
they wished to be kept
alive, regardless of the pain, suffering or indignity of their condition, a
doctor who deliberately interrupted
life-prolonging treatment with the intention
of thereby terminating the patient's life, would leave themselves with no answer
a charge of murder.
Nevertheless, the court went on to point out that doctors are not obliged to
provide to a patient treatment that the patient demands
if the doctor believes
that the treatment is not clinically indicated. The court endorsed the following
propositions about how treatment
is proposed and consented to or refused by a
competent patient:
1. Doctors, exercising their professional clinical judgment, decide what
treatment options are clinically indicated (i.e. will provide
overall clinical
benefit) for their patients.
2. They then offers those treatment options to their patients in the course
of which they explain to them the risks, benefits, side
effects, etc involved in
each of the treatment options.
3. The patients then decides whether they wishes to accept any of those
treatment options and, if so, which one. In the vast majority
of cases the
patient will, of course, decide which treatment option they consider to be in
their best interests and, in doing so,
may take into account other,
non-clinical, factors. However, patients can if they wish decide to accept (or
refuse) the treatment
option recommended on the basis of reasons which are
irrational or for no reasons at all.
4. If the patient chooses one of the treatment options offered to them, the
doctor will then proceed to provide it.
5. If, however, the patient refuses all of the treatment options offered and
instead informs the doctor that they want a form of treatment
which the doctor
has not offered, the doctor will, no doubt, discuss that form of treatment with
them but if the doctor concludes
that this treatment is not clinically
indicated, the doctor is not required (i.e. the doctor is under no legal
obligation) to provide
it to the patient although the doctor should offer to
arrange a second opinion.
11. 2. 7. 4. Orders suppressing the identity of the patient, their family
and the hospital in which they are being treated
In dealing with these sensitive cases which have the potential to be
sensationalized in the media, the courts have occasionally at
least made orders
suppressing the identity of the patient, their family and the hospital they are
in. In one case, Butler-Sloss P
put it this way:
It is extremely important for the sake of the patient that neither she nor any
member of her family, nor the existing hospital, nor
the hospital to which she
will go in order that she may die with dignity and in peace, is identified. It
is not necessary to explain
why; it is quite obvious that any identification
might lead to distress to anyone who is in fact dealing with her over the next
days or weeks. Consequently, it is crucial that the press understand and any
members of the public understand that there is a prohibition
on that degree of
publication. But there is no prohibition of course on publishing the facts of
this case or indeed anything I have
said other than in relation to
11. 3. The differences between the US and English
While there are different courts for England and Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland the common law of the United Kingdom jurisdictions,
particularly the
recent developments in that law, tends to be the same. This is partly because
the House of Lords is the final court
of appeal in civil matters in all United
Kingdom jurisdictions and because of the convenience of having the same common
law throughout
the country. Also the parliament in Westminster makes the statute
law that applies to England, Wales and Northern Ireland and sometimes
In this regard the common law is affected by fewer pieces of legislation than in
the US where State legislation can affect
the common law in many different ways
in the different States. The US common law is also affected by the US
constitution. While there
is no written constitution in the UK, as has already
been noted, the
European Convention of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
has been incorporated into United Kingdom law as Schedule 1of the
Human Rights Act
I. It will have effects similar to the effects on US
common law the “Bill of Rights” provisions of the US constitution
have had in the last 50 years.
Aside from these factors, there are a number of differences in the way the
judges have developed the law in the UK and the USA. These
can best be shown by
summarising those parts of the UK common law that are different from that
developed in the US. These are:
1. The best interests test is used in relation to both those in a persistent
vegetative state and those with different conditions
not involving
unconsciousness but for whom treatment is intrusive, hazardous and unlikely to
produce anything more than a very poor
quality of life.
2. Court approval continues to be required in cases involving persistent
vegetative state and the other conditions referred to in
3. The views of the person do not have to be proved. Their views and those of
their family can be taken into account, but it is for
the court to decide what
is in the person’s best interests.
There are also similarities. These are:
1. In the UK a judge has to be satisfied to a high degree of probability by
the evidence before they can make a declaration allowing
the withdrawal of
life-sustaining treatment. This seems similar to the “clear and convincing
evidence” test developed
2. The starting point is the maintenance of life. In the UK this is stated as
a positive duty on hospitals to take such steps as are
reasonable to keep a
patient alive. While in both the US and the UK this duty is not absolute,
substantial proof must be shown before
life-sustaining treatment may be
discontinued.
11. 4. Developments in the Australian law
In 2009, McDougall J of the Supreme Court of New South Wales confirmed that
the common law recognises a competent adult’s right
to autonomy or
self-determination: the right to control their own
He relied on United
States, Canadian, United Kingdom and Australian
Martin CJ of the
Western Australian Supreme Court supported him, but Higgins CJ of the Supreme
Court of the Australian Capital Territory
circumspect.
The 2009 case that came before the Supreme Court of New South Wales involved
a Mr A who had made an advance directive in an appointment
of enduring
guardianship in which he directed his enduring guardian to refuse consent to
dialysis. By July 2009 Mr A was being kept
alive by mechanical ventilation and
kidney dialysis.
relevant Area Health Service sought a declaration that Mr A’s treating
doctors would be justified in complying with Mr
A’s wishes as set out in
the advance directive.
McDougall J noted that the common law recognised two sometimes conflicting
matters. First, a competent adult’s right of autonomy
self–determination: the right to control their own body. Second the
interest of the State in protecting and preserving the
lives and health of its
citizens. After considering United Kingdom and Canadian cases on that conflict,
which are dealt with above
at 11. 2. 2 and 11. 2. 3, McDougall J stated that the
right to reject medical treatment does not depreciate the value of life. He
noted that a proper understanding of society’s interest in the
preservation of life cannot be considered without taking into
account the
constituents or attributes of life and that in a free and democratic society
those attributes include the right of autonomy
self-determination.
stated, relying on English authority, that:
It is in general clear that, whenever there is a conflict between a capable
adult’s exercise of the right of self-determination
and the State’s
interest in preserving life, the right of the individual must
J then went on to deal with the issue of consent in relation to consents to or
refusals of treatments set out in advance
directives. He noted that an apparent
consent or refusal of consent may be ineffective for a number of reasons:
1. the individual concerned may not have been competent in law to give or
refuse that consent.
2. even if the individual were competent in law, the decision may have been
obtained by undue influence or some other vitiating means.
3. the apparent consent or refusal may not extend to the particular situation
4. the terms of the consent or refusal may be ambiguous or
McDougall J dealt with the argument that refusal of medical treatment will be
vitiated if it is based on incorrect information or
an incorrect assumption. It
could be argued that he appeared to accept that there may be some situations in
which it could be said
that a refusal of consent was ineffective because it was
based on incorrect information or an incorrect assumption. However he noted
proposition well established in the common law that a valid refusal may be based
upon religious, social or moral grounds, or
upon no apparent rational grounds.
That proposition led him to state in relation to the suggestion that the absence
of, or failure
to provide, adequate information could vitiate refusal of
I do not accept the proposition that, in general, a component adult’s
clearly expressed advance refusal of specified medical
procedures or treatment
should be held to be ineffective simply because, at the time of statement of the
refusal, the person was
not given adequate information as to the benefits of the
procedure or treatment (should the circumstances making its administration
desirable arise) and the dangers consequent upon
McDougall J then came back to matters relevant to incorrect information or an
incorrect assumption and was clear, based on the High
Court’s decision in
Rogers v Whitaker
that an apparent consent to medical treatment may be
vitiated if, there was an adequate opportunity for explanation of the treatment
and its benefits and dangers, but no proper explanation was
He accepted that in circumstances where it was practicable for a doctor to
obtain consent to treatment, that, for the consent to be
valid, it must be based
on full information, including information as to risks and benefits. But he then
went on to deal with a question
that is fundamental to the effectiveness of
advance directives namely, whether an advance refusal of consent to certain
forms of medical treatment equally needed to be supported by the
provision of all adequate information.
McDougall J stated that a consent based on misleading information was clearly
of no value and that a consent based on insufficient
information was not much
better, but went on to point out that:
[O]nce it is accepted that religious, social or moral convictions may be of
themselves an adequate basis for a decision to refuse
consent to medical
treatment, it is clear that there is no reason that a decision made on the basis
of such values must have taken
into account the risks that may follow if a
medical practitioner respects and acts upon that decision. This is so a fortiori
there is no discernible rational basis for the decision. No question
arises of justifying what would otherwise be unlawful, and factors
to be taken
into account in determining whether something is or is not unlawful do not have
application by analogy.
McDougall J then went on to deal with the “emergency principle”
or “principle of necessity” and stated:
It follows that the principle of necessity cannot be relied upon to justify a
particular form of medical treatment where the patient
has given an advance care
directive specifying that he or she does not wish to be so treated, and where
there is no reasonable basis
for doubting the validity and applicability of that
McDougall J then went on to lay out the approach to be taken when dealing
with what he called “an advance refusal of medical
care”. It is
suggested that his approach, set out below, applies to other forms of advance
directive as well and to all those
dealing with advance directives whether they
be doctors, other health professionals, service-providers, family members or
McDougall J pointed out that:
[I]f there is any real doubt as to the sufficiency of an advance refusal of
medical treatment, the court should undertake a careful
analysis. But the
analysis should start by respecting the proposition that a competent
individual’s right to self-determination
prevails over the State’s
interest in the preservation of life even though the individual’s exercise
of that right may
result in his or her death. An over-careful scrutiny of the
material may well have the effect of undermining or even negating the
of that right.
It is necessary to bear in mind that not all those who execute advance care
directives are legally trained. Their words should not
be scrutinized with the
care given to a particularly obscure legislative expression of the will of
Parliament. On the other hand,
particularly bearing in mind the likely
consequences of upholding an apparent exercise of the right of
self-determination, the court
must feel a sense of actual persuasion that the
individual acted freely and voluntarily, and intended his or her decision to
to the situation at hand. As Robins JA pointed out in [
, if a medical
practitioner is to act on doubts as to the validity of an advance refusal of
medical treatment, those doubts must be
rationally founded. The same applies to
a court asked to determine the validity of an advance refusal of medical
treatment. It cannot
be correct to recognise, on the one hand, an
individual’s right of self determination; but, on the other, effectively
to undermine
or take away that right by over-nice or merely speculative
McDougall J was satisfied by the evidence that Mr A had made a decision to
refuse dialysis and that he was competent to do so at the
time he made the
decision. Also he was satisfied that Mr A’s expression of intent had not
been vitiated in any way and that
it was clear that the refusal of dialysis was
Mr A’s “own voluntary
McDougall J
noted that the result of the withdrawal of dialysis would hasten Mr A’s
death but, nevertheless, gave the Area
Health Service a declaration that it
would be justified in complying with Mr A’s wishes as expressed in his
advance directive
to his enduring
The Western Australian case did not involve giving effect to the advance
directive of a person who had become incapable of giving
a valid consent to
receiving or refusing medical treatment. It was about whether an organisation
providing residential care to a
man who was a quadriplegic and who was fed
through a percutaneous endoscopic gastronomy tube (a PEG tube) wanted the tube
knowing that he would die if it was removed sought declarations from
the Supreme Court.
was clearly competent and understood the consequences for him of the PEG tube
being removed. Martin CJ noted that the right
of autonomy or self-determination
was well established in the common law and that, as a corollary an individual of
full capacity
was not obliged to give consent to medical treatment, nor was a
medical practitioner or other service provider under any obligation
such treatment without consent, even if the failure to treat will result in the
loss of the patient's life. Martin CJ
noted that this principle has been
established by decisions in the common law jurisdictions of the United States,
Canada, the United
kingdom, New Zealand and
Martin CJ then
went on to make declarations that:
1. If after the man had been given advice by an appropriately qualified
medical practitioner as to the consequences which would flow
from the cessation
of the administration of nutrition and hydration, other than hydration
associated with the provision of medication,
he requested that his service
providers cease administering such nutrition and hydration, then his service
providers could not lawfully
continue administering nutrition and hydration
unless he revoked that direction. Further, his service providers would not be
responsible for any consequences to his life or health caused by
ceasing to administer such nutrition and hydration to him.
2. Any person providing palliative care to the man on the terms specified in
s 259(1) of the
Criminal Code (WA)
would not be criminally responsible
for providing that care notwithstanding that the occasion for its provision
arose from the man's
informed decision to discontinue the treatment necessary to
sustain his life.
The third 2009 case,
Australian Capital Territory v JT
, proceeded on
the basis that JT could not be regarded as having refused available medical
treatment because of his psychotic condition
for which he was receiving the
maximum tolerable dose of anti-psychotic
medication.
psychiatric history going back many years, but following the death of Pope John
Paul II in 2005, he became obsessed with
fasting to bring him closer to God. His
fasting amounted to starvation which was life threatening in itself; however, he
irrational belief that God would not let him die.
Over a period of four years he was hosptialised and fed through a
naso-gastric tube to avoid starvation. He resisted this treatment
and had to be
forcibly restrained. This forcible feeding caused distress to both JT and the
people carrying out the treatment. Feeding
through a PEG tube would require
surgical insertion of the tube and was not a long-term solution of itself,
leaving aside the question
of JT seeking to remove the tube.
As early as 2005, consideration was given by JT’s treating doctors to
“a simple palliative approach” which Higgins
CJ noted meant
“avoiding euphemisms” would allow JT to starve to death while easing
the associated suffering. In 2009
the Australian Capital Territory sought a
declaration that it is lawful for doctors employed by it to desist from
affording treatment
other than palliative care to JT.
The Territory argued that JT was accepting death and that his wishes should
be accepted. Higgins CJ’s response was that JT lacked
capacity to give a
valid consent and that his wishes arose from delusion and irrational thought
caused by his severe mental
After consideration
of some of the cases relied upon by McDougall J and Martin CJ, Higgins CJ went
on to state that:
Even in the case of a competent adult refusing treatment, medical carers are not
entitled to respect those wishes and may be under
a duty not to if there is
reason to suppose that the capacity of the patient to make a reasoned decision
has been diminished by illness
or medication, false assumptions, misinformation
or undue influence. If so, the medical carers must apply such treatment as their
clinical judgment deems to be in the best interests of the patient apart from
those wishes. Primarily, that is the patient’s
continued survival
compatibly with, not the interests of the medical carers institutional or
otherwise, but the interests of that
patient. In that context it would involve a
judgment as to the quality of the continued state of the patient as against the
risks or discomfort. Thus the use of forcible restraint to achieve a
therapeutic benefit or avert a therapeutic disaster would be
the duty of medical
carers to apply not an option they can simply chose to avoid out of distaste for
It is respectfully suggested that this is not a correct view of the
established law and that statements of the current law about the
obligation of
health professionals to give effect to the wishes of competent patients made by
McDougall J and Martin CJ set out in
the two cases discussed above are correct.
Competent patients do not have to have either a rational reason or any reason at
refusing treatment which they do not wish to receive. To accept Higgins
CJ’s statement of the law would be to ignore the reasoning
expressed and subsequently approved in a number of the cases seen as
establishing the current common
In any event Higgins CJ
did not have make any determinations about competent patients as it was clear
that JT was not competent to
give a valid consent or refusal of consent to his
Returning to the matters Higgins CJ had to decide, he noted that the
obligation to preserve life was not absolute but that there was
presumption in favour of prolonging life. He went on to state that JT’s
treating doctors and other care providers
were under a duty to provide
“competent and effective treatment” despite their concern that
providing care to JT was
distressing to them and may violate his rights to
humane treatment under
Human Rights Act
Furthermore, the
Territory was no more entitled to refuse treatment to JT than to any other
person in its care who was not competent
to refuse it. Higgins CJ accepted that
it was a matter of clinical judgment whether any proposed course of treatment
for JT would
be medically
However, Higgins CJ noted that the application before him was for a
declaration that it was lawful to decline to give medical treatment
available and might, at least in the short to medium term, avert JT’s
otherwise imminent death. Because he had formed
the view that it might well be
unlawful to decline to give relevant medical treatment, he could not, on the
evidence that had been
given so far, make the declaration that was
11. 5. Assisted suicide and euthanasia
As was pointed out by the US Supreme Court in
Washington v Glucksburg
in 1997, an examination of history, legal traditions and practices shows that
Anglo-American common law has punished or otherwise
disapproved of assisting
suicide for over 200 years.
Australian common law reflects the same tradition.
This book does not deal with either assisted suicide or euthanasia. None of
the actions taken by doctors as a result of their own
decisions or the decisions
of others, including courts, tribunals and public officials in relation to the
withholding or withdrawal
of medical treatment from patients amounts to
assisting suicide or euthanasia when carried out according to the law and
discussed in this book. Lord Goff of Chieveley noted in the
the clear distinction between the bounds of lawful treatment which
could include a decision to withhold or withdraw life-sustaining
treatment that
was no longer fulfilling any therapeutic purpose and unlawful
euthanasia.
Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus study
(2005) 366 (9503): 2112-7.
Rich, op cit (footnote 17),
Mohr v Williams
, 14 and 14-15 (1905). See also
105 N.E. 93
, 93 (1914).
Bedfellows – How medical jurisprudence has influenced medical ethics and
medical practice
, New York, Kluwer Academic, 2001, Chs 4 and 5 generally.
Salgo v Leland Stanford Jr University Board of Trustees
Natanson v Kline
350 P.2d 1093
Urofsky, M I,
Letting Go:
Death, Dying and the Law
, Norman, University of Oklahoma Press,
Kutner, L, “Due process
of euthanasia: The living will, a proposal”
Indiana Law
Ibid 550-551.
Ibid 551-554.
Urofsky, op cit (footnote 5),
John F Kennedy Memorial
Hospital v Bludworth
452 So.2d 921
, 926 (1984)
Ibid. For the decision of
the District Court of Appeal see,
432 So.2d 611
Ibid. 926-927.
Malette v Shulman
(1987) 47 DLR (4
Malette v Shulman
(1990) 67 DLR (4
) 321, 333.
Ibid 332 and 337.
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95.
Airedale NHS Trust v Bland
[1993] AC 789, 864; Re C
[1994] 1 All
R (Burke) v General Medical Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2006] QB 273.
[1994] 1 All ER
, 824 and 825.
R (Burke) v General
Medical Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2006] QB 273.
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95
102-103, 115-116 (Lord Donaldson) and the judgments of Butler-Sloss and
Staughton LJJ.
Nancy B v Hotel-Dieu de
(1992) 86 DLR 4
[1994] 1 All ER
Re B (adult: refusal of
medical treatment)
[2002] EWHC 429 (Fam)
[2002] 2 All ER 449.
Ibid. [100].
In the matter of
355 A.2d 647
(1976). See also Rich, B A,
Strange Bedfellows
– How medical jurisprudence has influenced medical ethics and medical
, New York, Kluwer Academic, 2001), 68 and Pence, G,
Cases in Medical Ethics
, Boston, McGaw-Hill, 3
ed, 2000, ch. 2.
Cruzan v Director,
Missouri Department of Health
[1990] USSC 122
, 290 (1990).
Ibid. 2852-2853.
Pence, op cit (footnote 33),
Annas, G J, “Nancy
Cruzan and the right to die” (1990)
, Vol 323, no 10, 670,
[1990] USSC 122
, 290 (1990).
Ibid. 290-291.
See for example,
matter of Conroy
486 A.2d 1209
In re Rosebush
491 N.W.2d 633
In re Martin
538 N.W.2d 399
Conservatorship of
28 P.3d 151 (2001).
John F Kennedy Memorial
Hospital v Bludworth
452 So.2d 921
, 926-927 (1984).
In the estate of
568 So.2d 4
, 15 (1990).
In re Martin
Ibid. 408-409.
Conservatorship of
28 P.3d 151 (2001).
Ibid. 170 and 173.
568 So.2d 4
In re the Guardianship of
2000 WL 34546715 (Fla. Cir. Ct.)
Gostin, J O, “Ethics,
Constitution
and the Dying Process – the case of Theresa Marie
Schiavo” (2005)
Vol 293 No 19 2403.
For a more detailed
descriptions of the Schiavo matter see, Mendelson, D and Ashby, M “The
medical provision of hydration and
nutrition: Two very different outcomes in
Victoria and Florida” (2004) 11 JML 282, 286-291 and Wllmott, L, White, B,
decision: Emotional but legally
controversial?”
[2006] BondLawRw 6
Bond Law Review
See also Skene, L,
“The Schiavo and Korp cases: Conceptualising end-of-life
decision-making” (2005) 13
In the matter of the
Guardianship of L.W.
482 N.W.2d 60
Ibid. 63-64.
Ibid. 67-68.
Ibid. 71-72. For another
account of the factors to be considered see,
In re Conroy
486 A.2d 1209
(1985), 1230-33 and 1249-50 in particular.
In the matter of the
Guardianship of L.W.
482 N.W.2d 60
, 76-79 (1992).
Gostin, J O, op cit
(footnote 57) 2403.
This may explain why in 2002
in the Schiavo Case Mrs Schiavo’s parents sought to show that she was in a
minimally conscious
state rather than in a persistent vegetative state. Greer J
did not accept this new evidence. He was upheld on appeal. See
Guardianship of Schiavo
2002 WL 31817960 (Fla. Cir. Ct.) and In
Guardianship of Schiavo
851 So.2d 182
[1993] AC 789.
Ibid. 871-872. For a New
Zealand case which takes a similar approach but predates
Auckland Health Board v Attorney-General
[1993] 1 NZLR 235.
Law Hospital NHS Trust v
Lord Advocate
[1996] ScotCS CSIH_2
[1996] SC 301.
[1991] UKHL 1
[1990] 2 AC
, 57-58 and
Airedale NHS Trust v Bland
[1993] AC 789, 862. For the
procedure to follow see,
Practice Note (Official Solicitor: Declaratory
Proceedings: Medical and Welfare Decisions for Adults who lack Capacity)
[2001] 2 FLR 158.
R (Burke) v General
Medical Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2006] QB 273.
For the decision
appealed from see,
R (Burke) v General Medical Council
[2004] EWCA 1879
[2005] QB 424.
Ibid. [80].
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
Airedale NHS Trust v
[1993] AC 789, 862.
Re D (Medical
[1998] 1 FLR 411.
For another 1997 case involving a person in a
condition which did not meet all the Royal College of Physicians’ criteria
persistent vegetative state but in relation to whom a declaration was
granted see
, Re H (A Patient)
[1998] 2 FLR 36.
NHS Trust A v M; NHS
Trust B v H
[2001] 1 All ER 801.
Ibid. 806-814.
NHS Trust v D
(unreported, Family Division, Johnson J, 10 November, 2000, 3. Mr D had a
progressive, untreatable brain lesion, a posterior fossa
arterio-venous
malformation.
[2001] 2 FLR 501.
Ibid. 506. For another case
showing the cautious approach of UK hospitals see,
NHS Trust v I
EWHC 2243 (Fam).
[2001] 2 FLR 158.
(2001) 65 BMLR
Airedale NHS Trust v
[1993] AC 789, 868.
An NHS Trust v A
[2005] EWCA Civ 1145.
Ibid. [88]-[94]. See also
[2001] Fam 15
, Butler-Sloss P at 27 and Thorpe LJ at 30.
, Butler-Sloss P at 28 and Thorpe LJ at 30;
An NHS Trust v A
EWCA Civ 1145
, [78] and [91].
An NHS Trust v A
[2005] EWCA Civ 1145
, [74], [83] and [96];
[1991] 2 WLR 140
An NHS Trust v A
[2005] EWCA Civ 1145
[2005] EWHC 2439 (Fam).
Ibid. [45]-[46].
R (Burke) v General
Medical Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 1003
[2006] QB 273.
Ibid. [31]-[32].
Ibid. [33].
Ibid. [34].
Ibid. [50].
NHS Trust v I
[2003] EWHC 2243 (Fam)
NHS Trust v Ms D
[2005] EWHC 2439 (Fam).
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
Ibid. [5]-[16].
Bridgewater Care Group
[2009] WASC 229
Australian Capital Territory v JT
[2009] ACTSC 105.
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761.
Ibid. [16].
Ibid. [27].
Ibid. [28].
Rogers v Whitaker
175 CLR 479
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
Ibid. [34].
(1990) 67 DLR
) 321, 337.
Hunter and New England
Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761
Ibid. [54]-[56].
Ibid. [60]-[61].
Bridgewater Care Group
[2009] WASC 229.
Ibid. [24]-[26].
Ibid. [58]. Martin CJ
gave his decision 14 August 2009. Mr Rossiter died 21 September 2009.
[2009] ACTSC 105.
Ibid. [17]-[18].
Ibid. [38].
See for example,
Airedale NHS Trust v Bland
[1993] AC 789;
[1992] EWCA Civ 18
[1993] Fam 95
Malette v Shulman
(1990) 67 DLR (4
New England Area Health Service v A
[2009] NSWSC 761.
Human Rights Act
Australian Capital
Territory v JT
[2009] ACTSC 105
Ibid. [66].
Airedale NHS Trust v
[1993] AC 789, 873.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (448 KB)
PDF format (184 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter