URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crawford, Michael JR --- "The Tort of Nuisance: From the Outside Looking in" [2024] MelbULawRw 12; (2024) 47(3) Melbourne University Law Review 554
THE TORT OF NUISANCE: FROM THE OUTSIDE LOOKING IN
I Introduction
II The Cost of Delineating Rights
A The Exclusion Thesis and the Ambit of an Owner’s Authority
B The Place of Nuisance in the Exclusion Model
C Victoria Park Racing & Recreation Grounds Co Ltd v Taylor
III Fearn v Board of Trustees of the Tate Gallery
A The Facts
B The Court’s Reasoning
C Unanswered Questions
IV Crossing the Rubicon
A Analysis of Existing Authorities
B From Exclusion to Governance
C Remedies and Redistribution
D The Costs of Prospective Uncertainty
V Conclusion
THE TORT OF NUISANCE: FROM THE OUTSIDE LOOKING
Michael JR Crawford
It is central to the exclusion paradigm of property law that visual
intrusions, however
unpleasant, cannot amount to actionable wrongs.
This proposition is best captured by Lord Camden CJ’s famous dictum that,
eye cannot by the laws of England be guilty of a trespass’.
This settled understanding has been upended by the recent decision
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in
Fearn v Board of Trustees
of the Tate Gallery
’), in which the Court
unanimously held that acts of visual intrusion can amount to a nuisance, and a
majority found that nuisance
had been established on the facts. This article
argues that the decision in
sets an undesirable precedent that
should not be followed in other common law
I Introduction
In recent years, ‘exclusion’ has replaced the ‘bundle of
rights’ as the dominant theory of
leading proponents stress, the value of the right to exclude is purely
instrumental.
Its purpose is not to encourage
people to live like hermits,
but to facilitate
anonymous interactions over scarce resources at low cost. It does this by
delineating the owner’s sphere
of exclusive authority solely in terms of
physical interactions with the relevant ‘thing’. It is thus
fundamental to
the exclusion paradigm that overlooking and other forms of
‘visual intrusion’ cannot amount to wrongs to property. This
was well understood by both practitioners and
theoreticians,
is perhaps best captured by Lord Camden CJ’s famous dictum that ‘the
eye cannot by the laws of England be guilty
This understanding of the basic architecture of property law has been
challenged by the recent decision of the Supreme Court of the
United Kingdom
Fearn v Board of Trustees of the Tate Gallery
’), in which a
majority of the Court held that overlooking by visitors to the Tate
Modern’s viewing gallery amounted to a nuisance against
leaseholders who live in a neighbouring block of
behaviour of a minority of the Tate Modern’s licensees was certainly to be
deplored, the Court’s decision
to extend the ambit of nuisance to visual
intrusions is wrong and should not be followed in other common law
The argument made below is not that acts of voyeurism are intrinsically
worthy of legal protection, but that permitting visual intrusions
worth paying for the systemic benefit of cheaply delineating the sphere of an
owner’s exclusive authority. By driving
a coach and horses through the
exclusion paradigm, the Supreme Court has doubtless protected, or perhaps even
increased, the value
of the claimants’ flats. However, this boon to the
claimants has come at the expense of both the Tate Modern and, more
significantly,
prospective certainty about the ambit of an owner’s rights.
The true legacy of the decision in
will thus not merely be an
enlarged conception of an owner’s rights in land, but a reduction in the
likelihood that future
disputes between neighbours will be resolved without
recourse to the courts. Whilst this is a future to which English law appears
have committed itself, it is one that courts in other
common law jurisdictions would do well to avoid.
II The Cost of Delineating
The Exclusion Thesis
and the Ambit of an Owner’s Authority
In ‘The Problem of Social Cost’, Ronald Coase famously
demonstrated that ‘Pigouvian taxes’ are not required
externality
property rights are fully delineated and transaction costs are sufficiently low,
affected by ‘spillovers’ will bargain their way to the Pareto
optimal distribution of rights.
strongest ‘invariance’ form, the ‘Coase Theorem’ says
that, in a world of zero transaction costs, the default distribution of
need not be allocatively efficient because parties will bargain their way to
the efficient
distribution.
Coase did not, of course, believe the Coase
and the bulk of his seminal
article is devoted to explaining how and why positive transaction costs shape
legal institutions. Whilst
Coase was acutely aware of the problem of transaction
costs, he was less alive to another source of friction; the costs of
delineating,
publicising and processing the rights in whose shadow people must
Thomas Merrill and Henry Smith have observed, Coase was typical of legal
economists in implicitly subscribing to a version of
the ‘bundle of
rights’ theory of property, according to which the institution of property
is merely an aggregation of
state-sanctioned in personam use rights attaching to
Merrill and Smith explain that
[t]he implicit conception of property that underlies these assumptions is that
of an authoritatively established collection of use
rights with respect to a
resource. Each situation has its own unique list of use rights, with different
assigned to different individuals. ‘Property’ is the
list that is currently recognized by law ... or by established practice
convention ...
The flaw in
the bundle of rights conception of property is its failure to appreciate that
delineating rights on a use-by-use basis
is prohibitively expensive,
particularly in cases where the impugned conduct affects more than two
people. To again borrow from Smith:
At the hypothetical extreme, the law would implement a list of use rights
holding between all potential pairwise combinations of
persons with respect to
any (at least heretofore) conceivable activity that has any impact on anyone.
The costs of this approach
would be prohibitive, but it is the vision lurking
economic approach to tort, and especially nuisance,
a world of both positive transaction
information costs, the law must
employ a delineation mechanism that resolves the maximum number of
resource conflicts using the minimum number of informational
It achieves this through the
proxy of exclusion, which acts as a ‘
over direct
delineation of this more “complete” set of legal
relations’.
The exclusion paradigm
forbids everyone but the person designated as ‘owner’ from
physically interfering with the collection
of resource attributes that together
constitute the legal ‘thing’. The virtue of the exclusion proxy is
that it obeys
the rule of the excluded
Because any given use either
involves physical interference or it does not, one simple informational variable
can delineate use rights
in an infinite number of possible
interactions.
In the case of land, the law implements the exclusion strategy by forbidding
physical incursions into a three-dimensional column of
space bounded in the
horizontal plane by the fence lines.
that require one to be inside the column are the sole preserve of the owner,
whilst those that do not remain open to everyone.
As the owner of a house, I
alone may paint a mural on the door or plant a Japanese maple in the front yard.
On the other hand, any
member of the public may sketch the maple or photograph
the mural, so long as they do so from the public
Contrary to the use-by-use
characterisation of property, this allocation of rights does not arise because I
detached the ‘sketching’
and ‘photographing’ sticks from
the bundle of rights that together constitute my freehold and assigned them to
passers-by. Instead, it reflects the fact that planting trees and
painting murals are uses that are captured by the proxy of
whereas sketching or
photographing them from the public footpath are not.
The Place of Nuisance
in the Exclusion Model
Although the exclusion model and its emphasis on boundary crossing is most
obviously associated with the tort of trespass, it is also
largely consistent
with paradigm cases of nuisance. As Lord Goff has observed:
[F]or an action in private nuisance to lie in respect of interference with the
plaintiff’s enjoyment of his land, it will generally
arise from something
emanating from the defendant’s land. Such an emanation may take many forms
— noise, dirt, fumes,
a noxious smell, vibrations, and
noise and other vibrations are energy-bearing waves that stimulate
adjacent particles rather than moving them through
readily conceive of archetypal examples of nuisance as instances of boundary
take a particularly stark example, whilst the Millers sued the neighbouring
cricket club in negligence and nuisance rather than
it is difficult to think of a
clearer example of gross boundary crossing than hitting a cricket ball into
someone’s backyard.
That such ‘emanations’ are considered acts of
‘nuisance’ rather than ‘trespass’ is largely explained
by an historical quirk of common law pleading, according to which the action was
determined by the location of the impugned conduct.
If it originated on the
plaintiff’s land, the appropriate action was trespass; if not, then the
claim was to be brought in
Consequently, fumes and vibrations emanating from neighbouring properties were
captured by nuisance, whereas acts of bodily boundary
crossing were actionable
as trespasses.
Whilst nuisance plausibly
extends to ‘aesthetic’ blights such as prostitution in residential
neighbourhoods as well as
a miscellany of other
instances in which non-invasive conduct amounts to a nuisance
‘must’, as Lord Goff
observed, ‘be relatively
C Victoria Park Racing
& Recreation Grounds Co Ltd v Taylor
Although it long predates the information cost
revolution in property theory, the role of exclusion in delineating an
to use land was strikingly captured by the 1937 decision of the High Court of
Australia in
Victoria Park Racing & Recreation Grounds Co Ltd v
Victoria Park Racing
’), in which the owner of a
racecourse sought to enjoin the defendants from broadcasting the results of
horse races that they
observed from a tower erected on neighbouring
majority of 3:2, the High Court refused the injunction, holding that the
defendants’ conduct did not amount to an actionable
The majority position was
captured by Latham CJ’s pithy statement:
The court has not been referred to any authority in English law which supports
the general contention that if a person chooses to
organize an entertainment or
to do anything else which other persons are able to see he has a right to obtain
from a court an order
that they shall not describe to anybody what they
The defendants did not
prevail over the plaintiff because their conduct
was deemed to be meritorious or otherwise worthy of protection. To the
contrary, they were unabashed free riders whose behaviour was described by
McTiernan J as ‘impudent’.
The defendants prevailed for the simple reason that their conduct did not amount
to a physical invasion of the plaintiff’s
land and was therefore not
wrongful. The outcome in
Victoria Park Racing
is thus nothing more than
an application of Lord Camden CJ’s famous dictum that ‘the eye
cannot by the laws of England
be guilty of a
where trespass means a
Fearn v Board of
Trustees of the Tate Gallery
This settled understanding of the law has been upended by UK Supreme
Court’s recent decision in
. The five claimants hold 999-year
leases over expensive flats in the Neo Bankside development, a collection of
residential towers
abutting the Tate Modern in Southwark,
The most striking feature of these
otherwise bland prisms is the transparent glass of the exterior walls. Whilst
this ensures the
residents’ enviable views out, it also guarantees
outsiders unobstructed views in.
claimants have been made painfully aware of this fact by the decision of their
nearest neighbour, the Tate Modern, to use the
top floor of its Blavatnik
Building as a public viewing gallery.
viewing gallery affords its 500,000–600,000 annual visitors uninterrupted
views both over London and into the interior
of the claimants’
Evidently, many visitors find the
view into the flats more diverting than that over south London. The trial judge
found that some
visitors used smartphones to take photos of the
claimants’ flats which they then posted
others even peered in with the aid of
binoculars.
The claimants, who
unsurprisingly object to this behaviour, sued the trustees of the Tate Gallery
arguing that it amounted to an
Although the claimants naturally emphasised the most egregious visual
intrusions, the essence of their claim is a right not to be overlooked by
those in the viewing gallery. If Lord Camden CJ’s
dictum is indeed a
foundational design feature of property law, then resolution of the dispute
should have been simple. The claimants
ought to have failed on the ground that
neither the defendant nor its licensees committed a wrong known to English law.
Indeed, this
is precisely the basis on which the claimants’ appeal was
dismissed by a unanimous Court of Appeal, which held that
despite the hundreds of years in which there has been a remedy for causing
nuisance to an adjoining owner’s land and the prevalence
of overlooking in
all cities and towns, there has been no reported case in this country in which a
claimant has been successful in
a nuisance claim for overlooking by a neighbour.
There have, however, been cases in which judges have decided and expressed the
that no such cause of action
this emphatic statement, the claimants not only prevailed on appeal in the UK
Supreme Court by a majority of 3:2, all five
members agreed that visual
intrusions or ‘overlooking’ can, in principle, amount to a nuisance
The Court’s
What separated the majority from the minority in
was thus not a
difference of opinion about the ambit of nuisance, but the correct
interpretation of the ‘reasonable user’
principle that lies at its
heart. In an oft-cited passage,
Lord Goff explained that strict liability in nuisance
has been kept under control by the principle of reasonable user — the
principle of give and take as between neighbouring occupiers
of land, under
which ‘those acts necessary for the common and ordinary use and occupation
of land and houses may be done, if
conveniently done, without subjecting those
who do them to an action:’ ... per Bramwell B. The effect is that, if the
is reasonable, the defendant will not be liable for consequent harm to his
neighbour’s enjoyment of his land; but if the user
is not reasonable, the
defendant will be liable, even though he may have exercised reasonable care and
skill to avoid
Lord Goff faithfully reproduced the key passage from
Bamford v Turnley
’), his gloss on Bramwell B’s famous dictum
contains more than a little creative licence. Whilst Bramwell B noted, en
passant, that acts necessary for ordinary use ought to be ‘conveniently
nowhere, contra Lord Goff, did he conflate the concepts of
‘ordinary’ and ‘reasonable’ use. What, then, is
proper relationship between these two concepts?
According to Lord Leggatt JSC, with whom Lord Reed PSC and Lord
Lloyd-Jones JSC agreed, the principle of ‘reasonable user’ is
coextensive with that of ‘ordinary use’. His
Lordship explained
[t]his principle of reciprocity explains the priority given by the law of
nuisance to the common and ordinary use of land over special
and unusual uses. A
person who puts his land to a special use cannot justify substantial
interference which this causes with the
ordinary use of neighbouring land by
saying that he is asking no more consideration or forbearance from his neighbour
than they ...
expect from him. Nor can such a person complain on that
basis about substantial interference with his special use of his land caused
the ordinary use of neighbouring land. By contrast, a person who is using her
land in a common and ordinary way is not seeking
any unequal treatment or asking
of her neighbours more than they ask of
Because the claimant
must prove that an unusual or atypical use of the defendant’s land
resulted in a ‘
substantial
interference with the
use of the claimant’s land’,
liability in nuisance can only arise when the defendant’s
unusual use of his land substantially interferes with the claimant’s
ordinary use of her land. Lord Leggatt JSC’s view
of liability in nuisance
can be summarised in the following
Plaintiff’s use
Defendant’s use
No nuisance
No nuisance
No nuisance
Lord Sales JSC, with whom Lord Kitchin JSC agreed, criticised the
majority’s interpretation of the ‘reasonable user’
requirement, describing it as
‘mechanistic’
and arguing that
it elevated one factor in the give and take enquiry ‘to unjustified
prominence’.
His Lordship instead
urged a ‘more open-textured objective reasonableness standard, which is
fact-sensitive in its application
across the whole range of possible
This difference of opinion was not merely semantic. According to the
majority, the substantial interference with the claimants’ ordinary use
enjoyment of their flats amounted to a nuisance because operating a public
viewing gallery could not be said to be ‘necessary
for the common and
ordinary use and occupation of the Tate’s
Lord Leggatt JSC explained
[i]nviting members of the public to look out from a viewing gallery is
manifestly a very particular and exceptional use of land.
It cannot even be said
to be a necessary or ordinary incident of operating an art museum. Hence, the
Tate cannot rely on the principle
of give and take and argue that it seeks no
more toleration from its neighbours for its activities than they would expect
By contrast, Lord
Sales JSC argued that the question of ‘reasonable user’ could not be
resolved by simply asking whether
the impugned use was ordinary or
Moreover, that the
claimants’ use is common or ordinary ‘should not of necessity trump
the ordinary right of the defendant
to use its property in a new way, so as to
eliminate all question of whether there is scope for a reasonable accommodation
According to his
Lordship, the reasonable user enquiry requires, amongst other things,
consideration of the degree to which the claimants
could have mitigated the
conduct of which they complain.
applying the principle of ‘give and take’ as between neighbours,
Lord Sales JSC could neither ignore the unusual
design of the claimants’
flats nor their refusal to install curtains or take any other self-help measures
which, his Lordship
argued, could reasonably be expected of people who live in
the densely populated centre of a large
Whilst Lord Leggatt JSC regarded this insistence on self-help measures as
victim blaming,
Lord Sales JSC pointed to
the absurdity of making the defendant liable in nuisance only because the
peculiar design of the Neo Bankside
towers attracted the gaze of those
His Lordship concluded that, when
assessed against the normal design of a residential tower in the area,
the Tate’s operation of the viewing gallery did not involve a nuisance.
The owners of the flats in Neo Bankside could not turn
the operation of the
viewing gallery into a nuisance by reason of the development of their own
property according to a design which
was out of line with the norm for the
Before discussing the broader implications of the decision in
important to note two questions left unanswered by Lord Leggatt JSC’s
majority judgment. The first, and most obvious, is that
of remedy. Although his
Lordship devoted several paragraphs to discussion of the principles that
determine whether the victim of
a nuisance should be entitled to specific relief
or damages in lieu,
the unenviable task of
determining the appropriate remedy was, in the absence of argument on the
question, remitted to a judge of
the Chancery
Division of the High Court of England and
The second, and related, question concerns identification of the precise
conduct that amounted to a nuisance. As was to be expected,
the claimants
highlighted the most egregious acts of overlooking, particularly the
visitors’ use of camera phones.
Leggatt JSC fixed upon this part of the claimants’ case, remarking of it
that, ‘[i]t is not difficult to imagine
how oppressive living in such
circumstances would feel for any ordinary person — much like being on
display in a zoo’.
This emphasis on
the licensees’ conduct suggests that the Tate Modern’s liability is
attributable to the conduct of its
licensees. However, in his summation, Lord
Leggatt JSC stressed that, ‘[i]nviting members of the public to look out
viewing gallery is manifestly a very particular and exceptional use of
This, by contrast, suggests
that the tortious conduct was not the behaviour of the visitors, but the mere
decision of the defendants
to use the top floor of the Blavatnik Building as a
public viewing gallery.
One might remark of this distinction: who cares? The existence of the viewing
gallery was a necessary condition for the visitors’
objectionable
behaviour, and it is well established that a freeholder may be liable in
nuisance for the conduct of her licensees.
Whilst this is true, specifying the precise conduct
remains important because it bears heavily on the issue of
If the mere operation of the
viewing gallery is wrongful per se, then the question of remedy is simple: the
claimants ought to be
entitled to an order enjoining the trustees from using
their land for that
the other hand, the wrongful conduct is confined to the more egregious conduct
of a minority of visitors, then the question
becomes far more difficult. As is
discussed in greater detail below, this is because any order for specific relief
must enjoin the
behaviour without also capturing the many uses of the viewing gallery that
ex hypothesi
, wrongful.
That Lord Leggatt JSC equivocated on this question is unfortunate, not least for
the Chancery judge who, absent a settlement, must
thread this remedial
IV Crossing the
Analysis of Existing
Authorities
Whilst the UK Supreme Court either failed or declined to answer these
questions, it was emphatic in its conclusion about the ambit
of the tort of
nuisance. Not only did both Lord Leggatt JSC and Lord Sales JSC hold that visual
intrusions could amount to a nuisance,
each also argued that this is a matter of
settled principle.
Indeed, Lord Leggatt JSC
remarked that the proven facts in
disclose a ‘straightforward
case of nuisance’.
This will come as
a surprise to many, not least the Court of Appeal which, as noted above,
unanimously dismissed the claimants’
appeal on the grounds that
established authorities
dictate precisely the opposite
conclusion.
As a matter of doctrine, the UK Supreme Court’s conclusion on the
question of ambit relies upon what could charitably be described
tendentious reading of the existing authorities. Take first, Lord Leggatt
JSC’s discussion of the
Australian authority,
Victoria Park Racing
. According to his Lordship,
Victoria Park
was not a case of nuisance caused by visual intrusion. It could not reasonably
be said that a single person looking onto the claimant’s
land while races
were taking place caused even trifling annoyance. The real issue was whether the
broadcasting of a commentary on
the races was a nuisance. The claim failed
because the majority of the court held that, as Dixon J put it ... ‘the
of the plaintiff’s complaint goes to interference, not with its
enjoyment of the land, but with the profitable conduct of its
Again, this decision provides no support
at all for the proposition that
watching from a neighbouring property, however
persistent and intrusive, can
never amount to a
Lord Leggatt
JSC’s summation of the case correctly identifies that the valuable
resource in dispute in
Victoria Park Racing
was not the spectacle of
horses galloping around a track, but
information
they finished. The unauthorised dissemination of this information was injurious
to the plaintiff because
it allowed punters, who would otherwise have purchased
tickets and attended the track in person, to instead bet with illegal
off-course bookmakers from the comfort of their local
Nevertheless, to confine the significance of
Victoria Park Racing
commercial disputes is to conflate the distinction between legal means and
private ends.
Information about the result
of a horserace is no less a product of the track on which it is run than a
potato is a product of the
soil in which it is grown. Each is a latent resource
attribute of land realised through the investment decisions and efforts of the
owner. In a world of positive transaction costs, the question of whether to
invest in potatoes or horse racing will depend, at least
in part, on which
activity enjoys legal protection from free riders. The
effect of the decision in
Victoria Park Racing
is simply to make clear
that information about activities taking place on privately owned land is,
unlike a potato, not a
protected resource attribute of the land.
Thus, if the owner of a racecourse wishes to capture the value of her investment
she cannot, unlike the farmer, rely on the law to assist
The majority in
Victoria Park Racing
could not have been clearer on this point. Chief
Justice Latham held:
I am unable to see that any right of the plaintiff has been violated or any
wrong done to him. Any person is entitled to look over
the plaintiff’s
fences and to see what goes on in the plaintiff’s land. If the plaintiff
desires to prevent this, the
plaintiff can erect a higher fence. ... In my
opinion, the law cannot by an injunction in effect erect fences which the
is not prepared to provide. The
defendant does no wrong to the
plaintiff by looking at what takes place on the plaintiff’s land. Further,
he does no wrong to
the plaintiff by describing to other persons, to as wide an
audience as he can obtain, what takes place on the plaintiff’s
ground. The
court has not been referred to any principle of law which prevents any man from
describing anything which he sees anywhere
if he does not make defamatory
statements, infringe the law as to offensive language, &c, break a contract,
or wrongfully reveal
confidential
information.
To the same
effect, Dixon J remarked that
[i]f one, who could not see the spectacle, took upon himself to broadcast a
fictitious account of the races he might conceivably
render himself liable in a
form of action in which his falsehood played a part, but he would commit no
nuisance. It is the obtaining
a view of the premises which is the foundation of
the allegation.
But English law is, rightly or wrongly, clear that the
natural rights of an occupier do not include freedom from the view and
of neighbouring occupiers or of other persons who enable themselves
to overlook the premises. An occupier of land is at liberty to
exclude his
neighbour’s view by any physical means he can adopt. But while it is no
wrongful act on his part to block the prospect
from adjacent land, it is no
wrongful act on the part of any person on such land to avail himself of what
prospect exists or can
Given these
clear statements of principle, it is impossible to concur with Lord Leggatt
JSC’s conclusion that
Victoria Park Racing
‘provides no
support at all for the proposition that watching from a neighbouring property,
however persistent and intrusive,
can never amount to a
To the contrary, this is
precisely the proposition that the majority judgments support.
Lord Sales JSC’s attempt to reshape
Victoria Park Racing
little better. For a start, his Lordship misinterpreted Latham CJ’s
remarks about fences as support for the proposition
that the reciprocity
principle in nuisance requires a claimant to demonstrate that she has taken
reasonable steps to either avoid
or mitigate the severity of the impugned
Contrary to Lord Sales JSC’s
view, Latham CJ’s acerbic remarks had nothing to do with liability in
nuisance. Chief Justice
Latham’s purpose was simply to make clear that the
plaintiff in
Victoria Park Racing
must rely on self-help measures because
the defendants’ conduct was not wrongful and thus would not be restrained
by the Court.
Lord Sales JSC’s principal attack on the authority of
Victoria Park
concerned the extent to which the majority relied on
authority which, his Lordship stressed, concerned prescriptive easements to
light and not the ambit of nuisance.
the plaintiff, owned a building with two ‘antient windows’,
entitling him to an uninterrupted flow of air and
light through apertures
corresponding to their dimensions.
renovations, he both enlarged the ancient windows and added new
Tapling, his neighbour and the
defendant, then built a warehouse that blocked the flow of air and light to both
and ancient windows.
Although Jones subsequently bricked-up the new windows and reduced the enlarged
windows to their original size, Tapling refused to
demolish his
Renshaw v Bean
Tapling argued that Jones’ act of opening new windows was both wrongful
and resulted in the extinguishment of the rights attaching
to his ancient
The House of Lords unanimously rejected Tapling’s argument, in the
process overruling
and its central heresy that one who opens new
windows commits a wrong against his
neighbours.
Lord Chancellor Westbury stated
that, ‘the opening of the new windows is in law an innocent act; and
no innocent act can destroy the existing right of the one party, or give any
enlarged right to the other, viz the adjoining
proprietor’.
Lord Cranworth
likewise observed:
Every man may open any number of windows looking over his neighbour’s
land; and, on the other hand, the neighbour may, by building
on his own land:
within twenty years after the opening of the windows, obstruct the light which
would otherwise reach them.
To the same effect, Lord Chelmsford held that
[i]t is not correct to say that the plaintiff, by putting new windows into his
house, or altering the dimensions of the old ones,
‘exceeded the limits of
his right;’
because, the owner of a house has a right at all times
(apart, of course, from any agreement to the contrary), to open as many windows
in his own house as he pleases.
By the exercise of this right, he may
materially interfere with the comfort and enjoyment of his neighbour: but of
this species of
injury the law takes no cognizance;
it leaves every one to
his self-defence against an annoyance of this
description; and the only
remedy in the power of the adjoining owner is to build on his own land, and so
to shut out the offensive
It is true that
none of their Lordships’ speeches were directed to the ambit of nuisance.
Nevertheless, as Dixon J clearly appreciated
Victoria Park Racing
import of these statements of principle cannot be confined to prescriptive
If A has a right to overlook
B’s land, then it cannot be that A’s conduct also amounts to a
nuisance or any other wrong.
Whether the
dispute concerns the acquisition, breach or extinguishment of rights, this is a
simple contradiction.
From Exclusion to
Although tortured and ultimately unconvincing, the doctrinal reasoning of
Lord Leggatt JSC and Lord Sales JSC are the least significant
aspect of the
decision in
. Given their Lordships’ obvious determination to
recognise nuisance by visual intrusion, it is surprising that they did not
dispense with the doctrinal contortions and simply declare that, as members of a
final appellate court, they were exercising their
power to make new law. The
issue of substance is not whether the common law always recognised the
possibility of nuisance by overlooking,
but the normative question of whether it
should do so now.
The case for the affirmative is simply that many visual intrusions are
clearly externalities. If, as Lord Leggatt JSC noted, the basic
justification
for private property in land is the internalisation of
externalities,
then there is no good
reason for restricting the ambit of nuisance to the traditional categories of
physical invasion such as smoke,
fumes or noise. Indeed, doing so would seem to
be an invitation to the inefficient use of land.
The flaw in this argument is its assumption that all activities with external
effects are inefficient.
‘spillover’ will only create an externality
costs exceed its benefits. Acts with external effects are more likely to be
inefficient than those whose effects are completely
internalised because its
‘doer’ will give no weight to the costs that her conduct imposes on
others. So long as the benefits
exceed her private costs, the conduct will be
privately worthwhile even if it is socially wasteful. Nevertheless, it is
that the private benefits
of imperfectly internalised conduct will exceed the sum of its private and
social costs, making it efficient despite the uncompensated
costs it imposes on
others. In any case, the excess of costs over benefits is not, of itself, a
compelling reason for the law to
intervene and rearrange the default rules
provided by
the exclusion model. Whether problems of inconsistent use should be resolved
by the ‘on-off’
of physical interference instantiated
by trespass or the
fact-intensive
of ‘reasonable’ use instantiated
by nuisance depends upon whether the benefits of switching to the latter mode of
determining
liability outweigh its
Consistently with the argument made
Smith has argued that nuisance,
like trespass, ‘rests on a foundation of
exclusion’.
What distinguishes the
two torts is not whether the impugned conduct involves an act of boundary
crossing, but the degree of decision-making
authority that each tort delegates
to the owner of the land affected by the defendant’s
The transition from trespass to
nuisance involves moving from a system that places an
open-ended set of uses under the owner’s sole authority to a more
accurate but costly process in which courts resolve disputes
by determining
rules for proper use that are peculiar to the land in
As Merrill and Smith have
observed separately, moving from a highly decentralised to a more centralised
system of dispute resolution becomes justified when
transaction costs prevent
parties from bargaining around inefficient default
particularly, we would expect to see the transition from ‘exclusion’
to ‘governance’ where complementary
uses are possible, but
coordination between the affected parties is thwarted by high transaction costs,
holdouts and other forms
of strategic
behaviour made possible by the exclusion regime under conditions of bilateral
An important question is thus whether the parties in
by high transaction costs or mired in strategic bargaining. The answer is:
obviously’. What is striking about the background facts is that the
Tate Modern’s viewing gallery and the Neo Bankside
flats were developed
contemporaneously.
Prior to the
construction and the sale of the flats, the nascent dispute thus involved only
two parties: the developer and the board
of trustees.
All other things being equal, transaction costs should have been relatively
Lord Leggatt JSC observed of this fact that
[a]lthough considerable time and evidence seems to have been devoted at the
trial to investigating what the Tate and the developers
of the Neo Bankside
flats knew of each other’s intended uses of their land at various stages
of the planning process, I cannot
see how this information could be relevant to
whether or not the Tate is liable in
A different
view of this fact is that the absence of a bargain between the developer and the
trustees is evidence that neither party
wished to rearrange the
default rules provided by the exclusion model. Whilst the claimants’
disappointment at their lack of privacy might form the
basis for a claim against
the developer,
it is not, of itself, a
reason to impose a novel form of tortious liability on their immediate
Even if this conjecture is incorrect and transaction costs were high, it does
not follow that the default rule of ‘look but
don’t touch’ was
inefficient. As noted above, Lord Sales JSC argued that the principle of
‘give and take’
required the claimants to take some steps to protect
their privacy.
Their refusal to do so
precluded a finding of nuisance. Another way of expressing his Lordship’s
position is to say that the claimants are, in Calabresian terms, the
cost-avoiders’.
The intuition here is that a small investment by the claimants in sheer curtains
or privacy film would solve the problem of voyeurism,
allowing the Tate Modern to continue to operate its viewing gallery without
making the claimants feel like zoological exhibits in
their own homes.
Consistently with Lord Sales JSC’s conclusion, this interpretation of the
cheapest cost-avoider principle
simply requires the Court to affirm the default
rule that acts of visual intrusion do not constitute wrongs.
Whether the claimants are the cheapest cost-avoiders is, of course, an
empirical question that depends on the available window furnishing
technology. If, for instance, the only blinds capable of shielding
the claimants
from the voyeurs’ gaze would also ruin the view from their flats, then
Lord Sales JSC’s reasoning becomes
less compelling. It certainly failed to
persuade Lord Leggatt JSC and the other members of the majority, for whom the
warranted a departure from the default rule of physical exclusion. Put in
its best light, the majority position is that declaring acts of visual
intrusion to be actionable wrongs creates the optimal compromise
uses because it preserves the viewing gallery for its intended use as a
window to central London whilst allowing the claimants to inhabit their flats
in relative privacy.
Remedies and
Redistribution
Whether the majority’s position is an improvement over the status quo
prescribed by simple trespass depends upon whether the
benefits of judicially
specifying rules for proper use between the parties exceed the costs of doing
so. The concrete problem here
is the cost of enforcing the remedy required to
give effect to the new distribution of rights. The claimants’ preference
doubtless, for injunctive relief over damages. The problem is that an
injunction designed to give effect to this compromise will
either be grossly
overinclusive or prohibitively expensive and require ongoing judicial
supervision.
An order that the southern
walkway of the viewing gallery be closed would create minimal compliance and
enforcement costs but would
also restrain a huge number of innocuous uses of the
viewing gallery that do not amount to a nuisance. On the other hand, an order
that the defendants employ additional security guards to prevent the use of
binoculars and camera phones would be sufficiently targeted.
However, not only
would such an order require regular judicial intervention to
address the claimants’ (inevitable) complaints about the diligence of
the guards,
the cost of complying with
it in perpetuity would greatly exceed the quantum of the claimants’
What, then, about an order for damages in lieu of injunctive relief? If we
assume that the Tate Modern is being made liable for the
most egregious
behaviour of its licensees, then the quantum of damages must equal the
diminution in the value of the claimants’ flats attributable
particular acts of visual intrusion rather than overlooking generally. Whilst
this is certainly a complication, it is not
an insuperable one. The real
objection to an award of damages is that it is a costly exercise in
redistribution for redistribution’s
sake. To say that specific relief is
prohibitively expensive is simply to say that the costs of judicially
reorganising the default
rules of real property exceed the benefits. If one is
concerned with efficiency as a goal, then the correct conclusion is not to
the claimants the second-best remedy but to relieve the defendants of liability
by reaffirming the basic rule that visual intrusions
do not amount to actionable
If this is correct, then why grant the claimants damages? In
Bramwell B famously remarked that
[t]he public consists of all the individuals of it, and a thing is only for the
public benefit when it is productive of good to those
individuals on the balance
of loss and gain to all. So that if all the loss and all the gain were borne and
by one individual, he on the whole would be a gainer.
whenever this is the
case, — whenever a thing is for the public
benefit, properly understood, — the loss to the individuals of the public
lose will bear compensation out of the gains of those who
According to
Lord Leggatt JSC, these remarks are both an endorsement of what is now called
‘methodological individualism’
in cost-benefit analysis
more significantly, authority for
the existence of an obligation binding those who have benefited from some change
to the status
quo to compensate those who have lost by it. His Lordship
explained that
when land is used to carry on an activity — whether it be operating a
railway, manufacturing bricks, operating a viewing gallery
or anything else
— which benefits many people but damages the amenity value of neighbouring
land, the relevant question to
ask is on which individuals should the loss fall.
Should it be borne by the individuals on whom the loss is inflicted or by those
who gain from the activity? Once the problem is seen in this way, the answer is
obvious. ...
It is most unjust to allow those who benefit from a use of land
which inflicts loss on a neighbour to do so without either stopping
the activity
or compensating the
efficiency simply requires that the sum of the benefits from a change to the
status quo exceed the losses, Lord Leggatt JSC’s
argument is that the law
must also attend to the distribution of the surplus amongst the affected
Consistently with
Pareto’s criterion of efficiency,
his Lordship’s
position appears to be that one should not be permitted to be made better off
by making someone else worse off. Applied to
, this principle
requires the Tate Modern to compensate the claimants for the costs that its
viewing gallery imposes upon them.
Although this may be an attractive ethical principle, the notion that someone
has a right to compensation
someone has caused her harm is
plainly wrong. A claimant only has an entitlement to compensation if she can
show that the defendant’s
conduct caused her loss
amounted to a
breach of her antecedent rights. Thus, and contrary to Lord Leggatt JSC’s
apparent argument, the law is replete
with examples of
damnum absque
. To take an obvious example, A is not liable for causing B pure
economic loss, even if A’s conduct were not only intentional
To return to land law, A may
ruin B’s television reception either by stealing his antenna or by
building a large structure
on neighbouring land that obstructs the signal to
Whilst in each case A has reduced
the amenity of B’s home, it is only in the former that A’s conduct
amounts to a breach
of B’s rights, thus entitling B to
compensation.
Contrary to Lord Leggatt
JSC’s position, many, if not most, land uses with unwanted external
effects do not trigger an obligation
to compensate
because they do not constitute the breach of any (legal) duty owed to those
harmed by them.
Quite apart from this, it is not clear that judicial redistribution is even
desirable. As noted above, some change in the status quo will be efficient if
the gain to A exceeds the harm to B. If redistribution
were costless, then A
could be compelled to compensate B and would still, by definition, be better
off. The problem is, of course,
that redistribution is never
The attempt by B to seek
compensation from A is, like any form of redistribution, an example of
rent-seeking because the object of
the exercise is to procure a pure transfer of
wealth from the former to the latter.
Whilst it may appear to be a zero-sum activity, rent-seeking is always
negative-sum because the
value of the transfer is its gross value
less the opportunity cost of the resources required to procure it. So, even in
the unlikely
event that A’s surplus exceeds the sum of B’s loss
the cost of compensating her so that A is still better off, the
effect of the redistribution must be to reduce the size of the
is a paragon example of this problem. Because the quantum of any
damages ultimately paid to the claimants will likely exceed the
incurred in obtaining them, their decision to sue is rational. However, the
price of achieving this redistribution is the sum of the
cost to the claimants
of bringing the action, to the defendants of resisting it and to the court of
adjudicating it,
which must be many
multiples of the value of the transfer itself. Whilst the amount of waste a
society is prepared to tolerate in
pursuit of its preferred
distribution of wealth is a question of social values, this should at least
demonstrate that Lord Leggatt JSC’s Paretian tendencies
unambiguously
desirable as they first appear.
The Costs of
Prospective Uncertainty
This is not, however, the only cost of the decision in
discussed above, the virtue of the exclusion model is that, at some cost to
precision, it delineates the owner’s sphere
of exclusive authority at very
low cost. Like transaction costs, ‘entitlement-determination costs’
are a source of friction.
entitlement-determination costs thus maximises the chances that allocative
inefficiencies will be corrected by private
As Merrill explains,
‘[t]he combination of low transaction costs and low
entitlement-determination costs will maximize the
extent to which conflicts
between competing uses of land can be resolved by market
transactions’.
By recognising such a significant exception to the exclusion paradigm, the
decision in
will create prospective uncertainty about the ambit of
an owner’s rights, thereby increasing entitlement-determination costs
reducing the number of land use disputes that are resolved by Coasean
Lord Leggatt JSC, who appeared
to be cognisant of this problem, was at pains to stress that the rule of
‘live and let live’
will prevent a flood of litigation by jaded
residents of high-rise flats who do not like being visible to their
near-neighbours.
However, in considering
the law of nuisance, Lord Leggatt JSC neglected the law of unintended
consequences. Lawyers are paid to be
inventive, and the genie of ‘nuisance by overlooking’, having
once been released, cannot now be put back in the
Whilst expanding the ambit of nuisance to include visual intrusion will
doubtless increase the incidence of litigation between neighbours,
the magnitude
of the increase will depend in part on which version of the ‘give
and take’ principle is ultimately adopted by English law. In this
respect, Lord
Leggatt JSC’s focus on ‘ordinary’ use is more desirable
than Lord Sales JSC’s emphasis on ‘reasonable’
Whereas Lord Sales JSC’s
approach is almost impossible for the parties to apply
Leggatt JSC’s emphasis on
ordinary use at least has some empirically verifiable grounding in the
locality principle.
Assuming that
ordinary uses in Belgrave Square differ markedly from those in
Bermondsey,
his Lordship’s
approach provides a modicum of guidance to those involved in land use disputes.
Moreover, as his Lordship was
keen to stress, it also avoids the embarrassment
of resolving such disputes by an approach to nuisance that is little more than
appeal to the judge’s personal view of the propriety of the
defendant’s conduct.
V Conclusion
Whilst the conduct of a minority of the visitors to the Tate Modern’s
viewing gallery was undoubtedly obnoxious and distressing
to the claimants, the
question for the UK Supreme Court was whether it also amounted to an actionable
The answer to this question
should not depend upon one’s instinctive reaction to the licensees’
more outré behaviour,
but instead on whether the benefits of departing
from the exclusion model and its central ‘look but don’t
norm exceed the costs.
Decision-makers, including courts, should minimise the sum of the costs of
decisions and the costs of errors.
without a decision on remedies, the litigation in
has, at enormous
cost, produced only a dubious improvement over the status quo prescribed by the
exclusion paradigm. Whilst the claimants’
expenditure will likely prove to
be a prudent investment in their valuable assets, the sum of the costs incurred
by all parties will
overwhelm any benefit to the claimants, making the
enterprise socially wasteful. Even more significant is the effect of the
on future disputes. The Court’s unanimous recognition of nuisance
by overlooking will generate prospective uncertainty about
the rights of
neighbours, the effect of which will be to minimise the chance that disputes
will be resolved by cooperative bargains
between the affected parties and
without the need for litigation.
The decision in
will doubtless be received by some judges in
other common law jurisdictions as a welcome invitation to update the law of
to take account of camera phones, social media and other baleful
realities of modern life. However, for the reasons discussed above,
invitation that they would be well-advised to decline.
* School of Law, University of Sydney. For comments, I am grateful to
Professor Matthew Conaglen, Professor Jamie Glister, Dr Timothy
Pilkington and
the anonymous referees. The usual caveats apply.
See generally Katrina M Wyman, ‘The
New Essentialism in Property’
(2017) 9(2)
Journal of Legal Analysis
Adherents to the exclusion model are sometimes referred to as ‘new
essentialists’: at 184. See also Michael JR Crawford,
An Expressive
Theory of Possession
(Hart Publishing, 2020) 22–3.
As Penner has written, ‘[n]o one
has any interest in merely excluding others from things, for any reasons or no
reason at all.
The interest that underpins the right to property is the interest
we have in purposefully dealing with things’: JE Penner,
The Idea of
Property in Law
(Clarendon Press, 1997) 70–1.
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz,
‘Information Asymmetries and the Rights To Exclude’
[2006] MichLawRw 54
(2006) 104(8)
Michigan Law Review
See also Jeevan Hariharan, ‘The
View from the Top: Visual Intrusion as Nuisance in
Fearn v Tate
(2024) 87(3)
Modern Law Review
Entick v Carrington
[1765] EWHC J98
(1765) 19 St
[2023] UKSC 4
[2024] AC 1
, 47 [133] (Lord Leggatt JSC,
Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing)
RH Coase, ‘The Problem of Social
Cost’ (1960) 3 (October)
Journal of Law and Economics
28–34. Pigouvian taxes are an impost on the party creating the spillover
equal to the difference between the private and
social cost of the activity: at
For a helpful discussion, see Bruce
Yandle, ‘Property Rights or Externalities?’ in Terry L
Anderson and Fred S McChesney (eds),
Property Rights: Cooperation,
Conflict, & Law
(Princeton University Press, 2003) 259, 265–76.
See generally Francesco Parisi,
Language of Law and Economics: A Dictionary
(Cambridge University Press,
2013) 47–8.
See Coase (n
) 15. On this point, see generally
Deirdre McCloskey, ‘The So-Called Coase Theorem’ (1998) 24(3)
Eastern Economic Journal
For the same observation, see Robert C
Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes
University Press, 1991) 281; Thomas W Merrill and Henry E Smith, ‘Making
Coasean Property More Coasean’ (2011)
Journal of Law and
Thomas W Merrill and Henry E Smith,
‘What Happened to Property in Law and Economics?’
[2001] YaleLawJl 34
(2001) 111(2)
Yale Law Journal
, 359–60, 366. See also Merrill and Smith,
‘Making Coasean Property More Coasean’ (n
Merrill and Smith, ‘What
Happened to Property in Law and Economics?’ (n
Henry E Smith, ‘Exclusion and
Property Rules in the Law of Nuisance’
(2004) 90(4)
Virginia Law
Given his focus on institutional
constraints, it is odd that Coase never noticed this. As Merrill and Smith note,
the form that property
rights take matters precisely because we do not live in a
frictionless universe: Merrill and Smith, ‘Making Coasean Property
Coasean’ (n
Henry E Smith, ‘Property as the
Law of Things’
(2011) 125(7)
Harvard Law Review
(emphasis in original).
The law of the ‘excluded
middle’ says that some proposition
or its negation must be true.
There is no ‘in between’. More formally, this is written as
See also Merrill and Smith,
‘What Happened to Property in Law and Economics?’ (n
Although the
often maligned, it remains an important part of land law:
Bocardo SA v Star Energy UK Onshore Ltd
[2010] UKSC 35
[2011] 1 AC 380
[19]–[20], 398 [26]
(Lord Hope DPSC). See also Crawford (n
) 34. On the application of the exclusion
theory to chattels, see Simon Douglas,
Liability for Wrongful Interferences
with Chattels
(Hart Publishing, 2011) 24, 65–7.
Bathurst City Council v
(1985) 2 NSWLR 704
, 706 (Young J).
To borrow Harris’ words, these
are but two uses in an owner’s ‘open-ended set of
use-privileges’: JW Harris,
Property and Justice
(Clarendon Press,
Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd
[1997] AC 655, 685 (‘
See also Richard A Epstein,
‘Nuisance Law: Corrective Justice and Its Utilitarian Constraints’
(1979) 8(1)
Journal of Legal Studies
, 56 (‘Nuisance
As Epstein has remarked,
[t]he term ‘invasion’ is not used as a disguised synonym for the
legal conclusion that the defendant’s activities
are of the sort to which
tortious liability should attach, where liability is at bottom imposed for
other, possibly economic, reasons.
Instead, the term ‘invasion’
a description of a natural state of affairs which in itself serves as a
justification for imposing legal responsibility
Ibid 53 (emphasis in original). See also Simon Douglas, ‘The Content
of a Freehold: A “Right to Use” Land?’
in Nicholas Hopkins
Modern Studies in Property Law
(Hart Publishing, 2013) vol 7, 359,
Miller v Jackson
[1977] EWCA Civ 6
[1977] QB 966
979 (Lord Denning MR).
FH Newark, ‘The Boundaries of
Nuisance’ (1949) 65 (October)
Law Quarterly Review
481–2; PH Winfield, ‘Nuisance as a Tort’
(1931) 4(2)
Cambridge Law Journal
If the trespass ultimately led to an
ouster, the appropriate action was
novel disseisin
) 481; Winfield (n
See (inevitably)
Thompson-Schwab v
[1956] 1 WLR 335
, 339 (Lord Evershed MR, Romer LJ agreeing at 341,
Parker LJ agreeing at 342) (‘
’). Whilst it is often
cited by proponents of a broad theory of nuisance,
) is only an appeal against the grant of
an interlocutory injunction by the trial judge: at 337–8. It is thus
extremely weak
authority for the proposition that aesthetic blights constitute
actionable nuisances. On the grab bag of claims that fall under the
‘nuisance’, see generally Christopher Essert, ‘Nuisance and
Normative Boundaries of Ownership’
(2016) 52(1)
Tulsa Law Review
, 96–7; Donal Nolan, ‘“A Tort against Land”:
Private Nuisance as a Property Tort’ in Donal Nolan and
Robertson (eds),
Rights and Private Law
(Hart Publishing, 2012) 459,
) 686. There have been attempts to sever
the connection between nuisance and boundary crossing. Ellickson, for instance,
that liability in nuisance should depend upon whether some change in
use is regarded as ‘unneighborly according to contemporary
standards’: Robert C Ellickson, ‘Alternatives to Zoning: Covenants,
Nuisance Rules, and Fines as Land Use Controls’
(1973) 40(4)
of Chicago Law Review
, 732. The difficulty of establishing those
standards is, of course, the flaw in Ellickson’s model.
Strictly speaking, these are not
(claim) ‘rights’ but ‘liberties’: see, eg, Simon Douglas
and Ben McFarlane,
‘Defining Property Rights’ in James Penner and
Henry E Smith (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Property Law
University Press, 2013) 219, 220–1. On Hohfeldian ‘liberties’
or ‘privileges’ more generally,
see Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld,
‘Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial
(1913) 23(1)
Yale Law Journal
[1937] HCA 45
(1937) 58 CLR 479
, 492 (Latham CJ)
Victoria Park Racing
Ibid 494, 498 (Latham CJ),
506–7, 511 (Dixon J), 527 (McTiernan J). For the dissenting
judgments, see at 504–5 (Rich J), 522 (Evatt J).
See also Kevin Gray, ‘Property
in Thin Air’
(1991) 50(2)
Cambridge Law Journal
) 10–11 [1]–[2], 12 [10]
(Lord Leggatt JSC).
Ibid 48 [137] (Lord Sales JSC).
Ibid 10–11 [1]–[2] (Lord
Leggatt JSC).
Fearn v Board of Trustees of the
Tate Gallery
[2019] Ch 369
, 392–3 [81]–[84] (Mann J)
Fearn (Trial)
Ibid 395 [88].
) 11 [4] (Lord Leggatt JSC).
Fearn v Board of Trustees of the
Tate Gallery
[2020] Ch 621
, 639 [53] (Sir Terence Etherton MR, Lewison and
) 39 [104], 47 [133] (Lord Leggatt JSC,
Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing), 60 [179] (Lord Sales JSC, Lord
Kitchin JSC
agreeing). This proposition was accepted without qualification in
Jalla v Shell International Trading and Shipping Co Ltd
[2023] UKSC 16
[2023] 2 WLR
, 1090 [3] (Lord Burrows JSC, Lord Reed PSC, Lords Briggs, Kitchin and Sales
agreeing) (‘
Cambridge Water Co v Eastern
Counties Leather plc
[1993] UKHL 12
[1994] 2 AC 264
, 299 (Lord Templeman agreeing at 290,
Lord Jauncey agreeing at 309, Lord Lowry agreeing at 309, Lord Woolf
agreeing at 310), quoting
Bamford v Turnley
[1862] EngR 907
(1862) 3 B & S 66
ER 27, 33 (‘
Ibid 15 [21] (emphasis in
McBride also summarises Lord Leggatt
JSC’s reasoning in a two-by-two table: Nicholas McBride, ‘“A
Straightforward
Case of Nuisance”: A Note on Fearn v Tate Gallery
’ (Research Paper No 14/2023, Faculty of Law, University of
Cambridge, April 2023) 11. However, he places a question mark in
the southeast
quadrant on the basis that Lord Leggatt JSC’s reasoning does not extend to
clashing uses that are atypical. This,
however, is not correct.
Because Lord Leggatt JSC’s test explicitly requires a substantial
interference with an
use, it must follow that the conflict
between two atypical uses cannot
amount to a nuisance.
) 77 [241].
Ibid 79 [245].
Ibid 78 [242].
Ibid 25 [50] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord
Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Ibid 73 [226] (Lord Sales JSC, Lord
Kitchin JSC agreeing).
Ibid 77 [241].
Ibid 73 [226].
Ibid 85 [271].
Ibid 33 [83] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord
Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Ibid 76 [237]–[238], 85 [272]
(Lord Sales JSC, Lord Kitchin JSC agreeing).
Ibid 87 [278].
Ibid 45–7 [126]–[133]
(Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Ibid 47 [132]–[133].
Fearn (Trial)
) 390 [71]–[85] (Mann J).
) 24 [48] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Ibid 25 [50].
Cocking v Eacott
[2016] QB 1080
, in which the Court of Appeal of England and Wales
unanimously held that the owner of a house was liable for the nuisance created
by her daughter, who was a mere licensee: at 1082–3 [1]–[2],
1088–9 [28] (Vos LJ, McFarlane LJ agreeing
at 1089 [33]), 1090 [35] (Arden LJ). See also
) 1089 [2] (Lord Burrows JSC,
Lord Reed PSC, Lords Briggs, Kitchin and Sales JJSC agreeing).
It is also relevant to defining the
precise ratio decidendi to emerge from the decision. I am grateful to Timothy
Pilkington for
this point.
The UK Supreme Court has, however,
made clear that the decision to grant or deny an injunction is the classic
example of judicial
discretion and cannot be fettered by a presumption
in favour of specific relief in nuisance cases:
Lawrence v Fen Tigers Ltd
[2014] UKSC 13
[2014] AC 822
855–6 [120]–[122] (Lord Neuberger PSC, Lord Mance JSC agreeing at
865 [167]), 864 [161] (Lord Sumption JSC), 866 [170]
(Lord Clarke JSC), 882
[239] (Lord Carnwath JSC)
See below Part IV(C).
It appears that the parties have
settled since the time of writing, with the Tate Modern
undertaking not to operate the viewing gallery in a way that causes nuisance
to the claimants: Natasha Rees and Sarah Heatley, ‘Fearn
and Others v The
Board of Trustees of the Tate Gallery’,
(News, 18 October
<https://www.forsters.co.uk/news/news/fearn-and-others-v-board-of-trustees-of-tate-gallery>,
at <https://perma.cc/Y93W-PNPZ>. The practical effect of the
settlement appears to be the permanent closure of the southern
walkway: see Ed
Cunningham, ‘The Tate Modern Has Reopened Its Majestic Tenth-Floor Viewing
(News, 6 September 2023)
<https://www.timeout.com/london/news/the-tate-modern-has-reopened-its-majestic-tenth-floor-viewing-gallery-090623>,
archived at <https://pe​rma.cc/EJ8L-ZHZX>. Importantly, the general
significance of this remedial point is not confined
), as it is likely to arise in any future
case concerning nuisance by visual intrusion.
) 39 [104], 47 [133] (Lord Leggatt JSC,
Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing), 59 [175], 60 [179] (Lord Sales
Kitchin JSC agreeing).
Ibid 12 [7] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord
Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
See above n
and accompanying text.
) 264, discussing
Victoria Park
) 38 [99] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing), quoting
Victoria Park Racing
Victoria Park Racing
) 500 (Rich J). See also Gray (n
On the distinction between legal means
and private ends, see generally Henry E Smith, ‘Mind the Gap: The Indirect
between Ends and Means in American Property Law’
(2009) 94(4)
Cornell Law Review
Lord Leggatt JSC’s reasoning on this point
has, however, been accepted by some commentators: see, eg, McBride (n
Moreover, if the law’s refusal
to exclude free riders makes an owner’s preferred use of its land
uneconomic then,
Lord Leggatt JSC, it is impossible to say that
free riders, such as the defendants in
Victoria Park Racing
), have merely interfered with the
profitable conduct of the owner’s business but not its enjoyment of its
land. Lord Leggatt
JSC’s discussion of
Victoria Park Racing
proceeds on an unwarranted distinction between personal and commercial uses of
Victoria Park Racing
Ibid 507 (emphasis added). For his
Honour’s part, McTiernan J concluded that, ‘[i]n my
opinion there are no legal principles which the court can apply to protect
the plaintiff against the acts of the defendants of which
it complains’:
) 38 [99] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
See ibid 64 [194] (Lord Sales JSC,
Lord Kitchin JSC agreeing), citing
Victoria Park Racing
) 61 [183]–[184] (Lord Sales JSC,
Lord Kitchin JSC agreeing), discussing
Tapling v Jones
[1865] EngR 323
; (1865) 20 CB NS
141 ER 1067
cited by the
majority judgments in
Victoria Park Racing
): at 496 (Latham CJ), 508 (Dixon J),
523 (McTiernan J).
) 63 [190]–[192] (Lord Sales JSC,
Lord Kitchin JSC agreeing), discussing
) 1073 (Lord Westbury LC),
1075–6 (Lord Cranworth), 1078–80 (Lord Chelmsford).
) 1068 (headnote).
[1852] EngR 75
(1852) 18 QB 112
) 1074 (Lord Cranworth).
) 48–9 (Lord Campbell CJ).
Ibid 1078 (emphasis added).
Justice Dixon wrote that,
[w]hen this principle is applied to the plaintiff's case it means ... that
the essential element upon which it depends is lacking.
So far as freedom from
view or inspection is a natural or acquired physical characteristic of the site,
giving it value for the purpose
of the business or pursuit which the plaintiff
conducts, it is a characteristic which is not a legally protected interest.
Victoria Park Racing
Rendered in more accurate Hohfeldian
terms, if A has a liberty against B to φ, it cannot be that A
simultaneously owes B a duty
not to φ. ‘[P]rivileges’ and
‘duties’ are, in Hohfeld’s language, ‘[j]ural
[o]pposites’:
see Hohfeld (n
) 45 [125] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing). For the classic discussion, see
generally Harold Demsetz,
‘Toward a Theory of Property Rights’
(1967) 57(2)
American Economic Review
For a discussion of this
assumption, see Jules L Coleman,
Markets, Morals and the Law
(Cambridge University Press, 1988) 76–7.
On the distinction between
‘rules’ and ‘standards’ see, eg, Frederick Schauer,
Thinking like a Lawyer: A New Introduction to Legal Reasoning
University Press, 2009) ch 10.
See above Part II(B).
Smith, ‘Exclusion and
Property Rules in the Law of Nuisance’ (n
See ibid 992–3.
Henry E Smith, ‘Exclusion
versus Governance: Two Strategies for Delineating Property Rights’ (2002)
Journal of Legal Studies
S453, S455. The flexibility of nuisance is
apparent at both the liability stage, where the court is concerned with
questions of ‘ordinary’
or ‘reasonable’ use, and at the
remedies stage where, in contrast to actions in trespass, courts are more
substitute damages for specific relief. For the classic formulation,
Shelfer v City of London Electric Lighting Co
[1894] UKLawRpCh 212
[1895] 1 Ch 287
322–3 (AL Smith LJ). More recently, see the comments in
) 851–7 [100]–[127] (Lord
Neuberger PSC, Lord Mance JSC agreeing at
865 [167]), 863–4 [159]–[161] (Lord Sumption JSC), 866 [171]
(Lord Clarke JSC), 882 [239] (Lord Carnwath JSC). The comparative
strictness of trespass is demonstrated by the cases on ephemeral and apparently
harmless interferences with airspace: see,
Bendal Pty Ltd v Mirvac
Project Pty Ltd
(1991) 23 NSWLR 464
, 468–70 (Bryson J).
Thomas W Merrill, ‘Trespass,
Nuisance, and the Costs of Determining Property Rights’
(1985) 14(1)
Journal of Legal Studies
, 25–6 (‘Costs of Determining
Property Rights’); Smith,
‘Exclusion and Property Rules in the Law of Nuisance’ (n
) 71 [221] (Lord Sales JSC, Lord Kitchin
JSC agreeing).
Ibid 25 [51] (Lord Leggatt JSC,
Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Or it might not. This would depend
on what representations, if any, were made by the developers to the claimants
prior to the purchase
of the flats.
) 70 [216] (Lord Sales JSC, Lord Kitchin
JSC agreeing).
The seminal discussion of this
concept can be found in Guido Calabresi,
The Cost of Accidents: A Legal and
Economic Analysis
(Yale University Press, 1970).
On judicial supervision and other
bars to specific relief, see
Co-Operative Insurance Society
Ltd v Argyll Stores (Holdings) Ltd
[1997] UKHL 17
[1998] AC 1
, 12–16 (Lord
Indeed, it was established at trial
that the Tate Modern already instructs its security guards to ‘stop people
taking photographs
of the flats and occupants’, but to almost no effect:
Fearn (Trial)
) 33 (emphasis added), quoted in
) 44–5 [124]
(Lord Leggatt JSC,
Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Richard A Epstein, ‘For a
Bramwell Revival’
(1994) 38(3)
American Journal of Legal History
) 45 [125] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing) (emphasis added).
The efficiency-based argument for
mandating compensation is that compelling the ‘taker’ to compensate
those whom she
makes worse off discourages forced transfers whose benefits to
the taker are less than the aggregate costs to others. In the literature
compulsory acquisition, this is often discussed under the rubric of
‘fiscal illusion’: Thomas W Merrill and Henry
Principles and Policies
(Foundation Press, 3
See generally Matthew D Adler and
Eric A Posner, ‘Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis’
(1999) 109(2)
Yale Law Journal
, 188–91. ‘Pareto’ improvements are
those departures from the status quo that make one party better off without
making anyone else worse off: at 188–90. ‘Pareto efficiency’
thus differs from the ‘Kaldor-Hicks’,
or ‘potential
Pareto’, measure of efficiency because the latter simply requires that the
winner’s surplus be sufficiently
large that he could, but need not,
compensate the loser and still be better off: at 191. Pareto efficiency can thus
also be seen
as a weak criterion of morality, whereas Kaldor-Hicks is not
obviously a
criterion of morality at all.
OBG Ltd v Allan
[2007] UKHL 21
, 53 [142] (Lord Nicholls);
Bradford Corporation v Pickles
587, 594 (Lord Halsbury LC).
The latter are precisely the facts
See ibid 686 (Lord Goff).
To reiterate the point made above
in Part II(A), this requires proof of an act of physical interference or
boundary crossing: see
Crawford (n
For a discussion of this point, see
Epstein, ‘Nuisance Law’ (n
) 78–9. Epstein also stresses that
permitting low-level irritations under the ‘live and let live’ rule
of nuisance
works as a form of implicit compensation because the victim one day
is likely to be the perpetrator the next: see especially at 82–4.
concept of ‘settlement costs’, see Frank I Michelman,
‘Property, Utility, and Fairness: Comments on the
Ethical Foundations of
“Just Compensation” Law’
(1967) 80(6)
Harvard Law
On the concept of rent-seeking, see
generally Gordon Tullock, ‘Rent Seeking as a Negative-Sum Game’ in
James M Buchanan,
Robert D Tollison and Gordon Tullock (eds),
Toward a Theory
of the Rent-Seeking Society
(Texas A&M University Press, 1980) 16.
Or at least the costs of
adjudication that are not borne by the claimant.
Merrill, ‘Costs of
Determining Property Rights’ (n
As Merrill points out, ambiguity
share the same estimate
of who holds the relevant rights and have the same
preference for risk: ibid 24.
) 27–8 [62]–[63] (Lord
Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC
For a similar observation, see
James Lee, ‘Different Views of Nuisance’ (2023) 139 (October)
Quarterly Review
Other commentators have taken
precisely the opposite view: see, eg, Hariharan (n
) 21 [38] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
Sturges v Bridgman
[1879] UKLawRpCh 225
, 865 (Thesiger LJ for the Court).
) 15 [20] (Lord Leggatt JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lord Lloyd-Jones JSC agreeing).
) notes, ‘[e]stablishing that
certain conduct is a problem and is to be discouraged differs from establishing
that it ought
to fall within
’: at 537 (emphasis in
Cass R Sunstein and Edna
Ullmann-Margalit, ‘Second-Order Decisions’ in Cass R Sunstein (ed),
Behavioural Law and Economics
(Cambridge University Press, 2000) 187,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
PDF format (260 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter