URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Matulionyte, Rita --- "Government Automation, Transparency and Trade Secrets" [2024] MelbULawRw 15; (2024) 47(3) Melbourne University Law Review 679
GOVERNMENT AUTOMATION, TRANSPARENCY AND TRADE SECRETS
I Introduction
II Transparency and ADMS in NSW
A The Concept of Transparency and Its Rationale
B Transparency of ADMS in NSW
III ADMS Transparency and Trade Secrets
A Trade Secrets as a Problem
B Information Held by Government: ‘Business Interests’ Exception
1 Broad Definition of ‘Commercial-in-Confidence’ Information
2 Broad Protection for Other Business Information
3 Inadequate Public Interest Test
C Information Held by Third Parties: ‘Immediate Access’ Provisions
1 Provision of Services to the Public
2 Contractual Duty To Provide Immediate Access
3 Vague Scope of Information
4 Limitations to Immediate Access
5 No Balancing of Competing Public Interests
IV Proposed Solutions
A Reducing Protection for Business Information Held by Government
1 Narrower Protection for Confidential and Other Business Information
2 Improving the Public Interest Test
B Improving Access to Information Held by Third Parties
1 Broadening the Scope of ‘Immediate Access’ Provisions
2 Clarifying Information to Which Government Should Have Immediate Access
3 Narrowing Down Exceptions to ‘Immediate Access’ Provisions
C Acquiring Essential Information through Improved Procurement
1 Defining ‘Essential’ Information
V Conclusion
GOVERNMENT AUTOMATION,
TRANSPARENCY AND TRADE SECRETS
Rita Matulionyte
The increasing use of automated decision-making
systems (‘ADMS’) in the government sector causes various problems.
of them is the lack of transparency around government algorithms, especially
when they are developed by third parties. This article
proprietary interests surrounding government automation technologies, such as
trade secrets, affect transparency around ADMS and what measures
could be taken to preserve — and increase — government
transparency
in the age of automation. The article focuses on New South Wales as a case study
and explores gaps within the
Government Information (Public Access) Act
’) in ensuring transparency in the
government automation context. It recommends that current legislative gaps be
addressed by:
(1) narrowing down the protection for trade secrets under the
(2) improving access to government information held
by third parties (eg government contractors); and (3) ensuring that the
leverages its procurement powers to acquire information that is
essential for public transparency
I Introduction
Federal and state governments in Australia have been heavily investing in the
digitisation of government services. The Commonwealth
government’s digital
transformation strategy sets an ambitious vision for the Australian government
to become ‘one of
the top three digital governments in the world by
with a $1.2 billion investment devoted to the implementation of this vision
in 2021–22 alone.
Similarly, the New
South Wales (‘NSW’) government has adopted the Beyond Digital
focuses inter alia on emerging technologies, and the Artificial Intelligence
Strategy which sees artificial intelligence (‘AI’)
as a tool that
could ‘improve service delivery and government
decision-making’.
AI, and automated
decision-making systems (‘ADMS’) more broadly, are already used in
numerous federal and state government
services. For instance, the federal
government uses algorithms to analyse relevant medical data from the Australian
are also implemented in the automated border control system,
‘SmartGate’, to verify the identity of travellers
entering and
leaving the country.
ADMS were also used by
Centrelink to calculate government overpayments (ie
Examples of the NSW government’s utilisation of ADMS include: Transport
for NSW’s use of smart road safety
Revenue NSW’s AI tool ‘to
identify and support customers facing
and NSW Health’s trials of an
AI-enabled sepsis identification tool in NSW
While emerging technologies have the potential to make government services
more effective, fair and accessible,
other ADMS cause numerous
of which is the lack of transparency around the use of these new technologies. A
report by the NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of Government: Using
Technology in Administrative Decision-Making
, concluded that there is
‘an almost complete lack of transparency about [the use of government
technology]’.
Recent case law also demonstrates the lack of transparency around automated
decision-making in NSW. In cases such as
v Secretary,
Department of Communities and Justice (NSW)
Ireland v Central Coast Council
which will be discussed below, individuals were rejected access to certain
information about ADMS employed by NSW agencies, despite
these systems directly
affecting their rights or legitimate
Transparency around ADMS used by governments is generally important for
ensuring government accountability and
Transparency is an essential
attribute of an open and democratic
government,
is a practical realisation of the human right to information that is implemented
in international human rights treaties.
the automated government context, transparency is especially important due to
the significant risks associated with the use of
new and emerging government
technologies (eg AI technologies). These risks include a lack of regulation,
insufficient accuracy, possible
bias, and privacy, data security and data breach
risks, as well as more general ethical
Keeping in mind that these new technologies often lack established quality
assurance and independent oversight frameworks, public
transparency becomes
especially important in enabling visibility and public scrutiny of these
technologies and facilitating government
accountability.
In addition, the information asymmetry that is increasingly visible in the
digital and automated government context leads to calls
for increased
transparency. Namely, as digital governments hold increasing amounts of
information about citizens and possess automated
tools to efficiently analyse
this data, there is a need to improve individuals’ access to government
information to address
this growing
Empirical studies have confirmed public interest in more transparency around
automated government
technologies.
While Australia’s federal and state governments are generally committed
transparency,
and in the AI and ADMS context in
particular,
implementation of this principle in relation to new and emerging government
technologies has proven to be challenging.
One of the reasons behind the lack of transparency is commercially confidential
information (or trade secrets)
results from government and private sector partnerships that are formed to
develop and implement government automation
tools. When third parties (eg
government contractors) are involved in the development, deployment or
maintenance of government ADMS,
much of the information is either held by
contractors or, even if held by the government, kept confidential due to its
nature and cannot be easily publicly
The purpose of this article is thus to examine the reasons behind the lack of
transparency around government ADMS and possible solutions
to improve ADMS
transparency. This article will focus particularly on how trade secrets affect
the transparency of government ADMS
and how the current legislative frameworks
could be improved to address the transparency challenges caused by such
proprietary information.
The article will use NSW as a case study to examine the impact of trade
secrets on the transparency of government ADMS and possible
law reform pathways.
The NSW government is one of the most advanced state governments in Australia,
both in terms of its digitisation
of government activities and its open
government policies.
The recommendations
considered in the context of NSW law will be relevant in addressing comparable
trade secret challenges in other
and internationally.
Part II of this article will briefly revisit the concept of transparency and
examine transparency challenges in relation to ADMS in
NSW. It will demonstrate
that despite the commitment to transparency in general and in relation to ADMS
more specifically, there
is still a significant lack of publicly available
information about automated tools used by the NSW government. Part III will
on trade secrets as one of the barriers to ensuring transparency around
government ADMS. By delving into the
Government Information (Public Access)
’), Part III will demonstrate
legal gaps that impede public access to government information about ADMS in
which private parties
have proprietary interests, both when such information is
held by government and when it is held by government contractors. Part
develops proposals on how current legislative gaps in NSW could be addressed to
ensure that the right to information is retained
in the age of government
automation, despite increasing government and private sector partnerships and
the commercial secrecy that
they generate.
Transparency and ADMS in NSW
The Concept of Transparency and Its Rationale
Transparency is a multifaceted and evolving concept with numerous proposed
definitions in the
literature.
the AI and ADMS context, various interrelated concepts have been used —
transparency, explainability, interpretability and
contestability —
without a clear consensus on what each of them mean and how they can be
delineated. For example, under Australia’s
AI Ethics Principles, AI
‘transparency and explainability’ is defined as a requirement for
‘responsible disclosure
so people can understand when they are being
significantly impacted by AI, and can find out when an AI system is engaging
contrast, NSW’s AI Ethical Policy refers to ‘transparency’
only, which is understood as a requirement that ‘[t]he
community should be
engaged on the objectives of AI projects and insights into data use and
methodology should be made publicly available
unless there is an overriding
public interest in not doing
NSW policy further emphasises the capability of ‘transparency’ to
ensure that there are review mechanisms through
which ‘citizens can
question and challenge AI-based
It is clear that transparency is important to different stakeholders for
different reasons.
As summarised in
Australia’s AI Ethics Principles, transparency is important for the
following group of stakeholders for the
following reasons:
[F]or users, what the system is doing and why; for creators, including those
undertaking the validation and certification of AI,
the systems’ processes
and input data; for those deploying and operating the system, to understand
processes and input data;
for an accident investigator, if accidents occur; for
regulators in the context of investigations; for those in the legal process,
inform evidence and decision‐making; [and] for the public, to build
confidence in the technology
This article focuses on
transparency around government ADMS that are directed to the public
(‘public transparency’) and
leaves other types of transparency (eg
transparency for auditors, incident investigators and supervisory authorities)
outside the
scope of this article.
‘Public transparency’ is defined broadly as the availability of
information about automated systems that the government
is using — their
development processes (including training, validation and testing), use
purposes, functioning and outcomes
— with the purpose of ensuring
government accountability, contestability of decisions and public
It should be acknowledged that despite its importance and potential,
transparency
is not capable of ensuring the quality of government
decisions and will not in all cases result in government accountability in
the automated decision-making context. Limitations of the government
transparency and open government concepts have been extensively
discussed in the
literature,
including transparency laws
that are too abstract, exceptions to government’s transparency obligations
that are too broad,
transparency’s inability to guarantee government
accountability and weak judicial enforcement of transparency
However, these and other limitations
surrounding the government transparency concept do not negate its overall
importance in ensuring
open and accountable government. Rather, they call for
ways to improve how government transparency is ensured, which is the ultimate
intention of this article.
Transparency of ADMS in NSW
There is no doubt that NSW is committed to transparency generally and in
relation to digital and automated government specifically.
as the main piece of legislation in this area, has an object to make government
information publicly accessible ‘[i]n order
to maintain and advance a
system of responsible and representative democratic Government that is open,
accountable, fair and effective’.
summary, the
requires twofold transparency from NSW agencies.
First, NSW agencies are required to proactively release certain information
(‘proactive
transparency’). This includes ‘open access’
information,
such as an agency’s
information guide, policy documents, disclosure log of access applications, and
other information listed
under s 18 of the
, unless there is an
‘overriding public interest’ against such
The NSW Information and Privacy
Commission (‘NSW IPC’) has explained that in the ADMS context,
‘open access’
provisions require agencies to identify datasets that
agencies hold, provide ‘inventories of machine enhanced decision-making
systems’, and ensure that documents and information that support
‘digital government and automated decision-making [have]
developed’ and are ‘available as open access
information’.
In addition to proactive transparency, agencies are required to provide
information that is requested by members of the public, either
via informal or
formal access requests (‘reactive
transparency’).
If a formal
information access request is lodged by a member of the public or other
interested stakeholder (eg a business), government
agencies have an obligation
to release the requested information unless there is an overriding public
interest against such release.
framework is further supported by several other NSW
policies. For instance, the NSW IPC’s
Charter for Public Participation:
A Guide To Assist Agencies and Promote Citizen Engagement
‘provides a
practical road map for embedding the functions of the
into the activities of NSW
the digital and automated government context, the NSW Beyond Digital
requires data to be open,
collected and shared with the public, while respecting the confidentiality and
‘Open Government, Open Data & Public Participation’ policy
encourages the proactive public release of government information by agencies in
ways that are respectful of data sharing safeguards,
as well as providing
information, advice and assistance to agencies and members of the public on
access to government
information.
Additionally,
transparency is implemented as one of the principles under NSW’s AI
Ethical Policy, with the aim of facilitating
the contestability and
reviewability of government decisions.
NSW government reports indicate that the public is increasingly interested in
information held by the government, with public requests
for government
information more than doubling over the last
Community Attitudes surveys conducted by the NSW government also suggest that
‘over 85% of members of the public value their
right to access
information’.
Despite this,
government transparency, especially around automated decision-making, remains a
challenging field.
First, despite
transparency requirements set under the
(eg requirements related to open access information) and the NSW
IPC guidance on how these rules apply to government
limited information about government
ADMS is currently being made available as open access information (ie on
agencies’ websites).
Notably, the NSW Ombudsman found a significant lack
of publicly available information on what ADMS NSW agencies are using, for what
purposes and how they are governed.
According to the NSW IPC, the rate of compliance with open access requirements
across all agencies is relatively high (72% in
However, the NSW IPC data do not
reflect the public availability of information about ADMS used in NSW; the NSW
compliance reviews are of a general nature and do
not examine the type or depth of information made available in open access.
it is not clear from NSW IPC reports how much information about digital
and automated systems is available as open access information.
Some further evidence suggests that agencies do not proactively disclose
information about the ADMS they use. For instance, it has
been previously
reported that Revenue NSW, a part of the Department of Customer Service (NSW),
had used automated technology to issue
garnishee orders without human oversight,
which was heavily criticised.
recently, the Department has introduced another automated tool that uses AI to
‘identify and support customers facing
Despite searching the
Department’s information guide, no information was found about either of
these automated systems.
The guide neither
contained ‘inventories of machine enhanced decision-making systems’,
nor referred to documents that
support digital government or automated
decision-making, as recommended by the NSW
Similarly, while
transparency of NSW agencies has remained
stable over the years,
significant
challenges remain. Data shows that a significant amount of information requested
by the public from NSW agencies is not
being disclosed or is only partially
disclosed. For instance, during 2021–22, 70% of access requests were
granted in full or
in part, with the remaining 30% of applications not satisfied
for various reasons.
While the NSW Agency
GIPA Dashboard does not have specific statistics relating to digital and
automated government services,
previous NSW
IPC studies suggest that similar rates for disclosure of information apply to
information related to digital government
(including automated
decision-making).
Most concerning are situations where requested information was not released
because it was not held by the government but, instead,
by government
contractors. Several recent cases demonstrate this problem. For instance, in
, the applicant sought information from the Department of
Communities and Justice (NSW) about rental subsidies; namely, policies and
documents regulating the automatic calculation of base rent and rental subsidies
as well as the algorithm, software specification,
source code and test suites
related to the rental subsidies calculation
Department determined that it did not hold the algorithm, software
specification, source code or test suites sought by the applicant,
information was held by the third party/contractor Northgate Public Services
(‘NPS’) that developed the
While the NSW Information and
unjustified,
the NSW Civil and
Administrative Tribunal affirmed the Department’s decision, agreeing that
the requested information was not
held by the
government.
The Tribunal also found that
the contract between the Department and NPS (signed before the enactment of the
) did not provide the government with a right to access
information held by the third party.
Tribunal held that, even if such a right to access information existed under the
contract, it was doubtful that the contractor
would have a duty to provide
access to information such as algorithms, source code and related data since
disclosing this information
would lead to commercial disadvantage for the
contractor.
In another case,
the applicant, Mr Ireland, sought access to documents relating to flood depth
level reports about his property, one of which related
to engineering
calculations produced by an aerial software program that was developed by a
third party and used by the Central Coast
Council to measure the flood
The Council determined that it did
not hold the requested information and rejected the
In contrast to
, the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal found that the
Council’s decision in
did not provide sufficient evidence
that the Council did not hold the information and remitted the case back to the
to be seen whether the final outcome will be similar to
Overall, despite the general commitment to transparency in NSW, there appears
to be challenges in ensuring both proactive and reactive
transparency around
government ADMS. This is concerning considering the scale of investment in, and
the increasing adoption of, such
systems by the NSW government, as well as the
possible risks such systems present for human rights and legitimate
There is therefore a need to
understand the reasons underlying the lack of transparency around government
ADMS and the possible ways
of addressing them.
ADMS Transparency and Trade Secrets
Insufficient transparency around government ADMS might be caused by different
For instance, information that
stakeholders are interested in may not have been documented and thus nobody
information may not be held by
the government but by third parties that develop or operate the
it may be too technically complex
or too resource intensive to locate the requested
information;
or information might not be
disclosed to the public due to competing public
This Part will explore how
public-private partnerships established for government automation purposes, and
the proprietary information
and trade secrets resulting from such partnerships,
affect the transparency of government ADMS, and whether the current NSW
is sufficiently equipped to deal with these emerging issues.
Trade Secrets as a Problem
As already indicated in the introduction, trade secrets — or more
broadly, sensitive business information of third parties —
is one of the
reasons behind the lack of transparency around government ADMS. Their importance
in the government ADMS transparency
context has been identified by government
institutions, by commentators and in court
For instance, the NSW Information and Privacy Commissioner has highlighted
problems with accessing digital government information
due to ‘contractual
relationships and claims of
commercial-in-confidence’.
relation to the NSW Digital Restart Fund that finances government digitisation
projects, the NSW Information and Privacy Commissioner
warned of the risk that
government agencies may not be able to access information held by third parties
who help develop government
particular, third-party vendors or contractors, such as ‘providers of new
platforms, software and/or cloud storage solutions
... may hold government
information but are not covered by the
This means that they cannot
be required to provide information that was traditionally considered government
information and therefore
had to be supplied to the public either proactively or
reactively.
The abovementioned cases of
illustrate how public-private partnerships generally, and commercial interests
more specifically, can create challenges in ensuring
transparency — ie by
denying public access to information held by government contractors. Trade
secrets might inhibit not only
reactive transparency, as exemplified in the
above cases, but also proactive transparency. Namely, agencies might decide not
to proactively
release certain information about ADMS due to trade secrets. This
is already seen in relation to government contracts, where commercially
sensitive information is hidden or deleted before the contract is published on a
public registry.
Numerous commentators have
highlighted the negative role of trade secrets in ensuring transparency around
government ADMS,
as well as more general
problems related to public-private partnerships in the government automation
While trade secrets are not a new problem, the role of third parties in the
automated government context and accordingly, the impacts
of their trade
secrets, are likely to increase in the future. Governments, including the NSW
government, are increasingly digitising
and automating their
Due to the specialised technical
skills required in such projects, governments often have no choice but to
participate in partnerships
with commercial partners and outsource the
development, operation and maintenance of automated tools on which they rely in
their services.
various problems related to such
partnerships,
private trade secrets stand out as one of the most significant
challenges.
The developers of information
technologies, including government contractors, increasingly rely on trade
secrets to protect their
intellectual property (‘IP’) in automated
tools. One of the reasons for this is that other IP rights (such as copyright
patents) are often not available for complex algorithms or only protect AI
models to a limited
secrets are thus becoming a dominant type of IP right that ADMS developers use
to protect their commercial interests.
of this suggests that the problem of access to government information in which
third parties have commercial interests is likely
to increase in the future.
Our next question is thus whether current NSW laws are sufficiently equipped
to meet the challenge of ensuring public access to information
that is important
for transparency and accountability around government ADMS, even in the context
of public-private partnerships.
treats the disclosure
of information held by the government
the disclosure of information held by third parties (eg government
contractors)
differently, I will examine
these two scenarios separately.
Information Held by Government: ‘Business Interests’
To start with, the
generally applies to ‘government
information’ that is defined as ‘information contained in a
which means that the government can only disclose information that they
‘hold’, and not information held by third parties.
When a government
agency intends to make this government information available to the public, it
is required to assess whether there
is no ‘overriding public interest
against the disclosure’.
In the table
appended to s 14, the
lists seven categories of such
information, or ‘exceptions’ to the government disclosure
one of which is ‘[b]usiness
interests of agencies and other
This ‘business
interests’ exception covers the disclosure of information that would: (a)
‘undermine competitive
neutrality’ of the agency or place it at a
competitive advantage or disadvantage in a
(b) ‘reveal
commercial-in-confidence provisions of a government
(c) ‘diminish the
competitive commercial value
of any information to any person’;
or (d) ‘prejudice any person’s legitimate business, commercial,
professional or financial
interests’.
Trade secrets and
other business interests are likely to fall under items 4(b), (c) or
Importantly, this ‘business interests’ exception, or any other
exception under s 14 of the
, does not apply automatically. If an
agency is requested to provide information that falls under the exception, it is
required to
consult with the third party that could be possibly affected by the
disclosure of the
information
and balance the two types of public
the public interests
favouring disclosure of government
information
and the public interests in
protecting information covered by the exception. This means that trade secrets
or other business information
are not automatically given priority and need to
be weighed against the public interest in disclosing information held by the
government.
establishes a general presumption in favour of
disclosure of government information.
The ‘business interests’ exception, however, is unreasonably
broad, which is especially problematic in the government
ADMS context, where
public-private partnerships and the resulting private interests are playing an
increasing role. There are three
specific problems related to the current
wording of the ‘business interests’ exception under the
Definition of ‘Commercial-in-Confidence’ Information
The first problem with the ‘business interests’ exception under
is the Act’s extremely broad definition of
‘commercial-in-confidence’ information under s 4(1) — or,
speaking, trade secrets
which allows the government to reject public disclosure of a wide range of
business-related information.
defines ‘commercial-in-confidence provisions’ as any
provisions of a contract that disclose a contractor’s financing
arrangements, cost structure, profit margins or full base case financial model,
as well as ‘any intellectual property in which
the contractor has an
interest’ or ‘any matter the disclosure of which would place the
contractor at a substantial commercial
disadvantage in relation to other
contractors or potential contractors, whether at present or in the
This definition of commercial confidential information seems to be broader
than information protected under the breach of confidence
doctrine, which
protects confidential information in various commercial and non-commercial
Under the breach of confidence
doctrine, the information must have ‘the necessary quality of confidence
must have been ‘imparted in circumstances importing an
obligation of confidence’ and there must be an ‘unauthorised
information’.
In contrast, the definition of ‘commercial-in-confidence provisions’
does not contain an explicit
‘confidentiality’ requirement; its definition seems to cover any of
the categories of information
listed under s 14, be it confidential or not.
Apart from trade secrets, ‘any intellectual property’ can include
patents, trademarks, plant variety rights etc. Registered IP rights
(eg patents, trademarks and plant variety rights) cannot be confidential
information about them is required to be published in public
Unregistered rights such as
are not confidential unless
the party decides to keep copyrighted content confidential.
Further, the definition of ‘commercial-in-confidence’ includes
information that would place a contractor at a ‘substantial
disadvantage ... at present or in the future’. Since this definition does
not require that information is subject
to confidentiality requirements, it is
generally broad and was also broadly interpreted by the NSW
According to this definition,
‘commercial-in-confidence’ information might cover not only
financial information that
legitimately deserves protection (eg financial
arrangements and profit margins)
also information that is essential for quality assurance purposes (eg
algorithmic parameters, training, external validation,
and assessment or audit
information). The disclosure of this information, especially if it indicates
issues related to the quality
of the technology, is likely to cause
‘substantial commercial disadvantage’ to the third party. At the
same time, the
public has a legitimate interest in accessing such information in
order to assess the quality of government technology, especially
if it makes or
impacts decisions directly affecting the interests of individuals.
In comparison, trade secret laws in other jurisdictions have a comparable
‘independent commercial value’ requirement.
Namely, both United
States (‘US’) and European Union (‘EU’) trade secret
laws, in addition to a secrecy element,
require that the information claimed to
be a trade secret be of value and that the value of this information derives, at
part, from the fact of
However, this ‘independent commercial value’ requirement is defined
in a narrow way. In order to meet this requirement,
it is not sufficient to
prove that the information owner ‘has gone to time, trouble, and
expense’ to collect information.
Rather, the essential inquiry is whether ‘the alleged trade secret, as
opposed to the AI system as a whole, gives its holder
a non-trivial advantage
over competitors’.
Sandeen and
Aplin argue that this requirement, if properly applied, would result in the
absence of trade secret protection for much
of the information related to AI
For instance, information
relevant for quality assurance and accountability purposes, such as validation,
external assessment or
auditing results, is unlikely to give competitors a
non-trivial advantage, as they would not be able to use it for developing their
own products or businesses. In contrast, under the current wording of the
, this information is likely to be covered by the broad
‘commercial-in-confidence’ definition and its public disclosure
likely to be denied.
Protection for Other Business Information
In addition to confidential contractual information (s 14 item 4(b) discussed
above), the
‘business interests’ exception covers a
range of other information related to third parties’ interests; namely,
information the release of which would ‘diminish the competitive
commercial value
of any information to any person’,
and ‘prejudice any person’s legitimate business, commercial,
professional or financial
interests’.
In contrast to item
4(b), items 4(c)–(d) cover not only contractual provisions, but also any
other commercially relevant information
held by the government.
The broad and unqualified nature of business information protected under
items 4(c)–(d) is concerning. First, there are no thresholds
limitations to these exceptions. In contrast to item 4(b), there is no
requirement that the competitive value of information be
‘significantly’ diminished or that the legitimate commercial or
professional interests be ‘substantially’
prejudiced upon its
disclosure. This means that
diminution of value or
prejudice to business interests of third parties should be taken into account
when determining whether the information can be disclosed
to the public.
Second, information protected by these provisions does not necessarily need
to be confidential at all.
This raises a
question as to why the
should deny disclosure of information
that is not confidential. If information had significant commercial value and
advantage, it
is reasonable to expect that their owners would keep it
confidential, allowing for it to be protected under the breach of confidence
doctrine. If it is not treated as confidential by an interested third party, it
is questionable whether its commercial value is so
significant that it deserves
protection under the
. Under the general breach of confidence
law, even commercially valuable information would generally not be legally
protected from
disclosure unless the organisation made efforts to keep it
confidential.
It is thus questionable
extends protection to information that is not kept
confidential by an organisation and that is not protected by general laws
confidential information, such as a breach of confidence
Public Interest Test
Finally, it is questionable whether the public interest balancing test, as
defined under ss 13–16 of the
, adequately enables agencies
to weigh interests in favour of and against disclosure, especially when dealing
with the ‘business
interests’ exception. This test can be praised
for its flexibility and its usefulness when agencies need to disclose certain
non-confidential commercial information in which there is a strong public
interest. At the same time, it is questionable whether
the public interest
balancing test is of help when dealing with
confidential
information — ie trade secrets.
is difficult to imagine that an agency would ever disclose confidential
information and expose themselves to risk of liability
under the breach of
confidence doctrine, even if there is a strong interest in disclosing this
information to the public. For instance,
even if an individual needs access to
some algorithmic information in order to challenge a decision that affects them,
agencies are
very unlikely to disclose this commercial information if it is
confidential for several reasons.
itself seems to favour trade secrets over public
disclosure in some cases. For instance, under s 32(1) of the
while certain government contracts with third parties should be published in the
government contracts register, ‘the commercial-in-confidence
provisions of
a contract’ do not need to be included in the register. Here, preference
is given to trade secrets and a balancing
of public interests does not apply at
all. Second, Australian law provides broad protection to confidential
information, with very
limited exceptions to such
protection.
Government agencies, being
risk-averse organisations, are unlikely to subject themselves to legal risk by
disclosing information
protected by law.
shows that the NSW judiciary may have a tendency
to strongly protect not only trade secrets but all IP rights around ADMS,
of their actual secrecy status. In
Civil and Administrative Tribunal suggested that information protected by any IP
right does not need to be publicly
The Tribunal gave a clear
preference to IP rights, without any significant effort to consider whether IP
interests outweighed the
interest of an individual to understand exactly how the
ADMS decision that impacted them was
Information Held by Third Parties: ‘Immediate Access’
The second situation that needs to be discussed separately is where
government information is held not by the government but by a
contractor. While the
provisions specifically regulating the
disclosure of information held by government contractors should generally be
welcomed, they
face a few gaps that prevent their effective implementation in
the government ADMS context.
The public disclosure of information held by government contractors is
currently addressed via s 121(1) of the
(‘immediate
access’ provision). First, the section defines situations in which it
applies, namely, where ‘[a]n
... enters into a contract (a government contract) with a private sector entity
(the contractor) under which the contractor is to
provide services to the public
on behalf of the
Section 121(1) then suggests that, in cases of such contracts, the agency
‘must ensure that the contract provides for
to have an immediate right of access’ to the following information held by
the contractor: (a) ‘information that relates
directly to the performance
of the services by the
contractor’;
‘information collected by the contractor from members of the public to
whom it provides’ the services;
and (c) ‘information received by the contractor from the
to enable it to provide the
Lastly, s 121(2)
provides a list of information that is excluded from the disclosure requirement.
This information includes: (a)
information about a ‘contractor’s
financing arrangements, financial modelling, cost structure or profit
(b) ‘information
that the contractor is prohibited from disclosing’ under
and (c) information that
‘could reasonably be expected to place the contractor at a substantial
commercial disadvantage in
relation to the
whether at present or in the
The NSW IPC has developed a few general guidelines for agencies
and contractors on how to follow these requirements in
as guidelines targeting digital government
Despite this, s 121 is
problematic in the ADMS context in a few respects.
of Services to the Public
First, s 121(1) of the
applies only where the government
contractor ‘provide[s] services to the public on behalf of the
agency’. In
, the Department of Communities and
Justice (NSW) argued that the government contractor that held the requested
information, NPS,
merely designed software used by the Department to provide
Since NPS was not directly
providing services to the public, s 121 arguably did not apply. Despite the NSW
Information and Privacy
Commissioner’s suggestions to interpret the
section in a broader manner,
Tribunal agreed with the Department’s conclusion that the contractor did
not provide direct services to the
This decision illustrates that the wording of s 121 and its current
construction are too narrow and incompatible with the goals of
. Increasingly, government contractors are not requested to provide
services to the public on behalf of the government but, rather,
to assist them
in the commencement of such services by developing tools to help make decisions,
providing access to databases and
smart platforms etc. The types of government
and private sector partnerships that exist have changed significantly since the
commencement
As a result of various
partnerships, government contractors could hold important information in which
the public may have a legitimate
interest. For instance, when a contractor
develops a system that automates a government decision or a part of the
decision-making
process, members of the public have a legitimate interest in
knowing exactly how the system functions, and in being able to scrutinise
check its accuracy and reliability. This is a prerequisite for the ability to
challenge decisions made with the help of ADMS,
to protect public interests and
hold the government accountable. Section 121 focuses only on old-type contracts
on the outsourcing
of government services and excludes new types of government
and private sector partnerships. The current wording of s 121 and its
construction thus have the potential to significantly reduce access to
government information, decrease government transparency
and accountability,
cause harm to the interests of individuals and businesses, and eventually
negatively affect trust in government
Contractual
Duty To Provide Immediate Access
The second problem related to s 121 is that access to government information
held by government contractors needs to — and can
established via a government contract. The statute does not set a statutory duty
for government contractors to provide
access to government information that they
, the government contract with the third party,
NPS, did not contain provisions providing government access to any
information.
Importantly, this contract
was signed before the enactment of the
and thus the Tribunal
considered that such a duty cannot be retrospectively introduced into the
However, even in relation to
contracts signed after the enactment of the
, there is no
guarantee that all government contracts have such an ‘immediate
access’ provision. If such contractual information
duties are omitted from
the government contract (by error or otherwise) — and since there is no
statutory duty to provide information
on government contractors —
governments would not be contractually able to request any information from
third-party contractors,
even if this information is essential for transparency,
decision contestability or government accountability purposes.
Scope of Information
Third, the categories of information to which a contract should establish
‘immediate access’, as listed under s 121(1)
are either narrow or vague. It is quite obvious that a contractor should provide
access to information that they receive from members
of the public and from the
agency. These provisions — ss 121(1)(b)–(c) — are thus
justified but they are narrow
in scope. The remaining s 121(1)(a) refers to
information that ‘relates directly to the performance of the
The exact information that is supposed to be covered by this
provision remains unclear. If this exact wording was replicated in a
would it cover information generated by the contractor, such as algorithm
structure, parameters, training, validation data or results?
Would it cover
independent auditing results and other external quality assurance information
of the provision, the contractor could
argue that information about the algorithm and its validation and testing does
not ‘relate
... directly to the performance of the
but rather sets
technical parameters behind the tool that is used in government service
provision. Thus, returning to
, even if such a vague
information duty existed in the contract between the NSW government and the
contractor, it is doubtful that
it would have covered the information that was
requested by the affected individual (eg algorithm, software specification,
code and test suites).
Limitations
to Immediate Access
The fourth issue related to s 121 is the broad exceptions to the
‘immediate access’ provisions. Most problematically,
a government
contract is not required to provide for the
to have an immediate right of access to information that would place a
contractor in a ‘substantial commercial disadvantage
in relation to the
agency, whether at present or in the
The concept of ‘substantial commercial disadvantage’, which was
already discussed above in relation to the ‘business
lacks legal certainty and
predictability, and has been interpreted by the NSW Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in an unreasonably
broad manner. In
, the Tribunal
determined that disclosure of the information requested by the applicant, namely
the algorithm, source code and test
could reasonably be expected to place the contractor (NPS) at a substantial
commercial disadvantage in relation to the agency (DCJ)
whether at present or in
the future. Essentially such disclosure could lead to the position that DCJ no
longer needed to engage in
the specialist services of NPS to facilitate DCJ
carrying out its business and discharging their statutory functions. On this
s 121(2)(c) is clearly enlivened and would operate to prevent the
requirement for access to the information by DCJ, to meet the criteria
information is held.
Tribunal agreed with the submission of the Department of Communities and Justice
(NSW) that if released,
the information could then be used by the Respondent to replicate and/or create
the same or a similar software product ‘in
house’ or use the source
code and algorithms (intellectual property) to request another service provider
to provide the service
at a lower cost and thus place the contract between NPS
and the Respondent in
unreasonable argument and more specifically, appears to demonstrate the
Tribunal’s misunderstanding of IP rights
and their scope. The
Department’s access to the algorithm, source code or training datasets
does not itself allow the Department
to share it with the public, replicate it
or create the same software product. Much of this information, especially the
source code,
remains protected under copyright law. Thus, access to subject
matter protected by IP laws (more specifically, copyright) does not
government agency to reproduce it or make it available to another service
provider and request them ‘to provide
the service at a lower cost’.
Copying and publicly communicating work protected by copyright would result in
Indeed, it is very difficult — if not impossible — to think of
ways that the disclosure of an algorithm and other technical
information could
put the contractor at a substantial commercial disadvantage
in relation to
. One of the consequences might be that the agency learns of the
algorithm’s flaws from this technical information and thus
discontinue the contract. For example, the agency may learn that the algorithm
or the model is of low quality, that it
is based on incorrect formulas or
assumptions, or that it provides inaccurate or biased results etc. However, the
law should not
protect illegitimate commercial interests such as the provision
of low-quality or harmful services and products. Not even the breach
confidence doctrine will protect information about
‘iniquity’.
Balancing of Competing Public Interests
Finally, exceptions to the ‘immediate access’ provisions, as
listed under s 121(2) of the
, will be applied by contractors
themselves, not by government agencies, and without the need to balance
competing public interests.
As discussed
above, when an agency is requested to disclose business-related information that
they hold, they are required to balance
the public interests in favour of and
against the disclosure of the information; the former’s prevalence is
presumed under
When the information
is held by a government contractor, the contractor will decide whether the
requested information falls under
any of the categories listed under s 121(2).
They are not required to undertake a balancing and weighting of different public
In practice, this enables the contractors to easily deny the
disclosure of information, as long as such disclosure is likely to cause
any ‘substantial commercial disadvantage ... whether at present or in the
In conclusion, government information held by third parties has much weaker
public access and transparency guarantees. The scope of
information that third
parties are required to disclose (if such contractual duty exists at all) is
quite narrow and vague, while
the exceptions to these disclosure duties are
overly broad and absolute. Keeping in mind the increasing importance of this
in practice, there is a need for new solutions that would ensure
efficient public access to information held by government contractors.
Proposed Solutions
The above analysis has demonstrated the current challenges that trade secrets
and other business information cause in ensuring transparency
around ADMS in
NSW. This Part develops three blocks of proposals on how these challenges could
be addressed. These proposals are
underpinned by a need to retain
and strengthen government transparency — and the human right to
information — in the context of an ever more digitised and automated
government that increasingly outsources the development
and deployment of
automated government tools.
governments adopt proprietary ADMS that impact the structure, operation or
decision-making procedures of the government,
information about such systems
ought to be made public.
The involvement
of third parties in the automation of government should not diminish government
transparency. On the contrary, emerging
technologies should enable governments
to increase transparency and address the asymmetry of information that is held
by the government
and by the public, as well as contribute to further
democratisation of government institutions.
As Bloch-Wehba summarised:
[W]hen agencies adopt and rely upon proprietary materials or software in making
decisions, those materials should generally be considered
matters of public
regardless of the licensing or contractual provisions that
govern. Indeed, allowing contracts between the government and its vendors
remove the infrastructure of decision-making from public control reflects a
formalistic approach that privileges the private sector’s
economic and
political power while virtually eviscerating the purposes of the statutory
protections.
At the same
time, it is unlikely that governments will agree to withdraw the protection of
trade secrets and other business information
in public-private partnerships
This might lead to undesirable
consequences, such as the unwillingness of businesses to collaborate with
governments in developing
government automation solutions, or lower quality
technologies being offered to the government. The below proposals seek to
a new balance between the public need to access proprietary
information related to government ADMS and the protection of third-party
interests. While these proposals directly refer to NSW legislation, they would
be relevant for other states and territories of Australia
when reconsidering the
protection of business interests in their respective legislation.
Reducing Protection for Business Information Held by Government
The first proposal is to reduce protection for business-related information,
including trade secrets, held by the government. As could
be seen from the
analysis above, increasing government collaborations with the private sector
will result in even more business-related
information being held by the
government (eg in government contracts). However, strong statutory protections
for such information,
such as the ‘business interests’ exception
, impedes the release of such information to the
public. In order to facilitate public access to business-related information
ADMS utilised by the NSW government, two actions are recommended: (1)
narrowing down the protection for ‘commercial-in-confidence’
information and other business information; and (2) improving the interest
balancing test by adding another factor that specifically
encourages the
disclosure of information about automated government systems.
Protection for Confidential and Other Business Information
Narrower protection for both confidential and other business information held
by the government is recommended for several reasons.
First, the main object of
is ‘to open
information
to the public’ with a goal ‘to maintain and advance
a system of responsible and representative democratic Government
that is open,
accountable, fair and effective’.
While this goal should be balanced against other legitimate public
including the confidentiality
interests of third parties, there is no reason why the
grant protection to trade secrets that is more extensive than that granted under
a general breach of confidence doctrine.
Second, the Australian breach of confidence doctrine already grants broad
protection to trade secrets. In contrast to international
and trade secret laws in many other
Australian breach of
confidence law does not explicitly require information to have an independent
commercial value, which demonstrates
its broader scope of protection. In order
to find a breach of confidence, it is sufficient to prove that the information
is confidential,
was imparted in a way that creates a duty of confidentiality
and was used without authorisation.
broad protection offered under the breach of confidence doctrine could thus be
sufficient to protect the legitimate interests
of government contractors.
Third, courts in other jurisdictions have given narrower protection to trade
secrets when dealing with freedom of information requests,
as compared to usual
trade secret cases. For instance, in case law concerning the US
Information Act
US courts have interpreted the term ‘trade secret’ to have a more
limited meaning than it does under the
According to Brauneis and
the government may only withhold records under Exemption 4 [of the
] for ‘a secret, commercially valuable plan, formula, process, or
device that is used [in connection with] trade commodities
and that can be said
to be the end product of either innovation or substantial
‘there must be “a direct relationship between the information at
issue and the productive process”, rather
than merely “collateral
confidentiality”’.
This suggests that ‘not all algorithmic processes that a vendor might
consider to be trade secrets in the commercial sphere
should count as trade
secrets for open records exemption
Keeping this in mind, there is no rationale to extend protection for
commercial confidential information under the
protection granted under the breach of confidence doctrine. Overly extensive
protection of business information under
undermines the
ultimate goal of the Act and inhibits transparency and accountability of the
government.
Thus, instead of an
overbroad ‘commercial-in-confidence’ definition, at the very least,
could make the protection of commercial confidential
information compatible with its protection under the breach of confidence
Further, it is questionable whether
non-confidential
information requires protection at all. As argued above, if a third party
provided the government with the information
without any confidentiality
restrictions, its commercial value and significance is assumingly so limited
that its public disclosure
does not need to be prohibited. Accordingly, the
could envisage that, in order for business information to be
protected under the legislation, it should be of commercial significance
third party (ie provide a competitive advantage) and they should have made
efforts to keep it confidential (ie disclosed it
in circumstances importing the
duty of confidentiality). In comparison, similar exceptions under the
generally only protect trade secrets and other confidential and
privileged information.
This additional
limitation for the protection of business interests under the
would encourage third parties, before disclosing information to the government,
to carefully assess which information is commercially
valuable and should
therefore be kept confidential.
the Public Interest Test
As a second proposal, NSW government agencies could be further encouraged to
disclose ADMS-related information through a revised public
Currently, when deciding whether
to release proprietary information about ADMS, agencies should weigh the
business risks of such
disclosure against a list of general factors in favour of
such disclosure.
Examples of factors in
favour of disclosure include information that would: ‘promote open
discussion of public affairs, enhance
Government accountability or contribute to
positive and informed debate on issues of public
importance’;
‘inform the
public about the operations of agencies and, in particular, their policies and
practices for dealing with members
‘ensure effective
oversight of the expenditure of public
and ‘reveal or
substantiate that an
... has engaged in misconduct or negligent, improper or unlawful
These examples, however, do not specifically refer to the digital or
automated government systems that are often developed through
public-private
partnerships. As explained above, such collaborations frequently result in a
lack of public access to information
systems that are based on new and emerging technologies might have elevated
risks and often
lack established quality assurance and oversight
mechanisms.
In such cases, the public
oversight and quality of such systems should be prioritised over the commercial
interests involved. To
do so, freedom of information laws could establish
mechanisms that would encourage agencies to disclose information about automated
government systems.
As one of the possible options for the
, an additional factor
could be added to the list of factors weighing in favour of the disclosure of
government information. This
factor could consider the use of automation as a
factor favouring the disclosure of information. A similar recommendation was
by the NSW IPC, but in relation to AI technologies
factor, it is recommended, should refer to all automated systems or processes
(not only to AI), as even relatively simple
software which does not amount to AI
might have significant impacts on individuals and thus pose significant
An additional factor in favour of
disclosure would give a stronger basis for government agencies to disclose
information about ADMS,
even if such disclosure affects certain business
Improving Access to Information Held by Third Parties
Apart from improving disclosure of information held by government, it is also
necessary to improve access to information held by government
contractors.
Keeping in mind that public-private partnerships are likely to increase in the
future and that government contractors
are likely to hold even more information
appropriate access to information held by these third parties. The
above analysis has demonstrated that current rules regulating
access to such
information under the
— especially s 121 (the
‘immediate access’ provisions) — are largely inadequate in the
modern context of
government and private sector partnerships. Three reforms to s
121 are recommended to improve access to information held by NSW government
contractors.
the Scope of ‘Immediate Access’ Provisions
The first proposal is to expand s 121 of the
so that it not
only covers contractors that provide direct services to the public but also any
third parties which provide ADMS tools
or services that facilitate the provision
of government services.
This would help
address the first problem related to
s 121; namely, its application to a narrow group of government contracts
Expanding the scope of s 121 is necessary to reflect the diversity and
complexity of government and private sector partnerships in
the context of
government automation.
In many cases,
government contractors do not directly provide services to the public on behalf
of the agency but ‘merely’
provide algorithmic or automated tools to
assist the government with their functions. Government reliance on these tools,
may have significant effects on individuals’ rights and
legitimate interests. As mentioned above, these tools have already
automatically
issued debt notices
and garnishee orders
to individuals,
played an instrumental
role in calculating rental subsidies,
and influenced parole decisions.
significance of such tools is not necessarily less — and is sometimes even
higher — than the significance of third-party
services directly provided
to the public. When information about these tools and how they work is held by
government contractors,
the law should ensure that individuals have the right to
access this information. In addition, without expanding the scope of s 121,
asymmetry of the information held by the government and its partners, and
information that the public can access, will further
increase and is likely to
result in unjustified limitations on the human right to
information.
Information to Which Government Should Have Immediate Access
Second, the immediate access provisions that are currently listed under s
121(2) of the
are general and vague in nature, and thus provide
little legal certainty as to the information to which government should have
These provisions need
to be defined in a clear and more specific way to increase legal certainty and
predictability for all parties
involved. The
provisions or the
corresponding NSW IPC guidance
more clearly list the types of information about government ADMS to which
government contractors are obliged to provide access
and under what conditions.
For instance, this could be system development and functioning information (eg
algorithmic parameters,
training and validation information), system external
testing, certification and auditing
information.
The UK Algorithmic
Transparency Standard provides useful guidance on what types of information
It could be made clear that
while some of this information might be made accessible to the government agency
only (ie under confidentiality
restrictions), other information needs to be
provided for public access purposes (ie free from confidentiality
This will ensure that the
public has access to the third-party information that is necessary for
government transparency purposes.
Down Exceptions to ‘Immediate Access’ Provisions
Thirdly, it is recommended that exceptions to the ‘immediate
access’ provisions, as listed under s 121(2) of the
reconsidered. As demonstrated above, these exceptions are either broad, vague or
inadequate, and make it very easy for contractors
to reject the request for
information as long as certain commercial interests are
Current provisions are thus
very protective of third-party commercial interests and make it barely possible
for the government to
fulfil its transparency and accountability duties.
Instead of these vague and broad provisions, more specific exceptions to the
‘immediate access’ provisions could be considered.
For instance,
such exceptions might focus on trade secrets
Namely, if the information to
which the government wants access constitutes commercial confidential
information as defined under
general law, this would be a legitimate ground for
the third party to reject a disclosure of such information. However, if the
information is not confidential in nature and the party cannot show
how its disclosure would lead to a significant commercial disadvantage,
disclosure should not be pre-empted. In any case, the exceptions for the
disclosure of information held by government contractors
should be compatible
with those applicable to business information held by the government.
Acquiring Essential Information through Improved Procurement
The above two solutions have the potential to improve access to third-party
information, both held by the government and by government
contractors. However,
they will not fully solve the problems identified earlier. For instance, even if
the above recommendations
are adopted, it will remain impossible to publicly
disclose information that qualifies as confidential commercial information or
trade secrets (either held by the government or by a third party), as disclosure
of such information might lead to government liability
under the breach of
confidence doctrine. If the
protects only
confidential
commercial information, contractors will start using trade secrets even more
intensely; for instance, by routinely requesting government
agencies to sign
non-disclosure agreements.
Further, even
if laws provided protection only to confidential information that provides a
significant commercial advantage, as proposed
above, an abundance of publicly
relevant information (eg about algorithmic parameters and validation) might
prove to be commercially
significant and thus excluded from public disclosure
duties. For these reasons, additional measures to improve public access to
information about government ADMS need to be considered.
One such possible measure is to ensure that the government leverages its
procurement powers to acquire, or using the
’s terminology,
to get a ‘hold’ of information that is essential for public
transparency purposes and without any
confidentiality
restrictions.
In particular, before
collaborating with third parties to develop or implement government ADMS,
governments should require third
parties to commit to the disclosure of
information that is essential for government public transparency
This information can be
provided on a one-off basis or continuously, and it can be licensed or owned by
the government. However,
for the purposes of the
, it should be
considered as ‘held’ by the government agency. Further, government
contractors would be required to provide
this essential information without any
confidentiality restrictions; otherwise, the government might not be able to use
this information
for public disclosure
This solution would address several of the problems identified above. First,
if such essential information is acquired and held by
the government, it could
be easily disclosed to the public, either through proactive or reactive
transparency pathways. The government
would not need to request such information
from the contractor, which requires relying on their disclosure procedures and
that the third party does not misuse and inappropriately apply the
exceptions to their disclosure duties. Further, if the government
information without commercial confidentiality restrictions, trade secrets, as a
barrier to government transparency, would
also be removed. There would be no
need for the agency to balance possible conflicting public interests (eg an
interest not to disclose
trade secrets) and the agency would not be unable to
disclose trade secrets due to legal liability risks. Other commentators agree
that despite public-private partnerships, the government should find solutions
that enable them to provide unrestricted access to
the information relevant for
transparency purposes.
The government should be able to get hold of such essential information
during procurement procedures.
Bloch-Wehba suggests, ‘the transparency problem raised by algorithmic
governance as it is presented today results largely
from procurement practices
that fail to foreground the public
During negotiations,
the government could require the contractors to provide such information without
confidentiality restrictions.
contractor does not agree to commit to the unrestricted disclosure of essential
information, the government should not enter
into contracts with such a party
that is not ready to support government transparency
obligations.
As suggested by Brauneis and Goodman, this is possible in practice and some
government institutions in the US have already been successfully
negotiating
contracts with much narrower non-disclosure duties or negotiating ownership over
confidential information.
In the case of
commercial contractors (as opposed to not-for-profit organisations providing
tools for free), governments arguably
have ‘additional leverage’ in
negotiations as they are paying for the
implementation of new contracting practices might require a revision of
procurement laws and practices as well as continuous monitoring
implementation.
For example, a
previously proposed Act of the Washington state legislature required ADMS to
have several transparency and accountability-enhancing
features, including that
they be open to audit and inspection by state
It also stipulated that
procurement contracts for ADMS contain non-disclosure provisions or other
obstacles to transparency.
This proposed
Act is an example of how procurement policies around government ADMS could be
‘Essential’ Information
In order to implement the above proposal, the remaining challenging task is
to determine what constitutes ‘essential’
information — ie
what information is so ‘essential’ for public transparency purposes
that the government should
require third parties to disclose it despite possible
associated commercial interests.
Australian and international government institutions and public organisations
have made preliminary attempts to list the types of
information about ADMS that
should be made publicly available, but there is no consensus on this question
yet. For instance, the
NSW IPC has suggested that agencies should identify
‘datasets and other forms of digital information and inventories of
enhanced decision-making in Agency Information Guides’, and ensure
that ‘documents/information that supports digital
government and automated
decision-making ... are available as open access
information’.
The NSW IPC has also
recommended that agencies ‘[e]nsure that
open access
[information]
includes a statement of use, inputs, and a description of the operation of the
AI system’.
The NSW Ombudsman has
suggested that
agencies should consider releasing draft specifications, code and even
‘beta’ versions of new machines to draw on external
expertise and
the technology is
put into operation.
the UK Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard, government agencies are
required to provide information about ownership
and responsibility, description
and rationale, decision-making processes, technical specifications and data, as
well as risk mitigations
assessments.
Under the EU’s
proposal for AI regulations, information to be included in the register of
high-risk technologies includes a
general description of the technology, a
detailed description of its elements and development, detailed information about
the monitoring,
functioning and control of the AI system, and risk management
and post-market evaluation
Especially detailed transparency provisions are available in the World Economic
Forum white paper on facial recognition technologies
enforcement.
Civil organisations and
academic commentators have also developed various proposals on what effective or
meaningful government transparency
around ADMS would
While a comprehensive public discussion and a separate study are required to
determine the types of information that are ‘essential’
transparency purposes, two main perspectives — a
‘stakeholder’ and a ‘system’
perspective — in selecting such essential information are proposed
Firstly, according to a ‘stakeholder’ perspective, governments
should keep in mind that different stakeholder groups require
different levels
of transparency about government automation and should ensure that each
stakeholder group has access to sufficient
information to meet their
In particular, governments should
meet the transparency needs of non-expert members of the public that have
limited knowledge about
government ADMS and require relatively general and
user-friendly information. Governments should also aim to meet the transparency
needs of members of the public such as Non-Government Organisations and
researchers, who might have expert knowledge about the systems
regulation, and require more in-depth and detailed technical information or
other quality assurance information.
this latter case, the government would have to balance public interests against
the interests of third parties, as it might not
be reasonable or justified to
require government contractors to disclose all of the technical information that
experts may seek.
Despite this, governments should ensure that at least some of
the relevant information sought by experts is made available to make
that they can effectively perform a public oversight function. For instance,
even if exhaustive information about algorithmic
parameters, training and
validation cannot be disclosed due to trade secrets, information such as
external validation, auditor’s
reports and independent legal evaluation
reports should be publicly available.
Second, a ‘system’ perspective suggests that ADMS should be
subject to different transparency standards depending on the
more specifically, depending on the level of impact or risk that it poses to the
rights and legitimate interests
of individuals. If the technology has minimal
effects on human rights or legitimate interests (eg automated traffic light
minimal information will need to be provided. If an ADMS has medium or
significant/high effects on individual rights or interests
(eg if it influences
a decision affecting an individual’s legal rights or social and economic
interests), a high level of transparency
of the system should be ensured. The risk or impact of AI is a criterion that
has been suggested
for regulating AI both in
In summary, as governments are increasingly using sophisticated algorithms in
their decision-making, which are likely to negatively
affect the legitimate
interests of their citizens, it becomes indispensable to maintain and increase
public transparency around such
algorithms. Focusing on the case study of NSW,
this article has demonstrated that current transparency around government ADMS
NSW is insufficient, with transparency laws such as the
containing significant gaps in ensuring transparency in the age of government
automation. This article has proposed a range of legal
reforms and improved
procurement practices which are expected to assist in enhancing transparency
around government automated decision-making
as well as ensure better government
accountability and improved public service delivery.
* PhD, LLM (Munich), Senior Lecturer at Macquarie University Law School.
This article is the outcome of a research project,
NO to BlackBox: Towards More Transparent
and Explainable AI in Government’, funded under the Macquarie University
Outside Studies
Program. My sincere thanks to Serena Abrahams for her editorial
assistance.
Digital Transformation Agency (Cth),
Digital Government Strategy: Accelerating the Digital Future of Our
Australian Public Service
(Report, 2021) 3.
Australian Government,
2021–22: Budget Strategy and Outlook
(Budget Paper No 1, 11 May 2021)
‘Beyond Digital’,
(Web Page) <https://www.digital.nsw.gov.au/strategy>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/9JT6-9DW7>.
‘Artificial Intelligence
Digital NSW
<https://www.digital.nsw.gov.au/‌policy/artificial-intelligence/artificial‌-intelligence-‌strategy>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/‌4HEV-JCBX>.
See ‘My Health Record’,
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
<https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-legislation/related-legislation/my-health-record>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/MM6C-6JSU>.
‘SmartGates’,
Border Force
(Web Page, 23 September 2019) <
https://www.abf.g​ov.au/entering-and-leaving-australia/smartgates/overview
>, archived at <https://perma.cc/
D5KM-G2EJ>.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Centrelink’s Automated Debt Raising and Recovery System: A Report about
the Department of Human Services’ Online Compliance
Intervention System
for Debt Raising and Recovery
(Report, April 2017) 1
Centrelink’s Automated Debt Raising and Recovery
Transport for NSW,
NSW Automated
Enforcement Strategy for Road Safety
(Report, November 2022) 4.
Revenue NSW, ‘Using Artificial
Intelligence To Identify and Support Customers Facing Hardship’,
Digital NSW
(Web Page, 21 September 2021) <
https://www.digital.nsw.gov.au/artic​le/using-artificial-intelligence-to-identify-and-support-customers-facing-hardship
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/WVZ3-776C
‘New Algorithm Tool Designed To
Identify Sepsis Risk in ED’,
eHealth NSW
(Web Page, 9 September
https://www.ehealth.nsw.gov.au/news/algorithm-tool-to-identify-sepsis
>, archived at <https://perma.cc/K2GC-NAFV>.
Cary Coglianese and David Lehr,
‘Regulating by Robot: Administrative Decision Making in the
Machine-Learning Era’
(2017) 105(5)
Georgetown Law Journal
See, eg, Carolin Kemper,
‘Kafkaesque AI? Legal Decision-Making in the Era of Machine
Learning’ (2020) 24(2)
University of San Francisco Intellectual
Property and Technology Law Journal
251, 252–3;
Christine Kumar, ‘The Automated Tipster: How
Implicit Bias Turns Suspicion Algorithms into BBQ Beckys’
(2020) 72(1)
Federal Communications Law Journal
, 99–100; Anna Huggins,
‘Addressing Disconnection: Automated Decision-Making, Administrative Law
and Regulatory Reform’
[2021] UNSWLawJl 37
(2021) 44(3)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
1048, 1076;
Yee-Fui Ng, ‘Institutional Adaptation and the Administrative
[2021] MelbULawRw 4
(2021) 44(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
915–24; Yee-Fui Ng and Maria O’Sullivan, ‘Deliberation and
Automation: When Is a Decision a “Decision”?’
(2019) 26(1)
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
, 21–3, 33.
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of
Government: Using Machine Technology in Administrative Decision-Making
(Report, 29 November 2021) 7 (‘
The New Machinery of
[2022] NSWCATAD 100
[2022] NSWCATAD 366
) [2]–[5] (Senior Member McAteer);
ibid [1]–[7] (Senior Member Ransome). For further discussion of these
cases, see below
accompanying text.
Various reasons for transparency are
well summarised in Michele Loi,
Automated Decision-Making Systems in the
Public Sector: An Impact Assessment Tool for Public Authorities
June 2021) 18–21; Lyria Bennett Moses and Louis de Koker, ‘Open
Secrets: Balancing Operational Secrecy and Transparency
in the Collection and
Use of Data by National Security and Law Enforcement Agencies’
[2017] MelbULawRw 32
Melbourne University Law Review
, 534–6, 548.
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation
and Development,
Modernising Government: The Way Forward
(2005) 29. For a
short overview of the history of open government, see Anita Stuhmcke,
Advancing the Objects of the Government Information (Public
Access) Act 2009 (NSW): An International Comparative Evaluation of Measures
To Promote Government Information Release
(Report, 23 June 2015)
13–16; Bernd W Wirtz and Steven Birkmeyer, ‘Open Government: Origin,
Development, and Conceptual
Perspectives’
(2015) 38(5)
International
Journal of Public Administration
, 382–4; Fons Wijnhoven, Michel
Ehrenhard and Johannes Kuhn, ‘Open Government Objectives and Participation
Motivations’
(2015) 32(1)
Government Information Quarterly
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
for signature 19 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976)
For analyses of various challenges
related to emerging government technologies, see Han-Wei Liu, Ching-Fu Lin and
Yu-Jie Chen, ‘Beyond
State v Loomis
: Artificial Intelligence,
Government Algorithmization and Accountability’
(2019) 27(2)
International Journal of Law and Information Technology
Lyria Bennett Moses and Edward Santow, ‘Accountability in the Age of
Artificial Intelligence: A Right to Reasons’
(2020) 94(11)
Law Journal
, 829–30; Emily Berman, ‘A Government of Laws and
Not of Machines’
(2018) 98(1)
Boston University Law Review
1326–31; Noah Bunnell, ‘Remedying Public-Sector Algorithmic Harms:
The Case for Local and State Regulation via Independent
Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problems
Robert Brauneis and Ellen P Goodman,
‘Algorithmic Transparency for the Smart City’
Journal of Law and Technology
Erik Bakke, ‘Predictive Policing: The Argument
for Public Transparency’
(2018) 74(1)
New York University Annual Survey
of American Law
For example, in a 2020 Australian
Human Rights Commission survey, ‘85% of survey participants indicated it
was very important,
or somewhat important, to be informed that a computer
program has made an automated decision affecting them’: Australian Human
Rights Commission,
Human Rights and Technology
(Final Report, 1 March
Government transparency is the main
goal of federal and state freedom of information acts: see, eg,
Information Act 1982
FOI Act (Cth)
Archives Act 1983
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013
Information (Public Access) Act 2009
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Since 2015,
the Australian government has also been a member of the Open Government
Partnership: ‘Australia’,
Open Government Partnership
Page) <https://www.opengovpartnership.org/‌members/australia>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/6V7X-5V25>.
See, eg, Department of Industry,
Science and Resources (Cth), ‘Australia’s AI Ethics
Principles’,
Australia’s Artificial Intelligence Ethics
(Web Page, 7 November 2019)
<https://www.industry.gov.au/publications/australias-artificial-intelligence-ethics-framework​/australias-ai-ethics-principles>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/ZD7J-CU6T>. According to Digital
Transformation Agency (Cth) (n
Agency ‘will be open and transparent in [its] interactions by clearly
communicating [its] processes including the way
[it] use[s] data and make[s]
decisions’: at 12. See also NSW Government, ‘Artificial Intelligence
Ethical Policy’,
NSW Digital
<https://www.digital.nsw.gov.au/policy/artificial-intelligence/artif​icial-intelligence-ethics-policy>,
at <https://perma.cc/CSB6-A7KF>. According to the NSW government,
AI must be a ‘solution that is open and transparent
so that NSW citizens
have access to efficient review mechanisms’.
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of
) 7. See also below
Part II(B).
While in different contexts these
terms might have slightly different meanings, for the purpose of this article,
they are used as
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of
) states ‘[a]
key transparency issue arises when an agency engages an external provider for
machine technology expertise’:
at 62. In its submission to the Australian
Human Rights Commission, the Information and Privacy Commission (NSW) states
that ‘there
is scope to strengthen existing information access laws to
better facilitate access to AI-informed decision-making, particularly
governments partner with the private sector and NGOs in using these
technologies’: Information and Privacy Commission
(NSW), Submission to
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Human Rights and Technology Discussion
(24 February 2020) 19 <
https://humanrights.gov.au/‌sites/default/files/2020-07/10_-_information_and_privacy_commission_nsw_1.pdf
archived at <https://perma.cc/L9JT-SRAE>. See also Jake Goldenfein,
‘Algorithmic Transparency and Decision-Making
Accountability: Thoughts for
Buying Machine Learning Algorithms’ in Cliff Bertram, Asher Gibson and
Adriana Nugent (eds),
Closer to the Machine: Technical, Social, and Legal
Aspects of AI
(Office of the Victorian Information Commissioner, August
2019) 41, 42–3; Rebecca Wexler, ‘Life, Liberty, and Trade Secrets:
Intellectual Property in the Criminal Justice System’
(2018) 70(5)
Stanford Law Review
, 1346, 1349–50.
Part II(B).
For an analysis of transparency and
ADMS problems under the
FOI Act (Cth)
Yee-Fui Ng et al, ‘Revitalising Public Law in a Technological Era:
Rights, Transparency and Administrative Justice’
[2020] UNSWLawJl 37
(2020) 43(3)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
For an analysis of state transparency
laws in the United States (‘US’), see generally Christina
Koningisor, ‘Transparency
(2020) 114(6)
Northwestern
University Law Review
See, eg, Ayo Næsborg Anderson
and Hanne Marie Motzfeldt, ‘Different Aspects of Transparency in Digital
Government: The
Danish Case’ (Conference Paper, European Conference on
Digital Government, 24 October 2019) 81–6. Anderson and Motzfeldt
transparency in digital government could be divided into transparency of data,
transparency of algorithms, transparency of
administrative decisions and
democratic transparency. See also Tom M van Engers and Dennis M de Vries,
‘Governmental Transparency
in the Era of Artificial Intelligence’ in
Michal Araszkiewicz and Víctor Rodríguez-Doncel (eds),
Knowledge and Information Systems
(IOS Press, 2019) vol 322, 33, 35–6.
See generally van Engers and de Vries (n
) which discusses the explainability of
AI decisions as an element of transparency.
See also Tal Z Zarsky, ‘Transparent Predictions’
University of Illinois Law Review
, 1530–2, which suggests that
transparency is not well understood in the algorithmic government
decision-making context. For
a brief history of government transparency, see
Daniel J Metcalfe, ‘The History of Government
Transparency’ in Padideh Ala’i and Robert G Vaughn (eds),
Research Handbook on Transparency
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2014)
Department of Industry, Science and
Resources (Cth), ‘Australia’s AI Ethics Principles’
NSW Government, ‘Mandatory
Ethical Principles for the Use of AI’,
NSW Digital
<https://www.digital.nsw.gov.au/policy/artificial-intelligence/artificial-intelligence-ethics-pol​icy/mandatory-ethical-principles>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/JU3D-P7PQ>.
Ibid. This compares with the
definition provided in Australian Human Rights Commission,
Human Rights and
) 60. According to
the Australian Human Rights Commission, transparency requires ‘that any
affected individual is notified where
artificial intelligence is materially used
in making an administrative decision’.
See generally David E Pozen,
‘Transparency’s Ideological Drift’
(2018) 128(1)
, for a discussion on transparency’s historical drift from
being a progressive ideal to a libertarian one.
Department of Industry, Science and
Resources (Cth), ‘Australia’s AI Ethics Principles’ (n
Cf NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery
of Government
) which proposes
strengthening government transparency towards courts, tribunals and disciplinary
or regulatory bodies: at 62.
Note that transparency can serve
various goals: see, eg, Bakke (n
144. Bakke lists five reasons for transparency: ‘(1) democratic
legitimacy; (2) the prevention of misconduct; (3) a remedy
for injustices; (4)
better substantive policies; and (5) community trust’. Tom van Nuenen et
al, ‘Transparency for Whom?
Assessing Discriminatory Artificial
Intelligence’ (2020) 53(11)
36, 37, 42–3, argues
that transparency should be understood by looking at the issue from the
perspectives of various stakeholders.
See, eg, Frank Bannister and Regina
Connolly, ‘The Trouble with Transparency: A Critical Review of Openness in
E-Government’
(2011) 3(1)
Policy and Internet
9–18; Harlan Yu and David G Robinson, ‘The New Ambiguity of
“Open Government”’ [2011]
UCLA Law Review Discourse
178, 182; van Nuenen et al (n
Danielle Moon and Carolyn Adams, ‘Too Much of
a Good Thing? Balancing Transparency and Government Effectiveness in FOI Public
Interest Decision Making’ (2015) 82 (November)
Australian Institute of
Administrative Law Forum
See, eg, Mark Fenster, ‘The
Opacity of Transparency’
(2006) 91(3)
Iowa Law Review
902–10; van Nuenen et al (n
Ibid s 6(1).
The list of ‘public interests
considerations’ can be found under s 14 of the
Information and Privacy Commission
Automated Decision-Making, Digital Government and Preserving
Information Access Rights: For Agencies
(Fact Sheet, August 2022) 2
NSW IPC Fact Sheet
Ibid s 9(1).
‘Open Government, Open Data
& Public Participation’,
Information and Privacy Commission
<https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/information-access/open-government-open​-data>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5X7G-HMF4>;
Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
Charter for Public Participation: A Guide To Assist
Agencies and Promote Citizen Engagement
(Guide, June 2018) 4.
‘Beyond Digital’ (n
‘Open Government, Open Data
& Public Participation’ (n
See above n
and accompanying text.
Information and Privacy Commission (NSW), 10 Year GIPA Data
Analysis Overview 2010 to 2020
(Report, September 2021)
<https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/nsw-information-commissioners-10-year-gipa-data-analysis-overview-2010-2020>,
archived at <https://perm​a.cc/G79C-ZU3E>
’). During 2010–20, applications to access government
information increased from 6,000 to 13,690.
Ibid, citing Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
NSW Community Attitudes to Information Access
Document, April 2020) <www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/media/3115>.
) s 6(1); Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
NSW IPC Fact Sheet
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of
) 7. At the time of
writing, the NSW Ombudsman, in collaboration with ADM+S, was conducting a study
to map the uses of ADMS in NSW
agencies: Loren Dela Cruz, ‘ADM+S Partners
with New South Wales Ombudsman To Analyse the Use of Automated Systems in NSW
(Web Page, 23 January 2023) <
https://www.admscentre.org.au/adms-partners-with-the-new-south-wales-ombudsman-to-analyse-the-use-of-automated-systems-in-nsw-govern​ment-sectors/
>, archived at <https://perma.cc/2N6Q-L425>
Information and Privacy Commission
GIPA Data Analysis
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of
) 2–3; Lucy
Cormack, ‘Revenue NSW’s Automated System Took Fines from
People’s Bank Accounts’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
30 November 2021) <
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/nsw/revenue-nsw-s-automated-system-took-fines-from-people-s-bank-accounts-20211129-p59d2m.html
archived at <https://perma.cc/LG59-78G2>.
Revenue NSW (n
‘Department of Customer Service
Agency Information Guide’,
NSW Government
(June 2024, Web Page)
<https://www.nsw.gov.au/departments-and-agencies/customer-service/access-to-information/department-of-customer-service-agency-information-guide>,
archived at <htt​ps://perma.cc/6DHY-QPL8>. Some brief information
NSW web page as an example
of a positive use of AI: ibid.
Information and Privacy Commission
NSW IPC Fact Sheet
Information and Privacy Commission
GIPA Data Analysis
‘5b: Did Applicants Get What
They Asked for?’,
Information and Privacy Commission (NSW)
<https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/information-access/agency-gipa-dashboard/gipa-dashboard>.
The latter number includes
full refusal of information (6%), information already
publicly available (2%) and applications withdrawn (6%).
See generally ‘Agency GIPA
Dashboard’,
Information and Privacy Commission (NSW)
<https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/information-access/gipa-dashboard>, archived
at <https://​perma.cc/4MYD-7DTD>.
The release rates for general
information and for information related to digital government have both been
around 65%: Information
and Privacy Commission (NSW),
GIPA Data Analysis
) [2]–[3], [8] (Senior Member
Ibid [10], [40].
Ibid [99], [117]–[118].
Ibid [96], [100].
Ibid [102]–[103]. For a useful
summary of the decision, see ‘Case Note: O’Brien v Secretary,
Department Communities
and Justice
[2022] NSWCATAD 100
Information
and Privacy Commission (NSW)
<https://www.ipc.nsw.gov.au/case-note-obrien-v-secretary-department-communities-and-justice-2022-nswcatad-100>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/‌DL46-4K76>.
) [8]–[9], [40]–[41] (Senior
Member Ransome).
Ibid [4]–[5], [20].
Ibid [45]–[50].
See above Part II.
For a broader discussion on how
technology use in government affects citizens’ views on government
transparency, see David
Valle-Cruz, Rodrigo Sandoval-Almazan and J Ramon
Gil-Garcia, ‘Citizens’ Perceptions of the Impact of Information
Use on Transparency, Efficiency and Corruption in Local
Governments’ (2016) 21(3)
Information Polity
321, 321–4,
Brauneis and Goodman (n
) 152. See also Ng et al (n
) which states: ‘[T]he
does not contain any specific requirements concerning the creation or
retention of data. There is no general statutory requirement
to create documents
and whether or not they are retained is determined by the requirements in the
Archives Act 1983
(Cth)’: at 1054.
) [99] (Senior Member McAteer).
For example, in
Re Schouten and
Department of Education
Employment and Workplace
[2011] AATA 365
, the departmental representative at the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal hearing was unable to explain how the
applicant’s rate
of youth allowance was determined because of the
complexity of the database and its programming: at [38]–[39] (Senior
) ss 13–15.
See, eg, Sharon K Sandeen and Tanya
Aplin, ‘Trade Secrecy, Factual Secrecy and the Hype Surrounding AI’
in Ryan Abbott
Research Handbook on Intellectual Property and
Artificial Intelligence
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2022) 443, 443–4;
Ana Nordberg, ‘Trade Secrets, Big Data and Artificial Intelligence
Innovation:
A Legal Oxymoron?’ in Jens Schovsbo, Timo Minssen and Thomas
Riis (eds),
The Harmonization and Protection of Trade Secrets in the EU: An
Appraisal of the EU Directive
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020) 192,
192–203; Sonia K Katyal, ‘The Paradox of Source Code Secrecy’
(2019) 104(5)
Cornell Law Review
, 1186, 1225–50; Wexler (n
Information and Privacy Commission
Report on the Operation of the
Government Information (Public Access)
: 2020–2021
(Report, 2022) 5.
Information and Privacy Commission
Digital Restart Fund: Assessing Information Access and Privacy
(Report, September 2022) 8 (‘NSW Digital Restart Fund’).
See ‘NSW Contracts
Infrastructure NSW
(Web Page) <
https://www.infrastructure.​nsw.gov.au/accessing-information/nsw-contracts-register/
archived at
https://perma.cc/
Sandin and Aplin (n
) 443–5; Nordberg (n
) 199–202, 210–17; Katyal (n
) 1225–32. See also Bunnell (n
) 266, 276–8; Bakke (n
See, eg, Hannah Bloch-Wehba,
‘Access to Algorithms’
(2020) 88(4)
Fordham Law Review
1290–5, which discusses how government service outsourcing and third-party
involvement in automating government services causes
various challenges. See
also Gillian E Metzger, ‘Private Delegations, Due Process, and the Duty To
Supervise’ in Jody
Freeman and Martha Minow (eds),
Government by
Contract: Outsourcing and American Democracy
(Harvard University Press,
2009) 291, 299–300. Metzger observes that ‘with expanding
privatization, private entities
increasingly are undertaking adjudications on
behalf of the government’: at 299. See also
Part II(B).
The NSW Digital Restart Fund is an
excellent example of this: Information and Privacy Commission (NSW),
NSW Digital Restart Fund (n
See above n
. See also Deirdre K Mulligan and
Kenneth A Bamberger, ‘Procurement as Policy: Administrative Process for
Machine Learning’
(2019) 34(3)
Berkeley Technology Law Journal
See, eg, Goldenfein (n
) 42–3, 46; Wexler (n
) 1348–53; Bakke (n
Rita Matulionyte, ‘Reconciling
Trade Secrets and Explainable AI: Face Recognition Technology as a Case
(2022) 44(1)
European Intellectual Property Review
(‘Reconciling Trade Secrets’); Katarina Foss-Solbrekk, ‘Three
Routes to Protecting AI Systems and Their Algorithms
under IP Law: The Good, the
Bad and the Ugly’
(2021) 16(3)
Journal of Intellectual Property Law and
, 248, 250–6; Nari Lee, ‘Protection for Artificial
Intelligence in Personalised Medicine: The Patent/Trade Secret Tradeoff’
in Jens Schovsbo, Timo Minssen and Thomas Riis (eds),
The Harmonization and
Protection of Trade Secrets in the EU: An Appraisal of the EU Directive
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020) 267, 277–8; Bakke (n
Matulionyte, ‘Reconciling Trade
Secrets’ (n
) s 14 item 4.
Ibid s 121(2).
Ibid s 4(1) (definition of
‘government information’).
Ibid ss 5–9.
These categories are: (1)
‘Responsible and effective government’; (2) ‘Law enforcement
and security’; (3)
‘Individual rights, judicial processes and
natural justice’; (4) ‘Business interests of agencies and other
(5) ‘Environment, culture, economy and general
(6) ‘Secrecy provisions’; and (7) ‘Exempt documents under
interstate Freedom of Information legislation’:
ibid s 14. NSW IPC refers
to each category as an ‘overriding public interest against
disclosure’ (‘OPIAD’):
see, eg, Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
GIPA Data Analysis
) s 14 item 4.
Ibid s 14 item 4(a).
Ibid s 14 item 4(b).
Ibid s 14 item 4(c).
Ibid s 14 item 4(d).
Notably, when information concerns
third-party interests, other categories of exceptions can be invoked too: see,
eg, ibid s 14 items
Male v Kempsey Shire Council
NSWCATAD 39
, [318] (Senior Member Starke) (‘
) ss 54(1)–(2). See also
Information and Privacy Commission (NSW), Guideline
5: Consultation on Public Interest Considerations
under Section 54 and
Government Information (Public Access) Act 2009
(NSW) (Report, April
NSW IPC Guideline 5
Examples of considerations that
could be taken into account are listed under s 12 of the
) does not refer to ‘trade
secrets’ at all, the ‘commercial-in-confidence’ term comes
closest to the trade
secret concept and, for the purpose of this article, I use
them as synonyms.
For criticisms of the trade secret
exception under s 47 of the
FOI Act (Cth)
), see Ng et al (n
) sch 4 item 1 (definition of
‘commercial-in-confidence provisions’).
See generally MW Bryan et al,
Sourcebook on Equity & Trusts in Australia
(Cambridge University Press,
ed, 2020) 308–13.
Coco v AN Clark (Engineers)
(1969) 1A IPR 587
, 590 (Megarry J) (‘
’). See also
Smith Kline & French Laboratories (Australia) Ltd v Secretary, Department
of Community Services and Health
(1990) 17 IPR 545
, 567–9 (Gummow J);
Andrew Stewart et al,
Intellectual Property in Australia
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 6
ed, 2018) 92–5 [4.5]–[4.6] (citations
Australian patents and trademarks
are published by IP Australia: ‘Our Agency’,
IP Australia
<https://www.ipaustralia.gov.au/about-us/our-agency>, archived at
<https://​perma.cc/6X3L-JVDD>.
IP Australia (Cth),
(Report, 2024) 84.
) [91]–[92], [102]–[104]
(Senior Member McAteer).
For example, in
), the Tribunal was satisfied that, in
the circumstances of the case, contract price was commercially sensitive
information: at [215],
[219] (Senior Member Starke).
In the EU, see
Directive (EU)
2016/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2018 on the
Protection of Undisclosed Know-How and
Business Information (Trade Secrets)
against Their Unlawful Acquisition, Use and Disclosure
[2016] OJ L 157/1,
art 2(1) (‘
EU Trade Secrets Directive
’). In the US, see the
Uniform Trade Secrets Act
§ 1(4) (definition of ‘trade
secrets’) (ULA 1985) (‘
’) which is a uniform law
that has been adopted in 49 states:
‘Trade Secrets Act’,
Uniform Law Commission
(Web Page, 12
<https://www.uniform​laws.org/committees/community-home?CommunityKey=3a2538fb-e030-4e2d-a9e2-90373d​c05792>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/MS7K-B4TX>. See also Sandeen and Aplin (n
Sandeen and Aplin (n
Ibid. See also Camilla A Hrdy,
‘The Value in Secrecy’
(2022) 91(2)
Fordham Law Review
559, 565–74.
See Sandeen and Aplin (n
) 456. See also Brauneis and Goodman (n
) 159, which states:
Even assuming that the source code and certain details of the model would
qualify as trade secrets or confidential information, we
sought training
materials, existing and planned validation studies, and other documentation
concerning the objectives and design
choices reflected in the algorithm. It is
hard to imagine that most, if any, of this material would qualify for the [trade
) s 14 item 4(c).
Ibid s 14 item 4(d).
For a brief explanation as to what
constitutes confidential and non-confidential information, see Information and
NSW IPC Guideline 5
) 7 [1.19].
Saltman Engineering Co Ltd v
Campbell Engineering Co Ltd
(1948) 65 RPC 203
(Lord Greene MR, Somervell LJ agreeing at 216, Cohen J agreeing at 219);
O’Brien v Komesaroff
[1982] HCA 33
(1982) 150 CLR 310
, 326–7 (Mason J,
Aickin J agreeing at 329, Wilson J agreeing at 329, Brennan J agreeing at 329);
Johns v Australian Securities Commission
[1993] HCA 56
(1993) 178 CLR 408
, 432 (Brennan
J), 438 (Dawson J), 461 (Gaudron J), 475 (McHugh J).
See also Brauneis and Goodman (n
) 154, which states that
‘[o]verbroad assertions of confidentiality in response to open records
requests are common in the field’.
Stewart et al (n
) 106–12 [4.17]–[4.22];
Tanya Aplin et al,
Gurry on Breach of Confidence: The Protection of
Confidential Information
(Oxford University Press, 2012) 3 [1.01].
See also Brauneis and Goodman (n
) 155, referring to the ‘[r]isk
averse’ nature of government organisations in such scenarios.
) [91]–[92] (Senior Member
Ibid [103]–[104]. This is
similar to the application of the trade secret exception in the US where
‘[t]here exists a
substantial foundation in both federal and state court
decisions for denying open records laws requests for information related to
IP of private government contractors’: Bakke (n
) s 121(1)(a).
Ibid s 121(1)(b).
Ibid s 121(1)(c).
Ibid s 121(2)(a).
Ibid s 121(2)(b).
Ibid s 121(2)(c).
See, eg, Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW), Guide to Section 121 of the GIPA Act for Private Sector
Contractors (Fact Sheet,
April 2020) 1–2 (‘Section 121 Guide for
Private Sector Contractors’).
See, eg, Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
Digital Projects (Fact Sheet, October
) [64] (Senior Member McAteer).
The NSW Information and Privacy
Commissioner submitted:
In this case the service provided by the government agency is private rental
subsidies. NPS’s algorithm provides an input to
the decision-making
process regarding the calculation which is intrinsic to the provision of private
rental subsidies. The Tribunal
may therefore consider that NPS is providing a
service directly to the public on behalf of the agency. Such an interpretation
accord with the objects of the
Ibid [82] (Senior Member McAteer).
Marie Bashir, Governor (NSW),
‘Commencement Proclamation under the
Government Information (Public
Access) Act 2009
’ in New South Wales,
Government Gazette of the State
of New South Wales
, No 84, 25 June 2010, 2901, 2901.
) [63], [90] (Senior Member
Ibid [114].
NSW IPC offers template contractual
provisions on access to information clauses for government contractors which
replicate the problematic
see Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
Guide to Section 121 of the GIPA Act for Agencies
Sheet, April 2020) 2 (‘
Section 121 Guide for Agencies
) s 121(1)(a).
Ibid s 121(2)(c). It is noted that
exceptions to the ‘immediate access’ rule are to some extent
similar, but not identical,
to the ‘business interests’ exception
that applies to information held by government: see at s 14 item 4. See also
Part III(B).
See above Part III(B)(1).
) [103] (Senior Member McAteer).
Ibid [112]. See also at
[103]–[104].
Gartside v Outram
26 LJ Ch 113
, 114, Wood V-C states:
The true doctrine is, that there is no confidence as to the disclosure of
iniquity. You cannot make me the confidant of a crime or
a fraud, and be
entitled to close up my lips upon any secret which you have the audacity to
disclose to me relating to any fraudulent
intention on your part: such a
confidence cannot exist.
Sections 12–14 of the
) apply to government
agencies only: see at s 4(1) (definitions of ‘agency’ and
‘government information’).
Ibid s 121(2)(c).
See above Part II.
See, eg, Bloch-Wehba (n
) 1299–300.
Brauneis and Goodman (n
See ibid s 3(1)(c).
See also Brauneis and Goodman (n
Marrakesh Agreement
Establishing the World Trade Organization
, opened for signature 15 April
1994, 1867 UNTS 3
(entered into force 1 January 1995) annex 1C
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
’) art 39(2)(b).
EU Trade Secrets
) art 2(1)(b);
) § 1(4)(i).
Stewart et al (n
) 92 [4.5], quoting
) 590 (Megarry J).
Freedom of Information Act
5 USC § 552(b)(4) (2018) (‘
Brauneis and Goodman (n
Ibid, quoting
Citizen Health Research Group v Food and Drug Administration,
[1983] USCADC 159
704 F 2d 1280
1288 [3] (Edwards J) (DC Cir, 1983) (‘
Public Citizen
) 1287 [1], 1288 [3] (Edwards J),
quoting Mark Q Connelly, ‘Secrets and Smokescreens: A Legal and Economic
Analysis of Government
Disclosures of Business Data’
Wisconsin Law Review
, 230. See also Brauneis and Goodman (n
Brauneis and Goodman (n
Cf ibid 154, which states that
‘the agencies have agency’ and ‘could have made more records
disclosable simply
by reducing the scope of confidentiality’.
There is an exemption for
‘trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a
person [that is] privileged
or confidential’:
) § 552(b)(4). Commercial
significance and efforts to keep the information confidential are the core
requirements for the protection
of trade secrets or confidential information
See generally
Ibid ss 12–14.
Ibid s 12(2) note (a).
Ibid s 12(2) note (b).
Ibid s 12(2) note (c).
Ibid s 12(2) note (e).
See above Part II(B).
The NSW IPC published guidance
recommending ‘the use of AI as a factor in favour of disclosure of
information under the
’: Elizabeth Tydd and Samantha Gavel,
of the Artificial Intelligence Regulatory Landscape: Information Access &
(NSW) (Web Document, October
<https://www.‌ip​c.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-11/IPC_Scan_of_the_Artificial_Intelligence_‌Regulatory_​Landscape_October_2022_0.pdf>.
For example, the Robodebt scheme
was not based on complex AI algorithms such as machine learning, but it resulted
in immense harm
on individuals and on government: Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Centrelink’s Automated Debt Raising and Recovery System
NSW IPC recommended
‘[e]xpand[ing] information access rights under government contracted
services to AI used for decision making’:
Tydd and Gavel (n
For a discussion on the variety of
private sector partnerships in Europe, see Martijn van den Hurk et al,
‘National Varieties
of Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs): A Comparative
Analysis of PPP-Supporting Units in 19 European Countries’ (2016) 18(1)
Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis
One example is the Robodebt
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Centrelink’s Automated Debt
Raising and Recovery System
1; Terry Carney, ‘Robo-Debt Illegality: The Seven Veils of Failed
Guarantees of the Rule of Law?’
(2019) 44(1)
Alternative Law
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery
of Government
) [3], [8] (Senior Member McAteer).
The risk-assessment tool,
‘COMPAS’, is used by law enforcement in the US ‘to assess the
risks of recidivism’:
Matulionyte, ‘Reconciling Trade Secrets’
See Bakke (n
See above Part III(C)(3).
See, eg, Information and Privacy
Commission (NSW),
Section 121 Guide for Private Sector Contractors
); Information and Privacy Commission
Section 121 Guide for Agencies
According to the NSW IPC,
government contracts relating to the provision of AI to government should cover
the ‘government/purchaser
right to audit/audit logs; notification
requirements in circumstances of adverse impacts including complaints or legal
action; access
to user manuals; training data; [retention of] government data
inputs’: Tydd and Gavel (n
Centre Digital and Data Office and
Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (UK), ‘Algorithmic
Transparency Recording
Standard Hub’,
(Web Page, 7 March
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/algorithmic-transparency-recording-standard-hub
>, archived at <https://perma.cc/Q7TT-5Q73>
See below Part IV(C).
See above Part III(C)(4).
See above Part IV(A)(1) for a
similar recommendation.
See Brauneis and Goodman (n
Brauneis and Goodman similarly
suggest ‘reducing the scope of confidentiality and ensuring government
possession of records
necessary to explain the algorithms’: ibid 154. See
also NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery of Government
) 62, which states that ‘the
tension [between trade secrets and transparency] can be avoided by good
procurement practices’.
See also Goldenfein (n
See Bloch-Wehba (n
) 1308–12. Bloch-Wehba discusses
why it is unacceptable to disclose trade secrets under protective orders only,
and not to the
general public.
See, eg, ibid 1308.
Improved procurement practices as a
way to improve government algorithmic accountability is advocated for in
Cary Coglianese and Erik Lampmann,
‘Contracting for Algorithmic Accountability’ (2021) 6(3)
Administrative Law Review Accord
175, 179; Goldenfein (n
) 41. The risks associated with the
procurement of government ADMS are discussed in
Mulligan and Bamberger (n
Bloch-Wehba (n
‘Informed by the principles
of open government, agencies and courts should avoid contracting for proprietary
decision-making
tools with vendors who require broad secrecy provisions’:
Brauneis and Goodman (n
NSW IPC has emphasised on numerous
occasions the need to improve government procurement practices to improve
government transparency:
see, eg, Information and Privacy Commission (NSW),
NSW IPC Fact Sheet
Relating to Establishing Guidelines for Government Procurement and Use of
Automated Decision Systems in Order To Protect Consumers,
Improve Transparency,
and Create More Market Predictability, Wash S 5116, 67
Legislature
(2021) §§ 4–6
(‘ADMS Procurement and Use Act’). An executive session was
scheduled in relation to this proposed Act on 7 February 2022,
but no action has
since been taken. This Act has now lapsed: ‘Bill Information: SB
Washington State Legislature
<https://app.leg.wa.gov/​billsummary?BillNumber=5116&Year=2021&Initiative=false#documentSection>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/HX5F-LWQJ>.
ADMS Procurement and Use Act (n
Bloch-Wehba
) 1308, discussing ‘ADMS
Procurement and Use Act’ (n
Information and Privacy Commission
NSW IPC Fact Sheet
Tydd and Gavel (n
) 17 (emphasis in original).
NSW Ombudsman,
The New Machinery
of Government
) 62 (emphasis
in original), citing Katie Miller, ‘The Application of Administrative Law
Principles to Technology-Assisted Decision-Making’
(2016) 86 (December)
Australian Institute of Administrative Law Forum
‘Algorithmic Transparency
Recording Standard: Guidance for Public Sector Bodies’,
Page, 5 January 2023)
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-for-organisations-using-the-algorithmic-transparency-recording-standard/algorithmic-transpar​ency-recording-standard-guidance-for-public-sector-bodies>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/​2XFX-YNES>; ‘Algorithmic
Transparency Recording Standard: Template’,
(Web Page, 18
April 2024)
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/‌algorithmic-transparency-tem​plate>,
at <https://perma.cc/52GY-CC3G>.
Proposal for a Regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council: Laying Down Harmonised Rules on
Artificial Intelligence (Artificial
Intelligence Act) and Amending Certain Union
Legislative Acts
, COM(2021) 206 final (24 April 2021) art II, annex IV
EU Regulation Proposal
World Economic Forum et al,
Policy Framework for Responsible Limits of Facial Recognition: Use Case Law
Enforcement Investigations
(Report, November 2022) 26, 33
<https://www.wefo​rum.org/reports/a-policy-framework-for-responsible-limits-on-facial-recognition-use-case-law-enforcement-investigations-revised-2022>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/5JVM-9YQV>.
See, eg, Centre for Internet and
Open Government: A Guide to Best Practice in Transparency,
Accountability and Civic Engagement across the Public Sector
(Report, 2011)
http://www.transparencyinitiative.org/archive/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/15-Open-gover ​ nment11.pdf
archived at
http://perma.cc/V244-AJME
Association for Computing
Machinery US Public Policy Council, ‘Statement on Algorithmic Transparency
and Accountability’
(Statement, 12 January 2017) 2
http://www.acm.org/binaries/ ‌ content/ ​ assets/public-policy/2017_usacm_statement_algorithms.pdf
archived at
http://perma.cc/ ​ 5TKE-LFHT
See, eg, Rita Matulionyte,
‘Increasing Transparency around Facial Recognition Technologies in Law
Enforcement: Towards a Model
(2024) 33(1)
Information and
Communications Technology Law
, 72, 75–7.
See, eg, NSW Government,
Artificial Intelligence Assurance Framework
(Report, March 2022) 13.
EU Regulation Proposal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (359 KB)
PDF format (546 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter