URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jha, Pranay --- "A 'Clearer' Accounts Rule: Challenging the Inflexible Application of the Clear Accounts Rule" [2024] MelbULawRw 14; (2024) 47(3) Melbourne University Law Review 635
A ‘CLEARER’ ACCOUNTS RULE: CHALLENGING THE INFLEXIBLE APPLICATION OF THE CLEAR ACCOUNTS RULE
I Introduction
II Context and Foundational Principles
A The Nature of a Trustee’s Liabilities to Trust Creditors and the Role of the Indemnity
B The Impacts of Insolvency
C Subrogation, Clear Accounts Rule and Prejudice to Creditors
D Circumventing the Prejudice: The Existing Debate
III Historical Justification for the Clear Accounts Rule
A Development of the Clear Accounts Rule in Australia
1 Origins in the English Cases
B Identifying the Underlying Principle
C The Presumptive Basis for the Rule in Cherry v Boultbee
IV Discretionary Approach to the Clear Accounts Rule
A The Mandate for Flexibility in Accounts
V How the Discretion Should Be Exercised
A Equity’s Consideration of Third-Party Interests
B Just Allowances Doctrine
C Application of Principles to Trust Creditors
VI Implications of the Discretion: The Role of Equity in Insolvency Law?
VII Two Final Exceptions to the Clear Accounts Rule
A Statutory Intervention into the Right of Indemnity
B Exclusion of the Clear Accounts Rule through the Trust Deed
VIII Conclusion
A ‘CLEARER’ ACCOUNTS RULE: CHALLENGING THE
INFLEXIBLE APPLICATION OF THE CLEAR ACCOUNTS RULE
The clear accounts rule, as applied in a trusts setting, reduces the value of
a trustee’s right of indemnity by the value of
their obligation to restore
trust funds. The rule has often frustrated unsecured trust creditors subrogating
to a trustee’s
right of indemnity as the creditors may be unable to have
the debts owed to them satisfied as a result of the rule’s operation.
of the case law and academic writing on the clear accounts rule seems to assume
that it is a rule of fixed application, applying
automatically wherever an
errant trustee seeks recourse to their rights of indemnity. This article
challenges that understanding
of the clear accounts rule by suggesting two
alternative bases on which its inflexible application may be avoided. First, the
accounts rule is examined from a historical perspective, which reveals
that the rule and its antecedents were intended to be applied
on a presumptive
rather than fixed basis. Second, the rule is examined from a
normative perspective. It is suggested that, given equity’s mandate
achieve practical justice in the taking of accounts, a flexible and
discretionary approach to the clear accounts rule that is
sensitive to the
interests of unsecured trust creditors is justified. Recognising the
possibility of circumventing the clear accounts rule has significant
implications for unsecured trust creditors. It possibly removes a key obstacle
from their only (indirect) route to accessing trust
assets in satisfaction of
the debts owed to them by the
I Introduction
The so-called ‘clear accounts rule’ has been applied in Australia
on numerous occasions to reduce the value of an errant
trustee’s right of
authorities to date appear to have assumed that the clear accounts rule has
fixed application wherever a trustee seeking to exercise
their right of
indemnity has caused a loss to the trust estate which the trustee is obliged to
make good. Contrary to that assumption,
this article argues that an inflexible
application of the clear accounts rule is unjustified. It does so on two bases.
considers the historical antecedents of the modern clear accounts rule
and suggests that the cases from which the rule emanates were
intending to lay
down rules of presumptive rather than fixed application. In particular, the
cases were presuming an errant trustee’s
intention to pay their indemnity
‘by anticipation’ through the funds they had misappropriated. That
presumption is a
weak one, which is
capable of displacement by evidence of the trustee’s actual intention
nature and circumstances in which the breach of trust occurred. Second,
recognising that the clear accounts rule need not be tethered
to its historical
origins and may instead be treated as a freestanding principle of modern equity,
this article also challenges the
rule from a normative perspective. It is
suggested that in light of equity’s general mandate to achieve practical
justice when
taking accounts, a flexible and discretionary approach to the clear
accounts rule is justified. That discretion is said to be capable
of considering
the interests of unsecured trust creditors and their contributions to the state
of the trust assets.
This article proceeds in
five substantive Parts.
Part II frames the discussion by explaining some of the fundamental concepts
in this article. It begins by briefly outlining what
the clear accounts rule is,
before providing the wider context of trustee insolvency, which grants relevance
to debates about the
application of the rule. This Part explains the position of
trust creditors in Australia, who are only able to indirectly access
assets in satisfaction of their claims by standing in the shoes of an insolvent
trustee and receiving the proceeds of their
indemnity (ie subrogation). It then
shows how those trust creditors are prejudiced by the clear accounts rule, which
creates an obstacle
in their only path to accessing trust assets.
Part III considers the clear accounts rule from a historical perspective and
suggests that the historical foundations of the rule
lie in matters of
presumption. The Part begins by providing an overview of the clear accounts
development in Australia across the 20
century. It shows how the
accounts rule moved from being expressed as a broad, principled limitation on
the trustee’s right of indemnity to a more formulaic
and mathematical
rule. What becomes apparent is that many of the Australian cases justify the
clear accounts rule on a historical
basis by suggesting the rule is premised on
a series of 19
century English cases. An examination of those
century cases reveals that the foundation of the clear accounts
rule was in presumption — that is,
a presumption that the trustee intended to pay their right of indemnity
in anticipation through the funds they had earlier misappropriated. The
Part also recognises that, independently of such cases, the rule in
Cherry v Boultbee
is also cited
as the historical foundation for the clear accounts
It suggests,
however, that this alternative historical explanation for the clear accounts
rule does not advance matters any further,
because the rule in
itself emanated from rules of presumption. Specifically, the rule in
is traced back to cases applying the presumptive doctrine of
satisfaction in the context of the administration of deceased estates.
follows that, regardless of which historical account for the clear accounts rule
one adopts, the rule’s origins lies in
presumption. Therefore, there is no
historical reason to treat the rule as one of fixed application.
Recognising that the clear accounts rule may now be treated as a freestanding
principle of modern equity no longer constrained by
its historical origins, Part
IV examines the rule from a normative perspective. It considers the function of
the clear accounts rule
as a technique used by courts of equity in the
administration of complex accounts. This Part suggests that in taking accounts,
is guided by a mandate to achieve practical justice between the parties.
This mandate necessitates a flexible and discretionary approach
to the clear
accounts rule. While the discretion is no longer exercised by reference to
abstract notions of justice, this article suggests that two lines of
equitable principle provide guidance on how the discretion may
be exercised. The
equity’s general concern for third-party interests, as evidenced in
cases involving constructive trusts, rescission and rectification.
The second is
equity’s willingness to ensure that parties seeking equitable relief
account for all the benefits they have received,
as evidenced through the
‘just allowances’ doctrine applied when ordering an account of
profits, occupation rent to co-owners
or rescission. It is argued by analogy
that beneficiaries seeking equitable relief ought to account for the
contributions made by
trust creditors to the trust fund.
Part V then considers the broader practical implications of equity exercising
its discretion not to apply the clear accounts rule.
It notes that, in effect,
by not applying the clear accounts rule, courts would be prioritising the
position of trust creditors over
that of beneficiaries. It also addresses
broader debates about the role of equity in insolvency settings. The conclusion
notwithstanding these concerns, the discretionary non-application of the
clear accounts rule is justified.
Finally, in Part VI, this article concludes by briefly raising two further
exceptions to the clear accounts rule that could be explored in the future.
The first is the notion that the operation of the clear
accounts rule may be
inconsistent with the statutory right of indemnity in certain Australian
a trust deed has been drafted specifically to
exclude the operation of the clear accounts rule. It is argued that there is
no reason to hold such deeds unenforceable, and thus
a well-drafted trust deed
should be capable of ousting the clear accounts rule.
II Context and Foundational
This article is primarily concerned with how the clear accounts rule may be
circumvented in light of its prejudicial implications
on trust creditors.
However, before diving into an analysis of the clear accounts rule, it is useful
address two questions that are foundational to the remainder of this article:
(a) what is the clear accounts rule?; and (b) how exactly is it said to
prejudice trust creditors?
The first question can be answered immediately. The clear accounts rule
provides that the value of an indemnity that a trustee may
recover from the
trust fund is subject to
liability that the trustee has incurred to
increase the trust fund, either by making good a loss or by disgorging an
unauthorised
terms, the rule suggests that the court will subtract the value of the
trustee’s liability to increase the trust
fund from the value of the
trustee’s liability to increase the trust fund need not be
connected with the liability giving rise to the trustee’s right of
liability incurred by the trustee to restore trust funds will attract the
operation of the rule.
The second question requires some further context. For those unfamiliar with
trusts and insolvency law, it would be entirely reasonable
to query how such a
rule, which on its face appears to settle the state of the account between
trustees and beneficiaries, could
impact trust creditors at all. To appreciate
the prejudice of the clear accounts rule on trust creditors, it is necessary to
something of the nature of a trustee’s liability to trust
creditors, the function of the trustee’s right of indemnity,
happens to those liabilities and indemnity rights when a trustee is made
insolvent. Each of those matters is
addressed below.
The Nature of a
Trustee’s Liabilities to Trust Creditors and the Role of the
While trusts, particularly those that engage in trading, business and other
commercial activities, are often thought of as distinct
Anglo-Australian law they have no separate legal
personality.
trustee has legal title to the assets that are held on trust for others (or for
a purpose), and the trustee is the legal entity
that enters into contracts with
third parties as principal and not as agent.
It follows that the trustee is personally liable to creditors for debts incurred
in the administration of the
conventional, throughout this article, debts incurred by the trustee in the
proper administration of the trust are described
as ‘trust debts’,
and ‘trust creditors’ are parties to whom such debts are
Although trustees are personally liable for trust debts, equity assists them
by conferring on trustees a right to an indemnity out
right to an indemnity, which allows the trustee to use trust assets to discharge
trust debts,
has been described as being
‘in the nature of the office of a
The right of indemnity can
be exercised in two alternative ways — reimbursement or
exoneration.
The right of reimbursement allows a trustee who has discharged a trust debt out
of their personal funds to recoup that amount out
of the trust assets. However,
usually the trustee is not obliged to use its
own funds like this. Thus, the right of exoneration arises where a trustee
has incurred a trust debt that has not yet been discharged.
circumstances, the trustee can resort to the trust fund directly to pay trust
Carter Holt Harvey Woodproducts Australia Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
’), the High Court of Australia
recognised that the right of indemnity also confers on the trustee a correlative
proprietary
interest in the trust assets that takes priority over the interests
beneficiaries.
That proprietary interest has been likened to a lien over trust
should be noted that while the trustee’s right of indemnity was originally
recognised in general law, it has now been enshrined
The implications of the statutory
recognition of the
trustee’s right of indemnity are considered further in Part VI.
Because the trustee is personally liable for trust debts, they are obliged to
pay trust debts regardless of the state of the trust
Therefore, it is useful to think of two pools of assets from which trust debts
may be satisfied: the assets subject to the trust
relationship and the
trustee’s personal
Ordinarily, the trustee will seek to discharge trust debts by resorting to the
trust assets via their right of
exoneration.
However, because the trust is not a separate legal entity, where the trust
assets are insufficient to meet trust debts, ‘the
cannot be made insolvent or wound up.
Instead, two scenarios may arise.
First, the trustee may have managed to successfully protect their personal
assets from trust debts by including a limitation of liability
clause directly
into its contracts with trust
Under a limitation of liability clause, the trustee’s personal liability
for trust debts may be limited to the extent of their
ability to discharge the
debt out of the trust assets.
limitation of liability is effective, the insufficiency of the trust assets to
satisfy the trust debts cannot push the trustee
into insolvency because, as a
matter of contract, the trustee will not be personally liable for the shortfall.
Accordingly, a scenario
where a trustee benefits from a limitation of liability
falls outside of the scope of this article.
However, trustees will not always be able to shield their personal assets
from trust creditors through a limitation of liability
Australian courts construe attempts
to limit liability strictly against
Thus, a defect in the drafting of
the limitation of liability clause may render it ineffective. Additionally, in
some situations,
a trust creditor may be in a superior bargaining position to
the trustee and refuse to include a limitation of liability clause in
or it may not have occurred to
the parties to include a limitation of liability clause in their agreements.
Accordingly, it is relevant
to consider the second scenario — that is,
where the trust fund is insufficient and where the trustee must resort to their
personal assets to satisfy trust debts. In the second scenario, if the trustee
is solvent, they may pay the trust creditors out of
their own assets and
subsequently seek reimbursement from the trust assets as and when that becomes
possible (if ever). However,
if the trustee’s personal assets are
insufficient to meet trust debts after the trust fund is exhausted (or if it is
the trustee will be insolvent, and the trust creditors can seek
judgment against the trustee and push them into formal insolvent
administration.
This second scenario is at
the heart of discussions concerning the operation of the clear accounts
The Impacts of
As the High Court recognised in
, it is an established
principle of bankruptcy law that ‘rights held by a bankrupt on trust do
not generally form part of the
bankrupt’s estate that is available for
general distribution amongst
creditors’.
While Australian
bankruptcy legislation has explicitly adopted
the exclusion of trust property from a trustee’s estate in
bankruptcy,
exclusion does not appear in the
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act
’) which governs the insolvency of
Nonetheless, the High Court has held that the same principle of bankruptcy law
applies, so trust assets held by corporate trustees
are not available for
distribution amongst a corporate trustee’s personal
Unlike trust assets, however, a trustee’s right of indemnity forms part
of the bankrupt or insolvent trustee’s
Therefore, the trustee in
bankruptcy or liquidator who takes control of the insolvent trustee’s
estate also takes control of
their right of indemnity against the trust assets.
Historically, there was some debate as to whether the proceeds from the
right of indemnity could only be distributed amongst trust
creditors, or whether they were also available to the trustee’s
However, in
the High Court settled that debate, endorsing the view that
the proceeds from the trustee’s right of exoneration are only to
distributed amongst trust creditors.
Therefore, the trust creditors (and not the trustee’s personal creditors)
are said to be ‘subrogated’ to the trustee’s
In simple terms, this means that
the trustee’s creditors ‘stand in the shoes’ of the trustee
and take the proceeds
from the realised right of
exoneration.
Subrogation, Clear
Accounts Rule and Prejudice to Creditors
Although upon insolvency, it is the trust creditors in whose pockets the
proceeds of the right of exoneration end up (rather than trustees), the
ordinary limitations on the trustee’s right of indemnity
subsist. The
subrogating trust creditors do not enjoy a ‘better right’ of
indemnity than the trustees did.
Accordingly, the clear accounts rule continues to apply to the exoneration
limb of the trustee’s right of indemnity even once
the trust creditors
have stepped into the trustee’s shoes through
subrogation.
Thus, returning to the
question posed at the beginning of
, the upshot is that the clear
accounts rule, which operates prima facie between trustees and beneficiaries,
can also impact trust
creditors when a trustee is insolvent. The outstanding
point to address then is how that impact is prejudicial. That is a point that
has been made by various
commentators
and can be illustrated using a simple example.
Imagine a trustee incurs a trust debt to a trust creditor worth $100,000.
Their right of indemnity confers on the trustee a right
under the exoneration
limb to apply trust funds towards the repayment of that debt. However, before
meeting that debt, the trustee
becomes insolvent. Accordingly, the trust
creditor is subrogated to the trustee’s right of indemnity. Imagine
further that
the trustee also expends $100,000 in an unrelated transaction found
to be in breach of trust. In that situation, the trustee would
be liable to
increase (or restore) the trust funds by $100,000. Under the clear accounts
rule, this amount would be netted off against
the trustee’s right of
indemnity, such that the value of the
indemnity would be reduced to $0. The trust creditor, subrogated to the right
of indemnity, would be unable to recover the debt owed
through the right of
exoneration; instead, they would be left with a personal claim against an
insolvent trustee.
The prejudice suffered
by the trust creditor is manifest — their ability to satisfy the debt owed
to them is undermined by
the trustee committing a breach of duty completely
unrelated to their transaction with the trust creditor.
Before proceeding, it is worth noting two points of qualification on the
prejudice suffered by unsecured trust creditors. First, the
right of unsecured
creditors is always vulnerable to the presence of claims by other unsecured
trust creditors. While that may be
true, it does not necessarily stand in the
way of attempting to avoid the distinct impact of the clear accounts rule.
least in some circumstances, the trust creditors may be able to avail
themselves of the benefits conferred by
Corporations Act
, directors of a corporate trustee are personally liable for debts
incurred by the trustee provided the corporation cannot discharge
the liability
or any part of it and is not entitled to be indemnified against the liability
out of the trust assets.
discussion of the circumstances in which
will apply is unnecessary for
present purposes. Instead, it suffices to note that while there are certainly
situations in which
will allow trust creditors to avoid the prejudice
described above, the provision is far from a universal solution. Most
notably, where the directors of the corporate trustee are themselves
impecunious
or uninsured,
will not assist trust creditors in satisfying the debts
Circumventing the
Prejudice: The Existing Debate
In light of the prejudicial effect of the clear accounts rule on trust
creditors, there have been calls to limit its operation, at
least insofar as it
applies to the trustee’s right of
exoneration.
The arguments in favour of limiting the application of the clear accounts rule
have often focused on the nature and purpose of the
trustee’s right of
exoneration. They have noted that the exercise of the right of exoneration is in
effect an exercise of the
power to apply trust assets towards the discharge of
the trust debt.
As D’Angelo puts it,
the right of exoneration never confers on the trustee beneficial ownership of
trust assets.
The trustee is merely a
‘conduit’ through whom trust assets are passed on to trust creditors
to discharge trust debts.
As the right of
exoneration does not result in the beneficial ownership of any trust funds being
passed onto trustees (as distinguished
from the right of reimbursement), it is
argued that the value of a right of exoneration should not be ‘netted
off’ against
the trustee’s outstanding liabilities to increase the
trust fund because it appears (economically at least) to ‘punish’
innocent parties that are external to the trust, that is, trust creditors.
However, the foregoing view does not necessarily reflect academic
example, Silink argues in favour of the right of exoneration being subject to
the clear accounts rule.
In her view, the
benefit to creditors from the trustee exercising their right of exoneration is
merely an incidental one.
Instead, the purpose of the right of exoneration is to relieve the trustee
from their personal liability to trust
Although the right of
exoneration does not confer ‘beneficial ownership’ of the trust
assets on trustees,
they are entitled to
any of the trust assets to meet their liabilities incurred qua
and are able to do so regardless of any existing proprietary rights of
beneficiaries in those assets.
this way, it seems reasonable for the trustee’s right of exoneration to be
characterised as ‘for the trustee’s
benefit’ such that it is
subject to the clear accounts rule or that its impact on trust creditors should
be disregarded as
merely incidental.
The foregoing debates seem to presuppose the fixed application of the clear
accounts rule, and then consider whether it is appropriate
to subject the
trustee’s right of exoneration to that rule. That in turn leads to an
analysis of the nature and purpose of
the trustee’s right of exoneration.
Indeed, to some extent, shades of this debate were also apparent in the divide
the majority and minority positions in the Privy Council’s
decision in
Equity Trust (Jersey)
Ltd v Halabi
Equity Trust
There, the Privy Council was concerned with, inter alia, the distinct question
of whether ‘a former trustee’s proprietary
interest in the trust
assets [should] take priority over the equivalent interests of successor
trustees’ (rather than considering
whether the clear accounts rule should
extend to the right of exoneration).
However, a key point of distinction between the majority and minority positions
in that case was whether the right of indemnity was
conferred onto trustees not
only for their personal benefit but also for the benefit of trust creditors
(which in turn affected whether
the interests of trust creditors should affect
the formulation of priority rules regarding the respective trustees’
Lord Briggs JSC of the majority considered that ‘[p]art of the
purpose of the trustees’ lien is to provide a mechanism
by which trust
creditors get paid’.
By contrast,
Lord Richards JSC and Sir Nicholas Patten of the minority considered ‘the
purpose of the indemnity as being protection
of the trustee, not of its trust or
indeed personal creditors’.
Notwithstanding this difference of opinion, it was accepted by both sides that
accounts rule applied so as to reduce the value of a trustee’s right of
indemnity and by extension the trust creditor’s
subrogation.
The relevance of trust creditors’ interests in
Equity Trust
will be considered further
With respect, while there is certainly value in having such debates, in the
following Parts, this article will aim to resolve the
issues posed by the
operation of the clear accounts rule by taking a different approach. Instead of
attempting to determine whether
the trustee’s right of exoneration fits
within the ambit of the clear accounts rule, this article will examine the
the rule itself. It will suggest that there is neither a historical
nor normative basis for applying the clear accounts rule inflexibly.
III Historical
Justification for the Clear Accounts Rule
Starting with the historical justification for the clear accounts rule,
Australian cases have suggested that the rule is rooted in history, citing a
series of 19
and early 20
century cases in its
However, an examination of the clear accounts rule’s history reveals that
the rule is grounded in presumption, rather than
inflexible application.
Accordingly, if one is to justify the clear accounts rule on the basis that it
is historically entrenched,
fidelity to the rule’s history would require
recognising the presumptive, rather than fixed, nature of the rule. It should
noted from the outset that the argument here is not that the clear accounts rule
be justified by reference to history — indeed
considers normative arguments against a fixed application of the
clear accounts rule that are not grounded in history.
To illustrate the point, this Part will begin with a historical overview of
the clear accounts rule’s development in Australia.
It will then consider
century (and early 20
century) cases which are
often cited as a historical justification for the clear accounts rule. Those
earlier cases disclose two
bases on which the clear accounts rule was being
applied: (a) as a presumption that the trustee was paying out their indemnity by
anticipation through the trust funds they had misappropriated; or (b) as an
extension of the rule in
. However, further historical analysis of
the rule in
will reveal that the rule emanated from cases applying
the doctrine of satisfaction, which itself turned on the presumed intention
testators. Accordingly, the conclusion reached is that on either view of the
clear accounts rule’s history, the rule appears
to be grounded in
presumption. Thus, if courts are indeed applying the historical
version of the clear accounts rule, trust creditors subrogated to the
trustee’s right of indemnity should be able to circumvent
operation by
adducing evidence that displaces the presumed intention behind the
trustee’s breach of trust.
Development of the
Clear Accounts Rule in Australia
In Australia, one of the first judicial endorsements of what resembles the
clear accounts rule (though not described as such) came
from the Full Court of
the Supreme Court of Victoria in
Cumming v Austin
Holroyd J (for the Court) observed that ‘a defaulting trustee who has a
beneficial interest in the trust estate cannot claim
anything against it without
making good his
defalcations’.
A few years later, Barton J of the High Court
expressed a similar principle in
Savage v Union Bank of Australia Ltd
There, his Honour relied on Kennedy J’s judgment in
Jennings (QB)
’), which in turn quoted
Re Evans; Evans
that a creditor could subrogate to the right of indemnity belonging to the
administrator of an estate, provided they had ‘
not lost such right
by being a debtor to the
A similar exposition of the principle was also put forward by Dixon J of the
High Court in
Vacuum Oil Co Pty Ltd v Wiltshire
In that case, his Honour
observed that creditors must depend on the rights of the executor and may lose
their subrogated right to
an indemnity where the executor is
required to make good a loss caused to the
were subsequently cited with approval by the High Court in
Investments Pty Ltd v Knight
where it discussed trust creditors’
rights of subrogation.
Notably, however,
those cases referred to the trustee losing their right of indemnity rather than
describing the mathematical process
of netting off obligations discussed
The more formulaic approach to the clear accounts rule was expressed by
Brooking J in
RWG Management Ltd v Commissioner for Corporate Affairs
RWG Management
that case, his Honour clarified that Dixon J’s statement in
was not intended to suggest that the trustee absolutely loses their right of
indemnity upon causing a loss to the trust
Rather, Brooking J suggested
‘that a balance is to be struck between what is due by way of compensation
and what is due by
way of indemnity and that if the balance is in favour of the
trustee he may recover from the estate to that
RWG Management
followed by Gordon J in
Australian Securities Investments Commission v Letten
where her Honour stated that ‘the clear accounts rule
is essentially a mathematical exercise setting off the trustee’s
indemnity against its liability with respect to previous breaches of
Additionally, there are numerous examples of modern cases citing
when discussing the clear accounts rule such as
Zohs Properties Pty Ltd v
Park v Whyte [No 3]
Park [No 3]
Lane v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
Lin; Re Gold Stone
Capital Pty Ltd (Trial
Indeed, the method of
‘striking a balance’ described by Brooking J accords with the High
Court’s articulation of
the clear accounts rule in
which cited
as a relevant authority for
that proposition.
Origins in the English
The preponderance of the Australian authorities cite Jessel MR’s speech
as the historical basis for the clear accounts
Jennings (QB)
cited by the High Court of Australia in
Kennedy J noted that the
‘clearest exposition’ of the rule was by Jessel MR in
, Peter Johnson appointed the defendant as an executor
under his will.
The defendant’s
instructions were to call in the debts of two businesses (in Cambridge and
London) run by Johnson and convert
all stock (except for that of the London
business) to money.
A quarter of the
proceeds were then to be divided amongst the two children of Johnson’s
deceased sister.
However, the will allowed
for one of these children, John Neill, to carry on the Cambridge business in his
own name until he reached
the age of 21; at that point, John Neill would have an
option to take the stock in accordance with an earlier valuation or bring
proceeds from selling the stock into
Contrary to Johnson’s instructions under the will, the defendant
carried on the Cambridge business in his own name and failed
to call in the
debts. He also used money advanced from John Neill’s share of the estate
to carry on the business but never
kept separate
The defendant subsequently became
insolvent and the creditors of the Cambridge business who had supplied goods to
the defendant sought
access to the trust assets to pay their
In what has been described as one of the first judgments to discuss the right
of creditors in the language we use today,
Jessel MR held that although they could not directly access the trust assets,
the creditors had a right to be ‘put in [the]
place’ of the trustee
against the trust estate.
Therefore, the
had a right to enjoy the benefit of the trustee’s indemnity. Crucially
Jessel MR qualified this right of the creditors by noting:
But if the trustee has wronged the trust estate, that is, if he has taken money
out of the assets more than sufficient to pay the
debts, and instead of applying
them to the payment of the debts has put them into his own pocket, then it
appears to me there is
’), a case predating
and cited in
Jessel MR explained the rationale for applying the limitation on the
trustee’s right of indemnity:
[T]he trustee, who is indebted to the estate in a sum largely exceeding this
fund, must be taken to have paid himself all that he
can claim out of the moneys
which have come to his hands, and for which he has not
The Master of the
Rolls went on to note that this was not an instance of
‘impounding a trust fund’.
Rather, the trustee already had all that he could claim and had ‘paid
Doering v Doering
’) (cited in
Stirling J followed
that the answer to any claim by a trustee was
that the trustee had already received their share — they had in their
they claimed.
Dowse v Gorton
Cotton LJ reached a similar conclusion, stating that a defaulting executor
had gotten ‘in their pocket the money out of which
the indemnity to which
they are entitled ought to be
There are various other 19
century cases which appear to apply a
principle consistent with what is now called the clear accounts rule. In
Lewis v Trask
North J held that a defaulting executor could only
be paid their costs out
of the estate once they had made good their
Bowyer v Griffin
Malins V-C noted that the costs of a trustee’s suit for the execution
of the trust could be set-off against a debt he owed to
McEwan v Crombie
held that the costs a trustee was seeking to recoup could be ‘set
off’ against the amount he owed to the trust
estate (which exceeded his
Taylor v Popham
held that where there were sums to be paid from each party to the other, a
solicitor’s lien for their costs only
extended to the
balance once all the costs were considered as a
Re Frith; Newton v Rolfe
, another case cited in
Kekewich J used the language of ‘clearing ...
accounts’ to explain the foregoing
principles.
his Honour stated the
[T]here may be some money owing by the trustees to the estate, and the creditors
may be willing to pay that in order to make the
trustees’ account clear;
and in that case the creditors are entitled to an assignment of the equity to
which the trustees succeed
on clearing their
Identifying the
Underlying Principle
One explanation for the rule expressed in the 19
century cases discussed above is that there is a presumption
that the trustee had already paid themselves their indemnity through
misappropriated funds (‘the presumption
That certainly appears
to be the rationale expressed in
where the courts variously expressed the view that the trustee had already
taken what was owed to them through the funds they had
misappropriated.
Relying on these cases,
Australian courts have, on occasion, similarly endorsed the presumption theory
underlying the clear accounts
rule. For example, in
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria noted that a defaulting trustee was
to be considered as having paid themselves what
would come to them ‘by
anticipation’.
Walters J similarly explained that the ‘theory
underlying the rule’ was based on the
trustee having paid themselves by
anticipation.
Brooking J stated that ‘it is clear’ that the
clear accounts rule was founded on the principle that a trustee must be
have paid themselves the amount due to
More recently, in
, Jackson J recognised the historical support for the presumption
before commenting that modern
authorities ‘do not gainsay those
propositions’.
As White has observed extra-curially, the presumption that the trustee has
paid out their indemnity through misappropriated funds
problematic.
If, indeed, the courts were
presuming the trustee’s intention to pay their indemnity through
misappropriated funds, there is
no reason why the actual facts of the case could
not displace that presumption. An example that immediately comes to mind is
the trustee’s default preceded the expense giving rise to the right
of exoneration. In that case, it could not be said that
a trustee was attempting
to pay off an expense they had incurred through misappropriated funds given the
expense in question did
not exist at the time of their default. Moreover, in
circumstances where the trustee has made an unauthorised investment that becomes
valueless, or the trustee has paid funds to someone not entitled to them, there
would be no misappropriated funds in the trustee’s
hands which could be
presumed to have been taken in payment of the indemnity.
Proponents of a fixed application of the clear accounts rule may reject the
presumption theory of the clear accounts rule and instead
suggest that its
historical origins lie in the rule in
. There is certainly a
significant body of authority that refers to the rule in
basis for the application of the clear accounts
For example, in
, Derrington J stated that
clear accounts rule) was in fact an application of the rule in
Similar explanations of
the clear accounts rule have been proffered in
JD & KJ Zohs
Whyte [No 5]
Authoritative texts such as
Derham on the Law of Set-Off
Jacobs’ Law of Trusts in
referred to
as the basis for the clear accounts rule. While
support for the view that the clear accounts rule is an application of the rule
is not universal,
unnecessary to digress into the debate here. For present purposes, it suffices
to note that pointing to the rule in
as the historical origin for
the clear accounts rule provides little support for the view that the rule
should be applied inflexibly.
As will be shown below, the rule in
itself emanated from cases applying the doctrine of satisfaction, which turned
on presumptions regarding a testator’s intent
when granting a legacy to
their creditors.
, Thomas Boultbee owed money to his sister, Catherine, who
subsequently made a will leaving him an amount greater than the debt he
During Catherine’s life,
Thomas became bankrupt and the plaintiff, his assignee, sued the executors of
Catherine’s will
for the legacy.
The executors of Catherine’s estate sought to set-off the
plaintiff’s claim against the debts owed by Thomas. Lord Chancellor
Cottenham rejected the right of the executors to ‘set-off’ the
plaintiff’s claim as, strictly speaking, the right
‘set-off’ only applies to mutual
This case concerned the right
of an executor of a creditor to pay out of the fund in hand. The relevant right
was ‘[t]he right
of an executor of a creditor to retain a sufficient part
of a legacy given by the creditor to the debtor, to pay a debt due from
the creditor’s estate’.
ultimately as Thomas had become bankrupt during Catherine’s life, there
was never any single person in whom both the right to receive the legacy
and the obligation to pay the debt were vested, and the right to retain had
no application.
Cases that have subsequently applied the rule in
have described
it as setting down the conditions under which entitlement to a fund may be
claimed. For example, in
Re Akerman; Akerman v Akerman
, Kekewich J
described the rule as follows: ‘A person who owes an estate money ...
cannot claim an aliquot share given to him
out of that mass without first making
the contribution which completes
Re Peruvian Railway
Construction Co Ltd
Re Peruvian
Railway Construction
’), Sargant J similarly stated that the rule
precludes a person from participating in a fund until they have fulfilled their
duty to contribute to that
Justice Sargant’s formulation was also quoted by Palmer J in
Otis Elevator Co Pty Ltd v Guide Rails Pty Ltd (in
The Presumptive Basis
for the Rule in
Cherry v Boultbee
While the presumed intention of the trustee and the rule in
be thought of as separate historical bases for the clear accounts rule, arguably
the two rationales are closely connected. As
has been noted in academic
commentary and case law alike, in
Cottenham LC
not divine any new principles of law.
Rather his Lordship was applying more general principles that are said to be
traced back to
Jeffs v Woods
observed below, the principles discussed in
were themselves
premised on the presumed intention of the testator and were not intended to
operate as fixed, equitable rules.
a testator left a £500 legacy to the
The plaintiff executor of the
testator’s estate advanced credit for goods to the defendant before
disbursing the £500
legacy to the defendant. In response to a suit brought
by the defendant to enforce payment, the executor of the testator’s
retain out of the legacy the money which the defendant owed to the
testator’s estate.
Master of the
Rolls Jekyll held that ‘it is very just and equitable’ for the
executor to say that the legatee has the
testator’s assets in their own
hands and the debt is consequently satisfied
At least occasionally,
is cited as a case concerning set-off by
That view appears to be
premised on Jekyll MR’s comments that although
stoppage is no payment at law, nor is it, of itself, a payment in equity, but
then a very slender agreement for discounting or allowing
the one debt out of
the other, will make it a payment ... equity will take hold of a very slight
thing to do both parties right.
However, for the same reasons provided above regarding
it is inapposite to speak of the rights of the executor in
that case as a right of ‘set-off’. Instead, as Derham suggests,
right described in both cases is ‘a right to appropriate a particular
asset as payment’.
To that extent,
the principle described in
and applied in
closely resembles the doctrine of satisfaction of a debt by a legacy, under
which equity will presume that where a person owes
a debt and gives a legacy to
their creditor, the legacy is in satisfaction of the
is, the legacy is appropriated as substantially equivalent to the payment of the
Various contemporary secondary sources which refer to
case as an application of the doctrine of satisfaction. For example,
Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence: As Administered in
England and America
as an application of the doctrine of
satisfaction.
Likewise, Toller, Whitmarsh and Ingraham’s
The Law of Executors and
Administrators
as a case concerning the doctrine of
satisfaction, being an example of money lent by the executor to a legatee being
held as part
payment of the legacy.
The Principles of Equity Jurisprudence: Embracing the Concurrent,
Exclusive and Auxiliary Jurisdiction of Courts of Equity
as a part of a class of cases ‘connected with the doctrine of
satisfaction’.
While Roper and
A Treatise on the Law of Legacies
discusses the case as an
example of the executor’s right to retain a legacy ‘by way of
set-off’, the term ‘set-off’
appears to be used
multiple references are subsequently made to the use of the legacy in
‘satisfaction of the legatee’s
Finally, in Lowndes’
Treatise on the Law of Legacies
is again cited in a
chapter concerning the satisfaction of debt by
While the foregoing texts are by no means intended to be an exhaustive list
of the sources considering
, they demonstrate substantial support
across the 19
century for a reading of
application of the doctrine of satisfaction. Indeed, support for this reading
can be found in Jekyll MR’s comments in
the case itself: ‘[I]f a man
gives a legacy to his creditor to the amount of his debt, this has been
construed a payment or
satisfaction of the debt
, because a man must be
supposed to be just before he is
bountiful’.
The principle described there by Jekyll MR was one arising out of the
presumed intention of the testator. Parenthetically, Jekyll
‘Notwithstanding this general doctrine, yet where the testator has left
wherewithal, and shewed his intentions so
to be, he has been construed to be
both just and bountiful.’
suggests that the principle was one of presumptive application, which could be
displaced by evidence of the actual intentions
of the testator. The contemporary
sources discussed above take a similar view. For example, Story observed that
the doctrine of satisfaction,
as applied in this context, was a mere presumption
that could be displaced even by the slightest of
circumstances.
Accordingly, he noted
that the rule would not apply in various scenarios, such as where the legacy was
less than the amount of the
debt, where a particular motive was assigned for the
gift or where the debt was incurred subsequent to the
Adams and Ralston similarly
referred to the presumption described in
as being a weak one that
was capable of displacement where the legacy was ‘less than the
debt’ or ‘payable at a
Roper and White observed
that the presumptive payment of legacies must be read subject to the actual
intention of the testator.
Similarly, in
Snell and Griffith’s
The Principles of Equity: Intended for the Use of
Students and the Profession
, the basis for the treatment of a debt to be
out of a legacy was said to be, inter alia, the
‘presumed intention of the
Additionally, Lowndes
observed that the ‘implication’ of the testator’s intention
to treat the legacy as satisfaction of a debt would
not arise in circumstances
similar to those
described by Story.
The status of the presumptive application of the rule was also affirmed in
various cases in the 17
centuries. In
Goodfellow v Burchett
a case considering whether a testamentary
devise of land could be used in satisfaction of a bond owed to the legatee, the
Court noted
that the principle turns on the circumstances of the case and relies
on a presumption of the testator’s
Talbott v Duke of
, another case concerning a legacy granted to a creditor of the
deceased, the Court noted that the particular circumstances evincing
testator’s intention, that the legacy should not be used in satisfaction
of the debt, could displace the application of
Richardson v Greese
Court found that the particular circumstances in which the legacy was granted,
as well as the specific terms on which it was
granted, displaced the presumption
that it should be used in satisfaction of the
Fowler v Fowler
although no circumstances were found to displace the presumption, the Court
similarly recognised the ‘rule’ as being
one of presumption rather
than fixed application.
Even in cases
that did not concern testamentary legacies, courts found that the application of
the rule as extended turned on the
intention of the parties. For example, in
Downam v Matthews
a case concerning the administration of the
estate of a deceased dryer, the Court held that the interactions between the
and the plaintiff clothier over the course of the years evinced an
intention to set-off the debts they each owed to one
The treatment of the doctrine of satisfaction as a rule of presumption
continued beyond the 17
centuries. In
Hassell v Hawkins
a case from the mid 19
Kindersley V-C observed that courts will ‘rely on the minutest shade of
difference’ to escape from the presumption
satisfaction.
To a similar effect, in
Lambert v Waters
century case, the Full Court
Supreme Court of Queensland held that the presumption of satisfaction was
displaced by the fact that the legacy was smaller than the
While various modern cases
continue to note that
is the basis for the rule in
the cases applying the rule very rarely speak of any presumed intention of the
little regard was given to the presumed
intention of the parties, or the surrounding facts which could displace that
Instead, Cottenham LC
spoke of the ‘
of an executor’ to retain a sufficient
part of the legacy in payment of a debt.
Early cases referring to
seemed to assume that they were dealing
with a fixed and established equitable principle, rather than a mere
displaceable presumption.
So much seems clear from the exposition of the rule in
Turner v Turner
Re Peruvian Railway
Construction
The modern Australian
authorities similarly make scant reference (if any) to a
‘presumption’, instead treating the rule
established principle. Thus, for example in
Gray v Gray
Young CJ in Eq referred to the rule as constituting a ‘general
that was an illustration of the more fundamental maxim that ‘he who seeks
equity must do equity’.
made no reference to the presumed intention of the parties. More recently, in
Re Hawden Property Group Pty Ltd (in liq)
, Gleeson JA provided a detailed
account of the rule in
While his Honour acknowledged the rule’s origins in cases concerning
the administration of deceased estates,
no reference was made to the rule being a presumption. Instead, his Honour spoke
of a ‘principle’ in equity and the
of a party to
appropriate a particular asset as
If indeed the rule in
is an application of the principle
discussed in
then its treatment as some sort of inflexible,
established rule of equity
appears to be a misstep. Moreover, insofar as the rule in
invoked as a
basis for the clear accounts rule, it seems
inappropriate to disregard the former rule’s history. Therefore, if one is
to apply the clear
accounts rule as some sort of historically entrenched principle, it seems
necessary to recognise the presumptive nature of the rule.
Of course, as
foreshadowed earlier, one may argue that the rule in
, and indeed,
accounts rule, has taken a modern form that is no longer tied to its
historical origins. That argument may now be addressed.
IV Discretionary Approach
to the Clear Accounts Rule
If the clear accounts rule was treated as a freestanding principle of modern
equity, pointing to the historical basis on which the rule was applied would
not stand in the way of treating the modern rule as a
rule of fixed application.
However, this Part will suggest that even if such a characterisation of the
clear accounts rule were accepted, the rule should (as
is characteristic of
equitable principles) be subject to discretionary considerations rather than
applied inflexibly.
Importantly, it is not suggested that such a discretion should be an
unstructured or absolute one. Instead, this Part suggests that
the discretion
should be grounded in equity’s conscience as understood in the modern
context — that is, it should be
exercised with reference to established
equitable principles. Specifically, the principles this Part draws on are
concern for third-party interests when granting remedies and the
allowances equity makes when taking accounts. Having regard to those
principles,
as well as the function of the clear accounts rule as a tool used by courts of
equity to administer complex accounts,
this Part suggests that there is a strong
normative basis for the clear accounts rule to be applied in a manner that is
to the interests of trust creditors.
The Mandate for
Flexibility in Accounts
Before considering the equitable principles that should guide the
approach when applying the clear accounts rule, it is necessary to briefly
set out why a discretionary approach is needed to begin
with. As has long been
recognised, in taking accounts, equity is guided by a mandate to achieve
justice between the
There are various circumstances in which equity may be called upon to take
accounts and, especially in the case of commercial trustees,
there will often be
a complex array of transactions and interests that courts must consider. In
those circumstances, to fulfil its
mandate to achieve practical justice between
the parties, equity cannot tie its hands behind its
Instead, it must apply accounting principles in a manner that is sufficiently
discretionary and flexible so as to be adaptable to
the particularities of the
cases before it.
Thus, for example, in
Huang v Wei [No 3]
Kunc J observed that ‘[t]he remedy of
account is a flexible one, intended ultimately to achieve a fair and just result
the parties’.
accounts rule should be no exception to that position — an inflexible
application of the rule would be
unjustifiably contrary to equity’s general approach when taking
accounts. Insofar as the clear accounts rule is functionally
an accounting
principle applied by equity in the examination of a trustee’s
it too should be applied in a
flexible and discretionary manner so as to achieve practical justice.
V How the Discretion
Should Be Exercised
The notion that equity should administer accounts in a flexible manner is
certainly not novel. As Watson has noted, historically,
the taking of accounts
was to be done according to the requirements of equity and good
Indeed, early cases concerning
the remedy of account noted that the account was to be taken according to the
dictates of equity and
justice rather than the rigour of the
However, as has been observed in case law and academia alike, equity no longer
resolves cases at a high level of abstraction by reference
to vague notions of
Instead, modern equity’s discretion is ‘rules-based’ in that
it is exercised by reference to an established body
of equitable
principles.
That view accords with the
manner in which the concept of ‘conscience’ has evolved in equity as
the source of equitable
obligations. While in medieval times, chancellors were
concerned with ‘prevent[ing] peril to the soul by
in the modern context
‘conscience’ invokes a set of well-established principles developed
by the courts of equity over
one cannot simply rely on the invocation of notions of ‘good faith’
or ‘justice’ in medieval cases
to assert that similar notions will
operate at such a high level today to dictate the operation of the clear
accounts rule.
Instead, any argument
that the clear accounts rule should not apply where its operation would be
‘unconscionable’ should
generally be made through an inductive approach by reference to established
equitable principles.
Consistently with that approach, there are two established lines of equitable
principle on which trust creditors could rely when attempting
to resist the
application of the clear accounts rule. First, in formulating appropriate
remedies, courts of equity are sensitive to the interests
While prejudice to third
parties is not necessarily determinative of equity’s discretion, it is
useful to examine the circumstances
in which third-party interests have guided
the court’s decision to award a particular remedy. Second, in various
modern contexts,
equity has made ‘just allowances’ when determining
the amount payable from one party to another. In making such allowances,
has been minded to making the party seeking equitable relief account for the
benefits that they have received (drawing on
the maxim that one who seeks equity
must do equity). In making parties account for the benefit they have received,
has been willing to prioritise the achievement of practical justice between
parties rather than being bound by stringent accounting procedures.
Consideration of Third-Party Interests
Starting with the consideration of third-party interests generally, Wright
has observed that equity is willing to consider third-party
interests in a range
circumstances
such as when imposing constructive
awarding injunctions.
An examination of
how third-party interests are considered in these contexts may inform how courts
should treat the interests of
trust creditors who are functionally ‘third
parties’ so far as the trustee-beneficiary relationship is concerned.
In the sphere of constructive trusts, numerous cases have acknowledged the
importance of considering third-party interests before
a remedy is awarded. In
Giumelli v Giumelli
, a majority of the High Court recognised that when
determining whether a constructive trust ought to be imposed, the court is
obliged to consider ‘all the circumstances of the
including the implications of the remedy on third
That decision was cited with
approval in
John Alexander’s Clubs Pty Ltd v White City Tennis Club
where the High Court noted that before deciding whether to declare a
constructive trust, the interests of third parties must be ‘borne
To a similar effect, the
High Court in
Bathurst City Council v PWC Properties Pty Ltd
unanimously
noted the need to avoid a ‘result whereby the plaintiff gains a beneficial
proprietary interest which gives an unfair
priority over other equally deserving
creditors of the
defendant’.
In the context of rectifying mistakes, courts have refused relief where it
would prejudice the interests of an innocent third party
who has acquired
interests under the document for
Similar circumstances have also
justified the refusal to rescind a contract. For example, in
Finance Ltd v C G Maloney Pty Ltd
, Giles J suggested that equity would
consider whether undoing the contract would prejudicially affect the interests
innocent third party who had in good faith and for value acquired rights
under the relevant
His Honour noted that equity’s rationale was to avoid unduly punishing the
innocent third party for conduct in which they had
His Honour observed that
notwithstanding the fact that there were two innocent parties (the party
subjected to a misrepresentation
and the innocent third party), it was the
prejudice to the innocent third party that was to be
A similar rationale has also
been applied to the protections afforded to bona fide purchasers for value of
real property
and personal
One apparent distinction between the position of trust creditors and the
third parties referred to above is that trust creditors have
not acquired an
interest in the trust property. For example, in the context of rectification and
rescission, the relevant third parties
have acquired interests under the
instrument with which equity would be interfering. However, this distinction
appear to be material to the exercise of equity’s discretion. What is
relevant is that a third party has acquired rights for
value (rather than as a
volunteer) and that the equitable remedy sought would directly and prejudicially
interfere with those rights.
Understood this way, it is unclear why the rights
of trust creditors should not be considered by equity when deciding whether to
apply the clear accounts rule. They too have acquired rights for value against
the trustee (acting in performance of the trust).
And, as explained above, their
ability to satisfy those rights too is directly and prejudicially affected by
the invocation of the
clear accounts
Perhaps the better objection to equity accounting for the interests of trust
creditors is the ‘acceptance of risk
The acceptance of risk
theory has been applied when courts have considered whether to impose a
constructive trust upon property owned
by an insolvent
In such circumstances, a
constructive trust would prejudice the constructive trustee’s general
creditors who would lose recourse
to the property subject to the constructive
trust. However, the acceptance of risk theory suggests that the general
creditors of
the constructive trustee should be taken to have accepted the risk
that they may cease to be the owner of the property because by
failing to take
security the general creditors have accepted the
The same could be said of
unsecured trust creditors — in dealing with the trustee they have accepted
the risk that the trustee
may become insolvent and failed to secure their debts
against the trust property.
Accordingly,
unsecured creditors should not be given priority over the beneficiaries in order
to satisfy their claims against the
As Paciocco notes, although the acceptance of risk theory is compelling, it
does not always justify giving preference to
beneficiaries.
The theory turns on the assumption that only the trustee’s creditors, and
not the beneficiaries, have had the opportunity to
deal with the trustee in the
past. However, where beneficiaries have had an opportunity to deal with the
trustees, there is ‘nothing
of substance’ to distinguish their
position from that of the creditors.
far as commercial trusts are concerned, the beneficiaries of the trusts have
often dealt with the trustees (eg when purchasing
units in a unit
They also have rights with
regards to the administration of the trust. For example, the trust deed may
confer on beneficiaries a
power to replace the
Alternatively, the
beneficiaries may apply to the court for it to exercise its inherent
deciding whether to remove a trustee, the court will consider the welfare of
beneficiaries and the preservation of the
trust estate.
Finally, it is worth noting that support for considering the interests of
trust creditors was also expressed by Lord Briggs JSC and
Lady Arden in
Equity Trust (Jersey)
. Lord Briggs JSC considered the prejudice suffered
by trust creditors as being material to how the priorities between the liens of
initial and successor trustees should be
determined.
His Lordship recognised the
invidious position of trust creditors who are ‘exposed to the unknowable
state of account
between the trustee with whom they deal and the
To similar effect, Lady
Arden emphasised the need to consider the effect of a trustee’s insolvency
on the ability of trust
creditors to enforce the debts owed to
Her Ladyship went on to note that
courts of equity have ‘sought to uphold creditors’ rights which
[may] have already
already observed, in
Equity Trust (Jersey)
all members of the
Privy Council seemed to presuppose the
application of the clear accounts rule, and a consideration of the
rule’s application was not in
Nonetheless, the majority’s
concern for the prejudice suffered by trust creditors, and its direct impact on
how priority rules
were formulated, remains illuminating.
Just Allowances
The second line of principle that justifies consideration of trust
creditors’ interests is the rationale underpinning the ‘just
allowances’ doctrine. The just allowances doctrine allows a fiduciary who
is subject to an order to account for profits or
an order declaring a
constructive trust to invoke the discretionary power of the court to make
deductions from the amount owing to
The court has wide latitude
to exercise its discretion, being able to make allowances for any matter that it
might think is ‘just
Thus, for example, it was
held that a trustee liable to account for profits made from a trust was entitled
to make allowances for
the time, energy and skill the trustee expended in
generating that profit.
As the learned authors of
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane’s Equity:
Doctrines and Remedies
note, there are various justifications for the just
allowances doctrine.
justification is that without the relevant allowance, the beneficiaries seeking
an account of profits would be able to
retain benefits for which they have not
For example, in
Re Berkeley
Applegate (Investment Consultants) Ltd (in liq); Harris v Conway
Edward Nugee QC (sitting as a deputy judge for the High Court) noted that
the fact that ‘work ha[d] been of substantial benefit
to the trust
property and to the persons interested in it in equity’ was a key factor
in the award of just allowances for the
value of that
similar effect in
Phipps v Boardman
Wilberforce J explained that
it would be ‘inequitable’ for beneficiaries seeking an account of
profits ‘to step
in and take the profit without paying for the skill and
labour which has produced it’.
Additionally, in
O’Sullivan v Management Agency & Music
Dunn LJ noted that in assessing the advantage gained by a wrongdoer, equity
will look at the ‘whole
situation’.
At a more fundamental
level, this explanation for the just allowances doctrine in the foregoing cases
is consistent with the maxim
‘he who seeks equity must do
In other words, the
principal seeking an account of profits is seeking equity and must therefore do
equity by submitting to
allowances made on ‘just
A similar explanation has been proffered for the ‘just
allowances’ that equity makes in other circumstances. For example,
ordering rescission, courts of equity have not been constrained by any stringent
requirement to restore the parties precisely
to the state they were in before
the contract.
Instead, equity has sought
to achieve practical justice between the parties by making allowances for
improvements or deteriorations
of the property to be
The basis for making such
allowances has also been explained as turning on the maxim ‘he who seeks
equity must do equity’,
have been wary of the injustice arising from a party taking possession of
property without
accounting for the benefits they may have
When considering
equity’s discretion to rescind a contract for unconscionable conduct,
the High Court in
Vadasz v Pioneer Concrete (SA) Pty Ltd
discussed at some length equity’s mandate to achieve ‘practical
There, the Court
approved Lord Wright’s comments in
where his Lordship
noted the importance of not ‘ty[ing] the hands of the court by attempting
to form any rigid rules’.
noted that a party seeking equitable rescission was
seeking the court of equity’s assistance and was therefore bound to do
It followed that the
Court’s mandate was to look at what was practically just for both parties
and not just the appellant.
To a similar effect, when taking the accounts of a co-owner, equity has
granted the co-owner, liable to pay occupation fees, an allowance
improvements made to the property.
Again, the basis for making such allowances has also been recognised as the
maxim of one who seeks equity must do
In other words, a co-owner
seeking equitable relief in the form of
occupation fees must do equity by accounting for improvements made to the
property. The courts have noted that they do not wish to
allow a party to be
unfairly benefited under an order in
Application of
Principles to Trust Creditors
Pulling these threads together, the two principles to be abstracted from the
foregoing analysis are that: (a) equity will generally
consider the prejudice to
third parties when exercising its remedial discretion; and (b) the maxim of
‘one who seeks equity
must do equity’ requires parties seeking
equitable relief to account for the benefits that have been conferred on
As third parties to the trustee-beneficiary relationship, trust creditors can
rely on these principles to justify a discretionary
refusal to apply the clear
accounts rule. As already observed, the application of the clear accounts
rule is prejudicial to their position — it is capable
of rendering their
only avenue to access trust assets, in the execution of their claims, valueless.
Additionally, trust creditors
can also call upon beneficiaries seeking equitable
relief for breach of trust to ‘do equity’. Take, for example, a
creditor who provides a banking facility to the trustee, which in turn
enables the trustee to acquire a trust asset or carry out
some profitable
enterprise for the benefit of the trust. Assume also that the trustee has
engaged in some other breach of trust unrelated
to their transaction with this
trust creditor. The trust creditor can certainly assert that the finance they
provided enabled the
trustee to acquire a trust asset or engage in a profitable
enterprise, which in turn increased the value of the trust fund. That
material benefit enjoyed by the beneficiaries of the trust. As with
co-owners, parties seeking rescission of a contract or principals seeking an
account of profits, the beneficiaries seeking the intervention of equity
should do equity by accounting for the benefit they have
received as a result of
the trust creditors’ contributions. That is, they should be required to
allow the subrogating trust
creditors to recover the full value of their
indemnity rather than seeking to net that indemnity off against an unrelated
of trust committed by the trustees. This view of the clear accounts rule
also seems consistent with the exception recognised in
the end of Jessel MR’s judgment.
The Master of the Rolls noted that a possible exception to the clear accounts
rule would exist if the creditors could demonstrate
that there was a profit to
the carrying on of the business which exceeded the deficit owed by the trustee,
thereby showing that ‘something
was gained by the use’ of the
creditors’ contributions.
least where the ‘credit’ provided by a trust creditor has profitably
contributed to the state of the trust fund,
there is a strong argument in favour
of not applying the clear accounts rule to the creditors’
disadvantage.
VI Implications of the
Discretion: The Role of Equity in Insolvency Law?
Before proceeding to a discussion of the other grounds on which the clear
accounts rule may be resisted, it is worth briefly commenting on the broader
implications of the argument made in
If accepted, the argument would
not only affect how the clear accounts rule is understood academically but would
also have significant
practical consequences for trust creditors in insolvency
settings. As will be recalled from
, unsecured trust creditors do not
have a prima facie right to resort directly to trust assets in the execution of
their claims. Instead,
their means of accessing trust assets is the indirect
route provided to them by their right to subrogate to the trustee’s right
of exoneration.
As the law currently
stands, the clear accounts rule is a major practical obstacle in that indirect
route to trust assets. However,
if the argument in
is accepted, it opens the possibility of having that obstacle
removed. That is, the trust creditors can finally detach the value
right of subrogation from other breaches the trustee may have committed.
The benefit to trust creditors does, however, come at the expense of letting
beneficiaries’ claims against trustees go unsatisfied.
discretionary consideration of trust creditors’ interests is found to be
determinative, the court would make separate
orders for the trustee to restore
the trust funds and for the trust assets to be realised in satisfaction of the
right of indemnity.
Insofar as the trustee is insolvent, they would not be able to meet their
obligation to restore the trust funds. Thus, in effect,
advocates for
shifting the burden of the trustee’s insolvency from the trust
creditors to the beneficiaries.
already raised arguments as to why, from
an acceptance of risk perspective, it is justifiable for beneficiaries to bear
this burden.
However, it is also worthwhile considering the recourse to equity’s
discretion in light of broader debates regarding the role
of equity in
insolvency settings.
Concerns have been raised about equity unduly adjusting priorities between
equally deserving creditors in the context of courts imposing
constructive trusts,
such concerns may also be cautious of equity exercising its discretion to adjust
priorities between trust creditors and
beneficiaries.
In response, however, it should be observed that it is the clear accounts
rule, and not its discretionary non-application, that constitutes
intervention to effectively adjust priorities between the parties. Absent the
application of the clear accounts rule,
the trustee’s right of indemnity
would take priority over the rights of beneficiaries in the trust fund. It is
through the
clear accounts rule that equity intervenes and puts the trust
creditors in a worse position than they otherwise would have been.
that a desire for equity to take a conservative approach to the rights of
parties in insolvency would support the non-application
of the clear accounts
Moreover, if accepted, the argument in the preceding Part would not have the
effect of all trust creditors automatically avoiding
the operation of the rule.
Instead, the trust creditor would need to demonstrate that they contributed
assets that benefited the trust fund. Thus, for example, a plaintiff entitled
to damages against the trustee qua
trustee would struggle to demonstrate
a beneficial contribution to the trust assets. Similarly, the principle would
not extend to
trust creditors whose credit was never converted into a profit for
the trust. The court’s discretion would turn on questions
determined on a
case-by-case basis. However, ultimately there would be certain deserving
creditors who contributed valuably to the trust assets and
as such would be
entitled to have their right of subrogation take priority over the claims of the
beneficiaries against the trustees.
VII Two Final Exceptions
to the Clear Accounts Rule
Beyond the bases for resisting the clear accounts rule outlined above, there
are two further circumstances in which the operation
of the clear accounts rule
could be avoided: (a) where the clear accounts rule is found to be contrary to
statute; and (b) where
its application is ousted by the trust deed. Each
circumstance is considered below (although in the interests of brevity, the
raised are not intended to be exhaustive).
Intervention into the Right of Indemnity
While an account of the general law right of a trustee’s indemnity has
already been provided in
of this article, the intervention of statute
into a trustee’s right of indemnity also poses interesting questions
the operation of the clear accounts rule.
Statutory provisions that confer on trustees a right of indemnity are not
uniform across all Australian jurisdictions. While a detailed
analysis of each
least in some jurisdictions, a trustee’s
statutory right of indemnity is
cast in wide terms and without reference to general law
restrictions.
For example,
Trustee Act 1925
Trustee Act
provides that ‘[a] trustee may
reimburse himself or herself, or pay or discharge out of the trust property
all expenses incurred in or about execution of the trustee’s
powers’. In
Free Serbian Orthodox Church Diocese for Australia and New Zealand
Property Trust v Dobrijevic [No 3]
Payne JA noted that
an ‘embodiment’ of the general law principle concerning a
trustee’s right to indemnity.
However, a question remains as to whether this ‘embodiment’ of the
general law principle also embraces general law exceptions
or limitations on
that right of indemnity, such as the clear accounts rule.
On one view, the absence of any reference to the clear accounts rule in
suggests that there was no statutory intention to incorporate the
rule as a qualification on the trustee’s statutory right
of indemnity.
Elsewhere, the
Trustee Act
is not silent on the role of law and
equity in regulating the rights of indemnity conferred by the Act. For example,
s 14B(3) of the
Trustee Act
explicitly enshrines the continued
application of ‘[a]ny rules and principles of law or equity that relate to
a provision in
an instrument creating a trust that purports to exempt, limit the
liability of, or indemnify a trustee in respect of a breach of
preserves ‘[a]ny rules and principles of law or equity
that impose a duty on a trustee exercising a power of investment ...
the extent that they are inconsistent’ with the
Trustee Act
any instrument creating the trust. Arguably then, the absence of any express
preservation of general law limitations on the trustee’s
indemnity (beyond the limitations recognised in
leaves little room for
the continued application of the clear accounts rule on the statutory right of
indemnity. That view would
appear to be consistent with Spigelman CJ’s
judgment in
Holdings v Kritharas Holdings (in liq)
where his Honour noted that the historical general
law test for indemnifiable expenses to be ‘proper’ and
‘reasonable’
must now be understood in light of the statutory
Ultimately, in that case, the New South Wales Court of Appeal concluded that the
‘proper’ and ‘reasonable’
expenses test, which had been
recognised historically at general law, was no longer determinative on whether
an expense incurred
by a trustee was
indemnifiable.
It should be noted that the conclusion reached by the Court of Appeal in
was doubted by the
Victorian Court of Appeal in
Additionally, in
Gatsios Holdings
, Spiegelman CJ expressly noted that the
‘statutory provision itself must be understood in light of the
pre-existing law, which it did not purport to
Gatsios Holdings
should not be relied on as authority for the proposition that
completely displaces the general law. However, it is unnecessary to digress into
a detailed discussion of the positions set out in
Gastios Holdings
for the purposes of this
Rather, it is simply relevant
to observe that the statutory right is a distinct source of the trustee’s
right of indemnity.
While the clear
accounts rule has traditionally applied to the general law right of
indemnity, a question remains as to whether the rule can also
be applied in
circumstances where a party invokes the statutory right of indemnity given the
absence of any reference to the rule
in the Act.
Exclusion of the
Clear Accounts Rule through the Trust Deed
The second possible exception to the clear accounts rule occurs when it is
contrary to the agreement of the parties. As the foregoing
analysis has
demonstrated, there is no reason to believe that the ‘clear accounts
rule’ is a mandatory rule of trusts
Instead, as noted above, it should
be considered a discretionary accounting technique available to the courts of
equity. It follows
that the rule can be displaced by specific drafting of the
instrument.
While the exact combination of words to be used is a question for transactional
in theory it is possible that a
trust deed could explicitly provide that the value of a trustee’s right of
exoneration is not
to be netted off or otherwise
affected by the value of any obligation of the trustee to restore trust
Additionally, the trust deed
could provide that beneficiaries may only bring claims against an insolvent
trustee once the trustee’s
right of exoneration has been satisfied out of
the trust assets.
There does not appear to be any case law to date on attempts to modify the
operation of the clear accounts rule through the trust
instrument. However, at
least in principle, there is no reason why such drafting should be rendered
ineffective by courts of equity. To appreciate that point, it is important to
recall that there are few fixed rights with general
characteristics that are
universally enjoyed by all
beneficiaries.
Instead, the trust
instrument, as given effect by equity, is the source of a beneficiary’s
While trust law recognises an
‘irreducible core’ of a trustee’s duties that cannot be ousted
by the trust instrument,
aforementioned drafting does not purport to exclude the operation of a
trustee’s duties or the corresponding rights of
beneficiaries. Instead,
it simply sets an order of priority as to when the beneficiaries’
rights can be
exercised and how the value of those rights will be calculated.
VIII Conclusion
The clear accounts rule has significant implications for trust creditors. It
impacts their only route to accessing trust assets in satisfaction of the
debts owed to them. This article has examined the clear
accounts rule from both
a historical and modern doctrinal perspective. It has suggested that a fidelity
to history would require
the clear accounts rule to be applied on a presumptive
basis, such that its application could be circumvented by adducing evidence
trustee’s actual intentions when misappropriating trust funds.
Alternatively, it has suggested that from a modern perspective,
a discretionary
approach to the clear accounts rule is justifiable. Such a discretion ought to
be exercised in a manner that is sensitive
to the prejudice suffered by trust
creditors and their beneficial contributions to the state of the trust assets.
Finally, this article
has observed that one further possibility to explore for
transactional lawyers is the way in which a trust deed or governing rules
trust can be drafted so as to avoid the clear accounts rule entirely.
* BA, LLB (Hons I) (Sydney); BCL candidate (Oxon). I am grateful to the Hon
Joseph Campbell KC FAAL, Dr Nuncio
Angelo, Professor Matthew Conaglen and Dr
Jeevan Hariharan for their insightful comments and feedback on earlier drafts.
remain my own.
Relatively recent examples include:
Staatz (as liquidator of Wollumbin Horizons Pty Ltd
(in liq)) v Berry [No 3]
[2019] FCA 924
(2019) 138 ACSR 231
[204]–[206] (Derrington J);
Park v Whyte [No 3]
[2017] QSC 230
[2018] 2 Qd R 475
504–7 [125]–[144] (Jackson J) (‘
Park [No 3]
Lane v Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation
[2017] FCA 953
(2017) 253 FCR 46
, 52 [5], 68–9
[54]–[59] (Derrington J) (‘
De Santis v
[2014] FCA 1243
(2014) 227 FCR 404
, 424–5 [74]–[77], 426 [82], 432
[106] (Farrell J);
Chu v Lin; Re Gold Stone Capital Pty Ltd (Trial Judgment)
, [246] (Jackman J) (‘
Re Gold Stone Capital
The term ‘trust creditor’ is
defined below in
Part II(A).
Put simply, a ‘trust creditor’ is a
party to whom a trustee has incurred a debt in their capacity as a trustee. The
issues apply only in relation to unsecured trust creditors; those that
are secured do not access trust assets via subrogation to
the trustee’s
indemnity but rather do so directly via their security. From here on,
‘trust creditor’ refers only
to those that are unsecured, unless
otherwise stated.
[1839] EngR 1099
(1839) 4 My & Cr 442
’). See below nn 110–24 and accompanying
Carter Holt Harvey Woodproducts
Australia Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
(2019) 268 CLR
524, 543–4 [31] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ) (‘
(Derrington J), citing
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Letten [No 17]
[2011] FCA 1420
(2011) 286 ALR 346
353 [20] (Gordon J) (‘
RWG Management Ltd v Commissioner for
Corporate Affairs
[1985] VicRp 42
[1985] 1 VR 385
(Brooking J) (‘
RWG Management
) 68 [55] (Derrington J).
Provident Capital Ltd v Zone
Development Pty Ltd
(2001) 10 BPR 19133, 19140–1 [49] (Young CJ in
Kelly v Mina
[2014] NSWCA 9
, [103] (Leeming JA, Ward JA agreeing
at [100]) (‘
’); Nuncio D’Angelo, ‘The
Trust as a Surrogate Company: The Challenge of
Insolvency’
(2014) 8(3)
Journal of Equity
) 540 [24] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman
JJ), 577 [129] (Gordon J);
Equity Trust (Jersey) Ltd v Halabi
[2022] UKPC 36
, 893 [58] (Lord Richards JSC and Sir Nicholas Patten, Lord Stephens JSC
agreeing), 934 [256] (Lord Briggs JSC, Lord Reed PSC and
Lady Rose JSC
agreeing), 941 [281] (Lady Arden) (‘
Equity Trust (Jersey)
Octavo Investments Pty
Ltd v Knight
[1979] HCA 61
(1979) 144 CLR 360
, 367 (Stephen, Mason, Aickin and
Wilson JJ) (‘
Investments
[24] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), 560–1 [82] (Bell, Gageler and Nettle JJ), 577 [129] (Gordon
) [103] (Leeming
JA, Ward JA agreeing at [100]).
Re Johnson; Shearman v
[1880] UKLawRpCh 214
(1880) 15 Ch D 548
, 552 (Jessel MR) (‘
Vacuum Oil Company Pty Ltd v Wiltshire
[1945] HCA 37
(1945) 72 CLR
, 324 (Latham CJ) (‘
Language to a similar effect was used
by the High Court of Australia in
see, eg, at 585 [156] (Gordon J).
Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties
(NSW) v Buckle
[1998] HCA 4
(1998) 192 CLR 226
, 245–6 [47] (Brennan CJ, Toohey,
Gaudron, McHugh and Gummow JJ) (‘
’); JD Heydon and MJ
Jacobs’ Law of Trusts in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed, 2016) 510–11 [21-02].
Re Blundell; Blundell v
[1888] UKLawRpCh 84
(1888) 40 Ch D 370
, 376–7 (Stirling J).
Worrall v Harford
[1802] EngR 342
(1802) 8 Ves
, 252 (Lord Eldon LC).
) 245 [47] (Brennan CJ, Toohey, Gaudron,
McHugh and Gummow JJ), quoting Austin Wakeman Scott and William Franklin
The Law of Trusts
(Little, Brown and Company, 4
ed, 1988) vol 3A, 345.
See above n
) 544 [32] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman
JJ), 561–2 [83]–[85] (Bell, Gageler and Nettle JJ), 582 [142]
(Gordon J).
Jennings v Mather
[1901] UKLawRpKQB 176
[1902] 1 KB 1
, 6 (Collins MR) (‘
Jennings (KB)
’), cited in
544 [32] n 70 (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ). For further discussion, see
generally RW White, ‘Insolvent Trusts: Implications
CPT Custodian
(2017) 44(1)
Australian Bar Review
Trustee Act 1925
Trusts Act 1973
Trustee Act 1958
) 552 (Jessel MR);
) 324 (Latham CJ), 335 (Dixon J).
See especially, Nuncio D’Angelo,
Transacting with Trusts and Trustees
(LexisNexis, 2020)
415–16 [10.98]–[10.99].
Nuncio D’Angelo,
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 2014) 299–300
[6.60]–[6.62].
Horwath Corporate Pty Ltd v
[1999] NSWSC 583
(1999) 32 ACSR 413
, 414–15 [8]–[17] (Young J);
Park & Muller (liquidators of LM Investment Management Ltd) v Whyte
(receiver of the LM First Mortgage Investment Fund)
[2015] QSC 283
[18]–[19] (Jackson J);
Re Austec Wagga Wagga Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2018] NSWSC 1476
, [13], [18] (Brereton J).
Elders Trustee & Executor Co
Ltd v E G Reeves Pty Ltd
[1987] FCA 332
(1987) 78 ALR 193
, 253 (Gummow J) (‘
Trustee & Executor
’); Heydon and Leeming (n
) 511–12 [21-03]. See generally
Transacting with Trusts and Trustees
) ch 3, 416 [10.102]. Trustees may also
attempt to embed a limitation of liability clause into the trust instrument
itself. However,
such a provision is unlikely to be effective where trust
creditors do not have notice of the clause:
Austrust Ltd v Astley
[1996] SASC 5681
(1996) 67 SASR 207
, 228 (Doyle CJ and Olsson J,
Duggan J agreeing at 243), affd
(1999) 197 CLR 1
, 38 [89]–[90] (Gleeson
CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ). The position where trust creditors have notice
of such a clause is
less settled: D’Angelo,
Transacting with Trusts and
Muir v City of Glasgow Bank
(1879) 4 App Cas 337
, 355 (Earl Cairns LC) (‘
Trustee & Executor
253 (Gummow J).
This may either be due to commercial
realities or because the clause is held unenforceable.
For further discussion, see D’Angelo,
Transacting with Trusts and
) 149 [3.13],
417 [10.103].
Helvetic Investment
Corporation Pty Ltd v Knight
(1984) 9 ACLR 773
(Mahoney JA) (‘
Helvetic Investment
Elders Trustee
) 253 (Gummow
Transacting with
Trusts and Trustees
) 552 (Jessel MR).
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), citing
Scott v Surman
(1742) Willes 400
125 ER 1235
(Willes CJ),
Winch v Keeley
(1787) 1 Term R 619;
[1787] EngR 38
, 1286 (Buller
Boddington v Castelli
[1853] EngR 515
(1853) 1 El & Bl 879
Bankruptcy Act 1966
Bankruptcy Act 1924
(Cth) s 91(a), as at 30 July
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ), discussing
Corporations Act
(definition of ‘property’)
Corporations Act
) 541–2 [26]–[27], 546 [36]
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ), 567–8
[94]–[95] (Bell, Gageler and Nettle JJ).
Ibid 542 [28] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ).
Re Enhill Pty Ltd
[1983] VicRp 52
[1983] 1 VR 561
, 564 (Young CJ). See generally Justice James Allsop,
‘The Intersection of Companies and Trusts’
[2020] MelbULawRw 18
(2020) 43(3)
University Law Review
) 549 [44] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman
JJ), 565–6 [92] (Bell, Gageler
and Nettle JJ), 585 [156]–[158] (Gordon J). Proceeds from the right of
reimbursement are
available for distribution amongst all the trustee’s creditors: at 549
[43] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), 565–6 [92] (Bell, Gageler and Nettle JJ), 584–5
[155] (Gordon J).
Ibid 545 [34] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), 578 [132] (Gordon J).
JD Heydon, MJ Leeming and PG Turner,
Meagher, Gummow and Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 5
ed, 2015) 365 [9-005], quoting Denis
Ashburner’s Principles of Equity
(Butterworth, 2
ed, 1933) 243.
) 555 (Jessel MR).
) 543–4 [31], 545 [34] (Kiefel CJ,
Keane and Edelman JJ).
See, eg, D’Angelo,
Transacting with Trusts and Trustees
) 253 [5.129]; White (n
) 18–22; Nuncio D’Angelo,
‘The Unsecured Creditor’s Perilous Path to a Trust’s Assets:
Is a Safer, More
Direct US-Style Route Available?’
(2010) 84(12)
Australian Law Journal
, 833 (‘The Unsecured Creditor’s
Perilous Path to a Trust’s Assets’); Harlan F Stone, ‘A Theory
of Liability
of Trust Estates for the Contracts and Torts of the Trustee’
(1922) 22(6)
Columbia Law Review
, 528; Diccon Loxton and Nuncio
D’Angelo, ‘Trustees’ Limitation of Liability: Myths,
Mysteries and a Model Clause’
(2013) 41(3)
Australian Business Law
, 145. But see Bajul Shah, ‘Trustee’s Indemnity and
Creditors’ Rights’
(2013) 19(1)
Trusts and Trustees
) 361 [43] (Gordon J); D’Angelo,
Transacting with Trusts and Trustees
249–50 [5.117]–[5.118].
Corporations Act
) s 197(1).
Transacting with
Trusts and Trustees
See, eg, D’Angelo,
) 268–9 [5.125].
See also HAJ Ford, ‘Trading Trusts and Creditors’ Rights’
[1981] MelbULawRw 1
(1981) 13(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
, 29–30; Stone (n
) 528, 535–6; Ronald Sackville,
‘The Trustee’s Right of Indemnity and the Creditor’s Right of
Subrogation:
The Hardening of Equity’
(2013) 7(1)
Journal of Equity
) 4, 20; D’Angelo,
) 268 [5.124]. But see
Diccon Loxton, ‘In with the Old, out with the New? The Rights of a
Replaced Trustee against Its Successor,
and the Characterisation of
Trustees’ Proprietary Rights of Indemnity’
(2017) 45(4)
Australian Business Law Review
, 290. See also White (n
Commercial Trusts
) 267 [5.123], 270
See, eg, Allison Silink,
‘Trustee Exoneration from Trust Assets: Out on a Limb?’
(2018) 12(1)
Journal of Equity
, 60–1; Shah (n
Commercial Trusts
) 270 [5.128].
See above nn
and accompanying text.
Equity Trust (Jersey)
) 882–3 [2], [4] (Lord Reed
Ibid 882 [2].
Ibid 939 [275] (Lord Briggs JSC, Lord
Reed PSC and Lady Rose JSC agreeing). See also at
948 [295] (Lady Arden).
Ibid 895 [66] (Lord Richards JSC and
Sir Nicholas Patten, Lord Stephens JSC agreeing).
Ibid 895 [66] (Lord Richards JSC and
Sir Nicholas Patten, Lord Stephens JSC agreeing),
939 [276] (Lord Briggs JSC, Lord Reed PSC and Lady Rose JSC agreeing).
RWG Management
) 397 (Brooking J) (citations omitted);
JD & KJ Zohs Properties Pty Ltd v Ferme
(2015) 16 ASTLR 167, 183 [71]
(Stanley J) (‘
JD & KJ Zohs Properties
’) (citations
HBSY Pty Ltd v Lewis
[2022] NSWSC 841
(2022) 108 NSWLR 558
[47]–[50] (Kunc J) (‘
’) (citations omitted).
(1902) 28 VLR 622
ing v Doering
[1889] UKLawRpCh 74
(1889) 42 Ch D 203
207–8 (Stirling J) (‘
[1906] HCA 37
(1906) 3 CLR 1170
, 1192 (Barton J)
Ibid 1191 (emphasis added), quoting
Jennings v Mather
[1900] UKLawRpKQB 164
[1901] 1 QB 108
, 113 (Lawrance J agreeing at 117)
Jennings (QB)
’), which in turn quoted
Re Evans; Evans v
[1887] UKLawRpCh 17
34 Ch D 597
, 601 (Cotton LJ). Note that
) erroneously cites
Jennings (QB)
) as having been reported in the
King’s Bench Division Reports
when in fact it was reported in the
Queen’s Bench Division Reports
: ibid 1191 n 1. The citation has
been corrected here.
Octavo Investments
) 367–8 (Stephen, Mason, Aickin and
Wilson JJ), citing
1186, 1188 (Griffiths CJ), and
) 1191 (Barton J);
) 336 (Dixon J).
RWG Management
Ibid, discussing
) 336 (Dixon J).
RWG Management
) 353 [20], citing ibid 397 (Brooking
JD & KJ Zohs Properties
) 183 [70] (Stanley J), citing
(Brooking J).
Park [No 3]
) 506 [139] (Jackson J), citing
(Brooking J).
) 68 [55] (Derrington J), citing
) 397 (Brooking
Re Gold Stone Capital
) [246] (Jackman J), citing
(Brooking J).
) 544 [31] n 68 (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), citing
68 [54] (Derrington J).
RWG Management
) 398 (Brooking J);
) 336 (Dixon J);
) 68 [54] (Derrington J);
Amerind Pty Ltd; Commonwealth v Byrnes
[2018] VSCA 41
(2018) 54 VR 230
, 238 [29] (Ferguson
CJ, Whelan, Kyrou, McLeish and Dodds-Streeton JJA).
) 1187 (Griffiths CJ), 1190–1
(Barton J), citing
Jennings (QB)
). Note that
) erroneously cites
Jennings (QB)
) as having been reported in the
King’s Bench Division Reports
when in fact it was reported in the
Queen’s Bench Division Reports
) 1187 n 2 (Griffiths CJ), 1191
n 1 (Barton J). The citation has been corrected here.
Jennings (QB)
) 114 (Lawrance J agreeing at 117),
) 548 (headnote).
Ibid 548–9.
Ibid. See also at 556 (Jessel MR).
Ibid 556 (Jessel MR).
Ibid 550–1 (headnote).
Aleksi Ollikainen, ‘Asset
Partitioning in the Trust’ (DPhil Thesis, University of Oxford, 2018) 27,
[1874] UKLawRpEq 15
(1874) LR 17 Eq 341
’), cited in
RWG Management
) 398 (Brooking J).
) 628–9 (Holroyd J for the Court),
) 208, citing
) 342 (Jessel MR).
[1889] UKLawRpCh 22
(1889) 40 Ch D 536
, 540–1 (Lopes
LJ agreeing at 543) (‘
’). See also at 541–2
(Lindley LJ, Lopes LJ agreeing at 543).
[1882] UKLawRpCh 101
(1882) 21 Ch D 862
[1869] UKLawRpEq 235
(1869) LR 9 Eq 340
[1883] UKLawRpCh 227
(1883) 25 Ch D 175
, 178. The use of
‘set off’ in this instance does not appear to have been invoking the
doctrine of set-off.
[1808] EngR 153
(1808) 15 Ves Jun 72
[1902] UKLawRpCh 8
[1902] 1 Ch 342
’), cited in
RWG Management
) 399 (Brooking J).
) 345, citing
) 553, 555 (Jessel MR), and
See, eg, Aleksi Ollikainen-Read,
‘Creditors’ Claims against Trustees and Trust Funds’
Trusts and Trustees
, 184, 188–9, citing
); Silink (n
) 86–7, citing
Re Dacre; Whitaker v Dacre
[1916] 1 Ch 344
, 347 (Lord Cozens-Hardy MR)
’); Thomson Reuters,
Ford and Lee: The Law of
(online at 22 July 2024) [14.3910], citing
RWG Management
) 398 (Brooking J).
See above nn
and accompanying text.
) 629 (Holroyd J for the Court).
(1972) 5 SASR 466
RWG Management
) 398 (Brooking J).
Park [No 3]
) 506 [138] n 70, citing
[1723] EngR 25
(1723) 2 P Wms 128
Park [No 3]
) 506 [138], citing
Re Kaupthing
Singer & Friedlander Ltd (in admin) [No 2]
[2011] UKSC 48
[2012] 1 AC 804
[13]–[53] (Lord Walker JSC, Baroness Hale, Lord Clarke JJSC and Lord
Collins agreeing, Lord Hope DPSC agreeing
at 826 [55]). Some other more modern
examples (which were not referred to by Jackson J in
Park [No 3]
)) include:
Hunters Beach Investments
Pty Ltd v Braams
[2001] NSWSC 577
(2001) 38 ACSR 701
, 712–13 [94]–[95] (Young CJ
(citations omitted);
) 566–7 [47]–[48] (Kunc J)
(citations omitted). The presumption theory has also been referred to in English
Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd v Cradock [No 4]
[1969] 1 WLR 1773
, 1778–9 (Ungoed-Thomas J).
This recently occurred in
[54]–[59] (Derrington J). See also Heydon and Leeming (n
) 514 [21-04], citing
); Loxton and D’Angelo (n
) 144 n 10, citing
68 [54], discussing
) 552–3 (Jessel
JD & KJ Zohs Properties
) 183–4 [72] (Stanley
(2020) 3 QR 409
[18]–[19] (Jackson J).
Rory Derham,
Derham on the Law
(Oxford University Press, 4
664–5 [14.88], citing
Heydon and Leeming (n
) 514 [21-04], citing
See, eg, White (n
) 173 (Cottenham LC).
[1891] UKLawRpCh 118
[1891] 3 Ch 212
, 219, discussing
[1915] 2 Ch 144
Re Peruvian Railway
Construction
(2004) 49 ACSR 531
Otis Elevator
’), quoting
Re Peruvian Railway
Construction
See, eg, Lee Aitken, ‘Recent
Applications of the Rule in Cherry v Boultbee (or Jeffs v
Wood)’ (2010) 84(3)
Australian Law Journal
(Palmer J); Derham,
Derham on the Law of Set-Off
) 615–16 [14.03].
See below n
and accompanying text.
) 669 (Jekyll MR).
See, eg, Derham,
Derham on the
Law of Set-Off
) 10 [2.01],
) 669 (Jekyll MR).
Derham on the Law of
) 616 [14.03].
Hassell v Hawkins
(1859) 4 Drewry 468;
[1859] EngR 356
, 181 (Kindersley V-C)
Heydon, Leeming and Turner (n
) 1016 [32-005].
Joseph Story,
Commentaries on
Equity Jurisprudence: As Administered in England and America
Little & James Brown, 3
ed, 1843) vol 2, 472 [1119], citing
(Jekyll MR).
Sir Samuel Toller and Francis
The Law of Executors and Administrators
, ed Edward D Ingraham
(John Grigg, 3
ed, 1829) 338, citing
The Editors of the Law
Students’ Magazine,
The Principles of Equity Jurisprudence: Embracing
the Concurrent, Exclusive and Auxiliary Jurisdiction of Courts of Equity
(Robert Hastings, 1848) 325, citing
RS Donnison Roper,
A Treatise on
the Law of Legacies
, ed Henry Hopley White
Butterworth and Son, 3
ed, 1828) vol 1, 789–90, discussing
Roper and White (n
William Lowndes,
A Treatise on
the Law of Legacies
(Joseph Butterworth and Son, 1824) 313, citing
) 670 (emphasis added).
) 474–5 [1122].
John Adams and Robert Ralston,
The Doctrine of Equity: A Commentary on the Law as Administered by the Court of
(T & JW Johnson, 8
ed, 1890) 105, citing
Roper and White (n
Edmund Henry Turner Snell and JR
The Principles of Equity: Intended for the Use of Students and the
(Stevens & Haynes, 2
ed, 1872) 428.
) 313. See also Story (n
) 474–5 [1122].
[1693] EngR 28
(1693) 2 Vern 298
(1714) Prec Ch 394;
[1743] EngR 42
(1743) 3 Atk 65
[1735] EngR 9
(1735) 3 P Wms 353
1098 (Talbot LC).
(1721) Prec Ch 580;
[1954] St R Qd 212
(Macrossan CJ), 228 (Philp J). For further examples of 20
cases applying the doctrine as a ‘presumption’, see Heydon, Leeming
and Turner (n
Steiner v Strang
[2014] NSWSC 1250
, [44] (Sackar J);
Ansett Australia Ltd v Travel
Software Solutions Pty Ltd
[2007] VSC 326
(2007) 214 FLR 203
, 224 [96] (Hargrave J),
Otis Elevator
) 536 [33] (Palmer J);
Perpetual Trustees (WA) Ltd v Equus Corp Pty Ltd
(Supreme Court of New
South Wales, Young J, 5 March 1998) 4–5 (‘
Perpetual Trustees
) 173 (Cottenham LC).
Ibid (emphasis added).
[1911] UKLawRpCh 44
[1911] 1 Ch 716
, 721 (Cozens-Hardy
MR, Fletcher Moulton LJ agreeing at 722).
Re Peruvian Railway Construction
) 150 (Sargant J).
(2004) 12 BPR 22755, 22767 [97]
(Sheller JA agreeing at 22755 [1], Bryson JA agreeing at
22755 [2]) (‘
’). See also Austin J’s first
instance judgment in
Gray v Guardian Trust
[2002] NSWSC 1218
) 22767 [91], quoting Rory Derham,
The Law of Set-Off
(Oxford University Press, 3
ed, 2003) 585
[2018] NSWSC 481
(2018) 125 ACSR 355
[36]–[50] (‘
Re Hawden Property Group
’), discussing
Re Hawden Property Group
) 361–2 [37].
Ibid 362 [43].
The Duty To Account:
Development and Principles
(Federation Press, 2016) 69–70
[188]–[191]. See especially at 69–70 [191] n 43, citing
Provost of Edinburgh v The Lord Advocate; Ex parte M’Laren
(1879) LR 4
App Cas 823
, 838–9 (Lord Hatherley) (‘
Lord Provost of
National Commercial Banking Corporation of
Australia Ltd v Batty
[1986] HCA 21
(1986) 160 CLR 251
, 268 (Gibbs CJ).
Spence v Crawford
, 288 (Lord Wright, Lord MacMillan agreeing at 286)
Heydon, Leeming and Turner (n
) 901 [25-065].
[2022] NSWSC 662
) 345 (Kekewich J).
) 69 [189].
Ibid, citing RM Jackson,
History of Quasi-Contract in English Law
(Cambridge University Press, 1936)
36 n 4. See also at 35–6.
See, eg, Sackville (n
Tanwar Enterprises Pty
Ltd v Cauchi
[2003] HCA 57
(2003) 217 CLR 315
, 324 [20] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne
and Heydon JJ) (‘
Tanwar Enterprises
James Edelman, ‘Judicial
Discretion in Australia’ (2000) 19(3)
Australian Bar Review
285, 296–7.
Rohan Havelock, ‘The
Evolution of Equitable “Conscience”’
(2014) 8(2)
Richard Hedlund, ‘Conscience
and Unconscionability in English Equity’ (PhD Thesis, University of York,
February 2016)
Tanwar Enterprises
) 324 [20] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh,
Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ). See generally Joe Campbell, ‘
The Duty To
Account: Development and Principles
by JA Watson’
[2017] SydLawRw 18
(2017) 39(3)
Sydney Law Review
See, eg, Elise Bant and Michael
Bryan, ‘Defences, Bars and Discretionary Factors’ in Elise
Bant and Michael Bryan (eds),
Principles of Proprietary Remedies
(Lawbook, 2013) 185,
201–2 [11.100]; Keith Mason, ‘Deconstructing Constructive Trusts
in Australia’
(2010) 4(2)
Journal of Equity
David Wright, ‘Third Parties
and the Australian Remedial Constructive Trust’
[2014] UWALawRw 2
(2013) 37(2)
of Western Australia Law Review
Muschinski v Dodds
[1985] HCA 78
160 CLR 583
, 623 (Deane J), cited in ibid 54–5.
CMG Equity Investments Pty Ltd v
Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
[2008] FCA 455
(2008) 65 ACSR 650
(Finkelstein J) (‘
CMG Equity Investments
quoted in Wright (n
40–1. See also
Re Clarke; Ex parte the Debtor v S Aston & Son
[1967] 1 Ch 1121
(Cross J for the Court).
Equity Investments
(Finkelstein J), cited in Wright (n
Patrick Stevedores Operations No
2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia
(1998) 195 CLR 1
, 42–3 [66]
(Brennan CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ), cited in Wright (n
(1999) 196 CLR 101
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ)
Ibid 113–14 [10], 125
[49]–[50]. But see Ying Khai Liew, ‘Constructive Trusts and
Discretion in Australia: Taking
[2021] MelbULawRw 6
(2021) 44(3)
University Law Review
discussing ibid.
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
, 44–5 [126]
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ) (‘
Alexander’s Clubs
) 113–14 [10], 125
[49]–[50] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ).
John Alexander’s Clubs
) 44 [126], 46 [129] (French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ). See also at 44–6
[126]–[130].
[1998] HCA 59
(1998) 195 CLR 566
(Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ)
Bathurst City Council
Smith v Jones
[1954] 1 WLR 1089
, 1092–3 (Upjohn J);
CMG Equity Investments
) 657 [24]–[26]
(Finkelstein J).
(1988) 18 NSWLR 420
Hunter BNZ Finance
Ibid 434, quoting George Spencer
The Law of Actionable Misrepresentation: Stated in the Form of a
(Butterworth, 2
ed, 1927) 280 [307].
Hunter BNZ Finance
Redman v Permanent
Trustee Co of New South Wales Ltd
[1916] HCA 47
(1916) 22 CLR 84
(Griffiths CJ and Barton J).
Joseph v Lyons
[1884] UKLawRpKQB 189
(1884) 15 QBD 280
, 286 (Cotton LJ). On one view, the prioritisation of
third-party interests is not a matter of discretion and will apply wherever
interests of third parties are impacted. However, an acceptance of that view
does not detract from the position taken in this
Part — if anything, it
elevates the status of third-party interests.
See above Part II(C).
See generally Wright (n
Stephenson Nominees Pty
Ltd v Official Receiver
(1987) 16 FCR 536
(Gummow J);
Australian Securities Commission v Melbourne Asset Management
Nominees Pty Ltd (rec and mgr apptd)
[1994] FCA 1031
(1994) 49 FCR 334
(Northrop J).
Space Investments Ltd v Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce Trust Co (Bahamas) Ltd
[1986] UKPC 1
[1986] 1 WLR 1072
(Lord Templeman for the Court); Wright (n
Elements of this theory also appear
extent that there is discussion of the fact that the creditors did not take
security: see at 552–3 (Jessel MR).
David M Paciocco, ‘The
Remedial Constructive Trust: A Principled Basis for Priorities over
(1989) 68(2)
Canadian Bar Review
Fitzwood Pty Ltd v
Unique Goal Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2001] FCA 1628
(2001) 188 ALR 566
(Finkelstein J).
See, eg, ibid 593 [94];
Letterstedt v
(1884) 9 App Cas 371
, 385–6 (Lord Blackburn for the Court)
Letterstedt
Miller v Cameron
[1936] HCA 13
(1936) 54 CLR 572
575, 578 (Latham CJ), 579 (Starke J), 580–1 (Dixon J, Evatt J agreeing at
582, McTiernan J agreeing at 582) (‘
Letterstedt
) 387, 389 (Lord Blackburn for the
(Latham CJ), 579 (Starke J), 580 (Dixon J, Evatt J agreeing at 582, McTiernan
J agreeing at 582).
Equity Trust (Jersey)
) 939 [276] (Lord Briggs JSC, Lord Reed
PSC and Lady Rose JSC agreeing).
Ibid 944 [295].
Ibid 948 [311].
See above n
and accompanying text.
Warman International
Ltd v Dwyer
[1995] HCA 18
(1995) 182 CLR 544
, 562 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Dawson and
Gaudron JJ);
Harris v Digital Pulse Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWCA 10
(2003) 56 NSWLR 298
310–11 [48]–[53] (Spigelman J), 371–84 [312]–[336]
(Heydon JA);
Lord Provost of Edinburgh
) 839 (Lord Hatherley);
Chameleon Mining NL [No 2]
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
[529]–[530] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ).
Lord Provost of Edinburgh
) 839 (Lord Hatherley). See
generally Heydon, Leeming and Turner (n
) 190–7 [5-280].
Re Jarvis (deceased); Edge v
[1958] 1 WLR 815
, 820 (Upjohn J).
Heydon, Leeming and Turner (n
) 190–7 [5-280].
Ibid 196 [5-280].
[1989] 1 Ch 32
Berkeley Applegate
’). See also at 50.
[1964] 1 WLR 993
, 1018, affd
, 1021 (Lord Denning MR), 1031 (Pearson LJ), 1031 (Russell LJ). The
approach of Wilberforce J in relation to the allowance for skill
and labour was
also cited with approval in the Privy Council appeal:
Boardman v Phipps
[1966] UKHL 2
[1967] 2 AC 46
, 104 (Lord Cohen), 112 (Lord Hodson).
[1985] 1 QB 428
Re Berkeley Applegate
50 (Edward Nugee QC);
Hagan v Waterhouse
(1991) 34 NSWLR 308
(Kearney J). See also
Heydon, Leeming and Turner (n
195–6 [5-280].
Heydon, Leeming and Turner (n
) 195–6 [5-280].
Brown v Smitt
[1924] HCA 11
(1924) 34 CLR
, 164 (Knox CJ, Gavan Duffy and Starke JJ), 169 (Isaacs and Rich JJ)
Ibid 172 (Isaacs and Rich JJ).
Erlanger v New Sombrero
Phosphate Co
3 App Cas 1218
, 1278–9 (Lord Blackburn)
(1995) 184 CLR 102, 109–11
(Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ)
Ibid 113. See also at
114, quoting
(Lord MacMillan agreeing at 286).
) 288 (Lord MacMillan agreeing at 286),
1278–9 (Lord Blackburn).
) 115 (Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ).
Ryan v Dries
(2002) 10 BPR
19497, 19498 [2] (Sheller JA), 19500 [12] (Giles JA), 19510 [61] (Hodgson
Forgeard v Shanahan
(1994) 35 NSWLR 206
, 223 (Meagher JA, Mahoney JA agreeing
at 219). See generally
Myers v Clark
[2018] NSWSC 1029
[95]–[109] (Ward CJ in Eq).
Squire v Rogers
[1979] FCA 48
, 125 (Deane J, Forster J agreeing at 108, Brennan J agreeing at
D’Angelo, ‘The
Unsecured Creditor’s Perilous Path to a Trust’s Assets’ (n
Bathurst City
) 585 [42] (Gaudron,
McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ); Paciocco (n
See, eg, Rohan Balani,
‘Abandoning the
Trust in Insolvency’
[2021] AdelLawRw 9
(2021) 42(1)
Adelaide Law Review
Trustee Act 1925
Trusts Act 1973
Trustees Act 1962
Trustee Act 1958
[2017] NSWCA 109
, [28] (Ward JA
agreeing at [1], Gleeson JA agreeing at [2]).
[2002] NSWCA 29
(2002) ATPR 41-864
, 44798 [9]
Gatsios Holdings
Ibid 44798 [8], 44799 [17]. See
also at 44802 [47] (Meagher JA).
[2003] VSCA 39
(2003) 7 VR 287
, 306 (Ormiston JA).
See also at 303–5 [44]–[46].
Gatsios Holdings
) 44798 [9].
Although, in the author’s
view, the approach taken by the Victorian Court of Appeal, in
Di Benedetto v Kilton Grange Pty Ltd
(2017) 16 ASTLR 463, is
preferable — the Court held that the inquiry turns on the nature of the
duty with which the trustee
was required to comply or the power they were
exercising: at 479 [64] (Ferguson and McLeish JJA and Cameron AJA).
Perpetual Trustees (WA)
) 7–8 (Young J), the Court
noted that the application of
could be displaced by the
agreement of the parties.
See Richard C Nolan, ‘Some
Particular and Some General Reflections on Trustee Contracts’ in Hans Tjio
The Regulation of Wealth Management
(National University of
Singapore, 2008) 247, 250–1.
See generally D’Angelo,
Transacting with Trusts and Trustees
) 310–12 [7.80]–[7.87].
The situation is complicated where
the right of indemnity relied on is the statutory right. There, a question will
arise as to the
extent to which the statutory right can be modified by the trust
deed. Campbell provides a useful list of cases that set out the
positions in
various states: JC Campbell, ‘Some Aspects of the Civil Liability Arising
from a Breach of Duty by a Superannuation
(2017) 44(1)
Australian Bar Review
, 34–5 n 44 (citations omitted). However,
the issue may be avoided if, as this author suggests may be the case, the clear
rule does not apply to the statutory right of indemnity to begin
CPT Custodian Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of State Revenue (Vic)
[2005] HCA 53
(2005) 224 CLR 98
109–10 [15] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Callinan and Heydon JJ).
David Fox, ‘Definition and
Classification of Trusts’ in John McGhee and Steven Elliott (eds),
Snell’s Equity
(Sweet & Maxwell, 34
ed, 2020) 635,
636–7 [21-004].
Armitage v Nurse
241, 253 (Millett LJ, Hutchison LJ agreeing at 264, Hirst LJ
agreeing at 264).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (373 KB)
PDF format (362 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter