URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Slockee, Thomas --- "Oh, when will they ever learn? a personal perspective on Aboriginal housing issues" [2009] ALRCRefJl 35; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 27
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 27–30 of the original
Oh, when will they ever learn?
A personal perspective on Aboriginal housing issues
By Thomas Slockee*
‘Access to safe and healthy shelter is essential to a person’s
physical, psychological, social and economic well-being
and should be a
fundamental part of national and international action ... An integrated approach
to the provision of environmentally
sound infrastructure in human settlements,
in particular for ... urban and rural poor, is an investment in sustainable
development
that can improve the quality of life, increase productivity, improve
health and reduce the burden of investments in curative medicine
and poverty
alleviation ... As a first step towards the goal of providing adequate shelter
for all, all countries should take immediate
measures to provide shelter to
their homeless poor ... All countries should adopt and/or strengthen national
shelter strategies ...
facilitate access of urban and rural poor to shelter by
adopting and utilizing housing and finance schemes and new innovative mechanisms
adapted to their circumstances ... People should be protected by law against
unfair eviction from their homes or land
and Torres Strait Islander peoples do not have adequate standards of living,
housing and security. Housing (shelter) is
a right—yet most Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples have to endure homelessness and standards of
housing that are
much lower than other Australians. In the area of housing and
anxiety about their future.
People are now using the term ‘affordable housing’. But there is
much more to living than just having affordable housing
and most good housing
managers realise that it’s about looking after people—not just the
bricks and mortar.
Many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who live in what is
referred to as public housing or community housing face extreme
poverty, poor
health, lack of opportunity for employment, family mental illness, family
instability and violence. Most Aboriginal
people I talk to in the course of my
work say they are in a crisis situation because of an inability to access public
or community
sector housing.
Other Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who try to find shelter
as tenants through the private market encounter overwhelming
discrimination and
racism. Yes, there are tenants’ rights. But our people seem to be under
the constant threat that if they
don’t live according to ‘white
fella’ ways or standards, then eviction and homelessness will be their
The fact is: there is ongoing discrimination against Aboriginal people in the
area of housing. There is a dire shortage of housing
for the urban Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islanders population. Mainstream housing is very difficult to
obtain—even through
government housing departments! As one Aboriginal
person said: ‘For an Aboriginal person to get non-Aboriginal housing, like
through the real estate (agent), you don’t get it. You just don’t.
Nobody will house you. It doesn’t matter what
references you
Indicators show that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders social and
economic disadvantage hasn’t improved and in some cases
has worsened, yet
governments pursue a dictatorial, ‘top-down’ approach, which in the
long run is doomed to fail and
leave Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples in a worse position.
I agree with the sentiments expressed by Australians for Native Title and
Reconciliation (ANTaR) in an open letter to the Federal
Indigenous Affairs
Minister, the Hon Jenny Macklin MP, printed in
The Australian
which, in part, reads:
Tangentyere
has rejected the
blackmail that will make housing conditional upon Aboriginal communities signing
leases that will relinquish control
to the government. ... In May 2007, Macklin
criticised the Howard Government’s attempt to impose a 99 year lease on
Tangentyere:
“No other group of Australians would have their property
rights treated this way ... we do not want land tenure reform being
condition of funding for basic services.” We agree that infrastructure and
services for Aboriginal people should not
depend upon the surrender of
fundamental rights.
We recognise the right of town camp residents to self-determination. We also
endorse the Productivity Commission’s recent call
for an end to
‘top-down’ directives from government and for the empowerment of
Aboriginal communities. Closing the gap
will not be achieved in any other
The use of coercive powers established under the Intervention threatens the
existence of one of the most successful Aboriginal organisations
in the country
and sets a dangerous precedent for undermining all Aboriginal community
initiatives. Such discriminatory action would
be unlawful without the suspension
of the Racial Discrimination Act—an action condemned by the Human Rights
Commissioner and
international human rights bodies
In 2001 the
Australian Housing Ministers issued a
Ten Year Statement of New Directions
for Indigenous Housing
with a vision for better Indigenous housing stating
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people throughout Australia will
• access to affordable and appropriate housing which
contributes to their health and well being; and
• access to housing which is safe, well designed and appropriately
maintained.
There will be a vigorous and sustainable Indigenous community housing sector,
operating in partnership with the Commonwealth and State,
Territory and Local
Governments.
Indigenous housing policies and programs will be developed and administered
in consultation and cooperation with Indigenous communities
and with respect for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
All this is now in the bin as a new reform agenda is rolled out. Under the
guise of ‘reform’, Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander housing is
being condemned, attacked and even dismantled.
A brief history
I have been part of the development of Aboriginal community housing for the
past 25 years. I have seen housing programs offered through
the Commonwealth
Department of Aboriginal Affairs and the Aboriginal Development Commission, then
through the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC) and then
the NSW Aboriginal Housing Office.
It all began in the mid 1970s with the Commonwealth Department of Aboriginal
Affairs, which funded Aboriginal community organisations
for land and housing.
Self-determination was the principle and self-management was the approach. This
was before the formation of
the Land Councils in NSW.
Aboriginal community organisations were formed under the policy of
self-determination to address the appalling conditions of our people
employment, training, education, health and other social issues—including
housing. The policy was one of self-determination
and community control.
There was no plan, no strategy, no policy on the proliferation and the
locations of these new Aboriginal community organisations.
In about 1980, the Aboriginal Development Commission (ADC) implemented a
strategy that required Aboriginal housing organisations to
increase their rents
to cover all housing related costs and administration costs. The grant for
administration was to be phased out
over a period of five years. Housing
management was the sole responsibility of the Aboriginal community
organisations. Control of
and responsibility of the Aboriginal Housing Company
and its homes was completely in the hands of the people themselves. That is,
company looked after rent collections, repairs and maintenance and payment of
local rates and other charges (for example, sewerage).
No effective training and
support was put in place. It was a ‘build and abandon’ approach.
The ADC was abolished and ATSIC was created with Regional Councils making
decisions for housing grants. Many community organisations—especially
those on ‘Reserves’ or ‘Missions’—were confused
for administering the funds.
There were also challenging community conflicts during this period.
The intentions and goals were optimistic. What Aboriginal people wanted was
the opportunity to do something ourselves to address the
atrocious conditions
our people were living in. Aboriginal people were just trying to get our people
decent housing and create situations
where we could get better education,
training, employment and health care.
In NSW, the state government also had a responsibility and was funded by the
Commonwealth to address the deplorable situation in Aboriginal
housing. The main
response was the Houses for Aboriginals (HFA) program, which operated mainly in
urban and large regional centres.
HFA houses were owned and managed by the
Housing Commission. There was a change in policy (about 1990) and the NSW
government began
funding housing for the Aboriginal community through the
Housing Aboriginal Community Program (HACP).
Even though the HACP was designed as a guideline for local Aboriginal
community organisations to put in place policies that would
bring about
effective and efficient housing management practices, this never really
happened. Housing needs were not being addressed
by the mainstream and many of
our people had dropped out and were living rough or in overcrowded conditions.
Many of our people in
charge of the Aboriginal community organisations
(including Local Aboriginal Land Councils) just used local practices and customs
(for example, giving preference to family members) in allocations and did not
really apply strong rental settings and collection
and arrears management.
Even before the HACP, many efforts have been given to train and support
Aboriginal Community Organisations with Aboriginal Housing.
There was limited
success and effective property and tenancy management is still a major
The NSW Aboriginal Housing Office (AHO) was created in 1998 and inherited a
system that was chronically ill. Other states had created
Aboriginal housing
structures within mainstream departments—most have since been abolished
and swallowed up by mainstream housing
initiatives. The AHO, with its separate
legislation, is also under threat as mainstream forces critically assess and
condemn Aboriginal
community housing providers.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders want reform. Non-Aboriginal managers
must realise that reform in our sector is a long, hard
process that requires
constant and sensitive engagement with our diverse communities and organisations
and a willingness and capacity
on behalf of bureaucrats representing the
government to negotiate and implement locally appropriate strategies after
proper consultation.
This situation of having a multitude of small Aboriginal housing
providers—including multiple providers in many small towns—is
making of non-Aboriginal policy makers, who in the past operated in a largely
uncoordinated way and with apparently no regard
for the long-term sustainability
of the Aboriginal housing sector. As a result, many of the houses that
Aboriginal housing providers
now have responsibility for were built to an
inappropriate standard and there is a significant backlog of repairs and
maintenance.
The NSW AHO inherited this problem and has not been funded
adequately to address all the issues.
The AHO engaged in a major sector strengthening and reform strategy in 2008
and I believed that this strategy would address the problem
of having too many
small and unsustainable Aboriginal housing providers and bring a provider
accreditation system into operation.
I and others, believed in and advocated for the Aboriginal Housing sector
reform to be that of a strategy to establish a small number
of larger scale,
specialised regional housing management services, building on the positive
demonstrations under the South East Area
Regional Management Service (SEARMS)
and Murdi Paaki Regional Housing Company (MPRHC), from which valuable lessons
have been learned.
The governments have required a different strategy, which has
been developed without engagement with Aboriginal leadership and the
It will be very challenging to bring about effective reform. When will the white
fella ever learn!
Aboriginal leadership
The Murdi Paaki region is a good example of Aboriginal people taking
leadership in Aboriginal housing. The ATSIC Murdi Paaki Regional
Council took
the initiative and did a comprehensive study of Aboriginal Community Housing
Organisations in its area. It was obvious
that small Aboriginal housing
organisations—which were a result of ‘white fella’
policies—were not sustainable
and that major reform was necessary. The
MPRHC was established to take over the ownership or management of Aboriginal
Community Housing
stock where local housing organisations had either fallen into
liquidation or were struggling with the management of their assets.
Murdi Paaki
Housing was formed in 1997 and set about rescuing the assets of many small
housing organisations in towns around outback
New South Wales. The Murdi Paaki
region covers almost one third of NSW and includes some of the most remote and
isolated communities
in the state. The MPRHC has overcome challenges and today
is providing services for the betterment of Aboriginal communities.
SEARMS is also another example of Aboriginal leadership taking the initiative
to reform. Established in 2003, SEARMS is a co-operative
that consists of six
Aboriginal housing providers, servicing the Aboriginal communities NSW south
coast Management Model. SEARMS
was created as a pilot Regional (communities
included Batemans Bay, Ulladulla Mogo and Moruya). The main goal was to improve
and tenancy management of the community-owned rental properties, and
bring about better outcomes in management and delivery of housing.
challenge was to ensure that local housing organisations were able to face the
challenges ahead with the escalating costs of
maintaining existing stock and
providing new homes in the communities into the future. By a negotiated
agreement during the establishment
phase, SEARMS assumed many of the policy and
management functions while leaving communities in control of other aspects of
making. Collaboration, participation and accountability to communities
and tenants are central features of the model.
I remain optimistic that the structures created through the leadership of
Aboriginal and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
will remain and
that the NSW Government will allow Aboriginal people to develop the strategies;
and allow Aboriginal people to plan
and implement Aboriginal housing programs
that will make the difference and ‘close the gap’—now and into
the future.
Another part of me is cynical as I observe what’s happening in
the Northern Territory and other states. I and, I believe, other
leaders are angry, frustrated and disheartened while we wait patiently (in hope)
for the decision makers to consult and
listen to the collective knowledge and
advise of Aboriginal people who have been working tirelessly at the community
and bureaucratic
levels for many years, trying to bring about reforms.
I believe that may be at the mercy of the ‘white fella’ again, as
a ‘mission manager’ attitude seems to be
the current way of dealing
with Aboriginal issues.
The road ahead is likely to be a rough one as non- Aboriginal policy makers
dominate and the rights of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples are
denied. The great white and black hope is to close the gap but if Aboriginal
people are not involved, then the
gap will not close and the desperate plight of
Aboriginal people will worsen. Then it may be known as ‘the great white
Maybe they could add a verse to the song:
Where has all the Aboriginals gone, long time passing?
Where has all the Aboriginals gone, long time ago?
Where has all the housing gone? O they are homeless everyone.
Oh, when will they ever learn?
Oh, when will they ever learn?
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples’ quality of life—our physical, psychological,
social and economic well-being—is
Please listen to us: engage, talk and listen. Work with us, so that together
we can make a difference and have a better Australia.
* Thomas Slockee is the Chair of the NSW Aboriginal Housing Office. He
has been referred to as a dynamic and visionary community leader,
at the front
line in bringing about new management systems and structures for Aboriginal
Housing in NSW. He was the first Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander person
ever appointed to the position of Chairman of the Southern Area Health Service
Board. He was also
the first and only Aboriginal person elected to the
Eurobodalla Shire Council. Tom was the Inaugural Chair of the Board of the
Housing Office in NSW. He was also Board Director for Aboriginal
Hostels Ltd in 1998–2000. This article expresses his personal
Agenda 21: the United Nations Plan of
Action from Rio, Chapter 7: Promoting Sustainable Human Settlement
Development.
Tangentyere Council is the major service
delivery agency for the 18 Housing Associations known as ‘town
camps’ in Alice
Springs. Tangentyere Council began operating in the early
1970s and was first incorporated in 1979.
Australians for Native Title and
Reconciliation, ‘Open Letter to the Hon Jenny Macklin MP’,
, 30 July 2009.
Australian Housing Ministers’ Ten
Year Statement of New Directions for Indigenous Housing,
Building a Better
Future: Indigenous Housing to 2010
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (213 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter