URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mahon, Claire --- "Playing Fair with Housing Rights During Mega-events" [2007] HRightsDef 26; (2007) 16(3) Human Rights Defender 20
Belated Justice for the Survivors of the Khmer Rouge regime?
Historical background
The Nature of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC)
Continuing Challenges for the ECCC
An assessment of the tribunal
Justice for the Survivors of the Khmer
Rouge regime?
Brigit Morris
It was the most unlikely of disguises. A former torturer, mass murderer
and Khmer Rouge heavy posing as a caring humanitarian worker
at a Thai refugee
camp. Wearing a worn UNICEF t-shirt, the former commander of the Khmer
Rouge’s notorious Tuol Sleng or S-21
prison looked shocked as his true
identity was finally revealed to authorities last year.
For over 30 years, since the dark days of the Khmer Rouge regime from 1975 to
1979, Comrade Duch had escaped his past. Duch, or Kang
Kek Leu as he his
properly known, was the man responsible for the medieval torture and death of
17,000 political prisoners at Tuol
Sleng prison in the heart of Phnom Penh. Like
many of the former regime’s leaders, Duch had escaped justice until last
when he was recognised at a refugee camp on the Thai-Cambodian border. His
arrest re-ignited the debate (and sense of urgency) concerning
the formation of
tribunals to bring what remains of the Khmer Rouge to justice. The debate led to
Kang Kek Leu becoming the first
man to be charged for crimes against humanity,
torture, homicide, as well as arbitrary arrest and detention by the newly formed
Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC). The ECCC represents an
attempt by the Cambodian Government and the international community
truth and justice from the senior leaders of the brutal Khmer Rouge
There is hope that by adopting a judicial forum, in contrast
to other informal truth and reconciliation commissions, the ECCC will
the notion of a cohesive political community in Cambodia, affirming governmental
accountability and the rule of law.
However, with the tribunals set
to begin in early 2008, debate is flaring as to the effectiveness and relevance
of a tribunal to
prosecute crimes committed more than 35 years ago.
Historical background
Drawing on the Maoist agrarian model, Khmer Rouge leaders Pol Pot, Ieng Sary
and Ta Mok led the country through four years of reformation.
The social and
economic foundations of society - religion, the family unit, marriage, formal
education and currency - were abolished.
Vulnerable minorities groups including
Buddhist monks, Thai and Vietnamese Cambodians, as well as educated elites, were
persecuted.
In all, ‘Democratic Kampuchea’ took the lives of
1.7 million people in the infamous ‘Killing Fields’; mass graves
were dug in the countryside to dispose of the dead. This
period ended in 1979
with the occupation of Vietnamese forces until Cambodian independence in
At the heart of debates concerning the tribunal’s credibility is the
simple question: why has it taken this long? The answer
is equally simple:
politics. For decades after their demise, the Khmer Rouge leadership were
propped up by overt support from the
Chinese Government, and more covert support
from the Thai Government, which provided sanctuary for senior Khmer Rouge
officials until
the late 1990s. More damning was the unofficial support the
Khmer Rouge received from the United States. Indeed the Khmer Rouge maintained
their seat in the UN’s General Assembly with the backing of these
supporters, until 1989.
Combative Cold War politics, coupled with Vietnam War shame, provided the US
with an excuse to delegitimise the Vietnamese leadership
of Cambodia, thereby
tacitly supporting the Khmer Rouge’s attempts to reclaim power. Further,
close US-Thai relations based
on shared intelligence and joint-military
operations slowed the process of justice and reconciliation necessary for
Cambodia to recover
from the trauma of civil war and genocide.
The era of Khmer Rouge legitimation ended in 1990. The UN Human Rights
Sub-Commission officially recognised and condemned the crime
of genocide
committed against the Cambodian people. Four years later, in 1994, the Cambodian
National Assembly passed a law labelling
the former leaders
‘outlaws’. In the same year the US Congress passed the
Genocide Justice Act
22 USC 2656
, prohibiting the US Government from
cooperating with the Khmer Rouge.
These belated acts paved the way
for the end of impunity. However it is striking to note that it was only after
the Khmer Rouge
no longer possessed any political or military power that the
international community finally took action.
The Nature of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Courts of Cambodia (ECCC)
After 30 years of inaction, the Cambodian National Assembly ratified a
cooperation agreement with the UN in October 2004. This agreement
established
Law on the Establishment of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia for the Prosecution of Crimes Committed during the
Period of Democratic
The ECCC will at long last provide a judicial forum
to try the former leaders for crimes against humanity, genocide, persecution,
homicide and torture.
The court will be structured in three tiers: a Trial Chamber; an Appeals
Court; and a Supreme Court. At every step there will be a
majority of Cambodian
judges, aided by several international judges. This decision reflects a careful
compromise between the Cambodian
Government, keen to assert its judicial
sovereignty over the proceedings, and the UN, keen to preserve the rule of law
in a fledgling
democracy. Also of importance in the negotiations establishing
the ECCC was the question of the tribunal’s location
– set to be held in the Cambodian capital Phnom Penh – in order
to preserve a sense of geographic relevancy, as well as
autonomy, for
Cambodians. This decision will hopefully provide the population with a sense
that they ‘own’ the outcome
of the tribunal.
These legal arrangements evolved during the mid-1990s, a time of enthusiasm
in the development of international law and justice. The
background for this
enthusiasm was the formation in 1993 of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) in 1994. Later, the adoption of the
Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court
in 1998, established the International Criminal Court
The ad-hoc tribunals of Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia
represent a legalistic approach to the recovery of justice. On the other
the 1990s also saw the creation of several truth and reconciliation commissions
in post-conflict situations, whose aim was
grounded in cathartic truth telling.
The paradigm example is South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.
The ECCC is an effort to consolidate these two
approaches to justice and reconciliation.
Continuing Challenges for the ECCC
In its continuing evolution, the ECCC faces innumerable challenges. The first
is the daunting process of consolidating existing archival
information on the
Khmer Rouge regime. This duty has fallen to Yale University’s
‘Cambodian Genocide Program’ (CGP),
which lodged a successful tender
to research atrocities of the Khmer Rouge on behalf of the Cambodian
Government.
However, due to the persecution of Cambodia’s
intellectuals during the 1970s, few local historians remained to develop
first-hand records of the period. Many files were also destroyed
either deliberately, or through carelessness by the Khmer Rouge.
The second challenge is the task of consolidating international law into
domestic Cambodian legislation. Since the first drafting
of the tribunal’s
law in 2000, icy diplomatic relations overshadowed this process. Concerns have
been raised by international
actors such as the non-governmental organisation,
Human Rights Watch, as to Cambodia’s capacity to hold fair trials. After
years of tense negotiation, the Cambodian Government agreed to a ‘mixed
law’ agenda. The nature of the criminal acts
committed by the Khmer Rouge
incorporate crimes prohibited under international human rights and humanitarian
law: crimes against
humanity, genocide, war crimes, forced labour, torture and
crimes against internationally protected persons. Those aspects of Cambodian
that apply include homicide, torture, rape, physical assault, arbitrary arrest
and detention, attacks on religion and abuses
of government authority. It has
been an arduous task to consolidate relevant elements of the 1948
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property during Armed
and the 1961
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
into domestic legislation.
A further concern is the issue of the identity of those called to trial. Many
of the regime’s former leaders have died, including
the leader of the
movement, Brother Number One, or Pol Pot. The prosecution made the sensible
decision to isolate convictions to
the senior leaders of the regime. Currently
awaiting trial are Nuon Chea or Brother Number Two, Kheiu Sampan, the former
Prime Minister,
Ieng Sary, the former Deputy-Prime Minister, and Ta Mok, who
held various senior positions in the Central Committee. Still, many
are outraged
at the prospect of continued impunity for many lower-ranking Khmer Rouge
recruits who were perhaps more directly responsible
for the atrocious crimes of
the Khmer Rouge. The ICTY faced similar concerns as only 13 senior military
leaders were prosecuted at
In this case the prosecution
argued that restricting liability to senior leaders of the Serbian Government
and military was more
conducive to building a sense of unity and reconciliation
amongst the embattled and war-weary populations of Serbia and Bosnia.
Compounding these debates are calls from one opposition party, the Sam Rainsy
Party, to condemn the complicity of Prince Sihanouk,
the nation’s former
leader, with the Khmer Rouge regime. Sihanouk’s son, Prince Ranariddh, is
the current opposition
leader, heading Cambodia’s Funcinpec Party. For
others, international actors such as US military leaders have their part to
answer in the tribunal. Covert US military actions in Cambodia during the
Vietnam War, including bombing campaigns on the Cambodian-Vietnamese
border from
1969-1973, cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians. These
atrocities, compounded by the US-backed coup
of Lon Nol against then Prime
Minister Prince Sihanouk in 1970, galvanised moderate support for the Khmer
Rouge. To avoid these legitimate
debates, the tribunal has been given temporal
An assessment of the tribunal
There is no doubt that the people of Cambodia deserve and expect justice.
Forums such as the ECCC serve to reflect upon, deter and
condemn actions of
gross human rights violations. Judicial proceedings can never, nor do they
strive to, restore the lives of lost
ones or erase memories. While some may
worry that the tribunal will open old wounds while failing to heal them, their
ultimate purpose
is to expose the truth and end cultures of impunity. In the
same way, commentary on the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission
found that the process of truth telling through evidentiary discovery
contributed to a sense of national belonging and cohesion.
reconciliation of this kind is often contrasted with retributive legal justice.
The judicial framework of the ECCC provides
a more formal forum for this
process, contributing to the rule of law in a country still struggling with
notions of democratic governance.
In this sense the formation of the ECCC
indicates an appreciation of the multi-dimensional concept of
‘nation-building’,
which includes the need to rebuild faith in state
authority and governance structures after periods of conflict.
For now at least, when the prosecution finally takes the stand in downtown
Phnom Penh early in 2008, the views of the critics who
dismissed the tribunal as
a pipedream will have been put to rest. As Comrade Duch replaces his UNICEF
t-shirt for prison robes, the
next generation of Cambodians will hopefully be
able to move on from their traumatic collective past to deal with the future
and social development of their country.
Brigit Morris is a candidate for the Bachelor of Laws/Bachelor of
Economics and Social Sciences at the University of Sydney. She recently
at the Geneva-based human rights NGO,
International Service for Human
Tom Fawthrop and Helen Jarvis,
Getting Away with Genocide: Elusive
and the Khmer Rouge Tribunal
Andrew Schaap, ‘Assuming Responsibility in the Hope of
reconciliation’ (2004) 3(1)
Hope of Reconciliation
Susan Cook, ‘Prosecuting Genocide in Cambodia: The Winding Path
Crimes of War Project
Magazine: The Tribunals
(2001) 3 <http://www.
crimesofwar.org/tribun-mag/cambodia_print.html> at 16 November 2007.
Fawthrop and Jarvis, above n 1, 110.
Donna Arzt, ‘Views on the Ground: The Local Perception of
International Criminal Tribunals in the Former Yugoslavia and Sierra
Leone’ (2006) 603
Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science
Robert Kwame Ameh, ‘Uncovering Truth: Ghana’s National
Reconciliation Commission Excavation of Past Human Rights Abuses’
Contemporar
Justice Review
Another example is the Special Court for Sierra Leone, established in 2002.
See Arzt, above n 6, 65.
Yale University,
The Cambodian Genocide Program
http://www.yale.edu/cgp/
at 16 November 2007.
Opened for signature 9 December
1948, 78 UNTS 277
(entered into force 12
January 1951).
Opened for signature 14 May
1954, 249 UNTS 240
(entered into force 7
August 1956).
Opened for signature 18 April
1961, 500 UNTS 95
(entered into force 24
April 1964).
Fawthrop and Jarvis, above n 1, 4.
Arzt, above n 6, 67.
Richard Ashby Wilson, ‘Anthropological Studies of National
Reconciliation Processes’ (2003) 3
Anthropological Theory
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.4 KB)
PDF format (507 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter