URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2019/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kwan, Martin --- "When Is An Electoral Expenditure Cap Justified? A Critique Of Unions Nsw V New South Wales" [2019] UNSWLawJlF 6; (2019) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 6
I INTRODUCTION
II RELEVANT BACKGROUND
A The Change in the Amount of Cap
B The Dispute on the Implied Freedom of Political Communication
III THE REASONING OF THE JUDGES
A A Hypothetical Example
B The Plurality
1 Evaluating the Plurality’s Reasoning: The Uncertainties
D Gageler J
F Edelman J
IV IMPLICATIONS AND TAKEWAYS
A Uncertainty and Implications for the Legislature
B Notable Precedential Value
1 Alternative Formulation of the Necessity Test
2 The Relationship between the Necessity Test and the Adequacy of Balance Test
V THE CAUSE OF THE UNCERTAINTY
VI CONCLUSION
WHEN IS AN ELECTORAL EXPENDITURE CAP JUSTIFIED? A CRITIQUE
UNIONS NSW V NEW SOUTH WALES
MARTIN KWAN
In the High Court decision of Unions NSW v New South Wales, the main issue
was whether the expenditure cap of $500,000 imposed on
third-party campaigners
pursuant to
section 29(10)
Electoral Funding Act 2018
(NSW) was valid. It
was held to be invalid because it impermissibly infringed the implied freedom of
political communication. This
commentary evaluates the different reasoning taken
by the members of the Court. By suggesting a hypothetical example to test the
reasoning of the judges, it is submitted that there remains some uncertainty
regarding when an expenditure cap is justified. In terms
of its precedential
value, it will be argued that the plurality’s approach demonstrates that
the necessity stage of the structured
proportionality analysis is not only a
substantive test (ie, focusing on and evaluating the measure itself), but it can
procedural test to determine whether Parliament has expressly
justified the necessity (ie, evaluating the steps taken to justify
the measure).
Further, it is argued that the necessity stage may be flexibly reframable as
asking whether a limit is ‘minimally
impairing’, depending on the
I INTRODUCTION
In the High Court decision of
Unions NSW v New South Wales
the main issue was
whether the expenditure cap of $500,000 imposed on third-party campaigners
pursuant to
section 29(10)
Electoral Funding Act 2018
’) was valid. It was held to be invalid because it
impermissibly infringed the implied freedom of political communication.
This commentary evaluates the different reasoning taken by the members of the
Court and the precedential value of the case. By suggesting
a hypothetical
example (see
Part III(A)
below) to test the reasoning of the judges, it is
submitted that there remains some uncertainty regarding when an expenditure cap
is justified, particularly because the judgement of Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ
(‘the plurality’) did not explore the
‘adequacy of
balance’ stage of the test.
This case is important in two ways. First, and in terms of its practical
implications, it provides some insights on how the legislature
can justify an
electoral cap (though there is still some uncertainty). Second, and in terms of
its precedential value, it builds
on the three question test developed by
McCloy v New South Wales
It will be argued that the plurality’s approach demonstrates that the
necessity test of the structured proportionality analysis
is not only a
substantive
test (ie, focusing on and evaluating the measure itself), but
it may also have a
aspect to determine whether Parliament has
expressly justified the necessity (ie, evaluating the steps taken to justify the
Further, it is suggested that the necessity stage may be flexibly
reframable as asking whether a limit is ‘minimally impairing’,
depending on the situation.
II RELEVANT BACKGROUND
A The Change in the Amount of Cap
Section 29(10)
imposes a cap on electoral expenditure of
$500,000 on third-party campaigners. By contrast, the cap for (1) political
party endorsing
candidates for the Legislative Council and candidates in up to
10 electoral districts for the Legislative Assembly, and (2) an independent
group of candidates for the Legislative Council is $1,288,500 under
and (5) of the
respectively.
Previously, the cap
for (1) third-party campaigners, (2) political party endorsing candidates for
the Legislative Council and candidates
in up to 10 electoral districts for the
Legislative Assembly, and (3) an independent group of candidates was $1,050,000
now repealed
Election Funding, Expenditure and Disclosures Act
The cap for third-party campaigners was reduced for the purpose of preventing
third-party campaigners from
drowning out
parties and
candidates,
whereas the cap for
political parties was increased to account for
The gap between the caps
imposed on third-party campaigners and political parties has been justified on
the grounds that third-party
campaigners are usually concerned with only a few
single political issues whereas political parties, aiming to form a government,
have to address all issues.
The present cap of $500,000 was decided based on a recommendation made by an
independent Expert Panel (appointed by the New South
Wales Government) in a 2014
Report (‘Expert Panel
The figure of
$500,000 was calculated by adding $100,000 to the highest amount spent by a
single third-party campaigner preceding
Importantly, the
Expert Panel recommended that the level of third-party campaigner caps be
reviewed after the 2015
Further, in a 2016
Report by the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters
(‘JSCEM’), it was recommended that Parliament
consider whether the
reduced cap was sufficient for third-party campaigners to reasonably present
their case.
However, the
recommended reviews were not conducted, and the $500,000 figure was directly
adopted by Parliament without accounting
for, firstly, the level of third-party
expenditure for the 2015 election and, secondly, the rate of inflation since
2011. Ultimately,
there was no consideration of whether a third-party campaigner
could ‘reasonably present its case’ with an expenditure
B The Dispute on the Implied Freedom of Political
Communication
The cap was held to constitute a direct burden on political
communication
‘directly affects the ability of third-party campaigners to engage in
political communication’.
Specifically, ‘[it] effects a restriction on third-party
campaigners’ “electoral expenditure”, thereby limiting
funds that a third-party campaigner may permissibly spend on goods and services
such as advertisements, production and distribution
of election material,
internet, telecommunications and postage, and
It should be clarified that the dispute between the parties was not about the
existence of the cap, or the fact that there was a difference
between the limits
imposed by the various caps.
the view of the plurality, the dispute concerned whether the halving of the cap
on third-party campaigners’ electoral expenditure
was necessary and
therefore whether the burden on the implied freedom could be
III THE REASONING OF THE JUDGES
There were five different judgements: (1) Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ, (2)
Gageler J, (3) Nettle J, (4) Gordon J, and (5) Edelman
J. While all of the
judgements held that the cap was invalid, their reasoning differed.
In determining whether the cap constitutes an impermissible burden on the
implied freedom, all judges applied the three question test
derived from
1. Does the law effectively burden freedom of political communication?
2. Is the purpose of the law legitimate, in the sense that it is compatible
with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed
government?
3. Is the law reasonably appropriate and adapted to advance that purpose in a
manner compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally
prescribed system
of government?
All of the judges, except for Edelman J, held that the purpose of the
legislation – to prevent ‘drowning out’ –
legitimate. However, as in
, all of the judges interpreted and
applied the same test differently, especially the third question. Because of
this, the guidance
provided by each judgement is different, and there remains
some uncertainty regarding when a cap is justified. This uncertainty is
exemplified in the hypothetical example proposed below.
A A Hypothetical Example
To illustrate this uncertainty, it is helpful to first raise a hypothetical
example which involves the dilemma of not having a sufficient
cap, but the
insufficiency is required to prevent drowning out. This example is used to
illustrate how the Court’s reasoning
can be applied to resolve such
problems. Assume the following where all figures are strongly supported by
empirical evidence and
reviews have been duly conducted by Parliament.
To prevent the drowning out of a political party, there needs to be a gap of
at least $X (eg, $400,000) between the cap for a political
party and the cap for
a third-party campaigner. A reasonably sufficient amount for a third-party
campaigner to present its case would
require $Y (eg, $800,000). There will be a
dilemma if a sufficient cap for a political party is set at $Z (eg, $1,000,000),
the gap of $X is not maintained. The present concern is how the
Parliament can justify its cap in a sense acceptable to the courts.
Can Parliament set the cap for a third-party as an amount which is smaller
than $Y (eg, $500,000), so drowning out is prevented but
is insufficient? If
Parliament is forced to set the cap to be sufficient at $Y (ie, $800,000), then
the purpose of prevention of
drowning out cannot be achieved
cap for a political party is increased to be at least $X + $Y (ie, $400,000 +
$800,000 = $1,200,000) so the $X (ie, $400,000)
gap is maintained. The
hypothetical problem would be made more challenging where the cap is simply
insufficient by a relatively small
amount like $10,000–$50,000.
The hypothetical problem may occur in reality where the government can only
feasibly achieve the aim of preventing drowning out at
the expense of not having
a sufficient cap. In other words, this dilemma is about the inability to achieve
at the same time
. To answer this question, the reasoning of the
judges must be studied carefully.
B The Plurality
Although the plurality did not expressly quote the three question test as
stated above, they considered all of its questions. Their
Honours assumed that
the purpose of the legislation to prevent ‘drowning out’ was
legitimate.
Of relevance is the
plurality’s analysis of the third question. In
plurality applied a three-staged structured proportionality analysis which
considered the third question by reference to
(1) suitability, (2) necessity,
and (3) adequacy of balance. In the present case, the main issue for the
plurality was (2): the
of the reduction. If the impugned
provision which effectively burdened the implied freedom was not necessary, it
would be invalid.
For clarity,
the three ‘questions’ here refer to the overall test, whereas the
three ‘stages’ refer to the
structured proportionality analysis
applied to the third question of the overall test.
To be necessary, the plurality held that the burden must be
‘justified’. The plurality noted that this is contrary to
practice as Parliament does not generally need to provide evidence to prove the
basis for the legislation it
The plurality then held that there was no basis for a halving of the cap
previously allowed for third-party campaigners. This was
partly because the
Expert Panel Report’s recommendation that the figure be checked against
the expenditure for the 2015 election
had not been done and, contrary to the
recommendation made by the JSCEM in 2016, no enquiry as to what is in fact
necessary to enable
third-party campaigners reasonably to communicate their
messages appears to have been
undertaken.
Therefore, the
burden was not justified as necessary.
1 Evaluating the Plurality’s Reasoning: The
Uncertainties
Was the plurality’s reasoning based on a mere
review, or a
substantive
failure to have a sufficient
Logically, the plurality
may have intended both. Yet, the actual reasoning of the plurality suggests
otherwise. This is because,
had the plurality meant the latter, they could have
simply invalidated the cap by asking whether the cap was sufficient (eg, by
for empirical evidence), rather than considering what the Parliament had
or had not procedurally considered.
Reversely, if the cap was sufficient, but the Parliament had failed to review
its sufficiency, would it mean that the cap was still
unjustified? These
uncertainties on how a cap is to be justified demonstrates that the focus of the
necessity test is not entirely
Nettle J’s analysis lends support to the view that a proper
justification is procedural, because his Honour’s reasoning
consider whether the cap was sufficient. Rather, Nettle J focused on the fact
that Parliament did not clearly and convincingly
demonstrate why the reduction
was necessary and not excessive.
In requiring a ‘demonstration’, Nettle J was similarly concerned
aspect of justification. Only Gageler J and Gordon
J’s reasoning required sufficiency (excluding Edelman J who stopped at the
purpose stage).
The third stage of the structured proportionality test, the adequacy of
balance, was not explored by the plurality. If the necessity
stage only entails
a procedural aspect on the facts, an insufficient cap may have been valid so
long as it also passed the adequacy
stage. The adequacy of balance stage
concerns whether a limit is ‘manifestly excessive by comparison to the
demands of legitimate
For example, it
may be argued that unless the cap is grossly insufficient, it might be possible
to pass the third stage (see further
analysis regarding the relationship between
the adequacy and necessity stages in
Part IV(B)(2)
below). This may occur where
the Court thinks highly of the benefits and importance of the
(eg, one of the benefits
has been identified as maintaining a level-playing
In any event, it is not
possible to derive a conclusion with certainty regarding how the Court would
decide under the adequacy stage,
particularly because the adequacy test is a
‘value judgment’ which has been criticised for its lack of
This lack of judicial
guidance on how balancing will be conducted adds to the uncertainty regarding
when a cap is justified.
Applying the plurality’s approach to the hypothetical problem above,
the goal of preventing drowning out
(without certainty) be able to
take precedence over (minor) insufficiency (depending on the third stage of the
structured proportionality
Despite holding the cap to be invalid, Nettle J’s approach appears more
supportive of the legislative goal of preventing drowning
out. First,
the absence
of evidence that the cap was sufficient for third-party
campaigners,
Nettle J was of the
view that it ‘is
conceivable
that the new cap and its relativities
with the caps imposed on parties and candidates is within the
According to
Nettle J, a political level playing field is comprised of an acceptable range of
differences between the cap for political
parties and third-party campaigners,
and Parliament can make selections within the range. In this way, Nettle J would
seem to allow
the goal to be achieved even where the cap is insufficient. This
is because Nettle J’s focus is on whether the cap is within
for ensuring level playing field
, rather than on
whether the cap is sufficient per se.
Nettle J held the cap to be invalid because Parliament did not consider
whether a cut of as much as 50 per cent was
In other words, Nettle
J was concerned with the failure to gather evidence to establish ‘the
appropriate relativity’.
It was not about sufficiency.
Applying Nettle J’s approach to the hypothetical problem above, the
goal of preventing drowning out
take precedence over
(minor) insufficiency (on the assumption that the level playing field is not
disrupted and hence within the
D Gageler J
, Gageler J did not deem the plurality’s three-staged
proportionality analysis to be suitable in considering the third question
Similarly, in this case,
Gageler J did not apply the three-staged test and instead solely relied on the
concept of ‘reasonably
appropriate’ (ie, the notion used in the
third question itself).
Gageler J did not think it necessary to consider whether third-party
campaigners were marginalised whilst the political parties were
privileged by
having a reduction in the cap of the
Rather, a cap is
justified by ensuring that the ‘amount is reasonably
appropriate’.
To be ‘reasonably appropriate’, a cap must be
to allow a third-party campaigner to be reasonably able
to present its case to
Thus, Gageler
J’s simple analysis shows that his Honour’s focus is solely on the
sufficiency of the cap itself (a question
of fact), rather than on whether the
Parliament has taken steps to ensure the cap is sufficient (a procedural
question). This is
further evidenced by the fact that Gageler J was the only
judge who expressly considered whether the cap was ‘self-evident’
has ‘been shown’ to be
sufficient.
Applying Gageler J’s approach to the hypothetical problem above, the
goal of preventing drowning out
take precedence over any
insufficiency. It must be sufficient.
Gordon J would require there to be ‘sufficient evidence that a
third-party campaigner could reasonably present its case with
an expenditure cap
of $500,000’.
sufficiency would be a prerequisite to justify a cap. However, Gordon J’s
approach is not identical to Gageler J or the
plurality’s approach.
Similar to the plurality’s approach, Gordon J’s criteria for
justification was focused on the actions taken by Parliament
procedurally to
justify a cap. Thus, Gordon J was not examining whether the cap was sufficient
(ie, a question of fact against the
cap itself), but instead required Parliament
to ensure that the cap was sufficient using evidence (ie, a question of whether
Parliament has procedurally done something). By contrast, Gageler J’s
approach simply asks whether the cap is sufficient.
Applying Gordon J’s approach to the hypothetical problem above, the
goal of preventing drowning out
take precedence over
insufficiency.
F Edelman J
Edelman J was the only judge who considered the purpose of the legislation to
be illegitimate. In other words, his Honour reached
a conclusion at the second
question without proceeding to the third question of the test. Given that
Parliament reduced the cap without
justification, the rational
was that Parliament must have ‘acted with the additional purpose, not
merely the effect, of quietening the voices of third-party
campaigners relative
to political parties and
candidates’.
A law which
to impair the freedom of political communication required by
representative and responsible government will ‘always be
illegitimate’.
aim/purpose
is different from a law having a legitimate purpose but
having the same
It would be helpful to understand Edelman J’s analysis of section 29(10)
in light of
(which will not be considered here),
because Edelman J seems to hold that they jointly reveal an illegitimate
It is also interesting to note that Edelman J would not simply take the
in the legislative preparatory materials (eg, the
Expert Panel Report). On the assumption that ‘the legislature is a body
acts rationally and not without any rhyme or
, Parliament must
have had an additional purpose when acting without sufficient
justification.
IV IMPLICATIONS AND TAKEWAYS
A Uncertainty and Implications for the
Legislature
The safest way to justify a cap is to have
ensure it is
sufficient for a third-party campaigner to present its case. To achieve the goal
of preventing drowning out, the legislature
should also prepare evidence to
justify cutting the cap. Having different caps for third-party campaigners and
political parties
permissible.
However, there
remains some uncertainty regarding what kind of evidence would be acceptable to
the Court. Would empirical evidence
be sufficient, or would other type of
evidence be required (eg, sociological and normative studies that are
qualitative in nature)?
The above conclusion presumes that (1) prevention of drowning out can be
achieved whilst (2) ensuring that third-party campaigners have
a sufficient cap. This commentary raises a hypothetical example (see
Part III(A)
above) where the two aims cannot be achieved simultaneously. In such
circumstances, the guidance provided by the judges’ approaches
different conclusions. Applying the judges’ approaches to the hypothetical
problem above, the goal of preventing drowning
(the plurality
and Nettle J) or (2)
(Gageler J and Gordon J) take precedence over
having an insufficient (in a minor way) cap. The uncertainty is heightened by
that the plurality did not consider the ‘adequacy of
balance’ stage, therefore making it difficult to predict how the
would balance the two (see
Part III(A)(1)
above). If the plurality were to hold
that an insufficient cap is balanced, the cap would be valid under the
plurality’s approach,
but invalid under Gageler J and Gordon J’s
approaches. Furthermore, the extent to which a cap must be sufficient is
In light of such uncertainties, the legislature may face challenges in
amending the invalid cap.
B Notable Precedential Value
1 Alternative Formulation of the Necessity
The necessity stage of the third question has previously been framed as a
substantive
test, asking whether ‘there is no obvious and
compelling alternative, reasonably practicable means of achieving the same
which has a less restrictive effect on the
However, this
case illustrates that there are two more aspects to the necessity stage.
Further, the phrase ‘compelling alternative’
is not mentioned by the
plurality at all. Then, what does the necessity test entail in this case?
First, the plurality considered a more fundamental question of necessity: a
element which requires the Court to consider whether
Parliament has expressly justified the necessity. In other words, the Court
should not simply ask whether the limit is necessary (a substantive test), but
too whether the necessity of the cap has been demonstrated
by Parliament (a
procedural test). It would not be illogical to extend the same procedural
requirement to the suitability stage and
the adequacy of balance stage, by
requiring Parliament to have expressly considered and justified them.
Second, it is suggested that the necessity test may be reframable to ask
whether the limit is ‘no more than is necessary’
(ie, ‘minimal
impairment’). The plurality expressly states that the concept of minimal
impairment (as established in
Canada) is analogous to the requirement of
reasonable necessity.
impairment is supportable and consistent doctrinally
because, in
, the plurality held that the necessity test is to
ensure the impugned measure fulfils ‘the legislative purpose with the
harm to the
Clearly, through
the use of similar words (‘least’ and ‘minimal’), the
concept of minimal impairment is highly
comparable and relevant. Whilst there
does not seem to be any real difference between
it (1) helps us to
understand the necessity test through a possible alternative formulation, and
(2) illustrates the potential comparability
between this aspect of the test in
Australia and Canada.
Furthermore, the traditional substantive necessity test (of asking whether
there is a compelling alternative) would be inappropriate
on the facts. Hord is
critical of the necessity stage (in a slightly different context) as, for him,
it ‘is questionable whether
it is appropriate to consider alternatives
under the constitutional mandate given Parliament’s broad discretion to
electoral system. In any event, judicial assessment of alternatives
is difficult in light of the complexity of the electoral
On the facts, it
would not be easy for the Court to consider the hypothetical question of whether
there is any alternative to prevent
drowning out, other than to reduce the cap.
It would have been more difficult given that Parliament has not accounted for
the procedural
consideration at all. Therefore, the plurality’s evaluation
from the procedural perspective is persuasive. It is logical to
consider whether
Parliament has supported the reduction with evidence. This case thus shows that
the structured proportionality analysis
is not rigid and can fit different
circumstances.
Surely, the procedural aspect of the necessity analysis would not always be
relevant in all circumstances in future cases, just like
the Court has not
applied the ‘compelling alternative’ formulation of the necessity
test in this case. It would depend
on the circumstances of the case. For
example, if Parliament does not fail to review the cap, the
substantive
aspect of the necessity test would play a greater role.
Therefore, when the conventional ‘compelling alternative’ test is
applied to a new cap, the Court may ask whether there
is a more compelling
of reduction than the newly designed one. In this regard, it would
be best practice for Parliament to take Appleby and Olijnyk’s
that ‘considering alternatives as part of the parliamentary deliberative
process may contribute not only to enhanced
legislative deliberation on
constitutional norms, but also to a richer form of constitutional
“dialogue” between the
Parliament’.
2 The Relationship between the Necessity Test and
the Adequacy of Balance Test
Does the reformulation of the necessity test to (1) include a
aspect, and (2) determine the minimal impairment, add anything
more to the structured proportionality analysis? At first instance,
whilst they
enrich the necessity test itself, it would seem that they do not add anything
more because they are already covered by
the adequacy of balance test. Although
the plurality did not consider the adequacy stage, this matter is important for
understanding
how the reformulation functions.
The adequacy test is similar to these reformulations because both of them
focus on the
of the reduction. In
, the plurality
formulated the adequacy test to ‘whether the
restriction is
’ by reference to ‘the importance of
the purpose and the benefit sought to be
, the plurality considered necessity in the sense of whether a
measure ‘goes far beyond those reasonably necessary for its
In other words,
the Court inquires as to whether its
Asking whether
the impairment is minimal is inquiring as to the extent.
However, it is argued that the adequacy test does not cover those aspects
because it analyses the
from a different perspective. Ultimately,
the adequacy test is a balancing exercise, but the necessity test is not. The
test asks ‘whether the
of the restriction imposed
by the impugned law [is]
outweighed by the importance of the purpose
value judgment’
whether the impugned provision would result ‘in a societal net
By contrast, the necessity test is not a balancing exercise (and hence it
does not compare with the
of the purpose). Instead, it merely
considers whether the extent of reduction is required to achieve the purpose. It
is not a value
To put the matter in another way, whether a cap has to be insufficient in
order to prevent drowning out is logically a question of
necessity (perhaps to
be supported by studies); whereas whether the cap has to be sufficient (given
the considerations on the implied
freedom) is arguably more appropriately
addressed as a value judgment question under the adequacy stage.
V THE CAUSE OF THE UNCERTAINTY
The academic questions that follow are why and how the application of the
three question test create the uncertainties and differences
in approaches. On
the one hand, the three question test yields sufficient protection for the
implied freedom of political communication.
Further, it generates consistent
conclusions, evidenced by the fact that all judges held the cap to be invalid.
On the other hand,
when the judges’ approaches are applied to the
hypothetical example, different results may be yielded.
The present case reinforces the fact that the application of the test can
generate some divergence among the judges. Whilst the purpose
of preventing
drowning out has been accepted/assumed to be legitimate, the test is still
largely discretionary (regarding how to
frame the third question). The
approaches of the plurality and Gageler J are particularly noteworthy because
they form the strongest
contrast in their application of the third question. In
the plurality’s view, whether a limit is ‘reasonably
appropriate’
depends on whether it is ‘necessary’ (and other
requirements); whereas Gageler J simply asks whether the limit is
‘reasonably
appropriate’ without relying on the plurality’s
structured proportionality analysis. It is this difference which is key
different results yielded by the hypothetical example.
Essentially, the plurality does not rely on the notion of ‘reasonably
appropriate’ as a test, but instead replaces it
‘necessity’ (or the ‘structured proportionality
analysis’) as the guiding notion. Therefore, the plurality’s
necessity test and Gageler J’s ‘reasonably appropriate’ test
are, in substance, slightly different aspects to the
third question.
The test of minimal impairment would arguably inevitably give marginally more
weight to the objective of the
because the thrust of the
necessity test has already presumed (especially after passing the second
question regarding legitimacy)
the objective
has to be achieved
as the limit is in the least infringing
As such, the final
conclusion regarding validity would be left to the adequacy of balance stage,
which is most contested for being
uncertain. In any event, the starting point of
the balancing stage is based on the purpose/objective. Thus, it may be arguable
the whole analysis might be slightly inclined towards objective.
By contrast, Gageler J’s test independently reviews the appropriateness
of the limit. Gageler J’s approach is best understood
as simply inquiring
as to whether the limit is reasonably appropriate
in light of
on the implied freedom of political communication. Thus, Gageler J’s
approach would inevitably yield slightly different
results than the
plurality’s
-inclined approach.
(This above attempt to explain the differences in the approaches is only
trying to explain the present case. The same explanation
may or may not be
applicable to other cases).
VI CONCLUSION
The three question test has always been the subject of academic debate. Not
only is the third question controversial as in this case,
other questions in the
test have commonly been criticised as ‘uncertain of
application’.
Murray is right in arguing that every time there is a difficult case on the
implied freedom of political communication, the
judges’ applications and
approaches will remove ‘some confusion, but also [lay] the groundwork for
continued uncertainty
In any event, this case is inevitably another landmark decision alongside
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
, and is another helpful illustration of the application of the
three question test. Its precedential value on the necessity test
should not be
* Research Associate, OBOR Legal Research Centre. I am grateful to the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and to the
team of editors for
their considerable help.
[2019] HCA 1
(2019) 363 ALR 1
(2017) 261 CLR 328
[2015] HCA 34
(2015) 257 CLR 178
For clarity, it is helpful to note that the total cap for a party that endorses
candidates in all 93 electoral districts
at a general election is
$11,429,700.
Election Funding, Expenditure and
Disclosures Act 1981
, (5), (10)(a)
’), as repealed by
Electoral Funding Act 2018
28–9 [104] (Nettle J), 57 [217], 58 [220] (Edelman J). It is again
, the total cap for a party that
endorses candidates in all 93 electorates at a general election is $9.3 million:
at 21 [74] (Gageler
[30]–[31], [38] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ), 31 [111] (Nettle J),
41 [153] (Gordon J).
29 [105] (Nettle J).
(Gageler J).
NSW Department of Premier and Cabinet,
Political Donations
(Final Report, December 2014) vol 1, 113
<https://www.dpc.nsw.gov.au/assets/media-news/95/attachments/611c3861d7/Volume_1_-_Final_Report
According to the Expert Panel, the
highest amount spent by a third-party campaigner at the 2011 election was
approximately $400,000:
[106] (Nettle J).
10 [26] (Kiefel CJ, Bell
and Keane JJ), citing Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters,
into the Final Report of the Expert Panel: Political Donations and the
Government’s Response
(Report No 1/56, June 2016) 49 [7.22].
Ibid 30 [107] (Nettle J).
[15] (Kiefel CJ, Bell
and Keane JJ), 38 [139] (Gordon J).
Ibid 38 [140] (Gordon J).
Ibid 12 [35]. ‘[If] any
differential treatment is an illegitimate purpose in respect of caps on
donations or electoral expenditure,
the legislature would never be in a position
to address the risk to the electoral process posed by such groups’: at 12
13–14 [42].
‘Procedural’ does not mean
that the Parliament is subject to certain formal procedures to be followed.
Instead, the
meaning here is that the Parliament failed to consider the relevant
questions and hence failed to justify the action.
For clarity, a
substantive
is different from a
test because, for the former, the focus is
on the cap alone (ie, whether the cap is justified, proportionate, etc) whereas,
latter, the focus is on the Parliament.
32–3 [116]–[117].
(n 2) 422–3 [290]
(Nettle J).
(n 3), the issue was
whether the prohibition regarding political donations unduly burdened the
implied freedom of political communication.
In the adequacy of balance stage,
French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ held that although ‘reducing the
funds available to
election campaigns there may be some restriction on
communication’, it is ‘more than balanced by the benefits’
because it enhances ‘equality of access to government’ by
‘removing the risk and perception of corruption’:
[93]. However, it is to be noted that the plurality in
‘observed that a cap on electoral expenditure is a
more direct
burden on political communication than one on political donations’: at 8
[15] (emphasis added). How this will affect the adequacy
consideration is not
known with certainty.
(n 1) 11 [31]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ), 25–6 [90] (Gageler J), 32 [113] (Nettle
(n 2) 376–7 [160]
(Gageler J). The adequacy test ‘is too open-ended, providing no guidance
as to how the incommensurables
to be balanced are to be weighted or as to how
the adequacy of their balance is to be gauged’: at 377 [160].
‘It is not self-evident, and it
has not been shown, that the cap set in the amount of $500,000 leaves a
third-party campaigner
with a reasonable opportunity to present its case’:
28 [101] (Gageler J).
[115] (emphasis
Ibid 33 [117].
It is more likely that Nettle
J’s approach will allow the goal of preventing downing out to take
precedence over insufficiency
than the approach of the plurality.
(n 2) [160]. See also
Joshua Forrester, Lorraine Finlay and Augusto Zimmerman, ‘Finding the
Streams’ True Sources: The
Implied Freedom of Political Communication and
Executive Power’
[2018] UWALawRw 22
(2018) 43(2)
University of Western Australia Law
28 [102] (emphasis
59 [222]. See also
42–3 [158].
Ibid 46 [173].
48–9 [179].
Ibid 58 [219]. See also 46 [172].
Edelman J’s approach is an interesting one because the previous
understanding was that there
were only two main approaches to determine the
objective, being either broad or narrow. The narrow approach would simply focus
the objective revealed by the words and operation of the statute whereas the
broad approach would additionally consider the Parliament’s
wider social
objective: see Larissa Welmans, ‘Section 18C and the Implied Freedom of
Political Communication’
[2018] UWALawRw 27
(2018) 44(1)
University of Western Australia
, 41–3. Here, by contrast, Edelman J’s approach
(arguably a more stringent version of the broad approach) infers the objective
and political motives from the circumstances beyond legislative materials.
A sufficient cap may not in itself be
enough because a procedural aspect to the necessity test will require Parliament
that the cap is sufficient and demonstrate this sufficiency using
evidence. See the analysis of Gordon J’s judgment in
25–6 [90] (Gageler J), 38 [141] (Gordon J).
(n 3) 195 [3] (French
CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ). See also Forrester, Finlay and Zimmerman (n 35)
190; Samuel J Murray, ‘The
Public Interest, Representative Government and
the “Legitimate Ends” of Restricting Political Speech’
[2017] MonashULawRw 1
Monash University Law Review
(n 3) 217 [82] (emphasis
Under Canadian laws, the
‘inquiry into minimal impairment asks “whether there are less
harmful means of achieving the
legislative goal”’:
Canada (Attorney General)
[2015] 1 SCR 331
[102]. See also Charles-Maxime
Panaccio, ‘The Justification of Rights Violations:
Charter’, in Peter Oliver, Patrick Macklem and Nathalie Des Rosiers (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Canadian
Constitution
(Oxford University
Press, 2017) 657, 662. This concept is thus similar and highly comparable to the
Australian necessity test, which
asks whether there is an ‘obvious and
compelling alternative, reasonably practicable means of achieving the same
purpose which
has a less restrictive effect on the freedom’:
(n 3) 195 [2].
Brendan Hord, ‘
Electoral Commissioner
: Between Severance and a Hard Place’
Sydney Law Review
Gabrielle Appleby and Anna Olijnyk,
‘Parliamentary Deliberation on Constitutional Limits in the Legislative
[2017] UNSWLawJl 36
(2017) 40(3)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
(n 3) 219 [87] (emphasis
added). The formulation of the adequacy stage by other judges uses different
wording. For example, Nettle
(n 2) asks whether a measure is
‘manifestly excessive’/‘grossly disproportionate’: at
422–3 [290].
(n 2) 373 [146].
Robert French AC, ‘The
Globalisation of Public Law: A Quilting of Legalities’ in Mark Elliott,
Jason NE Varuhas and
Shona Wilson Stark (eds),
The Unity of Public Law?:
Doctrinal, Theoretical and Comparative Perspectives
(Hart Publishing, 2018)
231, 242. See also
(n 3) 193–5 [2] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell
and Keane JJ).
(n 3) 195 [2]. Given it
is a value judgment, ‘reasonable minds may differ’: Eric Chan,
‘A Proportionate Burden:
Revisiting the Constitutionality of Optional
Preferential Voting’
[2017] UWALawRw 13
(2017) 42(1)
University of Western Australia Law
Welmans (n 45) 52.
Canadian scholarship on minimal
impairment supports this view. ‘Minimal Impairment implies that the
attainment of the state’s
objectives is not, to any extent, put into
question’: Panaccio (n 51) 662.
For clarity, one should note that the
necessity test is not asking whether the
is necessary, but
instead asks whether the
chosen measure
(and its extent) is
Welmans (n 45) 21 (criticising the
uncertainty caused by the first question on the difficulty of construing the
objective and the
third stage of the third question that it is not easy to apply
the ‘adequacy of balance’). See also Murray (n 48), who
similar criticisms, and Shireen Morris and Adrienne Stone, ‘Abortion
Protests and the Limits of Freedom of Political
Communication:
Preston v Avery
[2018] SydLawRw 15
(2018) 40(3)
Sydney Law Review
, 407, noting ‘the difficulties inherent in predicting the outcome of
proportionality analysis’.
Murray (n 48) 2.
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (157 KB)
PDF format (298 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter