URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/30.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Buckley, Ross P; van Romburg, Lucien J --- "The Need to Address the Broader Social Dimensions in Any Decision to Issue a Retail Central Bank Digital Currency" [2025] UNSWLawJl 30; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 952
I INTRODUCTION
A Policy Objectives within the Scope of Primary Central Bank Mandates
1 Promote Resilient Payment Systems
2 Support Monetary Anchor Role of Central Bank Money
3 Improve Cross-Border Payments
B Policy Objectives outside the Scope of Primary Central Bank Mandates
1 Foster Innovation
2 Encourage Competition
3 Enhance Financial Inclusion
III CENTRAL BANK MANDATES: A BRAVE NEW WORLD?
IV WHERE TO FROM HERE?
A A Needs- and Effects-Focused Approach
B Broad Public Engagement and Participation
V CONCLUSION
THE NEED TO ADDRESS THE BROADER SOCIAL DIMENSIONS IN ANY
DECISION TO ISSUE A RETAIL CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY
ROSS P BUCKLEY* AND LUCIEN J VAN ROMBURG**
Central banks, in deciding to issue a Central Bank Digital Currency
(‘CBDC’), tend to focus on how it might best support
their policy
objectives. While central banks typically view themselves as being in the
service of society, the ‘need’
for a CBDC will usually be assessed
within the scope of their primary mandates, traditionally concerned with
monetary policy. This
is problematic, as grounds for the issue of a CBDC that
fall outside this scope may not be considered fully. We suggest that the
needs of society and the effects of a retail CBDC should be given substantial
weight in decisions concerning a potential
CBDC. States should collaborate with
central banks and other diverse sources of expertise to ensure broad public
engagement and participation
in deciding whether there is an actual need for a
CBDC, as well as its design.
I INTRODUCTION
Contrary to popular belief, the Bahamas and China were not the first
countries to issue central bank money in digital form to the
In 1993, the Bank of
Finland launched its Avant Smart Card system, which issued smart cards preloaded
with Finnish markka, and functioned
much like debit or credit
Despite this pioneering
vision, Avant was discontinued in 2006 as it became more expensive to use than
simple debit cards. Initially,
the smart card was offered to customers for free,
but fees were later added, which reduced customer
The reason for
Avant’s discontinuance was ironic, as the Bank of Finland’s primary
reason for its issue was the potential
cost savings. This experience thus serves
as a timely cautionary tale of the importance of clarity about the precise
reasons for
issuing a retail Central Bank Digital Currency
Accordingly, we analyse the justifications given by central banks for their
intentions to issue a retail CBDC, and whether these rationales
address societal
needs broader than the purely economic. As well put by Hiep Ngoc Luu et al:
‘Despite CBDC gaining in its popularity,
our understanding of the reasons
why countries decide to adopt [a] CBDC is still in its
We aim to analyse
the policy objectives typically given as justifying CBDC projects and explore
whether central banks appropriately
consider broader societal needs in the
process. We ultimately argue that as CBDC issuance will have society-wide
effects, decisions
concerning a potential CBDC, including whether there is an
need for one, should involve multiple agencies within government,
and broad public engagement and participation. It should not be
a process driven
only by central banks and directed only through the lens of their monetary
policy mandates. This article contributes
to the literature examining the role
of central banks in social
The arguments for a wholesale CBDC are quite different, with wholesale CBDCs
potentially offering substantial efficiency gains in
cross-border trade
transaction payments, and capital market
transactions.
This article focuses
upon retail CBDCs – those designed for use by the general population, not
major banks and corporations.
Whereas a retail CBDC could be used by households
and businesses to effect online transactions and transfers of funds to family
friends, a wholesale CBDC would only be accessible to a limited range of
market participants, such as commercial banks, and would
be used to effect
wholesale payments and
settlements.
This article has five Parts. Part II surveys the broad reasons given by
central banks, in both advanced and developing economies,
for the issue of a
CBDC. Part III sets out our thesis that the ‘need’ for a CBDC will
typically be assessed in terms
of the scope of central bank primary mandates and
the related policy objectives, which are traditionally concerned with monetary
policy. This is problematic as grounds for issuing a CBDC which fall outside
this scope may not be considered fully. Part IV sets
out our suggestions for
needs-focused and effects-focused approaches and broad public engagement and
participation in making decisions
concerning a potential retail CBDC, including
whether there is an
need for one, and settling upon its model and
design. This should be facilitated largely by the state and not by central banks
Such an approach will ensure that the broader interests of all members of
society are properly taken into account. Part V concludes.
II CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCIES
While the technology that typically underpins CBDCs has existed for some
the term itself is relatively
recent, with reports indicating it was coined by Bank of England
(‘BoE’) research staff
Since then, CBDCs have
garnered sustained government and public interest, and today feature prominently
on policy agendas worldwide.
Today’s focus upon CBDCs is due, in large part, to the rise of
cryptocurrencies, and the systemic risks associated with the
digital asset
platforms which facilitate their
The catalyst for
developed nations’ focus on CBDCs (at least beyond China, which had been
researching them since about 2014)
was Meta’s Libra
The first Libra
Association white paper, published in June 2019, set out Meta’s plans for
a decentralised, blockchain-based,
low-volatility, asset-backed cryptocurrency
and a smart contract platform.
Governments and regulators globally reacted strongly against these plans for a
digital currency issued by a company with billions
of users globally, fearing
loss of monetary and economic sovereignty. In response, Meta issued an amended
‘White Paper v2.0’
and rebranded and
restructured Libra as Diem in December
Nonetheless, the entire
Libra/Diem project was wound down in January
Since then, many policy
papers have been published by governments internationally exploring potential
reasons for CBDC issuance,
which most often tend to be to address existing pain
points in, or future-proof, payment
The cases presented by central banks in deciding to issue a CBDC overwhelmingly
highlight the potential benefits. However, a CBDC
may also introduce risks,
particularly related to financial
Large transfers of retail deposits by households into CBDC could impact the
ability of commercial banks to access low-cost and stable
funding from the
public. This may ‘shrink their balance sheets’ and, in extreme
cases, require the central bank to make
available through their discount window
to the commercial banks the funds otherwise siphoned out of the commercial
banking system.
Further, during
financial crises, bank runs may occur as households suddenly move their
commercial bank deposits to the safe harbour
of CBDC, as a state-backed
risk-free asset.
At the moment,
bank runs are severely curtailed by the limited access to cash provided by most
bank branches. The digital nature
of CBDCs, without appropriate holding and
withdrawal limits, may facilitate massive, rapid and destabilising
withdrawals.
Several solutions,
however, have been proposed to mitigate the potential financial stability risks
posed by CBDCs. These solutions
include providing for no or very low interest
rates to attach to CBDCs so as to not compete with commercial bank
enforcing routine
quantitative limits on deposits and withdrawals of CBDCs with possibly more
restrictive limits at times of
and the use of deposit
How these solutions
will translate into and work in practice, however, is yet to be fully worked
through. Some jurisdictions, however,
are beginning to voice concerns over the
risks associated with the issuance of a CBDC. For example, while acknowledging
the political
drivers involved, United States (‘US’) President
Donald Trump recently issued an executive order ‘prohibiting the
establishment, issuance, circulation, and use of a CBDC within the jurisdiction
of the United States’ to protect Americans
from the risks associated with
a CBDC, including those related to its threat to financial system stability,
In grappling with these issues and considering the specific uses to which a
CBDC could be put, governments will have to determine
how a retail CBDC will be
This will involve
decisions concerning the CBDC’s architecture, user base, core technology,
and scope of usage.
there are three architectural choices for CBDC systems.
In centralised CBDC systems, central banks manage all payments and can keep a
record of all transactions.
Users store their units of value and use them for transactions through a central
bank account by verifying their
In decentralised systems, on the other hand, validation of payments and
recording of transactions occurs on blockchains operating
on decentralised
ledgers – as with the Bitcoin protocol. The validation process for
Bitcoin, known as mining, is highly unlikely
to be adopted for a retail CBDC due
to speed and energy usage issues, and alternative consensus mechanisms will be
adopted. However,
transactions are validated and recorded, and a CBDC will
operate as a guaranteed direct claim on the central
Finally, in a hybrid CBDC system, users would not necessarily have a central
bank account, and intermediaries will instead link users
to the central bank
through the intermediaries’ own
The costs of creating a
CBDC system will depend largely on its design, and will be significant. In 2024,
the European Central Bank
(‘ECB’) put out calls for applications for
potential digital euro component providers with an aggregate cost ranging
€430 million to €1.2
This range does not
include ECB staff expenses and costs related to the private sector’s
integration of a digital euro into
their business practices and systems.
Irrespective of the precise type of system that may be adopted to implement
the CBDC, in deciding the threshold issue of whether to
issue the CBDC, central
banks will almost inevitably start by asking how their mandated policy
objectives would be supported by
This is natural. The policy
objectives are, after all, in place for the benefit of the public at
As the economic and
socio-cultural contexts of each jurisdiction vary, there will be a range of
justifications for the issue of a
CBDC. However, central bank policy objectives
capable of achievement through the issue of a CBDC can, as we do below, be
into two broad groups: those that fall within the scope of the primary
mandates of central banks, traditionally concerned with monetary
policy, and
those that do not.
A Policy Objectives within the Scope of Primary
Central Bank Mandates
In this section, we consider the primary policy objectives of promoting
resilient payment systems, providing a monetary anchor, and
thereby ensuring the
singleness of money and promoting cross-border payments.
1 Promote Resilient Payment Systems
The primary reason given by central banks for choosing to explore issuing a
CBDC is to support the policy aim of promoting resilient
Payment systems need to
be reliable, resilient and safe to support commerce, and robust enough to
respond to the risks and challenges
that arise from greater levels of
digitisation, cyber-attacks, natural disasters and
Payment systems must
therefore be highly adaptive to respond effectively to future challenges.
Governments worldwide have taken steps
to modernise their payment systems
through legislative and supervisory means to address new risks and challenges
and have turned
towards advanced technology as a potential
The Reserve Bank of Australia (‘RBA’) believes a CBDC could
increase the resilience of some aspects of the Australian
A report published by
the RBA, in collaboration with the Digital Finance Cooperative Research Centre
(‘DFCRC’), noted
that a CBDC could be used to support increased
transparency and resilience in offline environments
particularly.
A CBDC could thus
make it possible for Australians to effect digital payments during electricity
and telecommunication disruptions,
such as those following natural
This is particularly
relevant as Australia is prone to natural disasters, the frequency of which have
increased with climate change.
In Europe, a digital euro is seen as a means to strengthen Europe’s
resilience against potential cyberattacks and technical
disruptions, such as
power outages.
Similarly, the
Central Bank of Nigeria has noted that an eNaira could enhance the resilience of
Nigeria’s payments system by
serving as a central alternative means for
digital payments.
Central banks have argued further that CBDCs could promote the resilience of
payment systems in the face of the risks presented by
the accelerated use of
digital payments and the potential for systems to be dominated by a handful of
digital payment services providers
through economies of scale and network
In such an oligopoly
environment, dominant payment services providers could set high prices for
consumers and disruption of their
services could threaten the efficacy of the
entire system. A CBDC could further promote the resilience of payment systems by
as a ‘redundancy’ system to complement non-CBDC
2 Support Monetary Anchor Role of Central Bank
The second case put forward by central banks in favour of CBDC is that it
could support the continued role of central bank money as
a monetary anchor,
which preserves public trust in money generally and commercial bank money in
particular.
The existence of
CBDCs will mean that the public can at any time exchange their commercial bank
money (for instance deposits with
a commercial bank) for central bank money,
just as they can do today for cash. Like cash, CBDCs will be risk-free and
convertible,
therefore providing a backstop for all other types of money –
a monetary anchor role important for maintaining financial
In a future where
physical cash is used far less than today, CBDC would ensure that the role and
function of commercial bank money
This policy aim is
significant considering the steep decline in physical cash use, particularly in
advanced economies.
According to
Corinne Zellweger-Gutknecht, Benjamin Geva and Seraina Grunewald, the decline in
the use of cash can be explained by
the increased use of commercial bank money,
public laws that restrict or exclude the use of cash, and the saving and
hoarding of
cash which keeps it out of
circulation.
We believe the
first factor is the principal one.
The decline in cash usage could also mean a CBDC will be needed to maintain
the singleness or uniformity of
Economic efficiency
demands that every dollar or euro be worth the same as every other dollar or
euro, otherwise merchants negotiating
sales would have to negotiate both the
price and which commercial bank would issue the money being used to pay the
price. This singleness
or uniformity of money is primarily ensured by the public
being able to exchange digital commercial bank money for central bank money.
This is done today by withdrawing cash from their bank account. If usage of cash
ceases or declines to minimal levels, this may no
longer be possible, and a CBDC
would be needed to provide the public with the ability to hold value in central
bank money. This function
is a particular motivation of the ECB in choosing to
issue a digital euro.
Federal Reserve has likewise indicated that a digital US dollar could provide
the public with wider access to digital money,
free from credit and liquidity
A CBDC can also serve as a defence against foreign distortions of a payments
system. The BoE and His Majesty’s Treasury (‘HM
have indicated that if digital money, denominated in other currencies, becomes
broadly available in the United Kingdom
(‘UK’), a digital pound
could potentially play a key role in maintaining the sterling as the unit of
The continued role of central bank money as a monetary anchor is also crucial
for developing economies. The People’s Bank of
China has noted that their
mandate is ‘to ensure the public’s direct access to cash, and make
sure the unit of account
is consistent in the era of digital economy by
digitalizing cash’.
Developing economies are particularly sensitive to currency substitution, where
a large share of domestic transactions are settled
in a foreign currency other
than the official unit of
In Nigeria, for
example, there is strong evidence that currency substitution significantly
impacts the demand for Naira.
The eNaira is an attempt to respond to this trend, to improve the availability
and usability of central bank
3 Improve Cross-Border Payments
A third argument advanced by central banks in favour of a CBDC is that it
could improve cross-border
Cross-border payments
are essential for every economy as they facilitate international trade, and
thereby contribute to economic
prosperity.
Global cross-border
payments are projected to grow significantly from USD190 trillion in 2023 to
USD290 trillion by 2030.
Cross-border payments are central to global economic well-being. Despite this
importance, such payment systems today are generally
and are particularly so
for migrant workers from developing economies who disproportionately incur more
expenses in effecting these
One potential solution to this problem is to make nations’ fast payment
systems interoperable so that users can transact with
each other seamlessly
across different systems.
other leading possible solution is CBDCs. CBDC systems for cross-border payments
can be designed to exist with other cross-border
payment systems or to share a
common system with other forms of
Domestic CBDC systems
can also be interlinked, or a common platform can be created for multiple CBDCs,
to ensure interoperability
amongst several national CBDC systems for effecting
cross-border payments.
been argued that the use of CBDC cross-border systems can ensure instant
settlement of both domestic and international cross-border
payments, which
lowers the cost of international remittances and reduces risk to
As such, CBDC
cross-border systems may likely increase capital flows, thereby stimulating
economic growth and increasing integration
of markets, which could present new
opportunities and
challenges.
The RBA and DFCRC’s pilot project did not embrace cross-border
payments, in an effort to reduce the risks associated with anti-money
and counter-terrorism financing. However, industry participants did express
their interest in the potential of CBDCs to
improve cross-border
In the US it has been
noted that a digital US dollar could potentially streamline cross-border
payments through the use of new technologies
and create further opportunities
for inter-jurisdictional interoperability and
collaboration.
People’s Bank of China has also noted that its e-CNY would provide
opportunities to explore how cross-border payments could
be improved through
pilot programs.
Finally, Nigeria
has stated that the eNaira could decrease costs and improve cross-border
transaction efficiency by real-time cross-border
foreign exchange
Policy Objectives outside the Scope
of Primary Central Bank Mandates
We next consider the broader, yet typical, central bank policy objectives of
fostering innovation, encouraging competition and enhancing
financial inclusion.
1 Foster Innovation
CBDCs could well help achieve the policy aim of fostering
innovation.
This policy aim does
not usually fall squarely within the primary statutory mandates of central
banks, concerned traditionally with
monetary policy. However, the role of
central banks in fostering innovation has received increased attention with
rapid technological
development and greater digitisation, and many central banks
have begun to focus upon enabling environments for technology development,
society can enjoy the advantages of
innovation.
In turn, central
banks are impacted by innovation, as novel technologies introduce new products,
services and unregulated market
This means central
banks have to balance their secondary role in creating enabling environments for
innovation with their primary
role of safeguarding financial
The role of central banks in fostering innovation has become more readily
accepted, despite central bank mandates not traditionally
incorporating concerns
of this kind.
In particular,
many central banks have said that fostering innovation could support them in
their duty to ensure financial stability.
In Australia, the RBA believes that
issuing a CBDC could support its policy aim of promoting innovation in payment
systems and financial
infrastructures,
particularly
through facilitating atomic
and programmable
Other central banks
have noted that the issue of a CBDC supports choice and
and could provide a
safe platform for private-sector innovations which may mitigate the risks
associated with private digital
2 Encourage Competition
A further case made by central banks for the issue of a CBDC is that it could
encourage competition in payments, a policy aim not
ordinarily considered a
primary part of a central bank’s mandate. This goal, however, is closely
related to the traditional
central bank mandate of ensuring safe, resilient and
efficient payment systems and maintaining financial stability. Central banks
faced with a myriad of challenges in executing this mandate. For example, while
access to modern payment services has increased
over time, universal access is
yet to be achieved.
services are also highly susceptible to network effects which can result in the
creation of established platforms with large
user bases. This can result in the
existence of a handful of dominant payment services firms, which presents a
significant barrier
to diversifying competition and lowering costs for
Central banks believe that a CBDC could encourage competition among private
sector intermediaries and thereby address concentration
in domestic payment
services and lower the high barriers to
In Australia, the RBA has
shared its vision for a payments system which is, among other things,
competitive.
It has reported
that a CBDC could promote competition in payments as a complement to private
digital currencies, rather than as a
competitor.
Other central banks
have stated that a CBDC could support competition through interoperable payments
that diversify available payment
instruments,
allowing firms to
offer competing CBDC-related payment
and facilitating a
competitive market for firms providing such
3 Enhance Financial Inclusion
Finally, central banks argue that CBDCs could enhance financial inclusion by
bringing more people into the formal financial
While financial
inclusion is more prominently an issue in developing economies, research has
suggested that it is also relevant for
Faced with this
challenge, central banks have argued that a CBDC could lower the entry barriers
to financial inclusion, such as expensive
banking costs, reduced risk appetites
of financial institutions, and a lack of trust in financial service
CBDC systems could be
used to make welfare payments to households far more efficiently, with the use
of digital identification
and could facilitate
payments to government, such as tax
Accordingly, central banks around the world believe that CBDCs could serve to
advance financial inclusion and thereby promote economic
The RBA believes a CBDC
has the potential to provide value-adding payment and settlement services to
Australian businesses and
households,
and support greater
access to financial services. Other central banks have noted that a
fit-for-purpose CBDC system could potentially
enhance financial inclusion
through its accessibility to a wider range of people, in comparison to the
narrower scope of private
sector payment
Finally, it has also
been argued that a CBDC could boost financial inclusion by supplementing
existing forms of payment services
through its intrinsic nature as legal tender
which can be transferred without the use of a bank
Given that there is yet
to be a CBDC in an advanced economy which can be analysed, precisely how a CBDC
will contribute to eradicating
financial exclusion is not entirely clear, and
more research is needed.
III CENTRAL BANK MANDATES: A BRAVE NEW
Early central banks tended to be private entities that funded governments as
well as conducted private banking
activities.
central banks began providing credit to other banks, facilitating interbank
transactions and acting as lenders of last
In the wake of the
economic uncertainty caused by the world wars, central banks shifted their focus
to ensuring financial
underpinned contemporary central bank mandates, which tend to focus primarily on
ensuring financial and price stability,
and safe and efficient
A typical central
bank mandate today tends to focus on monetary policy, a field in which
today’s central banks have developed
deep expertise over many decades. In
recent times, however, central bank objectives have been extended beyond
monetary policy to
areas in which central banks are not traditionally experts,
including the promotion of sustainability and financial
Bearing this in
mind, it is reasonable that central banks tend to consider the decision to issue
a CBDC largely through a monetary
policy prism. As such, whether full and proper
consideration is given to factors that fall outside this prism is an important
In most instances, for example, enhancing financial inclusion will not be an
express element of a typical central bank statutory mandate;
however, it is
arguable that as financial inclusion promotes economic growth, this objective is
adjacent to the central bank mandate
of ensuring financial
Some central
banks, including the BoE, have acknowledged that enhancing financial inclusion
falls outside the scope of their mandates.
Nonetheless, the BoE has stipulated
that financial inclusion should be considered when deciding whether to issue a
CBDC, bearing
in mind its significance for society as a
Importantly, the
National Bank of Denmark stated that the opportunities presented by distributed
ledger technology bring with it
both opportunities and challenges, some of which
fall outside central bank mandates and thus require wider societal
conversations.
The debate in both advanced and developing economies regarding the role that
central banks should play in promoting social issues
more broadly is quite
Some have argued, for
example, that central bank mandates are evolving based on new risks presented by
technological developments
and climate change, and the threats they pose to
financial stability.
Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-Four roundtable in 2023, the governors of the
central banks of several developing economies
highlighted central banks’
role in responding to social and environmental issues. This includes enhancing
financial inclusion,
promoting gender equity and advancing green
The Executive
Director of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion noted that central banks’
policy responses to social and environmental
issues are aligned with their
monetary mandates, and that such responses should therefore not be viewed as
‘mission creep’.
Governments around the world, including Australia, are now acting to strengthen
and modernise central bank
While we acknowledge that central bank mandates are evolving as new risks and
challenges arise, central banks are not necessarily
well-equipped with the
requisite expertise and experience to holistically consider the significance of
the broad range of factors
that will bear upon the decision on whether to issue
Bearing this in mind,
decisions concerning a potential CBDC – including whether there is an
need for one – should be treated as a society-wide matter,
not as a process driven solely or principally by central banks,
which almost
inevitably tend to view the issue of a CBDC through the prism of their main
concern with monetary policy.
IV WHERE TO FROM HERE?
If the decision to issue a CBDC is taken solely or principally by a central
bank, the grounds for, and consequences of, the issue
of a CBDC that fall
outside the narrow primary mandate of that central bank may not be considered
fully or at all. In an effort to
counter this challenge, we suggest: (i)
adopting a needs- and effects-focused approach be taken to answer the question
to issue a CBDC, including a rigorous assessment of all the
consequences of doing so and in particular the impact upon the elderly,
low-income households and those living in remote communities; and (ii) ensuring
broad public engagement and participation, potentially
facilitated by the state,
in deciding whether there is an
need for a CBDC and more broadly
in the design of the CBDC. A traditional widespread consultation and other
well-suited mechanisms
may well be used to achieve this engagement.
A A Needs- and Effects-Focused Approach
As already mentioned, most analyses of the grounds for issuing a CBDC focus
on the furtherance of the traditional policy aims of central
banks, as reflected
in their primary mandates. These grounds tend to be based on how existing
payment systems can be enhanced or
improved through the use of a
This approach tends to
neglect the full potential impacts of a CBDC on diverse members of society. The
need for a CBDC will vary
among jurisdictions based on their different societal
need for a CBDC should be based on addressing an
existing problem or likely future problem, rather than seeking solutions that
technology may provide but that may not actually be
As discussed further
below, only a handful of central banks appear to be giving priority to this
specific line of thought. Policymakers
need to resist the bright shiny nature
and accompanying allure of powerful new technology. Otherwise, they may fall
into the trap
that the Australian Stock Exchange (‘ASX’) did in 2016
when it apparently decided that distributed ledgers and blockchain
would be at
the heart of the project to replace the ageing Clearing House Electronic
Subregister System (‘CHESS’), rather
than starting with the problem
that needed to be solved and with a rigorous enquiry into how best to solve
For example, the need for a retail CBDC may well be less in advanced
economies whose payment systems have few existing pain points.
In Australia, the
RBA has stated that there is presently no clear public interest case for a
retail CBDC, particularly as it believes
that Australians are well-served by an
existing retail payments system that is, by international standards, efficient,
have however stated that there may well be a case for the issuance of a
wholesale CBDC in the near future, particularly to support
tokenised asset
The US Federal
Reserve considers the existing US domestic payments system to be safe and
efficient, although one senses that many
Americans, especially those with
experience of payment systems in Australia or Europe, might disagree with
respect to the ease of
use of the US
The Federal Reserve
has said that improvements that could be achieved by a CBDC could be effected
using existing payment
Similar sentiments
have been echoed in Japan, where the central bank has indicated no plans to
issue a CBDC on the ground that it
is not needed to enhance the efficiency and
stability of its payment and settlement
While no decision
has been taken yet to issue a CBDC in Japan, since 2021 the Bank of Japan has
carried out CBDC technical experiments
through proofs of concept and a pilot
Additional work has
also been undertaken by the Japanese Government and the Bank of Japan on the
potential design for a CBDC.
The National Bank of Denmark has also said it is not clear how a digital Danish
krone could provide safer and more efficient payments
than Denmark’s
existing well-functioning financial infrastructure, or otherwise create better
solutions for society.
broadly, questions have been raised as to whether the decline in cash usage in
advanced economies necessarily warrants the issue
of a CBDC to maintain the
public’s trust in central bank
However, these arguments around efficiency tend to neglect the vital monetary
anchor role performed by central bank money. The ability
of people to convert
their commercial bank digital money into central bank money ensures the
singleness of money: the vital characteristic
that every unit of money is worth
the same as every other unit.
Cash currently serves as this monetary anchor. The decline in cash usage thus
threatens the holding power of the anchor, especially,
one is tempted to muse,
upon a dark and stormy night.
Of course, cash withdrawals are strictly limited in amount at most bank
branches, so it is perhaps more the prospect of being able
one’s digital commercial bank money into cash by withdrawing the cash from
the bank, rather than the reality of
being able to do so in sizeable amounts.
Nonetheless, economists are broadly in agreement that the singleness of money is
system-wide economic efficiency – without it, parties to
transactions would not only be specifying a price, but also specifying
specific commercial banks that will be acceptable in providing the means of
paying the price.
On efficiency grounds, there is typically a much stronger case for a retail
CBDC in developing economies, where payment infrastructure
can be patchy and
inefficient. Some jurisdictions have developed innovative and pioneering mobile
money payment systems, such as
Kenya, where the ‘need’ for a CBDC to
improve existing systems is thus less compelling. Kenya has noted that the issue
of a CBDC ‘should not be a race to be
and that the
issue of a digital Kenyan shilling is not a priority in the short-to-medium
Indeed, in general
terms, the issuance of a retail CBDC is such a fundamental change in the nature
of money that many jurisdictions
are positioning themselves to be ‘fast
followers’ and are not seeking to be the first to make the
The exception in this
regard is China, which has forged far ahead with issuing a
motivated by its
government’s rather unique desires to diminish the dominance of some
private sector payments platforms such
as Alipay and have even more oversight,
and potential control, over its citizens’ spending habits.
In most developing countries the need for an improved payments system is
pressing. Whether a CBDC is the best solution for this challenge
remains up for
debate, and the answer will likely vary across countries.
There have been attempts by central banks to place the people at the centre
of their decisions to issue a CBDC, at least in principle.
These attempts also
consider the potential effects of a CBDC on society as a whole. One pressing
issue is the potential for a CBDC
to effectively make access to cash more
expensive or difficult, particularly for communities that remain reliant on
cash. This is
highly relevant in Australia, where real challenges exist around
the distribution of cash, from the subsidiary of the RBA that prints
bank branches, major retailers and other outlets that disburse and collect
As cash usage falls, the
cost of distributing each bundle increases as efficiencies of scale diminish. A
CBDC could worsen these
challenges as it further diminishes the demand for cash.
Faced with declining levels of cash usage and the emergence of new payment
instruments, the RBA has indicated that a core policy question is how
Australia’s monetary and payment arrangements should
adapt to the changes
in preferences and technology to best serve the Australian
The Central Bank of
Kenya, in adopting its ‘people centricity’ approach, has noted this
potential of CBDC to deepen financial
exclusion as digital funds are less
accessible and less inclusive than
Similar sentiments have
been echoed by the UK Parliament that has warned that a digital pound should not
worsen financial exclusion
for those who rely on cash, and that the
‘digitisation of money can’t, in any way, leave those people
To ensure that everyone has continued access to cash, the issue of any CBDC
must consider its impact on the elderly, the vulnerable
and low-income
households in particular. To this end, the Bank for International Settlements
has noted that CBDC should be user-friendly
for school children, seniors and
every age group.
CBDC should
have the same ease of use and accessibility as banknotes and coins. The RBA has
designed Australian dollar bank notes
specifically with the visually impaired in
mind, through tactile features and different
In deciding to issue
a CBDC, central banks should take into account how those affected by the reduced
use and access to cash will
be affected, which will require a range of
government departments’ collaboration and deep public engagement.
The skill set required to assess these broader societal impacts of a CBDC is
substantially broader than that typically held by central
bank staff, and may
well require the skills of sociologists, historians, psychologists and a whole
range of social scientists. A
central bank can, of course, hire such people
– and possibly should. Another way to tap into these skill sets, short of
people who hold them, is to engage with university academics in
structured settings which allow them the opportunity to share their
At least in Australia, such calls are rarely made upon members of the academy
and are likely to meet with an enthusiastic
As can be seen, the need for, and impact of, a CBDC is more nuanced than the
broad grounds cited by many central banks which focus
largely on payments
efficiency and monetary policy. While some central banks have considered the
fuller dimensions of the need for
a CBDC, they appear to be the exception rather
than the rule. As of July 2025, 137 countries and currency unions, which
98% of the world’s gross domestic product, are exploring a
Overall, the usefulness
of a CBDC will vary depending on where people live. It is important that this
usefulness is built into the
grounds put forth by central banks for the issue of
a CBDC. The focus on grounds related to central banks’ primary mandates
may steer the analysis away from broader societal needs and the effects of a
CBDC, which should ultimately be given considerable
B Broad Public Engagement and Participation
When central banks have decided not to issue a CBDC, in some cases this
decision appears to have been made without any extensive public
consultation.
Equally, in
many cases, when deciding whether there is a need for a CBDC, some central banks
have ‘jumped the gun’ and
considered that there is such a need
without proper public input. Some central banks have opened up discussion on the
possibility
of issuing a CBDC, such as through pilot projects and consultations.
However, without a thorough needs and effects assessment, CBDCs
may be issued
based predominantly on central bank preferences and the views of a narrow set of
industry stakeholders. In doing so,
the decision may well fail to account for
the overarching requirements and needs of diverse groups across society. In some
consultations appear to be more concerned with a CBDC’s potential
form and function (as discussed below). Even in these cases,
important that the full range of needs for, and effects of, a CBDC is
considered, as these factors will be built into
the CBDC’s design,
ultimately impacting its utility and rate of adoption. Broadly, the stakeholders
which should be consulted
in making the decision to issue a CBDC should reflect
a wide cross-section of society. They should include: (i) political stakeholders
(ie, government authorities and public
institutions);
(ii) industry
stakeholders (ie, businesses and other commercial organisations with a vested
interest in CBDC issuance); and (iii)
the general public, especially including
people from vulnerable groups (elderly, less-abled and low-income households),
cultural communities, and those who are
Governments will
face many practical challenges in managing a large pool of stakeholders, notably
the means used to engage with stakeholders
and how to process the receipt of
approach recommended
by the International Monetary Fund (‘IMF’) in
managing CBDC issuance stakeholders. This approach includes identifying
mapping all relevant stakeholders and developing a strategy to engage with them
from the inception of the CBDC project until
completion.
Ordinarily, public consultation typically captures wider public sentiment on
the likely impact on society of the introduction of new
laws, policies and other
government decisions. Australia has well settled practices in government for
seeking and conducting this
consultation. Departments of the Australian
Government, such as the Treasury and the Department of Finance, and bodies such
RBA often conduct public consultations on proposed initiatives alongside
the Australian Law Reform Commission
Government departments typically issue a consultation or discussion paper and
provide a time period – ideally up to 60 days,
with 30 days considered the
minimum – within which interested parties are invited to make submissions
on the proposal.
As a part of
the law reform process, the ALRC typically travels widely and consults with a
broad range of stakeholders around Australia,
including those with the expertise
and experience in the laws under review, as well as those likely to be impacted
by those laws.
The ALRC appoints an advisory committee or panel of experts for
each reform project to identify core issues and provide quality assurance
consultation and research process. At the end of this process, the Commission
formulates a final report incorporating its
key reform recommendations based on
submissions, face-to-face consultations and academic and industry research.
Overall, Australia’s
existing consultation mechanisms are well-established
and wide-ranging, forming an integral component of the accepted government
decision-making process. As a recent example of consultation in Australia, the
RBA and the DFCRC through their joint Project Acacia
called for industry
could be used for settlements of
transactions on wholesale tokenised asset
Although the project
does not relate to the issue of a retail CBDC, which is of wider import for the
general public, the call for
industry feedback illustrates the Australian
Government’s traditional willingness to engage in consultation to inform
its decision-making.
In a similar manner to our settled practices, some other central banks have
elicited the public’s view on the possible issue
of a CBDC through a
consultation process. For example, in February 2023, the BoE and the HM Treasury
published their consultation
paper seeking the views of the public around the
proposed design
of a digital
consultation paper represented a concerted effort by the UK Government to engage
with the public, the focus appeared to
be more on how a digital pound could
support the BoE’s mandate, and its potential design, rather than actual
public need. As
such, the focus of this consultation was not whether the public
believed there was an actual need for a digital pound, but predominantly
design. The responses to the consultation paper, however, highlighted the
public’s concerns and wider societal implications
of issuing a retail CBDC
in the UK, including those related to privacy, the future use of cash and the
rights of users of a digital
As of January 2025,
the BoE has stated that it has not made a decision on whether to issue a digital
pound, but, with HM Treasury,
has entered into a design phase to develop a
detailed policy and technology framework for a potential digital
consultations appears to have been on gathering
the public’s view on the
design of a CBDC, not whether the central bank should actually issue
The Bank of Canada, for example, has expressly declared that the decision to
issue a CBDC falls solely within the remit of Parliament
and the Canadian
Government.
As such, its
public consultation was primarily concerned with the potential design features
of a digital Canadian dollar. The Bank
of Canada has since announced that it
will be scaling back its work on issuing a CBDC and will be focusing instead on
the broader
Canadian payments
A similar approach
to public engagement has been taken in other jurisdictions, where no extensive
public consultation appears to
have been undertaken regarding the decision to
issue a CBDC, or even with respect to its potential design. In China, the e-CNY
to have been developed principally through pilot programs connected to
domestic payment services platforms launched in selected Chinese
cities, with
the People’s Bank of China publishing an e-CNY project white paper seeking
public comments.
Bahamas, while targeted baseline surveys on the levels of digitisation,
financial inclusion and the willingness of the public
to use new forms of
digital payments were conducted before the Sand Dollar’s pilot projects,
there appears to have been no
extensive public consultation specifically
concerning the need for a
The Sand Dollar was
launched in October 2020, but low adoption rates have meant that the digital
currency represented only 0.013%
of the money supply by the end of February
This low adoption can
be attributed to several factors, including the impact of
However, the
public’s lack of knowledge concerning the different forms of money, also
appears to have been a significant contributing
Even though non-monetary policy aims such as innovation, financial inclusion
and competition may be aligned with traditional central
bank mandates, central
banks may not be the best public institution to consider how these factors will
be impacted by a CBDC.
this end, in deciding to issue a CBDC, central banks should be supported by
multiple arms of government and associated entities
that have the necessary
subject-matter expertise and resources, such as welfare departments, legal
departments, trade organisations,
etc. The central bank should collaborate with
other government entities in deciding to issue a CBDC to ensure that the broader
of society and the effects of a CBDC are considered.
Indeed, the ultimate decision as to whether to issue a CBDC, in our view, is
rightly one for the state, not the central bank alone.
This approach has been
echoed by the RBA, which recently expressed that the ‘[g]overnment,
Treasury and RBA would closely consult
ahead of any decision to issue a CBDC,
should a public policy case for doing so emerge in the years
It is thus for
the people’s elected and accountable representatives to decide upon such a
fundamental reconfiguring of the
form of money. Serving a core sovereign
function, the creation of money seems somehow to embody elements of the
relationship between
the government and its citizens. There are strong emotive
and symbolic aspects of money that are society-specific and, as yet, poorly
understood. Accordingly, the decision to issue a retail CBDC should be one
ultimately for Parliament.
While governments should take full responsibility for the decision to issue a
CBDC, central banks will naturally bear some of the
fallout from the decision
due largely to the powers and functions conferred on central banks by their
founding statutes, which typically
include the sole and exclusive authority to
issue currency.
Furthermore,
central banks will play a significant practical role in the issuance of a CBDC.
Where central banks lack specific legal
authority to issue a CBDC, legislation
conferring such authority will most likely be passed by Parliament. However,
central banks
should not fulfil the all-encompassing role of ‘operator,
catalyst and overseer’ of a new CBDC payments system, and the
state should
play the larger initiating
Contemporary central
banks are provided with broad, sweeping powers to set interest rates, manage the
money supply and regulate the
They are meant to act
independently and free from political
It is precisely for
this reason that any decision to issue a retail CBDC, which will greatly impact
society as a whole, should be
made by Parliament.
The discourse on CBDCs and their impact on people’s lives illustrates
how important it is to place public participation at the
heart of the decision
to issue any digital form of retail central bank money. In the UK, the BoE
received over 50,000 responses to
New Forms of Digital Money
consultation paper, published in February
The respondents
expressed their concerns regarding the impact of a CBDC on privacy, access to
cash and freedom of choice, thus evidencing
how significant widespread
consultation is for the decision to issue a CBDC. The topics of cash and CBDC
elicit a broad range of
responses, often emotive, on a topic that few in society
deeply understand. Although we all think we understand money as we use it
day, many citizens do not understand, for instance, that the money they use is
almost exclusively merely the promises of commercial
banks and not in any way
minted by their nation’s central bank. Accordingly, Australia’s
traditional methods of consultation,
including possibly ALRC consultation, may
well be desirable to ensure a broad cross-section of society is heard from
before a decision
is taken to issue a CBDC – ideally a decision based on
actual need and a fuller understanding of its effects and consequences.
In addition to traditional consultation, there are of course alternative
mechanisms that exist to engage with the public’s wisdom
and the diverse
expertise and knowledge residing in our universities on these matters.
Structured assemblies of academics, well-briefed
on the matter at hand and
carefully chosen for their relevant expertise, have proven to be fertile sources
of new ideas and deeper
understandings. In Australia, the RBA has announced its
plan to convene regular CBDC advisory forums with academia and industry to
upon their relevant expertise. These planned advisory forums underscore the
RBA’s past efforts to engage with experts
from academia. This includes,
for example, a roundtable meeting held in February 2024, which brought together
academics from a diverse
range of disciplines to discuss the economic, legal and
social implications of introducing a CBDC in Australia, particularly its
on vulnerable communities and different cultural
traditional consultation to ensure broad public engagement and participation may
not, however, be well-suited for all
decisions related to the issue of a CBDC.
For example, the decision as to which design features should be built into a
CBDC may require
an approach which solicits more nuanced views, particularly
from members of society who may be seriously impacted by its issue. Alternative
mechanisms of public engagement targeting these specific members should
therefore be used, and could include, for example, citizen
This involves a
deliberative process where a panel of citizens participates in government
decision-making.
members may be selected from the general public, or from specific groups drawn
from demographics relevant to the issue under
consideration. Once a citizen jury
is formed, the panel discusses a particular issue for a predetermined number of
meetings of set
duration. These deliberations are overseen by a skilled
facilitator, and information on the issue is typically provided in advance
in real time by independent expert
The use of citizen
juries is not a new concept, and they have been used in Australia, New Zealand,
the US and other parts of the
world. While more research is required to measure
the usefulness of citizen juries, particularly in Australia, they do provide an
avenue for public engagement well-suited to capturing the views of specific
demographic groups who stand to be significantly affected
by government
It may well be that, on decisions concerning a potential CBDC –
including whether there is an
need for a CBDC, and if so its
potential design – wise central banks will engage carefully and
strategically with these sources
of wisdom and expertise through a process
entailing broad public engagement and participation.
V CONCLUSION
We have analysed the grounds cited by central banks in deciding to issue a
CBDC and considered whether the cited grounds include factors
beyond those that
support the primary mandates of central banks. Our analysis reveals that, while
central banks serve the public
as a whole in carrying out their mandates, their
perceptions on the need for a CBDC may be restricted by the scope of their
mandates, which are traditionally concerned with monetary policy and
financial stability. This is problematic, as the grounds for
and consequences of
a CBDC issuance that fall outside this scope may not be fully considered.
Furthermore, while central banks have amassed considerable expertise and
experience in executing their traditional monetary policy
mandates, this will
not typically be the case for the full breadth of issues raised by the decision
to issue a CBDC. On this basis,
we make two suggestions. First, a needs- and
effects-focused approach is required, as the need for, and likely impact of, a
has many more dimensions than those encompassed by monetary policy. Second,
the state, in collaboration with the central bank, should
facilitate broad
engagement with the public and with other diverse sources of expertise –
such as those that reside in our
universities – in deciding whether there
need for a CBDC and its impact on society. Our analysis has
also revealed that CBDC issuance is justified largely on the grounds
could support the objectives of central bank mandates. We argue the decision to
issue a CBDC should be treated as an undertaking
with society-wide implications
and one that should therefore involve Parliament and broad public, as well as
expert engagement led
by the state.
* Australian Research Council
ARC’) Laureate Fellow and Scientia
Professor, School of Private and Commercial Law, Faculty of Law & Justice,
of New South Wales.
** Postdoctoral Research Fellow, School of Private and Commercial Law,
Faculty of Law & Justice, University of New South Wales.
The authors
gratefully acknowledge the support of the Australian Laureate Fellowship
(FL200100007) for this research. We also extend
our gratitude to Brad Jones and
Scott Farrell for their thoughtful comments. The views herein are solely the
authors and not necessarily
the views of the ARC, the Australian Government, the
Reserve Bank of Australia, or its Payments System Board. All responsibility
errors rests with the authors.
Aleski Grym, ‘Lessons Learned from the World’s First
CBDC’ (BoF Economics Review No 8/2020, Bank of Finland, 2020)
Andrew Stanley, ‘The
Ascent of CBDCs’
(2022) 59(3)
Finance and Development
Grym (n 1) 17.
Hiep Ngoc Luu et al,
‘Cultural Values and the Adoption of Central Bank Digital Currency’
(2023) 30(15)
Applied Economics Letters
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851.2022.2089342>.
See, eg, Raffaele Felicetti,
‘A Study on Central Banks and Social Responsibility: The Case of the
ESCB’ (2024) 10(1)
Journal of Financial Regulation
<https://doi.org/10.1093/jfr/fjad010>, which examines whether the European
Central Bank should use its mandate to address
economic inequality even though
it would not be necessary in its pursuit of price stability.
See Ross P Buckley and Mia
Trzecinski, ‘Central Bank Digital Currencies and the Global Financial
System: The Dollar Dethroned?’
(2023) 18(2)
Capital Markets Law
, 152 <https://doi.org/10.1093/cmlj/kmad007>. See also
Emilios Avgouleas and William Blair, ‘A Critical Evaluation of
Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs): Payments’ Final Frontier?’
Capital Markets Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1093/cmlj/kmae002>.
Reserve Bank of Australia and
Treasury (Cth),
Central Bank Digital Currency and the Future of Digital Money
in Australia
(Report, September 2024) 5–8
<https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/central-bank-digital-currency/pdf/cbdc-and-the-future-of-digital-money-in-australia.pdf>
Future of Digital Money
See Primavera De Filippi and
Aaron Wright,
Blockchain and the Law: The Rule of Code
University Press, 2018) ch 1.
Grym (n 1) 1.
See Douglas W Arner et al,
‘The Financialisation of Crypto: Designing an International Regulatory
Consensus’ (2024) 53
Computer Law and Security Review
1–18 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2024.105970>; Policy 4.0,
Interdependencies in Crypto Ecosystems: Drivers, Implications and Policy
(Report, February 2023)
<https://policyfourpointo.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/Interdependencies-report-on-systemic-asset-linkages-in-crypto-ecosystems.pdf>.
See generally Ross P Buckley
et al, ‘Sovereign Digital Currencies: Reshaping the Design of Money and
Payments Systems’
(2021) 15(1)
Journal of Payments Strategy and
7 (‘Sovereign Digital Currencies’) .
Libra Association, ‘An
Introduction to Libra’ (White Paper, June 2019), 1
<https://www.allcryptowhitepapers.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/LibraWhitePaper_en_US.pdf>.
See also Dirk A Zetzsche, Ross P Buckley and Douglas W Arner, ‘Regulating
(2021) 41(1)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1093/ojls/gqaa036>.
Libra Association,
‘White Paper v2.0’ (White Paper, April 2020)
<https://www.accc.gov.au/system/files/public-registers/documents/54.%20Libra%20Whitepaper%20v2.0%2C%20April%202020.pdf>.
Diem Association,
‘Statement by Diem CEO Stuart Levey on the Sale of the Diem Group’s
Assets to Silvergate’ (Press
Release, 31 January 2022)
<https://www.diem.com/en-us/updates/stuart-levey-statement-diem-asset-sale/>.
Gabriel Soderberg et al,
‘How Should Central Banks Explore Central Bank Digital Currency: A Dynamic
Decision-Making Framework?’
(Fintech Note No 2023/008, International
Monetary Fund, September 2023) 8.
Corinne Zellweger-Gutknecht,
Benjamin Geva and Seraina Neva Grunewald, ‘The ECB and €
E-Banknotes: Could the ECB Issue
an Electronic Equivalent of Paper-Based Euro
Banknotes? Under Which Conditions Might Such “Electronic Banknotes”
Legal Tender Status?’ (Draft Research Paper, ECB Legal Research
Programme, 31 July 2020) 61–3
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3667057>.
discussion on the data and privacy risks presented by CBDCs, see Patrick
Schueffel, ‘CBDCs: Pros and Cons’ (2023)
Journal of Digital
Biagio Bossone et al, World
Central Bank Digital Currency: Background Technical Note
November 2021) 8
<https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/603451638869243764/pdf/Central-Bank-Digital-Currency-Background-Technical-Note.pdf>;
Amber Wadsworth, ‘The Pros and Cons of Issuing a Central Bank Digital
Currency’ (2018) 81(7)
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin
<https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/4ee8fb7526804ed2924ad2d4c108fe3a.ashx>.
Schueffel (n 17) 52.
Bossone et al (n 18) 8.
Avgouleas and Blair (n 6)
Bossone et al (n 18) 8.
Wadsworth (n 18) 16.
Strengthening American
Leadership in Digital Financial Technology
, Executive Order No 14178, 90 Fed
Reg 8647 (31 January 2025) s 1(a)(v)
<https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2025-01-31/pdf/2025-02123.pdf>.
For a technical discussion
and proposal for CBDC reference architecture, see Architecture, Interoperability
Requirements and Use
Cases Working Group, Digital Currency Global Initiative,
Central Bank Digital Currency Reference Architecture
(Technical Report,
January 2025)
<https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/extcoop/dcgi/Documents/DCGI%20CBDC%20Reference%20Architecture%20Report-20-01-2025.pdf>.
Buckley et al,
‘Sovereign Digital Currencies’ (n 11) 14.
Stefano Leucci,
‘Central Bank Digital Currency’,
European Data Protection
<https://www.edps.europa.eu/press-publications/publications/techsonar/central-bank-digital-currency_en>.
Buckley et al,
‘Sovereign Digital Currencies’ (n 11) 14.
Ibid 14–15.
Applications for Digital Euro Component Providers’,
European Central
(Web Page, 3 January 2024)
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/intro/news/html/ecb.mipnews240103_1.en.html>;
Letter from Christine
Lagarde to Auke Zijlstra, 15 November 2024, 3 n 10
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ecb.mepletter241115_Zijlstra~344bb2c155.en.pdf>.
Wadsworth (n 18) 30.
For a discussion on the
distributional effects of central bank monetary policy, see Felicetti (n 5)
Reserve Bank Act
Reserve Bank Act
’) in respect to
the duties of the Payments System Board and the
Bank of England Act
s 9A in respect to the Bank of England’s financial stability strategy
which includes providing secure and reliable payments
infrastructure. The Bank
of Canada also has a similar core function of promoting safe, sound and
efficient financial systems:
Bank of Canada Act
, RSC 1985, c B-2,
Preamble (‘
Bank of Canada Act
’); ‘Financial
Bank of Canada
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://www.bankofcanada.ca/core-functions/financial-system/>. See also
Alberto Di Iorio, Anneke Kosse and
Ilaria Mattei, ‘Embracing Diversity,
Advancing Together: Results of the 2023 BIS Survey on Central Bank Digital
and Crypto’ (BIS Paper No 147, Bank for International
Settlements, June 2024) 7 <https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap147.pdf>;
Bossone et al (n 18) 6; Bank for International Settlements,
Annual Economic
Report 2020
(Report, June 2020) ch 3
<https://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2020e.pdf> (‘
Annual Report
’); Zellweger-Gutknecht, Geva and Grunewald (n 17) 57.
Treasury (Cth),
Strategic Plan for the Payments System
(Consultation Paper, December 2022)
<https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-12/c2022-343663-final.pdf>;
Tanai Khiaonarong, Harry Leinonen and Ryan Rizaldy, ‘Operational
Resilience in Digital Payments: Experiences and Issues’
(IMF Working Paper
No WP/21/288, International Monetary Fund, 10 December 2021)
<https://doi.org/10.5089/9781616355913.001>.
Future of Digital
(n 7) 6–7, 15–17.
Annual Report 2020
Future of Digital
Reserve Bank of Australia
and Digital Finance Cooperative Research Centre,
Australian CBDC Pilot for
Digital Finance Innovation
(Project Report, August 2023) 9
<https://dfcrc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/australian-cbdc-pilot-for-digital-finance-innovation-project-report.pdf>
Australian CBDC Pilot
Ibid 20. For more
information, see Reserve Bank of Australia and Digital Finance Cooperative
Research Centre, ‘Australian CBDC
Pilot for Digital Finance
Innovation’ (White Paper, 26 September 2022)
<https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/central-bank-digital-currency/pdf/australian-cbdc-pilot-for-digital-finance-innovation-white-paper.pdf>.
See Tessa Satherley and
Daniel May, ‘Natural Disasters and Climate Risk’ (Briefing Book
Article, Parliamentary Library,
Parliament of Australia, 20 June 2022)
<https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_departments/Parliamentary_Library/Research/Briefing_Book/47th_Parliament/NaturalDisastersClimateRisk>.
Opinion of the European
Central Bank of 31 October 2023 on the Digital Euro
[2024] OJ C C/2024/669,
2 <https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/legal/ecb.leg_con_2023_34.en.pdf>
Opinion on the Digital Euro
’). For more on the EU’s
‘strategic autonomy’, see Mario Damen, ‘EU Strategic Autonomy
From Concept to Capacity’ (Briefing, Strategic Foresight
and Capabilities Unit, European Parliamentary Research Service, July
<https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2022/733589/EPRS_BRI(2022)733589_EN.pdf>.
Central Bank of Nigeria,
‘Design Paper for the eNaira’ (Paper) 9
<https://enaira.gov.ng//wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Design-Paper-for-Nigerias-CBDC-02_Oct-2021.pdf>.
Soderberg et al (n 16).
Di Iorio, Kosse and Mattei
(n 34) 6; Zellweger-Gutknecht, Geva and Grunewald (n 17) 48.
Zellweger-Gutknecht, Geva
and Grunewald (n 17) 48.
Soderberg et al (n 16)
See generally Tanai
Khiaonarong and David Humphrey, ‘Measurement and Use of Cash by Half the
World’s Population’
(IMF Working Paper No WP/23/62, International
Monetary Fund, March 2023).
Zellweger-Gutknecht, Geva
and Grunewald (n 17) 9–13.
Bank of England and HM
The Digital Pound: A New Form of Money for Households and
Businesses?
(Consultation Paper No 767, February 2023) 28
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/paper/2023/the-digital-pound-consultation-working-paper.pdf>
New Form of Money
Opinion on the Digital
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, ‘Money and Payments: The US Dollar in the Age of
Digital Transformation’
(Research Paper, January 2022) 14
<https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/money-and-payments-20220120.pdf>
US Dollar’).
See ‘The Digital
Bank of England
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/the-digital-pound>. See also Dong He,
‘Monetary Policy in the Digital Age’
[2018] (June)
Finance and
Development Magazine
13, 16; Vivien Lee and David Wessel, ‘Digital
Currencies: Five Big Implications for Central Banks’,
(online, 21 May 2018)
<https://www.brookings.edu/articles/digital-currencies-five-big-implications-for-central-banks/>.
Working Group on E-CNY
Research and Development of the People’s Bank of China, ‘Progress of
Research and Development
of E-CNY in China’ (White Paper, July 2021),
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/en/3688110/3688172/4157443/4293696/2021071614584691871.pdf
(‘E-CNY in China’).
Soderberg et al (n 16)
See, eg, Isaiah O Ajibola et
al, ‘Currency Substitution and Exchange Rate Volatility in Nigeria: An
Autoregressive Distributed
Lag Approach’ (2020) 11(2)
CBN Journal of
Applied Statistics
1 <https://doi.org/10.33429/Cjas.11220.1/8>; Sani I
Doguwa, ‘Currency Substitution: Evidence from Nigeria’ (2014)
CBN Journal of Applied Statistics
‘Design Paper for the
eNaira’ (n 42) iv.
Bossone et al (n 18) 6;
Future of Digital Money
(n 7) 21–2.
Kieran Murphy, ‘How
Training and Advice Can Speed Cross-Border Payments and Cut Costs’,
(Blog Post, 3 January 2024)
<https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2024/01/03/how-training-and-advice-can-speed-cross-border-payments-and-cut-costs>.
FXC Intelligence,
‘Cross‑Border Payments Market Sizing Data’ (Web Page)
<https://www.fxcintel.com/cross-border-payments-market-sizing-data>,
in Fabio Panetta, ‘Extending the Benefits of Digital Technologies to
Cross-Border Payments’,
The ECB Blog
(Blog Post, 31 October 2023)
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/blog/date/2023/html/ecb.blog231031~85a4bcdee0.en.html>.
Douglas W Arner et al,
‘Building Regional Payment Areas: The Single Rule Book Approach’
(BIS Working Paper No 1016, Bank
for International Settlements, May 2022) 1
<https://www.bis.org/publ/work1016.pdf>.
Panetta (n 60).
Codruta Boar et al,
‘Interoperability between Payment Systems across Borders’ (BIS
Bulletin No 49, 10 December 2021)
<https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull49.pdf>.
Soderberg et al (n 16).
Bank for International
Settlements, International Monetary Fund and World Bank,
Central Bank Digital
Currencies for Cross-Border Payments: Report to the G20
(Report, July 2021)
13 <https://www.bis.org/publ/othp38.pdf> (‘
Report to the
Anthony Ralphs,
‘Simplifying Cross-Border Payments through CBDC Technology’,
(Web Page, 18 December 2023)
<https://www.omfif.org/2023/12/simplifying-cross-border-payments-through-cbdc-technology/>.
Report to the G20
Australian CBDC Pilot
‘The US Dollar’
‘E-CNY in China’
(n 54) 4–5.
‘Design Paper for the
eNaira’ (n 42) 7–8.
See generally Bank of
England, ‘The Bank of England’s Approach to Innovation in Money and
Payments’ (Discussion
Paper, 30 July 2024)
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/paper/2024/the-boes-approach-to-innovation-in-money-and-payments.pdf>;
Di Iorio, Kosse and Mattei (n 34) 7.
Dorothee Delort and Jose
Antonio Garcia, ‘Central Banks and Innovation’,
(Blog Post, 19 April 2023)
<https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/psd/central-banks-and-innovation>.
See Signe Krogstrup,
‘Perspectives on Central Bank Mandates, Instruments and Policy
Trade-Offs’ (Speech, National Bank
of Belgium, 31 March 2022)
<https://www.bis.org/review/r220426g.pdf> (‘Perspectives on Central
Bank Mandates’).
Delort and Garcia (n 73).
Ibid; Agustín
Carstens, ‘Innovation and the Future of the Monetary System’
(Speech, Monetary Authority of Singapore,
22 February 2022)
<https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp230222.htm>.
‘Central Bank Digital
Reserve Bank of Australia
<https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/central-bank-digital-currency/>.
See generally George
Iddenden, ‘Atomic Settlements: The Next Regulatory Challenge?’,
Payments Association
(Web Page, 12 September 2023)
<https://thepaymentsassociation.org/article/atomic-settlements-the-next-regulatory-challenge/>.
Australian CBDC Pilot
(n 38) 9, 11.
‘The Digital
Pound’ (n 53) 28.
‘The US Dollar’
(n 52) 14; ‘Design Paper for the eNaira’ (n 42) 9.
Annual Report 2020
Ibid 67. See also Tony
Richards and Andreas Furche, Digital Finance Cooperative Research Centre,
Central Bank Digital Currencies: An Update on Rationales for Issuance and
Systemic Design Considerations
(Report, December 2022) 4
<https://dfcrc.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/Central-Bank-Digital-Currencies-CBDCs-An-update-on-rationales-for-issuance-and-systemic-design-considerations.pdf>.
Philip Lowe, ‘An
Efficient, Competitive and Safe Payments System’ (Speech, Australian
Payments Network Summit, 14 December
<https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-gov-2022-12-14.html>.
Australian CBDC Pilot
(n 38) 9, 11.
China’ (n 54) 5.
Bank of England,
‘Central Bank Digital Currency: Opportunities, Challenges, and
Design’ (Discussion Paper, 12 March 2020)
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/paper/2020/central-bank-digital-currency-opportunities-challenges-and-design.pdf>
(‘Opportunities, Challenges, and Design’).
‘Design Paper for the
eNaira’ (n 42) 9.
Felicetti (n 5) 79–82;
Di Iorio, Kosse and Mattei (n 34) 7. For more on how FinTech can support the
policy goal of financial
inclusion, see Douglas W Arner et al,
Sustainability, FinTech and Financial Inclusion
(2019) (Law Working Paper
No 006-2019, Faculty of Law, Economics and Finance, University of Luxembourg, 16
May 2019) <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3387359>.
Future of Digital Money
(n 7) 17–18.
See eg, Vijay Kumar, Sujani
Thrikawala and Sanjeev Acharya, ‘Financial Inclusion and Bank
Profitability: Evidence from a Developed
Market’ (2022) 53
Finance Journal
100609: 1–12
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfj.2021.100609>.
Soderberg et al (n 16). See
also Raphael Auer et al, ‘Central Bank Digital Currencies: A New Tool in
the Financial Inclusion
Toolkit?’ (FSI Insights No 41, Bank for
International Settlements, 12 April 2022)
<https://www.bis.org/fsi/publ/insights41.pdf>.
Ashley Lannquist and Brandon
Tan, ‘Central Bank Digital Currency’s Role in Promoting Financial
Inclusion’ (FinTech
Note No 2023/011, International Monetary Fund,
September 2023) <https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400253331.063>.
Brandon Joel Tan,
‘Central Bank Digital Currency and Financial Inclusion’ (IMF Working
Paper No 23/69, International
Monetary Fund, March 2023) 3
<https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400238277.001>.
‘Design Paper for the
eNaira’ (n 42) 6.
Australian CBDC Pilot
(n 38) 4–6.
‘Opportunities,
Challenges, and Design’ (n 88) 19.
Felicetti (n 5)
Andrew Dahdal,
Currencies and Public Law: History, Constitutionalism and the Revolutionary
Nature of Money
(Routledge, 2025) 60
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003478362>.
Ibid. See also Michael D
Bordo, ‘The Evolution of Central Banks’,
Hoover Institution
(Web Page, 14 November 2022)
<https://www.hoover.org/research/evolution-central-banks>.
Michael D Bordo, ‘A
Brief History of Central Banks’ (Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland, December
For a study setting out
the primary, and other, objectives of central bank mandates, see Simon Dikau and
Ulrich Volz, ‘Central
Bank Mandates, Sustainability Objectives and the
Promotion of Green Finance’ (2021) 184
Ecological Economics
107022:1–20 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107022>.
See ‘How Are
Central Bank Mandates Evolving?’,
Alliance for Financial Inclusion
(Web Page, 7 November 2023)
<https://www.afi-global.org/newsroom/news/how-are-central-bank-mandates-evolving/>
Evolving’); Jerome H Powell, ‘Panel on
“Central Bank Independence and the Mandate”: Evolving Views’
(Speech, Symposium on Central Bank Independence, 10 January 2023)
<https://www.bis.org/review/r230111a.pdf>.
Advisory Group on APEC
Financial System Capacity Building et al,
Promoting Financial Inclusion
through Innovative Policies
(Report, 2010) 60
<https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/159344/adbi-financial-inclusion-innovative-policies.pdf>.
‘Opportunities,
Challenges, and Design’ (n 88) 19.
‘Perspectives on
Central Bank Mandates’ (n 74).
Felicetti (n 5) 70.
See Charles Goodhart and
Rosa Lastra, ‘The Changing and Growing Roles of Independent Central Banks
Now Do Require a Reconsideration
of Their Mandate’ (2023) 14(4)
of Accounting, Economics, and Law: A Convivium
<https://doi.org/10.1515/ael-2022-0097>.
Evolving’ (n 104).
See, eg, Jim Chalmers,
‘Strengthening and Modernising the Reserve Bank’ (Media Release,
Treasury Ministers, 27 November
<https://ministers.treasury.gov.au/ministers/jim-chalmers-2022/media-releases/strengthening-and-modernising-reserve-bank>.
See Ross P Buckley,
Douglas W Arner and Dirk A Zetzsche,
FinTech: Finance, Technology and
(Cambridge University Press, 2024) 228–9
<https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009086943>; Ross P Buckley et al,
Fintech and Innovation Ecosystems’ (2024) 59
Financial Transformation
Soderberg et al (n 16)
See Christopher J Waller,
‘CBDC: A Solution in Search of a Problem?’ (Speech, American
Enterprise Institute, 5 August
<https://www.bis.org/review/r210806a.htm>.
Issues with the ASX CHESS
Replacement Project and its governance arrangements were a significant focus of
a recent parliamentary
inquiry: Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations
and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Statutory Inquiry into ASIC,
the Takeovers Panel, and the Corporations Legislation
(Report, April 2024)
<https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/committees/reportjnt/RB000185/toc_pdf/StatutoryinquiryintoASIC,theTakeoversPanel,andthecorporationslegislation.pdf>.
See also Reserve Bank of Australia,
Assessment of ASX Clearing and Settlement
(Report, September 2022) ch 4
<https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/financial-market-infrastructure/clearing-and-settlement-facilities/assessments/2021-2022/pdf/report-2021-2022.pdf>;
Lucas Baird, ‘ASX Ignored Warnings, Made Unworkable Demands on CHESS,
Inquiry Hears’,
Australian Financial Review
(online, 8 June 2023)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/financial-services/asx-ignored-warnings-made-unworkable-demands-on-chess-inquiry-hears-20230608-p5dezh>.
Future of Digital
‘Central Bank
Digital Currency’,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(Web Page, 2 August 2024)
<https://www.federalreserve.gov/central-bank-digital-currency.htm>.
Jean Flemming and Ruth
Judson, ‘Implications of a US CBDC for International Payments and the Role
of the Dollar’,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(Web Page, 16 February 2024)
<https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/implications-of-a-u-s-cbdc-for-international-payments-and-the-role-of-the-dollar-20240216.html>.
Bank of Japan,
Bank of Japan’s Approach to Central Bank Digital Currency
October 2020) 1
<https://www.boj.or.jp/en/about/release_2020/data/rel201009e1.pdf>.
Relevant Ministries and
Bank of Japan,
Relevant Ministries and the Bank of Japan Liaison Meeting on
Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC)
(Interim Report, 17 April 2024) 2
<https://www.mof.go.jp/english/about_mof/councils/meeting_of_cbdcli/20240612chuukanseirien.pdf>.
Danmarks Nationalbank,
‘New Types of Digital Money’ (Analysis No 8, 23 June 2022) 3
<https://www.nationalbanken.dk/media/z12aimyo/analysis-no-8-new-types-of-digital-money.pdf>
(‘New Types Analysis’).
‘Perspectives on
Central Bank Mandates’ (n 74) 5.
Brad Jones, ‘The
Economics of a Central Bank Digital Currency in Australia’ (Speech,
Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure
of Financial Markets, 8 December
2022) 2 <https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/pdf/sp-ag-2022-12-08.pdf>;
Markus K Brunnermeier,
Harold James and Jean-Pierre Landau, ‘The
Digitisation of Money’ (BIS Working Paper No 941, Bank for International
Settlements,
May 2021) 3 <https://www.bis.org/publ/work941.pdf>; Jon
Cunliffe, ‘Do We Need “Public Money”?’ (Speech,
Digital Money Institute, 13 May 2021)
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2021/may/jon-cunliffe-omfif-digital-monetary-institute-meeting>.
For a discussion on the
decline of cash usage, see Khiaonarong and Humphrey (n 48).
Francisco Rivadeneyra,
Scott Hendry and Alejandro García, ‘The Role of Public Money in the
Digital Age’ (Staff
Discussion Paper No 2024–11, Bank of Canada, 10
July 2024) 8
<https://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/sdp2024-11.pdf>;
Hanna Armelius, Carl Andreas Claussen and Scott Hendry, ‘Is Central Bank
Digital Currency Fundamental to the Monetary System?’
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review
Central Bank of Kenya,
‘Discussion Paper on Central Bank Digital Currency: Comments from the
Public’ (Paper, May 2023)
<https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Discussion-Paper-on-Central-Bank-Digital-Currency-Comments-from-the-Public.pdf>
(‘Comments from the Public’).
See Tony Richards,
‘Retail Central Bank Digital Currency: Design Considerations and
Rationales’ (Speech, UWA Blockchain,
Cryptocurrency and Fintech
Conference, 14 October 2020)
<https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2020/sp-so-2020-10-14.html>. For a
on the likely timing of central banks issuing a CBDC, see Di Iorio, Kosse and
Mattei (n 34) 8.
Heng Wang and Ross
Buckley, ‘The Coming Central Bank Digital Currency Revolution and the
e-CNY’ [2023] (March)
Singapore Journal of Legal Studies
See Tom McIlroy and James
Eyers, ‘Chalmers Reassures on Cash Supplies after Armaguard
Australian Financial Review
(online, 5 April 2024)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/financial-services/chalmers-reassures-on-cash-supplies-after-armaguard-meeting-20240405-p5fhpw>;
Lucas Baird, ‘Why It’s So Hard to Keep Cash Alive in
Australia’,
Australian Financial Review
(online, 26 March 2024)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/financial-services/aba-says-australia-s-geography-makes-keep-cash-alive-particularly-hard-20240326-p5ffb2>;
James Eyers, ‘Last-Minute Lifeline to Keep Cash Afloat’,
Australian Financial Review
(online, 25 March 2024)
<https://www.afr.com/companies/financial-services/banks-retailers-offer-last-minute-lifeline-to-keep-cash-afloat-20240319-p5fdgr>.
Future of Digital
‘Comments from the
Public’ (n 129) 31.
‘Development of a
Bank of England Retail Digital Pound Should “Proceed with Caution”,
UK Parliament
(online, 2 December 2023)
<https://committees.parliament.uk/committee/158/treasury-committee/news/198770/development-of-a-bank-of-england-retail-digital-pound-should-proceed-with-caution-mps-warn/>.
Annual Report 2020
‘Accessibility
Reserve Bank of Australia Banknotes
<https://banknotes.rba.gov.au/resources/for-people-with-vision-impairment/accessibility-features/>.
‘Central Bank
Digital Currency Tracker’,
Atlantic Council
<https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/cbdctracker/>.
For example, in Denmark,
the decision not to issue a CBDC appears to have been made by its central bank
without any public debate.
See ‘New Types Analysis’ (n 124) 3; Signe
Krogstrup, ‘New Types of Digital Money’ (Speech, Danmarks
Nationalbank,
9 March 2023)
<https://www.nationalbanken.dk/media/zh3n2jbu/skro-keynote-cbdc.pdf>.
Soderberg et al (n 16)
‘Law Reform
Australian Law Reform Commission
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/about/law-reform-process/>.
Office of Impact
Analysis, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Cth), ‘Best
Practice Consultation’ (Guidance
Note, July 2023) 7
<https://oia.pmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-08/best-practice-consultation.pdf>.
Reserve Bank of
Australia and Digital Finance Cooperative Research Centre,
Project Acacia:
Exploring the Role of Digital Money in Wholesale Tokenised Asset Markets
(Consultation Paper, November 2024)
<https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/central-bank-digital-currency/pdf/project-acacia-consultation-paper-2024-11.pdf>.
New Form of Money
Bank of England and HM
Treasury, ‘Response to the Bank of England and HM Treasury Consultation
Paper: The Digital Pound’
(Consultation Response, January 2024)
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/paper/2024/responses-to-the-digital-pound-consultation-paper.pdf>.
‘Progress Update:
The Digital Pound and the Payments Landscape’,
Bank of England
Page, 14 January 2025)
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2025/digital-pound-progress-update>.
See also the European
Central Bank, where the consultation process concerned gathering views on the
benefits and challenges of issuing
a digital euro and its possible design:
‘Digital Euro: Listening to the Public’,
European Central
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/euro/digital_euro/html/pubcon.en.html>.
Media Relations,
‘Bank of Canada Launches Public Consultations on a Digital Dollar’
(Press Release, Bank of Canada, 8
<https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2023/05/bank-canada-launches-public-consultations-digital-dollar/>.
‘Digital Canadian
Bank of Canada
<https://www.bankofcanada.ca/digitaldollar/>. See also Kyle Bakx and
Meegan Read, ‘Bank of Canada Shelves
Idea for Digital Loonie’,
(online, 18 September 2024)
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/bakx-boc-cbdc-digital-currency-1.7326887>.
See generally Huosong
Xia, Yangmei Gao, and Justin Zuopeng Zhang, ‘Understanding the Adoption
Context of China’s Digital
Currency Electronic Payment’ (2023) 9(1)
Financial Innovation
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854-023-00467-5>; ‘E-CNY in China’
See ‘History: The
Bahamian Payments Systems Modernisation Initiative’,
(Web Page) <https://www.sanddollar.bs/history>; Central Bank of the
Project Sand Dollar: A Bahamas Payments System Modernisation
(Report, 24 December 2019) 6
<https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/viewPDF/documents/2019-12-25-02-18-11-Project-Sanddollar.pdf>;
Soderberg et al (n 16) 18.
Digital Euro Association,
‘Lessons from the First Implemented CBDC: The Sand Dollar’,
Digital Euro Association Blog
(Blog Post, 23 June 2023)
<https://blog.digital-euro-association.de/lessons-from-the-sand-dollar?>.
See Andréa M
Maechler, ‘Technology and Inclusion in Central Banking’ (Speech, BIS
Innovation Summit, 7 May 2024)
<https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp240507.htm>
for a discussion on the need for central banks to build diverse teams with the
necessary experience.
Future of Digital
See Mihai Niţoi and
Maria-Miruna Pochea, ‘Trust in the Central Bank, Financial Literacy, and
Personal Beliefs’ (2024)
Journal of International Money and
103066: 1–20
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jimonfin.2024.103066>; Claudio Borio, ‘On
Money, Debt, Trust and Central
Banking’ (Speech, Annual Monetary
Conference, 15 November 2018) <https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp181115.pdf>;
Braun, ‘Speaking to the People? Money, Trust, and Central Bank
Legitimacy in the Age of Quantitative Easing’ (2016) 23(6)
International Political Economy
<https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2016.1252415>. See also Dahdal (n
Committee on Payment and
Settlement Systems, Bank for International Settlements,
The Role of Central
Money in Payment Systems
(Report, August 2003) 43. See, eg,
Reserve Bank
(n 34) s 34;
Bank of Canada Act
(n 34) s 25(1);
Bank Charter
, 7 & 8 Vict, c 32, ss 10–11.
Annual Report 2020
Dahdal (n 100) 159.
‘The Digital
Bank of England
<https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/the-digital-pound>;
New Form of
Future of Digital
(n 7) 32–3.
For discussion on citizen
juries and their role in deliberative democracy, see Graham Smith and Corinne
Wales, ‘Citizens’
Juries and Deliberative Democracy’
Political Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9248.00250>.
‘What is a Citizen
newDemocracy
<https://www.newdemocracy.com.au/what-is-a-citizens-jury/>; Kyle Bozentko
et al, ‘The Wisdom of Small Crowds:
The Case for Using Citizens’
Juries to Shape Policy’,
(online, 11 June 2021)
<https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-wisdom-of-small-crowds-the-case-for-using-citizens-juries-to-shape-policy/>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (191 KB)
PDF format (329 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter