URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dixon, Rosalind --- "A New Australian Constitutionalism? Constitutional Purposes, Proportionality and Process Theory" [2024] SydLawRw 23; (2024) 46(4) Sydney Law Review 455
I Introduction
II Bedrock Principles in Australian Constitutional Law
III From Old to New Constitutional Approaches
A Purposive or Functionalist Approaches to Construction
B Proportionality-Based Reasoning
C Representation-Sensitive Constructional Choice
IV Why a New Australian Constitutionalism
A Purposive Construction
B Structured Proportionality, Democracy and the Rule of Law
C Process-Sensitive Reasoning (or Judicial Representation Reinforcement)
V One or Three New Constitutional Models
VI Conclusion
George Winterton Memorial Lecture 2024
A New Australian
Constitutionalism? Constitutional Purposes, Proportionality and Process
Australian constitutional law rests on a foundation of settled principle,
including the idea that Australian constitutionalism comprises
a mix of legal
and political, negative and positive, and fixed and dynamic, constitutional
commitments. It also depends on a series
of settled substantive principles.
Beyond this, there is greater contest between three rival visions of
constitutional reasoning:
legalism versus purposive or
‘functionalist’ approaches to interpretation; autochthonous versus
proportionality-based
tests of constitutional validity; and context-invariant
versus process-sensitive or ‘representation-reinforcing’ approaches
to construction. This essay explores these three dimensions of contest, and
argues for the benefits of the newer approach within
each of these dyads. Each
of these approaches is conceptually and empirically distinct. But each offers
important benefits from a
democratic and rule of law perspective, and has
affinities from a conceptual and comparative viewpoint. The essay therefore
for a new purposive, proportionality-based and process-sensitive approach
to constitutional construction, as a unified approach to
constitutional
construction in Australia.
It also notes the incipient support for each element of this approach within
the judgment of members of the High Court of Australia
in recent Ch III
Introduction
Democratic constitutionalism in Australia subsists on a bedrock of certain
widely agreed principles, including the idea that the Australian
constitutional
order consists of a mix of legal and political, negative and positive, and fixed
and dynamic, constitutional
commitments.
The Australian constitutional order is also characterised by a range of
substantive principles shaped by these macro-constitutional
commitments.
But, beyond this ‘bedrock constitutional layer’, there is greater
contest over the future and foundations of the Australian
constitutional
Two models compete, in this context, for ascendancy in Australian
constitutional discourse,
emphasising three broad ideas about how the High Court of Australia should
approach the construction of the
Commonwealth
Constitution
. One model
features ‘legalism’, the use of autochthonous tests of
constitutional validity, and context-invariant principles
of constitutional
construction.
A newer, alternative model emphasises a more contextual approach involving
attention to constitutional purposes, proportionality
and process-based
considerations (‘three constitutional p’s’) — or
constitutional values, proportionality
and judicial ‘representation
reinforcement’.
The aim of the essay is to defend these ‘newer’ approaches, or
constitutional p’s, by highlighting the ways in which
they may help
advance commitments to democracy and the rule of law in
These three constitutional p’s are used as a shorthand for an approach
that involves attention to: (1) either constitutional
purposes or constitutional
values (noting that the two concepts are related but not identical, and that one
involves a ‘purposive’
and the other a ‘functionalist’
approach); (2) the notion of proportionality, but potentially involving
different stages
and variants; and (3) a variety of potential approaches to
judicial representation reinforcement.
The three p’s need not go together. This is true theoretically, and
evidenced by the fact that no current member of the Court
has explicitly
endorsed all three approaches. There is, however, a conceptual connection
between them which underpins the claim that
they can and should be viewed as
part of a new — if as yet unrealised or nascent —
model of Australian constitutional reasoning. Both purposive and functionalist
kinds of reasoning invite forms of constitutional
balancing usefully mediated
through a test of structured
proportionality.
Purposive construction in Australia invites attention to democracy as a
constitutional value, and hence representation-reinforcing
considerations. And
structured proportionality invites a range of difficult evaluative judgments by
courts, the political legitimacy
of which can be enhanced by explicit
consideration of democracy and representation-reinforcing arguments. While
existing legalist
approaches invite many of the same considerations, they do not
do so as openly, or to the same degree.
The essay also seeks to defend the three p’s as
a general approach
to constitutional construction. Of course, how they apply will vary
according to the context. Some constitutional values will be more
relevant in
some contexts than others. And the notion of proportionality will need to be
adjusted according to the nature of the
constitutional issue at stake. For
instance, it will need to be understood as involving one-, two- and three-stage
variants, of which
only the three-stage version is equivalent to current notions
of ‘structured proportionality’. Structured proportionality
may need to be glossed to accommodate a range of contextual, common-law style
and democratic considerations. But, subject
to these modifications, the argument
the essay makes is for a newly integrated approach by the Court, which
encompasses each of the
three constitutional p’s across all (or almost
all) areas of constitutional discourse.
In this sense, the argument the essay makes is for something like an
Australian version of the ‘new constitutionalism’
adopted in Latin
America in the 1990s — an approach that, while not wholly new, was
associated with an important shift in courts’
interpretive approaches in
the region during a time of broader democratic constitutional transition. While
the contours of this approach
are often contested, most scholars agree that, at
a minimum, this new constitutionalism involved greater reliance by courts on
constitutional
values and notions of
proportionality
as well as, some might argue, implicit commitments to judicial representation
reinforcement.
It was also widely defended as helping mark a transition to a more democratic,
substantive vision of constitutional
The essay also illustrates the plausibility, and distinctiveness, of this new
approach by reference to four recent decisions of the
Court involving Ch III of
Constitution
Benbrika No
the central question was whether the Legislative
Assembly of the Northern Territory (‘NT’) could give NT police the
to arrest and detain certain suspects and hold them for four hours pending
a decision to charge, or else release them unconditionally
or in conjunction
with an infringement notice. The key constitutional question was whether this
scheme effectively undermined the
independence and integrity of NT courts as
courts capable of exercising federal jurisdiction, or the
as it applied to NT courts. In
, the question before the Court was
whether Western Australia’s scheme for the preventative detention of
‘high risk serious
offenders’ was compatible with the
principle, or the independence and integrity of state courts as courts
capable of exercising federal jurisdiction. In
Benbrika No 2
, the Court
was required to consider whether provisions of the
Australian Citizenship
(Cth) authorising the Minister of Home Affairs to strip
certain convicted offenders (and dual nationals) of their citizenship was
inconsistent with the constitutionally prescribed separation of Commonwealth
judicial and non-judicial power.
, the question was
whether the Commonwealth Parliament could authorise the Minister of Home Affairs
to detain non-citizens for the
purpose of their potential later removal or
deportation from Australia where there was no reasonably foreseeable prospect of
removal and, related to that, whether relevant provisions of the
Migration Act 1958
should be interpreted as having that
effect. The answers were also variable: in
majority of the Court upheld the relevant schemes against challenge, whereas in
Benbrika No 2
the Court was (near) unanimous in striking
down the relevant legislation.
But each of the ‘new’ approaches or principles was evident in the
judgments of at least one Justice in each case. For
instance, constitutional
values played a notable role in the decisions of Justice Gordon in both
Benbrika No 2
and (then) Justice Gageler in
. Proportionality-based reasoning was a notable feature of Justice
Edelman’s reasoning in
Benbrika No 2
process-sensitivity was a hallmark of Justice Gageler’s dissent in
. And while none of these approaches gained support from a majority
of the Court, or was wholly new — each finds some support
in different
judgments of the Court across the last few decades — they were distinct
from the approach taken by the majority,
and the Court, in many prior cases.
The remainder of the essay is divided into five Parts.
certain foundational constitutional principles in Australia, which it suggests
should be viewed as largely settled or agreed
starting points for debates over
preferred approaches to constitutional construction.
explores the more
contested dimensions to the Australian constitutional model, and especially the
contrast between old and new approaches
to questions of legalism, sufficiency of
connection and context-sensitive interpretation.
outlines the key
democratic and rule of law arguments in favour of a ‘new’ more
purposive, proportionality-based and
process-sensitive approach to these
questions, while
considers their inter-dependence as well as their
independent status as principles of construction.
offers a brief
conclusion on the prospects for the new Australian constitutional model.
Bedrock Principles in Australian Constitutional
Like many other constitutional systems worldwide, the Australian
constitutional system consists of a mix of ‘legal’ and
‘political’ constitutional
Constitution
is a written, entrenched legal
instrument interpreted and enforced by the High Court of Australia. In that
sense, it embodies a canonically
‘legal’ model of
constitutionalism.
At the same time, the
Constitution
operates against the backdrop of a
range of unwritten,
conventional
constitutional norms, including norms of
responsible government and parliamentary rights
protection.
These norms are also
largely enforced through political rather than legal
This is part of what is meant when we talk about Australia as having a
‘Washminster’ system of government: this conveys
the idea that the
drafters of the
Constitution
borrowed from the United States
(‘US’) a system of federalism and an entrenched separation of
judicial and non-judicial
power, while retaining a United Kingdom
(‘UK’) style model of parliamentary democracy and responsible
government.
But it also conveys
the idea that core Australian constitutional norms are enforced through a mix of
legal and political processes
mechanisms.
There are also other ways in which Australia’s constitutional order
reflects a mix of legal and political constitutional models.
Constitution
itself affirms the central role of the Commonwealth
Parliament in the process of constitutional implementation. The
Constitution
contains a range of ‘by law’ clauses that permit
or require the Parliament to enact legislation implementing constitutional
requirements, or else permit Parliament to modify certain constitutional default
This is a hallmark of a constitutional model that combines legal and political
forms of constitutional
enforcement.
In addition, there are a growing number of tribunals and independent agencies
that play a critical role in the implementation of written
and unwritten
constitutional
In a comparative context, Mark Tushnet labels this the rise of a constitutional
‘fourth branch’.
Australia, this fourth branch also includes bodies such as Commonwealth and
state ombudsmen, integrity institutions, electoral
commissions and human rights
commissions, all of which rely on a mix of legal and political tools, and play a
central role in enforcing
capital ‘C’ and small ‘c’
constitutional norms.
Australian constitutionalism likewise rests on the idea of both a negative
and positive
Some scholars suggest that the very notion of constitutionalism is predicated on
there being limits to state action. Martin Loughlin,
for example, argues that
this is one reason we should reject the idea of constitutionalism within modern
democratic self-government.
Australian constitutional model also clearly contemplates a range of limits on
the actions of Commonwealth and state parliaments,
and those of executive
But, as a range of recent scholarship makes clear, the Australian
constitutional model is also predicated on a commitment to
state to act — not only for the protection of individual rights but also
for general ‘social
Numerous powers in
Constitution
empower Parliament to tax and
spend in ways that reflect the logic of a social welfare
Constitution
was shaped by a concern for workers’ rights, and a strong tradition of
Chartist thought and activism in
The political
constitution in Australia has also long reflected commitments to egalitarianism,
economic redistribution and a strong
Australian constitutionalism is also defined by competing commitments to
stability and change. On some level, this is true for all
constitutional systems worldwide. But Australian constitutionalism is also
characterised by
attempts to reconcile these commitments. For
instance, the High Court has generally eschewed both the idea of a purely
‘originalist’
or backward-looking approach to constitutional
construction and one that embraces the idea of a constitutional ‘living
Instead, it has
endorsed a ‘hybrid’ approach that distinguishes between the original
‘denotation’ of constitutional
language (which is not open to
change) and its contemporary ‘connotation’, as something that may
change in light of evolving
social attitudes and
understandings.
In addition, the Australian constitutional order combines a quite rigid
model of capital ‘C’ written constitutionalism
with a far more
flexible model of small ‘c’ constitutionalism and change:
Constitution
, for example, makes formal constitutional amendment
extremely difficult.
are far fewer obstacles to legislative change. We also have an active practice
and culture of legislative
Hence, the Australian
small ‘c’ constitutional model has been regularly updated by the
passage of a range of small ‘c’
or quasi-constitutional statutes
such as the
Racial Discrimination Act
Discrimination Act
Disability Discrimination Act
Age Discrimination Act
In addition to these ‘macro’ principles, the Australian
constitutional order arguably embodies a range of substantive
principles that
both reflect and are shaped by this
macro-structure.
principles are part of what makes Australian constitutionalism unique or
distinctive, in global terms, and what defines the
precise way
universal tensions within democratic constitutionalism are accommodated within
From Old to New Constitutional Approaches
There are, however, other elements of Australia’s constitutional model
that are less settled, or more open to contest: for instance,
autochthonous tests of constitutional validity, and context-invariant approaches
to construction.
‘Legalism’ in Australia is most prominently associated with the
ideas of Sir Owen Dixon, who argued for a ‘strict
and complete
legalism’ as the safest guide to the construction of the
Commonwealth
Constitution
Legalism, for Dixon, was clearly not the same as textualism: as a judge, Dixon
authored numerous opinions relying on modalities of
the text or language of the
Constitution
Indeed, some of Dixon’s most enduring constitutional decisions placed
significant reliance on constitutional history and structure
as well as prior
Legalism, in this
sense, is also best understood as an approach to constitutional construction
that permits attention to constitutional
text, history, structure
But it is also an
approach that downplays the relevance, or appropriateness, of attention to
broader values, or the consequences
And it is an approach that has commanded support from a wide range of lawyers
and judges.
Two other ideas are closely associated with the idea of legalism in
constitutional construction in Australia. First, the Court has
held that, at
least in the context of
Constitution
, the validity of
Commonwealth laws should be assessed by reference to either of two distinctly
Australian tests that ask whether
• sufficiently connected or ‘appropriate and adapted’ to a
particular head of power, or else
• ‘reasonably appropriate and adapted’ to advancing a
legitimate government purpose,
as to be within power, or avoid contravening a relevant constitutional
limitation.
The Court has also applied similar tests of reasonable necessity, or tests that
ask whether a law is ‘reasonably appropriate
and adapted’ to its
ends, in a range of other contexts — including Ch III of the
Constitution
Second, the
Court has held that the
Constitution
should be interpreted as an ordinary
legal text, and hence given its ordinary and natural meaning, without regard to
any ongoing
assumptions about the nature of federalism or the relationship
between the Commonwealth and the
In effect, this means
that the Court has endorsed a form of
context-invariant
approach to the
construction of Commonwealth legislative power.
Both approaches have legalist underpinnings: they state the question of
constitutional construction in ways that avoid any express
consideration of the costs or benefits of a law to the achievement of particular
constitutional or legislative purposes.
Legalism, autochthonous tests of
constitutional validity, and context-invariant approaches to construction are
thus all closely related
ideas. And each retains clear support in current
constitutional argument and practice.
At the same time, these legalist principles are under pressure from three
rival ideas or principles: purposive construction, proportionality-based
reasoning, and process-sensitive approaches to constitutional construction. As
notes, each of these ideas finds support in the judgments of at least
one current member of the High Court, as well as certain prior
decisions of the
Court. And, as
explores, they have a strong normative basis in ways that
make them true rivals in debates over the preferred approach to constitutional
construction in Australia.
Purposive or Functionalist Approaches to
Construction
What does it mean to talk about a ‘purposive’ approach to
constitutional construction? The idea of a purposive approach
to statutory
interpretation emphasises the importance of attention to statutory text, but
also the broader context in which a statute
is enacted. As the High Court held
Project Blue Sky v Australian Broadcasting Authority
, this can include
attention to a range of sources, including the legislative history behind the
law, the structure of legislation
and the broader context for a law’s
The same is true in a constitutional context. A purposive approach to
constitutional construction implies attention to the broader
purposes behind
particular constitutional provisions, and the constitutional project as a whole.
This, in turn, invites attention
to the text and structure of the
Constitution
as a whole, as well as the convention debates and debates
over constitutional ratification. This was the approach endorsed by the
Cole v Whitfield
in overruling prior doctrine limiting the
Court’s capacity to pay direct attention to the convention debates and
other legislative
history underpinning the
Constitution
The Court held that it was permissible to consider these sources for three broad
purposes: for identifying the contemporary usages
of constitutional language,
for identifying the mischief to which particular provisions were directed, and
for the broad purposes
Federation.
therefore set the stage for an important, if incremental, shift in
Australian constitutional construction toward a more purposive
approach animated
by a concern for the construction of particular provisions in the context of the
Constitution
as a whole, or an approach sensitive to the broad purposes
animating our federal constitutional
arrangements.
At the same time, constitutional ‘purposes’ can be construed at
varying levels of generality. The more abstract the characterisation
provision’s purpose, the more it lends itself to an evolving or dynamic
characterisation, whereas the more concrete or
specific the ways in which we
understand constitutional purpose, the more constraining it will be and less
capable of adapting to
changing circumstances. Recent decisions also reveal a
willingness to embrace more abstract notions of constitutional
which implicitly include purposes not fully foreseen by
the founders of a constitution, or a notion of evolving constitutional
Constitutional values are distinct from ordinary community or social values
in one important way: their construction is informed by
legal sources such as
the text, history and structure of a constitution, as well as prior case
Hence, the effort is to guide constructional choice by reference to a range of
legally grounded
But even still, the process necessarily invites attention to relatively abstract
constitutional values in ways that stand in clear
contrast to the call for a
form of ‘strict and complete
attention to such values could be seen as linked to a distinctive model of
functionalist
interpretation which emphasises constitutional substance
over form and the central role of judicial evaluative judgment in the making
constitutional constructional
A functionalist approach of this kind is evident in a range of High Court
cases, including recent decisions involving Ch III. For
instance, in
in applying the
principle, both Justices
Gordon and Gageler made explicit
constitutional
as informing the scope of exceptions to the
Their Honours held,
first, that these exceptions must not be construed so broadly that they
‘becom[e] the rule’.
Second, they held that the exceptions should be construed in light of relevant
constitutional values — including commitments
to individual liberty and
the rule of law.
Gageler J made
particular reference to the importance of the rule of law, in this
whereas Gordon J
emphasised the centrality of individual
But both Justices
emphasised constitutional values as reasons for finding that the relevant scheme
was incompatible with the reasoning
and the limits imposed by the
Proportionality-Based Reasoning
Structured proportionality was first adopted as a doctrine in Australia by a
majority of the High Court in
McCloy v New South Wales
in the context of
the implied freedom of political
communication.
, in cases involving the implied freedom, the Court
had asked whether a law engaged the freedom, and then whether it was reasonably
appropriate and adapted to achieving a legitimate end in a manner compatible
with the constitutionally prescribed system of representative
and responsible
government.
the Court held that a doctrine of structured proportionality could be
substituted for this test of whether a law was ‘reasonably
appropriate and
The Court in
suggested that the doctrine has three limbs or
elements. First, it asks whether a law is suitable to pursuing a legitimate
purpose. Second, it asks whether a law is narrowly tailored to that
purpose or is capable of being described as satisfying the requirements
minimal impairment of relevant constitutional norms or values. And third, it
asks whether a law is adequate in the balance, meaning
achieves more in terms of
the relevant legislative objective than it imposes in terms of relevant harms to
constitutionally significant
norms or values. This is in addition to the
question of whether a law pursues a legitimate government purpose, and does so
in a manner
compatible with the constitutionally prescribed system of
representative and responsible
government.
A test of structured proportionality is closely related to the Court’s
earlier test for determining constitutional validity,
which asked whether a law
was reasonably capable of being seen as appropriate and adapted to its
This doctrinal formulation has itself varied from time to time in ways that have
pointed to a greater or lesser willingness of the
Court to provide leeway to the
Parliament in the making of judgments about these matters. Hence,
proportionality could be seen as
a modest adjustment of the standard of review
applied by the Court in relation to the implied freedom of political
communication.
The most significant departure from prior approaches lies in a willingness
directly and openly to consider questions of adequacy in
This limb of the test
is rarely the sole basis for the Court’s resolution of questions of
constructional choice. But its inclusion
in a test of constitutional validity
still marks an important shift away from a more distinctively legalist test of
sufficiency of
connection, or one that asks whether a law is ‘reasonably
appropriate and adapted to its purpose’. It also marks a shift
quite distinctive or ‘autochthonous’ Australian approach toward a
more globally recognised approach to questions
of constitutional validity.
Structured proportionality is a doctrine that finds its origins in Germany
and the European Court of Human
It has migrated over
time to countries as diverse as Canada, South Africa, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong
and Colombia.
It is also an
increasing focus of jurisprudential and scholarly attention in other parts of
the Anglo-American world, including in
the UK, New Zealand and the US. While the
US Supreme Court continues to employ a form of categorical, tiered reasoning
which provides
an alternative to proportionality-based approaches, several
prominent US scholars have noted the intimations of proportionality-style
reasoning in aspects of the US Court’s recent jurisprudence on due process
and equal protection. Indeed, Moshe Cohen-Eliya
and Iddo Porat have suggested
that ‘almost all constitutional courts ... are adopting the doctrine of
proportionality as their
main pillar of constitutional
adjudication’.
question is the specific variant of proportionality a court adopts.
In Australia, the doctrine has also found clear majority support from the
Court in the context of the implied freedom of political
communication and the
application of
Constitution
, and the determination of whether
a law burdening interstate trade and commerce can be considered reasonably
necessary for a non-protectionist
Justice Edelman in
particular has also endorsed the extension of the doctrine to other contexts,
including Ch III of the
Constitution
. The Court in
expressly rejected the usefulness of structured proportionality to the
application of the
in applying the
principle, Edelman J
expressly relied on proportionality-style considerations as relevant to
determining whether the relevant legislative
scheme infringed the
Benbrika No
, Edelman J again adopted a distinctive approach to the application of the
principle, linking the concept of a punitive law to one that is
‘not proportionate to, or sufficiently connected with, an otherwise
legitimate purpose’,
emphasising the severity of the consequences of citizenship deprivation for
individuals, in this context.
And even more notably, in
, the Court expressly noted Edelman’s
preference for a test of proportionality in the course of its joint
In the recent decision
, Edelman J further elaborated this approach, noting its
connection to functionalism or a commitment to the protection of individual
Representation-Sensitive Constructional
The idea of process-based reasoning, or judicial representation
reinforcement, is less familiar to Australian constitutional lawyers.
prominent advocate of this approach in Australia is Chief Justice Stephen
Gageler, who has explicitly endorsed this approach
in his extra-judicial
Gageler draws, in this context, on a long tradition of
representation-reinforcing thinking in Australia and especially the US,
the work of John Hart Ely in
Democracy and Distrust: A Theory of
In the US context, Ely argued that the Supreme Court should avoid making
contested moral judgments in the interpretation of various
open-ended clauses of
Constitution
, and instead leave such questions to the political
branches of government. In this sense, Ely offered a critique — and
— to what he saw as the excesses of the Warren Court era in the
At the same time, Ely argued that the Supreme Court had an important role to
play in ensuring that the democratic process functioned
sufficiently well to
warrant judicial deference of this kind. Specifically, he argued that the Court
had a central role to play in
(1) maintaining the channels of political change,
especially in the face of attempts by incumbents to ‘clog’ those
or tilt them in their own favour, and (2) protecting the rights of
‘discrete and insular minorities’, in the face of
majoritarian
disregard or excesses.
The ideas have received criticism — especially because Ely claimed that
the theory he proposed was in some sense ‘neutral’
or objective, or
marked a sharp distinction between a procedural and a substantive role for the
But they have also had enduring influence in the
and sparked a further
line of more modern, comparative ‘political process’ or
‘representation-reinforcing
Gageler also adapted these ideas to the Australian context to capture the way
in which ideas of judicial representation reinforcement
can operate in a system
of representative and
responsible
government.
The prime focus
of his Honour’s reasoning in this context has been the degree to which
various legislative provisions have
the capacity to enhance or detract from the
constitutionally prescribed system of representative and responsible government.
is especially evident in cases involving the application of the implied
freedom of political
communication.
In this context,
Gageler connects the idea of representation reinforcement to his and Justice
Gordon’s preferred
categorical
approach to questions of
constitutional justification.
But there is no necessary connection between a commitment to judicial
representation reinforcement and an approach of this kind. The
idea of judicial
representation reinforcement can inform a far broader range of areas of
constitutional discourse, and be encompassed
within proportionality-based as
well as more categorical models of
For instance, in
, in dissenting on the constitutionality of the
NT’s system of ‘paperless arrests’, Gageler J placed explicit
on representation-reinforcing concerns. His Honour held that the scheme
in question was in fact punitive, and that the role of NT
courts in the scheme
was effectively to ‘facilitate punitive executive
detention’.
In reaching
this conclusion, Gageler also emphasised the representation-reinforcing benefits
of a decision to remove courts from
a role in this kind of scheme: doing so,
Gageler reasoned, would mean that
on its face
the scheme would appear as
a system of ‘catch and release’ or ‘one which authorises
police to detain, and then release,
persons arrested without warrant on belief
of having committed or having been about to commit an
This, Gageler
suggested, would also increase ‘political accountability’: it would
then be for the Assembly to decide
‘whether or not to enact a scheme
providing for deprivation of liberty in that stark
This reasoning also
stood in direct contrast to the more context-invariant approach to these
questions adopted by the
The essence of a process-sensitive approach is that it is explicitly context
sensitive and adjusts the appropriate level of judicial
scrutiny of a law to the
process by which it was adopted, or recently reconsidered by the legislature:
laws that reflect recent,
reasoned forms of legislative deliberation are more
likely to attract a degree of deference under this approach than laws that
animus, oversight or a lack of recent, reasoned debate. And the aim of
both judicial restraint and robust intervention, in this context,
is to promote
the proper functioning of the constitutional system of representative and
responsible government: restraint rewards
and encourages its independent
functioning, whereas intervention corrects and compensates for its failings.
Why a New Australian Constitutionalism
There are two broad arguments for this ‘new’ constitutional model
of reliance on constitutional values, proportionality
doctrines and
process-sensitive considerations compared to the older, more traditional
reliance by the High Court on legalism, and
autochthonous and context-invariant
approaches to constitutional validity: arguments that sound in commitments to
democracy and the
rule of law.
Commitments to democracy and the rule of law are important both within the
Australian constitutional tradition and more generally.
A commitment to
‘democracy’ was one of the key values relied on by the High Court in
as informing the development of the implied freedom of political
communication.
And as the Court itself noted in
a commitment to
representative government underpins
Constitution
It also underpins the history of key moments in the founding and re-founding of
the Australian constitutional order (for example,
the 1967 constitutional
referendum and passage of the
Australia Acts
Similarly, as Sir Owen
Dixon noted in
Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth
Constitution
is framed on the assumption of respect for the rule of
Commitments to
self-government and the rule of law are also part of an overlapping consensus
among constitutional democracies worldwide
requirements of a commitment to liberal constitutionalism.
Of course, each of these concepts must also be understood in the Australian
context in a particular way that is historically and structurally
rather than open ended.
Democracy, for example, is a contested concept that allows for broader or
narrower, or thicker or thinner,
interpretations.
reason, Justice McHugh in particular also criticised the Court’s reliance
on democratic values in
as too open ended, and as drawing on values
in the making of constructional choices in ways that led to too open ended a
judicial balancing or too much scope for judicial creativity in the
making of constitutional
implications.
The High Court
also narrowed its prior reliance on democracy and made clear
that the particular understanding of democracy at stake in
understood as one closely tied to the text and structure of the
Constitution
, namely the provision in
for representative
and responsible
government.
Similarly, the rule of law in Australia has a particular distinctive scope
and meaning.
At the most
abstract level, the idea of the rule of law entails a commitment to
non-arbitrary
government.
concretely, it can be understood to entail three interrelated ideas: the idea
that everyone, including the executive government,
should be subject to the law;
the idea of laws being published and knowable in advance; and the idea of a
government of ‘law
not men [or
In addition, these are not the only criteria for assessing the desirability
of an approach to constitutional construction; other considerations
include the
consistency of various approaches with a commitment to legal legitimacy and the
constitutional separation of powers.
notes, both legalism and
functionalism (or purposive approaches) are premised on attention to formal
constitutional modalities, and
hence notions of legal legitimacy.
Proportionality-based reasoning involves a modest rather than radical shift in a
approach to assessing the validity of laws. And process-based
considerations seek to respect, rather than undermine, a functional
understanding of the separation of powers.
Yet, as the rest of this Part shows, all three approaches can be seen to
offer modest but meaningful gains for democracy and the rule
Australia: purposive and proportionality-based forms of reasoning arguably
promote the rule of law in both the second and
third senses — that is,
rule according to norms that are the product of a collective or
‘intersubjective’ agreement,
rather than individual or subjective
judgment, and norms that are knowable and predictable in
application.
Purposive Construction
One of the key arguments for legalism is its relationship to the rule of
The text of a democratic
constitution is generally the product of agreement among a diverse range of
political elites, and often
the public at large, or their legislative
representatives. The history and structures found in a constitution have a
similar provenance.
And constitutional doctrine often reflects the judgments of
‘many minds’, or many different judges across time, through
process of incremental, common-law style
Reliance on these
sources — and these sources alone — is thus one way in which judges
can ensure that their constructional
choices reflect a commitment to the rule of
‘law not men [sic]’, or the many rather than the few. Or, as
Adrienne Stone
notes, it is one means by which judges can seek to apply a
standard of legal correctness that is ‘external’ to them as
individuals.
The difficulty with legalism, however, is that often it runs out or fails to
provide determinate answers to a range of real-world
questions of constructional
choice. This is a familiar critique of textualism as a theory that calls for an
exclusive focus on the
text of a written constitution and its original semantic
It is also one
reason that most
(including Owen Dixon himself) are willing to
go beyond the text to consider the guidance provided by a broader range of
historical,
doctrinal and structural modalities of constitutional
Even these additional sources, however, often fail to provide clear answers
to concrete questions of constructional
Often, they will
conflict, or point in different directions in the making of a specific
constructional choice.
Legalism, therefore, will also often ‘run out’ as a guide to the
resolution of concrete constitutional
controversies.
argument for attention to constitutional purposes or values, in this context, is
that it can provide additional guidance
to courts, which is again consistent
with a commitment to the rule of law.
Judges are routinely called on to make a range of values-based judgments
— for example, in sentencing, in determining the content
of notions of
‘reasonableness’ in tort or criminal law, or the scope of a
‘public policy’ exception in contract.
These judgments are also
often dependent on judgments about prevailing social values and expectations.
But values-based judgments
of this kind can also often be modified by statute
— and hence the collective judgments of the legislature. In a
constitutional
context, this is far less true. Judicial judgments about values
are often quite difficult for parliaments to override, and hence
heightened demand for such judgments to conform,
requirements of the rule of
The advantage of a purposive or functionalist approach, in this context, is
that it can help do exactly that, namely ensure —
to the maximum extent
possible — that the social and political values individual judges draw on
are those that find some support
in a broader set of collective value judgments,
such as those embodied in the text, history and structure of a constitution, or
Of course, even constitutional values can themselves run out, or fail to
provide decisive guidance in the resolution of concrete constitutional
like legalist arguments, they too may conflict or point in different directions,
or fail to provide sufficiently concrete
guidance in a particular case. Here,
there will be no choice but for judges to apply a form of interpretive default
rule (which itself
embodies certain values-based judgments) or else broader
social values, or consequences, as a guide to resolving a particular case.
this kind of broader, pragmatic approach could also be considered something like
a last resort from a rule of law perspective:
in some cases, it may be necessary
to provide certainty to individuals (itself a requirement of the rule of law).
But its systemic
consequences for the rule of ‘law not men [sic]’
should mean that judges only take this approach after exhausting the
provided by more orthodox legalist, purposive and functionalist approaches.
Structured Proportionality, Democracy and the
Rule of Law
Compared to more autochthonous tests of constitutional validity,
proportionality-based reasoning has three broad potential advantages.
notes, it is a constitutional discourse that speaks to the global
constitutional community. Speaking the same
constitutional language
the global community can also substantially reduce the ‘transaction
costs’ of other courts learning from Australia,
and the Court learning
from other constitutional and appellate
By itself, this may not be a sufficient basis for the Court to change its
approach to constitutional reasoning. In approaching the
task of constitutional
construction, most commentators agree that the Court should adopt the approach
that is best for Australia,
not the global community as a
At times, the idea of
a common language may also obscure important differences in context and
conceptions of the judicial role that
underpin the doctrine of proportionality
in different countries and the constitutional purposes that proportionality
analysis serves
in Australia.
And transnational dialogue of this kind must be approached with this risk in
But the virtue of proportionality discourse, in this context, is that it
provides a common conceptual and discursive frame for understanding
how various
normative and empirical claims have informed similar questions of constitutional
construction across countries. Being
part of a global dialogue on these
questions can also offer real benefits to Australia and Australian
constitutional discourse: it
can provide lawyers and judges with useful
doctrinal, discursive and empirical lessons in the resolution of open-ended
constitutional
questions. In this sense, the language of proportionality can
function much like a common economic currency: it can increase productive
of trade or exchange across
There are two additional arguments for proportionality-based forms of
reasoning which sound in commitments to the rule of law and
democracy. Doctrines
of proportionality offer a structured and transparent means by which courts can
adjudicate difficult questions
objectives and other constitutional
commitments.
These doctrines invite a broad approach to the question of whether relevant
constitutional norms are engaged in a given case, and
then a structured and
predictable framework for adducing and assessing the arguments and evidence as
to whether limitations on the
enjoyment or implementation of those norms are
justified in the circumstances.
In addition, the language of proportionality offers a framework for
constitutional analysis that resonates in ordinary, non-legal
discourses for
understanding the legitimacy of government action — hence, a
constitutional vocabulary that enhances the scope
for legislative and public
engagement with Court decisions on the meaning of the
Constitution
theories of constitutional construction, this will be important for enhancing
the scope for ‘dialogue’ with the
This, in turn, can have important
benefits — in
promoting a weaker, more democratically ‘responsive’ model of
judicial review on certain morally and
politically charged
In other accounts, the very idea of ‘constitutional dialogue’ is
contrary to notions of constitutional and judicial
But even in this
account, legislative engagement with the Court can promote compliance with Court
rulings. And public understanding
can promote public confidence in the Court and
constitutional systems of justice in ways that further enhance commitments to
constitutionalism
and the rule of law.
The most significant challenge to a structured proportionality analysis has
come from two members of the current Court, Justices Gageler
and Gordon, who
have argued for a more categorical US-style, tiered approach to these
Their Honours point to the value of this approach in offering clear
guidance to individual litigants and their advisors about how questions
of this kind will be approached by the Court in various categories
The argument has
considerable force. However, it also downplays the
rule of law
disadvantages
to the Court being required to identify appropriate tiers of
scrutiny on a case-by-case basis, or the potential artificial distinctions
may create between categories of
Many of these
criticisms have been ventilated in the US in the context of evolving debates
of categorical approaches to scrutiny
in that country. These criticisms have also been drawn out in Australia by
Evelyn Douek in
her analysis of the doctrine of
proportionality.
all involve some sacrifice in legal consistency and predictability and, hence,
commitments to the rule of law.
One response to this difficulty lies in a willingness to
insights to be gained from a categorical approach with the concept of structured
proportionality.
This kind of
‘calibrated proportionality’-based approach would be premised on the
idea that many of the factors that
Justices Gageler and Gordon identify as
informing a categorical approach can be used to guide the Court in applying a
form of structured
proportionality
Indeed, such an
approach is already arguably implicit in the approach of Justice Edelman to
structured proportionality. In his recent
judgments on the implied freedom of
political communication, Justice Edelman has offered an important modification
of the original
vision of proportionality offered in
modification which draws on common law notions and traditions as offering
important guidance in the calibration of structured
proportionality in various
The ‘calibrated
proportionality’-based approach could also be informed by a range of more
conceptual, representation-reinforcing
or process-sensitive
In either event, it
would have the capacity to maintain the benefits of proportionality-style
reasoning in promoting doctrinal consistency
and transparency, while at the same
time inviting appropriate attention to context in the application of the
relevant test.
This approach could also be applied in a manner that acknowledged the
distinctive task facing the Court in the construction of constitutional
versus prohibitions, and purposive versus non-purposive powers. Brad Selway, for
example, suggested that a test of proportionality
could be divided into
‘low’, mid-level and high-level
proportionality.
approach could be to distinguish between single-stage, two-stage and three-stage
approaches. This would be in addition to
more open-ended forms of balancing or
proportionality analysis, akin to administrative law–style notions of
reasonableness
proportionality.
Each test could also be understood as corresponding to different limbs of a
test of structured proportionality, and different areas
of constitutional
discourse. For instance, single-stage proportionality analysis would involve
only the first limb of a test of structured
proportionality, namely the question
of suitability. This test would also replace the notion of a law being
‘appropriate and
adapted’ to its purpose or context, and be
appropriate to cases involving the construction of non-purposive heads of
Commonwealth
A two-stage proportionality test would involve the first and second limbs of
a test of structured proportionality, namely questions
of suitability and
necessity. This, in effect, could replace the notion of a law being
appropriate and adapted’ to its purpose or
context and, hence, serve as a test for determining the validity of laws passed
a head of Commonwealth power deemed purposive in nature. The key
difference would be that the notion of necessity or minimal impairment
invite, or even require, more open and explicit engagement by the Court with
adjacent constitutional values, or those other
values adversely impacted by a
broad construction of relevant constitutional
Three-stage proportionality judgments, in contrast, would involve all three
limbs of a test of structured proportionality, including
the notion of
proportionality
stricto sensu
or judgments about ‘adequacy in the
balance’. A test of this kind could also be applied to all areas of
constitutional
law and discourse involving express and implied limitations on
Commonwealth and state power, or prohibitions on certain forms of
legislative
and executive action.
A more open question would be what kind of proportionality test would apply
in contexts such as
or Ch III which could be viewed as involving
constitutional provisions that are sources both of power
prohibition.
suggested by Justice Edelman in cases such as
seems to be a form of
three-stage proportionality test, albeit one that involves some degree of
judicial restraint in the making
of judgments about adequacy in the
But this is also an
area in which the Court might reasonably choose to apply a two- rather than
three-stage proportionality test.
Both approaches would be consistent with
existing doctrine, and yet render it more transparent and predictable in
application, in
ways that could be viewed as advancing a commitment to the rule
For all three-stage versions of proportionality, there would also be the
option of overlaying such a test with context-specific guidelines
drawn from a
mix of common law precedent and representation-reinforcing theory. For example,
in proposing a test of ‘calibrated
proportionality’ in the
application of the implied freedom of political communication, I have suggested
previously that the
High Court could ultimately take a flexible approach which
involves floating between four broad levels of scrutiny, the application
which would be informed by a range of contextual
Process-Sensitive Reasoning (or Judicial
Representation Reinforcement)
Compared to other forms of government, democracy has a range of instrumental
advantages. It reduces the likelihood of certain forms
and avoidable
humanitarian disasters.
citizens’ needs and
It also has important
intrinsic rationales or capacities to realise commitments to positive freedom or
‘active liberty’,
and equality, among
A system of
representative and responsible government can likewise advance government
effectiveness and accountability, and collective
forms of self-government.
Real-world political institutions, however, are subject to a range of
‘blockages’ or imperfections that impede their ability
these underlying democratic commitments — and uphold broader
constitutional commitments. For instance, individual
legislators are often
subject to ‘blind spots’ that mean they do not foresee the full
range of ways in which laws may
affect the realisation of constitutional norms,
or could be redesigned so as more effectively to protect individual
And parliaments as a whole are elected and structured in ways that mean that
certain voices and perspectives (for instance, those
of young people,
non-citizens, the homeless and those with mental illness) are systematically
excluded or
under-represented.
Each term, Parliament can also consider only a certain number of issues or
proposals for legislative change. This means that Members
of Parliament must
prioritise in ways that often reflect majoritarian interests and demands, or the
interests and priorities of certain
parties. For minorities, in particular, this
can mean that their calls for legislative change are often de-prioritised, or
legislative
Often, courts such as the High Court are well placed to counter these various
blockages and thereby
the performance of a system of
representative and responsible
government.
For instance,
they can ‘read down’ or construe statutory language in ways that
blind spots. Or they can construe statutes
in a dynamic way, which helps overcome the effect of legislative inertia. In
some cases,
the mere fact of the Court hearing a case may be enough — it
may draw sufficient media and public attention to an issue to
prompt legislators
(or executive actors) to give it increased attention and priority.
But to do so
consistently
courts must be mindful of
representation-reinforcing considerations — both in how they reason and in
how they select cases
(for example, for the grant of special leave). Such
considerations need not always be
But the more
explicit they are, the greater the advantages for democracy and the rule of law:
it is more likely that courts will
in fact construe statutes and the
constitution in ways that overcome relevant legislative blockages, and that
courts will be more
predictable as to when and why they are doing so.
Another argument for process-sensitivity by courts relates to the varying
risks associated with constitutional ‘over’
‘under’-enforcement.
There are a range of reasons why courts under-enforce open-ended constitutional
norms. Courts often have limited access to information,
compared to the elected
branches of government. Courts also face additional questions of
legitimacy in the making of contested moral and political choices, and in
some cases questions of ‘sociological’ legitimacy
acceptance.
But there are also varying risks to an approach of this kind. In some cases,
the harms suffered by individuals may be relatively easy
for future legislators
or executive actors to reverse. In others, the harms may be severe and largely
irreversible through subsequent
legislative action — for example, because
a person has been wrongfully imprisoned or otherwise deprived of their liberty,
has suffered irreparable harm to their relationships or individual
development.
Or current harms
may threaten the very foundations of a democratic system — or what David
Landau and I have called the ‘minimum
core’ of a system of
constitutional democracy.
the case of irreversible harms to individuals
the real and present
threats to the democratic minimum core, there will be very real costs of courts
deciding to under-enforce constitutional
A process-sensitive approach by courts starts from this understanding. It
rejects a context-invariant approach to questions of constitutional
validity or
construction. Instead, it embraces a case-by-case approach to questions of
legal, political and sociological legitimacy
— one that considers the
impacts of particular decisions both on individuals and on the constitutional
system as a whole. In
doing so, it also seeks to balance the benefits and
dangers to democracy of overly restrained and robust forms of constitutional
judicial review.
sense, it is an approach that is inherently democracy-enhancing.
One or Three New Constitutional Models
What is the relationship of these three different constitutional approaches
—purposive, proportionality-based and process-sensitive
constitutional construction? Clearly, they can be adopted independently. That is
true conceptually. It is also evident
from the fact that members of the Court
endorsed some, but not all, these approaches in the cases set out in
But there are still important conceptual affinities between the three
approaches which suggest the possibility of a — still
approach to constitutional construction, which combines attention
to constitutional purposes, proportionality doctrines and process-based
reasoning. For instance, judicial attention to constitutional values in
Australia entails the consideration of a wide range of potential
values — including (as a range of leading scholars have suggested),
commitments to the rule of law, government accountability,
impartial justice,
individual liberty, equality (especially political
recognition, national security and free
It entails a
commitment to positive as well as negative liberty, and the notion of an
‘effective government’ capable
of realising this positive vision of
liberty and
constitutionalism.
now require attention to notions of individual human
Many of these values
in the principles set out in
They also find
support in the case law that underpins these principles, as well as a broader
range of structural and historical arguments.
Further, this plurality of constitutional values means that the Court will
often be required to engage in a process of
competing values.
For instance, in determining whether a particular form of detention is properly
viewed as ‘punitive’
in nature, as in
Benbrika No 2
the Court could be seen as being implicitly called on to
balance commitments to individual liberty and national security. Or in making
judgments about the validity of a model of ‘paperless arrest’ or
preventative detention under state or territory law,
the Court could be seen as being required to balance
commitments to individual liberty and effective government. And, as Shipra
notes, any true constitutional balancing problem of this kind naturally
lends itself to resolution through a test of structured
proportionality.
Not all constitutional questions lend themselves to this kind of analysis. As
Shreeya Smith argues, some structural questions may
be better dealt with via a
more open-ended approach to balancing competing
But almost any
constitutional limitation or prohibition will do
And in such cases,
reliance on a test of structured proportionality provides a clear and
transparent way in which courts can make
such judgments within the confines of a
broader commitment to the legal
Another set of candidate Australian constitutional values could be described
as ‘democratic’ in nature. This includes
values such as political
but also commitments
to democratic deliberation and experimentalism — or values that find
support in the federal nature of
the polity, the bicameral structure of the
federal Parliament, and the role of the Senate in
particular.
These values also
again invite attention to other aspects of the new Australian constitutional
model — namely, a process-sensitive
or representation-reinforcing
There is a clear connection between how courts reason and the
facing legislators to engage in deliberation. If courts adopt
a context-invariant approach, legislators will have limited legal (as
political) incentive to revisit prior deliberations. Doing so will involve the
use of time and political capital but have
no impact on the likelihood that a
law is upheld by the Court. But if a court takes account of the timing and
quality of legislative
deliberations in assessing constitutional validity, this
can serve as a powerful incentive for legislators to reconsider prior
legislative
For courts to promote democratic deliberation, they must therefore adopt a
flexible and context-sensitive approach, one which accords
variable weight to
legislative constitutional judgments based on the degree to which they reflect
recent, reasoned processes of democratic
deliberation.
‘semi-procedural’ form of judicial review is also a hallmark of many
representation-reinforcing theories of judicial
but not of more
traditional legalist approaches to constitutional construction in Australia.
There is likewise a close conceptual affinity between a doctrine of
proportionality and a process-sensitive approach to constitutional
construction.
The doctrine of proportionality openly invites courts to engage in a form of
balancing that depends on a mix of legal
moral–political
judgment, and thus that stretches the limits of judicial political and
sociological legitimacy. One response to this, Chordia argues,
is for courts to
adopt a ‘a clearly articulated contextual institutional theory of judicial
restraint’.
The idea of
judicial representation reinforcement, or comparative political process theory,
also provides exactly this kind of account.
What does it mean to speak of a ‘new’ Australian constitutional
model — one based on attention to constitutional
purpose, proportionality
and process-sensitivity? None of the aspects of this model are truly new. As
notes, they find support in the decisions of at least some members of
the current Court, as well as previous decisions of the Court.
explores, they subsist on a deep and established bedrock of settled
constitutional principle. But they also represent a break from
constitutional orthodoxy in ways that could be seen as marking a new and
promising approach to constitutional construction
in Australia.
All three ‘p’s’ — constitutional purposes,
proportionality doctrines and process-sensitivity — represent
an important
evolution in existing constitutional approaches in line with global
constitutional developments. Even more importantly,
they represent an approach
that has significant democratic and rule of law benefits. They are also
interconnected.
Each ‘p’ can certainly be adopted independently. But they also
have important conceptual affinities: judicial attention
to constitutional
values often requires a form of balancing that is conducive to the application
of a test of structured proportionality.
One such value, in Australia, is the
idea of democracy implicit in the constitutionally prescribed system of
representative and responsible
government; democratic values can also be
enhanced by judicial attention to democratic representation-reinforcing
concerns. A doctrine
of proportionality also has conceptual affinities with the
idea of judicial representation reinforcement: it provides a language
legislators and ordinary citizens can understand and invites a form of
open-ended evaluative judgment that is usefully disciplined
by theories of
judicial representation reinforcement. In this sense, the three
‘p’s’ can also be seen as part of
new, tripartite
model of Australian constitutionalism that mirrors global variants of the
‘new constitutionalism’, such as those seen
in Latin America.
One version of the new constitutionalism in Latin America involves a quite
radical, neo-Bolivarian model of pluri-nationalism and
environmental
constitutionalism. But another, liberal–progressive version of the
‘new constitutionalism’ simply
entails the rejection of an earlier
legal formalism in Latin America, with strong continuities with Australian-style
legalism, in
favour of a more substantive approach to constitutional reasoning
that includes doctrines of purposive interpretation, and
proportionality.
This version of the ‘new constitutionalism’ is also distinct from
more critical accounts that view the concept as linked
to an expansion in
constitutional rights and judicial
or an expansion of
neo-liberal models of property rights
protection.
At the core of
the idea of judicial representation reinforcement is that courts should seek to
preserve space for democratic constitutional
deliberation on all questions,
including questions of first and second generation rights protection, and hence
that courts should
embrace a mix of strong and weak review, rather than wholly
strong forms of review.
is also an understanding that runs through many leading accounts of the
‘new constitutionalism’ in Latin
No Australian judge has gone as far as to endorse this new constitutional
model explicitly. But it is certainly a path left open by
some members of the
Court, — and one open to all — as part of a new
of constitutional reasoning.
Indeed, one of the advantages to connecting constitutional purposes,
proportionality and process-sensitivity is that it offers the
Court a path
through which to achieve greater consensus around the proper approach to
constitutional construction. An approach of
this kind is not associated with the
existing jurisprudence of any existing member of the Court. For that reason, it
could be considered
quite ‘new’ and radical, and of limited
near-term practical utility. There are, however, important reputational and
psychological
reasons for thinking that members of the Court may be more willing
to embrace an approach that represents an amalgam of the idea
of different
justices, rather than simply a line of jurisprudence associated with a single
The idea of the ‘new Australian constitutionalism’ is also
offered in exactly that spirit: as an idea that is prefigured
in interesting and
important ways in recent decisions of the Court but whose time has not yet, but
might still, come. And if it does,
the essay suggests, both Australian democrats
and constitutionalists will have reason to celebrate.
Please cite this essay as:
Rosalind Dixon, ‘Winterton Lecture: A New Australian Constitutionalism?
Constitutional Purposes, Proportionality and Process
[2024] SydLawRw 23
(2024) 46(4)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20811
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
 Professor, School of Global and Public Law, UNSW Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. Email: rosalind.dixon@unsw.edu.au; ORCID
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6613-8032. This essay is a modified version of
a public lecture given at the Supreme Court of Western
Australia on 11 April
2024. Research was supported by the Australian Research Council under Professor
Dixon’s Future Fellowship
FT210100667. The lecture is dedicated to the
memory of Professor George Winterton.
See, eg, Adrienne Stone,
‘More than a Rule Book: Identity and the Australian
Constitution
(2024) 35(2)
Public Law Review
(‘More than a Rule
See Rosalind Dixon,
‘Constitutional Fixed Points and the Australian
Constitution
Sunstein on “How to Interpret the
Constitution
(Blog Post, 21 February 2024)
<https://www.‌auspublaw.org/blog/2024/2/constitutional-fixed-points-the-australian-constitution-cass-sunstein-on-how-to-interpret-the-constitution>
(‘Constitutional Fixed Points’). On the scope and varying meaning of
some of these constitutional ‘imperatives’,
see also Joshua Thomson
and Madeleine Durand, ‘Constitutional Imperatives’
(2020) 49(1)
Australian Bar Review
See, eg, Adrienne Stone,
‘Judicial Reasoning’ in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne Stone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University
Press, 2018) 472.
See, eg, Jeffery Goldsworthy,
‘Constitutional Interpretation’ in Michel Rosenfeld and
András Sajó (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Comparative
Constitutional Law
(Oxford University Press, 2012) 689; Stone, ‘More
than a Rule Book’ (n
Rosalind Dixon,
‘Comparative Representation-Reinforcing Theory’,
Constitutionalism
(forthcoming) (‘CRRT’). See also Stephen
Gardbaum, ‘Comparative Political Process Theory’
(2020) 18(4)
International Journal of Constitutional Law
See Murray Wesson, ‘The
Reception of Structured Proportionality in Australian Constitutional Law’
(2021) 49(3)
Federal Law Review
Shipra Chordia,
Proportionality in Australian Constitutional Law
(Federation Press, 2020)
200–2. See below
Part III(B).
Javier Couso, ‘Latin
American New Constitutionalism: A Tale of Two Cities’ in Conrado
Hübner Mendes, Roberto Gargarella
and Sebastián Guidi (eds),
Oxford Handbook of Constitutional Law in Latin America
(Oxford University
Press, 2022) 354.
See Manuel José Cepeda
Espinosa and David Landau, ‘A Broad Read of Ely: Political Process Theory
for Fragile Democracies’
(2021) 19(2)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
; Manuel J Cepeda Espinosa, ‘Responsive
Constitutionalism’
(2019) 15(1)
Annual Review of Law and Social
See Couso (n
Kable v DPP (NSW)
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51
North Australian
Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
(2015) 256 CLR 569
Garlett v Western
(2022) 277 CLR 1
Benbrika v Minister for
[2023] HCA 33
(2023) 97 ALJR 899
Benbrika No 2
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 97 ALJR 1005
Lisa Burton Crawford and
Jeffrey Goldsworthy, ‘Constitutionalism’ in Cheryl Saunders and
Adrienne Stone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 357; Stone, ‘More than a Rule
). On this distinction
generally, see, eg, Jeremy Waldron,
Law and Disagreement
University Press, 1999); Richard Bellamy,
Political Constitutionalism: A
Republican Defence of the Constitutionality of Democracy
University Press, 2007); Adam Tomkins,
Our Republic
Constitution
Publishing, 2005).
See Rosalind Dixon,
‘Responsive Constitutionalism in Australia’
(2024) 52(3)
(‘Responsive Constitutionalism’).
Ian Killey,
Constitutional Conventions in Australia: An Introduction to the Unwritten
Rules of Australia’s Constitutions
(Anthem Press, new ed, 2014).
Stone, ‘More than a
Rule Book’ (n
Elaine Thompson, ‘The
“Washminster” Mutation’ (1980) 15(2)
Stone, ‘More than a
Rule Book’ (n
); Crawford and
Goldsworthy (n
). See also Ryan Goss,
‘What Do Australians Talk about When They Talk about “Parliamentary
Sovereignty”?’
For discussion, see Rosalind
Dixon and Tom Ginsburg, ‘Deciding Not to Decide: Deferral in
Constitutional Design’ (2011)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
John McMillan,
‘Administrative Appeals in Australia: Future Directions’ in Robin
Creyke (ed),
Tribunals in the Common Law World
(Federation Press, 2008)
Mark Tushnet,
Fourth Branch: Institutions for Protecting Constitutional Democracy
(Cambridge University Press, 2021). Where this branch is constitutionally
entrenched, Tarun Khaitan suggests it is useful to view
it as a form of
‘guarantor branch’: Tarunabh Khaitan, ‘Guarantor
Institutions’ (2022) 16(S1)
Asian Journal of Comparative Law
See, eg, Paul Kildea and
Sarah Murray, ‘Democratic Constitutions, Electoral Commissions and
Legitimacy: The Example of Australia’
(2021) 16(S1)
Asian Journal of
Comparative Law
S177. See also Stone, ‘More than a Rule Book’ (n
For general discussion, see
The Principles of Constitutionalism
(Oxford University Press,
2018); Adrienne Stone and Lael K Weis, ‘Positive and Negative
Constitutionalism and the Limits of
Universalism: A Review Essay’
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
Martin Loughlin,
Constitutionalism
(Harvard University Press, 2022).
Stone, ‘More than a
Rule Book’ (n
); Will Bateman,
‘Federalising Socialism without Doctrine’
(2024) 52(3)
; Lynsey Blayden, ‘Active Citizens and an Active State:
Uncovering the “Positive” Underpinnings of the Australian
Constitution
(2024) 52(3)
Federal Law Review
Partlett, ‘Australian Popular Political Constitutionalism’
Federal Law Review
; Rosalind Dixon, ‘Responsive
Constitutionalism’ (n
Constitution
See also discussion in Patrick Emerton and Kathryn James,
‘The Australian
Constitution
as a Framework for Securing Economic
(2023) 51(3)
Federal Law Review
; Blayden (n
); Bateman (n
); Stone, ‘More than a Rule
); Bateman (n
); Patrick Emerton, ‘Ideas’
in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne Stone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the
Constitution
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 143.
For general discussion, see
); Stone and Weis (n
). See also Stone, ‘More than a
Rule Book’ (n
‘Responsive Constitutionalism’ (n
Kartinyeri v
Commonwealth
(1998) 195 CLR 337;
Commonwealth v Australian Capital
[2013] HCA 55
(2013) 250 CLR 441.
See, eg, Goldsworthy,
‘Constitutional Interpretation’ (n
); Stone, ‘More than a Rule
See George Williams and
David Hume,
Power People: The History and Future of the Referendum in
(UNSW Press, 2010).
Lisa Burton Crawford,
‘The Age of Hyper-Legislation?’ (Conference Paper, Annual Conference
of the International Society
of Public Law, 25 June 2018).
See generally, Dixon,
‘Constitutional Fixed Points’ (n
Sir Owen Dixon,
‘Address upon Taking the Oath of Office in Sydney as Chief Justice of the
High Court of Australia on 21st April,
1952’ in Judge Woinarski (ed),
Jesting Pilate and Other Papers and Addresses
(Law Book, 1965) 245, 247
(‘Address’). For useful exploration, see Adrienne Stone,
‘Between Realism and Legalism:
Michael Coper and the Enduring Appeal of
Cole v Whitfield
’ in James Stellios (ed),
Encounters with
Constitutional Interpretation and Legal Education: Essays in Honour of Michael
(Federation Press, 2018) 89 (‘Between Realism and
Legalism’).
R v Kirby; Ex
Boilermakers’ Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR 254
Boilermakers
Melbourne Corporation v Commonwealth
[1947] HCA 26
(1947) 74 CLR 31
Melbourne Corporation
‘modalities’, see Philip Bobbitt,
Constitutional Fate: Theory of
Constitution
(Oxford University Press, 1982).
Boilermakers
Melbourne Corporation
Stone, ‘More than a
Rule Book’ (n
Rosalind Dixon, ‘The
Constitution
: Re-Reading the 2014 High Court Constitutional
(2015) 43(3)
Federal Law Review
(‘The Functional
Constitution
’); Sir Anthony Mason ‘Foreword’ in Rosalind Dixon
Australian Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018) vi. See
also Stephen Gageler, ‘Legalism’ in Tony Blackshield, Michael Coper
and George Williams
The Oxford Companion to the High Court of
(Oxford University Press, 2001) 429; Jeffrey Goldsworthy,
‘Australia: Devotion to Legalism’ in Jeffrey Goldsworthy (ed),
Interpreting Constitutions: A Comparative Study
(Oxford University Press,
See, eg, Murray Gleeson,
The Rule of Law and the
Constitution
(ABC Books, 2000).
Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
Jones v Commonwealth
[2023] HCA 34
(2023) 97 ALJR 936
, 968–9 [153]–[154] (Edelman J).
Amalgamated Society of
Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 54
(1920) 28 CLR 129.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355.
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360
Ibid 385 (Mason CJ, Wilson,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
For this as the preferred
understanding of
opposed to a more originalist one, see, eg, Stephen Gageler, ‘Beyond the
Text: A Vision of the Structure and Function
Constitution
Australian Bar Review
, 141–3 (‘Beyond the
Cf Chief Justice James
Allsop, ‘Values in Public Law’
(2017) 91(2)
Australian Law
Dixon, ‘The Functional
Constitution’ (n
); Rosalind
Dixon, ‘Functionalism and Australian Constitutional Values’ in
Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Australian Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing,
2018) 3 (‘Functionalism and Australian Constitutional Values’). See
also ibid; Lynsey Blayden, ‘Institutional
Values in Judicial Review of
Administrative Action: Re-reading
Attorney-General (NSW) v Quin
(2021) 49(4)
Federal Law Review
; Shreeya Smith,
‘Reconceptualising the Non-Statutory Executive Powers and Capacities of
the Commonwealth: Values, Balancing
and Functionalism through the Lens of
“Nationhood” Powers and Capacities’ (PhD Thesis, UNSW Sydney,
work in progress).
Dixon, ‘The Functional
Constitution’ (n
‘Functionalism and Australian Constitutional Values’ (n
See Owen Dixon,
‘Address’ (n
Dixon, ‘The Functional
Constitution’ (n
‘Functionalism and Australian Constitutional Values’ (n
) 48 [128] (Gageler J), 60 [169], 63
[175] (Gordon J).
Lim v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1
) 50 [136], 53 [148] (Gageler J),
59–60 [168]–[169], 64–5 [179] (Gordon J).
Ibid 48 [128], 49
[132]–[133], 51 [140], 54 [150] (Gageler J), 59–60
[168]–[169], 63 [176], 64–5 [179] (Gordon
Ibid 48 [128], 49 [133], 54
[168]–[169], 63 [176], 64–5 [179].
Other members of the Court
also noted the importance of the protection of individual liberty in this
context, including in the application
of the relevant scheme. But the majority
made these observations in the context of a more legalist approach to the
principle and the scope of the rule and exceptions it recognised: see, eg,
ibid 27–8 [55] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Steward JJ),
101–2 [279], [281]
(Edelman J), 105–6 [292] (Gleeson J).
McCloy v New South
[2015] HCA 34
(2015) 257 CLR 178
562, 567 (Brennan CJ, Dawson,
Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
) 193–6 [2]–[4],
214–15 [71] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ).
Unions NSW v New
South Wales
(2013) 252 CLR 530;
Unions NSW v New South Wales [No 2]
[2019] HCA 1
(2019) 264 CLR 595
Unions NSW No 2
). See also discussion in Adrienne
Stone, ‘Proportionality and Its Alternatives’
(2020) 48(1)
Federal Law Review
, 126 (‘Proportionality’); Justice
Susan Kiefel, ‘Section 92: Markets, Protectionism and Proportionality
Australian and European Perspectives’
[2010] MonashULawRw 15
(2010) 36(1)
University Law Review
, 10; Justice Susan Kiefel, ‘Proportionality: A
Rule of Reason’
(2012) 23(2)
Public Law Review
‘Proportionality’ (n
124–5, 146–8. See also Jeremy Kirk, ‘Constitutional
Guarantees, Characterisation and the Concept of Proportionality’
[1997] MelbULawRw 1
Melbourne University Law Review
‘Proportionality’ (n
Justice Susan Kiefel,
‘English, European and Australian Law: Convergence or Divergence?’
(2005) 79(4)
Australian Law Journal
Moshe Cohen-Eliya and Iddo
Proportionality and Constitutional Culture
(Cambridge University
Press, 2013); Alec Stone Sweet and Jud Mathews,
Proportionality Balancing and
Constitutional Governance: A Comparative and Global Approach
University Press, 2019); Po Jen Yap (ed),
Proportionality in Asia
(Cambridge University Press, 2020).
Moshe Cohen-Eliya and Iddo
Porat, ‘Proportionality and the Culture of Justification’
American Journal of Comparative Law
See discussion in Chordia
Betfair Pty Ltd v Western
[2008] HCA 11
(2008) 234 CLR 418
Betfair Pty Ltd v Racing New South Wales
[2012] HCA 12
(2012) 249 CLR 217.
Falzon v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 2
(2018) 262 CLR 333
, 343 [25] (Kiefel CJ,
Bell, Keane and Edelman JJ), 359–60 [95] (Nettle J)
88 [242], 94
[257]–[258].
Benbrika No 2
) 921 [94].
Ibid 923 [104].
) 1017 [52] (Gageler CJ, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ).
ASF17 v Commonwealth
[2024] HCA 19
(2024) 98 ALJR 782
, 802 [103]–[104].
Gageler, ‘Beyond the
Stephen Gageler, ‘Foundations of Australian Federalism and the Role of
Judicial Review’
[1987] FedLawRw 11
(1987) 17(3)
Federal Law Review
For analysis,
see Amelia Loughland, ‘Taking Process-Based Theory Seriously: Could
“Discrete and Insular Minorities”
Be Protected under the
Constitution
(2020) 48(3)
Federal Law Review
; Rosalind Dixon and Amelia Loughland, ‘Comparative Constitutional
Adaptation: Democracy and Distrust in the High Court of Australia’
International Journal of Constitutional Law
John Hart Ely,
and Distrust: A Theory of Judicial Review
(Harvard University Press, 1980).
See Gageler, ‘Beyond the Text’ (n
) 149–51, citing Percy Partridge,
‘The Politics of Federalism’ in Geoffrey Sawer (ed),
Federalism:
An Australian Jubilee Study
(Australian National University, 1952) 174.
) chs 5, 6. See also discussion in
Loughland (n
See Laurence H Tribe,
‘The Puzzling Persistence of Process-Based Constitutional Theories’
(1980) 89(6)
Yale Law Journal
See also Rosalind Dixon,
Responsive Judicial Review: Democracy and Dysfunction in the Modern Age
(Oxford University Press, 2023) ch 2 (‘
Responsive Judicial
Ryan D Doerfler and Samuel
Moyn, ‘The Ghost of John Hart Ely’
(2022) 75(3)
Vanderbilt Law
Rosalind Dixon and Michaela
Hailbronner, ‘Ely in the World: The Global Legacy of
Democracy and
Forty Years On’
(2021) 19(2)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
Gardbaum (n
); Dixon, ‘CRRT’ (n
Gageler, ‘Beyond the
) 139, quoting
) 109–11 (Sir
Maurice Byers QC) (during argument).
Unions NSW No 2
). See also discussion in Dixon and
Loughland (n
Judicial Review
Rosalind Dixon, ‘Calibrated Proportionality’
(2020) 48(1)
(‘Calibrated Proportionality’); Dixon,
‘Responsive Constitutionalism’ (n
) 620 [128].
Ibid 621 [135].
[37]–[38] (French CJ, Kiefel and Bell JJ), 651–2 [236]–[237]
(Nettle and Gordon JJ).
Australian Capital
Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106
, 139 (Mason CJ), 156
(Brennan J) (‘
See, eg, Elisa Arcioni,
‘Competing Visions of “The People” in Australia: First Nations
and the State’ (2023)
Comparative Constitutional Studies
Australian Communist
Party v Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
Stone, ‘More than a
Rule Book’ (n
Judicial Review
Theophanous v Herald
and Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
, 194–205 (McHugh J).
) 567. For useful exposition and
critical discussion, see Adrienne Stone, ‘The Limits of Constitutional
Text and Structure:
Standards of Review and the Freedom of Political
Communication’
[1999] MelbULawRw 26
(1999) 23(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
See, eg, Lisa Burton
The Rule of Law and the Australian
Constitution
(Federation
Press, 2017).
Martin Krygier,
‘What’s the Point of the Rule of Law?’
(2019) 67(3)
See Richard H Fallon Jr,
‘“The Rule of Law” as a Concept in Constitutional
(1997) 97(1)
Columbia Law Review
On the notion of
‘intersubjective agreement’, see, eg, Jürgen Habermas,
Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law and
(MIT Press, 1998).
See Murray Gleeson,
The Rule of Law and the
Constitution
(ABC Books, 2000); Antonin Scalia,
‘The Rule of Law as a Law of Rules’
(1989) 56(4)
University of
Chicago Law Review
See, eg, David A Strauss,
‘Common Law Constitutional Interpretation’
(1996) 63(3)
University of Chicago Law Review
See also Cass R Sunstein,
‘Burkean Minimalism’ (Working Paper No 273, John M Olin Program in
Law and Economics, 2006).
Stone, ‘Between
Realism and Legalism’ (n
See Cass R Sunstein,
How to Interpret the
Constitution
(Princeton University Press, 2023) 62,
On the connection between
legalism and textualism, see Stone, ‘More than a Rule Book’ (n
) 130 n 26.
Dixon, ‘The
Functional Constitution’ (n
See Julius Stone,
Province and Function of Law: Law as Logic, Justice and Social Control
(Associated General Publications, 1946).
See ibid. See also
Gageler, ‘Beyond the Text’ (n
On the relationship
between constitutional amendment, judicial override and legal and political
legitimacy, see, eg, Rosalind Dixon
and Adrienne Stone, ‘Constitutional
Amendment and Political Constitutionalism: A Philosophical and Comparative
Reflection’
in David Dyzenhaus and Malcolm Thorburn (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Constitutional Law
(Oxford University Press,
On transaction costs in a
constitutional context, see, eg, Dixon and Ginsburg (n
Kristen Walker, ‘International Law as a Tool
of Constitutional Interpretation’
[2002] MonashULawRw 4
(2002) 28(1) Monash University Law
. But see Michael Kirby, ‘Constitutional Law and
International Law: National Exceptionalism and the Democratic Deficit?’
(2009) 98(2)
Georgetown Law Journal
See, eg, Chordia (n
Andrew K Rose, Ben
Lockwood and Danny Quah, ‘One Money, One Market: The Effect of Common
Currencies on Trade’ (2000)
Economic Policy
‘Calibrated Proportionality’ (n
) 144–6; Evelyn Douek, ‘All
Out of Proportion: The Ongoing Disagreement about Structured Proportionality in
(2019) 47(4)
Federal Law Review
See also Robert
A Theory of Constitutional Rights
, tr Julian Rivers (Oxford
University Press, 2011). For doubts about this argument, see Stone,
‘Proportionality’ (n
See, eg, Vicki C Jackson,
‘Constitutional Law in an Age of Proportionality’
(2015) 124(8)
Yale Law Journal
, 3146; Susan Kiefel, ‘Standards of Review in
Constitutional Review of Legislation’ in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
University Press, 2018) 488. See also discussion in Stone,
‘Proportionality’ (n
See, eg, Geoffrey
Sigalet, Grégoire Webber and Rosalind Dixon (eds),
Constitutional
Dialogue: Rights, Democracy, Institutions
(Cambridge University Press,
2019); Rosalind Dixon, ‘Creating Dialogue about Socioeconomic Rights:
Strong-Form versus Weak-Form
Judicial Review Revisited’
(2007) 5(3)
International Journal of Constitutional Law
Dialogue’); TRS Allan, ‘Constitutional Dialogue and the
Justification of Judicial Review’
(2003) 23(4)
Oxford Journal of Legal
; Peter W Hogg and Allison A Bushell, ‘The
Dialogue between Courts and Legislatures (Or Perhaps the
Isn’t Such a Bad Thing after All)’
(1997) 35(1)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
See, eg, Rosalind Dixon,
‘The Supreme Court of Canada,
Dialogue, and
(2009) 47(2)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
Dixon, ‘A Minimalist Charter of Rights for Australia: The UK or Canada as
[2009] FedLawRw 13
(2009) 37(3)
Federal Law Review
See also Dixon,
Responsive Judicial Review
Momcilovic v
(2011) 245 CLR 1.
Brown v Tasmania
(2017) 261 CLR 328, 377–9 [162]–[166] (Gageler J), 465–6
[432]–[433] (Gordon J) (‘
’). For discussion
of this objection and its significance, see John Basten, ‘Understanding
Proportionality Analysis’
[2021] SydLawRw 5
(2021) 43(1)
Sydney Law Review
Dixon, ‘Calibrated
Proportionality’ (n
). See also
Stone, ‘Proportionality’ (n
) 128–9, 150.
‘Proportionality’ (n
See, eg, Adrienne Stone,
‘The Limits of Constitutional Text and Structure: Standards of Review and
the Freedom of Political
Communication’
[1999] MelbULawRw 26
(1999) 23(3)
University Law Review
; Stone, ‘Proportionality’ (n
) 152–3; Dixon, ‘Calibrated
Proportionality’ (n
Dixon, ‘Calibrated
Proportionality’ (n
Ibid. See, eg,
) 479 [484];
[2019] HCA 11
(2019) 267 CLR 171
, 330–1 [463].
Dixon, ‘Calibrated
Proportionality’ (n
). See also
Responsive Judicial Review
B Selway, ‘The Rise
and Rise of the Reasonable Proportionality Test in Public Law’
(1996) 7(4)
Public Law Review
, 212, 215.
Janina Boughey,
‘Proportionality and Legitimate Expectations’ in Matthew Groves and
Greg Weeks (eds),
Legitimate Expectations in the Common Law World
Publishing, 2017) 121, 134–9.
‘Functionalism and Australian Constitutional Values’ (n
For an earlier attempt to
explore the relevance of notions of proportionality to
, see Rosalind
Dixon, ‘Overriding Guarantee of Just Terms or Supplementary Source of
Power? Rethinking
Constitution
(2005) 27(4)
Sydney Law Review
For a defence of this
kind of approach, see, eg, Chordia (n
Dixon, ‘Calibrated
Proportionality’ (n
On the democratic peace
literature, see, eg, Bruce Russet,
Grasping the Democratic Peace: Principles
for a Post-Cold War World
(Princeton University Press, 1993); Bruce Russett,
Christopher Layne, David E Spiro and Michael W Doyle, ‘The Democratic
(1995) 19(4)
International Security
See Amartya Sen,
Development as Freedom
(Oxford University Press, 1999) ch 6.
See Samuel Issacharoff,
Fragile Democracies: Contested Power in the Era of Constitutional Courts
(Cambridge University Press, 2015); Joseph Schumpeter,
Capitalism, Socialism
and Democracy
(LeBooks, 1942).
See Stephen Breyer,
Active Liberty: Interpreting Our Democratic
Constitution
University Press, 2008); Waldron (n
For further on
‘blind spots of application’ and ‘blind spots of
accommodation’, see Rosalind Dixon and Davis
Landau, ‘Competitive
Democracy and the Constitutional Minimum Core’ in Tom Ginsburg and Aziz
Assessing Constitutional Performance
(Oxford University Press,
2016) 268 (‘Constitutional Minimum Core’); Dixon,
Judicial Review
) 83; Dixon,
‘Responsive Constitutionalism’ (n
For further on
‘blind spots of perspective’, see Dixon, ‘Creating
Dialogue’ (n
Responsive Judicial Review
). See also
Gardbaum (n
Judicial Review
) ch 5. See
also Dixon and Landau, ‘Constitutional Minimum Core’ (n
Judicial Review
For this concept, see,
eg, Lawrence Gene Sager, ‘Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced
Constitutional Norms’
(1978) 91(6)
Harvard Law Review
On these various forms of
legitimacy, see Fallon Jr (n
also discussion in Dixon,
Responsive Judicial Review
Judicial Review
Rosalind Dixon and David
Landau, ‘Transnational Constitutionalism and a Limited Doctrine of
Unconstitutional Constitutional
(2015) 13(3)
International
Journal of Constitutional Law
; Rosalind Dixon and David Landau,
Abusive Constitutional Borrowing: Legal Globalization and the Subversion of
Liberal Democracy
(Oxford University Press, 2021). See also ibid.
Judicial Review
See Stone, ‘More
than a Rule Book’ (n
See Dylan Lino
‘Indigenous Recognition’ in Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 243; Rebecca Ananian-Welsh and
Nicola McGarrity, ‘National Security:
A Hegemonic Constitutional Value?’ in Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Australian Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 267; Gonzalo
Villalta Puig, ‘Free Trade as an Australian Constitutional Value:
A Functionalist Approach to the Interpretation of the Economic
Constitution
of Australia’ in Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Australian Constitutional
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 287.
See Stone, ‘More
than a Rule Book’ (n
); Dixon, ‘Responsive
Constitutionalism’ (n
See Ashleigh Barnes,
‘Australian Constitutional Values: The Case for Dignity?’ (DPhil
Thesis, University of Oxford, 2023).
Part IV(C).
Joo-Cheong Tham,
‘Political Equality as a Constitutional Principle: Cautionary Lessons from
McCloy v New South Wales
’ in Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 151. See also Stone,
‘More than a Rule Book’ (n
See Scott Stephenson,
‘Deliberation as a Constitutional Value’ in Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Australian Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 133; Gabrielle
Appleby and Brendan Lim, ‘Democratic Experimentalism’ in Rosalind
Dixon (ed),
Australian Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018)
Judicial Review
). Cf Cass R
One Case at a Time: Judicial Minimalism on the Supreme Court
(Harvard University Press, 2001).
See Ittai Bar-Siman-Tov,
‘Semiprocedural Judicial Review’
(2012) 6(3)
Legisprudence
See Rosalind Dixon, ‘The Supreme Court of Canada, Charter
Dialogue and Deference’
(2009) 47(2)
Osgoode Hall Law Journal
Responsive Judicial Review
) 185–7; Dixon, ‘CRRT’
) 201. See also at 80–2.
Ran Hirschl, ‘The
Political Origins of the New Constitutionalism’
(2004) 11(1)
Journal of Global Legal Studies
; Tamás Györfi,
Against the
New Constitutionalism
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2016).
Thibault Biscahie and
Stephen Gill, ‘Three Dialects of Global Governance and the Future of New
Constitutionalism’ in
Guillaume Grégoire and Xavier Miny (eds),
The Idea of Economic
Constitution
in Europe: Genealogy and Overview
(Brill, 2022) 718.
Judicial Review
) ch 7. See
also Rosalind Dixon, ‘Fair Market Constitutionalism: From Neo-Liberal to
Democratic Liberal Economic Governance’
(2023) 43(2)
Oxford Journal of
Legal Studies
See, eg, Cepeda Espinosa
and Landau (n
); Cepeda Espinosa (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (252 KB)
PDF format (483 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter