URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2005/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Privacy Foundation --- "Census Enhancement proposal: Evaluation of the privacy risks - an NGO view" [2005] PrivLawPRpr 17; (2005) 11(7) Privacy Law and Policy Reporter 193
Census Enhancement Proposal: Evaluation Of The Privacy Risks – An Ngo View
Census Enhancement proposal: Evaluation of the privacy
risks – an NGO view
Australian Privacy Foundation
In May 2005, the Australian Bureau of Statistics issued a Discussion
Paper, Enhancing the Population Census: Developing a Longitudinal
article is an edited version of the Australian Privacy Foundation’s
submission to the ABS in response to the Discussion
The ABS material is at
http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/d3310114.nsf/Home/Census
,with links to other submissions.
Introduction
This submission has been prepared by the Australian Privacy Foundation to set
out briefly our views as to the privacy risks posed
by the Census Enhancement
Our understanding of the nature of the Census Enhancement proposal (
) has been informed by two key documents:
• the original ABS Discussion Paper which describes the proposal :
Enhancing the Population Census: Developing a Longitudinal View
Discussion Paper 2060.0, 26 April 2005 (
the Discussion Paper
• the subsequent publication of an independent Privacy Impact
Assessment, commissioned by the ABS :
Census Enhancement Proposal : Privacy
Impact Assessment Report
, Pacific Privacy Consulting
, June 2005
the PIA Report
We welcome the opportunity to clarify why we remain opposed to the
Overview of the proposal
The proposal is to change the way information collected through the
five-yearly Australian Census is stored, used, linked or matched
information, and disclosed. If implemented, the proposal will commence in
August 2006, when the next Census collection
The primary objective of the proposed changes is to create a Statistical
Longitudinal Census Dataset (
), which means a set of data
the next. By contrast,
the current and long-standing practice is that Census
data is not linked either over time, or with information from other sources.
The proposal is thus to convert the Census from being an anonymous
‘snapshot’ of Australians’ lives once every five
years, into a
‘movie’ highlighting changes in their lives.
The method by which Census data is to be linked over time (i.e. from one
Census to the next) is described as ‘probabilistic’
. This means using not name and address, but other
information about people collected through the Census (such as their date of
birth, sex, location, religion, language spoken, etc), to identify individuals
to a high enough degree of certainty that the ABS
can confidently link one
record to another.
The proposal to link Census data from one Census to the next includes
retrospective data-matching from the results of the 2006 Census
results of the 2001 Census. The SLCD will thus be created in 2006 through the
linking of 2001 and 2006 records, and
then next added to in 2011, and so on.
However in addition to the
of the SLCD, the proposal also
includes various uses of the SLCD, including the linking of Census data with
information from other
sources – such as information about births, deaths,
immigration and disease. In some cases names and addresses are proposed
used as the key to achieving this linking, while in other cases probabilistic
methods are proposed.
The rationale or driver behind the proposal is the creation of richer sources
of data for use by researchers. Epidemiological researchers
in particular are
interested in examining changes in populations over time, which can be relevant
to finding cause-and-effect trends
in relation to public health.
Key elements of the proposal
The PIA Report summarises the proposal into its eight component parts and
labels them from A to H. For ease of reference we will
use the same system. We
reproduce here Table 1 from the PIA Report, less its footnotes.
In addition to the eight components of the proposal identified in the above
Table, another three features of the 2006 Census (not
the subject of the
consultation on this proposal) must be highlighted, to complete the context in
which this proposal would operate:
• for the first time names will be captured electronically by the ABS
and converted to an electronic text file, and stored
for the processing period
in the database with the other information from the Census form
• for the second time people will be asked if they consent to have
part of their Census forms transferred to the Australian
Archives in an imaged,
identifiable format, for closed storage for 99 years (the first time this
occurred was in 2001)
• the geographic unit used for measuring data is to be made smaller,
with the adoption of the ‘mesh block’, which
may contain as few as
30 households
What is extraordinary about this proposal?
First, it is unique in the world. The PIA Report notes that “no other
countries currently do exactly what the ABS is proposing
to do”. For
example the UK only links data on identifiable individuals for 1% of the
population; but here the ABS proposes
to link information about every single
person in Australia
The SLCD will be a database holding richer data on Australians than has ever
been available before. As the PIA Report notes, that
alone means “a more
intrusive database than has been held before”
Second, the proposal includes using names and addresses to link Census data
to information from other sources, some of which are compulsory
collections of
personal information from people for a purpose entirely unrelated to this
proposal (such as registering a birth or
travelling overseas). This would
represent a breach of trust by the government agencies supplying that data to
And third, the proposal is retrospective. The “systematic use of 2001
Census data in ways not envisaged or explained at the
time of collection”
represents a significant breach of trust by the ABS
How privacy risks can be minimised
identifiable personal information, or by the use of secure technologies
minimise the risk of unauthorised access to the information.
While these are important features of any framework of privacy protection,
they are by no means enough. ‘Fair information’
principles adopted
around the world to protect privacy also stress the importance of limiting the
collection and storage of personal
information in the first place, to only what
is absolutely necessary
In short, sometimes the best way to protect privacy is to not collect
information about people at all, or to destroy information as
soon as possible
after its primary purpose has been met.
For decades Australians have trusted the Census collection because it has
incorporated practical features to protect our privacy -
like destroying all the
paper forms once they were processed, and even during the time before that point
of destruction, not entering
names and addresses into the database alongside the
‘statistical’ information we expected to be kept.
The safeguards for this proposal are not enough
The ABS has responded to the PIA Report’s identification of the various
• the law : legal obligations under the
Census and Statistics Act
which prevent the release of
identifiable data by the ABS
• technology : high standards of security in the ABS technological
environment, including an audit program
• staff integrity : a track record of defending the principle of
confidentiality
• the destruction of name and address information held by the ABS
after 15 months
The law is not enough
The law can be changed.
The PIA Report notes an example from Australian history of the willingness of
a past government “to put short term administrative
needs ahead of
principle” in relation to access to Census records
PIA Report notes, how we measure the magnitude and likelihood of the privacy
risks “depends largely on levels of
trust in future governments not to
overturn the longstanding principles underlying the
Census and Statistics
While it will not always be so, the current Australian Government has a
majority in both Houses of Parliament. There is therefore
little in our
Parliamentary processes to prevent a change of law even before the 2006 Census
collection date.
Nor can our judicial system protect the privacy of Census data. Now unique
amongst democratic countries, Australia does not have
the benefit of a bill of
rights, which would allow judges to overturn laws inconsistent with human
rights, or provide relief for
any person harmed as a result
bill of rights can also function to temper political pressures or temptations,
such as the temptation to access or use Census
or SLCD information (including
the imaged forms held by the Australian Archives) for new purposes.
The PIA Report concludes
that: in the absence of any
constitutional protection of privacy, (legislative safeguards) are ultimately
vulnerable to the decisions
of the government of the day.
Technology is not enough
Everything from the Pentagon to Paris Hilton’s address book has been
hacked into in recent years. No system is 100% secure.
The integrity of staff is not enough
The ABS has pointed to an organisational history and culture of staff
respecting privacy, noting there has been no prosecution of
staff for leaking
personal information in the ABS’s 100 years of
That may be so, but a lack of prosecutions does not prove there have been no
Nor is an unblemished record a reliable indicator of the future behaviour of
staff, because in the past, the richer data simply wasn’t
there to leak in
the first place. The 2006 proposal means both richer data (in the SLCD), and
more immediately useful data (because
of the linking of name and address with
Census data in the same database), will be held by the ABS, which adds up to the
of information
Other government agencies holding large databases of personal information
have been corruptible
, and there is no reason to believe that ABS
staff are any less subject than the rest of the population to the human
frailties of
self-interest, corruption, misplaced priorities or natural
Furthermore, by even suggesting the retrospective aspect of this proposal
– to use data collected in 2001 “in ways not
envisaged or explained
at the time of collection”
- the ABS is demonstrating that
past assurances about their use of data ring hollow.
The destruction of names and addresses after 15 months
is not enough
That names and addresses will be deleted after 15 months is not
enough to protect against privacy abuses – the damage will have
For that first 15 month period every five years, the risks of privacy
breaches will be greatest, because the data will be:
• easiest to obtain (the data will be most accessible in terms of
finding the information desired, because names and addresses
will be included
with the other Census information), and
• at its most valuable (both because the data is as its
‘freshest’ immediately after collection, and because names
addresses will be included in the information)
The risks associated with the first 15 month period will therefore be greater
than in previous Census collections, for two reasons:
• because of the ABS’s intention to actually record and store
names and addresses with other Census information (i.e.
in the same database)
for the first time, and
• because of the proposals to use names and addresses in ways not done
before (i.e. to link Census information with information
from other sources to
create even richer datasets)
But the risks don’t stop once the names and addresses have been
The creation of the SLCD using probabilistic methods to match data on
individuals is intended to have, as much as possible, the same
utility as if
names and addresses were permanently retained on the database along with all the
other data – from identifying
information such as sex, date of birth,
geographic region and country of birth, to particularly sensitive information
such as income,
religious affiliation and family relationship.
We believe the ABS can’t have its cake and eat it too.
If records for the entire population are to be ‘linkable’ to a
high enough degree of certainty to satisfy researchers
seeking longitudinal data
on individuals, then the records will be rich enough to make re-identification
so much easier too
The privacy risks for the SLCD will therefore be more significant than for
traditional Census data, and those risks will continue
to increase with each
successive Census – because once you add longitudinal data together, the
chances of re-identification
In short, it is easier to identify a person when you are looking at a movie,
instead of a single snapshot.
The net effect : how privacy protections will be eroded by this proposal
The net effect of the proposal examined here, and other features being
implemented for the 2006 Census, is to erode a number of features
which in the
past have proven effective means by which to ensure the privacy protection of
Australians.
The Australian Privacy Foundation is not reassured by promises about how the
technology will be secure, or how the law will prevent
unauthorised access or
non-statistical uses. We have seen too many examples over too many years to
believe that either the law or
a computer can stand in the way of human nature,
political imperatives or market forces
We believe that in order to protect the privacy of all Australians, we must
maintain the current system, which uses a mix of practical
techniques, as well
as the law and technology, to protect our privacy.
How might privacy be breached?
This erosion of the many practical methods for protecting privacy will leave
all Australians’ personal information at higher
risk of misuse or
disclosure for various purposes, unrelated to the original purpose for which it
is collected: the public interest
in statistics for research and the development
of public policy.
Simply by creating a database of richer data than has ever been available
before, the PIA Report concludes that ABS will be increasing
attractiveness to a range of potential users beyond those who would only be
interested in statistics”
The SLCD will be like dangling a tempting carrot in front of those who would
seek greater access to personal information for a range
of purposes: tracking
welfare fraud, identifying tax evasion, or locating people wanted for reasons
stretching from a lawful public
interest purposes (e.g. law enforcement) through
lawful but private purposes (e.g. debt collection) to the unlawful (e.g.
down individuals to do them harm).
As noted above, these risks will be most acute for the first 15 months after
each Census collection, during which the data will be
most valuable, and easiest
Possible privacy breaches could come from three sources:
• hacking into the system by people who want access to the data,
• unauthorised disclosure of information by ABS staff, whether
accidental or deliberate, and
• pressure to use Census / SLCD data for new purposes (political or
commercial)
The PIA Report concludes that “by far the greatest concern in relation
to the Proposal ... is the attraction of the dataset
to other official bodies in
pursuit of other public interests”
Taking other identity management schemes and proposals over the past two
decades as a guide, agencies most likely to be interested
in Census / SLCD /
other data-matched data will include the Tax Office, Centrelink, DIMIA, the
Health Insurance Commission, law enforcement
and national security agencies, and
State and Territory driver licensing authorities.
The identification of these risks to privacy are no more hypothetical than
the touted research benefits of the proposal; they are
based on the lessons of
In particular the risk of profiling and locating people using Census data
(which includes country of birth, language spoken and religion)
is significantly
increased by this proposal.
The worst excesses involving misuse of census data in the past have included
facilitating genocide (the Holocaust in Europe, possibly
in Rwanda), systemic
racial discrimination (apartheid in South Africa), and internment (American
citizens of Japanese descent during
However the pressure to use information for new purposes may not only come
from political responses to fear and hatred of people of
races or religions. The most mundane yet potent source of pressure could be
The Victorian Privacy Commissioner has for example warned of the
attractiveness of the data to commercial data brokers, who specialise
mining, matching and profiling for a range of business and government
. It is not too difficult to foresee a time of budgetary
pressures on government agencies, such that the ABS is expected to recoup
costs and/or generate profits by becoming a data supplier to other agencies,
business or interest groups.
The ‘key’ – the creation of a unique national
identifier?
The strength of the proposal (in terms of enabling research) is also its
weakest link. That weak point is the creation of the ‘key’
information is to be linked.
Whether using name and address or other detailed information about people,
the key will be, as the Victorian Privacy Commissioner
has advised, “a
universal and (relatively) unique identifier”. A universal, unique
identifier is the basis of any national
identification scheme. Even if not
intended by the ABS, this type of metadata is extremely valuable, because it is
an enabler for
other uses beyond those which were originally intended.
The result of this proposal will be a series of databases, each set
representing a tempting ‘honey-pot’ of data, containing
the broadest
range of the most sensitive personal data, in a form highly convenient for
profiling and data mining.
If this proposal were to proceed, we therefore have no doubt that personal
information in the various collections would quickly come
to be used in ways,
and for purposes, additional to the starter-set mentioned in the Discussion
Who believes their privacy is most at risk?
Attitudes towards privacy differ throughout the community, and may reflect
both past experience and current vulnerabilities in terms
of the fear of abuse
of personal information by governments.
In the 2001 Census, almost half of all Australians took their privacy so
seriously that they refused to allow the Australian Archives
to keep their
imaged Census forms, even with the promise that they would be kept in closed
storage for 99 years before being used.
However the response rate differed across the population, according to
country of origin and income. People born in England were
most likely to agree,
while people born in Vietnam were least likely. People on higher levels of
income were more likely to agree
than those on lower incomes.
Indigenous people, and people currently reliant on government support
(welfare payments and/or public housing) have also expressed
particular concern
at the likelihood of their Census information being leaked back to the
Government if Census information were linked
to other sources of
How might research be affected?
The Discussion Paper appears to accept without question the notion that
research projects,
and that therefore this barrier must simply be overcome. Yet privacy and
research share a significant value -
data quality.
If people believe a question being asked of them is overly intrusive, or that
their answer may possibly be used to affect them negatively,
the quality of
their answers becomes less reliable.
The Victorian Privacy Commissioner has warned of public wariness over Census
data possibly affecting its quality. He cites by way
of example the 1991 Census
in the UK, where the fallout from the poll tax debate affected the Census
response rate to such an extent
that the results were rendered
The ABS’s own research from focus groups indicated that around 20% of
people objected to the idea of using name and address
data to establish the link
between different censuses, and around 10% felt strongly enough that they would
likely react by not completing
the Census, or by giving false answers. The
research further found that around 5% could be described as “serious
who would object to the linking of their data using
probabilistic methods, even if name, address and date of birth were not
The proposal for creation of the SLCD sits somewhere between these
two scenarios, as the proposal is to include date of birth, but
not name or
As a rough indicator then, we may expect somewhere between 5% and 10% of the
population to object strongly enough to this proposal
that they would give
deliberately false answers to the Census, or not answer at all.
Our conclusion
As this proposal is unique in the world, we can only try and predict what the
costs – and the benefits – will be.
We believe the ABS is proceeding on an unfair and possibly blinkered basis.
The consultation process on this proposal suggests to
us that the possible
research benefits of the proposal have been taken as ‘given’ by the
ABS, but the privacy risks must
be quantified
The rationale for this proposal is better longitudinal data for research
purposes, and more particularly, medical research purposes.
Medical research is
(usually) a noble aim, and like anybody else, privacy advocates would love to
see marvellous advances in both
medicine and social policy – a cure for
cancer, or the eradication of poverty.
But the promised social benefits upon which this proposal rests are
unquantified. There is no guarantee that any social benefit will
come from this
proposal; even if a researcher were to pinpoint the cause of some disease or
disadvantage, it does not automatically
follow that governments will have the
resources or political will to intervene or address the problem.
This is not to say that we do not believe there could be research benefits to
the proposal. Nor is it to suggest that if only those
benefits could be proven
up-front, we would withdraw our objection to the proposal. We do believe,
however, that research and privacy
be recognised as important
public interests.
There is a delicate symbiotic relationship between the interests of research
andprivacy, which must be respected and protected.
When privacy is at risk of too great an intrusion, people instinctively
protect themselves with one of two responses: they will subvert
the system, or
disengage from the system entirely. In a research context, that means bad data,
or no data at all.
We believe the ABS has under-estimated the risk to the privacy of all
Australians posed by this proposal, and has also under-estimated
placed on privacy by Australians.
Our belief is that the predicted risks to both privacy
are so significant that they outweigh the predicted benefits, and for that
simple reason the proposal ought not proceed
The Australian Privacy Foundation is a non-governmental organisation
dedicated to protecting the privacy rights of Australians. See
www.privacy.org.au
We note here that the Principal of Pacific Privacy Consulting,
Nigel Waters, is also a Board member of the Australian Privacy Foundation.
However Mr Waters declared to the Foundation his interest as a consultant to the
ABS from the time this possibility was first mooted,
and has not participated in
the Foundation’s deliberations on this census proposal since that time.
Nor was the Foundation
privy to Mr Waters’ views prior to the publication
of his report by the ABS. The Foundation’s responses to the census
proposal have been primarily authored by Board members Anna Johnston and Dr
Roger Clarke.
An earlier submission, prepared prior to the publication of the
PIA Report, was made by the Australian Privacy Foundation on 7
An earlier proposal by the ABS to use names and addresses to
link records from one Census to the next was withdrawn in March 2005
opposition from organisations including the Australian Privacy Foundation.
See the PIA Report paras 4.2, 4.5, and 4.12.
PIA Report para 11.3.
PIA Report para 10.37.
In 1980 the OECD issued
Guidelines for the Protection of
. The ‘fair
information principles’ contained therein form the basis of privacy laws
to protect personal information
around the world, including Australian privacy
ABS response to the Census Data Enhancement Privacy
Impact Assessment
, June 2005, at
http://www.abs.gov.au/websitedbs/d3310114.nsf/Home/Census
See the PIA Report, paras 11.14 – 11.16.
George Williams, “Balancing national security and human
rights”, Fulbright Public Lecture, University of Melbourne,
available from
Australian Policy Online
www.apo.org.au
PIA Report para 11.19.
Paul Williams, head of the census program, quoted in Cherelle
Murphy, “Quarrel over use of census database”,
Financial Review
, 27 June 2005, p.6.
See for example the 1990-1992 NSW Independent Commission
Against Corruption investigation into the unauthorised release of government
information, known as the Roden Report.
Indeed we note a recent example in which a senior officer
within the ABS misused his computer access to alter his office footy-tipping
competition results, and that attempts by the ABS to maintain its reputation of
honesty and integrity by dismissing the officer were
undermined by his
reinstatement by the Industrial Relations Commission; Leonie Lamont,
“Sacked office footy tipster gets a
good result, again”,
Morning Herald
, 7 June 2005, at
www.smh.com.au
PIA Report para 10.37.
See components E, F, G and H of this proposal.
See advice from the Victorian Privacy Commissioner (para 12 of
his submission on this proposal), and from the Federal Privacy Commissioner
(referred to in para 10.8 of the PIA Report).
In addition to monitoring privacy abuses on behalf of the
Australian Privacy Foundation, a number of members have previously worked
various Privacy Commissioners’ offices or equivalents around the world,
and have thus seen hundreds of formal investigations
into alleged privacy
breaches, and thousands of enquiries from people believing their privacy to have
been breached.
See the PIA Report para 3.7. We understand the conditions of
this to be the same as for 2001, which is that only people who mark
consent will have their forms kept. The imaged copies will be sent to the
Australian Archives on the condition that they
not be used for 99 years.
We understand this will only be for the period of ‘census
processing’, but that is 15 months, or 25% of the time before
Census is conducted.
See the PIA Report para 3.6. We understand this will only be
for the period of ‘census processing’.
This is the core of the SLCD, i.e. components A and B of this
proposal, and will involve creating a unique identifying ‘key’
each person so that Census records can be linked together over time using the
‘probabilistic’ technique.
We understand that components C and D of this proposal will
involve using a unique identifying ‘key’ for each person
Census record can be linked with other sources of information about them using
the ‘probabilistic’ technique.
We also understand from the PIA
Report that this aspect of the proposal does not involve adding information from
these other sources
the SLCD. It involves the linking of data from
the SLCD with data from other sources to create a new set of data, for use in
research studies. This was not clear to us from the Discussion
This is components E, F, G and H of the proposal. It involves
linking records using names and addresses as the primary ‘key’
linkage. We understand from the PIA Report that this aspect of the proposal
does not involve adding information from these other
SLCD. It involves the linking of data from the SLCD with data from other
sources to create a new set of data, for use in particular
ways. Again, this
was not clear to us from the Discussion Paper.
This is component B of the proposal.
For example privacy guarantees given by other government
agencies to people registering birth or deaths, or passing through immigration
controls at Australian borders, will not have anticipated the linking of such
information with Census data.
See the PIA Report para 3.4. We understand that data is
nonetheless not intended to be published at these smaller cell sizes.
PIA Report para 11.3.
PIA Report para 11.13.
Paul Chadwick, Victorian Privacy Commissioner,
Submission to
the Australian Bureau of Statistics on its proposal – Enhancing the
Population Census: Developing a longitudinal
, 9 June 2005, para 41.
See para 7 in the Victorian Privacy Commissioner’s
submission on this proposal.
See the PIA Report para 5.7.
See para 42 in the Victorian Privacy Commissioner’s
submission on this proposal.
It should not pass without notice that there is no equivalent
‘Research Impact Assessment’. Indeed in its response
Report, the ABS noted that it must “weigh up the public benefits of the
proposal ... against privacy issues, risks
and benefits”. It then
effectively dismisses the privacy risks identified in the PIA Report because
they relate “largely
to perceptions of ’what might happen’ in
the future”.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter