URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glister, Jamie; Ridge, Pauline --- "The Respective Liabilities of Dishonest Fiduciaries and Their Knowing Assistants" [2025] MelbULawRw 5; (2025) 48(2) Melbourne University Law Review 436
THE RESPECTIVE LIABILITIES OF DISHONEST FIDUCIARIES AND THEIR KNOWING ASSISTANTS
I Introduction
II Principles Governing the Liability Relationship of Fiduciary and Knowing Assistant
A Introduction
B Knowing Assistance Liability Is ‘Accessorial’ and ‘Direct’
C Foundational Norms and Purposes
D The Equitable Identity of the Two Liabilities
E A Proposed Understanding of the Liability Relationship
III Three Questions concerning the Liability Relationship of Fiduciary and Knowing Assistant
A The Release Rule
1 Split Elections
2 Gain-Based Relief from the Fiduciary
3 Recovering Gains as Compensating Loss
C Contribution
1 Requirements for Contribution
2 Michael Wilson & Partners v Emmott
3 Discussion
4 Unequal Contribution
IV Conclusion
THE RESPECTIVE LIABILITIES OF DISHONEST FIDUCIARIES
AND THEIR KNOWING ASSISTANTS
Jamie Glister
* and Pauline
This article examines the relationship between fiduciary liability and
knowing assistance liability. We first consider the question
as one of precedent
and principle. What can be gleaned from case law and theory as to the nature of
the two liabilities and, therefore,
how they should relate to each
other? We then consider three questions concerning the
interaction of
fiduciary and knowing assistance liability: (a) whether the plaintiff’s
release of one party will necessarily
release others involved in the same breach
of fiduciary duty; (b) whether plaintiffs can make ‘split elections’
fiduciaries and knowing assistants (that is, recover gain-based relief
from some defendants and compensatory relief from others);
and (c) whether
wrongdoing fiduciaries and knowing assistants can seek contribution from each
other. Each issue has recently been
considered by an intermediate Australian
court but not in completely satisfactory ways. We show how the resolution of
these issues
depends upon, and will contribute to, clarification of the
relationship of the two
liabilities.
I Introduction
A trustee or other fiduciary is strictly liable for a breach of their
equitable duties and is subject to the full range of equitable
relief. If a
breach of trust or fiduciary duty is egregious, someone who is not the fiduciary
and who knowingly participates in that
breach will also be liable to the
beneficiary or principal: in the language of the cases, that other person must
have ‘assist[ed]’,
‘with knowledge’, in the
fiduciary’s ‘dishonest and fraudulent
That assistant is described as being a ‘constructive
‘accountable in
According to the High Court of Australia, liability for knowing assistance is
‘imposed directly’ upon the assistant and
is distinct from that of
the fiduciary.
Accordingly, ‘the relief that is awarded against a defaulting fiduciary
and [their] knowing assistant will not necessarily
coincide in either nature or
Yet the Court also describes knowing assistance liability as
‘accessorial’ in the sense that the elements of the liability
to and depend on the breach of trust or fiduciary
breach of trust or fiduciary duty is an essential element of liability for
knowing assistance: the liability cannot be
Yet, it is not necessary for the
fiduciary to be held liable or even to be
that knowing assistance is independently wrongful and generates a primary
liability but is also inseparably linked to
the fiduciary’s wrong.
The ramifications of these settled propositions for the respective
liabilities of fiduciary and knowing assistant and the relationship
interaction of those liabilities, including the equitable relief that might be
available, are not yet entirely clear. To what
extent is the liability of one
defendant affected by or dependent on the other? How are these liabilities alike
and how do they differ?
A complication in answering such questions is that
despite the clear-cut legal distinction between the liabilities of fiduciary and
knowing assistant, the actual relationship between the fiduciary and knowing
assistant may be exceptionally close (involving a corporate
alter ego or
intimate partner, for instance), at arm’s length (such as in a
professional agency relationship) or somewhere
in between. Furthermore, in
complex and ongoing dishonest and fraudulent schemes, the same parties may have
been both fiduciary and
knowing assistant at different points in the scheme and
in relation to different (often corporate) victims of the
In other words, the conceptual
distinctiveness of the liabilities of fiduciary and knowing assistant is not
necessarily reflected
in an actual relationship between those parties. A further
complication is that the historical precedents are difficult to interpret
their use of the obfuscatory language of constructive trusts and trustees and
because courts have tended not to distinguish
between the liabilities of express
trustees and implicated third parties (instead treating both as actual trustees
of the original
Our objective in this article is to clarify the interaction and relationship
of the fiduciary and the knowing assistant’s respective
liabilities
— we refer to this as their ‘liability relationship’. We do
this by first considering the question
as one of precedent and principle (Part
II). What can be gleaned from case law and theory as to the nature of the two
liabilities
and, therefore, how they should relate to each other? We then use
our provisional understanding of the
liability relationship to consider three questions raised in recent
Australian cases (Part III):
1 Whether the plaintiff’s release of one party from liability will
necessarily release others who are involved (whether as fiduciary
or assistant)
in the same breach of fiduciary duty;
2 Whether plaintiffs can make ‘split elections’ between
fiduciaries and assistants (that is, recover gain-based relief
defendants and compensatory relief from others); and
3 Whether fiduciaries and assistants can seek contribution from each
We will show how the resolution of these issues both depends upon, and will
contribute to, a clearer understanding of the relationship
of fiduciary and
knowing assistance liabilities.
This subject is important because such equitable claims and remedies continue
to be prioritised in litigation despite there often
being a concurrent statutory
regulatory regime in place: indeed, a feature of leading Australian cases is a
lack of attention given
to associated statutory claims, which tend only to be
mentioned briefly or not at all if the pleaded equitable claims are made
equitable principles in fiduciary and knowing assistance liability must be
clarified in the interests of efficient litigation
and just outcomes for
defendants inter se as well as for plaintiffs. This subject is also topical
following decisions in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales
(‘NSWSC’) and the New South Wales Court of Appeal
(‘NSWCA’) that highlight the unsettled
state of the law and provide
some clues for its principled development. In particular, three NSWCA decisions,
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Emmott
Cassaniti v Ball
Xiao v BCEG International
(Australia) Pty Ltd
prompted this article and will be considered.
An explanation of our terminology is necessary before going further. Knowing
assistance liability may attach to any ‘dishonest
and fraudulent’
‘breach of trust or breach of fiduciary duty’ whether or not the
latter also constitutes a breach
We avoid this cumbersome expression by using the term
‘fiduciary’ to include ‘trustee’ and ‘breach of
fiduciary duty’ to include breach of trust except
where it is necessary to
be more specific.
‘assistant’
to mean one who knowingly participates in a breach of fiduciary duty, but
we note that the requisite participatory conduct encompasses persons who
are equal participants with the fiduciary and not only those who perform a
We focus on Australian law, with some reference to English law for
comparison. The English dishonest assistance claim differs from
the Australian
knowing assistance claim in its scope and elements because it attaches to
breach of trust or fiduciary duty and determines culpability
according to a standard
of dishonesty rather than
Finally, it is worth noting that other
equitable and common law liabilities may attach to third parties associated
with a breach of trust or fiduciary
We, however, are concerned only with
knowing assistance liability.
Principles Governing the Liability Relationship of Fiduciary and Knowing
Introduction
What can we glean from Australian law as to how the liabilities for breach of
fiduciary duty and knowing assistance
relate to each other as a
matter of precedent and principle? Three features of the liability relationship
particularly relevant in answering this question and are discussed in this
Part. They concern:
1 The High Court’s characterisation of knowing assistance liability as
‘accessorial’ and being ‘imposed directly’
upon knowing
assistants;
2 The foundational norms and purposes of the two liabilities; and
3 The equitable identity of the two liabilities.
Knowing Assistance
Liability Is ‘Accessorial’ and ‘Direct’
A paragraph in the joint judgment of Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls
Michael Wilson
’) contains the only explicit consideration
by the High Court of the fiduciary and assistant’s liability
relationship.
Their Honours rejected the argument that an assistant’s liability was
‘no more than accessorial to the principal wrongdoing
fiduciary]’ and was therefore confined to ‘the nature and
extent’ of the relief obtained against the
Instead, the Court held that
liability to account as a constructive trustee is imposed directly upon a person
who knowingly assists in a breach of fiduciary duty.
The reference to the
liability of a knowing assistant as an ‘accessorial’ liability does
no more than recognise that
the assistant’s liability depends upon
establishing, among other things, that there has been a breach of fiduciary duty
‘the relief that is awarded against a defaulting fiduciary and a knowing
assistant will not necessarily coincide in either
These statements and the
cases cited to support them make clear that Australian
law does not endorse a duplicative liability model of knowing assistance:
the assistant does not
the fiduciary for remedial
the liability relates to and is grounded in the assistant’s own
wrongdoing.
this extent, at least, the fiduciary’s liability and the
assistant’s liability are distinct
and separate.
Their Honours in
Michael Wilson
seemingly limited the significance of
the ‘accessorial’ label to the fact that a breach of trust or
fiduciary duty is
a necessary element of knowing assistance
However, we suggest that this
label’s significance is more profound and that our suggestion is not
inconsistent with their
Honours’ understanding of knowing assistance
liability. Knowing assistance has the same framework of elements as accessorial
liabilities across private law: a primary wrong (the dishonest and fraudulent
fiduciary breach), involvement in that wrong through
(‘assistance’) and that assistance satisfying a requisite mental
element (either actual or constructive knowledge
as described in levels (i) to
(iv) of the so-called
substantive content and operation of the three elements of any accessory
liability are usually shaped by the norms, purposes
and history of the relevant
primary wrong — that is, they are not identical across private
Nevertheless, and despite their differences, accessorial liabilities in private
law share a unique form and function: the accessory’s
culpable involvement
(established by the requisite conduct and mental elements) in the primary wrong
justifies the accessory’s
liability for the consequences of that primary
remedies are determined by reference to the consequences of the primary wrong,
rather than the consequences of the accessorial
conduct, for the plaintiff and
respectively.
The remedies need not duplicate those available against the primary wrongdoer
because the accessory is independently
Nonetheless, that independent
liability responds to the consequences of the primary
this is consistent with the High Court’s description of knowing
assistance in
Michael Wilson
So is this accessorial understanding of the liability relationship between
fiduciary and assistant reflected in Australian law more
generally? As will now
be explained, support for the accessorial model just described can be found in
cases concerning loss-based
relief for knowing assistance; however, the picture
is less clear in relation to gain-based relief.
There are general assumptions in Australian law that the assistant is liable
for losses referable to the breach of fiduciary duty
and that this means that
the fiduciary and assistant are liable for the same
assumptions reflect the accessorial model described above. But it is difficult
to find unequivocal statements to this effect,
except in English
It may seem odd that such a
seemingly fundamental question has not been considered but there are some
plausible reasons for this.
Older cases refer to the assistant as being a
constructive trustee in the sense that the assistant becomes an actual
co-trustee of
the original trust and therefore responsible for the consequences
of the breach of that
however, the terminology simply connotes that the assistant is subject to the
same range of remedies as the actual trustee
or fiduciary but is not themselves
a trustee or fiduciary.
Moreover, until
recently it was assumed that equitable contribution was available as between
fiduciary and assistant.
This meant that
the question of who will bear ultimate responsibility for the claimant’s
losses could be left to the defendants,
to resolve by resort to a contribution
claim, rather than being left to a plaintiff who would be burdened with
potentially difficult
causation questions concerning which losses are
attributable to the knowing assistance. But the availability of contribution is
in doubt and so the need to find a principled justification for the extent
of an assistant’s loss-based liability is more
We suggest that the accessorial nature of knowing assistance explains why an
assistant’s loss-based liability is assessed by
reference to the
consequences of the fiduciary breach rather than their
assistance.
knowing assistance is accessorial, then the only relevant causation inquiry
concerns the conduct element of the claim. In our
view, this is reflected in the
case law. The question of law here is whether the assistant’s conduct was
causally relevant
primary wrong
: did it ‘“make a
difference” and forward or advance the primary breach or misconduct in
If so, and assuming that
the other elements of liability are met, the assistant is liable for the
consequences of the primary wrong.
A separate inquiry to determine which of
those consequences are attributable specifically to the assistant’s
conduct is never
undertaken and could be challenging if it
The current law is defensible because once the causal connection to the
fiduciary breach is established, the combination of the assistant’s
participation in, and knowledge of, the breach of fiduciary duty (in other
words, their culpability) justifies the assistant being
liable for that
fiduciary breach.
This is supported by the
demanding nature of the elements of the claim: the primary wrong must be
dishonest and fraudulent and the
assistant must either have actual knowledge of
it or be morally obtuse.
To suggest that
the assistant is only liable for losses that are referable to their assistance
would misconceive
the structure, function and (as we will see below) normative basis of
the liability.
The same reasoning applies in principle to gain-based relief: that is, the
assistant should account for gains that are causally linked
to the primary
wrong, rather than those causally linked to their accessorial conduct. However,
the limited judicial discussion on
this point is contradictory. The leading
authority is the 2018 High Court case of
Order of Foresters in Victoria Friendly
Society Ltd v Lifeplan Australia Friendly Society Ltd
Ancient Order
’), which confirms that gain-based relief
is available against knowing assistants and is
assessed according to equitable principles, rather than common law rules,
concerning causation.
However, in
Ancient Order
, the High Court was
divided on how exactly those equitable principles would operate.
Two of Lifeplan’s senior employees approached a competitor, Foresters,
with a plan to develop Foresters’ business in the
provision of prepaid
funeral plans at the expense of Lifeplan’s existing (and successful)
business in that area.
Foresters accepted
the proposal.
The scheme was successful and
Foresters’ prepaid funeral business increased dramatically while
Lifeplan’s fell precipitously.
High Court was unanimous in holding that Foresters was liable for knowing
assistance in the Lifeplan employees’ breaches
of fiduciary duty and must
account for its profits.
While Nettle J
would have limited the account to the net present value of profits made over a
four and a half year period,
the other four Justices ordered Foresters to account for the full capital
of its funeral products business.
However, the reasoning of those four
Justices differed.
The plurality of Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ focused on the connection
between Foresters’
and the benefit that it
According to the plurality the first stage of the inquiry is a causal one: what
benefit or gain has accrued to the assistant from
their knowing
assistance?
Their Honours concluded that
Foresters’ actions had resulted in the wholesale acquisition of
Lifeplan’s business connections: the benefit that Foresters acquired
was, quite simply, a business.
second stage of the remedial inquiry — the ‘quantification’
stage — the plurality noted that Foresters
bore the onus of showing why it
would be inequitable to order disgorgement of the full value of its funeral plan
To do this, in the
plurality’s view, Foresters would need to show that part of its profit had
‘no reasonable connection’
to its acts of knowing
assistance.
For the plurality, on the
facts, Foresters could not do so.
Consequently, the Court ordered the disgorgement of the full capital value of
Foresters’ funeral plan business — but only
because this was the
resulted from Foresters’ knowing
assistance.
On the other hand, Gageler J reached the same result in a different way. His
Honour said:
The benefit or gain for which a fiduciary or knowing participant is liable to be
ordered to account must, as a baseline requirement,
have a causal connection to
the fiduciary’s breach of equitable obligation. ... [T]he causal
connection which must exist for
a knowing participant to be liable to account
for a benefit or gain is not between the benefit or gain and the conduct which
constitutes
knowing participation. To require a causal connection of that nature
would recast
knowing participation as a free-standing head of liability
divorced from the
fiduciary obligations which it is the purpose of
equity’s imposition of liability on the knowing participant to
This approach
focuses on the link between the assistant’s gain and the fiduciary’s
breach. His Honour saw this approach
as providing the answer to Foresters’
argument that it could only be liable for specific gains made from specific acts
assistance (and could not therefore be liable to disgorge the full
capital value of its funeral plan
This difference in approach is significant for our understanding of the
defendants’ liability relationship even though it did
not affect the
Ancient Order
itself. The plurality’s approach viewed
knowing assistance as a discrete equitable wrong being accessorial only in the
that a dishonest and
fraudulent breach by a fiduciary is a necessary element of the
It contradicts the model of
accessory liability that we outlined above. The approach of Gageler J (who
preferred the term ‘ancillary’
rather than
‘accessorial’) viewed knowing assistance as being linked to the
fiduciary’s liability and as directly
supporting the obligations owed by
the fiduciary.
Both approaches are
consistent with the High Court’s description of liability being
‘imposed directly’ upon the
knowing assistant in
They are also consistent in how
they view the second quantification stage of assessing
However, as we explain in the next
section, Gageler J’s approach to the initial causation stage is more
supportive of the underlying
rationales and purposes of the two liabilities: the
most significant of which being to bolster protection of the fiduciary
relationship.
It also aligns with the traditional approach to loss-based relief
for knowing assistance.
But it is worth
noting that adopting Gageler J’s approach may result in a more onerous
gain-based liability for the assistant
even though no difference in result was
seen on the facts of
Ancient Order
Foundational Norms and Purposes
The accessorial nature of the fiduciary or trustee’s and
assistant’s liability relationship becomes clearer when considered
light of the foundational norms and purposes of the respective liabilities.
Fiduciary law and trusts law are directed to ensuring
‘disinterested and
undivided loyalty’ — and, where trust property is involved, high
standards of stewardship —
in certain relationships and legal forms that
are considered valuable to the functioning of
obligations are more demanding and absolute in character than the
common law obligations that may also circumstantially
Liability is strict, although this
is less remarkable when assistance liability comes into play
because the relevant trust or fiduciary breach must constitute a dishonest
and fraudulent design and hence be
The normative justification for knowing assistance liability as expressed in
the case law reflects a general legal norm underpinning
all accessorial
liabilities that it is wrongful to knowingly interfere with the performance of
another’s legal duties in a
relationship protected by law through conduct
that is causally linked to that other’s primary
The essence of the complaint is the
assistant’s knowing interference with the (protected and highly valued)
trust or fiduciary
relationship.
The pragmatic purpose of assistance liability — to protect
(‘enhance’) trust and fiduciary relationships —
Trusts law, fiduciary law and knowing assistance law are all directed to the
same end: to maintain and protect the high standards
of conduct expected of
trustees and fiduciaries by the provision of generous means of redress and
through strong
deterrence.
Hence, the knowing assistance claim provides the plaintiff with an additional or
alternative means of redress for the consequences
of the primary
also deter third parties, who deal with trustees or fiduciaries on a
professional basis, from becoming involved in trustee
or fiduciary wrongdoing
and may thereby reduce the risk of trust or fiduciary
It is also relevant that
liability only arises in circumstances of egregious
wrongdoing.
all these reasons, equity takes a robust, claimant-favouring approach to both
liabilities.
The Equitable Identity of the Two Liabilities
The third feature of the fiduciary and assistant’s liability
relationship that is evident in Australian law is that these liabilities
established according to equitable principles and method. This is symptomatic of
a broader regard in Australian law for the ongoing
relevance of equitable
principles and method, albeit in a fused system these are not necessarily
confined to equitable doctrine.
concepts, rules and methods do not apply in equity unless they resonate with the
relevant equitable norms, principles
The High Court has emphasised on several occasions that equitable doctrines
generally require close, evaluative and holistic consideration
of facts rather
than the application of clear and unyielding rules ‘giving rise to
definite issues of fact readily formulated
which, when found, automatically
determine [the
So, for example, a majority of Justices in
Ancient Order
took it for
granted that equitable causation principles applied, although their Honours
differed on whether the causal link should
be between the assistant’s
gains and their assistance or between their gains and the fiduciary breach. The
plurality noted
that such principles required close attention to the facts
informed by the prophylactic character of the ‘equitable disgorgement
principle’.
Similarly, Gageler J
emphasised the holistic, fact-based application of general principle rather than
the use of fixed rules.
Relatedly, and in contrast to the common law, equitable relief is always
discretionary, albeit such discretion is governed by settled
principles.
Moreover, that relief may be shaped to fit particular facts, including through
the imposition of terms on its
availability.
Hence, caution is necessary in analogising with common law forms of accessory
liability and in the application of common law rules
A good illustration of why the distinctiveness of Australian equity is
important in the context of this article concerns the common-law-derived
conceptual lens through which courts generally consider the liability
relationship of fiduciary and assistant. Traditionally, these
liabilities are
characterised for remedial and other purposes as being either ‘joint and
several’ or ‘several’.
These concepts of liability, as well as the concept of ‘joint’
liability, originate in the common law of
terms, joint and several liability (solidary liability) arises where wrongdoers
acting independently cause a plaintiff to
suffer the same indivisible harm by
reason of their distinct
liability arises where wrongdoers acting independently cause a plaintiff to
suffer different harms by reason of their distinct
Joint liability arises where
wrongdoers are responsible for the same
and joint and several, liabilities involve the same loss having been caused by
two or more wrongdoers but differ in whether
the wrong in question is joint or
distinct — if the wrongs in question are distinct, then the wrongdoers are
liable for the
full extent of the total loss both together (jointly) and
individually
(severally).
However, if the wrongdoers are responsible for distinct wrongs and different
losses, then they are severally liable for the separate
harms caused by their
own distinct wrongs.
In our view, the question of whether fiduciaries and their assistants are
jointly and severally, or severally, liable for losses and
gains resulting from
the fiduciary breach is not yet settled. The labels of ‘joint and
several’ and ‘several’
are used by judges and commentators in
a conclusory fashion, but they are question-begging and obscure the underlying
questions of
principle. Traditionally, equity considered ‘constructive
trustees’ (in the sense of persons implicated in a breach of
trust without
being express trustees) to be jointly and severally liable with the
-century reasoning was that a knowing assistant became an actual
trustee of the original trust as a consequence of their
reasoning is inconsistent with the modern understanding of the assistant’s
liability being independent and
-century cases are not conclusive. The NSWCA noted recently
that it was ‘tolerably clear’ that an assistant to a breach
be jointly and severally liable to restore misdirected trust
The question is also not
settled in relation to an account of profits, although assistants are not
generally liable for a fiduciary’s
profits: ‘joint and several
liability for benefits and profits is the exception,
not the rule’.
Uncertainties as to whether and when a fiduciary and assistant are jointly
and severally, or severally, liable for losses and gains
are compounded by the
fact that the historical common law on joint and several liability and its
consequences was illogical, led
was often modified by
and has been described as
requiring significant legislative
Hence, a large and sometimes
inconsistent body of law surrounds these labels and concepts. This raises the
question of whether they
should be applied to a fiduciary and assistant. Indeed,
the NSWCA in
has now questioned whether the descriptors of
joint and several and several are apt to describe
equitable liability relationships, suggesting that ‘the position in
equity may be much less black and white than the all-or-nothing
favoured by
common law’.
In support of this
suggestion, the Court noted that the nature of the liability relationship
between fiduciary and assistant is conceptually
quite different to liability
relationships between common law co-obligors: equitable relief may be available
on terms (which might
differ as between the fiduciary and assistant), subject to
defences applying to only one defendant and potentially result in different
accounts being available against each
Hence, the traditional (common-law-inspired) framing of questions regarding the
liability relationship of fiduciary and assistant
as dependent on whether
liability is joint and several or several may be misconceived and
A Proposed Understanding of the Liability Relationship
Based on the discussion in this Part we propose the following principles for
understanding the liability relationship of the fiduciary
and knowing
1 The assistant’s liability is grounded in
their own culpable conduct and will not necessarily duplicate the
fiduciary’s
2 The assistant’s liability is accessorial in form and function. Hence,
the assistant is liable to redress the consequences
of the breach of trust or
fiduciary duty;
3 The norms and purposes of fiduciary law and knowing assistance law are
directed to the same ends: robust and claimant-favouring
protection of trust and
fiduciary relationships; and
4 The liability relationship is governed by equitable norms, principles and
method. Resolution of specific questions concerning the
interaction of the two
liabilities is likely to be nuanced and fact specific. The common law concepts
of joint and several liability
and several liability do not necessarily
assist and may in fact hinder an equitable inquiry.
The second principle is inconsistent with the plurality judgment in
concerning the assistant’s gain-based
but it is supported by the
case law on the assistant’s loss-based liability and by the norms and
purposes of knowing assistance
In all other respects, these
principles accord with Australian law.
With this understanding of the liability relationship in mind, we now turn to
three specific questions raised by recent cases.
Three Questions concerning the Liability Relationship of Fiduciary and Knowing
The Release
A plaintiff is not obliged to sue both the fiduciary and knowing assistant
even where both claims are viable.
There may be practical obstacles to suing both defendants and strategic reasons
for why only one potential defendant is sued —
in any event, a defendant
may still join other parties by way of a
cross-claim.
With this in mind, and
assuming that the elements of the fiduciary and knowing assistance claims are
present in principle, what effect
does a covenant not to sue, a release, a
discontinuance of action, an abandonment of claim or consent to judgment by the
in relation to a defendant fiduciary or assistant have upon the
substantive liability of the other fiduciary or assistant
defendants?
This question arose in the NSWCA in
in relation to the
consequences for an assistant of a fiduciary’s release from
The judgments at first
instance and on appeal contain rich discussions of legal history, statutory
interpretation and equitable
concerned appeals by the principals, employees and clients
of an accounting firm involved in a tax avoidance scheme against successful
claims by the liquidator of the five companies used to implement the
The accounting firm arranged for
fictitious invoices to be raised by the claimant companies in order to create
tax deductions for
its clients who then paid these invoices and/or received
equivalent payments in return from the companies, thereby laundering the
clients’ funds.
The claimant
companies derived no commercial benefit from the scheme and incurred
considerable tax liabilities.
involved a web of legal and familial relationships between the accounting
firm’s principals, employees and client
participants.
Adding to the complexity,
the roles of the principals and employees in the scheme (as director, de facto
director or participant)
shifted over time and in relation to the various
claimant companies; they acted sometimes as fiduciaries and sometimes as
participants
in the scheme.
instance, most of the claimants’ directors and de facto directors were
held to have breached fiduciary duties.
Other principals and employees of the firm and clients who participated in the
scheme were liable as knowing assistants in dishonest
and fraudulent breaches of
fiduciary duty by the respective
Equitable compensation was
The main ground of appeal in
concerned whether the release
of a fiduciary also released those who knowingly assisted that fiduciary in the
relevant breach of
fiduciary duty.
of the claims against the accounting firm had been settled by the liquidator
prior to or during the hearing at first instance
and one claim was abandoned
before that hearing.
During the hearing,
the defendants were made aware of the judgment in
Edgewater Homes Pty Ltd v
Edgewater Homes
’), an unrelated NSWSC
Edgewater Homes
, Stevenson J held that when liabilities for breach of
fiduciary duty and knowing assistance (or knowing receipt of trust property)
were joint and several, a release of a knowing assistant (or knowing recipient)
would also release the fiduciary from
His Honour noted the
‘vexed question’ of whether or when the liabilities in the dispute
at hand were in fact joint and
several but found it unnecessary to resolve that
question because it was conceded by the applicant that those liabilities were
and several.
Edgewater Homes
, several defendants in
Re Earth Civil
their pleadings to include a defence based on ‘the principle that release
of a joint and several wrongdoer releases
the concurrent
wrongdoer’.
In response, the
claimants argued that liability was several only and that, therefore, the deeds
of settlement and release did not
release the remaining
defendants.
It was held by Ward CJ in Eq
that the defendants’ liability for losses was joint and
but that the release rule did
In brief, her Honour reasoned
that if the release rule had applied to equitable claims involving joint and
several liability, it
had been impliedly abrogated by
Procedure Act 2005
view was that the defence should not be followed in
On appeal, the Court in
independently reached the same conclusion and found that the
defence had never applied in equity.
There are three parts to the reasoning in
. First, the Court
considered the original common law rule that a release from liability of one
jointly liable co-obligee would release
other co-obligees and explained how the
rule has been extended to scenarios where liability was joint
despite that extension being illogical and unjust in
application.
Secondly, the Court engaged in an extensive statutory interpretation
exercise to determine the meaning and effect of
Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) (which, on its terms, applies where
‘judgment’ is obtained against a person with joint liability) and
its predecessor,
of which it is a consolidation,
s 97 of the
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW). This necessitated an inquiry
into the legislative history of those provisions and of
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
(NSW), which is of the same effect
but narrower in scope than
Civil Procedure Act 2005
applies only to joint tortfeasors.
Australian Capital Territory’s legislative equivalent to
held by the High Court in
Thompson v Australian Capital Television Pty
’) to have impliedly abolished the release
rule as it applied to joint tortfeasors.
The Court in
found that the same reasoning applied to s 97 of
Supreme Court Act 1970
This was reinforced by the fact that s 97 was re-enacted in materially the same
terms in the
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW) after the decision in
and by an analogous decision of the Victorian Court of Appeal in
relation to similar
Victorian legislation.
In the third and final part of its reasoning, the Court considered whether
the release rule had ever applied in equity and concluded
that as a matter of
authority and principle it had not: ‘there is no reason for an unjust and
disfavoured rule at common law
to be followed in equity, where liability is
conceptually different, is subject to discretionary defences and is apt to be
differently as between
defendants’.
In reaching its conclusion, the Court disagreed with the assumption that joint
and several liability would necessarily attract the
same consequences, including
the release rule, in equity as at common law, pointing to a number of scenarios
in which equity treated
a release from liability differently from the common
The Court also acknowledged that
the case law and commentary was divided on whether the common law release rule
applied in equity,
but traced much of that confusion to a misreading of the 1843
Irish decision,
Blackwood v Borrowes
(which concerned the effect of a trustee’s release on the liability of his
co-trustee) that entered legal texts at
the time and became entrenched in
This misreading was in not recognising that, by the terms of her deed of
release, the plaintiff in
had accepted the breach of trust and
taken the benefit of it (the benefit being the securities that were the subject
of the breach).
This was the basis of
the decision in
that the co-trustee who had not been released
was not liable.
As the Court in
It seems plain enough that a beneficiary who had accepted, and taken the benefit
of, conduct which is in breach of fiduciary duty
cannot thereafter sue an
accessory for knowing assistance in the breach. That is not because of the
release, but because the plaintiff would be approbating
and reprobating, or
inconsistent stances in relation to the same wrongful
point can be taken further: if, for example, the plaintiff acquiesces in the
breach of a fiduciary duty, or subsequently adopts
or ratifies that breach, it
could be argued that the elements of the fiduciary claim are not established at
and consequently that an essential element of knowing assistance liability
(the fiduciary breach) is not
The logic of the reasoning in
applies with equal force to
covenants not to sue,
discontinuance of
actions, abandonment of claims
consent judgments, so long as the plaintiff has not adopted, ratified or
accepted the fiduciary breach by taking any of those
steps. These conclusions
are consistent with our proposed understanding of the liability relationship in
The liabilities of fiduciary and knowing assistant are grounded in
their own culpability (they are ‘direct’ liabilities);
release of one does not absolve the other from liability to redress the
consequences of the fiduciary breach. This position
promotes the norms and
purposes of the two claims and reflects their robust and claimant-favouring
protection of trust and fiduciary
relationships. The only exception is where the
plaintiff’s conduct in fact amounts to an adoption, ratification or
of the fiduciary’s conduct. In that instance, an essential
element of the (accessorial) knowing assistance claim — the
fiduciary duty — is missing and therefore the assistant cannot be liable.
demonstrates, that outcome is consistent with the equitable
principles in this area more generally.
Furthermore, there is sufficient discretion and flexibility built into those
equitable principles and remedies to meet the justice
of each case. For example,
the terms of any arrangement between the plaintiff and the defendant who is no
longer liable can be taken
into account in fashioning the relief awarded against
the remaining defendants.
Where a plaintiff has suffered a loss and the fiduciary or the assistant (or
both) has also made a gain from the same breach, the
plaintiff can choose
whether to claim an account of profits or equitable
compensation.
Against an individual defendant, those remedies are alternative and not
cumulative: this means that an election must be
reasoning here is that the rights to loss-based and gain-based remedies are
inconsistent and hence ‘neither one may be
enjoyed without the extinction
The question discussed below is whether the plaintiff’s choice of remedy
against one defendant influences the remedies that
can be sought from others. We
will see that plaintiffs are not required to seek the same type of remedy from
all defendants: they
can make ‘split’ elections so as to seek
gain-based relief from some wrongdoers and compensatory relief from
This is consistent with the
nature of knowing assistance liability as being accessorial and imposed
directly. However, we will also
see that courts are attuned to the realities of
cases and that relief can be appropriately shaped. In this way, the equitable
of liability for breach of fiduciary duty and knowing assistance can be
It is first worth highlighting that plaintiffs can make the
election against a wrongdoing fiduciary and their assistants. A plaintiff who
seeks equitable
compensation from both the fiduciary and the assistant can obtain orders
for the full amount against both, although the plaintiff will not be able to
recover the total loss more than
Where accounts of profits are
sought, there is no problem in recovering the gains made by each wrongdoer.
Ancient Order
case, for example, Lifeplan successfully claimed the
profits made by the fiduciaries, Woff and Corby, and those made by their knowing
assistant, Foresters.
The more difficult question is whether a plaintiff can elect for
remedies from the fiduciary and the assistant. The High Court in
envisaged this possibility when it noted that the plaintiff
compensation from the defaulting fiduciary (who made no profit from the
default) and an account of profits from the knowing assistant (who profited
from his or her own
misconduct)’.
Club of the Clubs Pty Ltd v King Network Group Pty Ltd [No 2]
Club of the Clubs
’), Bergin J also allowed such a
Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA referred to the
possibility in
The NSWCA recently examined the issue in
, although the third
party in that case was found to be a knowing recipient rather than a knowing
Xiao and Chen, two directors of BCEG International Investment
(‘BCEG’), wrongly transferred funds from BCEG to a company
controlled, West Wyalong Marketplace (‘WWM’), to enable WWM to
finance a property development.
Chen were liable for $2.52 million as equitable compensation for the misapplied
funds while WWM was liable for $2.94 million
as an account of profits for
knowing receipt (the latter sum was larger because the account of profits
included an element of rental
income and an element of capital
NSWCA confirmed that BCEG could make this split
There was no inconsistency in claiming compensation from the fiduciary and gains
from the knowing recipient:
The liability of the knowing recipient is different in nature and extent to the
liability of the fiduciary, including that the knowing
recipient does not owe a
duty of loyalty to the principal. A gain-based remedy against the knowing
recipient is not inconsistent
with a compensation remedy against the defaulting
appears to confirm that plaintiffs can elect for different remedies
as between defaulting fiduciaries and liable third parties, including
knowing assistants, two issues deserve further comment. First, whether
plaintiffs can elect for different remedies in this
way might depend on whether
gain-based relief is sought from the fiduciary or from a knowing assistant.
Secondly, there is the question
of whether recovering profits from one defendant
operates to reduce the compensatory liability of other defendants.
Gain-Based Relief from
the Fiduciary
All of the Australian authorities that discuss the split election point
concern equitable compensation being sought from the fiduciary
and an account of
profits being sought from the assistant (or a knowing recipient of trust
property): this was the case in both
Club of the Clubs
and it was also the possibility envisaged by the High Court in
Michael Wilson
and by the NSWCA in
It now seems clear
that such a split election can be made. But what about the reverse position: can
a plaintiff seek an account of
profits from the fiduciary and equitable
compensation from the assistant?
A possible problem with doing so is that the plaintiff might be seen as
adopting the fiduciary’s breach by obtaining judgment
for an account of
profits against that
If the fiduciary’s breach was adopted, one of the necessary components of
the claim against the assistant — an underlying
fiduciary breach —
would no longer exist.
therefore be analytically difficult
to seek an account of profits from the fiduciary at the same time as seeking
equitable compensation from the
Support for the view that taking an account of profits involves adopting the
breach can be found in
Neilson v Betts
where Lord Westbury said: ‘[T]he decree of the Court below directed not
only an inquiry as to damages, but also an
account of profits. The two things
are hardly reconcilable, for if you take an account of profits you condone the
infringement.’
The authors of
say, in relation to accounts of profits, that the plaintiff
‘virtually elects to affirm or adopt the acts of the wrongdoer
done by the plaintiff’s agent, then calls upon this deemed agent to render
an account of the profits’.
Claimants in tracing cases have also been said to adopt or affirm the breach
when they claim the fruits of an unauthorised investment
On the other hand,
was a case about patent infringement and
the High Court has said that the basis of the liability to account for profits
cases is different from fiduciary
More generally, the idea that
taking an account of profits involves condoning a breach (in particular a
dishonest and fraudulent
one) can be criticised as being
artificial.
, for example,
Gleeson JA clearly saw accounts of profits as the means of ensuring that
wrongdoers do not profit from their wrongful
conduct rather than seeing them as
condonation of that conduct.
point is that this condonation argument may be particularly artificial in cases
(a common fact pattern in knowing
assistance cases) where the court often needs to decide when to
‘stop’ the account
and regard further gains as unconnected to the
All of this means that, at least in the usual case of an account of profits
being sought from a fiduciary, it would be artificial
to see taking an account
of profits as an adoption of the fiduciary’s breach. That being so, there
will be no analytical problem
in seeking equitable compensation from the
assistant at the same time as seeking profits from the fiduciary. Additionally,
discussed above, the NSWCA in
rejected the argument that
a release given to a wrongdoing fiduciary also released a knowing assistant from
The Court clearly saw the
release of the fiduciary as being a release of liability consequent on a breach
rather than as a release
of the breach itself (that latter view would have
affected the position of third parties in that
For these reasons, we think that split elections ought to be equally
available both ways: plaintiffs can recover loss from a fiduciary
and profits
from an assistant, or vice versa. However, the point is not free from doubt and
it should be noted that the England and
Wales Court of Appeal recently doubted
whether equitable compensation could be awarded against a dishonest assistant
when the plaintiff
had elected for an account of profits against the fiduciary.
Hotel Portfolio II UK Ltd (in liq) v Ruhan
, the plaintiff company
claimed both an account of profits from its former director and equitable
compensation from a dishonest assistant
in the director’s
the facts, no loss was suffered, so there could be no question of a compensatory
award against either the fiduciary or the dishonest
However, Newey LJ commented:
[Where] the claimant had elected for an account of profits instead of
compensation as against the fiduciary ... I should not have
thought that
compensation could be sought from the dishonest assistant. That it would not be
possible to claim compensation from
the dishonest assistant in such
circumstances might, I suppose, follow simply from the need to choose between
inconsistent remedies.
More generally, though, it seems to me that, for there to
be scope for a claim
for compensation for loss from a dishonest assistant,
the fiduciary should also be
His Lordship had
introduced this point by calling it ‘a further (and perhaps more
fundamental) objection’ to the compensation
This point was not fully
developed, but it may be the case that English law is more supportive of the
idea that taking an account
of profits from a fiduciary involves adopting that
fiduciary’s breach.
Recovering Gains as
Compensating Loss
The second issue that requires discussion is whether a plaintiff who recovers
an account of profits is thereby compensated for loss
that they have suffered.
Say a breach of fiduciary duty causes a loss to the plaintiff of $1 million with
knowing assistant in that breach making profits of $2 million. Can the
plaintiff recover $1 million from the fiduciary and $2 million
Or would recovery of the assistant’s profits mean that the plaintiff
was made whole such that recovering the loss from the fiduciary
amount to double satisfaction?
It is helpful here to remember three points: first, the liability of a
fiduciary or knowing assistant to disgorge profits does not
depend on the
principal suffering any loss;
where loss is suffered, compensatory relief is calculated in the same way
against the fiduciary as against the assistant:
in other words, the assistant is
liable to compensate for the effects of the fiduciary’s breach; thirdly,
it now seems clear
(at least in Australia) that split elections can be made
between fiduciaries and their assistants such that compensation can be claimed
from some defendants and accounts of profits from
The importance of this third
point will be somewhat diminished if the sums recovered under an account of
profits are seen as reducing
or eliminating the plaintiff’s loss so that
the relevant amounts can no longer be recovered from other defendants as
compensation.
Several cases suggest that the recovery of profits from one defendant reduces
or eliminates the amount of compensation that can be
claimed from others. In
United Australia Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd
’), the House of Lords held that a plaintiff did not
‘waive the tort’ by bringing a (gain-based) action for money
received against one
The plaintiff could still claim and recover damages in tort from a second
Importantly, however, the
damages recoverable from that second defendant would be reduced by an amount
equivalent to any sums recovered
from the first
The same point can be seen
more clearly in
T Mahesan v Malaysia Government Officers’ Co-operative
Housing Society Ltd
’) where an agent received a
bribe of M$122,000 in a transaction in which his principal also lost
The Privy Council noted that if the briber had been sued for damages, any
judgment against the briber would have been
satisfied by the
recovery of the bribe from the agent: ‘the damages are limited to the
actual loss sustained; and if the principal
has recovered the bribe from the
bribed agent the actual loss he has sustained ... is reduced by that
A similar approach was taken by Bergin J in
Club of the Clubs
the plaintiff was awarded (a) equitable compensation of $630,000 jointly and
severally against the wrongdoing fiduciary and
two knowing assistants and
(b) an account of profits of $2.15 million against a third knowing
However, the plaintiff was
‘not entitled to recover [compensation] in excess of the amount awarded in
respect of the account
of profits against’ the third
Put simply, recovery of the account of profits from one defendant was seen as
extinguishing the plaintiff’s loss.
This approach brings certain complications. For example, one effect of saying
that profits can operate to reduce or extinguish loss
is that the sequence of
recovery for a plaintiff becomes very important. Profits must already have been
recovered from one defendant
before that recovery will operate to reduce the
plaintiff’s loss and so work in favour of those other defendants whose
is compensatory. To return to the example of a fiduciary being liable
for $1 million in compensation and the assistant being liable
for $2 million in
profits, that fiduciary could resist enforcement of the $1 million compensation
order on the basis that the assistant’s
satisfaction of the $2 million
profits order had made the plaintiff whole. But it seems doubtful that the
assistant could resist
enforcement of half of the $2 million profits order on a
reverse basis. Another consequence is that questions of contribution become
more difficult than they already are: if recovery of profits operates to reduce
loss, is the defendant who has disgorged profits
entitled to contribution from
those who were liable to pay equitable
compensation?
It can also be argued that, in contrast to the cases discussed above, the
recovery of profits from one defendant should
operate to reduce the
compensatory liability of
was the position in
, where we have seen that BCEG was entitled to
the $2.94 million account of profits from WWM
$2.52 million equitable compensation from Xiao and
United Australia
were distinguished by Gleeson JA on, essentially, the ground that
the liabilities of the defendants in those cases were more closely
, where the fiduciaries and the knowing recipient were liable
for ‘separate and distinct wrongs’ (ie breach of fiduciary
knowing receipt).
Of course, the
difficulty with basing an explanation on the defendants being liable for
distinct wrongs is that virtually all questions
of double satisfaction involve
distinct wrongs — certainly those in both
United Australia
This is because
questions of double satisfaction arise in the context of concurrent rather than
joint wrongdoers.
The question of whether recovered gains operate to reduce or eliminate loss
has been said to turn on whether the forms of relief sought
are of the same or
of a different kind.
In our view, the
following points will be important in determining this question: the extent to
which losses and profits are directly
reflective of each other (ie are two sides
of the same coin); the proximity, nature and components of the wrongs committed
defendant; the aims and purposes of the liabilities in question; and,
possibly, the nature of the defendants (eg where one defendant
is a company
controlled by other defendants).
knowing assistance context, we can also note that a closer necessary connection
exists between the liability of wrongdoing
fiduciaries and their knowing
assistants than exists between fiduciaries and knowing
recipients.
A knowing assistant’s liability is grounded directly in their facilitation
of the fiduciary’s breach — we have
seen that the compensatory
liability of the knowing assistant is assessed according to the losses flowing
from the fiduciary breach.
In contrast,
the fiduciary breach may have occurred long before the property fell into the
hands of a knowing recipient. Moreover,
the recipient’s compensatory
liability is not based on the consequences of the fiduciary breach but rather on
what they received.
While accepting that
it is a necessarily fact-dependent matter, we would tentatively suggest that the
liabilities of wrongdoing fiduciaries
and their knowing assistants are so
interlinked that it will more commonly be appropriate to regard the recovery of
profits from
one defendant as reducing or eliminating the compensatory liability
On the point of election, we have seen that plaintiffs can make the same
election against all defendants: they can seek compensatory
relief from all
parties subject to double satisfaction or, alternatively, they can claim (and
recover) accounts of profits from all
defendants. Plaintiffs can also make
‘split’ elections whereby gain-based relief is sought from some
defendants and compensatory
relief from others. However, this last point is
qualified by the fact that the
recovery of profits might be seen to offset the plaintiff’s loss.
Importantly, this is all subject to the standard equitable rider that much
depends on the particular facts of a
have argued above, equitable relief in this area is nuanced, discretionary and
can be made subject to terms.
of the Clubs
, Bergin J held that there was no objection in principle to
plaintiffs making split elections as between fiduciaries and knowing
assistants.
However, her Honour also
recognised that allowing such split elections may be unfair in particular
, Gleeson JA
allowed the plaintiff to recover both $2.52 million as equitable compensation
and $2.94 million in an account of
This might just be seen as
appropriate on the facts of that case, where the trial judge said that the
financial arrangements were
‘as clear as
But there may still remain a
suspicion of double counting: insofar as the money that was transferred from
BCEG to WWM was ‘lost’
to BCEG and ‘gained’ by WWM, that
money surely represented two sides of the same coin. It may be that in similar
it will be improper to characterise the same money as lost from a trust
fund (to enable recovery of equitable compensation in that
amount from the
trustee) and as gained by the relevant accessory (to enable recovery of profits
in that amount from the accessory).
Contribution
Once the substantive and remedial liability of each defendant is established,
a further question is whether rights of contribution
will exist among those
defendants. This issue will not concern the plaintiff because contribution
rights between defendants do not
affect the basic liability of each defendant to
the plaintiff.
The plaintiff can
therefore recover from whichever defendant they choose. But this point is
important in our context and is particularly
so for knowing assistants: a
knowing assistant who is liable for the whole loss suffered by the principal
will want to seek contribution
from the fiduciary and from any other accessories
to the fiduciary’s breach.
Requirements for
Contribution
Entitlement to contribution in equity depends on parties sharing coordinate
liabilities
where those liabilities are of the same nature and to the same
is difficult to state this principle any more precisely, although some further
points can be made. First, the availability of
contribution does not depend on
whether liability is characterised as joint and several or several. Contribution
turns on the existence
of coordinate liabilities of the same nature and extent
and may be available even when liability is
leading case of
Dering v Earl of Winchelsea
involved contribution being awarded in favour of one surety against two other
sureties even though the three were liable
on separate
the other hand, contribution is not available merely because obligations are
owed to the same party and are related to the same
transaction: something more
is required before liabilities will be of the same
Secondly, contribution can still
exist even if the underlying liabilities require different causes of action to
enforce them or if
the parties can discharge their liabilities in different
means that contribution can exist when some parties are liable under statute
while others are liable in contract, tort or for
breach of fiduciary
However, those liabilities must
still be of the same nature: this is where obligations imposed in private law
and under statute may
not be sufficiently
Even if liabilities are coordinate and of the same nature and extent,
contribution in equity may still be refused for reasons of unclean
Burke v LFOT Pty Ltd
, Gaudron ACJ and Hayne J referred to ‘the rule
that a person who has been guilty of fraud, illegality, wilful misconduct or
gross negligence is not entitled to contribution from his
and Callinan J also
noted that a trustee with unclean hands would be unable to seek contribution
from their co-trustees.
, Eyre CB commented that unclean hands would only bar contribution
when the improper conduct had ‘an immediate and necessary
relation to the
equity sued
and by this Eyre CB meant the equity in seeking contribution, not the conduct
that gave rise to the liability for which contribution
However, other cases have not limited the principle that contribution in equity
may still be refused for reasons of unclean hands
in this way. In
, for example, contribution was denied to the managing partner of a
colliery who committed a trespass for which his
co-partners were also
In refusing contribution, the Court adversely commented on both the
partner’s conduct (as between his co-partners) and on the
recklessness of
the trespass
The coordinate liabilities and unclean hands issues are both relevant to the
question of whether rights of contribution will exist
among fiduciaries and
knowing assistants. If the liabilities are not coordinate, or if the parties to
a dishonest and fraudulent
design necessarily have unclean hands, then
contribution cannot be available between
At least until recently, the
position was unclear: several cases (including the High Court decision in
) assumed that contribution would be available between
fiduciaries and knowing assistants but none of those cases actually involved
contribution.
Other cases have identified a possible tension between the requirement that
liabilities be ‘of the same nature and to the same
extent’ and the
High Court’s statement in
Michael Wilson
that ‘the relief
that is awarded against a defaulting fiduciary and a knowing assistant will not
necessarily coincide in either
Finally, on the unclean
hands point, White J noted in
McNally v Harris
’) that there is no right to contribution between
trustees who have all been party to a fraudulent breach of trust and extended
this principle to include accessories to a breach of
2 Michael Wilson &
Partners v Emmott
These issues were examined by the NSWCA in
, which is a more
recent instalment in the long-running Michael Wilson & Partners
litigation.
MWP is a law firm based in Kazakhstan.
Emmott was a director and shareholder in the firm and Nicholls and Slater were
By 2006, Emmott, Nicholls and Slater had left MWP to set up their own business,
taking some of MWP’s clients with
Emmott thereby breached his
fiduciary obligations to MWP and Nicholls and Slater knowingly assisted him
MWP’s initial proceedings against Nicholls and Slater were brought in
New South Wales, while the claims against Emmott were
dealt with in London as
part of an arbitration agreement.
complicated matters, but eventually in 2012 the NSWCA found Nicholls and Slater
liable for equitable compensation in the amount
of USD680,000 and €380,000
respectively.
Both men were subsequently
declared bankrupt and the 2012 award remained substantially
unsatisfied.
In 2016, MWP took an assignment of the rights of the trustees in bankruptcy of
Nicholls and Slater.
MWP then attempted
to pursue Emmott for contribution in respect of the liabilities of Nicholls and
Slater under the 2012 award.
way, MWP sought to make the wrongdoing fiduciary, Emmott, liable to contribute
to the award made against the knowing assistants,
Nicholls and
In the NSWCA, Brereton JA gave three reasons for ordering a stay of
MWP’s contribution claims.
on the unclean hands point, his Honour endorsed the reasoning in
and held that contribution could not be
Secondly, Brereton JA held that the liabilities of knowing assistants and of
fiduciaries are not coordinate because those liabilities
do not necessarily
coincide in either nature or quantum.
Thirdly, and assuming that the liabilities were coordinate, Nicholls and Slater
had not paid more than their fair share of the debt
to MWP and there was no
prospect of them doing so in future.
Unlike the common law, equity does not require that a co-debtor has already paid
more than their fair share of a debt before the
right to contribution can
equity will not award contribution where there is no prospect of the claimant
being able to pay their own proportionate
His Honour’s first and second reasons would deny the availability of
contribution in all knowing assistance cases. However,
neither reason is the
ratio of the Court’s decision. Both Leeming JA and Emmett AJA agreed that
the contribution claims should
be stayed but for narrower reasons than Brereton
According to Leeming JA, it was not
necessary to discuss the issues of unclean hands or whether the liabilities were
coordinate.
Instead, his Honour’s
decision was based on the value of the contribution claims having only amounted
to around USD2,000
and on the lack of
any evidence that Nicholls or Slater had paid (or could pay) more than a
proportionate share of their
liabilities.
On the other hand, Emmett
AJA thought that the contribution claim ought to be stayed because it only
amounted to around USD2,000.
Leeming JA and Emmett AJA therefore held that a stay was justified because the
amount of money was too small, whereas a different
majority, Leeming JA and
Brereton JA, held that Nicholls and Slater had not paid any more than their
fair share and that they were not willing and able to
do so. Either or both can
be seen as the ratio decidendi of
. Importantly, however, neither
determines that contribution can
be available between
fiduciaries and knowing assistants.
The Australian position therefore remains much the same after
as it was before, although the unresolved question of law — whether rights
of contribution will exist among fiduciaries and
knowing assistants — is
stands as authority for the proposition that contribution is
unavailable but the correctness of that decision can be questioned. It
argued that there is no role for unclean hands in this area because the person
seeking contribution has necessarily washed
their hands (or is at least able and
willing to do so) by paying the liability that is the subject of the
contribution
regarding the extent to which
rests on the more specific ground
of the ‘joint fraud’ rule, under which trustees who are party to a
fraudulent breach
of trust may not claim contribution from each other, it can be
argued that this rule ought to be
This is because the joint
fraud rule was created by equity following the law in respect of joint
tortfeasors,
but the rule that joint
tortfeasors could not claim contribution has been abolished by
Even if the rule is to remain
as between trustees, it is not necessary to apply the rule as between wrongdoing
trustees and their
assistants.
On the issue of coordinate liabilities, there is indeed a certain tension
between the contribution requirement that liabilities be
of the same nature and
the High Court’s statement in
Michael Wilson
that the liabilities
of fiduciaries and knowing assistants ‘will not necessarily coincide in
either nature or quantum’.
However, several points can be made in response. First, the word
‘nature’ is somewhat protean and its meaning need not
be the same
for all purposes. Here, it is important to bear in mind the context of the High
Court’s statement in
Michael Wilson
. The issue at hand was that the
knowing assistants, Nicholls and Slater, were trying to take advantage of the
fact that the wrongdoing
fiduciary, Emmott, was a part-owner of the MWP
business. Emmott was held to be liable to MWP for equitable compensation for
of fiduciary duty but in the final accounting that liability would be
reduced or even eliminated by the value of his shareholding
Nicholls and Slater were trying to
piggyback on this fact to reduce their own liability: to do this they argued
that their liability
as knowing assistants necessarily depended on the final
amount payable by Emmott.
It was this
specific argument that the High Court rejected in
Michael Wilson
commented that the liabilities need not coincide in
That the Court did not have the
contribution meaning of the word ‘nature’ in mind is shown by its
assumption a few paragraphs
earlier that contribution
Secondly, it is also possible to read the High Court’s statement in
Michael Wilson
as saying only that liabilities will not coincide in
nature if gain-based relief is sought against one party and loss-based relief
sought against the other. That is, the liabilities would coincide in nature if
loss-based relief was sought against
On the issue of quantum, as we
have seen, equitable compensation against a knowing assistant is based on the
loss flowing from the
fiduciary’s breach and not the loss flowing from the
assistance in that breach.
liabilities of fiduciary and knowing assistant would therefore coincide in both
Indeed, this point can be taken further: the availability of contribution can be
seen as part of the reason why the knowing assistant,
whose causal effect may
have been rather minimal, can properly be made liable for the full loss suffered
by the plaintiff.
Thirdly, and most significantly, the availability of contribution can also be
supported at the level of principle. We have suggested
above that the liability
of a knowing assistant is accessorial in form and function and exists to bolster
the legal protection given
to fiduciary
relationships.
The purpose of knowing
assistance is therefore to increase the likelihood that a fiduciary breach will
be properly remedied: this
is why the assistant is liable for the consequences
of the fiduciary breach and (so we have argued) ought to be liable for their
gains linked to that breach.
the essential role of knowing assistance is to protect the fiduciary
relationship, it can be strongly argued that the
liabilities
of fiduciaries and knowing assistants, when that relationship is harmed,
of the same nature.
is, quite simply, the very raison d’être of
knowing assistance.
Contribution
A final question concerns the possible availability of unequal contribution
under the general law.
contribution is available, the relevant parties must normally contribute
equally; however, it has been suggested that the court
should be able to take
cognisance of different levels of culpability by awarding unequal
contribution.
The issue was examined in
George v Webb
Ward J found three defendants liable for equitable compensation but also
ordered the third defendant to indemnify the first
full indemnity was awarded, Ward J did not need to decide the question of
whether unequal contribution was
However, her Honour did
comment that if an indemnity had not been awarded, the defendants would have
been ordered to bear the loss
Given that the facts
justified a full indemnity, it seems that they would have also justified an
award of unequal contribution if
that possibility had existed. It therefore
appears that unequal contribution either is not available or, if it is
available, will
be appropriate in only very rare circumstances. This question of
unequal contribution is potentially important in the knowing assistance
because, as we have seen, knowing assistants can be liable for the whole loss in
a fiduciary breach even if their conduct
is causally minor by
comparison.
In addition, it is very
unlikely that proportionate liability
statutes (which allow for the apportionment of liability based on relative
blameworthiness) will apply to claims involving wrongdoing fiduciaries and
assistants.
In our view, contribution should be available between fiduciaries and knowing
assistants. The foundational norms and purposes of knowing
assistance support
the view that the liabilities of wrongdoing fiduciaries and their knowing
assistants are of the same nature and,
in the case of loss-based remedies, will
also be of the same extent. There is a little more to be said about the problem
hands, but even here unclean hands should not be an automatic
There should certainly be no
automatic bar on a knowing assistant claiming contribution from a fiduciary
(rather than vice versa).
Contribution may be refused in particular cases
— such as where a full indemnity would have been ordered in favour of the
from whom contribution is sought — but the possibility of
contribution should exist. This is consistent with the discretionary
flexible nature of equitable relief.
Importantly, the NSWCA decision in
does not stand in the way of
this analysis. As we have seen, neither of the possible rationes decidendi in
that case dictates that
contribution is never
Our suggested position is
also inconsistent with
, but that authority should not be followed
on the point.
The precise interaction of the substantive and remedial liabilities of a
fiduciary and their knowing assistant in a dishonest and
fraudulent design is
unclear in Australian law. We have argued that the fiduciary and knowing
assistant are independently liable
for the consequences of a breach of trust or
fiduciary duty and that those liabilities are directed to the same ends: robust
claimant-favouring protection of the specific trust or fiduciary
relationship as well as trust and fiduciary forms more generally.
liabilities interact is determined according to equitable norms, principles and
method; this means that the accompanying
inquiry and its outcomes will be
nuanced and fact specific.
Applying this understanding to specific questions concerning the liability
relationship that have arisen in recent cases yields some
insights but also
demonstrates the complexity of the topic. For example, our proposed
understanding is consistent with the decision
release of a fiduciary from liability will not automatically release the knowing
assistant (and vice versa) but, as that
litigation demonstrates, it may be
necessary to unpack centuries of conflicting common law and equity cases, and
statutory provisions,
in order to reach a principled conclusion. Furthermore,
the liability labels of joint, joint and several, and several obscure rather
than resolve the question of whether a fiduciary or a knowing assistant should
be released from liability. And even then, the outcome
of a case will turn on
its facts and how the court’s remedial discretion is exercised. The
‘split election’ question
of whether a plaintiff may seek an account
of profits from the fiduciary and equitable compensation from the knowing
assistant also
depends on the facts of the specific case and on whether the
remedies offset each other on the particular facts. It is not inconceivable
equity that a plaintiff might receive a windfall in this way. However, this
split election question is complicated by a broader,
unresolved question
concerning the effect of seeking an account of profits: is the plaintiff
adopting the fiduciary’s breach
by taking the resulting gain or,
conversely,
condemning the breach and demanding that the fiduciary disgorge the
proceeds of the wrong? The answer to the question of whether contribution
should be available between fiduciary and knowing assistant
is much clearer, in
our view. According to our proposed understanding of the liability relationship,
contribution should be available
in principle — at least when loss-based
remedies are sought from both the fiduciary and the knowing assistant.
There are some peripheral but important questions that we have not dealt
with. For example, we have not considered the nature of the
relationship in statutory schemes of accessory liability that overlap with
equitable liability such as in the
Corporations Act 2001
And how do the principles that we
have discussed in this article apply to other fault-based equitable third party
liabilities, such
as for procurement of breach of trust or fiduciary duty,
knowing receipt or inconsistent dealing? Finally, whilst we have applauded
valuable contributions made by recent lower courts to clarifying the liability
relationship of fiduciary and knowing assistant,
it should be noted that they
are subject to review by the High Court.
* Professor, University of Sydney.
† Professor, Australian National University. We are grateful to
Professor Joachim Dietrich for his robust feedback on an early
version of this
article, and we thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful and generous
suggestions.
Farah Constructions Pty Ltd v Say-Dee
(2007) 230 CLR 89
, 159 [160] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon
and Crennan JJ) (‘
Farah Constructions
’). See also
[1874] UKLawRpCh 20
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244
, 251–2 (Lord Selborne LC).
Soar v Ashwell
[1893] UKLawRpKQB 142
[1893] 2 QB 390
405 (Kay LJ), quoting
Barnes v Addy
(Lord Selborne LC);
Farah Constructions
) 159 [161] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan,
Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Dubai Aluminium Co Ltd v
[2003] 2 AC 366
, 404 [141]–[142] (Lord Millett)
Dubai Aluminium
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v
(2011) 244 CLR 427, 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan
and Bell JJ) (‘
Michael Wilson
’). See also
Development Pty Ltd v
DPC Estates Pty Ltd
[1975] HCA 8
(1975) 132 CLR 373
, 397 (Gibbs J), 408 (Stephen J,
Barwick CJ agreeing at 376–7) (‘
Consul Development
Farah Constructions
[160]–[161] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Michael Wilson
) 457 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan
and Bell JJ).
Ancient Order of Foresters in
Victoria Friendly Society Ltd v Lifeplan Australia Friendly Society Ltd
[2018] HCA 43
(2018) 265 CLR 1
, 33 [77] (‘
Ancient Order
’), in which Gageler
J preferred the
descriptor ‘ancillary’.
Michael Wilson
) 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ);
Constructions
) 164 [179]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Cassaniti v Ball
[2022] NSWCA 161
(2022) 109 NSWLR 348
, 378 [118] (Gleeson, Leeming
and Mitchelmore JJA) (‘
See, eg, ibid 353 [6]–[8], 354
[13] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Jamie Glister, ‘Knowing
Assistance and Equitable Compensation’
(2016) 42(2)
Australian Bar
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act
’). See also
Ancient Order
) 19 [25], 29
[65] (Gageler J);
359–60 [33]–[34] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
[2021] NSWCA 315
(2021) 396 ALR 497
). The judgment of Ward CJ in Eq at trial
is also significant:
Re Earth Civil
Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] NSWSC 966
[2023] NSWCA 48
(2023) 111 NSWLR 132
Farah Constructions
) 160 [163], 164 [179] (Gleeson CJ,
Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ);
Hasler v Singtel Optus Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 266
(2014) 87 NSWLR 609
, 623 [57] (Leeming JA,
Barrett JA agreeing at 612–13 [1]–[3], Gleeson JA agreeing at
613–14 [6]–[12]).
Pittmore Pty Ltd v Chan
[2020] NSWCA 344
(2020) 104 NSWLR 62
, 94 [154]–[157] (Leeming JA, Bell P
agreeing at 67 [1], Brereton JA agreeing at 106 [214]).
Re-Engine Pty Ltd (in liq) v
[2007] VSC 57
(2007) 209 FLR 1
, 24 [120] (Dodds-Streeton J)
Ancient Order
) 19 [26], 31 [72], where Gageler J uses
‘knowing participant’.
Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd v
[1995] UKPC 4
[1995] 2 AC 378
, 385 (Lord Nicholls for the Court) (‘
Barlow Clowes International Ltd (in liq) v Eurotrust
International Ltd
[2006] 1 WLR 1476, 1479–80 [10] (Lord Hoffmann for
the Court);
Abou-Rahmah v Abacha
[2007] Bus LR 220, 224 [14] (Rix LJ);
Group Seven Ltd v Nasir
[2020] Ch 129
, 158 [58] (Henderson, Peter Jackson
and Asplin LJJ) (‘
Group Seven
Farah Constructions
) 159 [161] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Michael Wilson
) 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ).
Ibid 455 [100], 457 [105].
Ibid 457 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ). See also at 457–8 [106], citing
Development
) 397–8 (Gibbs
J), 408 (Stephen J, Barwick CJ agreeing at 376–7),
Farah Constructions
) 159 [160]–[161] (Gleeson
CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Michael Wilson
) 457 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan
and Bell JJ).
On the duplicative or
‘secondary’ liability model, see generally Philip Sales, ‘The
Conspiracy and Civil Secondary Liability’
(1990) 49(3)
Cambridge Law
; Steven B Elliott and Charles Mitchell, ‘Remedies for
Dishonest Assistance’
(2004) 67(1)
Modern Law Review
Mitchell and Stephen Watterson, ‘Remedies for Knowing Receipt’
in Charles Mitchell (ed),
Constructive and Resulting Trusts
Publishing, 2010) 115.
See above nn
See Pauline Ridge, ‘Justifying
the Remedies for Dishonest Assistance’ (2008) 124 (July)
Law Quarterly
445, 449–51 (‘Justifying the Remedies’).
) 356 [22] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
Ancient Order
) 33 [76] (Gageler J), quoting
(Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
Joachim Dietrich and Pauline Ridge,
Accessories in Private Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 29.
Ibid 30. The norms and purposes of
tort law as well as contract law are relevant to the tort of inducing breach of
contract: see,
Zhu v Treasurer (NSW)
[2004] HCA 56
(2004) 218 CLR 530
, 571 [120]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Callinan and Heydon JJ)
Dietrich and Ridge (n
) 29. See also Lusina Ho, ‘The
Mental Element in Equitable Accessory Liability’
Legal Problems
Dietrich and Ridge (n
) 65. See also
) 356 [22] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
Dietrich and Ridge (n
See above n
and accompanying text.
New Cap Reinsurance Corporation
Ltd v General Cologne Re Australia Ltd
[2004] NSWSC 781
, [34] (Young CJ in
(Dodds-Streeton J);
George v Webb
[2011] NSWSC 1608
, [262]–[263]
(Ward J) (‘
’), cited in
Craigcare Group Pty Ltd v
Superkite Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWSC 326
, [224] (Hallen J).
Grupo Torras SA v Al-Sabah
[1999] Commercial Law Cases 1469, 1667
(Mance J) (‘
Grupo Torras
’) (Mance J’s finding on
dishonest assistance was affirmed in
Grupo Torras SA v Al-Sabah
Commercial Law Cases 221, 255 [119] (Robert Walker and
Tuckey LJJ and Sir Murray Stuart-Smith));
Casio Computer Ltd v Sayo
[2001] 43 International
Litigation Procedure 694, 701 [16] (Tuckey LJ, Arden LJ agreeing at 707 [41],
agreeing at 708 [44]);
Group Seven
) 177 [110] (Henderson, Peter Jackson and
Asplin LJJ);
Ultraframe (UK) Ltd v Fielding
[2007] WTLR 835
, 907–8 [1600]
(Lewison J). See also Elliott and Mitchell (n
Wilson v Moore
[1833] EngR 404
1 My & K 126
, 636–7 (Leach MR)
Cowper v Stoneham
(1893) 68 LT 18
, 19 (Stirling J)
’). See also Glister (n
Dubai Aluminium
) 404 [141]–[142] (Lord
) [353]–[354] (Ward J);
) 456 [101] (Gummow ACJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
See below Part III(C).
See also Pauline Ridge,
‘Monetary Remedies for Equitable Participatory Liability: General
Principles and Current Questions’
in Simone Degeling and Jason NE Varuhas
Equitable Compensation and Disgorgement of Profit
Publishing, 2017) 197, 211–13.
) 24 [120] (Dodds-Streeton J).
See Jonathan Tjandra and WMC Gummow,
‘Equity Unravels Two Tangled Webs of Deception’
(2022) 16(3)
Journal of Equity
Dietrich and Ridge (n
) 15–16. Cf Ho (n
), in which it is argued that a
(dishonest)
assistant’s willing participation in a breach of trust constitutes an
endorsement of that breach and hence justifies liability
for its consequences:
Farah Constructions
) 163–4 [177], 164 [179] (Gleeson
CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Cf Tjandra and Gummow (n
Ancient Order
) 12–13 [9] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), 34 [80] (Gageler J), 64 [179] (Nettle J). This approach stands
contrary to the
English approach: see
Novoship (UK) Ltd v Mikhaylyuk
[2014] EWCA Civ 908
[2015] QB 499
, 533 [107] (Longmore LJ for the Court). However, Lord Briggs has
suggested that the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom may want
to consider the
approach taken in
Ancient Order
): Lord Briggs, ‘Loose Ends in
Accounting for Profits’ in Ben
McFarlane and Steven Elliott (eds),
Equity Today: 150 Years after the
Judicature Reforms
(Hart Publishing, 2023) 109, 118.
Ancient Order
) 19–20 [27]–[30] (Gageler
Ibid 22 [38] (Gageler J).
Ibid 10 [2] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and
Edelman JJ), 45 [119] (Gageler J), 45–6 [121] (Nettle J).
This is what the Full Court of the
Federal Court of Australia (‘FCAFC’) had ordered in
Australia Friendly Society Ltd v Ancient Order of Foresters in Victoria Friendly
Society Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 74
(2017) 250 FCR 1
, 26 [88] (Allsop CJ, Middleton and Davies JJ).
Foresters’ appeal and Lifeplan’s cross appeal would have been
by Nettle J: ibid 74 [204].
Ancient Order
) 45 [120] (Gageler J, Kiefel CJ, Keane
and Edelman JJ agreeing at 10 [1]).
Ibid 12 [7].
Ibid 14 [12].
Ibid 14 [13].
Ibid 15 [15].
Ibid 16 [18].
Ibid 74–5. See also at 19 [25]
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ), 45 [120] (Gageler J).
Ibid 36–7 [85]–[86].
Ibid 37 [87].
See above nn
–61 and accompanying text.
Ibid 33 [77].
Michael Wilson
) 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ).
Ancient Order
) 14 [13] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman
JJ), 38–9 [91]–[95] (Gageler J).
See above n
and accompanying text.
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL [No
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
, 345 [174] (Finn, Stone and
Perram JJ) (‘
’). Discussion of the specific norms
and purposes of trusts law and the ways in which these interact with the norms
and purposes
of fiduciary law is beyond this article’s scope. On the norms
and purposes of trusts law, see generally Simone Degeling, Jessica
Irit Samet (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of the Law of Express Trusts
(Oxford University Press, 2023).
Pilmer v Duke Group Ltd (in
[2001] HCA 31
(2001) 207 CLR 165
, 196–7 [71] (McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and
Callinan JJ), quoting
Norberg v Wynrib
[1992] 2 SCR 226
, 272 (McLachlin J
L’Heureux-Dubé and McLachlin JJ), 312 (Sopinka J); PJ Millett,
‘Equity’s Place in the Law of Commerce’
(1998) 114 (April)
Law Quarterly Review
See above nn
–4 and accompanying text.
The leading statement of the
foundational norms and purposes of knowing assistance is contained in Gibbs
J’s judgment in
Consul Development
) 397. See also
) 571 [120] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby,
Callinan and Heydon JJ): ‘[i]nterference in legal relations
between other parties’.
Royal Brunei
) 386–7 (Lord Nicholls for the
Ancient Order
) 36–7 [86] (Gageler J). See also
Consul Development
Consul Development
) 397 (Gibbs J).
) 571–2 [121] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Kirby, Callinan and Heydon JJ).
See above n
and accompanying text. See also
Constructions
[159]–[163]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Callinan, Heydon and Crennan JJ). This may be contrasted
liability for procuring a breach of trust or fiduciary duty: at 159 [161]; or
for knowing receipt: at 140 [111], quoting
Barnes v Addy
) 251–2 (Lord Selborne LC).
Australian Financial Services
& Leasing Pty Ltd v Hills Industries Ltd
[2014] HCA 14
(2014) 253 CLR 560
(French CJ).
Muschinski v Dodds
[1985] HCA 78
(1985) 160 CLR 583
, 615 (Deane J);
Albion Insurance Co Ltd v Government
Insurance Office (NSW)
[1969] HCA 55
(1969) 121 CLR 342
, 350–2 (Kitto J, Windeyer J
agreeing at 352) (‘
Albion Insurance
Harris v Digital
Pulse Pty Ltd
[2003] NSWCA 10
(2003) 56 NSWLR 298
, 304–6 [6]–[20] (Spigelman
[116]–[120] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
Jenyns v Public Curator (Qld)
[1953] HCA 2
(1953) 90 CLR 113
, 118–19 (Dixon CJ, McTiernan and Kitto JJ)
’). This statement was made in the context of
equity’s vitiating doctrines and has been approved by the High Court on
various occasions: see, eg,
Tanwar Enterprises Pty Ltd v Cauchi
[2003] HCA 57
217 CLR 315
, 325 [23] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ);
Kakavas v Crown Melbourne Ltd
[2013] HCA 25
(2013) 250 CLR 392
, 426 [122] (French
CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ);
Lavin v Toppi
(2015) 254 CLR 459
, 474 [47] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ)
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR 85
[43] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Edelman JJ);
Ancient Order
) 12 [9] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman
JJ), 34 [82] (Gageler J);
Stubbings v Jams 2 Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 6
(2022) 276 CLR 1
20–1 [39] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ), 26 [75] (Gordon J). See also
The Juliana
(1822) 2 Dodson’s Admiralty Reports 504;
[1822] EngR 235
165 ER 1560
1567 (Lord Stowell);
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Kobelt
(2019) 267 CLR 1, 49 [120] (Keane J),
58–9 [150], 60 [154],
74 [217] (Nettle and Gordon JJ).
Ancient Order
) 12 [9] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman
Ibid 35 [82].
Warman International Ltd v
[1995] HCA 18
(1995) 182 CLR 544
, 559 (Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ) (‘
) 402–3 [503] (Finn,
Stone and Perram JJ).
) 377 [116] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
The generic accessory liability
framework — with which we argue that knowing assistance liability conforms
— accommodates
the equitable character of knowing assistance because it
does not dictate the substantive content of knowing assistance liability
instead defers to the norms and principles underpinning the primary liability,
namely trusts law and fiduciary law: see Dietrich
and Ridge (n
See below nn
–5 and accompanying text. See also
) 415 [553] (Finn,
Stone and Perram JJ).
They derive from the concepts of a
joint obligation and a several obligation: see Glanville L Williams,
Obligations: A Treatise on Joint and Joint and Several Liability in Contract,
Quasi-Contract and Trusts in England, Ireland
and the Common-Law Dominions
(Butterworth, 1949) 92 §41, 94–5 §43 (‘
Obligations
Common Law Team of the Law Commission,
Department of Trade and Industry (UK),
Feasibility Investigation of Joint and Several Liability
1996) 4 [2.1].
Where joint liability arises, there is
a single (‘one and indivisible’) cause of action:
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd
[1996] HCA 38
(1996) 186 CLR 574
, 581 (Brennan CJ,
and Toohey JJ) (‘
’). See also
) 361–2 [42] (Gleeson, Leeming
Mitchelmore JJA), quoting
Joint Obligations
) 603–4 (Gummow J, Gaudron J
agreeing at 591);
Baxter v Obacelo Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 66
(2001) 205 CLR 635
(Gleeson CJ and Callinan J, Gummow and Hayne JJ agreeing
at 657 [52]) (‘
’). See also
) 584 (Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ),
XL Petroleum (NSW) Pty Ltd v Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 12
(1985) 155 CLR 448
, 466 (Brennan J).
) 647 [19] (Gleeson CJ and Callinan
) 637 (Leach MR);
[1842] EngR 425
(1842) 12 Sim 369
, 1182 (Shadwell V-C);
) 19 (Stirling J). See also
Joint Obligations
) 156, citing
) 637 (Leach MR);
) 19 (Stirling J).
Michael Wilson
) 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ);
Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd v Cradock [No 3]
[1968] 1 WLR 1555
, 1582 (Ungoed-Thomas J);
Dubai Aluminium
) 404 [141]–[142] (Lord Millett).
See also Glister (n
) 373 [93] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA) (emphasis added). In
), the FCAFC
expressed the view that liability to restore the trust fund by way of equitable
compensation was ‘several only’
in relation to fiduciaries and
(subject to the principle against double recovery for
loss): at 416–17 [559] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ). This appears
counterintuitive
when extended to knowing assistants given that there is one
indivisible loss for which both fiduciary and knowing assistant are liable
the basis of distinct wrongs. But see Tjandra and Gummow (n
), in which it is argued persuasively
that, for principled and policy reasons, the fiduciary and knowing assistant are
each severally
liable for the one loss and that the fiduciary and knowing
assistant are analogous to concurrent wrongdoers at common law: at
) 411 [536] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ).
The Court noted two kinds of
exceptions. The first is where the knowing assistant is ‘the alter
ego/“nominee” (usually corporate) of the fiduciary’:
[556] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ), citing
Green v Bestobell Industries Pty
[1984] WAR 32
, 40 (Brinsden J). The second is where the fiduciary
and knowing assistant ‘
act in concert
to secure a mutual
416 [558] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ) (emphasis in original).
Hunt & Hunt Lawyers v
Mitchell Morgan Nominees Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 10
(2013) 247 CLR 613
, 647–8 [85] (Bell
and Gageler JJ), quoting Commonwealth of Australia,
Inquiry into the Law of
Joint and Several Liability: Report of Stage Two
(Report, January 1995)
), discussing how equity has not applied a
common law joint release rule:
at 372–5 [88]–[101] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
In 1949, Glanville L Williams
described the law on joint obligations as ‘a difficult and seriously
defective part of the common
law’ and called for legislative reform:
Joint Obligations
) 3, quoted in
) 372 [90] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
) 377–8 [115]–[116] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 377–8 [115]–[117]
(Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
See above nn
–61 and accompanying text. It is
also contrary to the specific wording (but not necessarily the purport) of Gibbs
leading judgment in
Consul Development
See above Part II(C).
) 378 [118], citing
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) r 6.21(1), in which Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA address concerns expressed about this proposition by Bryson JA
Yeshiva Properties No 1 Pty Ltd v Marshall
[2005] NSWCA 23
(2005) 219 ALR 112
[80]. See also
Re Earth Civil
) [2373]–[2375] (Ward CJ in
) 378 [118] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA). A strategic objective of a joinder may be to acquire a right
to discovery; another
may be to ensure that potential parties to future
proceedings are bound by the findings in the first proceedings: cf
[2017] NSWCA 210
(2017) 96 NSWLR 390
, 404–5 [63]–[70] (Leeming JA);
Fund Administration Pty Ltd v Chickabo Pty Ltd
[2019] VSCA 314
[1]–[9], [59]–[60] (Whelan, Beach and Niall JJA). See generally
Jonathon Moore, ‘Trust Claims and Third Parties’
(2024) 54(1)
Australian Bar Review
For example, if the plaintiff
consents to or acquiesces in the breach of fiduciary duty, the
elements of the fiduciary claim are not established and knowing assistance
liability does not arise:
[1989] HCA 4
(1989) 167 CLR 316
, 337 (Deane J)
’). See also
Blackwood v Borrowes
(1843) 4 Drury & Warren’s Irish Chancery Reports 441; 65 RR 729,
(Sir Edward Sugden LC) (‘
’), discussed in
[95]–[97] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
The proceeding appeared at first
instance in
Re Earth Civil
[26] (Ward CJ in Eq) and on appeal in
355 [16], [20]–[21] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA). The New South
Wales Court of Appeal (‘NSWCA’) dealt
with other appeals relating to
Ward CJ in Eq’s findings of fact and her Honour’s statement and
application of the corporate attribution rule in
Bluemine Pty Ltd (in liq) v
AKA (Civil) Pty Ltd
[2022] NSWCA 160
[236]–[238] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
See generally
Re Earth Civil
) 353 [6], 354 [13] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 353 [6]–[8] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 353 [7], 355 [19] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 353 [6]. See also
Earth Civil
[114]–[211] (Ward CJ in Eq).
) 353 [6]–[8], 354 [13] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Re Earth Civil
) [1253], [1674] (Ward CJ in Eq).
Ibid [2874] (Ward CJ in Eq).
Reference is also made (in relation to payments sent out by
the plaintiffs to some participants) to claims for knowing receipt of trust
assets in breach of
fiduciary duty: at [222] (Ward CJ in Eq).
Civil claims for breach of
statutory duties and involvement in those breaches were also
successful: ibid [2874]. See also
Corporations Act
) ss 79, 180–2.
) 355 [16], [20]–[21] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA). The other ground concerned whether one appellant
had the requisite
knowledge of the dishonest and fraudulent design: at 355 [17]
(Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Re Earth Civil
) [23], [525], [552] (Ward CJ in Eq). The
settlement sums were deducted from the sum claimed by way of compensation
against the remaining
defendants: at [24]
(Ward CJ in Eq).
[2019] NSWSC 44
Edgewater Homes
Re Earth Civil
) [558]–[560] (Ward CJ in Eq).
Edgewater Homes
) [15]–[16].
Ibid [24], [36]. In any event,
Stevenson J considered that the facts fell within the exception noted in
) that if parties
act in concert
to secure a mutual benefit’ they will be
jointly and severally liable: ibid [32]–[36], citing
) 416 [558] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ)
(emphasis in original).
Re Earth Civil
(Ward CJ in Eq). See also at [560]–[564] (Ward CJ in Eq).
Ibid [16] (Ward CJ in Eq).
The default position is several
liability: ibid [2443]. On the facts, the ‘acting in concert’
exception to the default position applied: at [2453]. The ‘acting in
concert’ exception was laid out in
) 416 [558] (Finn, Stone and Perram
Re Earth Civil
) [2471]–[2472].
Ibid [2454].
Ibid [2472].
) 359 [31] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
The rationale for the rule that a
judgment against one jointly liable obligee discharges other joint obligees is
that the cause of
action against all joint obligees is ‘one and
indivisible’:
ibid 366–7 [63]–[64] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA). The
extension of the rule to scenarios where liability was
joint and several was
said to be illogical because the justification for the original rule, namely the
‘singleness’ of
the joint obligation, had no force where there was
also several liability: at 361 [43] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA). See
at 363–4 [49]–[52] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 365–6 [58]–[62]
(Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
) 584 (Brennan CJ, Dawson and Toohey JJ),
613–14 (Gummow J, Gaudron J agreeing at 591).
) 369 [73], 371 [82] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 369–71 [76]–[82]
(Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA). See also at 369 [74]–[75]
(Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore
JJA), discussing
Harplex Pty Ltd v
Konstandellos
[2018] VSCA 67
(2018) 54 VR 174
, 188 [60] (McLeish and Hargrave JJA, McDonald
) 379 [120] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 373 [93]–[94] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Ibid 373–4 [95]–[97]
(Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA), discussing
). See also ibid 375–7
[106]–[114] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
) 374 [97] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
) 337 (Deane J).
A covenant not to sue one co-surety
does not extinguish that party’s liability for the debt
and does not affect another co-surety’s equitable rights to
contribution: see
463–4 [1]–[3] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane
For example, in
), one of the claims had
been abandoned and it was not suggested that that claim be treated differently
to the claims that were settled:
at [23]–[24] (Ward CJ in Eq).
See above n
and accompanying text.
Re Earth Civil
) [24] (Ward CJ in Eq).
) 559–60 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Gaudron JJ);
Sit v Capacious Investments Ltd
[1995] UKPC 54
[1996] 1 AC 514
, 520–1 (Lord
Nicholls for the Court) (‘
Tang Man Sit
’). A proprietary
remedy may be available if the gain is represented in proprietary form: Ridge,
‘Justifying the Remedies’
Tang Man Sit
), Lord Nicholls referred to an election
between an account of profits and damages as the ‘classic example’
of when remedies
for the breach of fiduciary duty are ‘alternative and
inconsistent’: at 521.
Sargent v ASL Developments
[1974] HCA 40
(1974) 131 CLR 634
, 641 (Stephen J). See also ibid.
Our discussion focuses on accounts
of profits and equitable compensation but similar questions could arise
regarding when an award
of rescission may accompany these remedies. An order for
rescission is, in this context, akin to an order to pay equitable compensation
in that a plaintiff could not recover both the misapplied property and
compensation based on its
value (but could, subject to the discussion below, recover the misapplied
property from one defendant and an account of profits from
) 608 (Gummow J);
Tang Man Sit
) 522 (Lord Nicholls for the
Woff and Corby were liable for
around $24,000 each — what they earned as a result of the drawings and
trust distributions:
Lifeplan Australia Friendly Society Ltd v Woff
[2016] FCA 248
(2016) 259 IR 384
, 471 [446], 480 [485] (Besanko J). Foresters’ liability
was for nearly $15 million:
Ancient Order
) 45 [120] (Gageler J, Kiefel CJ, Keane
and Edelman JJ agreeing at 9 [1]).
Michael Wilson
) 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ). The plaintiffs ultimately elected for equitable
compensation from the
knowing assistants: see
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 383
, [169] (Sackville
[2007] NSWSC 574
, [37]–[38]
Club of the Clubs
’). The finding of knowing assistance was
later overturned, but nothing was said to undermine Bergin J’s analysis of
split election point: see
King Network Group Pty Ltd v Club of the Clubs
[2008] NSWCA 344
(2008) 69 ACSR 172
, 184 [58] (Hodgson JA, Campbell JA agreeing at
186 [73]), 227 [315] (Young CJ in Eq).
‘One may without much
difficulty contemplate a case where the trustee and the participant are required
to account for the restoration
of the trust property, while the participant may
also be accountable for the profits derived from its use’:
) 375 [102], 377–8 [116].
The ‘also’ should probably be read as meaning
‘alternatively’ rather than
‘additionally’.
) 135 [1] (Gleeson JA, Mitchelmore JA
agreeing at 164 [163], Griffiths AJA agreeing at 164 [164]). The case involved
knowing recipients,
but Gleeson JA thought that the analysis of the election
point would apply equally to knowing assistants: at 141–2 [37], 147
Ibid 135–6 [2]–[7]
(Gleeson JA).
BCEG International (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Xiao
[2022] NSWSC 972
(2022) 162 ACSR 601
, 697–8 [446] (Rees J)
BCEG International
’). The orders of Rees J on equitable
compensation and account of
profits were not disturbed on appeal: ibid 163 [162] (Gleeson JA, Mitchelmore
JA agreeing
at 164 [163], Griffiths AJA agreeing at 164 [164]).
) 149 [69] (Gleeson JA, Mitchelmore JA
agreeing at 164 [163], Griffiths AJA agreeing at 164 [164]).
Ibid, citing
Michael Wilson
) 457–8 [106] (Gummow ACJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ),
) 375 [102] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
) 140 [30] (Gleeson JA), quoting
International
[413]–[415]
Club of the Clubs
) [6] (Bergin J);
Michael Wilson
) 457 [106]
(Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ);
) 375 [102], 377–8 [116] (Gleeson,
Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
of profits cannot involve adoption because the plaintiff can still elect for
compensation from the fiduciary until final
orders are made: see
569–70 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ). Warman was
given seven days to elect for compensation: at 570 (Mason
CJ, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Gaudron JJ).
See above Part III(A).
This would not prevent accounts of
profits being sought from all defendants, as the plaintiff could be seen to
adopt the actions
of the knowing assistant at the same time as adopting those of
the fiduciary.
[1871] UKLawRpHL 1
(1871) LR 5 HL 1
Peter W Young, Clyde Croft and
Megan Louise Smith,
(LawBook, 2009) 1121 [16.1230].
Tang Ying Loi v Tang
[2017] HKCFA 3
(2017) 20 HKCFAR 53
, 59–60 [18]–[22] (Lord Millett NPJ,
Ma CJ agreeing at 56 [1], Ribeiro PJ agreeing at 56 [2], Fok PJ agreeing at 56
Chan PJ agreeing 56 [4]);
Foskett v McKeown
[2000] UKHL 29
[2001] 1 AC 102
130–1 (Lord Millett);
Libertarian Investments Ltd v Hall
HKCFAR 681, 732–3 [169] (Lord Millett NPJ, Chan PJ agreeing
at 690 [1], Ribeiro PJ agreeing at 715 [98], Bokhary NPJ agreeing at 731
Re Hallett’s Estate
[1880] UKLawRpCh 38
(1880) 13 Ch D 696.
sale was wrongful, you can still take the proceeds of the sale,
adopting the sale for the purpose of taking the proceeds’: at
708–9 (Jessel MR)
(emphasis added).
) 9 (Lord Westbury). See
) 556–7 (Mason CJ,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ), discussing
Dart Industries Inc v
Decor Corporation Pty Ltd
[1993] HCA 54
(1993) 179 CLR 101.
Ancient Order
) 34–5 [81] (Gageler J); MJ Tilbury,
Civil Remedies
(Butterworths, 1990–93) vol 1, 26–7 [2015];
Stephen Watterson, ‘Alternative and Cumulative Remedies: What Is the
Difference?’
Restitution Law Review
, 16; Stephen
Watterson, ‘An Account of Profits or Damages? The History of
(2004) 24(3)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
472–3; Andrew Burrows,
Remedies for Torts, Breach of Contract, and
Equitable Wrongs
(Oxford University Press, 4
) 145 [53], where his Honour said that
‘BCEG [has not] condoned the wrongful conduct of WWM by electing for an
account of profits
from WWM ... [t]he gain-based
remedy of an account of profits strips the ill-gotten gains from WWM’.
See also at 149 [69] (Gleeson JA) and Windeyer J in
Colbeam Palmer Ltd v
Stock Affiliates Pty Ltd
[1968] HCA 50
(1968) 122 CLR 25
, 32: ‘the infringer is
required to give up his ill-gotten gains’.
) 566–7 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Gaudron JJ).
) 378 [116] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA). See above Part III(A).
) 377 [116] (Gleeson, Leeming and
Mitchelmore JJA).
[2024] Bus LR 160, 167
[17]–[20] (Newey LJ) (‘
Hotel Portfolio II
generally James McComish, ‘Remedies for Dishonest Assistance: Heartbreak
(2024) 83(1)
Cambridge Law Journal
; Matthew Frey and
Zihang Liu, ‘Equitable Set-Off, Election and Constructive Trusts’
(2024) 140 (July)
Law Quarterly Review
331. An appeal from
Portfolio II
) to the Supreme Court of the
United Kingdom has been heard and judgment is awaited.
Hotel Portfolio II
) 185 [67], [69] (Newey LJ, Birss LJ
agreeing at 189 [87]), 188–9 [86] (Males LJ, Birss LJ agreeing at 189
Ibid 185–6 [71] (Newey LJ,
Birss LJ agreeing at 189 [87]). His Lordship recognised that a fiduciary need
not be sued before
an accessory can be made liable for dishonest assistance and
his Lordship also anticipated the difficulties that may arise if a fiduciary
rely on an exemption clause. It is therefore not clear exactly what his Lordship
had in mind when saying that compensation could
only be claimed from the knowing
assistant if the fiduciary was also liable.
Ibid 185 [70].
There is no problem in obtaining
judgments in these terms; the question at hand is whether both can be
Consul Development
) 394 (Gibbs J), quoted in
) 557 (Mason CJ, Brennan,
Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ).
See above Part II(B).
Note that this would not prevent
orders being made against both; rather, it would give defendants an equity to
prevent the enforcement
of a compensatory order to the extent that gains had
already been recovered. Alternatively, this effect may be ‘built in’
to the orders themselves: see
Club of the Clubs
) [69] (Bergin J). See below n 188 and
accompanying text. See also
Anderson v Canaccord Genuity Financial Ltd [No
[2024] NSWCA 161
(2024) 115 NSWLR 1
, 19–22 [65]–[83] (Gleeson, Leeming and
White JJA).
[1941] AC 1
, 18 (Viscount Simon LC,
Lord Thankerton agreeing at 33, Lord Romer
agreeing at 33), 31 (Lord Thankerton for Lord Atkin, Lord Thankerton agreeing
Lord Romer agreeing at 33), 49 (Lord Romer for Lord Porter) (‘
Ibid 21 (Viscount Simon LC).
[1979] AC 374
, 377–8 (Lord
Diplock for the Court) (‘
Ibid 382 (Lord Diplock for the
Court), discussing
United Australia
). See also ibid 381 (Lord Diplock for
the Court).
involved money had and received and fraud: at 383 (Lord Diplock for the
Court). But the fact pattern in
can equally be analysed as the
briber knowingly assisting the agent to breach his fiduciary duty: see Paul S
Davies, ‘Bribery’
in Paul S Davies and James Penner (eds),
Equity, Trusts and Commerce
(Hart Publishing, 2017) 225, 226–7; Andrew Tettenborn, ‘Bribery,
Corruption and Restitution: The Strange Case of Mr Mahesan’
Law Quarterly Review
Club of the Clubs
See also Davies,
‘Bribery’ (n
United Australia
) have been referred to several times on
other points: see, eg,
Graham Barclay Oysters Pty Ltd v Ryan
[2002] HCA 54
, 591 [130]
(Gummow and Hayne JJ);
) 659–60 [57]–[58] (Gummow
and Hayne JJ);
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
, 611–12 (Brennan J);
Scott v Davis
(2000) 204 CLR 333
[229] (Gummow J);
Fairfield Pastoral Holdings Pty Ltd v Ridge Estate Pty Ltd
(2022) 398 ALR 203
, 290–1 [485] (White J). But until
), the only case to consider
whether the recovery of profits operates to reduce loss was
Health Services
Union NSW v McMillan
[2014] NSWSC 1868
Health Services
’). In that case, White J followed
), but without the benefit of argument
by the defendant:
Health Services Union
(n 190) [18].
See above n
and accompanying text.
) 150–1 [79] (Gleeson JA,
Mitchelmore JA agreeing at 164 [163], Griffiths AJA
agreeing at 164 [164]). See also at 150 [74], 151 [83] (Gleeson JA,
Mitchelmore JA agreeing
at 164 [163], Griffiths AJA agreeing at 164 [164]).
United Australia
), the discontinued claim against one
defendant was for debt or for money had and received and the claim against the
other was for
conversion: at 8–9
(Viscount Simon LC). The claims in
) were for money had and received and
the tort of fraud: at 383 (Lord Diplock for the Court).
) 608 (Gummow J).
Tettenborn (n
Club of the Clubs
litigation, the third knowing assistant was a special purpose vehicle
company jointly owned by the first two knowing assistants:
Club of the Clubs
Pty Ltd v King Network Group Pty Ltd
[2006] NSWSC 1138
, [4] (Bergin J).
However, this was not much different from
), where the accessory was owned and
controlled by the fiduciaries: at 135 [3] (Gleeson JA).
See Paul S Davies,
Accessory Liability
Publishing, 2015) 91–3.
We have also argued that a knowing
assistant’s profits must be linked to the fiduciary breach: see above Part
Quince v Varga
[2008] QCA 376
, 380–2 [48]–[58] (Douglas J, Holmes JA agreeing
at 365 [1]–[2], Mackenzie AJA agreeing at 367 [6]).
The argument here is somewhat
similar to that made in Part III(C), where the availability of contribution is
argued to be part of
what justifies a harsh remedy being available against a
knowing assistant.
) 599 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Dawson
and Gaudron JJ). ‘It is
necessary to keep steadily in mind the cardinal principle of equity that the
remedy must be fashioned to fit the nature of the case
and the particular
See above Part II(D).
Club of the Clubs
See above n
and accompanying text.
BCEG International
) 689 [407] (Rees J).
Proportionate liability statutes
can alter the liabilities of defendants, but they are very unlikely to be
engaged in the context
of fiduciaries and knowing assistants: see below n
Albion Insurance
) 349–50 (Kitto J, Windeyer J
agreeing at 352). The term ‘common obligation’ has also been used to
describe coordinate
liabilities: see, eg,
Mahoney v McManus
[1981] HCA 54
, 378 (Gibbs CJ) (‘
’). ‘Co-ordinate
liabilities’ was the term preferred in
Friend v Brooker
[2009] HCA 21
, 149 [41] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Bell JJ)
Burke v LFOT Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 17
209 CLR 282
, 292–3 [15] (Gaudron ACJ and Hayne J), 303 [50] (McHugh J),
332 [138] (Callinan J) (‘
Caledonian Railway
(1860) 3 Macq 833
, 844 (Lord Chelmsford).
) 292–3 [14]–[15] (Gaudron
ACJ and Hayne J), 300 [40] (McHugh J), 317 [91] (Kirby J);
) 148–9 [40]–[41] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Bell JJ).
(1787) 1 Cox 318;
(Eyre CB) (‘
’). The sureties were ‘the obligors
of distinct and separate obligations’: at 1185 (Eyre CB). See also
Craythorne v Swinburne
[1807] EngR 343
(1807) 14 Ves Jr 160
, 485 (Lord Eldon
) 151 [48] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne and
Bell JJ), quoting
Re La Rosa; Ex parte Norgard v Rodpat Nominees Pty Ltd
(1991) 31 FCR 83
, 91 (French J).
) 149 [42] (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne and
Bell JJ), citing
Street v Retravision (NSW) Pty Ltd
[1995] FCA 1197
(1995) 56 FCR 588
597 (Gummow J) (‘
Capita Financial Group Ltd v
Rothwells Ltd
(1992) 30 NSWLR 619
, 627–8 (Priestley JA, Kirby P
agreeing at 620, Cripps JA agreeing at 632). The same applies if a liability
cannot be enforced
at all against one party: in
) 463–4 [2]–[3] (French CJ,
Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ), a covenant not to sue one party did not
affect the liability
of that party to contribute.
) 303–4 [49]–[51] (McHugh
J), 337–8 [145] (Callinan J);
BP Petroleum
Development Ltd v Esso Petroleum Co Ltd
1987 SLT 345
, 348 (Lord
) 305 [56] (McHugh J), 337–8 [145]
(Callinan J);
(Gummow J);
HIH Claims Support Ltd v Insurance Australia Ltd
[2011] HCA 31
, 88 [39] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
) 293 [17].
Ibid 336–7 [143], citing
Austin Wakeman Scott and William Franklin Fratcher,
The Law of Trusts
(Little, Brown and Company, 4
ed, 1987–91) vol 3A, 405
The party seeking contribution, Sir
Edward Dering, was to blame for the default of his brother, Thomas Dering, which
led to the sureties
at issue being called upon in the first place: ibid 1184
(Eyre CB). But that Sir Edward was to blame did not affect his contribution
rights against
the co-sureties: at 1185 (Eyre CB). Sir Edward was refused his costs,
however, because the availability of the equity that he asked
‘doubtful’: at 1186 (Eyre CB).
[1878] UKLawRpCh 300
(1878) 10 Ch D 185
(James LJ for the Court) (‘
Lane v Bushby
[2000] NSWSC 1029
(2000) 50 NSWLR 404
, 407 [11]–[12] (Dunford J).
) 202 (James LJ for the Court).
See above n
and accompanying text.
Contribution was assumed to be
available (in respect of equitable compensation) in
Michael Wilson
) 455–6 [101] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ). Full indemnity
was awarded in
but Ward J clearly thought contribution was available:
at [353]–[354]. Contribution was assumed to be available (in respect of
accounts of profits) in
Zelden v Sewell
[2011] NSWCA 56
, [27] (Campbell
JA, Young JA agreeing at [30]) (‘
’). It was also
assumed to lie in
Warman International Ltd v Dwyer
(1992) 46 IR 250
(Derrington J) (‘
’), but note that no comment was
made on the issues of contribution on its appeal: see generally
International Ltd v Dwyer
[1994] QCA 12
). Contribution for gain-based
awards will be rarer because the liabilities of fiduciary and
knowing assistant will seldom coincide: see below Part III(C)(3). See also
William Gummow, ‘Knowing Assistance’
(2013) 87(5)
Australian Law
Michael Wilson
) 457 [106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan
and Bell JJ). This tension was noted in
DIF III — Global Co-Investment
Fund LP v Babcock & Brown International Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWSC 527
Re Earth Civil
[2433]–[2438] (Ward CJ in Eq).
(2008) 1 ASTLR 549, 584
[150]–[152] (‘
Emmott Appeal
) 516–20 [55]–[63] (Brereton
JA). See generally at 501–10 [8]–[39] (Brereton JA).
Ibid 501 [8].
Ibid 501–2 [8]–[9].
Michael Wilson
) 433 [9] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and
Emmott Appeal
) 502 [10]–[11], 519 [62] (Brereton
Ibid 502 [10]–[11].
) [338] (Sackville AJA, Meagher JA
agreeing at [1], Barrett JA agreeing at [2]). By 2021, the 2012 award, including
pre- and post-judgment
interest, was for USD1.84 million and €1 million:
ibid 510 [40] (Brereton JA).
Emmott Appeal
) 502 [11] (Brereton JA). Nicholls died
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Emmott
[2019] NSWSC 218
[10] (Ball J) (‘
Emmott Trial
Emmott Appeal
) 502 [12] (Brereton JA).
Ibid 502 [12], 510 [40] (Brereton
Ibid 525–6 [78].
Ibid 518–19 [59]–[61],
[150]–[152] (White J). See also ibid
520 [63] (Brereton JA).
Emmott Appeal
) 519–20 [62]–[63], quoting
Michael Wilson
[105]–[106] (Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ). His Honour also
noted that the High Court had assumed that
contribution would be available, but
his Honour said that this comment did not amount to an actual holding that
contribution would
Emmott Appeal
) 520 [63].
Emmott Appeal
) 525 [77]. Michael Wilson & Partners
argued that the contribution payable by Emmott would amount to a full indemnity,
which would
have negated the ‘fair share’ point, but this was
rejected unanimously: at 500–1 [4] (Leeming JA), 520 [63] (Brereton
542 [135] (Emmett AJA).
Ibid 521 [65] (Brereton JA);
) 378 (Gibbs CJ,
Murphy J agreeing at 381,
Aickin J agreeing at 381, Wilson J agreeing at 381–2).
Emmott Appeal
525 [76] (Brereton JA). On the
possibility of unequal contribution,
see below Part III(C)(4).
Emmott Appeal
) 500 [1] (Leeming JA), 542 [137] (Emmett
Ibid 500 [1].
Ibid. This was also the basis of
Ball J’s decision to stay the proceedings at trial:
Emmott Trial
) [49]. The value of the
contribution claims was small because Emmott had already been found not liable
in arbitration, in London,
in respect of much of the relevant loss, and an
English anti-suit injunction prevented MWP from relitigating those claims
against Emmott:
at [36]–[38] (Ball J).
Emmott Appeal
) 501 [5]–[6] (Leeming JA), quoting
) 154 [60] (French
CJ, Gummow, Hayne and Bell JJ).
Emmott Appeal
) 542 [137].
Anderson v Canaccord Genuity
Financial Ltd
[2022] NSWSC 58
(2022) 161 ACSR 1
, 537–8 [2819]
’), Ward CJ in Eq thought that
Emmott Appeal
established that
contribution could not be available between knowing assistants. Respectfully,
her Honour’s error was to think
Leeming JA and Emmett AJA agreed with Brereton JA on the unclean hands and
coordinate liabilities points. Whether contribution could
be available between
knowing assistants was not discussed on appeal: see generally
Canaccord Genuity Financial Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 294
(2023) 113 NSWLR 151.
The same error may
have been made in
[38] (Gleeson JA).
This argument supports the point
unclean hands must go
specifically to the claiming of contribution rather than to the underlying
see above nn
accompanying text. See also Alison Gurr, ‘Accessory Liability and
Contribution, Release and Apportionment’
[2010] MelbULawRw 16
(2010) 34(2)
University Law Review
, 496, discussing the conditional relief ordered in
Nelson v Nelson
(1995) 184 CLR 538
, 571 (Deane and Gummow JJ).
See Glanville L Williams,
Torts and Contributory Negligence: A Study of Concurrent Fault in Great Britain,
Ireland and the Common-Law Dominions
(Stevens & Sons, 1951) 127
On joint tortfeasors, see
Merryweather v Nixan
(1799) 8 Term R 186;
[1799] EngR 669
101 ER 1337
(Lord Kenyon CJ).
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act
Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1946
Law Reform Act 1995
Tortfeasors and Contributory Negligence Act 1954
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and
Tortfeasors’ Contribution) Act 1947
Proportionate
Liability Act 2005
See Tjandra and Gummow (n
) 457 [106] (Gummow ACJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
Ibid 456–7 [102]–[103]
(Gummow ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
See ibid 455 [100] (Gummow ACJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
See ibid 457–8 [106] (Gummow
ACJ, Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
Ibid 455–6 [101] (Gummow ACJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Bell JJ).
An admitted complication is that
the plaintiff’s election for profits against one defendant would affect
the contribution rights
among all defendants. This is because the same defendant
could not be liable to both disgorge profits and to contribute to the loss-based
award: see above
. One explanation may be that
contribution rights among defendants do not exist until judgment has been given,
at which point the
relevant election must already have been made. But the effect
of this would still be that the plaintiff could affect the contribution
of the defendants inter se. Further difficulties would arise if contribution was
sought from a party not joined to the original
action: see above n
and accompanying text.
See above n 42 and accompanying
On whether contribution should be
available when gain-based relief is sought from multiple defendants, the
governing question (as
always) is whether the liabilities are of the same nature
and extent: see above nn
accompanying text. As parties are normally accountable only for their own gains,
those liabilities would not coincide.
But there are rare occasions when multiple
parties are liable for gains made by one or more of them, and contribution could
be available
there: see, eg,
) [27] (Campbell JA, Young JA agreeing
(Derrington J). On the issue of when defendants may be jointly liable for gains,
) 415 [556],
416 [558] (Finn, Stone and Perram JJ).
This point was noted by Ward CJ in
Re Earth Civil
[2435]. See also Ridge,
‘Justifying the Remedies’ (n
) 459; Gurr (n
Part II(C).
Part II(B).
See above nn
–6 and accompanying text.
Unequal contribution is possible
under statute, but Victoria is the only Australian jurisdiction with an unequal
contribution scheme:
Wrongs Act 1958
See generally
Liability (Contribution) Act 1978
(UK) s 2 (‘
UK Contribution
) 324–6 [119]–[122] (Kirby
J). Cf JD Heydon, MJ Leeming and PG Turner,
Meagher, Gummow and
Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
(LexisNexis Butterworths,
ed, 2015) 404 [10-090], in which it is said that unequal
contribution is not available in this
way because of the anterior requirement that parties must be equally liable
for coordinate
obligations.
) [341]–[355].
Ibid [354].
See above Part II(B).
This is for two reasons. First,
apportionable claims must arise from a failure to take reasonable care which is
not the case when
defendants commit or assist dishonest breaches of fiduciary
duty: see, eg,
Civil Liability Act 2002
Civil Liability Act
’). See also
Elston Private Wealth Pty Ltd v
Wilson Advisory & Stockbroking Ltd
[2022] ACTSC 237
, [534] (Mossop J);
Cassegrain v Cassegrain
[2016] NSWCA 71
, [84] (Emmett AJA, Sackville JA
agreeing at [31]). Secondly, the benefit of proportionate liability is not
available to a person who intended to cause or fraudulently
caused loss: see,
NSW Civil Liability Act
ss 34A(1)(a)–(b). There are minor differences between the states
— for example, Victoria excludes fraudulent defendants
but not those who
caused loss intentionally: see
Wrongs Act 1958
Note that dishonesty is not a bar
to contribution under the
UK Contribution Act
(n 266), in which unclean
hands are instead considered at the apportionment stage of inquiry: see
[1993] Ch 140
, 148–9 (Ferris J); Charles Mitchell,
Contribution and Reimbursement
(Oxford University Press, 2003) 260 [13.17].
Similar reasoning would apply to the Victorian regime under the
Alexander v Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd
[2004] HCA 7
216 CLR 109
, 116 [2] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
Part III(C)(2).
Corporations Act
) ss 79, 181–3, 185;
[33]–[34] (Gleeson, Leeming and Mitchelmore JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (397 KB)
PDF format (380 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter