URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ferrell, David Moignard --- "'We Are One, but We Are Many': Conceptions of Australia's Sovereign People and the Proposed Voice to Parliament" [2024] SydLawRw 22; (2024) 46(4) Sydney Law Review 423
I Introduction
II Indigenous Sovereign Difference and the Voice Proposal
A Aboriginal Sovereign Difference
B The Voice to Parliament
1 Voice Proposal
2 Recognising Indigenous Australians
3 The Constitutional Consequences of Recognition
III ‘Great Underlying Principle’: The ‘Unified’ Account of ‘The People’
A The Modern Constitutional Unitary People
B The Unitary Sovereign People in Australian Law
IV ‘Strange Multiplicity’: Plural Accounts of ‘The People’ and the Rejection of the Voice
A ‘Polity Composed of Polities’: Plural Federal People
B Pluralist Constitutional Methods under the Voice
1 Deliberative Constitutionalism
2 Democratic Constitutionalism
C Are We One? Or Are We Many? The Rejection of the Voice
1 Fracturing the Unitary State
2 Plurality of Authority
3 Inequality of Peoples
V Conclusion
“We Are One, But We Are Many”: Conceptions of
Australia’s Sovereign People and the Proposed Voice to Parliament
David Moignard
This article examines the defeat of the 2023 referendum on the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Voice to Parliament (‘Voice’)
in terms of
competing conceptions of ‘the people’ in Australian constitutional
law. Applying James Tully’s theory
of popular sovereignty to Australian
law and history, this article advances the tension between two views of the
sovereign people
— as homogenous and formally equal, or plural and
differentiated — as a lens to analyse developments in Australian
constitutional
law. It begins by briefly surveying the history of Indigenous
Australian sovereign difference under the
Constitution
situating the recognition sought through the Voice.
It then identifies, drawing on Tully’s critique of ‘modern
constitutional’ popular sovereignty, an orthodox conception
sovereign people persisting in Australian law as a homogenous, formally equal
entity authorising the supremacy of representative
Parliament. Finally, it
suggests a competing strain of Australian constitutional thought which,
constructing the sovereign people
as plural, enables alternative forms of
constitutional governance. Such plural modes of constitutionalism, it argues,
were embodied
by the Voice and informed the No campaign’s arguments in the
terms of a ‘unified’ constitutional ‘people’.
examination of the Voice, this article articulates competing constructions of
‘the people’ as a lens for interrogating
developments in Australian
constitutional law.
Introduction
This article examines the defeat of the October 2023 referendum on the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice to Parliament (‘Voice’)
in terms of competing conceptions of ‘the people’ in Australian
constitutional law. By introducing James Tully’s
critique of ‘modern
constitutional’ popular sovereignty to existing Australian scholarship,
this article advances the
tension between two views of the sovereign people
— as homogenous and formally equal, or plural and differentiated —
as a lens to analyse developments in Australian constitutional law.
In May 2022, the Albanese Labor Government announced a referendum to decide
whether to insert a Voice to Parliament into the
Constitution
The proposed amendment was framed ‘[i]n recognition of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples
of Australia’. In
1992, the High Court had recognised ‘the people’ as sovereign in the
Constitution
Who ‘the people’ were and what their ‘sovereignty’
entailed, however, was
‘ambiguous’
Today, this article argues, the prevailing picture of Australia’s
sovereign ‘people’ is as a homogenous, formally
equal entity,
channelling its sovereignty through the representative government of
Commonwealth Parliament — a picture mirroring
that criticised by Tully in
Multiplicity
The Voice proposal challenged this orthodoxy, promising to formalise plurality
within the Australian people by recognising a distinct
constitutional status for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
In October 2023, the Voice proposal was defeated at referendum. This article
analyses the defeat as reflecting a continuing disagreement
of the sovereign ‘people’ in Australian constitutional culture:
whether they are to be constructed
as homogenous and formally equal, or as
plural and differentiated. Both views have foundations in Australia’s
constitutional
text and history, and reflect competing ideals in
Australia’s constitutional culture. Ultimately, in 2023, the Australian
rejected the constitutional pluralism embodied by the Voice proposal,
preferring values of formal equality, homogeneity and the centralised
of representative Parliament integrated into a ‘unified’ conception
of ‘the people’.
briefly surveys the history of Indigenous Australian sovereign
difference under the
Constitution
, detailing how Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ distinct sovereignty claims have been
suppressed in Australian
constitutional history, culminating in the Voice
proposal’s promise to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
as Australia’s ‘First Peoples’.
Tully’s analysis of ‘modern constitutionalism’ to Australian
law, arguing that, in tension with the plurality
of the Voice proposal, the
orthodox conception of the sovereign people in Australian law, inherited from a
‘modern constitutional’
tradition, is as a homogenous, formally
equal and unitary entity, legitimising the supreme authority of representative
Parliament.
argues that a plural conception of the sovereign people also
exists in Australian law, generating different modes of constitutional
governance aimed at more accurately representing the multiform people. Two such
theoretical approaches — deliberative
constitutionalism and democratic
constitutionalism — it is suggested, were imprinted into and projected
upon the Voice proposal.
Consequently, the rejection of the Voice, in the terms
of the No campaign, expressed a commitment to a ‘unified’ account
‘the people’, and the mode of constitutionalism it engenders.
Popular sovereignty is a ‘notoriously ambiguous
For the purposes of this article, popular sovereignty concerns ‘the source
from which the
Constitution
derives its
authority’.
The related
notion of ‘constituent power’, the power to amend the
Constitution
, is a specific manifestation of this
‘Constitutional
culture’ refers to the understandings of a legal system by the population
under that system, rather than
the understandings only of the elites who
directly practise constitutional
Whereas constitutional
history has generally focused on the roles of
the notion of
constitutional culture draws attention to broader cultural conceptions informing
the development of constitutional
I am conscious that I write as a non-Indigenous person in the field of
colonial law. It is not the purpose of this article to suggest
or advocate for
particular forms of recognition of First Nations sovereignty, or to speak for
the intentions of the
Uluru Statement from the Heart
’). Nor is it the purpose of this article to suggest which
view of the sovereign people is correct or preferable. Questions
appropriate recognition of Indigenous Australians are beyond the scope of this
article. Rather, this article takes as its starting
point that popular
sovereignty and constitutional legitimacy are predominately
cultural concepts which cannot be assumed in negotiations between Indigenous and
non-Indigenous peoples.
The purpose of this article is not to advocate any one conception of the
sovereign ‘people’ as monolithically correct
or preferable. Rather,
this article emphasises that the contradiction between the multitude and the
singular is central, inextricable
and jurisgenerative to the concept of a
sovereign ‘people’, and inseparable from Australia’s
settler-colonial history.
Consequently, the tension cannot be
‘resolved’ in law or by referendum. Rather, an understanding of this
paradox, and
the values and commitment which circulate it, directs attention
towards the legal-cultural inheritances operating in Australian constitutional
thought and provides a lens through which to understand developments in
Australian constitutional law.
This article is indebted to recent scholarship on Australian popular
sovereignty, particularly Elisa Arcioni’s investigations
people’, including as ‘plural’ or ‘unified’ in the
Commonwealth
and analyses by Nicholas Aroney, Benjamin Saunders, Simon Kennedy, Ron Levy and
William Partlett, among others, of the role of popular
sovereignty in
Australia’s
Constitution
. This article aims to supplement this
discussion by introducing the scholarship of Tully alongside an analysis of the
roots, implications for constitutional practice, and inhabitations of
these characterisations of ‘the people’ in Australian
constitutional
law, thereby developing a fuller picture of competing conceptions of
Australia’s sovereign people.
Indigenous Sovereign
Difference and the Voice Proposal
Continuing Aboriginal claims to sovereignty represent a ‘constitutional
legitimacy crisis’ for Australian
Section A of this Part will argue that the historical response of the Australian
state to this ‘crisis’ has been repression
of sovereign Aboriginal
identity, initially by segregation from, and later by assimilation into, an
imagined, uniform Australian
people, but that these policies necessarily failed
to dissolve the distinctiveness of Aboriginal sovereign claims in Australian
Consequently, Section B will argue that the Voice proposal promised, in
contrast, to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples as the
‘First Peoples’ of the Australian population, entrenching a form of
plurality in the
Constitution
Aboriginal Sovereign Difference
In 1788, Arthur Phillip arrived in Botany Bay carrying a commission declaring
British sovereignty over Australia from the eastern
shore to a longitude of 135
degrees east.
It was an ‘incredible’ legal
Contemporary international law would only have granted sovereignty over the
surrounding watershed,
only have been effective against European nations, not sovereign first
The commission for settlement, informed by accounts of offshore explorers,
assumed an empty land, home to few, rudimentary
Accounts of explorers
and administrators, including Arthur Phillip, increasingly expressed anxiety at
the apparent inaccuracy of
assumption.
Early judgments of
colonial courts distinguished between Aboriginal people and British subjects,
and recognised Indigenous legal
Shortly, however, the
rulings turned; settled territories became ‘newly discovered and
unpeopled’.
These rulings
informed the decision of the Privy Council in
Cooper v Stuart
Australia was a ‘tract of territory practically unoccupied without settled
inhabitants’.
Thereafter,
Indigenous groups would have no sovereignty within Australia’s legal
order. In 1824 and 1829, Australia’s
sovereign claim was extended westward
by proclamation to annex the remainder of the continent. Although the Australian
would not exercise effective control over the entire continent until
into World War II,
according to
colonial law any sovereignty of Indigenous nations had vanished.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples continued, however, to claim
distinct sovereign
Claims that First Nations’ sovereignty was never ceded underscore the
‘shaky’ legality of the foundation of the
Contrary to the
principle of consent by the governed, these claims demonstrate a segment of the
population whose members have not
consented to Australia’s constitutional
who insist upon their
distinct authority or constituent power even where the dominant constitution
implies this is
impossible.
The historical response of the Australian state to this ‘constitutional
legitimacy crisis’ has been to exclude Aboriginal
peoples from and later
assimilate them within a ‘unified’ conception of the Australian
This exclusion has typified Australian legal
At its most extreme, it comprised erasure through genocide and figuration of a
More recently, it involved segregation of Aboriginal people from the Australian
At Federation, Aboriginal people were excluded from voting in both Queensland
and Western Australia.
Federation, the
Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902
(Cth) conferred the right
to vote federally on all adult Australians, but actively excluded Aboriginal
people from that date.
suffrage was conferred upon Aboriginal people in 1963, it was not until 1983
that full legal equality would be enjoyed, through
the adoption of compulsory
voting, as had been imposed on the rest of the Australian population since
Aboriginal people were excluded from the operation of the Federal
Government’s power to make laws for ‘[t]he people of
Constitution
Constitution
continues to contemplate the exclusion of any race from
franchise if they are disqualified from voting at state elections, while
now-removed s 127 provided that ‘[i]n reckoning the numbers of the people
of the Commonwealth ... [Aboriginal people] shall
not be counted’. To the
extent that these provisions represent a constitutionalised acknowledgement of
minorities, they do
so on terms of subordination and confinement. Government
policy concerning Indigenous Australians has been paternalistic and expressly
coercive, including such contemporary measures as the Northern Territory
National Emergency Response.
This policy of exclusion morphed by degrees into one of assimilation and formal
equality, crystallising in the 1967 referendums which
removed s 127 and
included Aboriginal people within the Commonwealth Parliament’s races
Following the 1967
referendums, Australia’s
Constitution
contained no references to or
express recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Aboriginal claims to a distinct sovereign identity, however, were not dissolved
by attempts at formal
integration.
By recognising the persistence of Indigenous native title within common law,
but evading determinations regarding Indigenous sovereignty,
inflamed challenges of Indigenous sovereignty within the law without resolving
them. Brennan J spoke of a ‘change in
sovereignty’
‘fictions ... that there was no law before the arrival of the British
colonists in a settled colony and that there was
no sovereign law-maker in the
territory of a settled colony before sovereignty was acquired by the
However, the Court
refused to determine questions of pre-existing or persisting sovereign claims of
Aboriginal people.
In subsequent
cases, the High Court only hardened its disengagement from questions of
sovereignty.
The Voice to Parliament
Voice Proposal
In May 2017, the
Uluru Statement
was released, the product of the
First Nations National Constitutional
Convention.
The statement declared:
Our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander tribes were the first sovereign
Nations of the Australian continent ...
This sovereignty is a spiritual notion: the ancestral tie between the land ...
and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
... It has never been
ceded or extinguished, and co-exists with the sovereignty of the
Uluru Statement
called for the establishment of a constitutionally
enshrined Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice to Parliament, maintaining
that ‘[w]ith substantive constitutional change ... we believe this ancient
sovereignty can shine through as a fuller expression
of Australia’s
nationhood’.
2017, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull rejected this call for a Voice, stating
that such a body was not ‘desirable
or capable of winning acceptance at a
referendum’.
Nevertheless, the Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition relating
to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
was established in March 2018,
and the co-design process for an entrenched Voice proceeded into 2019.
In May 2022, the Albanese Labor Government announced a referendum on the
Voice, to be held within that term of government. In March
2023, the Government
released a proposed question and the text of the amendment. The question read:
A Proposed Law: to alter the
Constitution
to recognise the First Peoples
of Australia by establishing an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice. Do
you approve this proposed
alteration?
The proposed amendment
Chapter IX Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
129 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice
In recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First
Peoples of Australia:
(i) there shall be a body, to be called the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice;
(ii) the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice may make representations
to the Parliament and the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth on matters
relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples;
(iii) the Parliament shall, subject to this
Constitution
, have power to make
laws with respect to matters relating to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice, including its composition,
functions, power and procedures.
On 19 July 2023, the
Constitution
Alteration (Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice) 2023 (‘
Constitution
Alteration Bill’) passed both
houses of Parliament, to be put to the Australian people at referendum under s
128. On 14 October
2023, the referendum was defeated in every state, with 60% of
electors voting to reject the
Opposition Leader
Peter Dutton, commenting after polling had closed, repeated the central message
of the No campaign: ‘The
proposal and the process should have been
designed to unite Australians, not to divide
Recognising Indigenous Australians
The proposal had effectively conflated two matters: the constitutional
recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
as a distinct group
within the Australian people, and the establishment of the
The substance of the
proposed amendment concerned the establishment, composition and powers of the
Voice. Consequently, few submissions
to the Joint Select Committee on the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice Referendum (‘Joint Select
Committee’)
engaged with the legal consequences of recognising Indigenous
peoples in the
Constitution
. The locus of the debate was instead the
Voice body, and especially the effect of its representations to the executive
and Parliament,
Committee emphasising that ‘[v]ery few stakeholders disputed that
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples should
be recognised in some
Constitutional recognition was a core function of the proposal. The
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Constitution
Alteration Bill
stated that
the first purpose of the proposal was ‘to recognise Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples
Australia’.
recognition sought to remedy the fact that ‘the
Constitution
effectively excluded Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in
significant ways’.
Explanatory Memorandum moreover set out the
Uluru Statement
The second reading speech
for the Bill similarly stated that the proposal was targeted to remedy the fact
that ‘Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples are not recognised in
Constitution
... to recognise the First Peoples of Australia [and to]
rectify over 120 years of explicit exclusion in provisions of Australia’s
founding legal document’.
Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus observed: ‘The introductory words recognise
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as
the First Peoples of Australia.
They reflect the fact that establishing the Voice is an act of recognition, in
the manner the delegates
at Uluru sought in
The Constitutional Consequences of
Recognition
What would the consequences of such recognition have been? This article
engages with the possibility that this recognition could have
essentially
informed the constitutional meaning of ‘the people’. In their
submission to the Joint Select Committee, Nicholas
Aroney and Peter Gerangelos
suggested that the insertion of the Voice provisions in a discrete chapter would
give recognition of
Indigenous peoples ‘a structural prominence in the
Constitution
similar to three other important constitutional
topics’ and to ‘the other major institutions established by the
Constitution
’ — Parliament, the executive and the judiciary
— inviting ‘constitutional
implications’.
Unlike the proposed preamble recognising Aboriginal peoples that went to
referendum in 1999, the proposed Voice provisions did not
non-justiciability
Consequently, as Aroney argued elsewhere, ‘the introductory words [could]
contain implications of their
In particular,
[t]he recognition of ‘the First Peoples of Australia’ in the
proposed section 129 is likely to be interpreted in the
context of the
reference in the preamble to the [
Constitution
] to the agreement of
‘the people’ of the several Australian colonies ... [I]t is quite
possible ... that the ‘First
Peoples’ referred to in section 129
will be recognised by the courts as a distinct and yet integral part of the
‘Australian
People’ ...
This suggestion is
further supported by the content of extrinsic and campaign materials for the Yes
campaign, read through the High
Court’s approach to previous
constitutional amendments. In two cases in which the High Court meaningfully
interpreted amendments
Constitution
, the Court examined wide
extrinsic materials. In 2009, in
Commonwealth
the High Court was called on to interpret
s 51(xxiiiA)
, the ‘social
services power’ of Parliament inserted into the
Constitution
referendum in 1946.
All Justices
but one used extrinsic materials in interpreting the provision. Their Honours
analysed the second reading speech, parliamentary
debates surrounding the
passage of the Bill, the historical and political context of the passage of the
Bill and referendum, the
Yes and No cases put to voters in pamphlets, and even
the advice of the Solicitor-General and the Attorney-General’s department
to the Member who introduced the
Likewise, in 1998 in
Kartinyeri v Commonwealth
, a majority of the High Court considered the
case for the Yes vote provided to electors ahead of the 1967 referendum in
determining
the meaning of the amended races power under
Clear references to the recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples in the extrinsic materials, as well as the
in the context of claimed ‘spiritual’ sovereignty which
‘co-exists’ with the
could have supported the
judicial recognition of a distinct constitutional status for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples
among the Australian people. In its submission to
the Joint Select Committee, the Law Council of Australia asserted explicitly
the amendment promised to recognise the ‘unique status and rights of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as Australia’s
The additional comments from the Australian Greens similarly welcomed
the inclusion of the preamble sentence as an important recognition of First
People’s cultural ties to Country along with the
inclusion of the
Statement from the Heart into the Bill’s Explanatory Memorandum,
containing as it does, multiple references
to First Nations
Sovereignty.
form this recognition of a distinct place within the Australian people could
have taken is now unknowable.
Coe v Commonwealth
rejected the possibility of Indigenous sovereignty separate from the Australian
Likewise, while
invocations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander ‘sovereignty’
are diverse, scholarship relays that
few are aimed at external
independence.
sovereignty ‘is seen as a footing, a recognition, from which to demand
those rights and transference of power from
the Australian state, not a footing
to separate from it’.
Aroney suggested that the introductory phrase of the proposed
could support the
discovery of domestic dependent nationhood for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples, or fiduciary-like
obligations, as in Canada, New Zealand and
the United States.
However, this
coheres uneasily with the suggestion of national ‘unity’ envisioned
by the Yes campaign,
and notions
of ‘fuller nationhood’ expressed in the
Uluru Statement
submission of the Law Council of Australia to the Joint Select Committee
identified that one of the key reasons for the amendment
was that ‘all
Australians “own” the
Constitution
’, including
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
I argue that the
reference in the introductory phrase to ‘First Peoples’ rather than
‘First Nations’
could less radically be read to imply a unique status of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders within Australia’s
‘Great Underlying Principle’: The
‘Unified’ Account of ‘The People’
of this article related how historical policies of exclusion and
assimilation failed to resolve the fundamental ‘crisis’
legitimacy for the Australian state represented by continuing Aboriginal
sovereign claims. It also argued that, by contrast, the
Voice proposal stood to
recognise and entrench the distinct status of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples within ‘the
people’ of Australia.
will discuss popular sovereignty under Australian law, detailing how, contrary
to the Voice provisions, Australian constitutional
culture exhibits a bias
towards a ‘unified’ construction of ‘the people’
inherited from ‘modern constitutional’
Recognition of Indigenous plurality collides with the prevailing
understanding of ‘the people’ in Australian constitutional
culture: a ‘unified’ people, undifferentiated for the purposes of
law, represented through a single, supreme
Parliament. Section A will articulate
this construction, drawing on the theory of Tully, as emerging from a
‘modern constitutional’
tradition, which frames a formal
‘unity’ of ‘the people’ in order to enable abstracted
and centralised constitutional
modes, prioritising the unitary state, stable
representative government and formal equality. Section B will identify this
construction of ‘the people’ in the
jurisprudence of popular sovereignty in Australia, aligning it with the
endorsement
of the supremacy of Commonwealth Parliament.
The Modern Constitutional Unitary
Strange Multiplicity
, Tully set out to answer ‘one of the
most difficult and pressing questions’ of our age: ‘Can a modern
constitution
recognise and accommodate cultural
diversity?’
perceives, in contemporary Western constitutionalism, an inability to recognise
multiple, diverse peoples, and a predilection
‘to exclude and assimilate
cultural diversity in the name of
uniformity’.
This tendency
originates, Tully diagnoses, in a dominant strain of ‘modern
constitutional’
‘Modern constitutionalism’ generally refers to the political and
legal tradition emerging during the period of the Enlightenment
Europe, concerned broadly with limited government, the rule of law and the
protection of basic
Strange Multiplicity
, Tully criticises a strain of this tradition,
typified by the works of Thomas Paine, but broadly ‘given theoretical
in the writings of the modern European political theorists from John
Locke to John Stuart
which consciously
defined itself in opposition to ‘the “ancient constitution”
based on custom, tradition and irregularity’,
and framed the sovereign
people as uniform, singular and
homogenous.
As noted by David Lee, ‘[f]ew doctrines [were] as foundational to
modern constitutional theory [as] popular
sovereignty’.
The ‘notion that the ultimate source of all authority exercised through
the public institutions of the state originates in
the people’ provided a
secular foundation for modern constitutionalism’s most influential
However, the
‘diffuse and scattered’ nature of ‘the people’
complicated attempts to attribute to them supreme
The core project of
modern constitutionalism was the formation of a theory of centralised public
authority, ‘limited and circumscribed
within the bounds of
the establishment of
‘a constitution that is legally and politically uniform’ and free
from ‘the irregularity of
constitution’.
multiplicity of the population and their customary practices, observes Tully,
contradicted this ideal.
constitutionalism and popular sovereignty were ‘fundamentally at odds with
each other’.
this tension, modern constitutional theory constructed the sovereign
‘people’ with ‘a formal, narrowly
character’.
The people,
though a multitude in fact, were, as a sovereign entity, conceptualised as
‘unified’ and
‘indivisible and necessarily dominant within a
territory’.
This construction of ‘the people’ allowed the formulation of the
unitary state. The period of medieval constitutionalism
preceding modern
constitutionalism was defined by ‘horrifyingly bloody ... wars. The prime
reason for this was that there was
concept of the
Perceiving ‘conflicting jurisdictions and authorities of the ancient
constitutions [as] the cause of wars’, says Tully,
modern constitutional
theorists were motivated to theorise a unitary nation-state, whereby authority
was ‘organised and centralised
by the constitution in some sovereign body:
in a single person or assembly, a system of mixed or balanced institutions, or
undifferentiated
Thomas Hobbes,
for example, sought to arrest the fracturing of public authority which he
witnessed in the English Civil War. He posited
society as formed by a
‘covenant’ between every individual member of the
‘multitude’, whereby each agreed
to ‘confer all their power
and strength upon one man, or upon one assembly of men, that may reduce all
their wills, by plurality
of voices, unto one
This act constituted a unitary sovereign ruler, ‘one indivisible entity
with a unitary will and
personality’
aligned with
a unitary ‘Commonwealth’ capable of stably and authoritatively
wielding public authority.
This unitary quality of the sovereign authority was imposed back upon the
sovereign ‘people’. Jean-Jacques Rousseau seminally
theorised the
continuing sovereignty of ‘the people’ — separating
constituent from governing constituted
— through the ‘general will’ of the
population.
For Rousseau, sovereignty was ‘nothing less than the exercise of the
general will’.
maintained, however, the unitary structure of sovereign will. The notion of
‘a single superior and sovereign will capable
of expressing the permanent
and common interests of the entire nation’ remained attractive as a
bulwark against political
The ‘general
will’ subordinated individual wills to the ‘common
Sovereignty
was ‘indivisible’
and suffered no ‘partial wills’ or ‘partial
even if, in
fact, subsets of the community did conflict with the ‘general
Modern constitutional theorists sought to integrate this ‘ideal’
of popular sovereignty into the framework of the modern
constitution
but, remaining
‘distrustful of “the masses”’ [saw] radical democratic
participation and will formation [as]
destructive and
troublesome’.
Representative democratic government, as an institution, allowed popular
sovereignty to be ‘built into the apparatus of modern
constitutionalism’, but reduced the plurality of the sovereign
‘people’ to abstracted
majoritarianism.
Consequently, ‘democratic institutions were nothing more than positivist
structures that allowed for the determination of popular
‘[r]epresentative government [was] an acknowledgement that
constitutionalism [was]
In the United Kingdom, modern constitutional popular sovereignty underwrote
explanations of parliamentary
sovereignty.
Jeremy Bentham
theorised a ‘split’ in the sovereignty of the United Kingdom, where
‘the people’ chose assemblies
in periodic elections but did not
control lawmaking functions.
Albert Venn Dicey similarly posited a distinction between ‘legal’
and ‘political sovereignty’: the sovereignty
of the British
Parliament was a ‘merely legal conception [meaning] simply the power of
law-making unrestricted by any legal
Political sovereignty was possessed by the body whose will ‘is ultimately
obeyed by the citizens of the
and this was
‘the people’, or more particularly, ‘electors [who] can in the
long run always enforce their
Underlying this
was the modern constitutional notion of ‘the people’, or the nation,
as one. The ‘essence of representative
government’, said Dicey, is
that Parliament should ‘give effect to the will of ... the electoral body,
or of the nation’.
Because of the majoritarian structure of the people’s sovereign will,
Walter Bagehot identified the House of Commons, and not
the unelected House of
Lords or the Crown, as the sovereign
institution.
This positivist treatment of the sovereign ‘people’ was upheld by
formal equality and unity.
For Hobbes, in order to sustain the ‘unity’ by which the sovereign
institution was legitimated, it was necessary that
‘the people’ be
formally equal.
hierarchy of differences in society would allow the assertion of superior places
within the social order, and those with
inferior places would refuse the
covenant of society.
would reintroduce the pluralism Hobbes’ theory sought to
equality was not a natural fact but a formal construction: an
‘acknowledgement’, ‘allowance’
‘attribution’ between
covenanters.
For John Stuart Mill, similarly, sovereignty was to be vested in ‘the
entire aggregate community’ through
‘whole people’ must have ‘ultimate
Dicey advocated
for the referendum as a process of constitutional change, in part because he
believed a greater proportion of the
population, particularly minorities
outweighed in regular elections, would turn out to
participate.
This electoral
equality allowed ‘the people’ to be constructed as homogenous
‘in the sense that culture is irrelevant
[or] capable of being
transcended’.
being served sufficiently ‘by an implicit and substantive common good and
a shared set of authoritative European
institutions’,
modern constitution eliminates ‘diversity as a constitutive aspect of
Moreover, Tully perceives this restriction as a tool of colonial enterprise:
having been ‘designed to exclude or assimilate
‘justify the extinction or assimilation of different
‘employed, and continue[s] to be employed, to dispossess the Aboriginal
nations of their sovereignty and territory and
to subject them to European
constitutional nation states and their traditions of
interpretation’.
colonial European thinkers faced Aboriginal peoples that considered themselves
‘sovereign nations with jurisdiction over
their territories’, a
justification was required to establish European
sovereignty.
The distinction
upheld between ‘ancient’ constitutions, founded on custom and
perceived irregularity, and ‘modern’
constitutions, defined by
formality, abstraction and equality, and the superiority of the latter, served
to relegate Aboriginal political
associations to an ‘earlier stage of
[historical]
development’,
‘vacate[d]’ lands ‘for settlement without consent by removing
the sovereignty and property of Aboriginal
and allowed
for the figuration of uniformity of ‘the people’ as an indication of
having achieved modernity.
Any failure of Aboriginal peoples to conform to the uniformity of ‘the
people’, and to accede to the European institutions
of a modern
constitution, is viewed as evidence of their inadequacy for sovereignty, and
justification for their exclusion or assimilation.
In this way, the vision of a
people upheld by modern constitutionalism ‘legitimates the modernising
processes of discipline,
rationalisation and state building that are designed to
create in practice the cultural and institutional uniformity identified as
modern in theory’.
Modern constitutionalism was therefore, says Tully, ‘[t]he picture ...
of a culturally homogenous and sovereign people [whose]
constitution founds an
independent and self-governing nation state with a set of uniform legal and
representative political institutions
in which all citizens are treated
itself in opposition to the ‘multiform ... assemblage’ of
constitutions’.
Concepts of ‘popular sovereignty, citizenship, unity, equality,
recognition, and democracy’ came to
presuppose the uniformity of a nation state [and its people, such that]
multi-national federalism [and] demands for cultural recognition
, even as a threat to democracy, equality and liberty, rather than
as forms of recognition that can be explained and justified in
accordance with
principles of
constitutionalism.
The Unitary Sovereign People in Australian
This modern constitutional construction of popular sovereignty occupies the
Constitution
. British constitutional ideas were ‘second
nature to the colonial politicians who negotiated, debated and drafted our
Constitution
Recent scholarship by Saunders and Kennedy, and by Partlett, has revived
attention to the ways that British and American notions
of popular sovereignty
animated the framers and inhabit the
Constitution
It was not until 1992, however, that popular sovereignty was internally accepted
as the foundation for the authority of the
Constitution
, Mason CJ stated that despite the
Constitution
‘initial character as a statute of the Imperial Parliament’, the
Australia Acts of 1986 had ‘marked the
end of the legal sovereignty of the
Imperial Parliament and recognized that ultimate sovereignty resided in the
Australian people’.
Honour departed from the decades-old orthodoxy tracing the authority of the
Constitution
to its passage as an Act of the Imperial
Parliament.
Mason CJ was soon joined by Deane and Toohey JJ, and later McHugh J, as
advocates of popular sovereignty, leading George Winterton
to declare in 1998
that ‘there is no reason to doubt that the views of Mason CJ, Deane,
Toohey and McHugh JJ would be endorsed
by most, if not all, of the current
The text of the
Constitution
, however, contained
references to ‘the people’ of the Commonwealth, which did little to
clarify the term. The preamble refers to ‘the
people’ of the
original states, excluding Western Australia.
that the members of the Senate and House of Representatives shall be
‘directly chosen by the people’.
and the former s 127
further provide for the disqualification of races from ‘reckoning the
numbers of the people ... of the
Commonwealth’. Though the framers
regularly invoked ‘the people’, the ‘will of the people’
notion of self-rule in the Convention Debates, they failed to
‘articulate precisely what they meant by these
A core function
of the preamble had been establishment of a single, national people in
‘one indissoluble Commonwealth’.
John Quick and Robert Garran,
writing in 1901, observed that two purposes of the preamble were expressly to
declare the agreement
of the people of Australia and to declare their purpose to
These declarations were to be regarded as ‘promulgating principles, ideas,
or sentiments operating, at the time of the formation
of the instrument, in the
minds of the framers, and by them imparted to and approved by the people to whom
it was submitted’.
The potential significance of this ‘paradigm shift’ from
parliamentary to popular sovereignty was immediately
acknowledged.
As a Grundnorm,
or foundational norm,
sovereignty had the potential to significantly alter and direct understandings
of Australian constitutional law. The possibility
Constitution
was to be interpreted ‘for the benefit of the
‘the people’ possess an active ‘legal
sovereignty’
or ‘constituent
pervasively affect constitutional
The sovereignty of
‘the people’ did exhibit legal force. The implied freedom of
political communication, and the principle
of ‘representative
government’ on which it was based, were interwoven with the sovereignty of
‘the people’
and used to invalidate the laws of
Parliament.
Likewise, in
Roach v Electoral
Commissioner
Rowe v Electoral
Commissioner
the High Court demonstrated a willingness to invalidate electoral laws
considered inconsistent with the nature of ‘the people’
political community, asserting an implied minimum of
and distinguishing
the constitutional concept of ‘the people’ from the related
constitutional concept of
‘electors’.
These rulings produced anxiety about an expanded scope for judicial
law-making. Early judicial statements of popular sovereignty attributed
‘the people’ both ‘political’ and ‘legal’
sovereignty.
This Diceyan
terminology allowed ‘the people’ both supreme political power, as
electors of Parliament,
supreme law-making
stoking fears of a
potential ‘full panoply’ of judicially implied
The internalisation
of popular sovereignty appeared to ‘break Parliament’s theoretical
monopoly on law-making’
and enabled the Court and, potentially, other
constitutional entities such as the
to ‘claim its
own power to speak for the sovereign
Leslie Zines, an exponent of the ‘British traditional heritage’
of parliamentary sovereignty in Australia, expressed particular
following the
case, cautioning that such reasoning departed from the
principle of parliamentary supremacy and ‘may open up a Pandora’s
box of implied rights and
Zines would,
however, come to employ a Diceyan logic to restore the supremacy of
Parliament:
Although the implication of representative government derogates from the
principle of parliamentary sovereignty, it can be said,
paradoxically, to
strengthen the political legitimacy of that principle. The notion that emerges
... is that a form of representative
government is entrenched in the
Constitution
and, subject to that and any other guarantees and
restrictions in the
Constitution
, the supremacy of Parliament
2013, the High Court began to articulate a picture of the sovereign people that
accorded with Zines’ vision: a body of electors,
defined by political
equality, who expressed their sovereignty exclusively through representative
government. Following nearly two
decades playing no noticeable part in the
Court’s reasoning, the language of popular sovereignty reappeared in
Unions NSW No
In this case, a six-member majority of the Court identified ‘a
sovereign power residing in the people, exercised by the
representatives’.
years later, in
McCloy v New South
this sovereignty was refined further by a consistent bloc of Justices,
comprising French CJ and Kiefel, Bell, Keane and Nettle JJ.
This bloc began
framing the sovereignty of the Australian people as ‘political
sovereignty’,
described by Nettle J in
as the ‘freedom of electors,
through communication between themselves and with their political
representatives, to implement
legislative and political
In so framing the role of the sovereign people, the Court removed much of the
potential consequence of popular sovereignty from the
law, as any claim to speak
for ‘the people’ was returned to
Parliament.
Subsequently, as
Partlett identifies, it became ‘conventional wisdom’ to assert that
‘the Australian people exercise
a weak version of popular sovereignty
understood “in the late 19
-century British constitutional
sense”’ as acting through
argument for the implied freedoms’, asserts James Stellios, became
‘in effect the same as the political
and moral justification for the
common law principle of the supremacy of Parliament, namely the accountability
of Parliament to the
electorate’.
A feature of ‘political sovereignty’ articulated by this bloc was
‘political equality’. In 1902, Harrison
Moore had written of the
Constitution
that ‘[t]he great underlying principle is,
that the rights of individuals are sufficiently secured by ensuring, as far as
to each a share, and an equal share, in political
Six members of
the Court in
endorsed this statement, with French CJ, Kiefel, Bell
and Keane JJ asserting that ‘[e]quality of opportunity to participate
the exercise of political sovereignty is an aspect of the representative
democracy guaranteed by our
Constitution
The exact content of the principle of ‘political equality’ —
other than that it lies ‘at the heart of the
Australian constitutional
conception of political
sovereignty’
remained unarticulated.
was, however, reiterated in subsequent implied freedom
and broadly reflected
‘institutional requirements that flow from an egalitarian ideal’,
enabling democratic
Justice Keane had elsewhere articulated ‘political equality’ as
an attribute of the ‘unity’ and ‘solidarity’
for a sovereign people.
commentary clarifies the picture of ‘the people’ mobilised by the
majority in
. Keane had been a driving force in the reinvigorated
jurisprudence of popular sovereignty. His Honour was the first contemporary
justice to expressly declare that the sovereignty of ‘the people’
implied ‘political equality’, and it was
this statement which was
relied upon in the joint judgment of French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ
In his extra-judicial writing, Keane had contended that the notion of a
constitutional ‘people’ necessarily involved ‘social
solidarity’ and ‘political
In the American constitutional context, he stated, ‘unity’ provided
a stronger constitutional basis for desegregation
than the reasoning adopted in
Brown v Board of
avoided ‘the contortions of the later US jurisprudence relating to
affirmative action’,
and even prevented the ‘baffling’ position of the US Supreme Court
regarding the right to bear
In the Australian
context, ‘unity’ expressed both a limit on government in dividing
‘the people’ in public
life, as well as obligations of ‘civic
duty’ for ‘the
‘unity’ was asserted by Keane as a feature of Australia’s
constitutional order. While there were ‘of
course, serious differences
between societal
groupings’,
maintained:
Our Framers made the brave judgment that the prospect of a tyrannous majority,
of so much concern to members of persecuted minorities,
was a chimera in a
polity in which there were no rigidly defined social strata and antagonistic
societal groupings.
The picture of ‘the people’ articulated by this bloc
of Justices and informed by the commentary of Keane thus traces Tully’s
modern constitutional picture: a unified, formally equivalent and uniform
sovereign people, exercising their authority through elections
Parliament alone with sovereign authority.
‘Strange Multiplicity’: Plural
Accounts of ‘The People’ and the Rejection of the Voice
The preceding Part traced Tully’s analysis of the modern constitutional
‘unitary’ sovereign people in Australian
law and legal culture. It
described the tension in prevailing modern constitutional thought between
popular sovereignty and formal
constitutionalism, explaining how the
construction of the people as ‘unitary’ provided a conceptual
foundation for the
authority of the unitary state, representative government,
and formal equality. It then extracted these elements in the jurisprudence
popular sovereignty in Australia, which, by synthesising popular sovereignty
with parliamentary supremacy and formal equality,
invoked the sovereign people
as ‘unified’.
This ‘unified’ account is not, however, the only picture of
‘the people’ operating in Australian constitutional
law and culture.
In this Part, Section A will argue that an account of ‘the people’
as plural — divisible into
groups possessing distinct constituent power
and different capacities under the
Constitution
, referable to that
group’s unique relationship to the constitutional community and text
— pre-exists the Voice in Australian
federalism, illustrating how plural
constructions of the sovereign people manifest alternative constructions of
constitutional law.
Section B will argue that the Voice, poised to embed a
plurality of ‘the people’ in the
Constitution
express and legitimate such alternative constitutional forms. It describes
first, how, ahead of the referendum, the Voice
was analysed as a vector for
deliberative constitutionalism and, second, how the Voice stood to embody a
developing form of common
law constitutionalism, echoing Tully’s theory of
democratic constitutionalism. These deviations from constitutionalism predicated
on a ‘unitary’ people, Section C will claim, animated the No
campaign to reject the Voice proposal in the terms of modern
constitutional
commitments: the unitary state, supreme Parliament and formal equality.
‘Polity Composed of Polities’:
Plural Federal People
Australia’s people, at Federation, were not considered an aggregate
whole, but a ‘Federal
Commonwealth’
— a polity composed of polities.
‘[F]ederalism’,
says Aroney, ‘was the non-negotiable pre-supposition, not responsible
government’, of the
National Australasian Convention
Arcioni and Aroney
have highlighted how federalism continues to obstruct the framing of
Australia’s sovereign people as uncomplicatedly
The conception of
the Australian state as, in the terms of James Bryce, a ‘community made up
of communities’,
required a unique ‘set of analytical criteria’ to comprehend popular
sovereignty.
Different constructions of the sovereign people yield different modes of
constitutional government and different approaches to constitutional
plurality of ‘the people’ undermines an exclusive authority of
majoritarian government, enabling other, counter-majoritarian
institutions to
claim to speak for parts of the sovereign people. The institutions of Australian
government operationalise this union
of polities. ‘The composition of the
Senate’, Arcioni notes, remains ‘an obvious indication of the
peoples of the
states being distinct
communities’,
and ‘thereby identifies the constituent power of “the
majoritarian House of Representatives represents ‘the people of the
Commonwealth’, while the Senate represents ‘the
people of the
A federal High
Court, the ‘keystone of the federal
is necessary to
maintain the federal compact.
The power of judicial review, ‘a significant departure from the English
constitutional tradition of parliamentary sovereignty’,
grants the court a
counter-majoritarian power to enforce the federal
Further, contrary to Moore’s ‘great underlying
principle’,
sovereignty of the divisible ‘people’ does not manifest equal
political power. The
Constitution
explicitly discriminates between the
peoples of the states and territories in terms of political capacity, and the
High Court recognises
The ‘equal representation of the several Original States’ in the
Senate grants unequal voting power to residents of different
Section 128
a ‘double majority’ of ‘a majority of the States [by] a
majority of electors’ to pass constitutional
amendments, inflating the
power of less populous states.
Section 128
further requires that any formal
amendment affecting the constitutional power of a state not pass unless the
majority of electors
in that state approve the amendment, essentially granting a
veto power to residents of that state.
confirmed that
ensured representation in Parliament only for the people of states, not
territories.
allows Parliament to grant Territorians representation, they enjoy no
constitutional entitlement.
McGinty v Western
saw the Court
rebuff a constitutionally entrenched equality of voting
Gummow J emphasised that the ‘ultimate sovereignty’ reposed in
was not distributed equally, but anticipated unequal preference to the
electors of a state when altering constitutional provisions
affecting that
statements as to the reposition of “sovereignty” in “the
people” of Australia,’ said his
Honour, ‘if they are to be
given legal rather than popular or political meaning, must be understood in
light of the federal
considerations contained in
expressed the point more baldly:
Only the people can now change the
Constitution
. They are the sovereign.
But, because their rights to amend the
Constitution
are not equal, the
Australian people do not have equal shares in that sovereignty. ...
When the share of individuals in the sovereignty of the nation, in the right to
Constitution
and in Senate voting is expressly made unequal and
when new States and Territories may have unequal representation in the
Parliament,
it is obvious that equality of individual voting power is not and
has not been a fundamental feature of the
Constitution
tension between a unitary or a plural conception of ‘the people’ is
therefore already entrenched in structures of
Constitution
The incremental diminishment of the view of the
Constitution
agreement between sovereign
shift not just in judicial attitudes, but in Australian constitutional culture,
towards a unified understanding of the
national people. The growing dominance of
federal Parliament represented not merely a growing ‘preference for
British over
American institutions and
fundamentally ‘the
Constitution
[being] read in a new light ...
reflected from events that had ... led to a growing realization that Australians
were now one people
and Australia one
Pluralist Constitutional Methods under the
The legitimacy crisis occasioned by Indigenous claims to sovereignty urgently
re-animates this tension. By formally recognising Indigenous
plurality, the
Voice seemed poised to activate novel approaches to the
Constitution
contemporary constitutional theories, deliberative constitutionalism and
democratic constitutionalism, which emerged from the
commentary and case law
preceding the Voice referendum, illustrate the institutional and jurisprudential
potency of the plural conception
of ‘the people’ embedded in the
Deliberative Constitutionalism
Ahead of the referendum, the pluralist possibility of the Voice caused it to
be canvassed as a vector for deliberative constitutionalism.
Deliberative
democracy is ‘a reaction against traditional democratic models that
principally sought to tally the fixed preferences
of majorities or interest
It seeks to
reinvigorate democratic legitimacy by incorporating meaningful deliberation
between citizens in
decision-making.
Deliberative
constitutionalism extends this project to constitutional law, seeking to restore
democratic legitimacy by construing
a constitution as ‘principally a
vehicle for
deliberation’
‘within and among the constituent political units of a
[society]’.
Deliberative constitutionalism frames a constitution as a process by which
‘a polity continually ... work[s] through social
controversies and
refine[s] its own constitutional commitments via procedures of robust
deliberative
democracy’.
A system of parallel, representative institutions ‘giving political and
legal authority to disparate voices within the federal
state’ naturally
provides expression for democratic
deliberation.
Appleby, Ron Levy and Helen Whalan argued in 2023 that the Voice could operate
as an institution of deliberative democracy
‘capable of creating a
dialogue between peoples’ and facilitating a plurality of constituent
power groups ‘working
through, and perhaps, settling competing legitimacy
claims, via a deliberative and democratic
This model, they assert, avoids the ‘limits [of] the appropriateness of
[majoritarian] democracy in an unequally divided
‘multiple sovereignties [to] be
accommodated’,
achieving ‘a conversation about both constitutive ... and ongoing matters
... in which the sovereignty of each side may be
respected and pragmatic
solutions for allowing each to be expressed in practice are
This, say the
authors, was the method envisioned by the
Deliberative constitutionalism is posited as an avenue to involve diverse
peoples in ongoing
constitution-making,
particularly of informal constitutional change, affecting the ‘fragments
of ordinary law — statutes, judgments and unwritten
conventions’
amount to, if not enforceable law, ‘constitutional
to ‘avoid foreclosing essential debates about the nature and scope of
political community’,
allowing continual reinvention of the groups and identities recognised
constitutionally and ‘complex conceptions of political
community and
affiliation’.
further deviates from traditional constitutional approaches by authorising the
counter-majoritarian, constitutional court to defend
arrangements reached by
deliberative constitutional
It attempts to
reverse key commitments of modern constitutionalism, promising to reintegrate
the plurality of voices and authorities
in law and governance.
Democratic Constitutionalism
Tully’s answer to the motivating question of
Multiplicity
— whether constitutionalism can recognise cultural
diversity — was the promotion of a different way of thinking about
constitutions: reconceiving a constitution as ‘a “form of
accommodation” of cultural
diversity’.
This theory
of a ‘democratic constitutionalism’ is defined in opposition to the
abstracted formula of modern constitutional
popular sovereignty. Modern
constitutionalism, Tully saw, quarantines the multiformity of ‘the
people’ from the law at
the same time as it draws legitimacy from
As a ‘positivist
enterprise’, it imposes upon ‘the people’ the mould of a
unitary entity, ‘fragment[ing]
and stifl[ing] social discourse [and]
confin[ing] social and political
possibilities’.
Tully’s democratic constitutionalism instead frames the constitution
as an ‘activity, an intercultural dialogue in which the culturally
diverse sovereign citizens of contemporary societies negotiate
agreements on
their forms of association over
Under this theory, the actual forms of association within a sovereign people
are a source of constitutional law. Michael Simpson summarises:
If a constitution is not to be conceived of as something abstracted that stands
above an unformed constituent group of people, then
perhaps it can be conceived
in broader terms as the wide-ranging fields of interaction, understood as rules
and customs, that emerge,
are established, are contended with, and change
through the very practices of everyday interactive rule-following
constitutional theory invites judicial decision-makers to interrogate the actual
values, associations and recognitions
within a constitutional community —
revealing the ‘hidden constitutions’ of a polity, disguised by
of modern constitutionalism and the narrow range of uses of its
central terms’
and to formulate the law in some degree of conformity, limited by the formal
conventions of the
Constitution
and the common law, thereby
‘mak[ing] explicit the implicit rules embodied in practice in a culture or
community’.
Ahead of the Voice referendum, the High Court’s approach to Indigenous
plurality increasingly displayed a form of common law
constitutionalism
paralleling the commitments of democratic
constitutionalism.
internalisation of popular sovereignty, Justice French has noted, appeared to
authorise judges resorting to ‘“contemporary
community values”
to develop common law’.
If ‘the people’ were the authority underpinning the
Constitution
then it might be said that ‘community values’
should inform constitutional law. Popular sovereignty sees, thereby,
‘[s]tandards
and values ... being ascribed to the community and in turn
... being reflected back into the law
Brendan Lim saw Chief Justice Mason as expressing a judicial philosophy
favouring a ‘reflexive relationship between the concept
sovereignty and the phenomenon of judicial
lawmaking’.
perceived that an ‘evolving concept of the democratic process [in
Australia] is moving beyond an exclusive emphasis on
parliamentary supremacy and
majority will’,
openly acknowledged that judges make
Brennan J likewise saw
that contemporary values ‘justify judicial development of the
genius of the common law system’, states Brennan J, ‘consists in the
ability of the courts to mould the
law to correspond with the contemporary
values of society.’
This impulse animated his Honour’s judgment in
overruling the doctrine of terra nullius, he invoked ‘contemporary
values’ and ‘contemporary notions
of justice and human
imperative in today’s world’, his Honour said, ‘that the
common law should neither be nor be seen
to be frozen in an age of racial
discrimination’.
This method, and its conflict with a method predicated on a
‘unified’ people, arguably surfaced plainly in
Commonwealth
‘a battle for the identity of “the
, a bare majority of the High Court, comprising Bell, Nettle and
Gordon JJ, and Edelman J, writing separately, agreed that Aboriginal
Australians
could not be ‘aliens’ under
Constitution
Arcioni has argued that the majority judgments in
demonstrate a view
of ‘the people’ as ‘plural and diverse’, while the
dissent advanced ‘a unified conception
dominated by formal equality and
participation’.
minority, observes Arcioni, a distinct, Aboriginal constitutional status
contravened formal equality between subjects of
Kiefel CJ and
Keane J, two exponents of the ‘political sovereignty’ and
‘equality’ of the sovereign people,
maintained that the Australian
people were and are formally undifferentiated, saying ‘[f]rom the time of
British settlement
the legal status of Aboriginal persons in Australia —
as subjects of the Crown — has not been different from other
Australians’
is no ‘special class within the people of the
Commonwealth’.
minority suggested that recognition threatened the sovereignty of the Australian
state, as prohibited by
Their Honours also
advanced the supremacy of Parliament by, as Davenport describes, aligning
definition of ‘the people’
with the ‘broad legislative
discretion to control community membership [by]
citizenship’.
The majority, by contrast, conceived the constitutional people as
‘plural’, ‘capable of accommodating a distinct
identity of
First Nations people’.
This distinct place
‘the people’, said the majority,
was ‘directly contrary to accepting any notion of [external] Indigenous
sovereignty
persisting after the assertion of sovereignty by the British
‘fundamental reason’ for this recognition was the acceptance in
Australian law and society of the place of Aboriginal
peoples within the
Australian community.
meaning of ‘alien’, said Bell J, being responsive to ‘changes
in the national and international
was for the
Court, not merely Parliament, to
Edelman J most explicitly explained that Australian history has not
‘assimilated Aboriginal people within a unitary, homogenous
community that is defined almost entirely by legislative norms of
citizenship’.
Edelman J challenged the notion of formal equality and homogeneity endorsed
by the minority as inattentive to ‘the one thing
that is essential to real
community: difference’.
‘Political community’, says Edelman J, ‘is not a concept that
is wholly a creature of
legislation’.
the extent that such an approach might be said to be based upon a concern for
within the political community, it would involve a
misunderstanding of both equality and
community.’
Demands for
homogeneity in the capacities of the constitutional people
‘[misunderstand] the concept of equality before the
law. To treat
differences as though they were alike is not equality. It is a denial of
community.’
Though judicial resort to ‘community values’ need not necessarily
express pluralism, the jurisprudence surrounding Indigenous
constitutional status, particularly in
has given expression
to pluralist values and impulses by reference to plurality within the Australian
community. As Arcioni articulates,
the conflicting formulations of the
‘identity’ of ‘the people’ in
judicial commitments to particular constitutional
Yet further, these
conflicting judgments demonstrate how alternative constructions of the sovereign
people implicate genuinely and
significantly different approaches to a
constitutional practice, ostensibly founded on popular sovereignty. For the
minority Justices
, the role of ‘the people’ in
Australian constitutional law remains formalistic and their authority remains
abstracted.
The constructively unified people are sustained behind institutions:
defined by an equality which legitimates their engagement with
authoritative,
parliamentary democratic processes. For the majority Justices, however, the
forms of association they perceive within
the sovereign people are an
authoritative source of constitutional law. More than a mere figure, ‘the
people’ are, through
the mouths of the judicial elite, present and
operative in constitutional law.
Are We One? Or Are We Many? The Rejection of
In 2017, Prime Minister Turnbull refused the call from the
for a referendum on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice
to Parliament, saying:
Our democracy is built on the foundation of all Australian citizens having equal
civic rights — all being able to vote for,
stand for and serve in either
of the two chambers of our national Parliament ...
A constitutionally enshrined additional representative assembly which only
Indigenous Australians could vote for or serve in is inconsistent
fundamental principle.
It would inevitably become seen as a third chamber of
Parliament.
promising to recognise the plurality of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples, the Voice seemed poised to express, endorse
and legitimise novel
approaches to constitutional government and law. It appeared poised to provide
textual and institutional support
for deviations from the modern constitutional
orthodoxy predicated on a ‘unitary’ people. The Voice referendum
to the Australian people the same question which split the Court in
: Are the people ‘unified’ or plural for the purposes of
constitutional law? Beyond the legal and political elite, Australian
constitutional culture was surveyed. The Yes campaign saw in plurality a greater
‘fuller expression of Australia’s
nationhood’
adequate recognition of the distinctiveness of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Australians.
campaign raised as objections — in terms of the commitments of the modern
constitutional, ‘unified’ view
of ‘the people’ —
the integrity of the Australian state, the authority of Parliament, and the
equality of the
Fracturing the Unitary State
Suggestions of Aboriginal sovereignty resurfaced anxieties about the
integrity of the Australian state. The modern constitutional
formulation of a
necessary connection between a people and their unitary state emerged in both
the ‘progressive’ and
‘conservative’ No campaigns.
According to the progressive No campaign, which advocated for more significant
sovereign recognition, the passage of the Voice amendment threatened
to dissolve Aboriginal sovereignty by ceding it to the Australian
A conception of
Aboriginal sovereignty as necessarily unitary prohibited the co-existence of
that sovereignty with the Australian
constitutional order. For the conservative
No campaign, threats to the sovereignty of the Australian state arose in
suggestions that
a treaty between Aboriginal peoples and the Australian
Government would follow if the Voice proposal succeeded at referendum. As
No Pamphlet
states: ‘By definition, a treaty is an agreement
between governments, not between one group of citizens and its
government.’
reflects a loyalty to the unitary state model not entirely congruous with
current international practice, since ‘New Zealand
(Aotearoa), Canada,
Norway, Sweden, Finland, Japan, Greenland and the US have all negotiated
treaties with Indigenous
Circulating
misinformation also suggested that the success of the referendum would see land
ceded to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Australians as a result of the
referendum,
or that an ill-conceived ‘rent’ would have to be
These suggestions, encouraged by the
No Pamphlet
’s suggestion that
‘reparations and compensation and other radical changes’ may follow
underscored
anxieties about a fracturing of the stable authority of the Australian
Plurality of Authority
The No campaign similarly expressed concern that the Voice would dilute or
obstruct the authority of Parliament. The
No Pamphlet
foregrounded the
claim that the proposed amendment was ‘divisive and permanent’, and
warned that ‘[t]he High Court
would ultimately determine [the
Voice’s] powers, not the Parliament’ and so it ‘risks legal
challenges, delays
and dysfunctional
government’.
potential of the High Court, as interpreter of the
Constitution
authority through the Voice provisions contrary to the law-making supremacy of
Parliament was a core anxiety conveyed by
The fear that representations to the Voice would enable legal challenges to
government actions or that ‘activist judges’
might usurp the power
of the Voice to ‘interfere with the work of government’ remained a
‘genuine fear amongst
some Coalition MPs and constitutional
conservatives’ and circulated public
So too did the spectre of the Voice itself acting as an authority obstructing
the law-making supremacy of Parliament. This characterisation,
captured in
Turnbull’s infamous label, a ‘third chamber of
parliament’,
in the public discourse, despite inconsistency with the provisions
themselves.
The suggestion
that the Voice represented ‘a parallel system of representative government
also remained a persistent claim in No campaign media throughout the debate.
These arguments appeared influential with voters. For
32% of respondents to a
poll conducted shortly after the referendum, the top three reasons for voting No
included that the Voice
proposal would give Aboriginal people ‘too much
Inequality of Peoples
Perhaps the central claim of the No campaign was that the Voice
‘divides us’.
No Pamphlet
stated that ‘[t]his goes against a key principle of our
democratic system, that all Australians are equal before the law’,
‘[t]his Voice will not unite us; it will divide us by
The Pamphlet
claimed the proposal would ‘create different classes of citizenship’
and ‘[enshrine] a Voice in the
Constitution
for only one group of
Australians’:
Constitution
belongs to all Australians. Our Parliament is there to
represent all Australians. ... Our national anthem was recently changed to
reflect the fact that we are ‘one and free’. By contrast, this Voice
would permanently divide Australians, in law and
campaign depicted the Voice as a deviation from a principle of equality within
Constitution
. The primary organisation of the No campaign,
Australians For Unity, presented as its primary message: ‘The Voice will
Australians by race and completely change our
democracy.’
Australians are equal’, stated a typical opinion piece by the Institute of
Public Affairs: ‘The legal status
of Australians should not be decided
according to their skin colour or race. ... Our nation’s founding document
divide us’.
It further stated: ‘The universality of the Australian constitution
[should not] be compromised’ and ‘the concerns
and needs of
Indigenous Australians are fundamentally [not] different to that of
non-Indigenous
Australians’.
beyond constructive equality among ‘the people’, 32% of voters
polled stated that Indigenous and non-Indigenous
Australians faced the same
levels of discrimination.
Drawing explicitly on modern constitutional thinkers, the non-aligned Rule of
Law Education Centre accused the proposal of being
‘the antithesis of the
principle[s] espoused by American revolutionaries ... who considered it
self-evident that we are all
created equal. Revolutionary France ... embraced
this idea’.
suggestions of inequality reverberated strongly among No voters. According to
polling shortly after the referendum, 82% of
respondent No voters listed that
the Voice would ‘divide Australia’ in their top three reasons for
voting as they did.
of respondents it was the primary
This article has aimed to show that two conceptions of Australia’s
sovereign people persist in Australian constitutional culture
distinct, competing modes of constitutional practice, and that the tension
between these conceptions was animated in the
arguments surrounding, and outcome
of, the Voice referendum. Drawing on the scholarship of Tully who articulates
the tendency of
contemporary Western constitutional culture towards a uniformity
which supports abstraction and suppresses cultural diversity, this
article has
sought to demonstrate the significance of the competing pictures of the
sovereign people in Australian constitutional
culture — visions which
wrestled in the Voice debate and will do so again as Australia continues to
negotiate questions of
cultural and political diversity.
The reasons for the defeat of the Voice referendum are, of course, complex
and irreducible. It is commonly observed that misinformation
and disinformation
ran rampant, while critics have said that the messaging of the Yes campaign
struggled to cut through.
referendum in Australian history has passed without bipartisan support. Yet, the
commitments to a ‘unified’ people
exhibited by the No campaign
reveal the influence of a deeper ambiguity concerning the nature of popular
sovereignty as a Grundnorm
Constitution
spectre of deviation from orthodox constitutional modes, predicated on a
constructive ‘unity’ of ‘the people’,
inflamed anxieties
inherited from a modern constitutional tradition which, incorporated into the
rhetoric of the No campaign, informed
a rejection of the proposal in terms of
inherited values of the unitary state, parliamentary supremacy and equality.
The lens of these competing conceptions of ‘the people’
highlights the significance of Australian constitutional culture
historical inheritances to the development of Australian constitutional law. By
providing for intervention by the Australian
people in decisions about the shape
and values of the
Constitution
, referendums under
invite analysis
of the culturally and historically specific normative imaginary. Even the
debates and practices of judges and politicians
reflect the life of ideas
operating in wider society, especially where those elites claim to speak for
that community. As Australian
constitutional scholarship takes more seriously
the normative foundation of popular sovereignty, it is necessary to interrogate
often-unspoken assumptions and constructions that, underlying that concept,
direct and shape constitutional practice.
In this vein, while the defeat of the referendum represents a regrettable
failure to institutionalise culturally diverse popular sovereignty,
it does not
represent the triumph of a ‘unified’ view. Indigenous sovereign
difference survives the referendum. Australian
federalism remains in tension
with ideals of national formal unity. Both ‘unified’ and plural
views, and the approaches
to constitutional practice they engender, have roots
in constitutional text and history. Rather, the referendum re-enacts the paradox
at the centre of constitutional theory founded on popular sovereignty —
what Hobbes called the ‘double signification’
people’ — simultaneously a collective and a
sovereignty in its relationship to constitutional theory continues to contend
with this paradox. But, as the jurisprudence
of Aboriginal rights and federalism
illustrate, the negotiation of these two, apparently contradictory aspects of
‘the people’
can produce new law responsive to changing societal
demands. It remains a potent source of law that, constitutionally and
culturally,
Please cite this article as:
David Moignard Ferrell, ‘“We Are One, But We Are Many”:
Conceptions of Australia’s Sovereign People and the
Proposed Voice to
Parliament’
[2024] SydLawRw 22
(2024) 46(4)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20927
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
 Tipstaff, New South Wales Court of Appeal; BA/LLB (Hons I)
. Email: david.ferrell@anu.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0009-0004-2258-9829. A version of this article was
presented to the
Australian National University’s LLB Supervised Research
Paper course. Thank you to my supervisor, Professor Ron Levy, as well
Associate Professor Ryan Goss, Professor Desmond Manderson, Senior Lecturer
Kieran Pender, Associate Professor Joshua Neoh, Dr
James Willoughby, Professor
Robyn Ferrell, Professor Rosalyn Diprose, Georgia Crocker, and the Editors and
anonymous reviewers of
Sydney Law Review
Australian Capital
Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106
’) 137–8 (Mason CJ).
George Winterton,
‘Popular Sovereignty and Constitutional Continuity’
[1998] FedLawRw 1
(1998) 26(1)
Federal Law Review
Sarah Murray, ‘“The
People” as a Source of Constitutional Principle: The Australian
Constitution
and the Contours of Representative Government’ (2017) 29
(Special Issue)
Singapore Academy of Law Journal
James Tully,
Multiplicity: Constitutionalism in an Age of Diversity
(Cambridge University
Press, 1995).
Winterton (n
) 4. See also Benjamin B Saunders and
Simon P Kennedy, ‘Popular Sovereignty,
“The People” and the Australian
Constitution
: A Historical
Reassessment’
(2019) 30(1)
Public Law Review
Winterton (n
George Duke and Carlo Dellora,
‘Constituent Power and the
Commonwealth
Constitution
A Preliminary Investigation’
[2022] SydLawRw 9
(2022) 44(2)
Sydney Law Review
Jason Mazzone, ‘The
Creation of a Constitutional Culture’
(2005) 40(4)
Tulsa Law Review
Ibid 685–96.
See Elisa Arcioni,
‘Competing Visions of “The People” in Australia: First Nations
and the State’ (2023) 1(1)
Comparative Constitutional Studies
(‘Competing Visions’).
Gabrielle Appleby, Ron Levy
and Helen Whalan, ‘Voice versus Rights: The First Nations Voice and the
Australian Constitutional
Legitimacy Crisis’
[2023] UNSWLawJl 25
(2023) 46(3)
Kenneth Roberts-Wray,
Commonwealth and Colonial Law
(Stevens & Sons, 1966) 631. See also
Henry Reynolds,
Truth-Telling: History, Sovereignty and the Uluru Statement
(NewSouth Publishing, 2021) 24.
A Treatise on
International Law
, ed A Pierce Higgins
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2001 reprint of 1924) 129–30.
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, 33–8 (Brennan J) (‘
Worcester v Georgia
[1832] USSC 39
(1832) 543–4 (Marshall
Reynolds (n
R v Ballard
[1829] NSWSupC 26.
[1841] NSWSupC 92
Kercher, ‘Recognition of Indigenous Legal Autonomy in Nineteenth Century
New South Wales’
[1998] IndigLawB 54
(1998) 4(13)
Indigenous Law Bulletin
Wilson v Terry
1 Legge 505
, 508 (Stephen CJ).
Cooper v Stuart
[1889] UKLawRpAC 7
(1889) 14 App Cas 286
, 291 (Lord Watson).
Reynolds (n
) 85–6. See also Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 12 September 1901,
4806–7 (Alfred Deakin, Attorney-General).
See Paul Muldoon and Andrew
Schaap, ‘Aboriginal Sovereignty and the Politics of Reconciliation: The
Constituent Power of the
Aboriginal Embassy in Australia’ (2012) 30(3)
Environment and Planning D
Michael Dodson,
‘Sovereignty’
, 18. See also Reynolds
Muldoon and Schaap (n
See Ron Levy, Ian
O’Flynn and Hoi L Kong,
Deliberative Peace Referendums
University Press, 2021) ch 5; Appleby, Levy and Whalan (n
Arcioni, ‘Competing
Visions’ (n
See Sean Brennan and Megan
Davis, ‘First Peoples’ in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne Stone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University
Press, 2018) 27, 47; Shireen Morris, ‘
in the High Court:
Implications for Indigenous Constitutional Recognition’
(2021) 49(3)
Federal Law Review
George Williams, Sean
Brennan and Andrew Lynch,
Blackshield and Williams Australian Constitutional
Law and Theory: Commentary and Materials
(Federation Press, 7
ed, 2018) 137 [4.15]. See also Reynolds (n
Constitution
Elections Act 1885
Commonwealth Franchise
Williams, Brennan and Lynch
) 136 [4.11].
Muldoon and Schaap (n
) 547. See Desmond Manderson, ‘Not
Yet: Aboriginal People and the Deferral of the Rule of Law’
(2008) 29/30
Arena Journal
Arcioni, ‘Competing
Visions’ (n
Joint Select Committee on
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice Referendum, Parliament of
Advisory Report on the
Constitution
Alteration (Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023
(Report, May 2023) 12 [2.14]
Voice Advisory Report
Brennan and Davis (n
Ibid 58. See also at
99–100 (Deane and Gaudron JJ).
Ibid 29 (Brennan J).
Commonwealth
[1993] HCA 42
(1993) 68 ALJR 110
Uluru Statement from the
(Statement, First Nations National Constitutional Convention,
26 May 2017) (‘
Uluru Statement
Calla Wahlquist,
‘Indigenous Voice Proposal “Not Desirable”, Says
The Guardian
(online, 26 October 2017)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/oct/26/indigenous-voice-proposal-not-desirable-says-turnbull>.
Josh Butler,
‘Indigenous Voice to Parliament: Australia Rejects Constitutional Change
as Albanese Says Vote “Not End
of the Road”’,
(online, 14 October 2023)
<https://www.‌theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/oct/14/australian-voters-reject-proposal-for-indigenous-voice-to-parliament-at-historic-referendum>.
Voice Advisory Report
See ibid 17–28
[3.3]–[3.42].
Ibid 11 [2.9].
Explanatory Memorandum,
Constitution
Alteration (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023
(Cth) 2. See also at 10 [7].
Ibid 2. See also at
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 30 March 2023, 2702
(Mark Dreyfus, Attorney-General).
Nicholas Aroney and Peter
Gerangelos, Submission No 92 to Joint Select Committee on the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Voice
Referendum,
Inquiry into the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Voice Referendum
(2023) 2 [5], [6].
Aroney and Gerangelos (n
) 3 [10]. See also Mark McKenna, Amelia
Simpson and George Williams, ‘First Words: The Preamble to the
Constitution
[2001] UNSWLawJl 28
(2001) 24(2)
UNSW Law Journal
Nicholas Aroney,
‘First Peoples and the People of the Australian Commonwealth’
(Conference Paper, Queensland Supreme
Court and District Court Judges
Conference, 14 August 2023) 2–3 (‘First Peoples’).
Ibid 4. See also Aroney and
Gerangelos (n
) 3–4 [10].
Wong v Commonwealth
(2009) 236 CLR 573
Constitution
(Social Services) 1946
) 587–91 (French CJ and Gummow J),
623–5 (Hayne, Crennan, and Kiefel JJ),
649–51 (Heydon J). Cf at 604 (Kirby J).
Kartinyeri v
Commonwealth
(1998) 195 CLR 337, 358 (Brennan CJ and McHugh J), 361–3
(Gaudron J), 382–3 (Gummow and Hayne JJ), 406–7, 413 (Kirby
Australian Electoral
Commission,
Your Official Referendum Booklet
(2023) 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18
Yes Pamphlet
’). See also Lorena Allam, Josh Butler, Nick
Evershed and Andy Ball, ‘The Yes Pamphlet: Campaign’s Voice to
Referendum Essay — Annotated and Factchecked’,
(online, 20 July 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2023/‌jul/20/the-vote-yes-pamphlet-referendum-voice-to-parliament-voting-essay-aec-published-read-in-full-annotated-fact-checked>
Yes Pamphlet Factchecked
See above n
and accompanying text.
Law Council of Australia,
Submission No 91 to Joint Select Committee on the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice Referendum,
Parliament of Australia,
Advisory Report on the
Constitution
Alteration (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023
(21 April 2023) 12, quoted in
Voice Advisory Report
) 13 [2.17].
Voice Advisory Report
) 85 [1.2].
) 31–4 (Brennan J);
) 114–15 (Mason CJ).
Sean Brennan, Brenda Gunn
and George Williams, ‘“Sovereignty” and Its Relevance to
Treaty-Making between Indigenous
Peoples and Australian Governments’
[2004] SydLawRw 15
(2004) 26(3)
Sydney Law Review
Larissa Behrendt,
Achieving Social Justice: Indigenous Rights and Australia’s Future
(Federation Press, 2003) 99. See further Asmi Wood,
‘Self-Determination under International Law and Some Possibilities for
Australia’s
Indigenous Peoples’ in Laura Rademaker and Tim Rowse
Indigenous Self-Determination in Australia
(ANU Press, 2020) 269,
‘In recognition of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of
Australia’.
Aroney, ‘First Peoples
) 6–8. See also Aroney and
Gerangelos (n
Yes Pamphlet
Law Council of Australia (n
) 7, quoted in
Voice Advisory
) 12 [2.16].
Voice Advisory
) 85 [1.2].
See ibid 11–13
[2.10]–[2.17].
See especially ibid ch
David T ButleRitchie,
‘The Confines of Modern Constitutionalism’
(2004) 3(1)
Ibid 41–2. See also at
67. Tully does not suggest that this widely drawn collection of temporally
aligned ‘modern constitutional’
thinkers, including
‘Paine’s contemporaries, especially Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Adam
Smith, Immanuel Kant, Benjamin Constant
and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, as
well as several of his predecessors, such as John Locke and Thomas Hobbes’
(at 42) are
entirely monolithic in their advancement of a unitary sovereign
people. Rather, he sees these strains of modern constitutional theory
‘elbowed aside entire areas of the broader language of constitutionalism
— such as the common law, earlier
varieties of whiggism and civic humanism
— which provide the means of recognising and accommodating cultural
(at 37) and that ‘[d]espite the dominant trend to
uniformity, subordinate areas of constitutional theory and practice have
open to the recognition and accommodation of different cultures’ (at 31).
Consequently, as will be articulated in
, expressing pluralism does not
necessarily involve inventing whole new ways of thinking, but rather
‘recover[ing] and reconstruct[ing]’
those strains of ‘common
law’ and constitutionalism which allowed ‘intercultural negotiations
on just forms of
constitutional association’ (at 31).
Daniel Lee,
Sovereignty in Early Modern Constitutional Thought
(Oxford University Press,
2016) 1. See also Tully (n
ButleRitchie (n
) 1. See also at 7.
) 66. See also at 67.
Ibid ch 3, 64–7.
ButleRitchie (n
) 29. See also Tully (n
See especially Tully (n
Levy, O’Flynn and Kong
) 7 (emphasis in original). See also
Thomas Hobbes,
, ed David Johnston (Norton, 2
ed, 2020) 118. See
also Tully (n
Colón-Ríos,
Constituent Power and the Law
University Press, 2020) 29; Murray Forsyth, ‘Hobbes’s
Contractarianism: A Comparative Analysis’ in David
Boucher and Paul Kelly
The Social Contract from Hobbes to Rawls
(Routledge, 2004) 39,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
The Social Contract
, tr Jonathan Bennett (Early Modern Texts, 2017) 7.
See also Forsyth (n
Rousseau (n
Jeremy Jennings,
‘Rousseau, Social Contract and the Modern Leviathan’ in David
Boucher and Paul Kelly (eds),
The Social Contract from Hobbes to Rawls
(Routledge, 2004) 117, 118.
Rousseau (n
ButleRitchie (n
See Saunders and Kennedy
Introduction
to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
, ed Roger Michener (Liberty
ed, 1982) 27.
Walter Bagehot,
Constitution
(Chapman & Hall, 1867) 164, 270, cited in Saunders
and Kennedy (n
) 38. See further Tully (n
Kinch Hoekstra,
‘Hobbesian Equality’ in SA Lloyd (ed),
Hobbes Today: Insights for
the 21st Century
(Cambridge University Press, 2012) 76.
Ibid 99–100.
Ibid 102 (citations
John Stuart Mill,
Considerations on Representative Government
Geraint Williams,
Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Considerations on Representative Government
(Dent, 1996) 223.
Ibid 226. See also
Saunders and Kennedy (n
Rivka Weill, ‘Dicey
Was Not Diceyan’
(2003) 62(2)
Cambridge Law Journal
Ibid 69. See also
Ibid 82. See also at
James Stellios,
and Stellios’s The High Court and the
Constitution
(Federation Press,
ed, 2022) 594 (‘
The High Court and the
Constitution
Saunders and Kennedy (n
) 37; William Partlett,
‘Remembering Australian Constituent Power’
[2023] MelbULawRw 13
(2023) 46(3)
University Law Review
) 137–8 (citations omitted).
Brendan Lim,
Australia’s Constitution After Whitlam
(Cambridge University Press,
2017) 135–41.
Winterton (n
Justice Patrick Keane,
‘The People and the
Constitution
[2016] MonashULawRw 18
(2016) 42(3)
University Law Review
, 538 (‘The People and the
Constitution
’); Arcioni, ‘Competing Visions’ (n
Saunders and Kennedy (n
John Quick and Robert
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
(Australian Book Company, 1901) 286; McKenna, Simpson and Williams (n
Quick and Garran (n
Winterton (n
Trischa Mann (ed),
Australian Law Dictionary
(Oxford University Press, 2
2015) ‘Grundnorm’.
Court and the Constitution
) 137–8 (Mason CJ);
Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
(1996) 186 CLR 140
, 230 (McHugh J)
See Partlett (n
See Winterton (n
) 137–8 (Mason CJ).
Roach v Electoral
Commissioner
(2007) 233 CLR 162
Rowe v Electoral
Commissioner
[2016] FCA 1081
(2010) 243 CLR 1
) 173 (Gleeson CJ);
) 18 (French CJ).
) 199 (Gummow, Kirby and Crennan JJ).
(Gleeson CJ);
58 (Gummow and Bell JJ), 119 (Crennan J), 75 (Hayne J, dissenting). See also
) 896; Elisa Arcioni,
‘The Core of the Australian Constitutional People: “The
People” as “The Electors”’
[2016] UNSWLawJl 16
(2016) 39(1)
) 137–8 (Mason CJ);
) 230 (McHugh
See ibid 79–83.
Leslie Zines, ‘A
Judicially Created Bill of Rights’
[1994] SydLawRw 14
(1994) 16(2)
Sydney Law Review
Leslie Zines,
Court and the
Constitution
(Federation Press, 5
ed, 2008) 565.
See further Stellios,
The High Court and the Constitution
) 600; Ryan Goss, ‘What Do
Australians Talk about when They Talk about “Parliamentary
Sovereignty”?’
Unions NSW v New South
(2013) 252 CLR 530 (‘
Unions NSW No 1
’). See further
The High Court and the Constitution
Unions NSW No 1
) 548 [17] (French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ). See also at 571 [104] (Keane J).
McCloy v New South
[2015] HCA 34
(2015) 257 CLR 178
, 207 [45] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ)
Unions NSW No
) 571 (Keane J);
v New South Wales
[2014] HCA 35
(2014) 254 CLR 508
, 593 [196]–[197], 601 [225], 604
[236] (Keane J);
ibid 207 [45] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane
JJ), 257 [216] (Nettle J);
Brown v Tasmania
(2017) 261 CLR 328, 359 [88]
(Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ);
Clubb v Edwards
[2019] HCA 11
(2019) 267 CLR 171
[51] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ);
Unions NSW v New South Wales
[2019] HCA 1
264 CLR 595
, 614 [40] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ) (‘
Unions NSW No
) 257 [216] (Nettle J) (citations
Partlett (n
Court and the Constitution
W Harrison Moore,
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia
(John Murray, 1902) 329.
) 207 [45] (citations omitted). See
also at 226 [110]–[111] (Gageler J), 258 [219], 273–4 [271] (Nettle
Ibid 274 [271] (Nettle
Will Bateman, Dan Meagher
and Amelia Simpson,
Hanks Australian Constitutional Law: Materials and
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 11
ed, 2021) 1238
Unions NSW No 2
) 614 [40] (Kiefel CJ, Bell and
LibertyWorks Inc v Commonwealth
[2021] HCA 18
(2021) 274 CLR 1
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ).
Joo-Cheong Tham,
‘Political Equality as a Constitutional Principle: Cautionary Lessons from
McCloy v New South Wales
’ in Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 151, 160 (citations
Keane, ‘The People
and the Constitution’ (n
But see Tham (n
Keane, ‘The People
and the Constitution’ (n
533, 539. See also PA Keane, ‘In Celebration of the
Constitution
(Speech, Banco Court, Brisbane, 12 June 2008)
http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/ ‌ journals/QldJSchol/2008/64.html
(‘In Celebration of the
Constitution
Keane, ‘The People
and the Constitution’ (n
Celebration of the Constitution’ (n
Nicholas Aroney,
Constitution
of a Federal Commonwealth: The Making and Meaning of the Australian
Constitution
(Cambridge University Press, 2009) 1 (‘
Constitution
a Federal Commonwealth
But see generally
Tully’s discussion of American federalism and ‘diverse’
federalism: Tully (n
James Bryce,
American Commonwealth
(Macmillan, 2
ed, 1889) vol 1, 14. See
Constitution
of a Federal Commonwealth
) 34–5. See further Peter C
Oliver, ‘Parliamentary Sovereignty, Federalism and the Commonwealth’
in Robert Schütze
and Stephen Tierney (eds),
The United Kingdom and the Federal Idea
(Hart Publishing, 2018) 49,
58. See also Stephen Gageler, ‘James Bryce and the Australian
Constitution
’ (2015) 43(2)
Federal Law Review
177, 185; Partlett (n
Nicholas Aroney,
‘Constituent Power and the Constituent States: Towards a Theory of the
Amendment of Federal Constitutions’
Jus Politicum
Elisa Arcioni, ‘The
Peoples of the States under the Australian
Constitution
[2022] MelbULawRw 12
(2022) 45(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
, 867 (‘Peoples of the
Constitution
; Arcioni, ‘Peoples of the States’ (n
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 18 March 1902, 10967
(Alfred Deakin, Attorney-General).
R v Kirby; Ex parte
Boilermakers’ Society of Australia
[1956] HCA 10
(1956) 94 CLR 254
(Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Fullagar and Kitto JJ);
Forge v Australian Securities
and Investments Commission
[2006] HCA 44
(2006) 228 CLR 45
, 73 [56] (Gummow, Hayne and
Crennan JJ).
James Stellios,
Federal Judicature: Chapter III of the
Constitution
(LexisNexis,
ed, 2020) 376 [7.27].
See further Arcioni,
‘Peoples of the States’ (n
Street v Queensland
Bar Association
[1989] HCA 53
(1989) 168 CLR 461.
Constitution
A-G (NSW) ex rel
McKellar v Commonwealth
(1977) 139 CLR 527, 532–3 (Barwick J), 542
(Gibbs J), 561–3 (Stephen J, Mason J agreeing at 562–3),
(Jacobs J), 568–9 (Murphy J), 582 (Aickin J)
A-G (Cth) ex rel
McKinlay v Commonwealth
[1975] HCA 53
(1975) 135 CLR 1
Court and the Constitution
596–7 (discussing
Ibid 237–8.
Court and the Constitution
Commonwealth
[1971] HCA 16
(1971) 122 CLR 353
, 396 (Windeyer J) (‘
Payroll Tax
Ron Levy and Hoi Kong,
‘Introduction: Fusion and Creation’ in Ron Levy, Hoi Kong, Graeme
Orr and Jeff King (eds),
The Cambridge Handbook of Deliberative
Constitutionalism
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 1, 1.
Hoi L Kong and Ron Levy,
‘Deliberative Constitutionalism’ in Andre Bächtiger, John S
Dryzek, Jane Mansbridge and
Mark E Warren (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of
Deliberative Democracy
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 625, 634.
Robyn Hollander and Haig
Patapan, ‘Deliberative Federalism’ in Ron Levy, Hoi Kong, Graeme Orr
and Jeff King (eds),
The Cambridge Handbook of Deliberative Constitutionalism
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 101, 102. See also Kong and Levy (n
Appleby, Levy and Whalan
) 764. But see especially Asmi
Wood, ‘Critique of “Voice versus Rights”’ [2023]
Law Journal Forum
5:1–17, in particular Wood’s criticism of this
projection onto the Voice as presuming the function of the Voice while
was still ‘in train’ (at 3), overreaching the ‘meaning in
Constitution
Alteration Act
(at 6) and, centrally,
assuming a non-Indigenous perspective in approaches to questions of Indigenous
sovereignty and self-determination
(at 13). Wood acknowledges the Voice’s
‘recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples [as]
giv[ing] form to the Indigenous body-politic referred to by the
majority in
Love v Commonwealth
’ (at 3–4). See also
15–16. However,
he retorts that ‘[c]onstitutional legitimacy
not really an issue for most Indigenous people
’ (at 7, emphasis
in original). ‘[N]on-Indigenous peoples should avoid addressing these
deficiencies [in colonial legitimacy]
through the Voice or other Indigenous
attempts for some form of redress’ and instead allow Indigenous voices on
issues of Indigenous
sovereignty and self-determination to set their own agenda
Appleby, Levy and Whalan
Kong and Levy (n
Ibid 21 (citations
Kong and Levy (n
ButleRitchie (n
Michael Simpson,
‘“Other Worlds Are Actual”: Tully on the Imperial Roles of
Modern Constitutional Democracy’
(2008) 46(3)
Osgoode Hall Law
See further ibid
Robert French, ‘The
Constitution
and the People’
[2001] FedJSchol 7
<https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/FedJSchol/2001/7.html>.
See also Robert French, ‘Law Making in
Representative Democracy: The
Durability of Enduring Values’ (2017) 19(1)
Flinders Law Journal
PD Finn, ‘A
Sovereign People, A Public Trust’ in Paul Finn (ed),
Essays on Law and
Government: Volume 1 — Principles and Values
(Law Book Co, 1995) 1,
Ibid 169, quoting Anthony
Mason, ‘Future Directions in Australian Law’
[1987] MonashULawRw 6
(1987) 13(3)
University Law Review
) 170, quoting Sir Anthony Mason,
The Mason Papers: Selected Articles and Speeches by Sir Anthony Mason
Geoffrey Lindell (Federation Press, 2007) 398, 405. See also John Braithwaite,
‘Community Values and Australian Jurisprudence’
[1995] SydLawRw 21
(1995) 17(3)
Sydney Law Review
Dietrich v The Queen
[1992] HCA 57
(1992) 177 CLR 292
Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152
Arcioni, ‘Competing
Visions’ (n
Ibid 95–6. See also
) 172 [9] (Kiefel CJ).
Ibid 221 [178] (Keane J).
See further at 221–3 [176]–[182] (Keane J).
See ibid 172–3
[9]–[10], 176177 [25] (Kiefel CJ), 196–8 [91]–[94],
200–01 [102]–[103] (Gageler
J), 226–228 [197],
[199]–[205] (Keane J).
Mischa Davenport,
Love v Commonwealth
Section 51(xix)
Aliens Power and a
Constitutional Concept of Community Membership’
[2021] SydLawRw 25
(2021) 43(4)
, 590. See also
Alexander v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 19
(2022) 96 ALJR 560
, 574 [43]–[44] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson
Arcioni, ‘Competing
Visions’ (n
) 76. See also
) 426; Wood (n
) 278–9 [356] (Gordon J).
Ibid 183 (Bell J), 272
[335], 278 [355], 279–80 [360] (Gordon J), 252–4 [269]–[272]
(Nettle J), 289 [396] (Edelman
Ibid 189 [69].
Ibid 187 [64].
Ibid 315 [453].
Ibid 289 [396].
Ibid 321 [466].
Ibid 320–1 [467]
(emphasis added).
Ibid 315 [453].
Arcioni, ‘Competing
Visions’ (n
Malcolm Turnbull,
‘Response to Referendum Council’s Report on Constitutional
Recognition’ (Media Release 41263,
Department of Prime Minister and
Cabinet, 26 October 2017) (‘Response to Referendum Council’)
<https://pmtranscripts.pmc.gov.au/release/transcript-41263>.
Malcolm Turnbull, ‘I Will Be Voting Yes to Establish an Indigenous Voice
to Parliament’,
Malcolm Turnbull
(Web Page, 16 August 2022)
<https://www.malcolmturnbull.com.au/media/i-will-be-voting-yes-to-establish-an-indigenous-voice-to-parliament>
(‘I Will Be Voting Yes’).
Yes Pamphlet
Uluru Statement
Yes Pamphlet
Australian Electoral
Commission,
Your Official Referendum Booklet
(2023) 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19
No Pamphlet
’); Lorena Allam, Josh Butler, Nick Evershed and
Andy Ball, ‘The No Pamphlet: Campaign’s Voice to Parliament
Essay — Annotated and Factchecked’,
The Guardian
(online, 20 July 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2023/jul/20/the-vote-no-pamphlet-referendum-voice-to-parliament-voting-essay-aec-published-read-in-full-annotated-fact-checked>
No Pamphlet Factchecked
Paul Karp, ‘Why a
Voice to Parliament Won’t Affect First Nations Sovereignty as Lidia Thorpe
The Guardian
(online, 26 January 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/‌jan/26/will-indigenous-voice-to-parliament-impact-first-nations-sovereignty-explainer>.
No Pamphlet
No Pamphlet
Factchecked
Kirstie Wellauer, Carly
Williams and Bridget Brennan, ‘Why the Voice Failed’,
(online, 16 October 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-10-16/why-the-voice-failed/102978962>.
RMIT ABC Fact Check,
‘Secret Agendas, Context-Free Claims and Mistaken Identities: These Are
the Key Themes in Voice to Parliament
Misinformation’,
29 September 2023)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-09-29/fact-check-voice-to-parliament-misinformation/102913680>.
No Pamphlet
Sonam Thomas, ‘The
Voice and the High Court Challenge: Analysis of a Misrepresented Legal
RMIT University
(online, 13 June 2023)
<https://www.rmit.edu.au/news/crosscheck/the-voice-and-the-high-court-challenge>.
Turnbull, ‘Response
to Referendum Council’ (n
Wahlquist (n
). But see Turnbull,
‘I Will Be Voting Yes’ (n
); RMIT ABC Fact Check (n
Morgan Begg and Daniel
Wild, ‘Indigenous Voice Counterpoint: A Violation of Racial
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 6 June 2019)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/indigenous-voice-counterpoint-a-violation-of-racial-equality-20190603-p51u3u.html>.
Rafqa Touma,
‘People Who Watched Sky News More Likely to Have Voted No in Referendum,
Survey Finds’,
The Guardian
(online, 16 October 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/oct/16/people-who-watch-sky-news-more-likely-to-vote-no-survey-of-voting-behaviour-finds>.
No Pamphlet
Australians for Unity,
(Website, 25 July 2023)
<https://webarchive.nla.gov.au/awa/‌20230725035824/https://australiansforunity.com.au>.
Begg and Wild (n
Referendum; The Argument for Voting No’,
Rule of Law Education Centre
(Web Page, 2023)
<https://www.ruleoflaw.org.au/voice-the-case-for-voting-no/>.
See, eg, Wellauer,
Williams and Brennan (n
Thomas Hobbes,
Elements of Law: Natural and Politic
, ed Ferdinand Tönnies (Routledge,
ed, 2018) 124. See further Hobbes (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (317 KB)
PDF format (543 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter