URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Salomon, Michelle --- "Testing the bounds of secrecy: a better approach to protecting government information from unauthorised disclosures" [2009] ALRCRefJl 43; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 51
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 51–54 of the original
Testing the bounds of secrecy
A better approach to protecting government information from unauthorised
disclosures
By Michelle Salomon*
The government collects and produces vast amounts of information, much of
it highly sensitive.
In some instances, we rely on public servants to keep information
secret—in others, we want them to share, or publish, information
other public interests. When public servants have to make judgment calls, they
should be able to turn to the law for certainty
as to whether a disclosure will
be applauded or criminalised.
In an increasingly interconnected world, it is critical that Commonwealth
information that does not belong in the public domain remains
confidential. However, there also should be compelling efforts to ensure that
government is transparent and accountable.
Australia is striving to achieve the
proper balance.
The Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) is currently conducting an
inquiry into federal secrecy laws. This article will highlight
one feature of
the ALRC’s proposals by examining the prosecutions of three past cases
under s 70 of the
Crimes Act 1914
The actual outcome of
the prosecutions will be contrasted with what their outcome might be,
hypothetically, had the offences been
prosecuted under the ALRC’s proposed
new offence: had the prosecution been required to prove harm to a specified
public interest.
Although it is not a present requirement for the prosecution to
prove harm, the issue of harm is frequently discussed in sentencing
The ALRC’s Secrecy Review
The Australian Attorney-General, the Hon Robert McClelland MP, has asked the
ALRC to review federal secrecy laws in Australia, thereby
marking the fourth of
a series of ALRC inquiries into the laws surrounding secrecy, privacy and
freedom of information.
2009, the ALRC released a Discussion Paper containing proposals aimed at setting
out directions for reform.
will submit a final report with its recommendations to the Attorney-General on
11 December 2009.
Secrecy laws regulate the disclosure of government information. There are
roughly 500 secrecy provisions scattered throughout Commonwealth
legislation—about 70% of these expressly attach criminal liability for
breach, while the remainder establish a duty not to
disclose certain
information. However, where such provisions regulate Commonwealth officers, a
breach of a duty not to disclose may
attract a criminal penalty under s 70 of
, harm is neither an express
nor an implied element of the offence that the prosecution must prove.
To address the lack of clarity, certainty and consistency surrounding secrecy
provisions, the ALRC has made a preliminary proposal
to repeal s 70 of the
and create a general secrecy offence in the
(Cth). Under that proposal, criminal penalties would only be imposed
when the prosecution can prove that a nexus exists between the
unauthorised
disclosure and harm to identified public interests. Disclosures lacking any
likely, intended or actual harm would normally
be addressed by administrative
Criminalising disclosure
Under the ALRC proposals, criminal liability would only be imposed where the
prosecution can prove that the disclosure did, was reasonably
likely to, or
intended to:
• harm the national security, defence or international relations of the
Commonwealth;
• prejudice the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution or
punishment of criminal offences, breaches of a law imposing
a penalty or
sanction, the enforcement of laws relating to the confiscation of the proceeds
of crime, or the protection of the public
• endanger the life or physical safety of any person;
• pose a serious threat to public health or public safety;
• have a substantial adverse effect on personal privacy; or
• have a substantial adverse effect on a person in respect of his or
her lawful business or professional affairs or on the business,
commercial or
financial affairs of an
organisation.
The ALRC has formed the preliminary view that other kinds of harm such as
harm to the effective working of government or harm to internal
processes are more appropriately protected by administrative processes.
Testing the bounds of secrecy: Three case snapshot
[1] R v Goreng
Ms Tjanara Goreng Goreng was a Commonwealth officer with the Office of
Indigenous Policy Coordination. Ms Goreng Goreng was found
to have intentionally
disclosed information she obtained through her employment on several
A. Without authorisation, Ms Goreng Goreng emailed copies of work-related
documents to her daughter, who was working on a school project
Indigenous peoples. Two of the documents shared were already in the public
domain, but the third was marked confidential.
B. Ms Goreng Goreng also disclosed four internal work emails that had been
written by or sent to her supervisor. The emails discussed
government plans to
address alleged human rights violations taking place in the Mutitjulu Aboriginal
community, including child prostitution,
sexual abuse and
pornography.
Ms Goreng Goreng
forwarded the emails to her friend, Ms Dorothea Randall, a finance officer and
well-known member of the Mutitjulu
community. In some of the emails, Ms Goreng
Goreng made negative remarks about her supervisor’s professionalism, his
and the Department’s policy.
C. Ms Goreng Goreng was also charged with disclosing the details of a
confidential meeting she attended, where a Mutitjulu youth worker
allegations of financial mismanagement against Ms Randall. This charge was not
proved because the jury could not agree on
Outcome under current secrecy framework
The jury found Ms Goreng Goreng guilty of five counts of breaching s 70 of
The Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory
ordered that Ms Goreng Goreng pay $2,000, subject to a three-year good behaviour
bond. In sentencing, the court recognised that while the unauthorised
disclosures did not result in actual harm, they generated considerable
harm: there was the risk of further disclosure and misrepresentation of the
position of the Office of Indigenous Policy
Coordination, the Department and/or
the Australian Government.
Hypothetical outcome under ALRC proposal
The harm discussed in the sentencing judgment is not a criminal offence under
the ALRC model. In sentencing, the court stated that
Ms Goreng Goreng’s
conduct in leaking the information prejudiced the public interest in
‘fulsome and frank’ communications
government.
In the ALRC’s
view, this kind of damage to internal government processes is more appropriately
handled through administrative
Under the ALRC’s proposed general secrecy offence, the court would have
to consider whether the unauthorised disclosures actually
caused harm, were
reasonably likely to cause harm or intended to cause harm to one of the public
interests specified by the ALRC.
The disclosures Ms Goreng Goreng made to her daughter are unlikely to meet
any harm requirement. Most relevantly, the disclosures
concerning the youth
worker and her supervisor may have had a substantial adverse effect on the
supervisor and youth worker’s
personal privacy and/or professional
While Mr Allen Robert Kessing was employed as a customs officer with the
Australian Customs Service (ACS) he worked on reports of
an investigation into
criminal activity and organised crime believed to be taking place at
Sydney’s Kingsford Smith Airport.
The reports were given a security
classification and provided to Mr Kessing’s managers.
On 31 May 2005, an article appeared in
The Australian
, which described
lax security at Sydney Airport citing information from the ACS
article—which noted that airport workers ‘have been involved in
drug-smuggling and stealing from passengers’—inspired
comprehensive expert review of airport safety which resulted in a $200 million
Government plan to improve airport
Mr Kessing was charged with disclosing the information in the reports in
contravention of s 70(2) of the
(as Mr Kessing resigned from
the ACS on 10 May 2005, he was charged under s 70(2), which covers former
Commonwealth officers).
Outcome under current secrecy framework
A jury convicted Mr Kessing and the court sentenced him to nine months
imprisonment, released upon entering into a $1,000 and nine-month
good behaviour
bond. In sentencing, the court recognised that there may have been public
interest in the exposure of information
on airport security, but stated that
this was no justification for his communication of the content of the
The court acknowledged
that the disclosure did not result in any actual harm, but said that it had the
potential to damage the reputation
of persons engaged in work at the airport and
prejudice public confidence in the ACS.
Hypothetical outcome under ALRC proposal
The general secrecy offence proposed by the ALRC covers disclosures likely to
harm public safety and/or prejudice the investigation
of breaches of the
It is likely that the
disclosures made by Mr Kessing could have compromised airport security and the
safety of people using the airport,
and also may have prejudiced investigations
into criminal activity at the airport.
Separate to the ALRC’s Inquiry, a Committee of the House of
Representatives has recommended that the Australian Government enact
legislation
to protect people who make public interest disclosures (or
‘whistleblowers’). The Australian Government has
not yet formally
responded to this inquiry.
When Mr Desmond Patrick Kelly was a senior public servant with the
Commonwealth Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA), the DVA
sent him and
300 other employees a draft proposed statement for the Minister of
Veteran’s Affairs in response to a review of
veterans’ entitlements.
Later that day, an email was sent notifying all recipients that the ministerial
statement would not
be made public and advised that previous communication
concerning the proposal should remain confidential.
A few days later, an article was published in the
Government’s proposal to cut the veterans’ package by $500 million,
which would have the effect of denying benefits
to, ‘war widows asking for
rent assistance, soldiers bombed in Darwin and veterans exposed to radiation in
Hiroshima’.
The article
claimed to have had access to confidential government documents and included a
direct quotation from the withdrawn ministerial
Mr Kelly was charged under s 70(1) of the
for breach of a
duty not to disclose information which came into his possession as a
Commonwealth officer.
Outcome under current secrecy framework
A jury convicted Mr Kelly of one count of breaching s 70(1) of the
and he was ordered to pay a $1,000 bond, for 12 months of good
behaviour. The conviction was overturned on appeal on the basis that
evidence used to convict Mr Kelly was considered too weak to support a
conviction—mere records of phone calls between Mr
Kelly and the
journalists did not suggest that he communicated the information to
Hypothetical outcome under ALRC proposal
Under the ALRC’s proposed offence, it would be unlikely that the
prosecution could prove that relevant harm resulted from the
alleged disclosure.
The sentencing remarks considered the disclosure to have caused an embarrassment
to government and the exposure
of a bad policy decision, but under the
ALRC’s proposal, a threat to the effective working of government would not
to warrant a criminal conviction.
As the following three cases highlight, the requirement that the prosecution
prove that a disclosure caused, or was likely to cause
harm to a specified
public interest may lead to prosecutions being proved in a limited range of
situations. While criminal sanctions
play an important role in deterring
unauthorised disclosures, the ALRC has suggested a greater focus on
administrative sanctions
and effective information handling policies and
practices within government.
ALRC’s proposals seem to be more faithful to the factors that influence
conduct in the workplace and would, if adopted,
provide an improved framework
for keeping secrets both safe and sound.
* Michelle Salomon is a student at the University of Maryland School of
Law. She worked at the Australian Law Reform Commission as
an intern, assigned
to the Secrecy Inquiry, in July and August 2009.
The author wishes to thank Anna Dziedzic for her thoughtful comments on
earlier drafts and mentorship.
As the recommendations of the ALRC’s final report are subject to
parliamentary embargo, this article is based on the proposals
ALRC’s Discussion Paper.
The final report of the Secrecy Inquiry
was being finalised at the time of publication and is under a parliamentary
embargo. This
article is based on proposals made in the Australian Law Reform
Commission’s Discussion Paper (DP 74),
Review of Secrecy Laws
Section 16A(2)(e) of the
(Cth) provides that the court must have regard to any injury, loss or
damage resulting from the offence.
For Your Information: Australian
, ALRC 108 (2008);
Keeping Secrets: The
Protection of Classified and
Security Sensitive Information
Open Government:
A Review of the Federal
Information Act
, ALRC 77 (1995).
Review of Secrecy Laws
Discussion Paper 74 (2009).
Ibid, Proposals 7–2 and
Ibid, Proposal 7–1. Proposal
7–2 organises the general secrecy offence into three tiers, designed to
match a criminal
penalty with the gravity of the conduct.
[2008] ACTSC 74
; Transcript of
Proceedings,
R v Goreng Goreng
(Supreme Court of the Australian Capital
Territory, Refshauge J, 14
October 2008), 5.
V Violante, ‘Goreng Goreng guilty
of email leak’,
Canberra Times
(online), 26 August 2008,
<www.canberratimes.com.au/news/local/news/general/goreng-goreng-guilty-of-email-leak/1253796.aspx>
at 16 September 2009.
Transcript of Proceedings,
(Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory, Refshauge J, 14
October 2008).
See ALRC DP 74, Proposal 7–1(e)
[2007] NSWDC 138.
M Chulov, J Porter, ‘Airport
staff “smuggling drugs”—Secret Customs report exposes criminal
The Australian
, 31 May 2005, 1.
An Independent Review of
Airport Security and Policing for the Government of Australia
(2005); see
also R Ackland,
‘Kessing’s Case Highlights the Media’s
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online), 27 February 2009,
<www.smh.com.au/opinion/kessings-case-highlights-the-medias-ethics-20090226-8iz9.html
at 16 September 2009.
[2007] NSWDC 138
, [49] and [59].
See ALRC DP 74, Proposal 7–1(b)
See House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs—Parliament of Australia,
Whistleblower
Protection: A Comprehensive Scheme for the Commonwealth
[2006] VCC;
M Harvey and G McManus,
‘Cabinet’s $500m rebuff revealed’,
The Herald Sun
February 2004.
[2006] VSCA 221
(Callaway and Redlich JJA and Coldrey AJA).
See ALRC DP 74, Ch 13–15.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (218 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter