URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/USydLRS/2022/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:50:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kinley, David; Sheehan, Kym --- "ESG risk is a core concern for financial services regulation" [2022] USydLRS 1
The University of Sydney Law School
The University of Sydney Law Research Series
ESG risk is a core concern for financial services
David Kinley and Kym Sheehan
This paper can be downloaded without charge
University of Sydney Law Research Series
ESG risk is a core concern for financial services regulation
Professor David Kinley (Sydney Law School) and Dr Kym Sheehan (Newcastle
Law School)
22 April 2022
This is our submission in response to the Australian Law Reform
Commission’s
Background Paper FSL5 Risk and
Reform in Australian Financial Services Law
(March 2022).
In it we suggest that a much wider and deeper consideration of ESG risk
management throughout the financial services sector in Australia
and overseas is
not just desirable but necessary.
Our submission focuses
on the broad question of
‘social’ risk factors (the ‘S’ in ESG) for the sector
and, in that regard, specifically
on the human rights impacts of financial
services and their regulation. And
on the particular
‘conduct and product risks’ within financial services that impact
directly or indirectly on relevant
human rights concerns.
In addition to a range of international and domestic sources, our submission
draws directly on the research, data and findings that
comprise our
Services Human Rights Benchmark (FSHRB)
launched in May 2021 measuring the
levels of human rights risk management and compliance of the largest 22
financial services entities
listed on the Australian Stock Exchange.
ESG risk is a core concern for financial services
Professor David Kinley (Sydney Law School) and Dr Kym
Sheehan (Newcastle Law School)
22 April 2022
Our submission
This submission responds to the ALRC Background Paper FSL5
Risk and Reform
in Australian Financial Services Law
(March 2022).
In it we draw on the research, data and findings that comprise our
Financial Services Human Rights Benchmark
(FSHRB) launched in May 2021
measuring the levels of human rights risk management and compliance of the
largest 22 financial services
entities listed on the ASX.
We note that the Terms of Reference for the FSL Inquiry direct the Commission
to examine,
(i) “the continuing emergence of new business models, technologies and
practices”; and
(ii) “how best to maintain regulatory flexibility to clarify technical
detail and address atypical or unforeseen circumstances
and unintended
consequences of regulatory arrangements” regarding “the coherence of
the regulatory design and hierarchy
of laws, covering primary law provisions,
regulations, class orders, and standards.”
As such and given especially that this BP is concerned expressly with
financial services risk, we are surprised to see that the BP
barely mentions the
management of ESG risk, let alone offering any concerted consideration of its
relevance to corporations and financial
services regulation.
Our submission suggests that a much wider and deeper consideration of this
critical and fast-growing matter of concern throughout
the FS sector in
Australia and overseas, is not just desirable but necessary. In consequence, our
submission focuses on
the broad question of ‘social’
risk factors (the ‘S’ in ESG) for the sector and, in that regard,
specifically
on the human rights impacts of financial services and their
regulation. And
on the particular ‘conduct and product
risks’ within financial services that impact directly or indirectly on
human rights concerns.
ESG context – global
ESG risks are no longer peripheral matters consigned to the
‘non-financial’ basket of board room and management concerns.
Evidence of the relevance and impact of ESG concerns is today increasingly found
not only in the policies and practices of financial
services providers
themselves – the UN’s
Principles of Responsible Investment
global database on ESG-related policies of leading finance and investment
entities notes that more than 750 such policies have been
created since
– but also in the
professional services that advise them and in the regulatory architecture that
governs them.
From headlines in BlackRock’s Larry Fink’s annual letters to
financial institutions
everywhere advertising their ESG
credentials
and leading law and
accounting firms competing to provide ESG services to financial corporate
to lawmakers and
regulators across Europe where various countries now oblige corporations
(including financial service entities)
to undertake environmental and social due
the management of ESG
risks is manifestly of serious concern throughout the sector.
Further, the European Commission has recently released a draft Directive
mandating such corporate due diligence practices across the
EU with the object
“to better integrate risk management and mitigation processes of human
rights and environmental risks and
impacts, including those stemming from value
chains, into corporate
strategies”.
expanding ESG due diligence beyond environmental risks to include, expressly,
human rights risks, this so-called mHREDD Directive
will likely have
“significant implications for Australian
businesses”,
Australian financial services entities with significant international
operations. Most especially, in this respect, the
mHREDD will augment existing
EU risk management mandates on sustainability-related disclosure in the
financial services
ESG context - Australia
ESG concerns are already reflected in Australia’s ‘twin
peaks’ model of financial regulation. Thus, under the
Corporations Act
financial product disclosures must include “the
extent to which labour standards or environmental, social or ethical
considerations
are taken into account in the selection, retention or realisation
of the investment”.
APRA’s recent
Practice Guide (CPG 229) on Climate Change Financial Risks
2021) does not impose any new regulatory requirements or obligations, it is
intended to “assist APRA-regulated entities
to manage climate-related
risks and opportunities within their existing risk management and governance
practices,”
specifically, compliance with “
Prudential Standards CPS 220 Risk
Risk Management
Additionally, there is a host of
practitioner
commentaries on ESG
practices in the financial services sector in Australia, as well as the
(updated April 2021) on the scope of directors’ duties under
Corporations Act
to encompass environmental and climate change
considerations, alongside a similar legal opinion being actively canvassed
human rights risks for directors across multiple
Relevance of human rights risk (the ‘S’ in ESG)
No matter the expansion of ESG research and practice throughout the finance
sector, the ‘social’ in ESG remains the least
explored and least
understood of the three elements. It is in this regard that there is a growing
interest both in the impact of
finance on human rights and on the role that
human rights can and do play in financial sector practices and
regulation.
As we noted in our submission to the Hayne Royal Commission in 2018:
“Misconduct in financial services and behaviour that fails to meet
community expectations are not just matters of legality and
professional ethics:
they concern infringements of peoples’ basic human rights. The revelations
of Banking and Financial Services
Royal Commission Interim Report have
illustrated the often raw human consequences of malfeasance by our banks,
insurers, super funds
and financial advisers, which, we argue, run deeper than
transgressions of relevant corporate or commercial laws. Such conduct frequently
undermines established human rights laws and standards.”
That submission was based on our analysis of some 314 cases of misconduct
recorded by ASIC between January 2017 and September 2018,
in which we found that
in all cases involving relationships between a financial services entity and its
customers or clients (some
255 of the 314 cases), at least one, and in most
instances, more than one of (then) four identified human rights categories were
adversely affected. This work paved the way for what was to become the Financial
Services Human Rights Benchmark (in which we expanded
the human rights
categories to six).
Risk and the financial services human rights benchmark
The Financial Services Human Rights Benchmark (FSHRB)
is a world first benchmark designed to specifically measure the human rights
performance of financial services entities (FSEs). We measure human rights
performance against
6 human rights categories
where FSEs impact human rights, using
to assess risk, outcome
and impacts, with
(proxies) to measure factor performance
within each domain. For convenience, we call this the 655i benchmark model.
simple way to remember the key elements of the benchmark.
: 655i model
We measure risk management using three factors –
Policy Positions
Due Diligence
– and assess these
factors for each domain using a specific set of indicators for that
Our first benchmarking report released in 2021 for the 2019 financial year (a
key year being the year in which the Hayne Royal Commission
Final Report was
released) indicates that not one of the 22 ASX-listed FSEs in our sample
identified human rights as a material non-financial
risk for their business. Our
sample FSEs typically adopted the
‘risk-trifecta’
operational, compliance and conduct risk most frequently identified as material
sources of non-financial risk.
We note the definitions of those terms as follows:
operational risk
the risk of losses resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes,
people and systems or from external events and includes
legal risk, but excludes
strategic and reputational
compliance risk
the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, or loss
to reputation a bank may suffer as a result of its failure
to comply with laws,
regulations, rules, related self-regulatory organisation standards and codes of
conduct applicable to its banking
conduct risk
the risk of inappropriate, unethical or unlawful behaviour on the part of
an organisation’s management or
: Non-financial risk trifecta
Each category within the non-financial risk trifecta would appear to
implicitly require consideration of human rights risk. Sexual
harassment, breach
of financial services laws requiring extensive customer remediation, misuse of
customer information, breaches
of privacy, and wage underpayment could each fit
within two, if not all three of these risk categories. As defined above, none of
the three risk categories specifically identify
risk topics
human rights risk, climate change risk, technology risk). This raises the
question of how risks are identified by and within
our sample FSEs so that they
can be adequately managed by each entity.
We observed our sample FSEs adopt the
Three Lines of Defence
approach to risk management. As we noted in our Year 1
This standard corporate model allocates responsibilities for risk from
frontline management/business units as ‘risk owners’
through risk management and compliance functions (line 2), to internal audit
function (line 3), using a policy framework
and risk identification and ranking
methodologies. As noted, for example, in AMP’s 2019 Corporate Governance
Statement, “The
‘three lines of defence’ approach is designed
to provide assurance to management and the board that risks are identified,
managed and reported effectively.” APRA has identified the 3LOD framework
as providing an effective framework for risk
Yet the 3LOD
framework appears to operate alongside a
internal risk
governance framework that includes the
This somewhat dislocated approach - risk identification via 3LOD at first
line, risk accountability via the separate risk governance
process - might help
explain why closer attention isn’t being paid to human rights risk, with
appropriate risk identification,
adequate resourcing and accountability.
Risk identification within FSEs has to also consider risk
and how it is managed
within FSEs. APRA’s research indicates risk culture work is undertaken by
the second line of defence
(risk function) with the board setting the
FSE’s risk appetite (relevant to both product risk and conduct
In considering the laws
surrounding product design and development, consideration should be given to how
this work is undertaken
within FSEs. As we note in our Year 1 report,
Noting the importance that the Hayne Royal Commission attached to so-called
‘norms of conduct’,
we argue that merely achieving adherence to the law by demonstrating these norms
(which simply restate the existing laws) won’t
be sufficient to achieve
improved human rights performance by FSEs. And while it is clear that these
norms of conduct dovetail nicely
with the risk trifecta of operational,
compliance and conduct risk, the norms are less helpful when considering risk
topics as diffuse
as human rights risk or climate change risk.
Considerations of the financial services laws around product risk and conduct
risk must appreciate how risk is managed within FSEs.
While chapter 7 operates
independently from APRA’s prudential regime, we see merit in aiming for
consistency across these different
regulatory regimes.
A human rights approach to product and conduct risk
An issue we addressed in our benchmark is how to
translate financial services law concepts to human rights impacts. Research we
as part of our work designing the FSHRB considered actual or potential
breaches of
Corporations Act 2001
chapter 7 as identified in ASIC
media releases which we then translated firstly into
conduct concepts
shorthand way of classifying the particular conduct, noting that some of these
descriptions would fall within the ALRC’s
category of product
This typology is
reproduced below .
We then considered the types of human rights impacts arising from these types
of conduct across our six human rights
categories.
protection against FSE providing misleading information or
withholding
information that materially impairs a person’s informed
“consent” regarding contractual relations with
Anti-discrimination
No discrimination on illegitimate grounds such as gender, race,
indigeneity, or disability.
Economic security
“Quality” of goods and services necessary for the enjoyment of
basic economic, social and cultural rights (including the
“continuous
improvement of living conditions” such as housing, health care and
education) is “not sacrificed for
the sake of increasing profits.”
Also covers fair remuneration both within FSEs and their suppliers, contractors
and clients.
Health and safety
Rights to workplace health and safety as pertaining in the FSEs themselves,
their suppliers, contractors and clients (re: commercial
lending), and as
pursued (or not) by FSEs in their broader societal interactions.
Voice and participation
Right to freely express views relevant to functions of FSE or the impact of
their actions, including the right to association and
participation in decisions
directly affecting their interests – especially
their suppliers, contractors and clients),
communities
indigenous), and, in certain circumstances,
broader societal interactions
(eg regarding relevant policy positions).
Right to remedy
Right to appropriate means of redress or “effective remedy”
when human rights standards are violated or infringed.
: Our 6 human rights categories
Economic security
is an important human rights category for
financial services. It’s a principal reason why a person engages with
financial services
in the first place, typically with the expectation of
securing economic advantages (including minimising economic disadvantages).
Product risk could adopt a similar ‘aim’ for financial products
– that they contribute towards the person prudently
promoting their
economic security and thus provide a yardstick against which to measure any
product. This human rights category does
not operate in the vacuum.
Our research also identified
important category of human rights. Our research found that privacy and
information rights are often linked to economic
security, in particular whether
and how the features of a product (such as a CFD) or the process of obtaining a
product (conflicted
advice) lead to the informed consent of the customer
purchasing the product. In other words, privacy and information rights have
product and conduct risk implications.
The category of
Anti-discrimination
has implications for
product risk (the product discriminates unfairly against the person based on
race, gender or disability –
for instance, insurance or superannuation
products penalising women on the basis of gaps in their contributions) and
conduct risk
(website offering the products is not able to be read by technology
used by vision impaired persons; financial intermediary unfairly
cultural sensitivities to ‘sorry business’ to offer funeral
insurance to indigenous youths).
The category of
Voice and participation
reflects the need for
the customer’s voice to be heard at all stages in their relationship with
the FSE and for their participation
in all decisions that impact on their
relationship with the FSE. We note here the work of the Australian Human Rights
on AI-informed decisions by corporations and other private sector
entities should ensure people affected by these decisions are (i)
made aware of
the decision and how AI was used in the decision-making process; (ii) be
provided with reasons or an explanation for
the decision; and (iii) have an
avenue to appeal to an independent external body for a review of that decision
and to correct the
decision if
We learned of the ways financial services can impact
from several case studies presented at the Hayne Royal Commission
as the customers experienced stress and anxiety from the losses
they suffered in
relying upon the financial advice they were given by AFS-licensed individuals
and firms. It can also occur when
the insurance product purchased by a retail
customer does not provide the expected benefit to cover a health-related claim
the definitions of health are out of date and do not reflect current
medical thinking.
A feature of financial services regulation is the use of alternatives to
court-based remedies found in internal customer complaint
mechanisms as well as
the external AFCA mechanism. Our human rights category of
emphasises the necessity of an effective remedy - namely, one
that provides a timely and appropriate means of redress not only when
rights laws are contravened but also when human rights standards are adversely
impacted. Any consideration of chapter 7 needs
to keep in mind the time and cost
involved for a person to obtain a remedy.
Advantages of a human rights approach to risk in financial
A human rights approach to risk in financial
services offers several advantages over an approach that focuses narrowly on
of the financial product or the process by which it is acquired.
1. It focuses on the person
with the aim of at a minimum of
doing no harm while also aiming for an improvement in the person’s welfare
via financial services.
Arguably no amount of regulation – be it
disclosure-based or DDO – can assist where there is a risk of significant
to the person. Such products should not be offered; any conduct that would
create such a negative impact must not be engaged in.
2. It provides a yardstick
to assess the products being offered
and the process of obtaining these products. The goal of ensuring the promotion
of a person’s
economic security by strictly minimising the risk of adverse
financial impacts ought to be readily acceptable to the financial services
sector and understood by persons engaging with the sector.
3. It places the right to an effective remedy
regulatory regime
governing the financial services sector. Thereby
consideration is given not only to the type of remedy but also to the method of
accessing the remedy. It allows for use of alternatives to court-based remedies.
It recognises that the point of impact can arise
short of a breach of the law
and would encourage FSEs to adopt appropriate measures to respond to adverse
4. It can keep pace with technology and address its impact
customers by providing a person-centric approach to the law.
It is our suggestion therefore both that ESG ought to be a matter of
significant concern for this Inquiry and that an analysis of
social risk viewed
through the lens of how financial services impact on human rights standards is
not only necessary but feasible.
We believe human rights can readily be
accommodated within a guiding set of principles for chapter 7 as illustrated by
our earlier
comments in this submission as well as by our research for the
Financial Services Human Rights Benchmark.
For example:
“[a]s stewards of our clients’ capital, we ask businesses to
demonstrate how they’re going to deliver
on their responsibility to
shareholders, including through sound environmental, social, and governance
practices and policies”,
Fink’s 2022 Letter to
There are various ways
in which financial institutions use reports to illustrate their approach and
record in ESG, see
more specifically their approach to green, social and sustainability funding,
or investing see
Capital (to be known as Collimate Capital following its demerger from AMP).
For example,
that “major Australian banks must transform their
organisations to meet growing stakeholders ESG expectations,” and a
headline item in Ashurst’s recent
and Financial Regulation
briefing declared that “ESG data and related
expectations - an expansion of the regulatory perimeter and
expectations”.
See the Business and Human
Rights Resource Centre’s
Due Diligence Portal
for a Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence and Amending Directive
2019/1937 (23 February 2022), at
mandatory human rights and environmental due diligence be coming to
, Corrs Chambers Westgarth (25 Feb 2022). The Directive’s
reach, as noted in the Briefing, will encompass Australian businesses
“have an established direct or indirect business relationship with any of
the EU entities or non-EU entities caught by
the Directive’s employee and
financial thresholds, and form part of that entity’s value chain,
including upstream and
downstream activities related to the production and
provision of goods and
(EU) 2019/2088
(27 November
Section 103D(1)(l),
Corporations Act
, and accompanying ASIC,
Guide 65: Section 1013DA disclosure guidelines
(November 2011).
APRA finalises
prudential guidance on managing the financial risks of climate change
Release, 26 Nov. 2021.
For example,
Lloyd Freeburn & Ian Ramsey,
“An Analysis of ESG Shareholder
Resolutions in Australia”
[2021] UNSWLawJl 40
(2021) 44(3)
and Ismail Sila & Kemal Cek,
Impact of Environmental, Social and Governance Dimensions of Corporate Social
Responsibility on Economic Performance: Australian
Procedia Computer Science
, 797-804. Also ACSI,
Shareholder
Resolutions in Australia: Is there a Better Way?
Environmental,
Social and Governance Law in Australia 2022
, an International Comparative
Legal Guide published by Global Law
See, for example, a
recent statement from Business for Social Responsibility (BSR) (which represents
businesses in the civil society
sphere) noting that worldwide
“ESG-labelled [sic] funds and ESG assets [are] on track to exceed US$50
trillion by 2025,”
which “serves as a blaring market signal to
investors, companies, and regulators on the importance of managing business
on people and the planet.” BSR,
the Human Rights Gap in ESG
Robert McCorquodale
& Stuart Neely, “
Directors Duties and Human
Rights Impacts: A Comparative Approach”
Corporate Law Studies
(online publication 7 Feb.
In respect of which,
see the ground-breaking Casey O’Connor & Sarah Labowitz,
the ‘S’ in ESG: Measuring Human Rights Performance for Investors
(March 2017)
in response to the Interim Report
, Royal Commission into Misconduct in the
Banking and Financial Services Sector (26 October
Refer to Appendix 1
Methodology Report
(available to download from the FSHRB website
for our generic lists of governance Indicators (13 indicators), policy positions
(7 indicators) and due diligence (13 indicators).
This approach is found in
the Prudential Inquiry into the Commonwealth Bank of Australia and endorsed by
APRA in its subsequent self-assessments,
ASIC and APRA.
Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision
Principles for the Sound Management
of Operational Risk
, June 2011,
Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision,
and the Compliance Function in Banks
, April 2005,
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission,
Supervision Update Issue 57 – Conduct Risk
March 2015.
Financial Services Human
Rights Benchmark,
Year 1 Report
(December 2020), 7.
Australian Prudential
Regulatory Authority,
Practice Guide CPG 220 Risk Management
, April 2018,
Risk governance can be
defined as 'the formal structure used to support risk-based decision making and
oversee risk management across
the Group’s operations. This consists of
Board and management committees, delegations of authority for decision making,
structures and related reporting,' per
2021 Corporate Governance Statement
We adopt APRA’s
definition of risk culture as ‘the norms of behaviour for individuals and
groups that shape the ability
to identify, understand, openly discuss, escalate
and act on an entity’s current and future challenges and risks. Risk
is not separate to organisational culture but reflects the influence of
organisational culture on how risks are managed.’ APRA,
Transforming
governance, culture, remuneration and accountability: APRA’s
Information Paper
APRA 2014, 16. We note
their 2019 review of a sample of FSEs’ self-assessments found that FSEs
‘either struggled to articulate
their assessment of culture or provided
little evidence to support their assessment.’ APRA 2019, 10.
The six norms are: obey the
law, do not mislead or deceive; act fairly; provide services that are fit for
purpose; deliver services
with reasonable care and skill; and act in the best
interests of the other when acting for another: Royal Commission
, February 2019,
Kym Sheehan and David
Kinley, ‘Community Expectations: Putting people before profit means taking
human rights seriously’
The University of Sydney Law School Legal Studies
Research Paper Series No. 18/73 (November 2018), 9 (Fig. A-1)
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3279869
The six human rights
categories used in the benchmark are, for the most part, composites of specific
individual human rights found
in both international human rights laws and
relevant Australian laws. They have been chosen because they are the most
relevant to
the core business operations of financial service entities, and they
have been categorised in a way that makes them intelligible
to non-human rights
specialists in and around the finance sector. Refer to our Methodology Report
for further information on these categories.
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Rights and Technology Final Report
(2021), 73.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.9 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter