URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Editors --- "Reform Roundup" [2009] ALRCRefJl 51; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 73
Reform Roundup
Administrative Review Council
Alberta Law Reform Institute
British Columbia Law Institute
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Manitoba Law Reform Commission
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Scottish Law Commission
South African Law Reform Commission
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee
Reform Roundup
Articles in Reform Roundup are contributed by the law reform agencies
73 Administrative Review Council
73 Alberta Law Reform Institute
75 British Columbia Law Institute
76 Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
76 Manitoba Law Reform Commission
77 New South Wales Law Reform Commission
79 Queensland Law Reform Commission
80 Scottish Law Commission
81 South African Law Reform Commission
83 Tasmania Law Reform Institute
83 Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee
Entries to Reform Roundup are welcome. Please contact the Editor at
reform@alrc.gov.au
Administrative Review Council
Conduct guide
On 26 August 2009, the federal Attorney- General launched the
Administrative Review Council’s revised
Guide to Standards of Conduct
for Tribunal Members
. The Guide, fi rst published in 2001, has been updated
to refl ect the evolving role of tribunals and the changing public expectations
of tribunal members. The Guide continues to focus on core administrative law
values—respect for the law, fairness, independence,
respect for persons,
diligence and effi ciency, integrity, and accountability and transparency. The
publication is intended to assist
and complement tribunal management in
maintaining the high level of standards expected of tribunal members.
Reports on the ARC website
All of the Council’s reports are now available for download from its
website at www.ag.gov. au/arc. These reports cover a wide
range of topics
including: merits review tribunals; Government Business Enterprises; rule making
by Commonwealth agencies; and environmental
decisions and the AAT. Copies of
Council publications also can be obtained by contacting the Council Secretariat
via email at
arc.can@ag.gov.au
Alberta Law Reform Institute
Purchasers’ remedies
In March 2009, the Alberta Law Reform Institute (ALRI) released Report for
Discussion No 21 entitled
Contracts for the Sale and Purchase of Land:
Purchasers’ Remedies
. Recent case law from the Supreme Court of Canada
and the Alberta Court of Appeal jeopardise two longstanding protections for
of land. This report makes preliminary recommendations to restore
those protections and explores different methods of restoration.
The fi rst jeopardised protection is a purchaser’s ability to obtain
specifi c performance if the seller fails to convey the
land. Traditionally, the
law’s position was that all land is essentially unique, so damages are
almost never an adequate remedy
for failure to transfer. Thus, a purchaser could
easily obtain an order for specifi c performance. But recent cases have signifi
cantly narrowed the concept of uniqueness. Unless the purchaser’s needs
can be met only by transfer of the specifi c parcel
of land and no other,
damages will be considered a suffi cient remedy and specifi c performance will
no longer be available.
In ALRI’s opinion, the remedy of specifi c performance should not be
tied to concepts of uniqueness or adequacy of damages.
The appropriate remedy
for failure to transfer land is the remedy which best meets the objectives of
fairness, effi ciency and effectiveness
between the seller and purchaser. On
these measures, specifi c performance should be available to purchasers who have
met (or are
ready, willing and able to meet) their obligations under the
agreement. ALRI proposes to restore the ready availability of specifi
performance in this area.
The second jeopardised protection concerns a purchaser’s ability to fi
le a caveat against the title of the land subject to
the agreement for sale. An
inability to obtain specifi c performance means a purchaser will no longer have
an interest in land necessary
to fi le a caveat. If damages can compensate for
failure to transfer land, the purchaser simply has a contract right against the
seller and no caveat can be fi led. The interest of a purchaser without a caveat
has no priority over any subsequently registered
interests of execution
creditors or other purchasers or transferees of the land. The purchaser’s
claim is, therefore, vulnerable
to easy defeat. ALRI proposes to restore a
purchaser’s ability to fi le a caveat. Consultation on this report ended
2009 and a report containing ALRI’s fi nal recommendations should
be published by the end of 2009.
The Creation of Wills
After public consultation on an earlier report for discussion, ALRI released
Final Report No 96,
The Creation of Wills
, in September 2009.
ALRI’s fi nal recommendations include:
Dispensing power.
ALRI reiterates a previouslymade recommendation to
enact a dispensing power enabling a court to validate a written will which does
not comply with the statutory formalities of execution.
Testamentary capacity of minors.
ALRI recommends that the age of
testamentary capacity remain at 18 years. Current statutory exceptions should
also be retained to
allow minors to make a will if they are married, partnered,
a parent or in the Canadian Forces. In addition, a new provision should
any minor who wants to make a will to apply to court for validation of a specifi
Statutory wills for persons without testamentary capacity.
(and most of Canada), a substitute decision-maker for a person without
testamentary capacity is not allowed to make, alter
or revoke a will on that
person’s behalf. Our consultation found little support for granting courts
the power to make ‘statutory
wills’ as permitted in New Brunswick,
England, Australia and New Zealand. ALRI does not recommend that statutory wills
in Alberta.
Oral wills and electronic wills.
ALRI recommends no change to the
current law which recognises only written wills. Oral wills should not be valid
either in their own
right or under the dispensing power. Similarly, the
should not recognise electronic wills as valid in their own right.
However, the dispensing power should be amended to be wide enough
court, in an appropriate case, to validate a will in electronic form despite its
lack of compliance with the usual formalities.
But ‘electronic form’
should be narrowly defi ned to prevent any possible recognition of videotaped or
tape-recorded
Exempt wills.
Members of the Canadian Forces on active service,
mariners and seamen at sea may make ‘exempt wills’ which do not
with all the formalities. Taking into account concerns expressed on
behalf of the Canadian Forces, ALRI does not recommend removing
this exemption.
A statutory provision allowing exempt wills provides guaranteed validity for
such wills, whereas applying to validate
a non-conforming will under a
dispensing provision does not.
Holograph wills.
should not enact a special
provision addressing unwitnessed printed will forms with handwritten entries.
Such problem wills should
be validated by a court severing the handwritten
entries and fi nding a holograph will or by a court making an order under the
should recognise holograph wills made in the
testator’s ‘own writing’ and defi ne that as
‘handwriting, footwriting,
mouthwriting or writing of a similar
kind’. The current undefi ned requirement of ‘handwriting’ is
too narrow and
could be viewed as discriminatory.
Will formalities. The Wills Act
should continue to require that a will
be signed by the testator at its ‘end or foot’, subject to the
traditional saving
provision to alleviate some of the main problems arising from
a strict interpretation. We do not recommend change in this area because
not think it wise to extend recognition, without the safeguard of court
scrutiny, to anything written below a testator’s
ALRI recommends the retention of concurrent witnessing. However, the statute
should allow a witness who previously signed the will
in the other
witness’s absence to acknowledge their signature to the other witness when
both are together, rather than having
to actually re-sign the will. This
recommendation overturns case law that renders such a will invalid.
ALRI recommends retaining the traditional saving provision
which validates wills signed by an incompetent witness. We do not want
witness competence a matter which must be proved in every application for
probate. However, the
should disqualify as a witness any person
who signs a will on behalf of and at the direction of the testator. No other
express disqualifi
cations should be stated.
ALRI recommends retaining the witness-benefi ciary rule but offsetting its
harsher effects by giving a court the discretion to prevent
loss of the
testamentary gift, if it is satisfi ed that the witness or spouse did not
exercise any improper or undue influence on
the testator.
In addition to the witness-benefi ciary rule, ALRI further recommends that an
interpreter and a person who signs a will on behalf
of a testator should also be
disqualifi ed from receiving any benefi t under the will. However, the
interpreter’s disqualifi
cation would not apply to any charge or direction
in the will for the payment of appropriate remuneration for the interpretation
services. An interpreter or proxy signer could also apply to a court to prevent
loss of the gift on proof that no undue infl uence
or fraud occurred.
Finally, if an executor or trustee acts as a witness to the will, it does not
affect any trust provisions but does cause loss of any
remuneration directed by
the terms of the will. ALRI recommends that the
should provide
that loss under the witness-benefi ciary rule does not apply to a charge or
direction in the will for the payment of
appropriate remuneration, including
professional fees, to an executor or trustee of that will.
Criminal jury trials
ALRI has published
Criminal Jury Trials: Challenge for Cause Procedures,
Report on Consultation Memorandum 12.20
, which is the fourth in a series of
interim publications on its inquiry into criminal procedures.
The report suggests that a consistent process be followed when a trial
participant exercises the statutory right to challenge one
or more prospective
jurors for cause.
In particular, the report proposes that:
• notices of intention to challenge and opposition to a challenge be
given in timely manner;
• challenge materials be as complete and informative as possible;
• and the roles of the trial judge, counsel and panel of triers be
clearly defined.
It is anticipated that a consolidated fi nal report containing all proposals
in respect of criminal procedural rules will be published
at the conclusion of
the consultation effort.
British Columbia Law Institute
Unfair contracts relief
The law of contracts in British Columbia (BC), similar to several other
common law jurisdictions, is rooted in centuries old principles,
such as freedom
of contract, which assumed that contracting parties had equal bargaining power.
The modern reality, however, is that
in many situations, contracts involve a
stronger party imposing terms on a weaker party. Contract terms that are unfair
may negatively
affect individuals or groups who are more vulnerable, such as
consumers and small businesses. In times of fi nancial instability
and economic
downturn, such as the current North American recession, consumers or small
businesses are even more likely to be victimised
by predatory or unfair contract
terms and left without viable remedies.
While the financial aspects of unfair contracts have been the subject of
extensive commentary, there has been much less discussion
with respect to what
the law can do to provide protection from unfair contracts. In October 2009, the
British Columbia Law Institute
(BCLI) commenced a twoyear legal research and law
reform project to study these issues related to unfair contract terms in BC. The
Unfair Contracts Relief Project draws, in part, on previous work of the
Institute on the subject of unfair contract terms and predatory
The goals of this project include:
• carrying out comprehensive legal research, investigation,
consultation and analysis of issues relating to unfair contracts
addressing whether changes in practice or reform of BC’s law of contracts
are necessary to ameliorate the effects
of unfair contract terms;
• providing legal education and information resources relating to
issues arising from the imposition of unfair contract terms;
• publishing a fi nal report with recommendations for best practices
and law reforms in BC to address law reform to prevent
or provide relief from
unfair contract terms.
The project is being carried out with the assistance of a volunteer project
committee, made up of members with expertise in contracts
and lending issues.
The BCLI aims to publish a consultation paper and hold an extensive public
consultation before publishing its
fi nal report, which will include
recommendations for law reform and commentary, in September 2011.
Assisted living
Supportive housing or assisted living (AL) is often called a ‘middle
option’ of health/housing, which lies at the centre
of a seniors’
housing continuum, bookended by independent living at one end and high care
long-term residential facilities
at the other. AL is often broadly described as
a type of independent living that includes some form of personal and health care
AL is already a signifi cant concern to Canadians, and with the impending
‘age wave’ will only be more so in the future.
It is clear that
Canadians will need to fi nd legislative and regulatory systems that make sense
to users and providers of AL.
In October 2009, the Canadian Centre for Elder Law (CCEL) commenced a
three-year legal research and law reform project to review and
revise British
Columbia’s legislation associated with assisted living. The Assisted
Living Project draws on previous work of
the CCEL, which identifi ed notable
defi ciencies and inconsistencies in several areas of legislation relating to AL
in British Columbia.
The goals of the project include:
carrying out thorough legal research, investigation, consultation and
analysis of issues relating to AL in BC, and proposing concrete
and specifi c
law reforms as appropriate; publishing a fi nal report with proposed draft
legislation/drafting instructions; and conducting
outreach activities to
increase government, professional and public understanding of the issues and
recommendations.
The project is being carried out with the assistance of a volunteer project
committee comprised of legal experts, persons experienced
in dealing with AL and
observer representation from the government. The BCLI aims to publish a fi nal
report, including proposed
draft legislation/drafting instructions and
commentary, in September 2012.
Law Reform Commission of Western Australia
Problem-oriented courts and judicial case Management
Following the release of the Commission’s consultation paper,
Intervention Programs
, and a lengthy submissions period, work has been
completed on the fi nal report and recommendations for this inquiry. At the time
of publication of
, the Commission was awaiting tabling of the fi
nal report in Parliament.
Once tabled, the report will be available in hard copy and in electronic
format from the Commission’s website at www.lrc.justice.wa.gov.
Work is continuing on the Commission’s reference to
examine and report upon the operation and effectiveness of the system of
selection. The matter was referred to the Commission as a result of concerns
raised about the growing number of people who apply
for, and are granted,
exemptions from jury service, or who are disqualifi ed or ineligible to
participate on a jury. The consequent
effect of these exemptions and disqualifi
cations from jury service is that juries become less representative of the
community. In
addition to this, those who remain eligible for jury service then
carry a greater burden to fulfi l this important civic duty. The
anticipates the release of a detailed discussion paper in late 2009.
Coronial practice in WA
Throughout 2008, the Commission undertook an
extensive consultation process on its review of coronial practice in WA, meeting
all relevant and interested agencies and organisations associated with the
Coroner’s Court. A signifi cant amount of preliminary
research and
analysis was also undertaken. Work has commenced on the drafting of a
comprehensive discussion paper that will address
the issues raised during the
consultation process and identify the role and responsibilities of the Coroner
in a contemporary world.
It is envisaged the project will take several years to
complete, with the discussion paper expected in early 2010.
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act
The Commission has
received a new reference to examine and report upon the application of the
Community Protection (Offender Reporting) Act 2004
(WA). The Act is
primarily aimed at monitoring paedophiles and other serious sex offenders. The
scope of the reference is very narrow,
Commission being asked to consider:
• how the Act applies specifi cally to reportable offenders who are
children; and
• reportable offenders who are over the age of 18 and commit the
offence in circumstances which are exceptional, for example
consensual sexual
activity with a person the offender honestly and reasonably—but
mistakenly—believed to be of or over
the age of 16 years.
This reference was initiated as a result of concerns raised about the number
of children sentenced in the Children’s Court for
reportable offences who
are required to comply with the reporting requirements of the Community Offender
Protection Register. Because
of the mandatory nature of the Act, there is no
mechanism or discretion to enable the Court to deal with young offenders in a
that refl ects the low end of the scale of seriousness of the offence, or
that indicates that the juvenile is not a sex offender
of the type for which the
register originally came into force.
The Commission is in the preliminary stages of the reference, with foundation
research still being undertaken. It is anticipated that
the Commission will be
in a position to release a discussion paper some time in 2010.
The Commission has an e-news subscription service which informs subscribers
when reports and papers are released as well as keeping
subscribers up-to-date
with the Commission’s activities. The Commission invites
readers to subscribe to this service. Subscription is free and you can
unsubscribe at any time—just follow the prompts at
www.lrc.justice.wa.gov.au
Manitoba Law Reform Commission
Waivers of liability for sporting and recreational Injuries
This recently released report,
Waivers of Liability for Sporting and
Recreational Injuries
(Report 120), provides an overview of civil liability
for providers of sporting and recreational activities for the personal injuries
or death of consumers arising under three regimes of legal responsibility: The
Occupiers’ Liability Act
, the tort of negligence and the law of
contract. This report reviews Canadian case law on personal injury and fatality
claims involving
contractual waivers of liability and considers the approach in
other jurisdictions in respect of the use of waivers of liability.
The report makes recommendations aimed at protecting the interests of
consumers by prohibiting or alternatively by limiting the use
of waivers of
liability for personal injury or death resulting from negligence in sporting and
recreational activities, while ensure
that providers of sporting and
recreational activities may still obtain acknowledgements and assumptions of
inherent risks from consumers
of these activities.
Private international law
Private International Law Report
(Report 119), released in 2009,
deals with two matters arising out of the Supreme Court of Canada decision in
Tolofson v Jensen
Lucas v Gagnon
, namely choice of law for tort
and the characterisation of limitation periods, and with jurisdiction
simpliciter and the concept
of real and substantial connection pertaining
The Commission recommends the enactment of legislation to codify the
general rule, with the greater specifi city, and to empower
Manitoba courts to apply a different law in exceptional circumstances.
Commission also recommends that
The Limitation of Actions Act
to codify the
principle that limitation periods are substantive,
rather than procedural.
In addition, the report deals with the establishment of the jurisdiction of
the Court of Queen’s Bench in cases where a defendant
has been served with
a statement of claim outside of Manitoba. Currently, the case law is in a state
of uncertainty. The Commission
recommends that Manitoba follow several provinces
that have enacted the model legislation proposed by the Uniform Law Conference
of Canada entitled the
Uniform Court Jurisdiction and Transfer Proceedings
Posthumously conceived children
The Commission’s report,
Posthumously Conceived Children: Intestate
Succession and Dependants Relief
(Report 118), released in February 2009,
considers three matters respecting intestate succession—two are amendments
to existing
sections of
The Intestate Succession Act
, and the third is
the question whether posthumously conceived children should be eligible to
inherit from and through a deceased
parent who dies intestate. There is also the
issue of whether posthumously conceived children should receive
dependants’ relief.
The Commission recommends that
The Intestate Succession Act
Dependants Relief Act
be amended to include posthumously conceived children
in order to remedy the current discrimination and to avoid costly litigation.
well, the Commission recommends that
The Intestate Succession Act
amended to require of survivors conceived before and born after the death of an
intestate and of posthumously conceived children,
the 15 day survival which is
required of other survivors of the intestate. The Commission also recommends an
amendment to provide
for an equal sharing in an intestacy by maternal and
paternal cousins of equal degree of kinship.
The Limitation of Actions Act
In recent years several Canadian jurisdictions have enacted—and the
Uniform Law Conference has proposed—legislation that
simplifi es and
rationalises the law of limitations. The Commission is currently considering
recommendations as to whether and how
Manitoba should modernise its legislation,
including reform in relation to both personal and real property limitations.
A draft report was released in June 2009 and, after a period of community
consultation, the Commission is now fi nalising this inquiry.
Improving administrative justice
Manitoba has approximately 160 administrative agencies, boards and
commissions that operate outside the government departmental structure.
government relies on administrative agencies, boards and commissions to
regulate, adjudicate, give advice, administer substantial
fi nancial and other
assets and provide goods and services.
The Commission is examining the elements of the formal and informal
mechanisms for appointments to administrative agencies, boards
and commissions
and considering recommendations for a new appointments process for Manitoba. It
is currently preparing a report entitled,
Improving Administrative Justice in
Manitoba: Starting with the Appointments Process
Pension benefi ts and marital breakdown The Commission is carrying out
research with respect to a possible gap in the law in Manitoba
relating to the
division of pension benefi ts between divorced spouses.
New South Wales Law Reform Commission
Jury directions
The Commission is in the fi nal stages of its inquiry into jury directions in
criminal trials.
In February 2007, the Attorney General requested that the Commission inquire
into the directions and warnings given by a judge to
a jury in a criminal trial.
The Commission is required to have regard to:
• the increasing number and complexity of the directions, warnings and
comments required to be given by a judge to a jury;
• the timing, manner and methodology adopted by judges in summing up to
juries (including the use of model or pattern instructions);
• the ability of jurors to comprehend and apply the instructions given
to them by a judge;
• whether other assistance should be provided to jurors to supplement
the oral summing up; and
• any other related matter.
In December 2008, the Commission published a consultation paper (
, CP 4) which looks at the instructions that judges currently
give. It poses the question of whether the instructions are necessary
trial and, if so, whether they can be presented to jurors in a more effective
way. Consideration is also given to the
ways in which judges’ oral
directions can be supplemented by other materials, such as computer technology,
written summaries,
and fl ow charts setting out pathways to a verdict.
The Commission has received submissions from the public on all aspects of
jury directions, including the ways in which they are delivered,
series of advisory committee meetings in 2009 ahead of preparation of the fi nal
The Commission has completed its reference into privacy, with the release of
Invasion of Privacy
(Report 120) in August 2009.
The Commission recommends that there should be an action for invasion of
be able to claim
compensation and places limitations on the action.
Under the Commission’s proposals, the action is only applicable where
an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy
that is not overridden by
public interests such as freedom of speech. The Commission has advocated a
common sense approach, whereby
important concerns such as the public’s ‘right to know’ and
the protection
of national security. The report recommends that the new cause of
action only be introduced as part of national law reform so that
would be uniform throughout Australia.
FOI and privacy
The Commission received expanded terms of reference from the Attorney General
in June 2009 ‘to inquire and report on the legislation
and policies
governing the handling of access applications for personal information of
persons other than the applicant under the
Freedom of Information Act 1989
(or any successor legislation)’. The report was due in October
People with cognitive or mental health Impairments
The Commission commenced two projects in early 2007 under its Community Law
Reform Program relating to people with cognitive or mental
health impairments
coming into contact with the criminal justice system. The fi rst was to review
section 32 of the
Mental Health (Criminal Procedure) Act 1990
(NSW). This
provision gives magistrates very broad powers—including diversion from the
criminal justice system—when dealing
with a defendant who is
developmentally disabled, or suffering from a mental illness, or suffering from
a mental condition for which
treatment is available in a public hospital (but is
not mentally ill within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Mental Health Act
). The second project was to review the principles of sentencing
offenders with cognitive or mental health impairments.
In September 2007, the Attorney General issued the Commission with new,
expanded terms of reference. As well as the matters already
being considered,
the Commission is now also required to consider ‘fi tness to be
tried’ and the ‘defence of mental
The Commission is planning the release of a consultation paper in late 2009,
with a fi nal report to follow.
The Commission’s inquiry on the law of complicity is reaching its fi
nal phase, with the preparation of a report for the Attorney
Complicity refers to rules that widen criminal liability beyond the main
perpetrator of a criminal act to another person or persons
who may have assisted
the main perpetrator to commit an offence. The secondary participant can be held
equally guilty of the crime
committed. The concept is often referred to as
derivative or secondary liability. The law of complicity in NSW is still based
the common law, unlike most states, territories and the Commonwealth, which
have codifi ed the relevant principles.
In January 2008, the Commission published a consultation paper on the law of
complicity. The paper focuses on two types of complicity:
extended common
purpose, and accessorial liability. The third type, which is not considered in
any detail, is concerned with joint
criminal enterprise.
The paper outlines the criticisms which have been directed at these aspects
of the law of complicity, particularly by the former High
Court judge, the Hon
Michael Kirby AC CMG, in a number of High Court cases.
Workplace deaths
The Commission is conducting a statutory review of provisions inserted in
2005 into the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 2000
(NSW), which
created a new offence relating to workplace deaths.
The Commission has prepared an interim report for the Attorney General, which
is yet to be made public.
Emergency medical care and the restricted right to practise
The Attorney General asked the NSW Law Reform Commission last year to review
Medical Practice Act 1992
(NSW) to determine whether individuals
whose legal right to practise medicine is restricted ought to be under any, and
if so what,
obligation to provide emergency medical care contrary to the
restriction on their right to practise.
Practitioners whose right to practise is restricted may only be able to
provide ‘urgent’ services if they act in breach
of the restrictions
imposed on their right to practise. If they abide by those restrictions, their
conduct amounts to ‘unsatisfactory
professional conduct’. On the
other hand, if they ignore the restrictions and provide the urgent treatment
required, they are
likewise guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under
the Act for ignoring a condition attached to their registration. The
not resolve this difficulty.
The Commission made three recommendations designed to overcome these diffi
culties in its fi nal report,
Emergency medical care and the restricted right
to practise
(Report 121), published in May 2009.
Review of penalty notice offences
The Attorney General, in December 2008, asked the Commission to inquire into
the laws relating to the use of penalty notices in NSW
and, in particular, in
relation to the level of penalties available, the methods by which offences are
selected which attract penalties,
and the methods by which penalties are set, as
well as the categories of persons in relation to whom they should be
The Commission plans to publish a consultation paper by the end of 2009.
Family violence
The NSW Law Reform Commission is working with the Australian Law Reform
Commission on its family violence inquiry. The NSW Law Reform
received terms of reference in July 2009 and is now calling for preliminary
submissions.
The commissions are working on a joint consultation paper to be released
early in 2010, with a fi nal report due in July 2010.
(Editor’s note: See the article on page 55 for further discussion on
this inquiry.)
Queensland Law Reform Commission
Jury directions and warnings
In March 2009, the Queensland Law Reform Commission released an issues paper
that examines a number of specifi c jury directions and
warnings, and considers
several options to improve jury directions generally. The paper also examines
whether jurors can be assisted
by the provision of other information, such as
transcripts or other written aids.
The Commission is undertaking a research project with former jurors to
investigate the extent to which they understood, and were assisted
directions, warnings, addresses and summing up given in their respective
The Commission’s fi nal report is due at the end of 2009.
Uniform succession laws
In April 2009, the Queensland Law Reform Commission completed the fi nal
The Administration of Estates of Deceased Persons
concluded the fourth and fi nal stage of the Uniform Succession Laws Project.
The report includes model legislation to facilitate
the implementation of the
National Committee’s recommendations by the states and territories.
The project was an initiative of the Standing Committee of Attorneys General,
and aimed to update and harmonise the succession laws
of the states and
territories. It was undertaken by the National Committee for Uniform Succession
Laws, which included representatives
from all states and territories, except
South Australia.
In developing the recommendations contained in the report, the National
Committee was guided by four objectives:
• the simplification of the law;
• the simplifi cation of processes;
• the protection of persons with an interest in the estate of a
deceased person; and
• recognition of the extent of informal administration.
Simplifi cation of the law
As part of the simplifi cation of the law, the National Committee sought to
assimilate, to the greatest extent possible, the role
of administrators with
that of executors. For example, the National Committee recommended that the
chain of representation, which
presently passes through executors only, should
also be able to pass through administrators. Where an administrator dies without
having completed the administration of the estate, this recommendation will
enable the executor or administrator of the deceased
administrator to continue
the administration of the original estate, and will avoid the need to obtain a
further grant in relation
to the original estate.
The National Committee also streamlined and clarifi ed the statutory order
for the application of assets towards the payment of debts
in a solvent estate.
This is an area of the law that has historically given rise to considerable
uncertainty and litigation.
Simplifi cation of processes
In addition to simplifying the law, the National Committee sought to simplify
the processes for the administration of estates. The
major reform proposed, in
this respect, is the scheme for the recognition of certain Australian grants
without the need for those
grants to be resealed. Under the fi rst stage of
these proposals, if a person dies domiciled in an Australian state or territory,
a grant made in that jurisdiction and bearing the required endorsement as to
domicile will generally be effective in the other Australian
avoids the need to obtain a grant, or the resealing of a grant, in each
Australian jurisdiction in which there
is property to be administered.
The protection of persons with an interest in the estate of a deceased
The National Committee also recognised that the lack of information provided
by some personal representatives is an issue that commonly
gives rise to
disputes in relation to the administration of estates. The National Committee
clarifi ed the duty of a personal representative
to maintain documents about the
administration of an estate, and provided benefi ciaries and other specifi ed
persons with a mechanism
to obtain access to the documents that must be
maintained by a personal representative.
A second issue that gives rise to complaints about the administration of
estates concerns the amount of commission charged by personal
representatives
(particularly under the provisions of a will). The National Committee
recommended that the court have an express
power to review the amount that is
charged, or proposed to be charged, by a personal representative for
administering an estate.
Recognition of the extent of informal administration
The National Committee also recognised the extent to which many estates are
able to be administered without a grant, and included
provisions to facilitate
that course. For example, the National Committee recommended that:
• elections to administer should be able to be fi led by the public
trustee, a trustee company or a legal practitioner;
• the model legislation should clarify the liability of a person who
administers an estate informally; and
• the model legislation should include a provision to facilitate the
payment, by a person who holds money or personal property
of a deceased person,
of certain amounts without requiring the production of a grant.
Scottish Law Commission
The Scottish Law Commission has published its report and draft Bill on
(ScotLawCom No 215). It is a comprehensive review of the law
of testate and intestate succession and recommends a thorough updating
simplifi cation of the current succession rules.
The recommendations for the distribution of intestate estates form the heart
of the reform. The Commission recommends that an intestate’s
spouse or civil (same sex) partner should inherit the whole estate up to the
value of a threshold sum (suggested to be
£300,000). Any excess will be
divided into two parts—one for the spouse or civil partner and the other
for any issue of
the deceased (children, grandchildren, etc). So, if the
deceased leaves no issue, the spouse or civil partner will inherit the whole
estate regardless of its size. If the deceased is not survived by a spouse or
civil partner, the issue will inherit everything. For
example, Ethel dies
intestate leaving her husband, Harold, a daughter, Donna, and net estate of
£340,000. Harold receives £320,000
(that is, the threshold sum plus
half of the excess) and Donna £20,000. These reforms place the surviving
spouse or civil partner
in what the Commission considers to be their rightful
position: as the main heir on intestacy. Also, the current distinction between
heritable and moveable estate is largely eradicated.
Secondly, there are recommendations for the protection of certain close
family members. If the deceased dies testate, making inadequate
provision for the surviving spouse or civil partner, the recommendation is that
the survivor should be entitled to a legal
share of the estate, which is to be
valued at 25% of what he or she would have inherited if the deceased had died
intestate. The
report makes two alternative sets of recommendations in relation
to disinherited children. One is that the deceased’s issue
entitled to a legal share of the estate, also valued at 25% of what he or she
would have inherited on intestacy. If, in
our example, Ethel had left her entire
estate to charity, Donna’s legal share would be £5,000 and
Harold’s £80,000.
The second, more radical, alternative is that
protection should only be given to a deceased’s dependent child, who is to
entitled to a capital sum from the estate. It is calculated by reference to
his or her maintenance needs for the period between the
deceased’s death
and the time when, had the deceased survived, his or her alimentary obligation
to the child would have ceased
(that is, at 18 or, if the child is in further
education or training, by age 25). The capital sum is payable out of the whole
other than any part which goes to a person who owes the child an
obligation of aliment. So, if a father dies leaving a young child,
which devolves to the child’s mother will be disregarded, on the basis
that she owes the child an alimentary obligation.
Under this scenario
disinherited adult children would have no claim. Those who responded to the
Commission’s earlier discussion
paper on this inquiry were evenly divided
between the two options, so the Commission considered it right to present both
alternatives.
The fi nal decision is for the Scottish Parliament.
The report expressly provides that a person who has a right to a legal share
may renounce it at any time. This may be appropriate,
for example, where a widow
wishes to leave her estate to her badly handicapped son and not to her well-off
daughter, or where the
testator’s main asset is a business which would
suffer a disproportionate loss if a part had to be sold in order to meet a
for legal share.
The third set of recommendations relates to cohabitants. The current
provision, in s 29 of the
Family Law (Scotland) Act 2006
repealed; instead, a cohabitant whose relationship is terminated by the
deceased’s death is to be entitled to an
‘appropriate
percentage’ of the sum which he or she would have inherited had the couple
been spouses or civil partners.
This will apply in testate cases as well as on
intestacy, so the survivor will receive a percentage of the legal share to which
spouse or civil partner would have been entitled or, alternatively, a
percentage of the intestate succession entitlement of a spouse
or civil partner.
Prescribed factors are to be taken into account in determining the appropriate
percentage: they focus exclusively
on the length and quality of the
cohabitant’s relationship with the deceased. Factors such as the size of
the estate, the existing
means of the survivor, the identity of the other benefi
ciaries and so on will be irrelevant and cannot be considered. So, for example,
a woman whose relationship lasted for 40 years and who brought up the
couple’s children might be entitled to a large percentage,
say 95%, of
what she would have received if married to the deceased. But the appropriate
percentage for the survivor of a couple
who had only been together for a few
years, who managed their fi nances separately and whose household did not
include children might
be around 25% of a spouse or civil partner’s
entitlement.
The report makes other recommendations, many of which stem from
recommendations in the Commission’s
Report on Succession
which have not yet been implemented. For instance, there is consideration of
international private law issues, the rectifi
cation of wills and the revival of
revoked wills. Apart from recommended reforms about caution, the report does not
address matters
relating to executors and estate administration. The Commission
intends to review the law in this area in a future project, possibly
part of its Eighth Programme of Law Reform.
South African Law Reform Commission
Statutory law revision
Work continues on the Commission’s major investigation on statutory law
revision (Project 25), which aims to establish a permanently
simplifi ed,
coherent and generally accessible statute book. An audit of all national
legislation (excluding provincial and secondary
legislation) by the Commission
revealed that there are close to 3,000 statutes on the statute book, comprising
Principal Acts, Amendment
Acts, Supplementary or Additional Acts and Private
Acts. Many of these Acts are not being applied anymore while others contain
that are in confl ict with the
Constitution
. Redundant and
obsolete provisions on the statute book are being identifi ed and government
departments are being consulted in order
to verify these provisions.
With a view to increasing research capacity, the Commission identifi ed
advisory committee members for appointment by the Minister
of Justice and
Constitutional Development. In July 2008, 112 advisory committee members were
appointed to 14 advisory committees.
Initial meetings of these advisory
committees were held to decide the way forward, and agree on a division of the
statutes to be
reviewed; time-frames of the fi rst stage of the review; and the
development of consultation papers.
Further meetings were held earlier this year to consider these consultation
papers. Once approved, these consultation papers will
be submitted to the
departments concerned to consider and to comment on the preliminary fi ndings
and proposals.
In March 2009 a progress report and a Cabinet Memorandum detailing progress
made in the project up to the end of February 2009 was
submitted to Department
of Justice and Constitutional Development. The Minister submitted the progress
report to Cabinet for noting.
Discussion papers released as part of this investigation are available on the
Commission’s website.
Hindu marriages
The Commission is developing a discussion paper as part of its investigation
into the recognition of Hindu marriages. The inquiry,
which was approved for
inclusion in the Commission’s program in 2006, is part of Project 25
(discussed above).
South African law does not recognise marriages by Hindu rites; therefore all
the legal consequences of marriage do not apply to such
marriages in South
Africa. Couples in a Hindu marriage for example need not use the court if they
want to get divorced. Spouses also
cannot claim any of the legal consequence of
divorce, such as maintenance, after the relationship has ended. The aim of this
investigation
is to look into the recognition of Hindu marriages in order to
afford these marriages full legal recognition and the same status
as marriages
concluded in accordance with civil rites.
The report on Project 124:
was submitted
to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development in February 2009 and
publicly released in August. The Minister
has subsequently sought and obtained
Cabinet approval to submit the Protection of Personal Information Bill into
Parliament.
The Commission’s investigation covered all aspects regarding the
protection of personal information in relation to the processing
(collection,
storage, use and communication) of the information by the State or another.
The Commission has recommended that privacy and information protection be
regulated by a general information protection statute, which
supplemented by codes of conduct for the various sectors.
The legislation is pro-active in nature, focusing on ensuring that proper
systems are put in place instead of only policing encroachments.
The Bill applies to both the public and private sector; to paper records as
well as those held on computers; and to identifi able
natural and juristic
persons. It will give effect to the following internationally accepted core
information protection principles,
and will provide that personal information
• obtained fairly and lawfully;
• used only for the original specified purpose;
• adequate, relevant and not excessive to purpose;
• accurate and up to date;
• accessible to the subject;
• kept secure;
• destroyed after its purpose is completed;
• transferred only to countries that ensure an adequate level of
information protection; and
• accounted for by the responsible party at all times.
Provision is made for exceptions to the information protection principles.
Exclusions and exemptions are furthermore possible for
specifi c sectors in
applicable circumstances. Special provision has also been made for the
protection of special (sensitive) personal
information, such as information
regarding children, religion, health and sex life, race, political persuasion
and criminal behaviour.
The Commission recommends a fl exible approach where industries will develop
their own codes of conduct (in accordance with the principles
set out in the
legislation), which will be overseen by the regulatory agency. Codes of conduct
for individual sectors may be drawn
up for specifi c sectors on the initiative
of the sector itself or of an Information Protection Regulator.
The Regulator will administer both the new
Protection of Personal
Information Act
and the existing
Promotion of Access to Information
The recommendations and draft legislation are the result of a profoundly
thorough consultation process. Should these recommendations
be adopted by
Parliament, the protection of information privacy in South Africa will be in
line with international obligations in
terms of requirements and
developments.
Adult prostitution
The Commission is considering the responses it has received in its
investigation into adult prostitution (Project 107:
Sexual Offences: Adult
Prostitution
) after releasing a discussion paper for public comment earlier
this year. The Commission also held a series of public workshops and
online questionnaire as part of consultation on the investigation.
The Commission is considering the need for law reform in relation to adult
prostitution and identifying alternative policy and legislative
responses that
might regulate, prevent, deter or reduce prostitution. A secondary aim is to
review the fragmented legislative framework
which currently regulates adult
prostitution and enhance alignment with international human rights obligations.
Under current South
African legislation, voluntary selling and buying of adult
sex and all related acts are criminal offences.
The proposed four law reform options outlined in the discussion paper
• total criminalisation of adult prostitution (status quo);
• partial criminalisation of some forms of adult prostitution and
prostitution related acts;
• non-criminalisation of adult prostitution; and
• regulation of adult prostitution and prostitution related acts.
All of the proposed options presuppose the criminalisation of under-aged and
coerced prostitution and traffi cking of people for the
purpose of prostitution
(the legislature has recently revised and severely sanctioned commercial sexual
exploitation of children
and traffi cking of children and adults for sexual
purposes). The criminalisation of coerced adult prostitution must be included
the option which is ultimately recommended in the report.
The Commission is preparing its report, which will contain the fi nal
recommendations of the Commission and will be accompanied by
legislative
proposals pertaining to adult prostitution.
Tasmania Law Reform Institute
Easements and analogous rights
This project reviews the current laws of easements and analogous rights in
Tasmania to ensure that they meet community expectations
On 17 February 2009, an issues paper was released. The large response that
has been received from members of the public (requesting
copies of the paper and
talking to the Institute about problems with the existing law) demonstrates that
this is an area of public
concern in Tasmania. Public comment received by the
Institute indicates that there is a great deal of uncertainty about the rights
and obligations of the owners of the dominant and servient tenements. The need
for a low cost dispute resolution forum is another
key theme in the responses
received from the public.
Work is currently underway on the preparation of the fi nal report. The
report will make recommendations for reform in relation to
the current
legislative requirements in Tasmania for the creation, variation and termination
of easements. Other important areas
to be considered are the abandonment of
easements, the recognition of novel easements, and the recognition of easements
Male circumcision
On 2 June 2009, an issues paper was released that examines the law relating
to non-therapeutic male circumcision in Tasmania. The
paper was written for the
Board of the Institute by a postgraduate student enrolled at the Faculty of Law,
Mr Warwick Marshall.
The particular focus of the paper is the criminal and civil liability of a
person performing a nontherapeutic circumcision. For the
purposes of the paper,
a circumcision is regarded as nontherapeutic if it is performed for any reason
other than remedying or treating
an existing disease, illness or deformity of
the body. Prophylactic circumcisions are included as non-therapeutic
circumcisions.
The paper provides a brief review of the medical and non-medical background,
examines the current legal situation in relation to criminal
responsibility,
family law, the legal responsibilities of circumcisers in the provision of their
service and the relevant human rights
law. It also describes the legislative
regimes for circumcision that exist in some overseas jurisdictions, briefl y
outlines some
options for reform and provides a list of questions to direct
discussion.
After an examination of the law in Tasmania, the paper concludes that adults
and children capable of consent can almost certainly
provide consent for the
procedure so that a circumciser can legally perform the procedure (subject to
other duties the circumciser
will have in the provision of their service).
However, the paper also concludes that there is uncertainty as to whether
consent for the circumcision of their child is suffi cient to
allow a circumciser legally to perform the procedure.
The main purpose of the paper is to encourage, and provide the background
for, deliberation about whether changes need to be made
to the law in Tasmania.
In particular the paper invites consideration of:
• the circumstances in which a person is criminally liable for
performing nontherapeutic circumcision (punishable by either
imprisonment, a fi
ne, or other means);
• the circumstances in which a person is liable under civil law for
performing a non-therapeutic circumcision; and
• the regulation of the commercial aspects of male circumcision.
Following consideration of all responses it is intended that a fi nal report
will be published, containing recommendations.
Victorian Parliament Law Reform
Alternative dispute resolution and restorative justice
The Victorian Parliament Law Reform Committee (VPLRC) tabled its report on
alternative dispute resolution (ADR) and restorative justice
in May 2009.
The report contains 44 recommendations which aim to realise the potential of
ADR services in Victoria, ensure high quality services
and make ADR accessible
to all members of the community. The recommendations include:
• reducing barriers to access for members of the community, including
establishing more dispute settlement centres throughout
the state, providing
more assistance for people from non-English speaking backgrounds and developing
culturally appropriate services;
• increasing the capacity of Victorians to resolve civil disputes
themselves through education about confl ict resolution and
communications
skills; and
• increasing the supply of ADR services, particularly by exploring the
scope for additional industry ombudsman schemes and by
undertaking research into
the potential use of online ADR.
The report also contains 34 recommendations aimed at enhancing current
restorative justice programs and making restorative justice
more widely
available in Victoria, including:
• improving the experiences of victims participating in the Youth
Justice Group Conferencing (YJGC) Program, a restorative justice
operating in the Children’s Court of Victoria, through increased provision
of information and support to victims and
more follow-up with victims after a
group conference;
• increasing the quality and consistency of restorative justice
services through the training and accreditation of providers;
• expanding restorative justice programs in Victoria, including a
staged rollout of restorative justice programs to suitable
adult offenders, a
pilot program using restorative justice for some more serious offences (but not
for family violence and sexual
offences) and a trial restorative justice program
for suitable offenders after they have been sentenced by a court.
Members of Parliament (Register of Interests) Act
The VPLRC is currently reviewing the
Members of Parliament (Register of
Interests) Act 1978
(Vic). The Act sets out a code of conduct for members of
the Victorian Parliament. It also requires them to disclose certain fi nancial
and other interests that have the potential to confl ict with their public
duties, such as land and shareholdings, in a register.
The VPLRC has received 28
submissions to the review and held four public hearings between June and August
this year. The VPLRC will
table its fi nal report to the Victorian Parliament in
December 2009.
Powers of attorney
The VPLRC is conducting an inquiry into Powers of Attorney in Victoria. The
terms of reference require the VPLRC to consider law reforms
to streamline and
simplify powers of attorney documents to enable more Victorians to plan for
their future fi nancial, lifestyle
and healthcare needs.
The VPLRC has called for public submissions to the inquiry, and has received
more than 60 submissions to date. Public hearings were
held in October 2009 and
more are planned for late 2009 and early 2010
The inquiry is due to be completed by 31 August 2010.
Further information about the work of the VPLRC, including copies of reports,
terms of reference and information about how to make
a submission, is available
at www.parliament.vic.gov.au/lawreform, or by calling (03) 8682 2851.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (354 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter