URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:41:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McMahon, Michael --- "Indigenous Cultures, Copyright and the Digital Age" [1997] AboriginalLawB 23; (1997) 3(90) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 14
Indigenous Cultures, Copyright and the Digital Age
By Michael McMahon
The development and internationalisation of the `institutionalised'
intellectual property system has occurred without any specific
consideration
being given to the particular needs and aspirations of the indigenous peoples
of the world. In Australia over the past
twenty years there has been increasing
interest in these needs and aspirations
to date little has occurred to assist indigenous Australians through the
intellectual property system. The limited achievements
have been the result of
action by individuals to protect their rights under the existing intellectual
property regime.
Indigenous laws dealing with
intellectual property and endeavours remain unrecognised in Australia and most
The need for action to recognise
and protect indigenous knowledge has become ever more urgent as the pressures
to commercialise information,
knowledge and cultures builds and accelerates in
what is popularly called the Digital Age. These pressures become harder to
as technology, transport and travel shift information, articles and
people around the globe with relative ease. The rules of the
game are changing
rapidly and we are all operating into a new context, `one in which borders no
longer have their old meaning, rights
and powers may not be defined by spatial
boundaries, property cannot be protected in traditional ways, and much of the
social, and cultural action has been attracted to the upstart venues
of cyberspace.'
Digital technology--which allows for all previous forms of communication and
information, including text, graphics, sound and moving
images, to be encoded
into strings of 1's and 0's and retrievable at an address--is changing the
intellectual property scenario at
a rapid rate. Some writers and commentators
believe that copyright will adapt and survive the latest technological
developments in
the way in which it has in the past.
Others argue colourfully and sometimes persuasively that
the copyright system in particular will not survive.
If this latter group are right then the main `plank' of the
institutionalised intellectual property which indigenous people in Australia
have used to protect their artistic and cultural expressions will become less
relevant and difficult to administer.
basic proposition of these writers and commentators is that the very
foundations on which copyright developed--that reproduction
and dissemination
were difficult and expensive and so could be controlled--no longer apply in an
environment where information can
be created, stored and disseminated in
digital form.
The ever expanding application of digital technology will continue to have
profound effects for all people. Keeping pace with, let
alone trying to
anticipate, the changes and consequences of the application of digital
technology to so many aspects of our lives
is difficult. Indigenous communities
face particular challenges because of the problems they already have of
accessing and applying
the existing intellectual property system to their
cultures, let alone trying to deal with one which is coming under increasing
from changes in technology.
In any situation there are generally opportunities and the digital age offers
some to indigenous cultures, although accessing them
may not be as easy as many
of the more enthusiastic writers would have us believe. Taking advantage of the
benefits of digital technology
involves considerable costs which are often
overlooked by the commentators such as John Perry Barlow. This is particularly
the application of digital technology to computer networks--the process
which has given birth to the Infobahn. Never before has it
been possible to
transmit information so quickly and in such quantities as the Infobahn allows.
The possibilities sound great but
the reality is that costs of computer
equipment and software remain beyond the reach of many people, let alone the
problem that many
remote indigenous communities have no access or high cost
access to telephones and electricity.
For example, the community of Yirrkala is situated in Eastern Arnhem Land and
is well served with utilities. The community has an
enviable record of
introducing technology and training people in its use, particularly in its
model Literacy Production Centre attached
to the Community School. However, for
anyone in the community to go `on line' during the day at present to take
advantage of the
Internet would cost $18 per hour in telephone charges alone to
connect to the nearest service provider in Darwin. This means that
Community School wanted to use the Internet for three hours each day it would
cost them about $11,000 per year in telephone
charges alone. The present
funding environment means that such costs act as a barrier for remote
indigenous communities which want
to connect to the Infobahn so as to benefit
from what it may have to offer them. While there are very progressive uses of
technology by some indigenous organisations such as the Tanami
and developments in satellite
technology will improve the opportunities to `connect' from a remote location,
it is going to take
considerable expenditure and investment if indigenous
Australians in remote areas are to take full advantage of the Digital Age.
William J Mitchell puts it in `City of Bits', his `windshield survey along the
`No network connection at all--zero bandwidth--makes you a digital hermit, an
outcast from cyberspace. The Net creates new opportunities
but exclusion from
it becomes a new form of marginalisation.'
Many of the community based indigenous organisations which may be able to
provide access facilities are being squeezed for funds
and having to adjust
their priorities. Purchasing computers, training people in the use of them and
getting on to the Infobahn all
have to compete with the more immediate concerns
of health, housing and sewerage in most indigenous communities in Australia.
Another issue that is often overlooked but which is crucial to indigenous
people is that as well as having access to equipment and
services at a
reasonable cost, using digital technology also involves education and training.
There may be real advantages in having
communication, reproduction and
dissemination of information easier but you still have to know which keys to
press on the keyboard
or where to position the cursor before you click the
mouse. For many people, but particularly indigenous people in remote areas for
whom English may be a second language, there are major educational barriers
blocking access to the Infobahn.
But if these `threshold' issues of cost and training can be adequately
addressed then indigenous communities will be well served
by the changes to
information technology. In the past indigenous people living in remote
communities could be easily marginalised
and to a large extent ignored in a
world where geography determined so much of one's destiny. In the Digital Age
that need no longer
be the case. Indeed, marginalisation will come (or already
existing marginalisation further exacerbated) from a failure to understand
the opportunities which digital technology offers.
Properly equipped and trained indigenous communities will also be able to take
advantage of control over the dissemination of information
which digital
technology allows, as well as reach a much larger audience than is presently
possible. Traditionally indigenous communities
have relied on reproduction and
dissemination of their information by people outside their communities. This
has often lead to disappointments
and misunderstandings. The use of on-line
digital technology will mean that indigenous people in remote areas will be
able to exercise
greater control over the amount and nature of the information
and material which is disseminated from their communities. This would
welcomed after such a long history of surrendering control over so much of
their artistic and cultural information and material
to third parties to
interpret and present to the rest of the world. Already some communities are
realising the commercial potential
of the Internet
http://www.ozemail.com.au/~jukurrp
and it is to be hoped that before too long we are reading about communities
selling their art direct to American purchasers rather
than auction houses.
While recognising the importance of such
developments it is also necessary to recognise the very real fears in
communities of `rip-offs'
of their intellectual property, particularly in the
digital environment where issues of protection remain uncertain and the
uses and dissemination so wide.
If William J Mitchell is correct and the economic engine in the `soft cities'
of cyberspace is the `bit business'--the production
and consumption of digital
information--then indigenous people may be able to participate in ways that
have not previously been open
to them. They will have access to information
which would have previously been inaccessible to them. They will be able to
information and develop strategies with other indigenous people around
Australia and around the globe. It will be their common interests
bring them together. Location will no longer divide people.
As well as the indigenous specific law reform work referred to above the
previous Commonwealth government had begun to address some
of the more general
challenges to the copyright system through the work of the Copyright Law Review
That work has been given an
added imperative following Australia's participation in the Diplomatic
Conference held by the World Intellectual
Property Organisation in December
1996. At its conclusion that Conference adopted the WIPO Copyright Treaty and
the WIPO Performances
and Phonograms Treaty.
http://www.wipo.int/eng/index.htm
These treaties will have an important effect on copyright law in Australia
over the next couple of years as the government decides
whether Australia
should amend its laws so as to be in a position to comply with the treaties'
requirements and ratify them. The
intended to set new standards for the digital environment, including the
introduction
of a new exclusive right of `authorising any communication to the
public of their works, by wire or wireless means, including the
available to the public of their works in such a way that members of the public
may access these works from a place and at
a time individually chosen by
Indigenous people need to be part of the process of adapting the copyright laws
to fit the Digital Age. They will need to articulate
clearly their needs and
demands for a better system of intellectual property protection or alternative
arrangements which will protect
their cultures in a fast changing technological
environment. They too will have to live in the Digital Age where `intellectual
protection will simultaneously become both more necessary and more
difficult to obtain.'
At the conclusion of its Diplomatic Conference in Geneva in late 1996 the World
Intellectual Property Organisation stated that it
wished to do further work on
indigenous intellectual property rights and will hold a conference for this
purpose in Thailand in April
this year. If the Commonwealth Government is
serious about its election commitment to address the copyright issues of
Australians it must ensure that it draws on the experiences and work
done by indigenous people so that it can play a central and
leading role to
achieve results at the WIPO Conference. But it should not take the position of
handing it all over to WIPO. Considerable
work has already been done in
Australia and the needs have been largely identified. Those needs are expanding
with the increase of
digital technology, particularly on-line. What is really
required now is the political will to act. Experience in the legislative
protection for intellectual property has shown that if the political will, need
and impetus are there, change can come. It came when
the Commonwealth
Parliament hastily passed the
international discrimination over uncertainty as to protection for computer
programs in this country. It also came quickly
in 1989 with the passage of
Circuit Layouts Act
after pressure from the United States. The need
was identified and acted on quickly with the passage of the
Olympic Insignia
The needs of Australia's indigenous people for intellectual property reform are
no less urgent and are becoming more so in the Digital
The Working Party on the Protection of
Aboriginal Folklore commenced work in 1975 and reported in 1981 (
the Working Party on the Protection of Aboriginal Folklore
, Department of
Commonwealth published an Issues Paper entitled
`Stopping the
Rip-offs--Intellectual Property Protection for Indigenous Australians'
(Commonwealth of Australia, 1994). Work and consultations continued although
the continuation of the process has become uncertain
under the present
Government.
The recent history of indigenous artists use
of the law to protect their artistic and cultural expression is set out and
illustrated
Copyrites--Aboriginal Art in the Age of Reproduction
NIAAA and Macquarie University, 1996.
See the casenote by Martin Hardie in this
issue concerning the action by John Bulun Bulun and George Milpurrurru where
includes a claim in customary law relating to the land from which the
artist's work arises.
Mitchell, William J,
City of Bits--Space,
Place, and the Infobahn
, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.), 1995, p.168.
Stanbury, WT, `Aspects of Public Policy
Regarding Crown Copyright in the Digital Age'
(1996) 10 (2)
Intellectual Property Journal
131. (Stanbury
analyses the arguments of
John Perry Barlow in the article listed in footnote 35). See also Collie I,
`Copyright is Dead....or is it?' 1 (1)
10 and the comments
of Schwartz, E., in his Introduction to the `Copyright in the 21st Century'
(1995) 13 (2)
Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal
See in particular John Perry Barlow, `The
Economy of Ideas: A Framework for the Re-thinking of Patents and Copyright in
the Digital
Age (Everything You Wanted to Know About Intellectual Property is
Wired Magazine
, March 1994, p. 84; and Nicholas Negroponte,
Being Digital
, Hodder and Stoughton, 1995, p.58.
Courts are sometimes finding it difficult in
dealing with the concepts of computing and digital technology. A Federal Court
recently distorted a long established copyright principle and sent shock
waves through the local computer software industry when
he found that a single
word in a computer language was a computer program in which copyright
subsisted. See
Data Access Corporation v Powerflex Services Pty Ltd and
33 IPR 194.
The decision is being appealed.
Tanami Network Pty Ltd is an indigenous
owned video-conferencing network based at Yuendumu. It has undertaken important
work in linking
communities and has also been involved in the development of
multimedia product.
Mitchell, William J,
City of Bits--Space,
Place, and the Infobahn
, The MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.), 1995, p.18.
Jukurrpa Artists' web site. This collective of women artists sell artwork from
11] See Sally Blackney, `Sold to the Terminal in the Corner' in
Weekend Australian
, 1-2 February 1997 where it is reported that Sotheby's
put the whole of its Aboriginal Art Sale catalogue on the net and had an
buyer ring up and spend $18,000.
`Copyright Reform: A Consideration of rationales, Interests and
Objectives'
, February 1996.
See the WIPOweb site for the full text of
treaties and other material:
14] Article 8, WIPO Copyright Treaty, 20 December 1996.
Rubin H, Fraser L and Smith M, `US and
International Law Aspects of the Internet: Fitting Square Pegs into Round
International Journal of Law and Information
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter