URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zhou, Suzanne; Desai, Tarishi; Sto-Domingo, Mary Grace Anne Rosales --- "Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 8; (2024) 25(1) Melbourne Journal of International Law 175
BOOK REVIEW
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
edited by Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (Oxford University
Press, 2023) 600 pages. Price USD140 (Hardcover) ISBN: 9780197687710
How does international law affect our health? This question has taken on new
urgency since the COVID-19 pandemic. As the global community
examines how to
prevent another paralysing health emergency from happening again, it has sought
to find answers and solutions in
There has been renewed attention to how health is governed at the
international level and how policies and treaties can broker a healthier
for the next generations. This attention is reflected in developments including
the World Health Assembly’s establishment
of a Working Group to Revise the
International Health Regulations and an Intergovernmental Negotiating Body to
negotiate a new pandemic
negotiations
at the World Trade Organization (‘WTO’) for a
for COVID-19 health technologies,
increasing number of decisions under human rights treaties relating to
and renewed interest in linkages
between the environment and health,
at the most recent
United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Conference of the Parties.
O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier have written a textbook to support a new
generation of law students to grapple with these
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
Global Health & Policy
’) is part of a series of
three books by Gostin and Meier.
Whereas the
other two books in the series have a more specialised focus on health and human
rights, this book adopts a more general
approach and espouses a broader
collaboration.
The book is part of the Global
Health Law Consortium collaboration, with each chapter drafted by subject-matter
The book is divided into four broad sections covering several chapters on
similar themes. Section I, ‘Frameworks & Institutions
Health: Shifting Actors & Norms in a Globalizing World’, covers the
building blocks of global health law, providing
an overview of the conceptual
frameworks,
frameworks,
rights norms
global health law. Section II, ‘Global Health Governance for Disease
Prevention & Health Promotion’, covers global
health governance
frameworks within specific areas, including infectious
non-communicable diseases
and environmental
Section III, ‘Economic
Institutions, Corporate Regulation & Global Health Funding’, covers
the economic aspects of
global health, including the sustainable development
economic development
international
of corporations and other commercial
and global health
Finally, Section IV, ‘International Legal Efforts to Address Rising Health
Threats’, examines a range of topical and
multisectoral global health
issues, including antimicrobial resistance,
pathogen sharing,
sexual and reproductive
in conflict,
and universal health
book also has a preface
and introduction by
the editors,
a foreword by World Health
Organization (‘WHO’) Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom
Ghebreyesus
and an afterword by Steven
Solomon of WHO’s Legal Office.
The book is designed for academic purposes with a list of guiding questions
and a bibliography supporting each chapter of the book.
Although intended as a
teaching tool, the book takes on advanced topics and would best suit students
who already have a basic knowledge
of international law.
Global Health Law & Policy
is timely and relevant as the world
continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and continues to face multiple
global health
crises. Indeed, the book begins with a moving dedication to those
who died in the COVID-19 pandemic and has a clear desire to demonstrate
global health law and policy can be used to build a healthier
Accordingly, the book’s focus on global health law covers how it
interacts with both domestic and international law and binding
and non-binding
instruments. Importantly, the role of soft law receives significant attention
given its importance in practice to
global health law and policy, as do
non-health treaty regimes, including human rights, trade and the environment and
their interrelationships.
Though the book largely covers international law, its
strength is its consideration of a wide range of fields of international law,
including tensions between various subspecialities that impact on justice in
global health. Further, it adopts a multidisciplinary
approach, drawing on
fields such as sociology, economics and history in its analysis. Contributing
authors are cognisant of the importance
of an intersectional approach to global
health law and policy. The book also promotes a multisectoral and “health
in all policies”
approach to maximise the impact of global health law and
The significant expertise of the contributing authors is evident throughout
the book, and as experienced practitioners of global health
law, the reviewers
found the book very informative. The editors are to be commended for selecting
contributing authors who have expertise
across a range of specialisations and
geographical perspectives. Unlike many US-published textbooks, both the
contributors and case
studies cover a wide range of countries, providing the
book with a truly global analysis of global health law and policy. Another
strength of the book is its focus on the ongoing impacts of colonialism on
global health that are acknowledged throughout the book.
Similarly, the book
pleasingly focuses on the financing and institutional practicalities of
organisations like the WHO, World Bank
and WTO in ways law textbooks often do
The book contains almost 600 pages of substantive content over 20 chapters
and is very comprehensive. Though in its entirety, it may
cover too much ground
for what is usually a one-semester elective subject where other readings are
included in the syllabus, global
health law teachers will find it very easy to
selectively assign chapters from the book to suit their class requirements.
students as well as global health practitioners will appreciate being
able to explore specific chapters based on their interests.
In terms of the limitations of the book, although the book generally flows
well, sometimes the chapters still feel self-contained
despite the intention for
the book to be read as one textbook. This is less of a concern with later
chapters that deal with specialised
areas that do not overlap across chapters,
but early chapters that provide conceptual overviews of the field can be
repetitive as
basic concepts and history are explained from different angles.
Topics that repeat across several chapters include, for example,
the history of
and early 20
century International Sanitary
Conferences and International Sanitary Conventions (precursors to the
International Health
Regulations
the shift from
comprehensive primary health care to selective basic packages in the priorities
of global health funders
and the adoption
of the Sustainable Development Goals.
having this repeated content allows one to examine the topic from different
perspectives and selectively assign chapters for
teaching, the first half of the
book in particular does feel repetitive if read cover to cover.
There are also some absences. Section III, covering international economic
concepts, for example, does not cover international investment
law, which is
surprising given the widespread concerns for tobacco control caused by
investment disputes brought by Philip Morris
entities against Australia and
Uruguay over tobacco packaging and
and the Eli Lilly cases against
Canada regarding access to medicines.
topics that could potentially have been included in the book include the UN drug
control regime
in relation to drug policy,
harm reduction, palliative care and access to
occupational health in
International Labour Organization treaties;
or migration and health.
However, given the
wide range of activities that affect health, these absences are unavoidable in
any book that aims to cover the
field (and are a feature of all books on global
health law to date), and the book overall does an admirable job of covering the
areas of global health law practice and representing the issues.
In many ways, these limitations are less a critique of the book and more a
demonstration of how global health law is still very much
a fragmented
discipline, both by subspeciality of international law and by health issue. The
chapter on trade, for example, is excellent
on the access-to-medicines issues
that have arisen out of the HIV and COVID-19
But it has much less to say on
the trade issues that have been the focus of those working on NCDs, with key
topics like front-of-package
food labelling
or alcohol warning labels at the WTO
mentioned in the chapter (although there is a case study on tobacco plain
packaging at the WTO).
It is striking how
different the emphasis is even within the same topic when viewed from the lens
of different disease groups —
one can easily imagine a totally different
distribution of topics on trade and global health, had NCDs rather than
infectious diseases
been the starting point. The book overall also demonstrates
the tremendous differences between the types of law that apply to, for
mental health as compared to infectious disease pandemics, or to NCDs as
compared to protecting health care in conflict,
or to sexual and reproductive
health as compared to environmental health. The sheer breadth of what a book on
global health law has
to encompass means it is valuable to have a book that
provides an overview about how different areas of international law interact
with different issues in global health.
The book has an optimistic perspective on international law as a tool for
justice in global health. At the same time, it acknowledges
the colonial roots
of global health and their ongoing impacts as well as the continued effects of
racism and gender inequities in
It also discusses the growing
threat of right-wing populism to global health, particularly in the context of
sexual and reproductive
health and rights.
However, this discussion could have benefited from a further exploration of
strategies being employed by an increasing number of
national and transnational
coalitions of populist and conservative political and religious actors to refute
commitments and established
understandings of international human rights law
that impact health,
including the
interpretive approach of ‘human rights originalism’ to limit
States’ responsibilities to provide
healthcare, such as abortion
Similarly, the book has less to
say about the co-option of international law by modern bad faith actors, such as
the tobacco industry,
to the detriment of
As the COVID-19 pandemic has shown, health touches on and is influenced by
almost every aspect of human society. Books on global health
law are therefore
ambitious projects.
Global Health Law & Policy
is no different and
does an admirable job in not only providing expert perspectives across a complex
and wide-ranging field but doing
so in a way that provides an accessible
introduction to students to the range of topics in modern global health law.
Suzanne Zhou,
⁑ and Mary Grace Anne Rosales
Sto-Domingo
See World Health Assembly,
Strengthening WHO Preparedness for and response to Health Emergencies
WHA Res 75(9), 75
plen mtg, Agenda Item 16.2,
WHO Doc WHA75(9) (27 May 2022); World Health Assembly,
The World Together:
Establishment of an Intergovernmental Negotiating Body to Strengthen Pandemic
Prevention, Preparedness and Response
, WHA Dec SSA/2(5), 5
mtg, WHO Doc WHASS2/2021/REC/1 (1 December 2021).
See, eg, World Trade Organization,
Draft Ministerial Decision on the
TRIPS Agreement
WTO Doc WT/MIN(22)/W/15/Rev.2 (17 June 2022).
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 3 January 1976);
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities
, opened for signature 30 March
2007, 2515 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 May 2008).
See also COP28 UAE,
COP28 Declaration
on Climate and Health
(Meeting Report, 03 December 2023).
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
opened for signature 9 May
(entered into force 21 March 1994).
Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason
Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier
(Oxford University Press, 2023).
The other titles in the series are
Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Foundations of Global
Health & Human Rights
(Oxford University Press, 2020) and Benjamin Mason
Meier and Lawrence O Gostin (eds),
Human Rights in Global Health:
Rights-Based Governance for a Globalizing World
(Oxford University Press,
Global Health Law Consortium,
Health Law Consortium
(Web Page) <
https://globalhealthlawconsortium.org/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/LB9T-6WD7
Lawrence O Gostin and Alexandra Finch,
‘Global Health: Global Determinants, Global Governance, and Global
Law’ in Lawrence
O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health
Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University
Press, 2023) 15.
Sharifah Sekalala and Roojin Habibi,
‘Global Health Law: Legal Frameworks to Advance Global Health’ in
Lawrence O Gostin
and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law &
Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press,
Benjamin Mason Meier and Matiangai
Sirleaf, ‘Global Health Landscape: The Proliferating Actors Influencing
Global Health Governance’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 65.
Judith Bueno de Mesquita and Lisa
Forman, ‘Global Health Norms: Human Rights, Equity, and Social Justice in
Global Health’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 91.
Gian Luca Burci and Björn
Kümmel, ‘Global Health Diplomacy: The Process of Developing Global
Health Law and Policy’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 119.
Pedro A Villareal and Lauren Tonti,
‘Infectious Disease: Preventing, Detecting, and Responding to Pandemic
Threats under International
Law’ in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason
Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 147.
Roger Magnusson and Lawrence O Gostin,
‘Non-Communicable Disease: Regulating Commercial Determinants Underlying
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
University Press, 2023) 175.
Priscila Rodríguez and Eric
Rosenthal, ‘Mental Health: From Institutions to Community Inclusion’
in Lawrence O
Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law &
Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press,
Marlies Hesselman and Benjamin Mason
Meier, ‘Environmental Health: Regulating Clean Air and Water as Underlying
Determinants
of Health’ in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 231.
Stéphanie Dagron and Jennifer
Hasselgård-Rowe, ‘Sustainable Development: The 2030 Agenda and Its
Implications
for Global Health Law’ in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin
Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a
Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 259.
Diane A Desierto and Erica Patterson,
‘Economic Development Policy: Poverty Alleviation for Public Health
Advancement’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 285.
Lisa Forman, Katrina Perehudoff, and
Chuan-Feng Wu, ‘International Trade Governance: Free Trade and
Intellectual Property Threaten
Public Health’ in Lawrence O Gostin and
Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice
for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 311.
Roojin Habibi and Thana C de
Campos-Rudinsky, ‘Commercial Determinants of Health: Corporate Social
Responsibility as Smokescreen
or Global Health Policy?’ in Lawrence O
Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy:
Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 339.
Sam Halabi and Lawrence O Gostin,
‘Global Health Funding Agencies: Developing New Institutions to Finance
Health Needs’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 365.
Isaac Weldon and Steven J Hoffman,
‘Antimicrobial Resistance: Collective Action to Support Shared Global
Resources’ in
Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
University Press, 2023) 395.
Mark Eccleston-Turner and Michelle
Rourke, ‘Pathogen Sharing: Balancing Access to Pathogen Samples with
Equitable Access to
Medicines’ in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason
Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 423.
Aziza Ahmed and Terry McGovern,
‘Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights: Advancing Human Rights to
Protect Bodily Autonomy
and Sexuality’ in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin
Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a
Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 447.
Jocelyn Getgen Kestenbaum and Benjamin
Mason Meier, ‘Health in Conflict: International Humanitarian Law as Global
Health Policy’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 473.
Alexandra Phelan and Kim van Daalen,
‘Climate Change: A Cataclysmic Health Threat Requiring Global
Action’ in Lawrence
O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
University Press, 2023) 501.
Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason
Meier, ‘Universal Health Coverage: Whole of Government Approaches to
Determinants of Health’
in Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 525.
Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason
Meier, ‘Preface: A Field Born of Trying Times’ in Lawrence O Gostin
and Benjamin
Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring
Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) xv.
Lawrence O Gostin and Benjamin Mason
Meier, ‘Introduction: Foundations of Global Health Law & Policy’
in Lawrence
O Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law &
Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press,
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus,
‘Foreword: The Law as a Fundamental Determinant of Global Health’ in
Lawrence O Gostin and
Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law &
Policy: Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press,
Steven Solomon, ‘Afterword:
Foundational Information for a New Generation’ in Lawrence O Gostin and
Benjamin Mason Meier
Global Health Law & Policy: Ensuring Justice
for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023) 551.
‘Dedication’ in Lawrence O
Gostin and Benjamin Mason Meier (eds),
Global Health Law & Policy:
Ensuring Justice for a Healthier World
(Oxford University Press, 2023).
See Gostin and Finch (n
) 23–5; Sekalala and Habibi (n
) 41, 44-45; Burci and Kümmel (n
) 121; Villarreal and Tonti (n
See Meier and Sirleaf (n
) 71; Burci and Kümmel (n
) 123; Halabi and Gostin (n
) 367; Gostin and Meier, ‘Universal
Health Coverage: Whole of Government Approaches to Determinants of Health’
Transforming Our Word: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development
, GA Res 70/1, UN GAOR, 70
sess, Agenda Items 15 and 116, UN Doc A/Res/70/1 (21 October 2015, adopted 25
September 2015). See Meier and Sirleaf (n
) 80–4; Dagron and
Hasselgård-Rowe (n
); Desierto
and Patterson (n
Gostin and Meier, ‘Universal Health Coverage: Whole of Government
Approaches to Determinants of Health’
) 533, 535–7, 539–40, 543.
Philip Morris Brands Sàrl v
Uruguay (Award)
(ICSID Arbitral Tribunal, Case No ARB/10/7, 28 June 2016);
Philip Morris Asia Limited v Commonwealth of Australia (Final Award Regarding
(Permanent Court of Arbitration, Case No 2012-12, 8 March 2017).
Eli Lilly & Company v Canada
(Final Award)
(ICSID Arbitral Tribunal, Case No UNCT/14/2, 8 March 2017).
Relating primarily to the treaty
regime established by the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
, opened for
signature 30 March
1961, 520 UNTS 151
(entered into force 13 December 1964);
Convention on Psychotropic Substances
, opened for signature 21 February
1971, 1019 UNTS 175
(entered into force 16 August 1976);
United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
, opened for signature 20 December
1988, 1582 UNTS 95
(11 November
See, eg, Felicia Marie Knaul et al,
‘Alleviating the Access Abyss in Palliative Care and Pain Relief: An
Imperative of Universal
Health Coverage’ (2018) 391(10128)
For a list of these conventions, see
International Labour Organization,
List of Instruments by Subject and Status:
Occupational Health
(Web Page) <
https://normlex.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12030:0::NO
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3G2L-KW9J
See, eg, Ibrahim Abubakar et al,
‘The UCL-Lancet Commission on Migration and Health: The Health of a World
on the Move’
(2018) 392(10164)
Forman, Perehudoff and Wu (n
See, eg, Anne Marie Thow et al,
‘Nutrition Labelling is a Trade Policy Issue: Lessons from an Analysis of
Specific Trade Concerns
at the World Trade Organization’ (2018) 33(4)
Health Promotion International
See, eg, Paula O’Brien and
Andrew D Mitchell, ‘On the Bottle: Health Information, Alcohol Labelling
and the WTO Technical
Barriers to Trade Agreement’ (2018) 18(1)
Forman, Perehudoff and Wu (n
See, eg, de Mesquita and Forman (n
12); Hesselman and Meier (n 17); Ahmed and Terry (n 25).
Ahmed and McGovern (n
See, eg, Gráinne De
Búrca and Katharine G Young, ‘The (Mis)Appropriation of Human
Rights by the New Global Right:
An Introduction to the Symposium’
International Journal of Constitutional Law
See, eg, Katharine G Young,
‘Human Rights Originalism’
(2022) 110(5)
Georgetown Law Journal
See, eg, Neiloy R Sircar and Stella A
Bialous, ‘Tobacco Industry’s Human Rights Makeover: An Archival
Review of British
American Tobacco’s Human Rights Rhetorical Veneer’
(2024) 33(1)
Tobacco Control
∗ BMus/LLB (Melbourne), LLM (Cantab), Manager–Prevention, McCabe
Centre for Law and Cancer.
⁑ BA(Hons)/BCom, JD (Melbourne), Manager–Treatment &
Supportive Care, McCabe Centre for Law and Cancer.
† BA.Philo, JD (Manila). Regional Manager for Asia, McCabe Centre for
Law and Cancer.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (68.5 KB)
PDF format (278 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter