URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2003/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Taylor, Des --- " [2003] IntTBLawRw 23
Introduction
The EU and its legal order
Non-retrospectivity in EU law
A sub-concept of legal certainty
The nature of non-retroactivity in EU law
The acts of the EU institutions
Judgments of the ECJ
The ECJ’s preliminary rulings on interpretation
The European Union’s Approach to Legal
Non-Retrospectivity: Are There Problems for International Businesses?
Introduction
The European Union (EU) is one of the major and important trading areas of
As a consequence, many international businesses are
likely, at some stage, to be involved in transactions which have a
Union’ aspect to them. Whilst such business transactions
will, essentially, occur in one of two ways—they will arise
from business
transactions conducted entirely
the EU, or they will arise by
virtue of business transactions conducted
the EU—it is not
important that there are different circumstances giving rise to such
transactions; what is important is that
such transactions will all, to varying
degrees, be subject to the laws and legal order of the EU.
For such businesses—like
business—it is very important
that there be legal certainty. This involves the business knowing, or at least
being able easily
to ascertain, what is the governing law that applies to the
particular transaction in which they are (or are likely to become) involved.
businesses cannot ascertain the applicable law that governs an existing or
contemplated venture, they run the risk of being in
a situation of legal
uncertainty. Such a prospect can easily deter businesses from embarking on
commercial ventures. This is because
business persons—whilst they might be
prepared to take risks (regarding the success or otherwise of their contemplated
undertaking)
based on the merits of their particular product or
service—they are unlikely to embark on a project if the legal ground rules
of the environment in which they are to operate are uncertain. Hence, legal
certainty is an important factor in the encouragement
or discouragement of
international business.
Before explaining further and examining the concept of legal certainty and
the sub-concept of non-retrospectivity as it occurs in
the EU legal order, it is
first necessary to briefly describe the nature of the EU and its legal order.
The EU and its legal order
The EU is a grouping of 15 European states—Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
France, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom—in which,
goods, services, people and capital circulate freely.
Approximately 378 million people are citizens of the EU,
is still growing. By virtue of the agreement between the EU and the EFTA
(European Free Trade Association) countries,
which came into force
on 1 January 1994, the EU’s Single Market has been extended to the EFTA
countries other than Switzerland.
The entire area now covered by the Single
Market is known as the European Economic Area (EEA). Its population is
approximately 382
million people.
In addition to this, countries
such as Turkey, Cyprus, Malta, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Latvia,
Estonia, Lithuania, Bulgaria,
the Czech Republic and Slovenia have all lodged
applications to join the EU.
In the area of international trade, the EU is already the world’s
largest trading entity, accounting for approximately one-fifth
of the total
global trade in goods.
In addition, the EU is emerging as an
important ‘collective’ world power.
In the future, the
EU’s importance both in relation to trade and political clout will no
doubt increase even further. As Lester
Thurow has argued, it is even possible
that it will be the EU, not Asia (or especially China), which writes and
dominates the agenda
for the 21st century.
There are, in fact, three European Communities, namely the European Coal and
Steel Community (ECSC), the European Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom) and the
European Community (EC). The combined ECSC, Euratom and EC are, however, now
often collectively referred to as
simply the ‘European Community’,
The members of all three Communities at the
present time are the aforementioned 15 states. Initially, the three Communities
had different
institutions, but this was changed by the Merger Treaty of 1965
which made the same institutions common to all three Communities.
discussion which follows, whenever reference is made to the European
Communities, the focus will be primarily on the most
important Community of the
three, namely the European Community.
The comparatively new EU was created by the Treaty on European Union (TEU)
which came into force on 1 November 1993. The EU is something
of a hybrid. It is
not vested with a ‘legal personality’ as such, nor has there been
any transfer to it of sovereign
powers by the member states. Rather, it has been
created as a superstructure over ‘three pillars’. The first pillar
the aforementioned three Communities (namely the ECSC, Euratom and the
EC). The second pillar comprises co-operation among the member
states with a
view to adopting joint action in the field of foreign and security policy
(CFSP). The third pillar comprises co-operation
among the member states with a
view to framing common policies in justice and home affairs (CJHA). The EU is
served by the same institutional
framework that applies to the European
Communities.
Consequently there is, at the present time, both an EC and an EU, with the
former being part of the ‘three pillars’ structure
of the latter.
For the sake of simplicity, and in keeping with what seems to have become the
accepted practice (since the entering
into force of the TEU), the term
‘European Union’ (or ‘EU’) has herein generally been
used even when, strictly
speaking, the term ‘European Community’ (or
‘EC’) may be the correct terminology. Likewise, when mention
herein of, for example, ‘an institution of the EU’, strictly
speaking it may actually be ‘an institution
of the EC’. Similarly,
even though a country may now be, and may be referred to herein as, an ‘EU
member state’,
at the time of the particular happening under discussion,
it may actually have been an ‘EC member state’ or even an ‘EEC
member state’.
The EU legal order is, essentially, the law of the European Communities as it
applies throughout the EU. It is a
legal order in the sense that
it is distinct from—though closely linked to—the legal systems of
the EU member states.
This is because the Treaties upon which the
EU is founded are more than just international agreements: they form the
Constitution
’ of the EU.
An important consequence of
this separate legal existence is that the national legislatures of the EU member
states have no power
to amend or repeal any part of EU law.
Furthermore, in the event of conflict, EU law is
(that is, it
overrides national law).
Another important characteristic of EU law
is its ability, provided certain conditions are satisfied, to confer rights or
obligations
directly on the citizens of the EU. This is known as the doctrine of
direct effect.
EU law comes in two forms: ‘written’ and ‘unwritten’.
There are three main sources of written EU law, namely:
(a) the three founding Treaties (as amended) and their various annexes and
(b) the secondary legislation (for example, the Regulations, Directives,
Decisions, Recommendations and Opinions made by the EU institutions
exercise of the powers conferred on them in the founding Treaties);
(c) the agreements the EU has concluded with non-EU member states and other
international organisations.
As with all written
legal systems, gaps do appear from time to time in the written law of the EU. It
is the role of the ‘unwritten
EU law’ to fill in such gaps. Such
unwritten law comprises the ‘general principles of EU law’
recognised by the
ECJ in its judgments.
These general principles of
EU law include:
(a) the principle of respect for fundamental human rights;
(b) the principle of proportionality;
(c) the principle of natural justice;
(d) the principle of equality;
(e) the principle of legal professional privilege;
(f) the principle of legal certainty.
One of the sub-concepts of the principle of legal certainty is
‘ nonretrospectivity’, which is the focus of this article.
To this point, there has been mention of the importance of the EU to
international businesses and the problems generally that legal
uncertainty (in
environment) can cause. There has also been given a brief description
of the structure of the European Union and its legal order as
indication that one of the general principles of EU law is the principle of
legal certainty, of which non-retrospectivity
is a sub-concept. Such sub-concept
of nonretrospectivity in the EU legal order will now be further examined and
discussed, and thereafter
some conclusions will be proffered that, the writer
submits, can be drawn as to whether or not the EU’s approach to legal
nonretrospectivity
causes any problems for international businesses.
Non-retrospectivity in EU law
A sub-concept of legal certainty
As already mentioned, non-retrospectivity is a sub-concept of the overriding
principle of legal certainty. This latter principle (legal
certainty) is not
something which requires the law to be rigid (that is, fixed and inflexible).
Rigidity is synonymous with being
impervious to change. The law, almost always,
needs to have some degree of flexibility so that judges, using their discretion,
apply it to different situations and different persons. As Lord Lloyd and
Michael Freeman have noted, a legal system which does not
allow, within certain
limits, room for judges to manoeuvre will be unworkable.
it would seem that only a totally static society could tolerate a completely
rigid system of law.
Rather, legal certainty is all about
predictability
. This, essentially, means that the applicable law should be
clear and precise—and its effect should be predictable. If this
not possible, then persons and entities are in a most precarious and
unsatisfactory situation—namely, one of legal
certainty. For
business persons, especially, a state of legal uncertainty can be, at the least,
a hindrance and, more seriously, a
With legal certainty, there is the main principle—the principle of
legal certainty, and there are various sub-concepts, or special
applications, of
the main principle—namely, the protection of vested rights,
the protection of legitimate
expectations
and non-retroactivity. These sub-concepts are found
amongst the various major ‘characteristics’ of legal certainty which
have been identified by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in its judgments.
Such major characteristics of legal certainty are what
the ECJ principally looks
for when a question arises as to whether legal certainty is or is not present in
relation to a particular
EU law (or administrative act). They are as follows:
EU laws must be clear, precise and predictable.
Kloppenburg,
the ECJ said that the principle of legal certainty means that ‘Community
legislation must be unequivocal and its application
must be predictable for
those who are subject to it’.
Likewise, in
the ECJ spoke of the need for EU law to be ‘clear and precise so that
those concerned may know without ambiguity what are their
rights and obligations
and may take steps accordingly’.
In another case,
Commission v United Kingdom,
the ECJ spoke of the need for ‘legal
EU laws must be in a language understandable by the person to whom they are
This was emphasised in
where the ECJ
observed that The national courts of the Member States must…take care that
legal certainty is not prejudiced
by a failure arising from the inability of the
worker to understand the language in which a decision is notified to
3 Any factual situation should normally, in the absence of any contrary legal
provision, be examined in the light of the legal rules
existing at the time when
that situation took place.
What this means is that laws should
be contemporaneous with the situation under review.
Laws should not apply
retrospectively.
This links in with the fundamental ‘core
aspect’ of legal certainty that persons should at all times know, or at
be able to ascertain, the legal consequences of a contemplated course of
action—and they cannot do this if laws are not contemporaneous
situations. An example of this requirement can be seen in
Pedro Burdalo
Trevejo and Others v Fondo Garantía Salarial.
This was an
Art 234 (ex Art 177) EC reference by a
Spanish court to the ECJ concerning the interpretation of a Council Directive
77/187 of 14 February 1977 regarding the safeguarding
of employees’ rights
in the event of transfers of undertakings. The ECJ ruled that it followed from
the facts that, irrespective
of the material scope of the Directive in
circumstances such as those described by the national court, the Directive could
the employees concerned ‘since the transfer of the undertaking
which was at issue took place prior to the date on which the
directive first
produced legal effects in the Member State concerned’.
date of the ‘transfer’ (19 May 1978) preceded the accession of Spain
to the Communities, which produced legal effects
only from 1 January 1986. Thus
the Directive could not be relied on because the transfer of the undertaking
occurred before the Directive
had begun to produce legal effects in Spain (the
member state concerned).
In line with this requirement of legal
certainty (that is, that laws should be contemporaneous with situations), EU
laws generally
only take effect on a particular date after their publication in
Official Journal
Publication in the OJ is deemed
to be notification to everyone of the existence and content of the particular
laws—and the
date on which they will take effect.
exceptional cases, where the purpose to be achieved so demands, and where the
legitimate expectations of the persons concerned
are duly respected, is it
possible for an EU law to take effect before the date of its publication in the
OJ (that is, to apply retroactively).
4 EU laws should not (generally) come into force
immediately.
Otherwise, there may be legal uncertainty because,
whilst persons may know of the existence of the particular laws, they may not
know or appreciate the extent of their obligations thereunder. In
for example, the ECJ said that an ‘institution cannot,
without having an adverse effect on a legitimate regard for legal certainty
resort without reason to the procedure of an immediate entry into
Likewise, in
the ECJ held that any
amending legislation should have adequate transitional provisions so that the
people and entities covered or
affected by such legislation can adjust
themselves to the new régime.
It is not invariably the case
that there can be no immediate application of EU law: it is just that
normally this is the situation. In exceptional circumstances, an immediate
application of the particular law may be justified—and,
this was held to be the case.
In order to ensure legal certainty, there should be time limits.
limits are, essentially, periods of time within which proceedings
must be commenced or some other action
taken; otherwise—after
the expiration of the particular period of time (that is, the time
limit)—such proceedings or
other action are barred. Time limits ensure
legal certainty because the uncertainty brought about by the possibility of laws
annulled, or of a state of inaction being changed, is removed once the
prescribed time limit has passed.
6 Vested rights should normally be protected.
Basically, the
position regarding the protection of vested rights is as follows: where
individual rights are conferred by individual
administrative measures, the
rights that arise are vested (or acquired) rights. If the vested rights arise
from lawful measures,
they are protected by the principle of legal certainty and
cannot be withdrawn retroactively. Whether they can be withdrawn for the
(that is, prospectively) depends on the terms of the measure by which they were
conferred. If the EU measure which gave rise
to the vested rights is unlawful,
the vested rights can always be revoked, at least prospectively, provided (a)
this is done within
a reasonable time and (b) the EU institution concerned gives
sufficient regard to how far the persons affected by the measure may
led to rely on its ‘lawfulness’.
One of the leading
cases in this area is
As regards the retroactive
revocation of vested rights conferred by unlawful measures, basically the
situation is that retroactive
withdrawal of vested rights conferred by an
unlawful measure is only possible if (a) the particular measure was adopted on
of false or incomplete information provided by the persons affected by
the measure,
or (b) the particular measure is illegal or
If the ECJ does allow the retroactive revocation of
vested rights conferred by an unlawful measure, such revocation is, generally,
subject to very strict conditions.
Consorzio Cooperative
unreasonable delay was held to be a bar to the
retroactive revocation of an unlawful measure.
Legitimate expectations should normally be protected.
Essentially this
means that EU law should not be different from that which could reasonably be
expected. Eleanor Sharpston has correctly
commented in this regard that a
‘legitimate expectation’ is a belief that it was legitimate for him
or her to entertain
as to the way in which he or she would be treated by an EU
institution in the application of EU laws and measures.
fairly clear from the ECJ’s case-law that the mere fact that a trader is
disadvantaged by a change in the law will not,
in itself, give any cause for
complaint based upon disappointment of legitimate expectations.
Jurgen Schwarze has stated: ‘[The] Court has emphasised the essential
freedom enjoyed by the legislature to alter for the
future the fundamental legal
conditions in which traders operate, even if the changes made work to the
disadvantage of all firms
in a certain industrial sector.’
seems that, in order to establish a claim for infringement of legitimate
expectations, essentially what an individual must be
able to do is to point
either to ‘a bargain’ of some form which has been entered into
between the individual and the
authorities, or to ‘a course of conduct or
assurance’ on the part of the authorities which can be said to generate
legitimate expectations.
As regards an overall appraisal of the
protection of legitimate expectations, it seems the case-law of the ECJ pivots
question of ‘the foreseeability of change’. A distinction
is drawn between ‘quantitative change’—for
example, an
adjustment to the monetary compensatory amounts, which is usually considered to
be foreseeable, and ‘qualitative
change’—for example, a
modification of the underlying system, where foreseeability depends, to a large
extent, on the
nature of the change effected. A distinction can also be detected
between ‘changes of view by the authorities’—which
usually considered to be foreseeable, and ‘changes in underlying
circumstances’—which may well be foreseeable
by the alert or prudent
8 In order to ensure legal certainty, there should be continuity of existing
concepts and organisation whenever legislation is amended or altered (unless
the legislature expresses a contrary intention).
The aforegoing are just the ‘major’
characteristics of legal certainty identified by the ECJ. There are also various
characteristics of legal certainty, such as:
Agreements (such as those falling under Art 81 (ex Art 85) EC) should
not be rendered automatically void without any examination.
This was so held
In that case, the ECJ ruled that in general it
would be contrary to the general principle of legal certainty to render
automatically void before it is even possible to tell which are the
agreements to which Art 85 EC (now Art 81 EC) as a whole applies.
Every EU institution should abide by and respect its own rules and
This principle is known as
patere legem quam ipse fecisti.
It has often been raised before the ECJ but seldom applied.
typical case where this principle was raised is
From characteristics 3 and 6, it can be seen that the EU legal order
recognises the need generally for non-retroactivity. By virtue
of characteristic
3, EU laws should not be made to apply retrospectively and any factual situation
should normally, in the absence
of any contrary legal provision, be examined in
the light of the legal rules existing at the time when that situation took
From characteristic 6, it can be seen that not only does the EU legal
order recognise the need to protect vested rights, it also
takes the attitude
(i) if the vested rights arise from lawful measures, they are protected by
the principle of legal certainty and cannot be withdrawn
retroactively; and
(ii) a retroactive withdrawal of vested rights conferred by an unlawful
measure is only possible if the particular measure was adopted
on the basis of
false or incomplete information provided by the persons affected by the measure,
or the particular measure is illegal
or erroneous—and, in any event, if
the ECJ does allow the retroactive revocation of vested rights conferred by an
measure, such revocation is, generally, subject to very strict
conditions.
This approach to non-retroactivity is reinforced by characteristics 4 and 8.
Characteristic 4 supplements the requirement for there
to be non-retrospectivity
by requiring that, also, adequate forewarning should be given of future changes
to the laws of the EU
(EU laws should not generally come into force
immediately).
Businesspersons should thus be able to proceed in the
knowledge that, normally, there will not only be no changes to the law as it
applies to past transactions, but also as regards future transactions they will
be given adequate forewarning to enable them to adapt
to any changes in the law.
Characteristic 8
(there should be continuity of existing legal concepts and
organisation)
further complements the attempt to ease the adaptation to
future changes in the law. An example of how characteristic 8 works can
in the continuity arrangements which were made by the EU regarding the
introduction of the euro currency: the EU,
inter alia,
adopted rules
designed to guarantee the continuity of contracts denominated in national
currencies between the start of the final
stage of Economic and Monetary Union
(EMU) on 1 January 1999 and the ending of national currencies by 1 July 2002, so
as to provide
legal certainty for businesses (and consumers).
From the aforegoing, it can be clearly seen that the ECJ has extensively and
comprehensively identified the ‘characteristics’
certainty—and amongst these is ‘non-retrospectivity’. The
nature of non-retroactivity in EU law will now
be examined further.
The nature of non-retroactivity in EU law
Essentially, non-retroactivity (in EU law) means that, in the interests of
legal certainty, acts, events, situations and legal relationships
which occurred
or arose before the entry into force of an EU law should not be affected by that
law. There are two contexts in which
non-retroactivity can be considered and
discussed, namely:
1 the acts of the EU institutions;
2 the judgments of the ECJ.
The acts of the EU institutions
The ECJ has developed various rules concerning non-retroactivity in relation
to the acts of the EU institutions. These are as follows
(some have already been
mentioned).
The first rule is that, whilst in principle the EU institutions are free to
determine the date on which their laws come into force,
such laws cannot apply retroactively, that is, they cannot produce legal effects
in respect of events taking place prior
to the date of their actual publication
The basis for this is, of course, the principle of legal
certainty which, as has been mentioned earlier, equates with legal
predictability.
There cannot be legal predictability if laws are made to apply
retroactively.
The second of the rules developed by the ECJ (in relation to
non-retroactivity and the acts of the EU institutions) is that, as also
mentioned previously, whilst EU laws such as Regulations may enter into force on
the day of their actual publication in the OJ and
thus produce immediate legal
effects, this is something which is normally incompatible with the principle of
legal certainty. In
order for there to be legal certainty, persons affected by
new laws should not only be made aware of the existence of such laws,
should also be allowed sufficient time to make themselves fully acquainted with
the laws’ content, ramifications and scope.
In general, the immediate
entry into force of a measure (such as a Regulation) is justified only where
there are serious reasons
for holding that any interval between the publication
and the entry into force of the measure would have been prejudicial to the
The third of the rules developed by the ECJ (in relation to non-retroactivity
and the acts of the EU institutions) is that—notwithstanding
aforementioned previous rules—in certain circumstances where special
conditions are met, a degree of retroactivity will,
however, be allowed.
Initially, the ECJ, in cases such as
stated quite categorically
that a measure which is of a legislative nature cannot have retroactive
By this the ECJ meant, for example, that a Regulation could
not be used for the purposes of determining the classification of products
imported, before its entry into force. Subsequently, however, the ECJ subjected
its ruling in
to certain exceptions. In
example, the ECJ stated that, although in general the principle of legal
certainty precludes a Community measure from taking effect
from a point in time
before its publication, it may exceptionally be otherwise where the purpose to
be achieved so demands and where
the legitimate expectations of those concerned
are duly respected.
An example of a situation where retroactivity was
acceptable can
Diversinte SA & Another v Adminstracion Principal de Aduanas e
Impuestos Especiales de La Junquera.
The background facts were
as follows:
(a) Between 28 February 1987 and 2 March 1987, Iberlacta (one of the plaintiffs)
had exported to Germany 207 tonnes of denatured
milk powder containing 12% fat.
(b) Between 3 and 5 March 1987, Diversinte (the other plaintiff) had exported to
the same destination 120 tonnes of a similar product
containing 18% fat.
(c) As at those dates (when the exporting was actually done), the denatured milk
powder was exempt from a certain agricultural tax.
Subsequently, however—on 17 March 1987—Regulation 744/87 was
published in the OJ. According to its terms, the particular
agricultural tax on
the export of milk powder was extended to certain previously exempt products
(including those of the plaintiffs)
with effect from 12 February 1987. The
plaintiffs contested their liability to such tax. According to them, Regulation
invalid because it was retroactive and did not satisfy the conditions
under which the ECJ permitted retroactivity. In its judgment,
the ECJ noted
firstly that it has been consistently held that, although in general the
principle of legal certainty precludes a Community
measure from taking effect
before its publication, it may exceptionally be otherwise where the purpose to
be achieved so demands
and where the legitimate expectations of those concerned
are duly protected.
It then went on to note, however, that
although—according to the case-law of the Court—it is not impossible
for measures
to have retroactive effect, measures having such effect must
include, in the statement of reasons on which they are based, particulars
justify the desired retroactive effect.
The ECJ thereafter observed
that, in the instant case, the Regulation in dispute (dated 16 March 1987) did
not explain anywhere
why it had a retroactive effect as from 12 February 1987.
In fact, the third recital in the Regulation’s preamble merely stated
‘in order to prevent speculation in the product covered by the Regulation
the latter’s provisions should be introduced
as a matter of
urgency’. At best, that recital enabled it to be understood why the
Regulation was immediately applicable—but
it did not state why the charge
had to affect traders who exported non-skimmed milk in the month prior to the
adoption of the Regulation.
That lack of information made it
impossible for the ECJ to review the extent to which the retroactive effect was
justified by the
objective of the Regulation, or whether the legitimate
expectation of the traders in question was protected.
Consequently,
in those circumstances the ECJ had no alternative but to declare that the
Regulation in dispute did not meet the requirement
of stating reasons laid down
by Art 190 EC. This, in turn, meant that the second paragraph of Art 3 of
Commission Regulation (EEC)
No 744/87 of 16 March 1987—amending Regulation
(EEC) 805/86 introducing a charge on denatured skimmed-milk powder coming from
Spain and derogating from Regulation (EEC) 1378/86 as regards the accession
compensatory amounts in trade with Spain—was invalid
in so far as it
declared that the Regulation was applicable with effect from 12 February 1987
(that is, retroactively).
The fourth of the rules developed by the ECJ (in relation to
non-retroactivity and the acts of the EU institutions) is that, although
procedural rules are generally held to apply to all proceedings pending at the
time when they enter into force, this is not the case
with substantive rules. On
the contrary, the latter are usually interpreted as applying to situations
existing before their entry
into force only in so far as it clearly follows from
their terms, objectives or general scheme that such an effect must be given
As the ECJ said in
‘This interpretation
ensures respect for the principles of legal certainty and the protection of
legitimate expectations, by
virtue of which the effect of Community legislation
must be clear and predictable for those who are subject to it.’
the Corte Suprema di Cassazione in Rome referred to the ECJ
for a preliminary ruling under Art 177 EC various questions on the
interpretation
of Council Regulation (EEC) 1697/79 of 24 July 1979 (which
entered into force on 1 July 1980) on the post-clearance recovery of import
duties or export duties which had not been required of the person liable for
payment at the time the goods passed through the customs
procedures. Various
traders had challenged amended notices, issued by the Italian State Finance
Administration (Amministrazione delle
Finanze dello Stato), requiring them to
pay a sum equal to the difference between the agricultural levy calculated at
the rate applicable
on the day of acceptance of the import declaration and the
levy calculated at the more favourable rate introduced between the import
declaration and the release of the goods for home use. The Italian State Finance
Administration claimed that the more favourable
rate had been applied in
In its judgment, the ECJ noted that it was clear from the
documents before the court that until 1976 the Italian authorities had
calculated the levies by applying the more favourable rate at the request of the
The ECJ had, however, in its earlier judgment of 15 June
Frecassetti,
held that that method could not be
applied to agricultural levies on imports from non-member states, which had to
be calculated
at the rate applicable on the day when the import declaration was
accepted by the customs authorities. To give effect to this decision
of the ECJ,
Regulation 1697/97 was enacted. By virtue of such Regulation, where the
competent authorities found that the correct
amount of duties had not been
charged, they were obliged to take action to recover them. Essentially, what the
ECJ was now being
asked in this reference was to determine the
Regulation’s effect
ratione temporis
(that is, whether it applied
retrospectively). After indicating (as mentioned above) that substantive rules
are usually interpreted
as applying to situations existing before their entry
into force only in so far as it clearly follows from their terms, objectives
general scheme that such an effect must be given to them, the ECJ stated that
the provisions of the Regulation could not be accorded
retroactive effect unless
sufficiently clear indications led to such a conclusion.
then stated that, far from indicating any retroactive effect, both the wording
and the general scheme of the Regulation led
it to the conclusion that the
Regulation provided only for the future.
The fifth of the rules developed by the ECJ (in relation to non-retroactivity
and the acts of the EU institutions) is that the principle
of non-retroactivity
does not apply to interpretations of EU laws. If an EU law is not clear and is
clarified by a subsequent EU
law, the clarification contained in the later rule
may be used for cases which occurred prior to the later law’s coming into
For example, in
the Council
implemented, subsequently, certain rules for the interpretation of the Common
Customs Tariff. The ECJ accepted that
such rules were applicable to goods
imported even prior to the date of implementation of the rules. In its judgment,
the ECJ observed:
‘[These] Rules for interpretation were devised with the
aim of co-ordinating, for the tariff as a whole, interpretation practices
down by special provisions, so that they do not form a legal innovation but
apply to imports effected even before 1 January
However, in deciding whether something really is just an interpretative
provision, the ECJ adopts a restrictive approach. This can
be seen from cases
Judgments of the ECJ
In relation to non-retroactivity and the judgments of the ECJ, the position
is as follows. ECJ judgments which are:
(a) given in direct actions for annulment declaring an act of an EU institution
(b) given in reference proceedings for a preliminary ruling declaring an act of
an EU institution invalid;
(c) interpretative judgments and, in particular, interpretative preliminary
are normally regarded as having retroactive effect going back in time to the
coming into force of the particular law or measure to
which they relate.
However, the ECJ may, exceptionally, ‘in application of the general
principles of legal certainty inherent
in the Community legal order’,
restrict the retroactive effect of its interpretative judgments in order not to
upset legal
relationships established in good faith in the past.
Likewise, for reasons of legal certainty, the ECJ may restrict the retroactive
effect of a judgment declaring a Regulation void
or invalid.
In the following discussion, there is separate consideration of:
(a) the ECJ’s preliminary rulings on interpretation; and
(b) the ECJ’s preliminary rulings on validity.
The ECJ’s preliminary rulings on interpretation
It is generally considered that the ECJ’s Art 234 (ex Art 177) EC
preliminary rulings on interpretation apply retrospectively.
As the ECJ said in
The interpretation which, in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred on it by
Art 177 of the EEC Treaty, the Court of Justice
gives to a rule of Community law
clarifies and defines where necessary the meaning and scope of that rule as it
must be or ought
to have been understood and applied from the time of its coming
into force. It follows that the rule as thus interpreted may, and
applied by the courts even to legal relationships arising and established before
the judgment ruling on the request for
interpretation, provided that in other
respects the conditions enabling an action relating to the application of that
brought before the courts having jurisdiction are satisfied.
However, notwithstanding the above-mentioned
‘normal’ position regarding the ECJ’s Art 234 (ex Art 177) EC
interpretative
preliminary rulings (that is, that they apply retrospectively),
exceptionally
the court may—in application of the general principle
of legal certainty inherent in the Community legal order and in taking
of the serious effects which its judgment might have, as regards the past, on
legal relationships established in good faith—be
moved to restrict for any
person concerned the opportunity of relying upon the provisions as thus
interpreted, with a view to calling
in question those legal
relationships.
In other words,
in exceptional situations,
the interests of legal certainty, the ECJ can declare that its interpretative
judgment will only apply prospectively (that is,
for the future). The
‘exceptional situations’ when the ECJ might be moved to do this
arise when it gives a ‘new’
interpretation to some aspect of EU law.
Here the word ‘new’ is used in the sense of ‘completely
different and
unexpected’ as compared to earlier case law. Because such
new interpretation is completely different and unexpected, the ECJ,
by imposing
a temporal limitation, endeavours to preserve a state of legal certainty for
persons who organised their affairs and
otherwise acted on the basis of the law
as it was understood to be previously. The effect of a temporal limitation in an
interpretative
judgment is to prevent anyone other than the plaintiff in the
particular case—and those persons who have already instituted
proceedings
as at the date of the judgment—from relying on the ruling in respect of
the period preceding the date on which
it was delivered.
The following are some examples of the cases where the ECJ has imposed
temporal limitations in its interpretative judgments.
Defrenne (No 2)
Defrenne (No 2),
the ECJ held that the equal pay
provision of Art 119 (now Art 141) EC had direct effect, in the sense that any
female worker could
rely on it in proceedings against her employer before courts
of any of the member states. However, because this was a ‘new’
interpretation which was contrary to the conclusions previously reached by most
of the authors on the subject,
the ECJ added a ‘temporal
limitation’ to its judgment. The ECJ decided that ‘important
considerations of legal
certainty affecting all the interests involved’
made it impossible to reopen the question as regards the past and, therefore,
although Art 119 (now Art 234) EC was directly effective, only workers who had
already brought legal proceedings at the date of the
judgment could benefit from
the ruling as to such direct effect.
An analysis of the
judgment shows that—in relation to the issue as to whether or
not it should impose a temporal limitation—the ECJ regards
the following
as important and relevant:
(a) the practical (for example, financial) consequences;
(b) the misapprehension of the parties as to the state of the law; and
(c) the conduct on the part of the EU institution (in this case, the
Commission).
At this point, it is also mentioned that, in various judgments handed down in
cases subsequent to
Defrenne (No 2),
and Salumi Srl,
the ECJ emphasised that
was an ‘exceptional’ case and that temporal limitations
will only be imposed in exceptional cases. The ‘general
that an interpretation applies retrospectively. Moreover, such a temporal
limitation may be allowed only by the ECJ
and only in the interpretative
judgment itself.
The ECJ also imposed a temporal limitation when giving its judgment in
That case involved a demand for restitution of
university fees which a French citizen (Vincent Blaizot) and 16 other students
made to the University of Liège in Belgium. The fees at issue were
supplementary registration fees
paid by non-Belgian students
prior to 13 February 1985. This was the date on which the ECJ had decided in
that the imposition of such fees constituted
discrimination on the grounds of nationality which was prohibited by the EC
In their submissions to the ECJ, the University of Liège and the
other defendants in
emphasised that the judgment in
constituted a ‘new development in Community law’
which ‘would have serious repercussions if it were to have effect
September 1976 onwards’ (that is, be retrospective).
situation was, they submitted, comparable to that in
Defrenne (No
They therefore asked the ECJ to impose a temporal
limitation. In agreeing to grant this request, the ECJ pointed out that, as it
had recognised in its judgment in
Defrenne (No 2),
‘it is only
exceptionally
that [the ECJ] may,
in application of the general
principle of legal certainty inherent in the Community legal order,
to restrict for any person concerned the opportunity of relying upon the
provision as thus interpreted with a view to calling
in question legal
relationships established in good faith’,
‘such a restriction may be allowed only in the actual judgment ruling upon
the interpretation sought’.
In support of its decision to impose a temporal limitation in its
judgment, the ECJ initially stated (at para 29):
This judgment
deals for the first time
with the question whether
university education may be regarded as constituting vocational training for the
purposes of Art 128 of
the EEC Treaty.
(At para 30):
As the Court has held [in Defrenne (No 2)], in determining whether or not to
limit the temporal effect of a judgment it is necessary
to bear in mind that
the practical consequences of any judicial decision must be weighed
the Court cannot go so far as to diminish the objectivity of the
law and compromise its future application on the ground of the possible
repercussions which might result, as regards the past, from a judicial decision.
(And at para 31):
This case marks
a development
with regard to the inclusion of university
studies in the scope of the term ‘vocational training’ for the
purposes of
Community law.
The ECJ then went on to
point out that, before
the scope of the term ‘vocational
training’ was uncertain. It was only when the ECJ gave its judgment in
that such previous uncertainty was ended (because it was then
known that the university studies preparatory to the exercise of a
profession were covered by the term ‘vocational training’).
These comments display the ECJ’s acceptance that there was a
‘new’ development in the law (in the sense of it being
‘completely différent and unexpected’). The ECJ also indicated,
in paras 32 and 33 of the judgment, how the national
authorities were mislead by
the conduct of the Commission as to the true legal position:
Indeed, with regard to university education, that development is reflected in
conduct of the Commission.
Letters sent by the Commission to Belgium
in 1984 show that at that time the Commission did not consider the imposition of
the supplementary
enrolment fee to be contrary to Community law. It was not
until 25 June 1985, in the course of an informal meeting with officials
Belgian Education Ministries, that the Commission stated that it had changed its
position. Two days later, more than four
months after the delivery of the
Judgment of 13 February 1985, it stated during a meeting of the education
committee established
by the Council that it had not completed its review of the
matter; that is to say, it had not yet formed a definite opinion of the
conclusions to be drawn from that judgment, which itself concerned technical
education, as was pointed out above.
The attitude thus adopted by the
Commission might reasonably have led the authorities concerned in Belgium to
consider that the relevant
Belgian legislation was in conformity with Community
As a result, the ECJ concluded that, in
those circumstances, pressing considerations of legal certainty precluded any
reopening of
the question of past legal relationships where that would
retroactively throw the financing of university education into confusion
might have unforeseeable consequences for the proper functioning of
universities.
Therefore, in so far as access to university studies
was concerned, the direct effect of (then) Art 7 of the Treaty could not be
relied on in support of claims regarding supplementary enrolment fees improperly
charged prior to the date of this judgment, except
in respect of students who
had brought legal proceedings or submitted an equivalent claim before that
as it has subsequently done in
other cases
—the ECJ, in deciding whether or not to impose a
temporal limitation, looked for and highlighted the same type of criteria
gave prominence to in
Defrenne (No 2),
(a) the practical (that is, financial) consequences;
(b) the misapprehension of the parties as to the state of the law; and
(c) the conduct on the part of the particular EU institution.
This is basically what Advocate General Tesauro was referring to when, in his
Simitzi v Kos
he stated that, in taking a
decision to impose a temporal limitation, the ECJ has consistently applied two
principles, namely:
First, it weighs
the possible practical consequences of its judgments
the absence of any temporal limitation, while pointing out that this cannot go
so far as to diminish the objectivity of the law
and compromise its future
application on the ground of possible repercussions which might result, as
regards the past, from a judicial
decision. Secondly, the Court considers
whether there were any objective uncertainties as to the scope of the
provisions of Community law
which are the subject of the interpretative
and to what extent the actual conduct of the Community institutions
might have nurtured those uncertainties.
the comments of the ECJ in its judgments in cases such as
Defrenne (No
it seems fairly obvious that financial considerations are an important
factor, but they will not
by themselves
justify the imposition of a
temporal limitation.
This can also be seen from the ECJ’s judgments in
To justify the imposition of a temporal
limitation, there must also be present the other factors, namely misapprehension
state of the law (that is, legal uncertainty) and conduct on the part
of an EU institution which caused the parties to be mislead.
In a number of cases—such as
Worringham and Humphreys,
Francovich,
—the ECJ has chosen not to impose temporal
limitations, even though it was requested to do so by the parties. In
Worringham and Humphreys,
for example, the ECJ ruled that a
contribution to a retirement benefits scheme which was paid by an employer on
behalf of employees
by means of an addition to the gross salary and which,
therefore, helped to determine the amount of that salary constituted
within the meaning of the second paragraph of Art 119 (now Art
141) EC. The defendant employer (Lloyd’s Bank) asked the ECJ
to impose a
temporal limitation in its ruling because, otherwise, the judgment would lead to
claims for the retrospective adjustment
of pay scales covering a period of
After first stating that although the consequences of any
judicial decision must be carefully taken into account (but not if it
the objectivity of the law and compromised its future), the ECJ then went on to
point out that, in its
Defrenne (No 2)
judgment, it had accepted that a
temporal restriction on the direct effect of Art 119 (now Art 141) EC might be
taken into account,
exceptionally, having regard:
(a) to the fact that the parties concerned, in the light of the conduct of
several Member States and the views adopted by the Commission
and repeatedly
brought to the notice of the circles concerned, had been led to continue, over a
long period, with practices which
were contrary to Art 119 (now Art 141) EC; and
(b) to the fact that important questions of legal certainty affecting not only
the interests of the parties to the main action but
also a whole series of
interests, both public and private, made it undesirable in principle to reopen
the question of pay as regards
The ECJ then said that, in this case neither of these conditions has been
Francovich,
the ECJ held that where an EU member
state (in this case, Italy) had failed to implement an EU Directive, it was
obliged to compensate
individuals for the damage suffered (as a result of its
failure to implement the Directive), provided certain conditions were satisfied.
In his Opinion, the Advocate General had proposed the imposition of a temporal
limitation; his view was that this was justified given
the uncertainty regarding
the legal ground of the liability of the EU member states, its required
conditions, its extent and the
financial consequences that might be entailed.
However, the ECJ did not follow the Advocate General’s suggestion and no
limitation was imposed. It would seem that the ECJ’s reason for
not imposing a temporal limitation in its judgment in
it wanted clearly to show that it desired to penalise quite harshly Italy, as
well as any other EU member states, for failing
to implement Directives.
It was previously mentioned that, in relation to non-retroactivity and the
judgments of the ECJ, there needs to be consideration of:
(a) the ECJ’s preliminary rulings on interpretation; and
(b) the ECJ’s preliminary rulings on validity.
The above discussion has concerned the ECJ’s preliminary
rulings on interpretation. The ECJ’s preliminary rulings on validity
now be considered.
The ECJ’s preliminary rulings on validity
Article 234 (ex Art 177) EC gives the ECJ jurisdiction not only in relation
to ‘interpretation’ of the Treaty and acts
of the EU institutions,
but also in relation to the ‘validity’ of acts of the EU
institutions. The validity of EU laws
can be challenged either under Art 230 (ex
Art 173) EC—an action for annulment)
or under Art 234 (ex
Art 177) EC—a preliminary ruling as to validity. Consequently, before
analysing the Article 234 (ex Art
177) EC preliminary rulings as to validity, it
is first necessary to consider the position regarding Art 230 (ex Art 173) EC
for annulment.
Actions for annulment are brought under Art 230 (ex Art 173) EC. However, Art
231 (ex Art 174) EC and Art 233 (ex Art 176) EC are
also relevant, particularly
the second paragraph of Art 231 (ex Art 174) EC which provides that, in the case
of a Regulation, the
ECJ ‘shall if it considers it necessary state which
of the effects of the Regulation which it has declared void be considered
definitive’. In other words, normally a ruling of annulment applies
but, if it is a Regulation which is being annulled, the ECJ can
impose a temporal limitation in its judgment for the purpose of preserving
certainty. On a number of occasions, the ECJ has utilised this
In fact, in the interests of maintaining legal certainty,
the ECJ has even, in some instances, gone so far as to declare that the
of an annulled act should continue in force until the adoption of new
legislation.
An Article 234 (ex Art 177) EC preliminary ruling declaring an EU act invalid
is like an action for annulment under Art 230 (ex Art
173) EC in that,
generally, it also has retrospective effect.
In addition, even
though the Treaty does not make any provision for the imposition of temporal
limitations in its Article 234 (ex
Art 177) EC preliminary rulings, the ECJ has
held, in such cases as
Roquette Frères
that the ECJ can, when making a declaration of
invalidity in the context of an Article 234 (ex Art 177) EC preliminary ruling,
by analogy the second paragraph of Article 174 (now 231) of the
This is ‘for the same reasons of legal
certainty as those which form the basis of that provision’.
In other words, the second paragraph of Article 231 (ex Art 174) EC enables the
ECJ to impose a temporal limitation both in its
judgments annulling an act under
Art 230 (ex Art 173) EC and in its declaration of invalidity in Art 234 (ex Art
177) EC preliminary
references.
One of the cases in which the ECJ discussed the imposition of temporal
limitations in its judgments concerning invalidity was
Lomas & Others v
United Kingdom.
In that case, the legality of an agricultural
clawback was in issue. The common organisation of the market in relation to
meat provided for the payment of premiums on sheep. If the sheep were
subsequently exported, an amount equal to the premium (the
clawback) had to be
repaid. The ECJ held that the operation of this system was in breach of EU law.
Essentially this was because
Art 4(1) of Commission Regulation 1633/84 was
invalid in as much as—by providing for the charging, by way of clawback,
amount which in most cases was not exactly equal to that of the slaughter
premium actually granted—the Commission had exceeded
the power conferred
on it by Art 9(3) of Regulation 1837/80.
In relation to a question
to it on the temporal effects of its judgment, the ECJ referred to its case law
and stated that it could
limit the temporal effect of a finding that an EU
measure was invalid on the basis of
‘overriding considerations of legal
certainty involving all the interests at stake in the cases
concerned’.
In considering whether such criteria were
Lomas & Others v United Kingdom,
the ECJ held that to permit
the invalidity of the illegal Regulation to be relied upon in relation to past
situations would ‘give
rise to significant financial consequences and
serious organisational difficulties as a result of the reopening of accounts
since closed and the need for the clawback to be recalculated in respect of
Therefore, in the view of the ECJ, there were
overriding considerations of legal certainty and these prevented the effects of
invalid provisions of the Regulation from being called into question.
An exception was, however, made in favour of those persons who
had already instituted legal proceedings.
The ECJ has resorted to the imposition of temporal limitations in its Article
234 (ex Art 177) EC preliminary rulings in only a very
small number of cases.
Normally, the ECJ’s preliminary rulings, both in relation to
interpretation and validity, apply retrospectively.
Furthermore, when the ECJ
does impose a temporal limitation, it is obviously endeavouring to maintain
legal certainty by protecting
persons who have been relying on previous
interpretations of EU law against sudden changes in that interpretation. The ECJ
impose a temporal limitation without any good reason. In every case
where it does impose a temporal limitation, the ECJ needs to
be convinced that
there are indeed justifying ‘overriding considerations of legal
certainty’.
From the above, the writer argues, it can be seen the EU takes a mature and
sophisticated approach to the concept of legal non-retrospectivity.
In its legal
order, the EU has not only recognised as important both the main principle of
legal certainty and the sub-concept of
non-retrospectivity, it has also clearly
identified the
of non-retrospectivity and formulated
that apply when issues concerning non-retrospectivity arise. Thus, provided they
follow the established guidelines and ground-rules
concerning same,
international businesses contemplating doing business with or within the EU do
not have to fear that any such business
transaction will be unexpectedly or
unfairly prejudiced by EU legislation and/or acts of the EU institutions which
might be made
to apply retrospectively.
LLM (Advanced) (UQ), SJD (UTS), PhD (UQ), Lecturer in Law, University of
Southern Queensland, Toowoomba. The author is genuinely
grateful to Professor
Gabriel Moens and the TC Beirne School of Law at the University of Queensland
for having been given the opportunity,
during recent years, to give various
visiting lectures in order to present ideas on the principle of legal certainty
and to gain
constructive and useful feedback. The author accepts sole
responsibility for the opinions and views expressed herein.
See, eg, the EU’s publication,
The European Union and the
March 2001, available at www.ecdel.org.au/eu_global_player (28 June
The EU’s Single Market was—at least in theory—completed
on 31 December 1992. This was achieved following the signing
of the Single
European Act (SEA) on 17 February 1987. Subsequently, there has been the
introduction of a single currency (the euro).
As from January 1 2002, 12
European countries have given up their national currency forever and adopted a
common currency: the euro.
The new euro banknotes and coins circulated alongside
the respective national currencies during a changeover period, which varied
slightly from country to country. On 1 March 2002, however, it became sole legal
tender throughout the euro zone.
Source: Eurostat. Its website is at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/eurostat.
The EFTA countries are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Switzerland.
Many of these countries are already linked to the EU by ‘Europe
Agreements’ which provide for free trade in industrial
products as well as
economic co-operation in a range of areas.
Source: European Commission,
The European Union and World Trade,
1995, Brussels: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities.
By this, it is meant that the EU (as such) is becoming an important world
power in its own right (as distinct from the world power
importance of
individual Member States such as France, Germany and the United Kingdom). In
this regard, see also the EU publication,
Head to Head: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe
and America,
1992, New York: William Morrow and Company.
This occurred with the coming into force of the Treaty on European Union
(TEU). 12 Case 26/62
Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der
Belastingen
[1963] ECR 1.
Case 294/83
Partie Ecologiste ‘Les Verts’ v Parliament
[1986] ECR 1339.
See also the Opinion of Advocate General Lagrange in Case 8/55
Fédération Charbonnière de Belgique v High Authority
56] ECR 245
For further information on this aspect, see, eg, St JN T Bates,
‘European Community legislation before the House of Commons’
12 Statute Law Review 109.
Costa v ENEL
[1964] ECR 585.
These agreements range from association treaties and complex trade and
co-operation agreements to more simple sectoral trade agreements.
category of written EU law, in addition to those mentioned, consists of the
Conventions between the EU member states distinct
from, but concluded within the
context of, the founding Treaties (eg, the Brussels Convention on Jurisdiction
and the Enforcement
of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters).
The general principles of EU law are those which the ECJ has derived both
from the treaties and from the legal principles recognised
in the national legal
systems of the EU member states. In certain circumstances, the general
principles of EU law are treated as
being superior even to any of the forms of
legislation (eg, Regulations, Directives and Decisions) defined in the treaties.
For further
information in this regard, see, eg, Toth, AG,
Encyclopaedia of European Community Law (Volume 1 Institutional Law),
Oxford: Clarendon, 277.
Lord Lloyd and Freeman, MDA,
Lloyd’s Introduction to
Jurisprudence,
5th edn, 1985, London: Stevens & Sons, at 1106 (7th edn,
2001, London: Sweet & Maxwell).
In some writings, the term ‘acquired rights’ is used instead
of ‘vested rights’. However, the two terms
are generally synonymous.
Even in England which, as mentioned, has no general principle of legal
certainty, there has been a clear recognition of, eg, the
principle of
protecting legitimate expectations. See, eg,
Schmidt v Secretary of State for
[1969] 2 Ch 149 at 170–71;
Attorney General of Hong
Kong v Ng Yuen Shiu
[1983] UKPC 2
[1983] 2 AC 629
; and Forsyth, CF, ‘The provenance
and protection of legitimate expectations’
(1988) 47 Cambridge Law Journal
Kloppenburg v Finanzamt Leer
[1984] ECR 1075
See also Joined Cases 212– 2177 80
Amministrazione delie Finanze dello
Stato v Sri Meridionale Industria Salumi and Others
[1981] EUECJ R-217/80
[1981] ECR 2735
Case 169/80
Administration des Douanes v Societe Anonyme Gondrand
Frères and Societe Anonyme Garancini
[1981] ECR 1931
Commission v United Kingdom
[1980] ECR 2445
at para 46.
Alfonso Farrauto v Bau-Berufsgenossenschaft
See, eg, Case 10/78
Belbouab v Bundesknappschaft
[1978] ECR 1915.
Case C-336/95
Pedro Burdalo Trevejo and Others v Fondo Garantía
[1997] ECR 1
at para 14.
at paras 15 and 16.
Article 254(1) (ex Art 191(1)) EC.
This is not an uncommon procedure. In many countries, publication in the
Government Gazette
(or similar) is deemed to be notice to all and sundry
of the coming into force of a particular law.
Decker v Hauptzollamt Landau
[1979] ECR 101
at 111; Case
Metallurgica Rumi v Commission
[1982] ECR 487
at 503; Case
Padana v Commission
[1982] ECR 517
at 525; Case 84/81
Dairy Products Limited v Intervention Board for Agricultural Produce
at 1777; Case 108/81
Amylum v Council
[1982] ECR 3107
Case 114/ 81
Tunnel Refineries v Council
[1982] ECR 3189
at 3206; Case
Meiko-Konservenfabrik v Germany
[1983] ECR 2539
at 2548–49.
Racke v Hauptzollamt Mainz
[1979] ECR 69
Neumann v Hauptzollamt Hof/Saale
[1967] ECR 441
Deuka (No 1)
[1975] ECR 421
at 433–34; Case 5/75
Deuka (No 2)
[1975] ECR 759.
37 Case 17/67
Neumann v Hauptzollamt
[1967] ECR 441.
See also Case 57/72
GmbH v Einfuhr und Vorratsstelle fur Zucker
[1973] ECR 321.
Eg, to enforce rights.
Eg, by the Commission.
In this regard, see, eg, Case 3/59
Germany v High Authority
; Case 48/69
ICI v Commission
[1972] ECR 619.
In some writings, ‘acquired rights’ is used rather than
‘vested rights’—however, these terms are synonymous.
Joined Cases 7/56 and 3–7/57
Algera v Common Assembly
; Case 54/77
Herpels v Commission
[1978] ECR 585
; Case 14/81
Alpha Steel Ltd v Commission
[1982] ECR 749.
Joined Cases 7/56 and 3–7/57
Algera v Common Assembly
Joined Cases 42 and 49/59
SNUPAT v High Authority
[1961] ECR 53
Case 111/63
Lemmerz-Werke GmbH v High Authority
[1965] ECR 677
Herpels v Commission
[1978] ECR 585
at 599. See also
Joined Cases 42 and 49/59
SNUPAT v High Authority
[1961] ECR 53
Hoogovens v High Authority
. 47 Case 15/85
Consorzio Cooperative d’Abruzzo v Commission
[1987] ECR 1005.
48 Sharpston, E, ‘Legitimate expectations and economic
(1990) 15 European Law Review 103
See, eg, Case 78/77
Lührs v Hauptzollamt Hamburg-Jonas
; Case 52/81
Faust v Commission
[1982] ECR 3745
; Case 245/81
Edeka v Germany
[1982] ECR 2745
; Case T-521/93
Atlanta AG and Others v
Council and Commission
[1996] ECR II–1707.
Schwarze, J,
European Administrative Law,
1992, London: Sweet &
Maxwell, 1131. 51 Craig, PP, ‘Substantive legitimate expectations in
domestic and Community law’
(1996) 55 Cambridge Law Journal 289
Klomp v Inspecktie der Belastingen
[1969] ECR 43
Kledingverkoopbedrijf De Geus en Uitdenbogerd v Robert Bosch
at 52. 55 See, eg, Case 110/77
Mulcahy v Commission
[1978] ECR 1287
; Case 432/85
; Case 148/73
[1974] ECR 81
; Joined Cases 219 to 228, 230
to 235, 237, 238 and 242/80
Andre and Others v Commission and Council
[1984] ECR 165
; Joined Cases 87, 130/77, 22/83, 9 and 10/84
Commission and Council
[1985] ECR 2523.
Mulcahy, ibid.
See also Case C-137/92P
Commission v BASF AG
[1994] ECR I–2555.
Article 254 (ex Art 191) EC.
Société pour l’Exportation des Sucres v
[1977] ECR 709
at 726. In the
Société pour
l’Exportation des Sucres
case, a Regulation was involved which
provided that it was to enter into force on 1 July 1976. As the Regulation was
published on
2 July 1976, the ECJ rejected accidental retroactivity and ruled
that it could only properly be applied as from 2 July 1976, since
there were no
factors capable of attributing to it retroactive effect.
See, eg, Case 17/67
Neumann v Hauptzollamt Hof/Saale
; also Case 57/72
Westzucker GmbH
Einfuhr und Vorratsstelle
[1973] ECR 321.
Siemers v Hauptzollamt Bad Reichenhall
[1971] ECR 919
Racke v Hauptzollamt Mainz
[1979] ECR 69
at para 20.
Joined Cases C-260/91 and C-261/91
Divesinte SA and Another v
Adminstracion Principal de Aduanas e Impuestos Especiales de La Junquera
[1993] ECR I–1885.
at para 9. 64
at para 10. 65
at para 12. 66
at para 13.
at paras 14 and 15.
Joined Cases 212 to 217/80
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v
Srl Meridionale Industri
Salumi and Others
[1981] EUECJ R-217/80
[1981] ECR 2735
at para 10.
Case 113/75
Frecassetti v Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato
[1976] ECR 983.
Joined Cases 212 to 217/80
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v
Sri Méridionale Industria Salumi and Others
[1981] EUECJ R-217/80
[1981] ECR 2735
at para 12.
Case 183/73
Osram GmbH v Oberfinanzdirektion Frankfurt
Case 158/78
Biegi v Hauptzollamt Bochum
[1979] ECR 1103
at para 11.
Article 230 (ex Art 173) EC.
Article 234 (ex Art 177) EC.
Amministrazione délie Finanze dello State v Denkavit
[1980] ECR 1205
at 1223, citing Case 43/75
Defrenne v Sabena (No
[1976] ECR 455
at 481 where the ECJ referring to ‘important
considerations of legal certainty’ restricted the application of its
establishing the direct effect of Art 141 (ex Art 119) EC to future
Commission v Council
[1987] ECR 1493
at 1522. See also
the second paragraph of Art 231 (ex Art 174) EC.
Joined Cases 66, 127 and 128/79
Amministrazione delle Finanze v
[1980] ECR 1237
Joined Cases 66, 127 and 128/79
Amministrazione délie Finanze v
[1980] ECR 1237
at para 10.
Defrenne v Sabena (No 2)
[1976] ECR 455.
See, eg, Kapteyn, PJG and VerLoren van Themaat, P,
Introduction to the
Law of the European Communities,
1973, London: Sweet & Maxwell, 296.
Defrenne v Sabena (No 2)
[1976] ECR 455
at paras 74 and
Case 811/79
Amministmzione delle Finanze dello Stato v Ariete SpA
[1980] ECR 2545.
Cases 66, 127 and 128/79
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v
[1980] ECR 1237.
at para 11.
Blaizot v Universite de Liege and Others
[1988] ECR 379.
For a very good commentary
on this case, see de Lacey, P and Moens, GA,
The Decline of the
University,
1990, Tahmoor: Law
Press, 29. 93 Case 293/83
Gravier v City of Liège
[1985] ECR 593.
94 Case 24/86
Blaizot v Universite de Liège and Others
at para 26. 95
at para 28. Emphasis added. 97
Emphasis added.
at para 31.
at paras 32 and 33. Emphasis added.
at para 34. 102
at para 35. 103 See, eg, Case
Barber v Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance Group
Case C-163/90
Administration des Douanes et Droits Indirects v Leopold
Legros and Others
[1992] ECR I–4625; Case C-415/93
Union Royale
Belge des Sociétés de Football Association v Bosman
Joined Cases C-485/93 and C-486/93
Simitzi v Kos
Opinion of Advocate General Tesauro (para 17) in Joined Cases C-485/93
and C-486/93
Simitzi v Kos
[1995] ECR I–2655. Emphasis added.
Case C-200/90
Dansk Denkavit and Poulsen v Skatteministeriet
[1992] ECR I–2217. 107 Joined Cases C-367/93 to C-377/93
FG Roders BV
and Others v Inspecteur der Invoerrechten en
[1995] ECR I–2229. 108 CaseC-137/94
The Queen v
Secretary of State for Health ex p Richardson
[1994] ECR I–3407. 109
Worringham and Humphreys v Lloyds Bank Ltd
[1981] ECR 767.
Joined Cases C-6 and 9/90
Francovich v Italy
[1991] ECR I–5357. 111
Joined Cases C-363/93, C-407/93, C-408/93, C-409/93, C-410/93 and C-411/93
René Lancry SA
v Direction Générale des Douanes
[1994] ECR I–3957.
112 Case C-137/94
The Queen v Secretary of State for Health ex p
[1994] ECR I–3407. 113 Case 69/80
Worringham and
Humphreys v Lloyds Bank Ltd
[1981] ECR 767.
at para 30. 115
at para 32.
Joined Cases C-6 and 9/90
Francovich v Italy
[1991] ECR I-5357.
See, eg, Carmen Plaza Martin, ‘Furthering the effectiveness of EC
directives and the judicial protection of individual rights
thereunder’
(1994) 43 International and Comparative Law Quarterly 26 at 46.
Article 241 (ex Art 184) EC (‘the plea of illegality’) is an
adjunct to Art 230 (ex Art 173) EC. However, no action
can be brought directly
against a Regulation under Art 241 (ex Art 184) EC.
Council v Parliament
[1986] ECR 2155
; Case 45/86
Commission v Council
[1987] ECR 1493
; Case 51/87
Commission v
[1988] ECR 5459.
Case 275/87
Commission v Council
[1989] ECR 259.
See also Case
Commission v Council
[1973] ECR 575
; Case 59/81
Commission v
[1982] ECR 3329
; Case 264/82
Timex v Council and Commission
[1985] ECR 849
; Case C-295/90
European Parliament v Council
; Case C-41/95
Council v Parliament
[1995] ECR 1
Case 130/79
Express Dairy Foods v Intervention Board
Case 145/79
SA Roquette Frères v French State—Customs
Administration
[1980] ECR 2917.
Pinna v Caisse d’allocations familiales de la
[1986] ECR 1.
Case 145/79
SA Roquette Frères v French State—Customs
Administration
[1980] ECR 2917
. Reference to new treaty section added. 125
126 Joined Cases
C-38/90 and C-151/90
Thomas Edward Lomas and
Others v United Kingdom
The ECJ additionally held that Art 4(2) of Regulation 1633/84 was also
invalid in so far as it required
a security to be lodged in order to ensure that the amount due pursuant to
Art 4(1) was charged. 128
at para 24. Emphasis added. 129
at para 27. 130
at para 28. 131
at para 29.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (200 KB)
PDF format (153 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter