URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2009/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ciccarelli, Marina; Goddard, Trevor; Merritt, Judith --- "Minimising Mental Stress among Workers: How Can Good Corporate Citizens Achieve This?" [2009] IntJlSSWC 4; (2009) 1(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 33
MINIMISING MENTAL STRESS AMONG WORKERS:
HOW CAN GOOD CORPORATE CITIZENS ACHIEVE THIS?
Marina Ciccarelli*, Trevor Goddard** and Judith Merritt***
A. INTRODUCTION
B. WORK AND NON-WORK FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO WORK-RELATED MENTAL STRESS
C. WHAT IS CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP?
D. WHY CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP?
E. ADOPTING A CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP APPROACH TO THE PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF STRESS
F. WHY ARE ORGANISATIONS IMPORTANT IN THE MANAGEMENT OF MENTAL STRESS?
G. CONCLUSION
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
MINIMISING MENTAL STRESS AMONG WORKERS:
HOW CAN GOOD CORPORATE CITIZENS ACHIEVE THIS?
Work-related mental stress injuries are a major concern across all industry
sectors in Australia. Various risk factors are associated
with work-related
mental stress. However, unlike many physical and environmental hazards at the
workplace, hazard identification
and control of mental stress among workers are
less developed in organisational risk management processes.
Interventions to minimise work-related mental stress and its adverse impact
on health and wellbeing have often focused primarily on
the individual. This
paper supports interventions at the organisation-individual interface that not
only engender change at the individual
worker or job level, but also facilitate
a change in the psychosocial culture of the organisation. Proactive
organisational interventions
that address the mental health and safety of
workers require the development of a leadership and management style allowing
participation in driving changes to the psychosocial culture of the
workplace. In the current climate, this might be viewed as a
movement towards
good corporate citizenship.
This paper proposes that various stakeholders in the Australian workers
compensation community have the individual and collective
potential to be
significant drivers of change in how organisations prevent and manage mental
stress among workers.
A. INTRODUCTION
Health is not simply a state of physical, social and mental wellbeing. In
functional terms, health is the resource that permits people
to lead socially
and economically productive lives.
Increasingly, non-medical factors such as the work environment have been
identified as the most long-term influential components
So, in the context of work,
this means health is an important component of, and inextricably linked to, a
healthy society and the
individuals within it.
Mental stress is identified as a social determinant of
Its impact on people’s ability to lead economically productive lives
and the prevention and management of stress are priorities
in the Australian
National Mental Health
Work-related mental stress has been defined as the ‘harmful physical
and emotional responses that occur when the requirements
of the job do not match
the capabilities, resources, or needs of the
Work-related mental stress has also been conceptualised as being
fully recursive and cyclical, such that the physical or psychological
of exposure to stressors can lead to vulnerability to future stressors by
depleting the resilience and coping abilities
individual.
An individual’s
response to stressors may manifest as physical and/or mental
ill-health.
Within the Australian workers compensation legislation, work-related mental
stress is a compensable disease. The median lost time
for a mental stress claim
exceeds 60 days, resulting in a long duration claim for many
The steady rise in financial and social costs associated with mental
stress-related workers compensation claims should be concerning
stakeholders.
Between 1997−98 and 2005−06, the number of workers compensation
claims in Australia decreased by 11 per cent; however
claims categorised as
‘mental disorders’ increased by 4.8 per
Claims for mental stress comprised 5 per cent of all serious claims in
2005−06 and represented the seventh most common mechanism
of injury for
Australian workers.
Female workers were more likely to claim compensation for work-related
mental stress than their male
and, regardless of gender, workers aged 40−54 years were most likely
to submit a claim.
Mental stress
injuries resulting in a claim were most often due to high work pressure,
harassment and exposure to workplace or occupational
workers, 55 per cent of mental stress claims were from those in associate
professional, professional and transportation/production
roles including police
officers, road and rail transportation drivers, and education professionals.
Among female workers, approximately
33 per cent of mental stress claims were by
those in professional roles (education) and 28 per cent among clerical and sales
Compensable mental stress claims in Australia are, in general, more than
twice as long and twice as costly as claims for other work-related
illness or disease. In 2005−06, mental stress claims were characterised by
a median work absence of 10.9 weeks compared
to 4.1 weeks (for all
and a median per claim direct cost of A$15,500 compared to A$6,100 for all
B. WORK AND NON-WORK FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO
WORK-RELATED MENTAL STRESS
Life in the 21st century is complex, representing a sometimes delicate and
blended balance of an individual’s work and personal
Technological advancements have
provided temporal and spatial mobility resulting in a shift in employers’
expectations of when,
where and how work tasks are completed. This can lead to
an increased blurring of work and family life for many workers who take
or who adapt to globalisation of
business by communicating with clients and partners in different time zones.
Alongside this complexity
is the inability to differentiate the primary causes
of mental stress in the workplace, at home or in the community. Consequently,
the causes of many stressors remain undetermined with stakeholders becoming
reluctant to take responsibility in an increasingly litigious
society. The fact
that the number of claims for work-related mental stress injuries appears to be
rising while other compensable
claims for ill-health or injury are
suggests that many individuals are struggling to cope with the psychological
demands placed on them as modern-day workers. However,
the causal relationship
between workplace factors and the development of a mental stress disorder is not
Although psychosocial factors such
as high job pressure and low job control,
perceived lack of support by peers and
supervisors,
bullying and harassment are
commonly reported, an individual’s psychological and/or physiological
response to these potential
stressors will also depend on the individual’s
personality traits and coping style,
natural supports available within the
environment.
These psychosocial risks accumulate during life and increase the propensity
for poor mental and physical health. When exposed to
stressors, the body’s
hormones and nervous system prepare for a fight or flight response. This results
in elevated heart rate,
diversion of blood to muscles and an increased state of
alertness that impacts on both the cardiovascular and immune
In isolated occurrences, these
physiological responses have limited impact on health, but exposure to extended
periods of mental
stress coupled with a lack of social support may be
potentially damaging to health irrespective of the context of life in which they
arise, be it at work or in other
circumstances.
Therefore, exposure to mental stress due to work may have an effect on the
worker’s psychological and physical functioning and
health in both the
work and home environments. Similarly, stressors from non-working life have the
capacity to impact on psychological
health and fitness to perform job tasks in
the workplace. It is not realistic to expect workers to ‘leave their
troubles at
the door’, so employers need to understand that stressors in
either work or non-work environments can potentially impact on
individual’s performance in other life roles. This is an important
interdependency to consider when viewing the many facets
of health through the
social model of health.
In the medical model, disability is deemed to be caused by disease or trauma
and responsibility falls to the individual to deal with
its consequences.
Disability viewed in this light requires medical care in the form of individual
treatment, so management of the
disability is centred on a curative approach or
the need to adapt the individuals’ behaviour. However, the social model of
disability defines these same issues as problems of society created by societal
systems. In this light, disability is not attributed
simply to individuals but
to a complex collection of causal conditions with the broader social milieu. So,
under the social model,
the amelioration of these problems requires action
across the political, social and economic area and becomes the collective
responsibility
of the broader
Regardless of the risk factors, early identification and intervention is key
to minimising the degree of associated
disability.
Benjamin Franklin is credited
with coining the adage ‘an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
cure’ and this is no
truer than in the management of work-related mental
stress disorders. Although work-related mental stress has been identified as
quantifiable and measurable risk,
it appears its prevention and management are less understood than other
physical and environmental hazards at the workplace.
Fewer resources are available to support employers in understanding
work-related stress or the strategies available to minimise workers’
in comparison to other workplace hazards. Psychological stressors are
diverse and often difficult to isolate. Consequently, employers
who are not
sufficiently prepared to deal with this unique hazard may solely rely on
legislative standards for guidance. This supports
the notion of a ‘race to
the bottom’ where standards are concerned, with employers reluctant to go
beyond any minimal
legislative requirements, often through fear or
misunderstanding. Current occupational safety and health (OS&H) legislation
all Australian jurisdictions requires employers to take reasonable action to
ensure workers are not exposed to hazards. However,
unlike the numerous
regulations and codes of practice related to the control of physical workplace
hazards, there are limited guidelines
available as to how employers can fulfil their duty of care regarding the
control of mental stress hazards. Furthermore, State and
Federal workers
compensation legislation requires the worker to establish on the balance of
probabilities that work contributed to
the mental stress
These provisions aim to limit
access to compensation for a mental stress claim, but fail to address the fact
that an increasing number
of Australian workers are experiencing mental stress
disorders that impact directly on work performance. What is required might be
shift in the way employers and other stakeholders view their role in the
management of mental stress among workers. Instead of
a strict focus on dealing
with specific OS&H concerns, a broader approach that acknowledges the
importance of promoting the overall
health of workers may be more effective.
C. WHAT IS CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP?
Corporate citizenship is an overarching philosophy describing how business
might operate as a more integral part of society. The concept
of corporate
citizenship is not new; in the 1940s, Peter Drucker postulated that corporations
needed to be redefined as social
institutions
due to the permeation of their
activity across everyday life, including our roles as consumers, workers and
community members. With
corporations identified as legal or ‘false
person’ entities, they are often incapable of human and ecological
sensitivity.
Ironically, the very reason for the formation of a corporation (to
pursue the interests of the community that could not be enacted
by individuals
alone) appears to have been trampled on by the very free market system that
created them. The form of capitalism adopted
by industrialised societies has
provided few checks and balances to the power being afforded to the corporate
sector as agents of
citizenship may be one response to this lack of corporate accountability, and a
philosophy that attempts to both address
the use of corporate power and perhaps
redirect it for mutual economic and social advantage.
Corporate citizenship is often used as a metaphor in an attempt to reconcile
the way that businesses interact with the communities
in which they
This is underpinned by the notion that business might need to adopt a more
humanistic role in its interactions with society. Reliance
on this metaphor of a
human citizen to describe what corporate citizenship might look like redefines
corporations as social institutions
that are not isolated components within a
community. An industrialised approach to economic development should recognise
that individual
workers and their employers are joint citizens; both with rights
and responsibilities for the health and development of the communities
they belong. Corporate citizenship encourages corporations to move beyond
isolated charitable or philanthropic engagement,
recognising they play an active
role in setting and responding to community values and needs. Instead of
remaining purely a philosophical
stance, corporate social responsibility is one
strategy that allows business to take legitimate action within a social model of
to address the health status of workers, including those with mental
stress disorders.
Since corporate citizens are, by definition, politically and socially engaged
within the community, they cannot fail to respond if
something goes wrong in the
society that their success is based on.
example, regardless of whether the cause was predominantly work-related or not,
having workers with a mental stress disorder
will negatively impact on the
organisation. Organisations who deny liability for addressing mental stress
among their workers may
reduce their financial burden in terms of workers
compensation payments, however do not alter the fact that they have a worker who
may be increasingly absent from the workplace and/or with diminished work
capacity. In this context, corporate citizenship would
suggest that the
employer, the worker and other relevant stakeholders in society, such as the
insurer, and occupational safety and
health and workers compensation
authorities, should engage to develop complementary strategies in response to
this growing social
Indeed, the
multifaceted nature of mental stress lends itself to resolution by a unity of
stakeholders who may not traditionally
work together or, at the very least,
through the creation of a new system allowing stakeholders to work in different
ways. Another
method of business engagement in this mutuality is through civic
participation or where ‘work’ and ‘community’
Mutual participation is imperative
in achieving corporate citizenry and supported historically by events including
initiatives outlined
in the World Health Organization Ottawa
and subsequent charters. The Ottawa Charter identified strategies to
‘strengthen community actions’ and the ‘reorientation
future health services’ as being essential in addressing complex health
Strengthening community actions involves health promotion through multiple
agencies (stakeholders, employers, insurers), enabling
communities to set
priorities, make decisions, plan strategies and take advantage of the
‘neural networks’
stakeholders
create by interacting with other groups. Central to this process is community
empowerment that brings together partners
to draft solutions. This draws on
existing human resources to enhance self-help opportunities and social capacity
by developing flexible
systems to strengthening community participation in
resolving issues such as stress that are multi-factorial.
The reorientation of future health services would see responsibility for
health shared amongst individuals, institutions (including
business), government
and society. The capacity to deliver change for better health outcomes is
enhanced as interventions move outside
the medical model and its focus on
clinical and curative interventions, towards the social model that sees
healthier workplaces developed
by opening dialogue between the health sector and
the broader social, political and economic environments.
How employers and other stakeholders act on these issues reflects their
citizenry and demonstrates their acceptance of mutual responsibility
work-related stress. The late 20th century saw increasing discourse around the
area of corporate social responsibility. While
the concept is not
the terminology now increasingly
applies some form of moral standard to activities of an organisation. The
concept of ‘accountability’
for one’s actions, both in terms
of non-maleficence (do no harm) and beneficence (do
spans across business and the social
and health services sector. It highlights that the non-medical factors,
including the work environment,
may prove to be the most long-term influential
component of health status.
understanding that worker health is a direct consequence of corporate activity,
the International Classification of Functioning,
Disability and Health (ICF) has
identified that people in positions of authority, decision-making ability and
socially defined influence
are influential
over the health status of people in the community.
D. WHY CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP?
Corporate citizenship takes a positivist approach to health that aligns well
with the concept of organisations investing in the health
and wellbeing of their
workers as an important part of their risk management strategies and maintenance
of their human resource assets.
In March 2005, Australian Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer, the Hon
Chris Pearce MP, requested that the Corporations and Markets
Advisory Committee
(CAMAC) investigate the extent to which duties of directors under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) should include corporate social
responsibilities. The review
highlighted that an investigation of the interests of community stakeholders
other than shareholders was well overdue. It focused
on whether Australian
companies should adopt socially responsible business practices and, if so, how?
And whether the
Corporations Act
should require certain types of
companies to report on the social impact of their activities? One result of this
investigation was
that existing legislation was not deemed to be the appropriate
vehicle to drive these changes.
This was not the first attempt to influence business governance structures by
embedding social issues into corporate practice. Standards
Australia released
AS8003: Corporate Social Responsibility
as part of their Governance
Standard series. The Standard draws heavily on the
Universal Declaration on
Human Rights
and International Labour Organization conventions that advocate for the
rights of workers within the workplace. How workers respond
physically or
psychologically to the demands of their work are a product of the relationships
between the worker, the employer, the
organisation and other stakeholders. These
relationships therefore must be based on a set of moral
(driven by both business
and society), and not simply on compliance with legislative requirements.
Morally, stakeholders might consider
being accountable for preventing the wrong
thing being done, by actively doing the right
So, rather than only
preventing harm in the community by adhering to legislation, employers might
like to be seen taking action deemed
as ‘the right thing’ in
preventing stress; often in partnership with stakeholders (such as insurers),
who historically
viewed these actions as outside their realm of interest or
responsibility.
So what is the benefit to stakeholders of adopting a corporate citizenship
approach in the prevention and management of stress among
workers? The work of
authors including John Elkington
has drawn attention to the benefit of being a good corporate citizen by
addressing the triple bottom line: attention to the financial,
environmental aspects of a company’s performance. Employers who actively
pursue the corporate citizenship agenda
are shown to:
• be recognised as employers of choice
• have a higher correlation of value alignment between corporate
mission and community values
• have improved workforce productivity; and
• have a stronger workplace commitment to OS&H and subsequent
management of OS&H
These benefits are most evident in organisations where the commitment to
corporate citizenship comes from the CEO, senior manager
or industry sector
champion, supported not only by publicly disclosed rhetoric but activity that
demonstrates commitment of physical
and financial resources and measurable
An excellent example of acceptance of the mutual responsibility for the
health of individuals within a community by a regulatory agency
is the 2008
initiative, developed by WorkSafe Victoria (the State occupational health
and safety and workers compensation authority). The Victorian
State Government
identified the rising incidence of chronic disease within the community and
associated work absences negatively
impacting on the productive capacity of the
State (with estimated annual losses of $44 million). Furthermore, it identified
chronic disease increased the risk of a work-related musculoskeletal injury
and placed an ‘unsustainable burden on the State’s
public health
provides complementary worksite health checks and screening for a range of
chronic diseases, with information and advice on future
health management to
workers in small-sized businesses. Larger employers (with an annual payroll
exceeding $10 million) are eligible
to receive a grant subsidy of up to $30 per
worker towards the cost of these screenings or to expand existing workplace
programs. The aim of this initiative is to reduce the prevalence of
musculoskeletal injuries by 5 per cent and related work absences
by 10 per cent,
through controlling associated chronic health conditions such as obesity,
physical inactivity and smoking. Despite
the fact that these chronic disease
risk factors are not work-related, WorkSafe Victoria, in partnership with
employers, has accepted
their role in promoting the health of workers. Thus, it
is feasible for these stakeholders to demonstrate similar corporate citizenry
and mutual responsibility regarding the issue of mental stress among workers,
regardless of whether the causes are work-related or
E. ADOPTING A CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP APPROACH TO THE
PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF STRESS
The International Classification of Functioning, Health and Disability
is complementary to the
philosophy of corporate citizenship. It offers a conceptual framework that
encompasses business activity
(i.e. employers and insurers) by recognising the
impact business has on individual and community health. It may be that health
and promotion programs might be more successfully delivered through
the improved participation of business in health-related causes.
Business can
play a significant role through driving industry changes by altering workplace
practices, contributing to codes of
conduct, creating guidance notes and
defining workplace cultures. These strategies can assist in removing societal
barriers and encourage
the provision of supports and facilitators that
ameliorate workplace stress. The ICF integrates the two opposing medial and
models, creating a combined biopsychosocial approach to health. This
synthesis provides a coherent view of the various perspectives
of health from a
biological, individual and social perspective.
A new paradigm that moves beyond legislative compliance alone and responds to
the individual/organisational interface is supported
by the ICF by allowing
social issues such as mental stress to be addressed within the business
environment. Stakeholders can acknowledge
the bioethical principle of
beneficence, which assists to reduce the often tenuous link between business and
community objectives.
acknowledgement by multiple stakeholders is the first important step in being
able to engage with a complex social health
issue such as mental stress without
the burden of legal responsibility.
Stakeholders might respond to the issue of work-related mental stress through
various principles that reflect the values of corporate
citizenship:
Minimise harm:
minimise the negative consequences of work
activities on stakeholders, including
This refers directly to the employers’ duty of care to ensure that
workers are not exposed to hazards (including mental stress
hazards) in the
workplace which may result in ill-health or harm, but also addresses the moral
obligation to protect workers from
Maximise benefit:
contribute to societal wellbeing through investment in business activity that
benefit shareholders and stakeholders by resolving
joint complex social
problems. Initiatives by employers to promote the overall health and wellbeing
of their workers as joint members
of society, regardless of the percentage
contribution of workplace versus personal factors, and promote a healthy
Be accountable and responsive to
stakeholders:
collaboration and transparent reporting, which includes open communication
between employers and workers regarding actions
that are taken to promote the
prevention and management of mental stress within the organisation.
Support strong financial results through more effective management of
the anticipated outcome of a corporate citizenship approach is that
through shared responsibility for addressing the issues related
to mental stress
disorders, regardless of causation, employers achieve the long-term benefits of
a healthy workforce who have the
capacity for optimal productivity.
F. WHY ARE ORGANISATIONS IMPORTANT IN THE MANAGEMENT OF
MENTAL STRESS?
The literature identifies primary, secondary and tertiary interventions to
prevent and manage work-related mental
at three levels. These
are at the individual level, the organisational level and the
individual-organisational
Primary interventions
that aim to prevent workers’ exposure to mental stress are at the
organisational level because they address
potential work-related causes
including the level of job demands, diversity of tasks available, flexible work
arrangements, training
and support requirements and job control available to
Secondary interventions
are often at the individual level and include relaxation training, stress
management counselling and cognitive
behaviour therapy. These interventions aim
to change the way in which individuals respond to stressors in their environment
not eliminate or reduce the source of the
Tertiary interventions
aim to minimise the effects of a stress disorder on an individual and are often
provided via organisation-level
strategies such as graduated return-to-work
programs and counselling through employee assistance
Implementing
interventions at the individual level is often more expeditious than creating
change across the culture, policies and
processes of the
organisation;
however there is
evidence that organisationally focused interventions have positive impacts at
both the individual and organisational
levels and are more effective in
addressing the impacts of job stress than interventions at the individual level
Strategies that combine aspects of individual and organisational
interventions to manage stress are likely to be more sustainable
because they
involve a two-pronged approach. Interventions at the organisational-individual
interface have the potential to establish
a healthy environment that not only
or minimises worker exposure to stress hazards, but also
provides workers with the resources they need to become
more resilient to
, regardless of where it occurs. In practice, this would include
organisational commitment to accept co-responsibility for maintaining
health of all workers, developing jobs with flexible working arrangements,
providing suitable and sufficient knowledge,
technological equipment and human
resources to match work demands to the capabilities of workers, and facilitating
access to appropriate health services for individual treatment,
such as individual and family counselling and stress management workshops.
However, employers who adopt a paternalistic approach may find that their
perceptions of what workers perceive as the causes of their
mental stress, and
what is required to ameliorate this, are different to the perceptions of the
workers themselves. Collaboration
with workers is essential. Five key factors
for a successful approach to mental stress prevention have been
identified,
including: (i)
adopting a stepwise and systematic approach; (ii) an adequate diagnosis or risk
analysis of mental stress hazards;
(iii) a combination of employer-directed and
worker-directed measures (including prevention at the source of the hazard and
the coping capacity of workers); (iv) a participative approach to
stress prevention involving workers and middle management; and
(v) top-down
support from senior management to embed workplace cultural change in
Although a risk management approach to workplace hazards is commonplace for
physical and environmental hazards such as manual handling,
the identification
of the sources of stress and implementation of appropriate controls are less
understood within organisations.
It is not sufficient for employers to rely
simply on legislative guidelines for the identification and control of mental
stress hazards
as they are not well established. Organisational interventions
solely based on compliance with duty of care requirements in OS&H
legislation may fall short of the mark in effectively dealing with mental
stress, as it can lead to a restricted focus on employee
behaviours. Being
proactive about the OS&H of employees requires the development of policies
and processes at the organisational
level that become culturally immersed in the
Drivers beyond legislative requirements might include perceived economic
and the moral beliefs
and values of the employer.
Moving beyond this minimalist legal requirement, organisational strategies
driven by social change and moral and discretionary motivations
all contribute
to good corporate citizenship.
So while organisations may be motivated by enlightened self-interest, these
strategies also have complementary financial, social
and environmental gains for
the key stakeholders and the
Through corporate citizenship, employers who provide a strong front-end
approach to preventing mental stress among their workers,
and who also provide
workers with support and resources to manage stress when it occurs (regardless
of the contribution of work and
non-work factors), may reduce work absences and
costs associated with mental stress claims. While many large employers may
have some of these strategies in place, small- to medium-sized
businesses often lack access to the knowledge and resources to implement
measures. Therefore, the concept of corporate citizenship needs to extend beyond
the employer to other community stakeholders
including workers compensation
insurance companies, safety and health regulatory bodies and workers
compensation authorities. Organisational
risk management strategies have a
greater propensity for all stakeholders to benefit; the worker benefits through
resumption of work,
the employer benefits through reduced worker absence and the
insurer benefits through reduced financial liability and a less complex
management process. Consequently, all stakeholders should consider their social
responsibilities in contributing to the development
of organisational risk
management strategies that minimise the impact of mental stress.
For example, among employers, these preventative organisational strategies
might focus on the inclusion of psychological profiling
and matching as part of
recruitment processes, identification of potential stress hazards as part of
regular employee performance
reviews and routine OS&H safety audits, and
communication and collaboration with workers regarding their perceived needs
toolbox meetings. While the onus to address the prevention of
work-related mental stress appears to fall on the shoulders of the
support from other stakeholders is essential. Employers need support to develop
organisational processes that encourage
open, transparent communication between
workers and management regarding workload issues, training needs, peer and
supervisor support
and other factors impacting on the workers’
psychological and physical health. OS&H regulatory agencies have the
to better inform employers about the issues of mental stress and
provide advice on how to incorporate stress reduction strategies
management processes.
In the event that a mental stress injury does occur, employers should focus
on early intervention injury management (in many cases
even before a formal
claim is lodged). Accommodation of the stress disorder can be successfully
achieved through modifications to
work roles, flexible work hours, job redesign,
and access to employee assistance programs including stress management and
psychological
counselling. However the capacity for an employer to deliver these
is heavily influenced by the support they receive from the workers
compensation
authority and the insurer.
Workers compensation legislation in Australia currently provides employers
with protection from financial responsibility for stress
injuries that do not a
have significant work contribution. However, these legislative exclusions do
little to encourage employers
to adopt a holistic view of worker health. Instead
they almost imply, ‘If it’s not my problem, and I am not financially
liable, then it is not my concern.’ This is diametrically opposed to the
philosophy of good corporate citizenship, which would
state that an organisation
must remain politically and socially engaged. Therefore, legislators and workers
compensation authorities
responsible for administering the legislation might
consider how the current exclusion provisions limit the capacity of employers
be good corporate citizens.
Another key stakeholder, the workers compensation insurer, has the capacity
to influence the employer’s organisational approach
to the prevention and
management of stress. Their influence can extend beyond, and sit external to,
legislative requirements. The
insurer has the potential to influence the
organisational risk management strategies of underwritten organisations through
annual insurance premiums. Discounting annual insurance premiums for
proactive socially responsible strategies to prevent and manage
stress may be
one method that shifts the focus of interventions from individuals to
organisations. The number, duration and cost
of mental stress claims can provide
direct feedback to the employer about the success of their organisational
strategies in managing
stress injuries. This possibly makes the insurer a
powerful facilitator of social and organisational change, resulting in effective
risk management strategies to ameliorate mental stress among Australian
G. CONCLUSION
Stress is a major concern of modern life. Causal factors for the development
of stress and associated mental or musculoskeletal disorders
are difficult to
isolate due to the complex interactions of work- and non-work-related risk
factors. A focus on reducing the major
causes of stress in the workplace and
promoting worker resilience to stress can be brought about through a deliberate
focus on the
organisational-individual interface. A corporate citizenship
approach to the prevention and management of stress among workers requires
stakeholders to accept a role in managing this issue.
Corporate citizenship must move beyond simple rhetoric. Action-oriented
solutions to complex community health problems such as stress
will not come from
individual societal sectors but from credible multi-stakeholder dialogues. The
causal risk factors of poor health
and stress spread across the economic, social
and political milieu and encompass a broad suite of the social determinants of
These determinants are often deeply embedded in our societal frameworks
and require major deconstruction and consequent reconstruction
to remove or
reduce the factors that contribute to the issue of stress. The objective here is
to move away from the burgeoning litigious
environment and the
guilt-by-association framework, putting responsibility for mental stress into a
social model of health.
When everyone acts as good citizens, individually and collectively, we add
value to society.
The dynamic
nature of this relationship ensures ongoing scholarly and community
contributions to defining the current context of
this relationship beyond
legislative compliance.
corporate citizens should always understand and manage their influence over the
wider community for the benefit of society as
whole, not distinctive
components.
citizenship addresses the issue of mental stress among workers by regarding
business and societal relationships as integral
to the minimisation of mental
stress. Employers who choose to adopt a moral, rather than a legalistic, stance
towards their responsibility
for promoting the mental health of their workers
require the support of others in the community, including occupational safety
health and workers compensation regulatory agencies and workers compensation
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Partial funding for this paper was provided through a research grant from the
Occupational Therapist’s Registration Board of
Western Australia.
This paper is prepared with the support of the Curtin Health Innovation
Research Institute.
PhD; Senior Lecturer, School of
Occupational Therapy; Senior Research Fellow, Centre for Research into
Disability and Society, Curtin
University of Technology, Perth, Western
MIntlStds (Distinction) BSc
(OT) BCom; Senior Lecturer, School of Occupational Therapy; Research Associate,
Centre for Research into
Disability and Society, Curtin University of
Technology, Perth, Western Australia.
MHlthSc (OT) GradCertEd
(TTeach) BAppSc (OT); Lecturer, School of Occupational Therapy; Curtin
University of Technology, Perth, Western
World Health Organization,
Health Promotion Glossary
, World Health Organization, Geneva, 1998.
World Health Organization,
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Health Organization, Geneva, 2001.
R Wilkinson and M Marmot,
Social Determinants of Health: The Solid Facts
Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, Denmark, 2003
http://www.euro.who.int/document/e81384.pdf
at 20 January 2007.
Department of Health and
National Mental Health Strategy
, Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra, 2006
http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/mental-strat-about
> at 1 July 2008.
National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health,
Stress at Work
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/pdfs/stress.pdf
at 20 January 2008.
RS Lazarus and S Folkman,
Stress Appraisal and Coping
Springer, New York, 1984.
CL Cooper and S Cartwright,
‘Healthy Mind, Healthy Organisation: A Proactive Approach to Occupational
Stress’ (1994)
Human Relations
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Occupational Health and Safety Statistics Report
— Median Lost Time from Work 2005/06
http://nosi.ascc.gov.au/Default.aspx
at 21 January 2009.
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Occupational Health and Safety Statistics Report
— Number of Cases 1997/98−2005/06
http://nosi.ascc.gov.au/Default.aspx
at 21 January 2009.
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Compendium of Workers' Compensation Statistics
http://www.ascc.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/50DC141A-A6B2-4062-8295-AB38BD4871EF/0/Part_A_Summary_of_serious_claims_200506.pdf
at 21 January 2009.
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Occupational Health and Safety Statistics Report
— Number and Percent of Cases 2005/06
http://nosi.ascc.gov.au/Default.aspx
at 21 January 2009.
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Occupational Health and Safety Statistics Report
— Median Lost Time from Work 2005/06
http://nosi.ascc.gov.au/Default.aspx
at 21 January 2008.
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Occupational Health and Safety Statistics Report
— Median Total Compensation Payment 2005/06
http://nosi.ascc.gov.au/Default.aspx
at 21 January 2008.
The Big Picture:
Life, Work and Relationships in the 21
, Hardie Grant
Books, Melbourne, 2006.
‘Knowledge Work in Distributed Environments: Issues and Illusions’
New Technology
Work and Employment
Australian Safety and
Compensation Council,
Occupational Health and Safety Statistics Report
— Number of Cases 1997/98-2005/06
http://nosi.ascc.gov.au/Default.aspx
at 21 January 2008.
‘Participation in Decision Making as a Strategy for Reducing Job-related
Strain’ (1983) 68
Journal of Applied Psychology
R Karasek and T Theorell,
Healthy Work: Stress, Productivity, and the Reconstruction of
Working Life
, Basic Books, New York, 1990.
S Michie and S Williams,
‘Reducing Work Related Psychological Ill Health and Sickness
Absence: A Systematic Literature Review’ (2003) 60
Occupational and
Environmental Medicine
K Belkic, P Landsbergis, P
Schnall and D Baker, ‘Is Job Strain a Major Source of Cardiovascular
Disease Risk?’ (2004)
Scandinavian Journal of Work Environment and
R Wilkinson and M Marmot,
Social Determinants of Health: The Solid Facts
Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, Denmark, 2003
http://www.euro.who.int/document/e81384.pdf
at 20 January 2007.
M Kivimäki, P
Leino-Arjas, R Luukkonen, H Riihimäki, J Vahtera and J Kirjonen,
‘Work Stress and Risk of Cardiovascular
Mortality: Prospective Cohort
Study of Industrial Employees’
British Medical
World Health Organization,
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Health Organization, Geneva, 2001.
M Sullivan, M Feuerstein, R
Gatchel, S Linton and G Pransky, ‘Integrating Psychosocial and Behavioral
Interventions to Achieve
Optimal Rehabilitation Outcomes’ (2005) 15
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
475; M Lehmer and A Bentley,
‘Treating Work Stress: An Alternative to Workers’
Compensation’ (1997) 39
Journal of Occupational and Environmental
Health Canada,
Advice on Stress Risk Management in the Workplace,
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/alt_formats/hecs-sesc/pdf/pubs/occup-travail/stress-part-2/stress-part-2_e.pdf
at 19 February 2008.
Commission for Occupational
Safety and Health, Department of Consumer Employment and Protection,
Practice: Violence, Aggression and Bullying at Work
http://www.docep.wa.gov.au/WorkSafe/PDF/Codes_of_Practice/Code_violence.pdf
at 1 July 2008; A Williamson, ‘Managing Stress in the Workplace:
Part 1 — Guidelines for the Practitioner’
International
Journal of Ergonomics
161; UK Health and Safety Executive,
Standards for Work-related Stress
http://www.hse.gov.uk/stress/standards/index.htm
at 1 July 2008; Occupational Safety and Health Service, Department of
Labour, New Zealand,
Healthy Work: Managing Stress and Fatigue in the
http://www.osh.govt.nz/order/catalogue/stress/stressfatigue.pdf
at 17 February 2009; European Communities,
Guidance on Work-related
Stress: Spice of Life or Kiss of Death
http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/publications/2002/ke4502361_en.pdf
at 1 July 2008.
Commission for Occupational
Safety and Health, Department of Consumer Employment and Protection,
Practice: Violence, Aggression and Bullying at Work
http://www.docep.wa.gov.au/WorkSafe/PDF/Codes_of_Practice/Code_violence.pdf
at 1 July 2008; Commission for Occupational Safety and Health,
Department of Consumer and Employment Protection,
Code of Practice: Working
http://www.docep.wa.gov.au/WorkSafe/PDF/Codes_of_Practice/COPworkinghours.pdf
at 1 July 2008.
R Guthrie, ‘The
Australian Legal Framework for Stress Claims’
Journal of Law
and Medicine
The Concept of
the Corporation
ed) The New American Library, New York,
I Michelman,
Limitations of Capitalism
, Avebury, 1994.
J Moon, A Crane and D
Matten, ‘Can Corporations be Citizens? Corporate Citizenship as a Metaphor
for Business Participation
in Society’ (2
ed), No. 13-2003,
International Centre for Corporate Social Responsibility Research Paper
http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/nubs/ICCSR/research.php?action=download & id=22
at 17 February 2009.
D Birch, ‘Corporate
Citizenship: Rethinking Business beyond Corporate Social Responsibility’
Perspectives on Corporate Citizenship
, eds J Andriof and M McIntosh,
Greenleaf Publishing, Sheffield, 2001.
Barricades and
Boardrooms: A Contemporary History of the Corporate Accountability Movement
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva, 2004.
M Cargo, G Grams, J Ottoson,
P Ward, and L Green, ‘Empowerment as Fostering Positive Youth Development
and Citizenship’
American Journal of Health Behavior
World Health Organization,
Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion
, First International Conference on
Health Promotion, 1986
http://www.who.int/hpr/NPH/docs/ottawa_charter_hp.pdf
at 17 February 2009.
D Teller, ‘United
Nations Global Compact Cities Programme’ (2003) 11
Journal of Corporate
Citizenship
English coalminer Robert
Owen was perhaps a ‘pioneer’ of corporate social responsibility
during the industrial revolution,
removing young children from the coalmines in
concern for their health and education, and with the foresight to supplement the
wage so as not to disrupt the income received by the family unit,
often while the child then attended schooling. Owen recognised
education of children was an important factor in creating a future healthy
E Spencer, A Mills, M Routy
and P Werhane,
Organisational Ethics in Health Care
, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2000.
P Lee and D Paxman,
‘Reinventing Public Health’ (1997) 18
Annual Review of Public
1; A McMurray,
Community Health and Wellness: A Socioecological
ed) Mosby, Sydney, 2003.
World Health Organization,
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Health Organization, Geneva, 2001, e330 at 187.
Joint Committee on
Corporations and Financial Services, Parliament of Australia,
Responsibility: Managing Risk and Creating Value
http://www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/corporations_ctte/completed_inquiries/2004-07/corporate_responsibility/report/report.pdf
at 21 January 2009.
Standards Australia
International,
AS8003-2003: Corporate Governance – Corporate Social
Responsibility
, Sydney, 2003.
United Nations,
Declaration of Human Rights
, UN Doc A/810 at 71, 1948
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
at 4 March 2008.
Insights: A Brief Introduction
, Mayfield Publishing Company, Los Angeles,
E Spencer, A Mills, M Routy
and P Werhane,
Organisational Ethics in Health Care
, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2000.
J Elkington,
with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business
, New Society
Publishers, New York, 1999; J Elkington, ‘A New Agenda for
Business’, in Sustainable Development: Improving
Competitiveness through
Corporate Social Responsibility, ed Tom Nash, Director Publications, London,
F Küskü and A
Zarkada-Fraser ‘An Empirical Investigation of Corporate Citizenship in
Australia and Turkey’
British Journal of Management
Lambert, ‘Added Benefits: The Link between Work-life Benefits and
Organizational Citizenship Behaviour’
The Academy of
Management Journal
‘Corporate Citizenship: Australian Corporate Attitudes towards
Stakeholder Engagement’ (2004) 2
Journal of New Business Ideas and
12; A Carroll, ‘The Moral Leader: Essential for Successful
Corporate Citizenship’ in
Perspectives on Corporate Citizenship
eds J Andriof and M McIntosh, Greenleaf Publishing, Sheffield, 2001.
WorkSafe Victoria,
WorkHealth – Question and Answers
http://www.worksafe.vic.gov.au/wps/wcm/resources/file/eb1cc50bf1afda3/WHpublic_QAs_180308.pdf
at 1 July 2008.
World Health Organization,
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health
Health Organization, Geneva, 2001.
A Carroll, ‘Corporate
Social Responsibility: Evolution of a Definitional Construct’ (1999) 38
Business and Society
‘Corporate Citizenship: Australian Corporate Attitudes towards
Stakeholder Engagement’ (2004) 2
Journal of New Business Ideas and
12; D Teller and T Goddard, ‘Creating the Space for CSR: The
Committee for Melbourne’, in
Management Models for Corporate Social
Responsibility
, eds J Jonker and M de Witte, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,
2006; Boston College Center for Corporate Citizenship,
What is Corporate
Citizenship?,
http://www.bcccc.net/index.cfm?pageId=2007 & printview=true
at 17 February 2009.
E Kendall, P Murphy, V
O’Neill and S Bursnall,
Occupational Stress: Factors that Contribute to
its Occurrence and Effective Management
, Centre for Human Services,
Griffiths University, 2000.
R DeFrank and C Cooper,
‘Worksite Stress Management Interventions: Their Effectiveness and
Conceptualisation’ (1987)
Journal of Managerial Psychology
M Dollard, ‘Work
Stress Theory and Interventions: From Evidence to Policy’ (Paper presented
at the NOHSC Symposium on
the OHS Implications of Stress, Melbourne, December
A Lamontagne, T Keegel, A
Louie, A Ostry and P Landsbergis, ‘A Systematic Review of the Job Stress
Intervention Evaluation
Literature, 1990−2005’
International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health
M Dollard, ‘Work
Stress Theory and Interventions: From Evidence to Policy’ (Paper presented
at the NOHSC Symposium on
the OHS Implications of Stress, Melbourne, December
A Lamontagne, T Keegel, A
Louie, A Ostry and P Landsbergis, ‘A Systematic Review of the Job Stress
Intervention Evaluation
Literature, 1990−2005’
International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health
M Kompier, C Cooper and S
Geurts, ‘A Multiple Case Study Approach to Work Stress Prevention in
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology
M Oxenburgh,
‘Cost-benefit of Ergonomic Improvements’ in
Occupational
Ergonomics: Work Related Musculoskeletal Disorders of the Upper Limb and
, eds F Violante, T Armstrong and Ǻ Kilbom, Taylor & Francis,
London, 2000.
KPMG Consulting, ‘Key
Management Motivators in Occupational Health and Safety’ (2001) 23
Safety in Australia
26; N Storey, ‘Senior Management Commitment to
Health and Safety — What Drives Them?’ (2001) 23
A Carroll, ‘A Three
Dimensional Conceptual Model of Corporate Social Performance’ (1979) 4
Academy of Management Review
J Elkington,
with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business
, New Society
Publishers, New York, 1999.
Post-capitalist Society
, Harper Business Publications, New York,
A Carroll, ‘Corporate
Social Responsibility: Evolution of a Definitional Construct’ (1999) 38
Business and Society
‘Corporate Citizenship: Australian Corporate Attitudes towards
Stakeholder Engagement’ (2004) 2
Journal of New Business Ideas and
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (239 KB)
PDF format (137 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter