URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:14:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hilbert, J; Ver Ploeg, C --- "Project-based learning and ADR education: one model for teaching ADR students to problem solve for real" [2013] LegEdDig 44; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 44
Project-based learning and ADR education: one model for teaching ADR
students to problem solve for real
J Hilbert and C Ver Ploeg
Appalachian Journal of Law
, Vol. 11, No.2, 2012, pp 157-184
In 2003, William Mitchell College of Law (William Mitchell) took a
leap of faith and offered an experimental course in
which interested
students were given the opportunity to assume full responsibility for commencing
and completing a substantial and
complex project for a real client. That
opportunity – titled Advanced Alternative Dispute Resolution (Advanced
had no textbook, no lesson plan, and no teacher’s manual.
Instead, the course was premised on the faith that a group of 15
students, most
of whom did not know each other, could come together and design, from scratch, a
quality dispute resolution procedure
for a Fortune 500 company that needed a
thoughtful approach to recurring internal disputes. Because that early
proved so successful, William Mitchell has continued to offer
upper-level students the opportunity to complete their ADR training
undertaking similar work on behalf of new clients.
Generally, ADR education has thrived this past decade as law schools now
offer a wide range of interesting and diverse courses on
dispute resolution
skills. As report after report has documented, the legal profession requires
more emphasis on hands-on, interactive
learning where students solve problems
(and not just read cases) and perform work that is similar to the types of tasks
be expected of them as lawyers.
While ADR has climbed into the ranks of mainstream legal education, ADR
instruction still remains a fairly unique breed. Since the
very beginning, ADR
courses ‘required new pedagogies [because] [l]aw students do not learn to
negotiate, mediate, or arbitrate
by responding to Socratic questions in the
classroom.’
William Mitchell’s Advanced ADR course is neither a lecture-based
course nor a seminar. Rather, it is best viewed as an extended
exercise in
creative problem-solving. Faculty members leave much of the work to the
students, stepping in only to facilitate, inject
an occasional dose of reality,
and ensure the quality of the students’ final work product. The
students’ most apparent
challenge is to design an effective dispute
resolution process for their client. However, they soon discover that learning
work together effectively as a group poses an equally important
challenge. Project management is central to all that the students
conduct legal and field research, meet with their client, draft materials, and
make presentations.
Thus, students must work collaboratively throughout the semester to analyse
their client’s unique needs and design customised
dispute resolution
procedures to meet those needs. The client, who in all but the first project has
been a non-profit organisation,
has genuine and complicated problems.
In this way, the course replicates the practice of law. Lawyers rarely work
in isolation. They negotiate, problem solve, meet in committees,
and serve on
task forces. And they typically do all of those things with strangers.
Many students are uncomfortable that there is no text, no agenda, and no
boilerplate model that simply awaits discovery. Consequently,
it takes time for
the students to realise that they must create a customised process and that no
roadmap lies before them.
Thus, it has sometimes been necessary to explain to uneasy students that the
challenge of the semester’s project – indeed
the challenge of the
practice of law – is to figure out what to do when you do not know what to
Although students perceive that the faculty members play a largely passive
role in the Advanced ADR course, they are actually serving
as facilitators who
allow the students to self-teach, much like the role a facilitator plays within
ADR. In addition, the course
demands considerable behind- the-scenes
The greatest challenge has typically been finding the right client. The ideal
client is an organisation that experiences recurring,
often festering,
interpersonal difficulties with leaders that recognise – or are open to
considering – the value of developing
a thoughtful approach to addressing
those problems. Ultimately, the faculty members select the client based on three
The first criterion is the suitability of the client’s needs for a
one-semester student project. Thus, at the outset, the
faculty must be confident
that a client’s needs will provide a sufficiently solid foundation upon
which to base an educational
experience.
Although a project’s parameters may not be entirely clear at first, the
faculty will typically be able to identify projects
that pose too broad of a
challenge for a one-semester project.
The second criterion is the availability of the person or persons who will
serve as the students’ primary contact or contacts.
The client liaison
must be someone who understands and can communicate the client’s needs;
can be contacted regularly for additional
necessary information; will attend a
formal mid-semester ‘course check’ to ensure that the students are
proceeding in
the right direction; will attend the end-of-semester formal
presentation; and will assume responsibility for implementing the final
The third criterion is whether the client is a non-profit organisation. Even
though our first client was a for-profit organisation,
we strongly prefer to
provide these services to non-profit organisations. At the beginning of each
semester, we impress upon the
students that they will be providing a quality
work product for which attorneys typically charge, and clients pay, quite high
Furthermore, the students can better appreciate the value of their efforts
if they are assisting a non-profit organisation, rather
than providing their
work product for free to a for-profit business that would otherwise pay fair
market value.
Ultimately, both the client and the students understand that they are
entering into an attorney- client relationship.
Students must understand that enrolling in the Advanced ADR course will
require not only initiative and commitment, but also time.
Each semester
contains 14 three-hour class sessions. Within that framework, the students
– who typically do not know each
other – must work as a team to
complete a quality work product that they will formally present to their client
during the 13
Because students hit the deck running on the first day of class, it is
possible. Soon after
registration, each enrolled student receives an email containing general
information concerning the course’s
new client, available resources, and
course grading guidelines.
The ideal enrolment consists of upper-level law school students, most of who
will graduate at the end of the semester. Advanced ADR
is considered a capstone
course in which students have the chance to combine theory with practice.
Enrolment, which is now capped
at 15 students, has ranged from eight to 25
students. Experience with prior classes demonstrated that high enrolment made it
for students to work collectively.
The first class of the semester sets the tone for the entire project. As a
small group that must work closely together to complete
a challenging task, it
is helpful to get to know each other quickly. After the students get
comfortable, more details emerge, and
this establishes the information sharing
process for the whole semester.
Students have met on their own during weekends when doing so was necessary to
complete a project and prepare a client’s presentation.
Similarly, we
remind students that as legal professionals they are required to account for
their time because, at the end of the
semester, they must submit final logs that
detail their individual and committee contributions.
We also reassure the students that it is not unusual to feel lost in the
beginning. After all, other students have felt the same way.
collective goal is to help the students determine, ‘How to figure out what
to do when you do not know what to do.’
In the early years, we invited our client to the first class so that the
students could get a clearer sense of the project at the
outset. Now, we
schedule the client to join us during the second class. We have found that it is
more productive for faculty members
to provide the client’s general
information and needs (as we then understand them) so that the students have an
opportunity
to prepare for their first meeting with the client the following
In the Advanced ADR course, the faculty facilitates the students’ work
as opposed to using lectures and Socratic examination.
In the end, the faculty must strike the right balance so that the final work
product is of high quality and the students have the
opportunity to learn and
apply key lessons about working together and developing successful dispute
resolution programs or processes.
Since inception of the Advanced ADR course, two professors have co-taught it.
Team teaching has been a necessary feature of the course
for a number of
reasons. First, the course does not follow a set lesson plan, so the professors
are literally working without a net.
Having a second pair of eyes and another
set of ideas offers much needed support. Second, each professor brings his or
her own unique
set of skills and experiences. Third, as students break into
different subgroups, the two professors can split their time and provide
one-on-one observation and support to more than one subgroup at a time.
Another interesting aspect of team teaching is that it requires that the
professors collaborate, just like the students. In some ways,
team teaching
provides a model to the students of how multiple players can work together on a
single project.
Perhaps one of the most challenging issues is to what extent faculty should
guide the students in their work. It is often difficult
to reconcile learning
objectives with the need to complete the project on time and produce a high
quality work product for the client.
Unlike our counterparts in the formal
clinical setting, the Advanced ADR course has at least two built-in advantages
that mitigate
the urgency of having to intervene in the students’ work.
First, the course runs for 14 weeks and the students’ work
product is due
at the conclusion of the course. There are 14 class periods (plus any other
specially scheduled meetings) to resolve
and address any issues that come up.
Second, the students in the course provide the advantage of having many other
voices that can
lend an opinion or offer some supervisory assistance. All of the
students in the course have taken an ADR survey course and are typically
end of their law school careers.
Ideally, the faculty fosters the students’ independence and allows them
– perhaps with some nudges along the way –
to find the right
solution at the end of the day. During the semester, the students may grow
frustrated with the process and the
uncertainty of how to proceed. While this
frustration should not be allowed to take over the course, it can be an
important part
of the learning process. As students wrestle with their
discomfort and try to find the right steps to take (or help their colleagues
reach the right decision), their disorientation can provide insight into the
practice of law in ways that are quite powerful. In
some respects, this faith in
the students finding their way without significant intervention from the faculty
communicates high expectations
important message on the eve of their graduation.
Part of the challenge for the students is finding the right balance for
leadership. Even if they work as a group, leadership is critical
to keep the
group moving and to help resolve the many minor disagreements that can arise on
everything from the agenda, direction
of the project, or substantive issues. In
our experience with the Advanced ADR course, many students are reluctant to take
role because they do not want to appear too pushy or adversarial.
Indeed, students working out their hierarchy consumes a lot of
time in the first
few classes.
It can be important to remind the students that although collaboration can
often feel like it is taking more time; it is a natural
part of the learning
One of the first tasks that the students undertake is to break into
subgroups. The subgroups are often a product of the first class,
project is divided into discrete parts that could create enough work for several
multi-student groups.
As the subgroups form, the faculty can begin to learn a little about the
students, particularly what sort of expertise they bring
to the course and what
degree of commitment they have to it. Many students have substantial experience
in ADR settings either as
volunteer mediators, staff at mediation centres,
professionals at social service agencies, or other useful backgrounds that
enormously to the overall project. As a first step on day one, we
have the students introduce themselves, share their background
information, and
discuss their relevant work experience. This allows the students to assign
themselves to appropriate subgroups that
might need some of the individual
strengths identified.
As the course continues, it is also important that the students learn to
critique and rearrange their initial subgroup structure as
needed. However, they
must also maintain some degree of overall structure and check-in periodically as
a large group to ensure that
the project is coherent and that there are no major
gaps. Toward the end of the class, additional subgroups – such as an
subgroup or a presentation subgroup – may be needed to generate
the final work product.
One key piece of guidance that is required from the faculty is to clarify the
agenda and identify the tasks to be completed between
each class. For example,
at the end of each class, regardless of how the class has been spent (and even
whether the entire class
time has been used), the faculty and students should
spend a few minutes discussing what each group (or individual) will do before
the next class.
At the beginning of the following class, the faculty and students should
conduct a quick check- in and remind everyone what is planned
for that class
period. After one or two weeks of having the faculty lead this process, the
students will begin to catch on and be
able to initiate the conversation at the
opening and closing of each class.
In addition to the opening and closing of each class, there must also be a
sufficient opportunity for the class as a whole to share
information and to
report on any new or challenging developments.
While each course project reflects the different needs of its particular
client, there are some consistent components with respect
to the final work
product that is submitted and presented to the client at the conclusion of the
course. These components consist
of a written manual, presentation, and
electronic copies.
The written manual contains the description of the program or process and all
forms and other accompanying documents (often in appendices).
The forms and
other documents include everything from sign-in sheets for participants, to flow
charts for users, to marketing materials,
which includes brochures, websites,
and other outreach materials.
At the end of the class, the client meets with the class for a formal
presentation of the project and the manual. The content of the
highlighted through a PowerPoint presentation or other presentation format. The
presentations have usually lasted between
60-90 minutes. The client also
receives an electronic copy of the manual so it can be integrated into any other
materials that
the client uses. The client also receives electronic versions of
all the presentation materials, such as the PowerPoint presentation.
The students use the final class to review the process that they used and to
reminisce about how the subgroups formed and worked.
It is a critical lesson to
To make the lesson interactive and lasting, the final class should let
students lead the discussion by listing the specific things
that did and did not
work. In addition, the final class is a good time to provide some important
positive support for the students
before they leave law school. So little of law
school is spent on providing feedback, and this is an important time for the
to feel good about their work. Typically, the clients are extremely
happy about the work product, so it can be fun to debrief the
students on the
clients’ satisfaction.
As with all grading in law school, it is imperative that the standards of
evaluation are communicated clearly at the beginning of
the course. Especially
in the Advanced ADR course, where there is no final exam or paper, and the
entire grade is based on the participation
in the project, students must
understand exactly what is expected of them and how they will be measured.
At the end of the semester, the faculty put each student’s name on a
piece of paper and independently arranges the slips of
paper in order of the
value of the student’s contribution to the project. The faculty members
then compare and rearrange the
rankings until they have reached agreement.
Because the students are given substantial feedback and opportunities for
improvement
throughout the semester, their grades tend to be high in a very
small range. This is the ideal because it reflects a quality project
everyone contributed.
Although each semester’s students and clients have been different, and
the Advanced ADR course still feels like working without
a net, the students
have always welcomed the challenge. The students typically view their real life
lawyering as among the most satisfying
of their law school experiences.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (677 KB)
PDF format (3.14 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter