URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:35:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Oldham, James --- "The Letters of Sir William Blackstone 1744-1780" [2007] AULegHist 10; (2007) 11(1) Legal History 133
BOOK REVIEW - The Letters of Sir William Blackstone 1744-1780
BOOK REVIEW - The Letters of Sir William Blackstone
WILFRED R PREST (ED), SELDEN SOCIETY, 2006
As author of the
Commentaries on the Laws of England
, published in the
1760s, William Blackstone is a survivor. The
Commentaries
continue to be
read and relied upon in common law countries of the 21
Blackstone’s exposition is often the starting point for investigations
into the formative years of doctrines or principles
in the common law –
doctrines or principles that govern us still. Perhaps this is especially true in
the United States where,
not infrequently, constitutional issues turn on an
understanding of the state of the law in ‘the founding era’, which
cannot be discerned without an understanding of the English law of the late
Much less well known, however, is William Blackstone the person. The
attention paid to him by biographers has been surprisingly slight
four have made the attempt: a 1782
compilation,
two biographies
published in America in the first half of the 20
and a slim biography by
Ian Doolittle published in 2001.
This glaring deficit is soon to be remedied by Wilfred Prest, who is near
completion of a full-scale biographical work. As a by-product
of his research,
Prest has given us a prelude in this volume of letters, painstakingly collected
from diverse libraries, record offices,
and private holdings in England and
Blackstone’s letters do not compare to those that exude eloquence and
literary artistry (as in the letters by the Earl of Chesterfield)
or those that
feature political intrigue, gossip, and acid commentary (as in the 4,000
surviving letters of Horace Walpole). The
Blackstone letters are nevertheless an
important contribution to the legal history of the early modern era. They
enlarge our understanding
of Blackstone’s somewhat bland personality, his
ambivalence about whether to live in the practical world of law or the academic
confines of Oxford, his anxiety about acquiring a judgeship, his evolving
philosophy about the common law, and his occasional connection
to sociological
As to the latter, there are two surprises. First is Blackstone’s
correspondence with abolitionist Granville Sharp, and second
is the absence of
any correspondence whatever with Jeremy Bentham. These merit brief
explanation.
Granville Sharp was a genuine hero in the long campaign from the 1760s to the
1830s to eradicate slavery in England. His unrelenting
and self-sacrificing
efforts to achieve justice for individual slaves (as in the landmark 1772
Somerset case) and to effect legislative
change (as in coaxing Parliament to
regulate the slave trade) are well-known. Sharp’s first interaction with
Blackstone was
one of anger – Sharp was incensed by an alteration that
Blackstone made in the second edition of the
Commentaries
others have recounted,
in volume one of his first edition wrote that the moment a slave landed in
England, he became ‘
eo instante
a freeman’, but in the second
edition he appended the following: ‘though the master’s right to his
service may
possibly still continue’. Sharp sent Blackstone two of his own
books (see letter 122), and evidently in his transmittal letter
indignation about the change. Blackstone replied (letter 124), thanking Sharp
for the ‘entertainment and instruction’
that Sharp had given him,
and explaining that a later qualification in volume one to his earlier
statement had been misunderstood, so that he found it necessary
‘to explain it more fully in subsequent
Blackstone then
provided additional substantive details. Thereafter, Sharp continued to send
Blackstone copies of Sharp’s anti-slavery
publications, to which
Blackstone responded with patience and courtesy (see letters 126, 135, 142).
The absence of Bentham letters is not because no such letters were written.
Prest notes in his Introduction (at xiii) that, for a
variety of reasons, the
letters in his edition may well represent only a fragment of Blackstone’s
correspondence. Bentham is
a case in point. Bentham’s fierce criticism of
Blackstone’s
Commentaries
became notorious, as reflected in two
publications,
A Fragment on Government
(published anonymously in 1776)
A Comment on the Commentaries
(not published until 1928). Blackstone
did not consider Bentham’s vitriolic critiques to be worthy of epistolary
as Bentham recorded in his
Historical Preface to the
Fragment on Government
, Blackstone, when asked if he intended to make any
answer to Bentham’s critique, said, ‘No, not even if it had been
Nevertheless
Bentham did state in a letter to his old friend, the Rev John Forster, that
Blackstone in a new edition made several
alterations in consequence of
Bentham’s work, ‘though with but an indifferent
Historical Preface
, Bentham commented that two years later, he
and Blackstone were on better terms due to a common interest in the penitentiary
Blackstone worked closely
with William Eden, later Baron Auckland, a diplomat and MP, to craft a bill
dealing with the transportation
of criminals to the colonies, the establishment
of Houses of Hard Labour, and regulation of prison ships anchored in the Thames
(chillingly
called ‘the Hulks’) (see letter 166). At about the same
time, Bentham published his second work,
A View of the Hard Labour Bill
and he sent copies to Blackstone and Eden. In his
Historical Preface
Bentham wrote: ‘From the Judge I received a note, which still exists, I
believe, somewhere’, the contents of which Bentham
then recorded from
Blackstone did not enter
upon a working relationship with Bentham, but they had discovered common ground
and may well have corresponded
further. Blackstone’s continuing work with
William Eden, however, is reflected fully in a dozen and a half letters in
Other letters have revealing content. At age 23, Blackstone wrote to an uncle
by marriage (letter 3) about his law studies and, among
other musings, described
the common law of Littleton’s time as an edifice of ‘beautiful
Symmetry’ with all apartments
‘leading one into another without
Confusion’, but subsequently the law had become ‘swoln, shrunk,
curtailed, enlarged,
altered & mangled’ so that the harmony of the
system was ‘quite annihilated: & now it remains a huge, irregular
Pile’. This anticipates Blackstone’s famous image of the common law
Commentaries
, especially as shaped (or corrupted) by legal
fictions, as ‘an old Gothic castle’ with obsolete towers and
but the ‘inferior apartments, now converted into rooms of
convenience, are chearful and commodious, though their approaches
are winding
and difficult’.
Additional letters of interest to legal historians include 16 (1771 –
doldrums in the law courts), 18 (1753 – common versus
civil law, the jury
de Essentia
’ in the common law), 28-29 (1756 –
sensitivity concerning transcription of statutes), 64 (1761 – taking
101 (1766 – example of soliciting a judgeship), 128 (1770, after
becoming a judge, on whether women or petit larceners fall
under the statutory
description of those eligible for transportation), 137 (1775 – workload on
the western circuit, Lent assizes),
139 (1775 – imposing fines at Lincoln
for non-attendance by summoned jurors), 144 (1778 – potential sale of a
folio set of
Viner’s Abridgement
, ‘nearly as good
as new’, for 30 or 40 pounds), 164 (1779 – puisne judges’
salaries), and 155, 171, 176 (1778-79
– dismay at parliamentary politics).
Valuable in its own right, the edition of Blackstone’s letters by
Wilfred Prest was prepared against the expectation that the
full-scale biography
would soon follow. Perhaps for this reason, many of the editorial footnotes are
brief, limited to identification
of recipients of letters or of persons named in
the text of the letters. Other notes do give explanatory detail, but the full
of Blackstone’s life and career is yet to come. We look forward to
seeing and absorbing Prest’s forthcoming biography,
and in the meantime,
The Letters of Sir William Blackstone 1744-1780
is a commendable
James Oldham
St Thomas More Professor of Law & Legal History
Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, DC
The Biographical History of
Sir William Blackstone and a Catalogue of Sir William Blackstone’s Works:
With a Nomenclature
of Westminster-Hall, by a Gentleman of Lincoln’s Inn,
published by the author (1782).
David A Lockmiller,
William Blackstone
(1938); Lewis C Warden,
The Life of Blackstone
Ian Doolittle,
See eg, J Oldham,
Common Law in the Age of Mansfield
(2004) 316-18.
The inconsistency between the
first and second passages in volume one of Blackstone’s first edition may
have been pointed
out by Lord Mansfield, Chief Justice of the Court of
King’s Bench, or by puisne King’s Bench justice John Eardley Wilmot.
See letter 95; also
English Common Law in the Age of Mansfield
See Charles M Atkinson,
Jeremy Bentham His Life and Work
See Mary P Mack,
Bentham: An Odyssey of Ideas 1742-1792
(1962) 341.
Atkinson, above n 6, 70.
Atkinson, above n 6, 71.
See letters 147-151, 153,
158-159, 160-161, 164, 166-167, 171, 174-177. The bill laid out in letter 166
was finally enacted as
The Penitentiary Act
, though much reduced in scope
from the original plan. See Doolittle, above n 3, 89.
Commentaries I: 268. See
also the Introduction by John H Langbein to the University of Chicago’s
facsimile edition, 1979,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (73.8 KB)
PDF format (178 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter