URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2009/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
S. Gotsman, Mervyn (MD, FRCP, FACC); Adler, Stephen (JD) --- "Under What Circumstances Can an Acute Myocardial Infarction Be Regarded as a Work-Related Accident?, Multi-Causal Diseases as Work Accidents" [2009] IntJlSSWC 3; (2009) 1(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 21
UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES CAN AN ACUTE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION BE REGARDED AS A WORK-RELATED ACCIDENT?
MULTI-CAUSAL DISEASES AS WORK ACCIDENTS
Mervyn S. Gotsman, MD, FRCP, FACC∗ and Stephen Adler, JD**
A. INTRODUCTION1
B. MEDICAL UNDERSTANDING OF MYOCARDIAL DISEASE (CORONARY ATHEROSCLEROSIS) AND HEART ATTACKS (INFARCTS)
I. The Natural Development of Myocardial Disease
1. Narrowing of the Artery
2. Dynamic Variations in Coronary Vascular Tone
II. Causes of Coronary Artery Disease
III. Myocardial Infarcts May be Caused by Precipitating Events
C. LEGAL RECOGNITION OF A HEART ATTACK, OR HEART DISEASE, AS A WORK ACCIDENT
I. Triggering Events at the Workplace
1. Circadian Patterns
2. Sudden Physical Exertion
3. Mental Stress
4. Return to Work
5. Sudden Changes in Climate
6. Major Life-threatening External Influences
D. DISCUSSION
I. Lessons for the Prevention of Heart Attacks at Work
II. Cost and System Implications
III. Conclusion Regarding Heart Attacks as a Work Accident
UNDER WHAT CIRCUMSTANCES CAN AN ACUTE MYOCARDIAL
INFARCTION BE REGARDED AS A WORK-RELATED
MULTI-CAUSAL DISEASES AS WORK ACCIDENTS
Mervyn S. Gotsman, MD,
Stephen Adler, JD
Workers compensation systems compensate for work accidents and occupational
diseases. Multi-causal diseases, such as heart disease,
are not accidents and
are not occupational diseases. They are an ordinary part of life, and heart
attacks, for example, may occur
without a precipitating event. However, coronary
heart disease may be aggravated by unusual physical exertion or mental stress,
in a myocardial infarct (heart attack). If such strain or stress
occurs at work, it is often compensated for by the workers compensation
This paper asks whether the legal theories that are used to determine if a heart
attack should be recognised as a work accident
are consistent with modern
medical knowledge on the subject. To answer this question, we must first examine
the medical theory relating
to the effect of an event at work on a latent
illness, such as pre-existing heart disease, which must be present to produce a
We describe events at work as ‘triggers’ of acute myocardial
infarction. However, most of these triggers are not connected
to the workplace.
Triggers occasionally occur during an unusual, sudden and acute emotional event,
such as stress or unusual physical
effort at work, which, therefore, are
work-related. This work-related event results in ruptured plaque in a diseased
coronary artery.
Intimal (the inner layer of the artery) disruption initiates a
thromboembolic clot of the coronary artery involved. Thrombus forms,
the artery, coronary flow is impeded, and the distal myocardium undergoes
necrosis and infarcts (an acute myocardial infarction
or heart attack). Thus,
the sudden acute emotional event or physical effort at work has caused a heart
attack, which should be compensated
by the workers compensation system.
The medical and legal basis for recognising the relationship between the
trigger and the heart attack are not precise. We suggest
that an unusual acute
stressor, or trigger, which occurs in the workplace should be the basis for
recognising the infarct as a work
accident. In Israel, when it has been
determined that a work-related trigger event contributed to the occurrence of a
heart attack,
the attack is recognised as a work accident.
This paper describes the importance of risk factors which can cause a heart
attack, the experimental, pathological, and clinical evidence
of plaque rupture
as a cause of heart attacks, clinical examples, and legal theories for
recognising a heart attack as a work accident,
with particular reference to
Israeli and American sources.
INTRODUCTION
Workers compensation programs compensate for work-related injuries and
disabilities, while other social welfare or social insurance
programs, such as
disability insurance and general accident insurance, provide income for those
injured and disabled by causes not
related to work. Since workers compensation
generally provides superior benefits than other social welfare or social
insurance programs,
there must be reasonable and clear criteria to determine
when a disease with several underlying or precipitating causes is considered
work accident. Also, workers compensation systems are financed by employers and
should not be burdened by compensating for non-work-related
injuries. It is,
therefore, essential that a workers compensation system develop tools to
distinguish between work-related injuries
and disabilities and those which are
not work related. It is a major challenge for the legal and medical profession
to determine
whether a disease is caused by work and to what extent it is
work-related. This determination is based upon legal and medical considerations
and, therefore, this paper approaches the issue from the perspective of both
professions, using heart disease (coronary atherosclerosis)
and heart attacks
(infarcts) as examples.
We attempt to overcome the communication difficulty between the medical and
legal professions, discussing heart attacks and coronary
artery disease as work
occupational
non-work-related
and multi-causal
Work accidents and
occupational diseases are compensated by workers compensation programs. Non
work-related diseases are not compensated.
Multi-casual diseases are generally
not compensated; however, sometimes, an event at work can aggravate the existing
disease and,
therefore, precipitate or ‘trigger’ the appearance or
complication of an underlying disease, such as a heart attack,
recognised as a work injury.
The law has developed a theoretical basis to determine whether a work-related
factor has triggered a heart attack. These are mainly
legal presumptions,
generally developed by courts or workers compensation tribunals.
We shall first explain how cardiologists understand the development of
coronary artery disease and how it can develop into a heart
attack. Then we will
describe the legal presumptions and tests for recognition of a heart attack as a
work accident. Then we will
discuss if the legal assumptions are compatible with
medical knowledge.
B. MEDICAL UNDERSTANDING OF MYOCARDIAL DISEASE (CORONARY
ATHEROSCLEROSIS) AND HEART ATTACKS (INFARCTS)
I. The Natural Development of Myocardial
The heart requires oxygen to survive. This oxygen is supplied by arteries
which surround the heart. Coronary arterial diameter (calibre)
and blood flow
vary continuously to adjust for the oxygen demands of the heart muscle. Thus,
the walls of these arteries are an active,
muscular tube which contracts or
relaxes (dilates) to maintain blood pressure. If the blood flow to the heart is
blocked or reduced
drastically, the heart muscle cannot function and a heart
attack occurs. Such changes in the blood flow due to abnormal coronary
(pathophysiology) are determined by two factors: (1) Narrowing of the artery due
to excessive fatty plaque (atheroma), plaque
rupture and/or thrombus formation;
(2) Dynamic variations in coronary vascular tone due to contraction or
relaxation of its muscular
arterial wall.
1. Narrowing of the Artery
Narrowing of an artery by the formation of fatty plaque (coronary atheroma)
reduces coronary blood flow to the heart muscle (myocardium).
Coronary atheroma
is a process in which cholesterol or its derivatives are deposited in the wall
of the artery (or other blood vessels).
This may be exacerbated by fibrosis
(atherosclerosis or formation of scar tissue). This process develops naturally
in the normal
course of peoples’ lives. Atheroma accretion starts in
childhood but may be accelerated by recognised risk factors, such as
high plasma
LDL, low HDL, elevated triglycerides, hypertension, diabetes, cigarette smoking,
homocysteinaemia or a hectic lifestyle.
Most people have more than one of these
underlying risk factors. Most risk factors are unrelated to work.
This gradual process is punctuated by acute episodes (the acute anatomical
incident) when the developing plaque ruptures, the continuity
of the inner
lining of the arterial wall is broken (endothelial damage), a clot (thrombus)
forms, and blood flow to the artery is
obstructed.
Rupture of a plaque may be part of the natural evolution of the disease or it
may be triggered by an event, such as extreme stress
or an unusual physical
strain. Trigger factors, such as sudden stress, constrict the arterial wall, and
the changing wall can hasten
plaque rupture. Rupture may also occur when the
pressure inside the cholesterol lake increases or the cap wall is too thin or
The ruptured plaque then
loses its natural protective surface layer, exposing the underlying vessel wall,
which causes a clot (thrombus)
The developing clot causes sudden and progressive obstruction of the vessel,
reducing blood flow and culminating in a heart attack
(total occlusion). The
good news is that the body has a protective mechanism (fibrinolysis) which
dissolves clots. The dynamic interaction
between clot formation and dissolution
determines whether the final outcome of this process will be total closing of
the artery (occlusion)
or partial blockage or total clot dissolution, leaving a
nearly smooth artery wall or a clot which dissolves and forms
2. Dynamic Variations in Coronary Vascular
The muscular cells in the coronary artery wall are sensitive to changes in
oxygen tension. There is also a dynamic interaction between
the secretion of
local substances in the blood vessel wall and nervous influences. Some
substances cause muscle relaxation, while
others cause contraction (dynamic
narrowing). Normal coronary vascular tone is when this interaction maintains an
optimal diameter
inside the artery (luminal) and modulates blood flow to meet
the needs of the heart muscle (myocardium). Abnormal coronary vascular
occurs when the feedback mechanism (homeostatic) fails, normal function is
deranged and inadequate blood flow deprives the heart
muscle of an adequate
oxygen supply and causes ischaemia with chest pain (angina
II. Causes of Coronary Artery Disease
According to current medical knowledge, coronary artery disease develops
during most of our lives, caused by a number of factors,
the most common being
genes, smoking, stress (which can be work-related or non-work-related), high
cholesterol, being overweight
and improper diet. This list is not exclusive and
there may be other factors which contribute to the development of coronary heart
disease. Most of these factors are unrelated to work. The main factor which can
be related to work is stress, which is not an accident
but a gradual process
occurring over years, and which has many non-work-related factors.
III. Myocardial Infarcts May be Caused by
Precipitating Events
As described above, the development of coronary artery disease is a normal
part of life and can develop to an extent that a heart
attack will occur
naturally, without outside stimulus. Pre-existing heart disease must be present
to produce a heart attack. The
heart functions despite the narrowing of the
artery and dynamic variations in coronary tone, which are part of normal life.
unusual narrowing or dynamic variations can be the immediate cause of a
heart attack. These unusual narrowing or variations can be
influenced by
triggers — specific events in one’s life. These triggers change the
steady state of coronary structure
and blood flow and cause ischaemia or
infarction. Such sudden events in people with or without risk factors for
coronary artery disease
interact to cause arterial constriction, plaque rupture
and clot formation. Triggers exist in a person’s normal life, unrelated
work, such as unusual physical strains (sports, sex, lifting heavy objects),
stress (personal crisis, arguments, fear), circadian
and weekly variations,
extreme climate changes and stress related to war or other outside danger.
However, there may also be triggers
at work which precipitate heart
How does a trigger cause the heart attack? Under conditions of extreme
stress, excessive secretion of adrenaline produces profound
vasoconstriction,
reduction in coronary blood flow, ischaemia of cardiac muscle and damage to the
vasoconstriction cracks the plaque with rupture. This initiates a thrombotic
cascade: thrombus forms and occludes the artery,
interrupts coronary blood flow
and precipitates acute myocardial
infarction.
To summarise the pathophysiology of the triggering mechanisms, there are five
underlying mechanisms involved in the trigger of a
myocardial infarction: (1)
intense vasoconstriction; (2) endothelial dysfunction; (3) rupture of an
atheromatous plaque; (4) generation
of a thrombus over the ruptured plaque, or
plaque with damaged endothelium; and (5) defective thrombolysis. We suggest that
the trigger
event at work, which can be the immediate cause for a heart attack,
is the basis for the legal principle determining when a heart
attack will be
recognised as a work accident.
C. LEGAL RECOGNITION OF A HEART ATTACK, OR HEART
AS A WORK ACCIDENT
Most workers compensation systems recognise that coronary artery disease has
many underlying causal factors and is, therefore, not
an occupational disease.
Also, since the heart disease is not caused by an accident (one-time sudden
event), it is not recognised
as a work accident.
The fundamental principle of compensability for workers compensation is an
An important principle of many workers compensation systems, including those in
Israel and most American states, accepts a worker
as he is, including the risk
factors which cause heart disease to develop. Sudden acute stress and strain are
part of a person’s
normal life outside of work but may also occur at the
workplace. A heart attack may occur as a part of one’s normal life or
be triggered by events occurring at work or outside of work.
Since most causes/risk factors of heart disease are not work-connected and it
has not been proven that workers have a significant
risk of developing heart
disease more than other sectors of the population, this disease is not
recognised by most jurisdictions
as an occupational disease. In Israel and most
American states, heart disease is also not recognised as a
‘micro-trauma’,
because it has not been proven that it is caused by
many ‘micro’ events at work occurring over a period of time. Work
stress events or recurrent physical exertion are difficult to isolate and
measure as micro events. There are, however, some jurisdictions
which recognise
workers doing certain types of work, such as police, as having greater risks of
unnatural development of heart
A few jurisdictions
will accept a claim regarding heart disease if a physician has testified that it
was caused by the worker’s
When a heart attack is triggered by an unusual strain or stress at work, it
should be recognised as a work accident. These are generally
unexpected events.
While the worker suffers from coronary artery disease, the immediate cause of
the heart attack is the work-related
trigger event. Such a heart attack is seen
as an accident which has been triggered by an acute strain or stress at work.
When events occurring at work (a precipitating event) have a significant
effect upon a heart attack, there is a justification for
the workers
compensation system compensating the injured worker. There is more justification
for the workers compensation system
compensating a worker who has had a heart
attack when the work-related triggers were substantial and were a significant
triggering the myocardial infarct.
This theory is compatible with the modern medical understanding of coronary
heart disease and heart attacks, and is based upon medical
research which
indicates that work-related events, especially unusual stress or strain, may
trigger an acute heart attack. Many jurisdictions
define the trigger, or
precipitating event, as an unusual strain or stress at work, which can be
connected in time to the worker’s
heart attack. An important policy
decision for a workers compensation system is to determine the type of
work-related triggers required
for recognising a myocardial infarct as a work
Most workers compensation systems require four elements in order to recognise
a myocardial infarct as a work accident: (1) A diagnosed
heart attack,
identifiable in time. (2) A work-related event, generally an unusual event,
which is either an acute emotional or mental
stress or an unusual physical
strain. An ‘unusual’ event is required as an indication that the
heart attack did not occur
in the person’s normal life but instead is
work-connected. The main legal problem is to identify the unusual stress or
and determine its intensity and contribution to the occurrence of the
heart attack. Intensity is usually determined by comparing
the specific event to
the worker’s usual daily work routine, including his usual work-related
stress and strain. (3) Evidence,
both medical and legal, of a connection between
the occurrence of the myocardial infarct, at the time it occurred, and the event
at work. (4) Evidence, both medical and legal, that the work-related triggers of
the heart attack played more than a chance role
in the occurrence at the time it
happened. These slippery criteria relate to the balancing of the work-related
and non-work triggers
of the heart attack.
According to Richard Cohen and Gary Klein, because medical science cannot
conclusively establish causality, the test can only be a
legal one. Thus they
propose that the test should be the difference between the employment exertion
and that of a normal person,
without taking into account any possible
‘personal causal
contribution.’
I. Triggering Events at the Workplace
There are a number of trigger events which may be the immediate cause of a
heart attack and which occur during ones’ normal
lifetime or at the
workplace. These include circadian patterns, sudden physical exertion, mental
stress, a return to work, sudden
changes in climate and major life-threatening
external influences.
1. Circadian Patterns
Circadian patterns are the normal 24-hour variations of body activity. There
are major circadian variations in heart rate and blood
pressure. They increase
in the early morning after rising, and when one goes to work. There is a small
secondary peak in the late
afternoon and a major decrease at night during sleep.
The body is less active at night than during the day. Changes in the circadian
pattern, which can be described as heart rate and blood pressure variations and
coronary artery events, can trigger a heart attack.
It has been shown that an unusually high percentage of heart attacks occur
because of circadian patterns. Sudden cardiac death also
has a circadian
variation. The Framingham Heart Study found that sudden death was more common
from nine o’clock in the morning
to one o’clock in the afternoon,
and the hourly risk of sudden cardiac death was 70 per cent greater between
seven and nine
o’clock in the
In other studies
adjusted for wake-up times, sudden death was greater in the first three hours
after waking.
Three studies have
shown a primary peak incidence of infarction at nine o’clock in the
morning and a secondary peak at eight
o’clock in the
Similar changes were
found in different participating countries.
Environmental stresses, periods of rest and changes in the temporal pattern
of work also alter the circadian variation. An afternoon
siesta, for example,
produces a fall in heart rate and blood pressure but waking up is associated
with the same changes which occur
after awakening in the
The circadian patterns express themselves through heart rate and blood
pressure variations and coronary artery events. Heart rate
and blood pressure
variations occur during the day and
The fright-flight situation stimulates the adrenergic nervous system axis and
causes a fast heart rate (tachycardia) and a rise in
blood pressure. Rest
(parasympathetic stimulation), on the other hand, slows the heart rate
(bradycardia). Heart rate increases when
one has strain or stress, even in
anticipation of exercise, and falls when the body is at rest and even in
anticipation of rest.
short-term changes (minutes or hours) occur in response to daily activity or
rest, or at night in response to different levels
of sleep, arousal, or dreams.
People with stable coronary artery disease show peak ischaemic activity in the
morning hours, particularly
in the first three hours after
2. Sudden Physical Exertion
Running or isometric lifting of heavy objects causes fast heartbeat
(tachycardia) and a rise in blood pressure, and may precipitate
a heart attack.
Sudden anger and vigorous sexual activity have similar
It has been shown that
regular physical activity reduces the incidence of acute events precipitated by
violent exercise.
showed that physical
exertion in non-trained patients was an important precipitating factor. Mountain
hiking and downhill skiing
also increase the incidence of sudden cardiac death
for people who are not used to this physical
3. Mental Stress
Excessive mental stress may be an important trigger of heart
Mental stress is more
difficult to assess objectively but the Onset Study showed that high anger
levels were reported by 14 per cent
of patients within 26 hours prior to the
onset of myocardial infarction.
also been shown that Type B blue-collar workers exhibit
learned helplessness,
which can trigger a heart attack.
On the London City bus lines, bus drivers have more acute myocardial
infarctions than ticket takers. The drivers have a time-urgent
occupation and have to adhere to strict timetables, while the conductors are
non-pressurised, physically active
Mental stress has also been studied in people with silent ischaemia. Mental
arithmetic can induce ischaemia and is associated with
changes in cerebral blood
flow in regions of the brain associated with mental
It is also associated
with an increase of a substance (local Nitric Oxide or NO) which causes a
negative response (paradoxical forearm
vasodilator response) to mental
4. Return to Work
There are weekly rhythms, such that more heart attacks occur when people
5. Sudden Changes in Climate
Sharp decreases or increases in temperature and changes in sunspot activity
are associated with an increased prevalence of heart
6. Major Life-threatening External
Major life-threatening external influences precipitate heart attacks. The
Athens earthquake in 1981 increased the incidence of cardiac
death when compared
to the same period in the previous
More heart attacks
occurred during the 1994 California earthquake and the day after than in the
subsequent week.
The threat of
war has the same effect and the Scud missile attacks on Israel during the
Persian Gulf War increased the incidence
D. DISCUSSION
Most of the abovementioned triggers are not connected to work. The circadian
pattern is part of our everyday activity, although sometimes
work may require
sudden changes in our daily routine. Sexual activity, sudden climate changes,
wars and earthquakes are not related
The triggering events which may be work-related are unusual physical strain
or mental stress. These must be interpreted against the
background of everyday,
routine, work-related environmental stress and strain, which is present for the
specific worker and also
his or her predisposing, personal, underlying
pathogenic mechanism.
The legal and medical knowledge appear to be compatible to each other. An
accident is a sudden event which causes physical injury.
If acute stress or
unusual physical exertion are work-related and trigger the heart attack, it is
considered a work accident. Myocardial
infarction is viewed as an injury related
to the sudden accident, since it occurs suddenly and damages the heart. Medicine
that an unusual strain or stress may trigger a heart attack. Therefore,
despite the fact that the worker suffered from coronary artery
disease, which
was the background for his heart attack, its immediate cause was the triggering
event at work.
Unless the triggering event had an insignificant role in precipitating the
heart attack, it is reasonable to place the burden of compensation
for the heart
attack on the source of the insurance (workers compensation system, private
insurance company, et cetera). Therefore,
in Israel and other jurisdictions,
when the work-related triggers play more than a chance role in the occurrence of
the heart attack,
at the time it occurred, the heart attack is regarded as
work-related and compensated as a work
Since a significant proof that a trigger at work caused the heart attack is
the time connection, for a heart attack to be recognised
as a work accident in
Israel, it must occur within a short time after the trigger event —
minutes, hours or a few days.
This is because the plaque can rupture, which causes a clot and blockage, then
repair itself and then clot again, all of which can
take a few days. Therefore,
it is assumed that if the heart attack occurs within hours or days of the
unusual strain or stress at
work, there is a causal relationship between them
and, therefore, the infarct should be regarded as a work accident.
In Israel, the National Insurance Institute, which is responsible for workers
compensation payments, and the National Labour Court,
which decides disputes
relating to labour law and social welfare law, have adopted this rule and
accepted heart attacks as a work-related
accident which entitles the worker to
compensation.
The fundamental
principle is that the acute stressor should make a substantial contribution to
causing the infarct and be more prominent
than the natural predisposing risk
Prior to the adoption of the trigger test, heart attack cases were decided
according to Professor Arthur Larson’s test, which
divided workers into
two categories: those with pre-disposed risks and those without predisposed
risks. The worker with pre-disposed
risks had to prove a more acute work event
than the worker without such
Because of the fact that, according to the American Heart Association, a heart
attack is always the result of underlying conditions,
there is always
‘personal causal contribution’. Thus, the Larson test became a de
facto ‘wear and tear’ test,
The Larson test was abandoned because of the difficulty to determine whether
a worker had predisposed risks. Since a heart attack
occurs when coronary artery
disease is present, all workers have a certain degree of predisposed risk.
States then turned to an ‘unusual
exertion’ rule, which only awarded
compensation if the worker’s exertion was greater than what should have
been expected.
But most states abandoned this stricter standard, and those that
did not abandon it relaxed it, such as New York, which allowed the
unusual event
to be measured against varying standards, including the ‘wear and
tear’ of nonemployment
This overturned the earlier rule, used in the
Dworak v. E. Greenbaum Co
under which an employee was not awarded compensation for a heart
attack suffered after exertion deemed ‘part of a day’s
The Dworak case
was overturned by
Masse v. James H. Robinson Co.
, which awarded
compensation to an employee who suffered a heart attack at home a week after
‘strain in the course of daily
Pennsylvania courts also distinguished between cases in which the worker had
a pre-existing heart condition, in which case unusual
exertion had to be
though this was changed
in 1972 when the legislature eliminated the ‘accident’
requirement.
Minnesota has no
‘by accident’ requirement, so unusual exertion is never
The law is similar
in Georgia.
I. Lessons for the Prevention of Heart Attacks at
It is possible to reduce the occurrence of heart attacks. Business and
industry can, for example, modulate the environmental stressors
to decrease the
incidence of work-related events. While it is generally not possible to prevent
sudden emotional conflicts, work
which has inbuilt mental stress should be
studied and modified. This includes work with learned helplessness, time urgent
activities and stress, which have been proven to increase the level of
heart attacks. Also, workers should be protected from unusual
physical activity,
such as sudden lifting of unusual heavy weights, which can trigger a heart
II. Cost and System Implications
Recognising heart attacks as work accidents has acute cost implications.
Critics say that the loosening of American standards threatens
to overburden the
system, turning it into an ‘all-encompassing health insurance
In fact, the
position of the American Heart Association for years was that except in rare
circumstances, such as
cor pulmonale
, heart cases should be legislatively
removed from the workers compensation
Many states have adopted
stricter standards out of such
Social welfare programs cannot avoid balancing the justice of compensating
workers for infarcts which have probably been triggered
by work-related events
against the considerable costs of such a policy. The result in many
work-related heart attacks as
work accidents, subject to certain conditions which increase the accuracy and
fairness of the policy
and also limit costs. A society’s attitude towards
enlarging the circle of accepted work injuries beyond those of work accidents
and occupational diseases is also affected by its general social welfare
program. In those countries with broad social welfare programs,
there is less
urgency to compensate for a work accident, since the worker whose heart attack
is not work-related has access to disability
insurance, general non-work-related
accident insurance, medical coverage and more. Thus, failure to recognise a
heart attack as a
work accident will not leave the injured worker without
income. However, in jurisdictions which do not have alternate sources of
for workers disabled by a heart attack, the outcome of the compensation case may
mean the difference between poverty and a
minimum income which guarantees a life
with human dignity.
Other critics have proposed a strictly medical approach, under which an
impartial medical panel evaluates the merits of compensation
Though the panel’s
finding is not binding, it is conclusive in the absence of an appeal. This is
similar to a plan adopted
It also mirrors the
impartial court-appointed medical advisors used in the Israeli Labour Court,
where the medical opinion has an
important role in deciding whether the heart
attack was work-related.
III. Conclusion Regarding Heart Attacks as a Work
We suggest that jurisdictions adopt the ‘unusual-strain-and-stress
trigger test’ to decide whether heart attacks should
be recognised as work
injuries. This test is compatible with modern medical knowledge of how acute
strain or stress can trigger a
heart attack.
Former Director,
Department of Cardiology, Hadassah University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Judge, President, National
Labour Court, Jerusalem, Israel. Email:
stefana@court.gov.il
Alex Chester, student, Harvard
University Law School, assisted in preparing this article for publication.
Work accidents arise out of and
during the course of work and are usually sudden and clearly work-related.
Therefore, when a person
is at work and his hand is injured by a machine or he
or she falls from a ladder, there is no causality issue since the accident
clearly work-related.
Occupational diseases are
illnesses which medical research has proven to be caused entirely or mainly by a
certain type of work.
For example, asbestosis is generally recognised as an
occupational disease for a worker in an asbestos factory. See, eg, P Brodeur,
‘Annals of Law, The Asbestos Industry on Trial: 1 — A Failure to
(New York), 10 June 1985, 57.
Non-work-related diseases
develop naturally, unrelated to events at work and, therefore, are not
compensated by a workers compensation
Multi-causal diseases have many
causes, one or more having a work connection and other causes having no work
connection, such as
the natural development of the disease. Heart disease is a
multi-casual disease. These diseases are not recognised as occupational
but may have some work connection.
The trigger theory has also
been suggested for recognising mental accidents as work accidents in an article
by Stephen Adler and
Rivka Schochet. See
S Adler and R Schochet,
‘Workers’ Compensation and Psychiatric Injury Definition’
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
Tissue macrophages (phagocytes)
produce enzymes such as metalloproteinases or collagenases, which dissolve the
interstitial collagen
(fibril-forming protein constituent connective tissue) in
the fibrous cap. MJ Davies & AC Thomas, ‘Plaque Fissuring —
Cause of Acute Myocardial Infarction, Sudden Ischaemic Death, and Crescendo
Angina’ (1985) 53
British Heart Journal
363; ML Gronholdt, S
Dalager-Pedersen and E Falk, ‘Coronary Atherosclerosis: Determinants of
Plaque Rupture’ (1998) 19
European Heart Journal
MA DeWood et al,
‘Prevalence of Total Coronary Occlusion During the Early Hours of
Transmural Myocardial Infarction’
New England Journal of
; MS Gotsman et al, ‘Angiographic Findings in the Coronary
Arteries After Thrombolysis in Acute Myocardial Infarction’
American Journal of Cardiology
715; Y Rozenman et al, ‘Early
Intravenous Thrombolysis in Acute Myocardial Infarction: The Jerusalem
Experience’ (1995)
International Journal of Cardiology
Dysfunctional endothelium is
a physiological dysfunction of normal biochemical processes carried out by the
endothelium. Normal endothelium
has a specific paracrine effect on the
underlying smooth muscle cells in the arterial wall. A normal artery dilates in
response to
an intra-arterial injection of acetylcholine and is mediated by the
production of endothelial Nitric Oxide (NO). Endothelium overlying
atheromatous plaque is dysfunctional and has a blunted response to
acetylcholine, NO production does not occur and the coronary
artery constricts.
The artery is also more sensitive to endothelin and thromboxane A
with an intense vasoconstrictive effect and does not respond to prostacycline
with vasodilatation. These arteries undergo more vasoconstriction
intense spasm is likely to cause plaque rupture. An elevated serum cholesterol
also causes endothelial dysfunction and this
can be reversed if treated.
Israeli examples of
myocardial infarcts triggered by work-related events, which have been recognised
by the National Labour Court
as work accidents, include:
i An airline manager had arranged to fly 800 supporters of the local football
team abroad for a key match. The flights were overbooked.
The supporters arrived
at the airport and there were insufficient available seats. This caused a
violent verbal and physical altercation
between the supporters and the airline
manager. He felt severe chest pain, collapsed and had an acute infarct. The
intense psychological
reaction to the event caused plaque rupture, clot
formation, obstruction of the artery and an acute myocardial infarct.
ii A bus driver brought his bus to the filling station on a cold morning. He
noticed that he had a puncture and flat tyre. The garage
worker on duty had not
started his shift and refused to change the tyre. An argument erupted between
the driver and the worker. The
driver changed the tyre, which was unusual
exercise in the cold weather. He developed severe retrosternal (behind the
sternum, the
breastbone) chest pain and shortly thereafter an acute myocardial
infarction. The sudden unusual physical activity on a cold morning
was an acute
iii A young television director found that his senior announcer had arrived
late for a television broadcast. There was a sharp argument
between the two. The
announcer walked out and refused to go on the air without an apology. The
director felt severe chest pain and
developed an acute myocardial infarction.
iv A young garage worker had to jack up a motor car and the jack slipped. The
worker was under the car and he tried to prevent the
car from falling by
propping the car up by himself. He started to sweat. An hour later he had severe
chest pain and that evening
sustained an acute myocardial infarct.
v A young office worker was mobilised for his annual reserve army training.
After three days of severe physical training with prolonged
unaccustomed
exercise, he developed severe retrosternal chest pain and later that evening had
an acute myocardial infarction. The
unusual exercise precipitated rupture of a
previously insignificant plaque.
vi A worker in a tyre factory loaded 400 tyres onto a truck manually each
day. The administration tried to improve output. On the
first day of the new
schedule, the worker loaded 800 tyres, and in the late afternoon he felt severe
chest pain. That evening he
developed an acute infarct. The sudden change in the
intensity of physical work induced plaque rupture, despite the fact that the
patient normally undertook heavy physical labour.
vii A middle-aged butcher found that two of his workers did not appear for
work in the morning after repeated Scud missile attacks
during the Persian Gulf
War. He did the work of three workers during the next 12 hours, and during the
day there were two further
siren warnings of missile attacks. That evening he
developed an acute myocardial infarct. The extra physical work and the emotional
fright caused by the missile warnings induced rupture of an insignificant
atheromatous (accumulation and swelling in artery walls)
In all of these cases, risk factors for atheroma accretion were present.
However, in each instance, it was considered that the emotional
or physical
trigger was more important than the risk factor and that random chance could not
explain the event. In some cases, the
chest pain started during the acute
emotional or physical stress. However, in some patients, it was delayed by 12 or
24 hours. Presumably
the plaque ruptured during the acute stressful event,
thrombus formed and was lysed and washed away, and only some hours later, the
rate of thrombosis with decreased flow exceeded the rate of thrombolysis: S
Work Accidents Issues
, Israel Bar Association Press, Jerusalem
1999 at 25–52.
Excessive vasoconstriction
can cause profound ischaemia (restriction in blood supply) or rupture of a small
soft atheromatous plaque.
Hypercholesterolaemia or an underlying plaque changes
the function of the endothelium so that the response is abnormal. A similar
effect occurs in atheromatous arteries: F Crea, JC Kaski, A Masori et al,
‘Key References on Coronary Artery Spasm’ (1994)
Circulation
2442. Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) accumulates and causes
vasodilatation, a classic autocrine reaction. The normal endothelium secretes
several paracrine (signalling) mediators which modulate the function of the
neighbouring muscle cells. Increases in blood flow activate
local shear stress
sensitive elements in the endothelial cells. They secrete nitric oxide that
diffuses to the adjacent medial muscular
cells which causes relaxation with
vasodilatation. The endothelium also secretes prostacycline, a potent
vasodilator. Endothelin,
also secreted by the endothelial cells, causes
contraction of the arterial muscle cells with vasoconstriction and reduction in
blood flow.
Circulating platelets also have a paracrine effect; they secrete thromboxane
, a potent vasoconstrictor. They also initiate and amplify the
clotting mechanism in the bloodstream. Renin, secreted by the juxtaglomerular
(near a kidney glomerulus), converts angiotensinogen (serum globulin formed by
the liver) to angiotensin I (oligopeptide in the blood
that causes
vasoconstriction). This is converted to angiotensin II, a potent
vasoconstrictor. This is an endocrine effect, the parent
substance is secreted
by the kidney but it acts on a distant effector site. Adrenergic nerves liberate
neurotransmitters (norepinephrine),
which dilate or constrict the arteries
— alpha receptors cause vasoconstriction and beta receptors
vasodilatation. The parasympathetic
(craniosacral) neurotransmitter,
acetylcholine (the only neurotransmitter used in the somatic nervous system),
causes vasodilatation
(dilation of a blood vessel).
There is a dynamic interaction between these effects. Some cause muscle
relaxation, others contraction: the interaction maintains
optimal luminal
diameter of the arteries and modulates blood flow to meet the needs of the
myocardium. However, when the homeostatic
physiology is deranged. Inadequate blood flow deprives the local muscle of an
appropriate oxygen
supply and causes ischaemia.
E Falk, ‘Coronary
Thrombosis: Pathogenesis and Clinical Manifestations’ (1991) 68
American Journal of Cardiology
68. They are mediated through different
mechanisms: increased sympathetic activity, endothelin secretion, thromboxane
production and prothrombotic activity, or decreased nitric oxide
production, prostacycline secretion and decreased thrombolytic activity.
P Barth and HA Hunt,
Workers’ Compensation and Work-Related Illnesses and Diseases
Press, 1980 at 105.
Commonwealth/Dep’t of State Police
22 Va. App. 245
468 S.E.2d 702
Medlin v. County of Henrico Police
34 Va. App. 396
(2001). In fact, even states that are most extreme in not including heart
conditions under workers compensation, such as Nevada,
still make exceptions for
such public-sector protective occupations. See P Barth and HA Hunt,
Workers’ Compensation and Work-Related Illnesses and Diseases
Press, 1980 at 108.
For example, Illinois
effectively requires a claimant
to ‘find a credible medical
witness to testify that the exertion might or could have been the proximate
cause of the injury’:
P Barth and HA Hunt,
Workers’ Compensation
and Work-Related Illnesses and Diseases
, MIT Press, 1980 at 108. According
to some, because the specific cause of a case of heart disease is unknown,
finding a medical witness
to testify is a simple matter. Thus the effect of the
Illinois law is to remove all serious obstacles to compensation, making cases
dependent only on the skill of the participating attorneys. See RV Dalenberg,
‘Coronary Heart Disease and the Law’ (1973)
Modern Concepts of
Cardiovascular Disease
RS Cohen and GS Klein,
‘A Proposed Solution to the Legal Problems of Workmen’s Compensation
Heart Cases’ (1973)
Supplemental Studies for the National Commission
on State Workmen’s Compensation Laws
This was also shown in the
Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression Trial (CAST): SN Willich et al, ‘Circadian
Variation in the Incidence
of Sudden Cardiac Death in the Framingham Heart Study
Population’ (1987) 60
American Journal of Cardiology
SN Willich et al,
‘Increased Onset of Sudden Cardiac Death in the First Three Hours after
Awakening’ (1992) 70
American Journal of Cardiology
Triggers and Mechanisms of Myocardial Infarction (TRIMM) study also examined
shift workers and found that the peak onset
of infarction occurred in the first
three hours after waking.
The Multicenter
Investigation of Limitation of Infarct Size (MILIS), the Intravenous
Streptokinase in Acute Myocardial infarction
(ISAM) and the second Intravenous
Streptokinase and Infarct Survival (ISIS-II).
D Mulcahy et al,
‘Heart Rate and Blood Pressure Consequences of an Afternoon SIESTA (Snooze
Induced Excitation of Sympathetic
Triggered Activity)’ (1993) 71
American Journal of Cardiology
D Sapoznikov, MH Luria, Y
Mahler, MS Gotsman, ‘Day vs Night ECG and Heart Rate Variability Patterns
in Patients without Obvious
Heart Disease’ (1992) 25
Electrocardiology
MH Luria et al, ‘Early
Heart Rate Variability Alterations after Acute Myocardial Infarction’
American Heart Journal
D Mulcahy et al,
‘Circadian Variation of Total Ischaemic Burden and its Alteration with
Anti-anginal Agents’ (1988) 332
JE Muller et al,
‘Triggering Myocardial Infarction by Sexual Activity’
Journal of the American Medical Association
SN Willich et al,
‘Physical Exertion as a Trigger of Acute Myocardial Infarction’
New England Journal of Medicine
The TRIMM study and the
Onset Study examined the patient’s activity in the hours before acute
myocardial infarction.
M Burtscher, M Philadelphy
and R Likar, ‘Sudden Cardiac Death during Mounting Hiking and Downhill
New England Journal of Medicine
DK Ahern et al,
‘Biobehavioural Variables and Mortality or Cardiac Arrest in the Cardiac
Arrhythmia Pilot Study (CAPS)’
American Journal of
MA Mittleman et al,
‘Triggering of Acute Myocardial Infarction Onset by Episodes of
Anger’ (1995) 92
Circulation
JN Morris et al,
‘Coronary Heart Disease and Physical Activity of Work’ (1953) 262
R Soufer et al,
‘Cerebral Cortical Hyperactivation in Response to Mental Stress in
Patients with Coronary Artery Disease’
Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA
C Cardillo et al,
‘Role of Nitric Oxide in the Vasodilator Response to Mental Stress in
Normal Subjects’ (1997) 80
American Journal of Cardiology
RI Glass and MM Zack, Jr,
‘Increase in Deaths from Ischaemic Heart Disease after Blizzards’
D Trichopoulos et al,
‘Psychological Stress and Fatal Heart Attack, The Athens Earthquake
Natural Experiment’ (1983)
J Leor, K Poole and RA
Kloner, ‘Sudden Cardiac Death Triggered by an Earthquake’
New England Journal of Medicine
SR Meisel et al,
‘Effect of Iraqi Missile War on Incidence of Acute Myocardial Infarction
and Sudden Death in Israeli Civilians’
Dan Yitzhak v NIL
National Labour Court, 18 Lbr Ct Cases 315, 411. (Hebrew).
Zitelli v. NII
National Labour Court, Nevo 171/2006, 19.2.2007. (Hebrew).
Work Accidents
, Israel Bar Association Press, 1999 at 25–52.
Compensation Law
, Mathew Bender New York 1972 at 7-166.
P Barth and HA Hunt,
Workers’ Compensation and Work-Related Illnesses and Diseases
Press, 1980 at 112–13. See text accompanying footnote
Burris v. Lewis
141 N.E.2d 424
Dworak v. E. Greenbaum
, 261 App. Div. 1022,
25 N.Y.S.2d 829
(1941), aff’d,
287 N.Y. 555
38 N.E.2d 224
Masse v. James H.
Robinson Co
301 N.Y. 34
92 N.E.2d 56
, 57 (1950).
Interstate Cemetery Co.
164 Pa. Super. 233
63 A.2d 388
Compensation Law
, 1972 at 43-10.
Fleischer v. State of
Minn. Dept. of Highways
247 Minn. 396
77 N.W.2d 288
Lumbermen’s Mut. Cas. Co. v. Kitchens
81 Ga. App. 470
(1950), awarding compensation to a worker who suffered heart failure after
carrying less than 20 pounds;
Bussey v. Globe Indem. Co.
81 Ga. App.
59 S.E.2d 34
(1950), awarding compensation to a bookkeeper who suffered
heart attack five minutes after walking up a single flight of stairs to
GA Hellmuth, ‘Medical
Studies on Workmen’s Compensation’ (1967) 36
Industrial Medicine
and Surgery
See JE Goshkin,
‘Legislative Action, The Only Reasonable Solution to the Problems of
Workmen’s Compensation Heart Cases’
LaTourette v.
Workers’ Comp. Appeals Bd.
17 Cal. 4th 644
(1981): an employee who
suffered a heart attack due to a pre-existing heart condition while attending a
work-related seminar did
not suffer a compensable injury because the injury did
not arise out of the employment and had no causal connection.
RK Roberts, ‘Problems
and Suggested Solutions to Cardiovascular Cases in the Workmen’s
Compensation Field’ (1970)
6 Williamette Law Journal, 91.
P Barth and HA Hunt,
Workers’ Compensation and Work-Related Illnesses and Diseases
Press, 1980 at 114.
See S Adler, ‘Medical
Evidence in the Israeli Labor Courts: Court-Appointed Expert Medical
Advisors’ in
Hospital Law
, eds A Carmi and S Schneider,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988 212
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
PDF format (192 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter