URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burstyner, Naomi; Grant, Genevieve --- "Australian Coronial Litigation: An Empirical Profile" [2025] UNSWLawJl 22; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 679
AUSTRALIAN CORONIAL LITIGATION:
AN EMPIRICAL PROFILE
NAOMI BURSTYNER
AND GENEVIEVE GRANT
In the wake of a reportable death, persons who dispute coronial decisions
or findings may face the daunting and costly prospect of
superior court review.
Little is known about the characteristics of coronial litigation, despite its
significance to parties, coronial
systems and the community. This article
presents an empirical profile of Australian coronial litigation, investigating
the parties,
claims, death circumstances, case durations and outcomes in decided
cases (1993–2022). Case numbers and applicant self-representation
increased, while applicant success rates have dwindled. Case profiles also vary
according to whether applicants are family members
of the deceased. The study
has important implications for efforts by courts, coronial staff and support
services to better meet the
needs of parties in these high-stakes
proceedings.
I INTRODUCING CORONIAL LITIGATION
Coroners play a vital role as judicial
inquisitors in the investigation of more than 21,500 reportable deaths in
Australia each year.
deaths include those which are unexpected, unnatural, violent or resulted from
an accident or injury; causally related
to a medical procedure or medical care;
or where the death occurred in care or police
Coroners may make a range
of directions and decisions during the course of an investigation in addition to
their ultimate factual
findings regarding a death. These decisions and findings
range from the reportability of a death to the holding of an inquest and
establishing the cause of a death.
Individuals and entities with a connection to a death may dispute and seek to
challenge the coroner’s decisions or findings.
We use the term ‘coronial
litigation’ to describe these disputes when they progress to judicial
review applications and
Coronial litigation is distinct from other kinds of litigation in important
ways. The coronial jurisdiction is distinct from Australia’s
criminal jurisdictions, by virtue of its inquisitorial rather than adversarial
nature. In the setting of coronial litigation,
the role of the coroner whose
decision or finding is being challenged is typically confined to making
submissions setting out the
material which was before the coroner and which
might be relevant to the appeal. However they do not make submissions as to the
of the appeal, nor are they active participants in proceedings, unlike a
more active defendant in other kinds of
litigation.
The legal framework for
coronial litigation – and Australian coronial law – is principally
shaped by individual and discrete
Coroners Acts, enacted in each state and
The common law also
plays a role in contextualising the discretionary role of the
who is tasked with
investigating causes and circumstances of
Each of the Coroners Acts
in Australia sets out the grounds for appeal upon which coronial litigation may
be commenced and by whom.
circumstances, it may be possible or even required for review to be sought first
by application to the coroner.
In others, a party with sufficient interest or standing can move directly to a
superior court to appeal the coroner’s
An interested party
may alternatively make an application for judicial review under the relevant
Supreme Court Rules and these grounds
broadly include claims of jurisdictional
error, error of law or denial of procedural
In summary, coronial
litigation typically takes the form of appeals or judicial review in state and
territory Supreme Courts, with
the exception of Queensland, where cases are
brought in the District Court.
While each of the Coroners Acts operate independently, when viewed together,
the Acts represent a patchwork of different rights and
dispute pathways. Despite
similarities of some appeal grounds and rights across jurisdictions, the
landscape reflects the sheer variety
and complexity of coroners’ work,
with decisions ranging from who is the senior next of
and whether a body may be
to whether an
investigation should be
The differences also
reflect the diversity of legal arrangements in a federation. Appendix A captures
this, setting out the superior
court appeal rights for each Australian
Wales (‘NSW’) have reviewed the bases on which coronial
decisions and findings can be appealed, and particularly the
challenges family
members may experience in these
This attention has led to
recommendations for changes to law and practice, including clarifying the
grounds of appeal.
In Victoria,
significant changes to the
Coroners Act 2008
Coroners Act
’) have sought to make it easier for families to seek
review in both the Coroners Court and the Supreme Court. These changes
discussed further in
The value of coronial litigation includes
promoting fairness, equity and access to justice, by allowing interested parties
to challenge
a coronial decision affecting them. As noted above, the common law
complements the statutory grounds of appeal. Cases such as
Annetts v McCann
have emphasised the significance of natural justice
principles.
For parties affected
by a coroner’s decisions or findings, coronial litigation can provide an
important opportunity for participation
heard’ is a demonstrated need that stakeholders have in the coronial
and the ‘day in
court’ that coronial litigation can provide is significant. As a review
mechanism, coronial litigation
also supports accurate and high-quality coronial
information and decisions and helps to reinforce the prevention purpose of the
At the same
time, however, coronial litigation gives rise to the persistent challenge common
to civil justice systems: balancing
costs and delay with achieving accurate
It cannot be a
mechanism for ventilating generalised dissatisfaction with coronial processes or
findings, nor ‘resolve the
inevitable limitations of the coronial process
to provide outcomes that satisfy families deeply affected by a death in tragic
circumstances’.
the proper administration of justice must ‘take into account the fair
treatment of third parties engaging in coronial
processes’.
Despite the important functions of coronial litigation, there is little
empirical evidence about trends in the nature, prevalence
and outcomes of these
cases. Coronial litigation also represents a poorly understood aspect of the
work of families in ‘constructing
a “last chapter” for the
person who died’.
data deficit
is an impediment
for efforts to improve the availability and management of coronial litigation as
there is no baseline for evaluating
the impact of reforms. To address this
dearth of data and shed light on the coronial litigation landscape, this article
a quantitative analysis of judgments in Australian coronial litigation
in the period 1993–2022. The study sought to determine
the characteristics
of claims, deaths, parties and outcomes in coronial litigation. In view of the
recent law reform, policy and
research focus on the experiences of family
members in coronial processes, we also specifically explored cases brought by
family members
identifies a number of important features of the coronial litigation landscape.
Coronial litigation often requires parties
to be exposed to legal processes for
protracted periods of time. There has been a marked increase in the number of
appeals over time,
with much of this growth attributable to case numbers in
Victoria. We also show that BFM applicants are more likely than others to
unrepresented and that applicants who are represented are more likely to achieve
a successful outcome. These and other findings
raise important questions about
the justice being meted out in coronial litigation, and whether there are
opportunities to do better
in resolving these disputes.
of this article provides a synthesis of the existing literature and
limited evidence regarding disputes in the coronial context.
the research design and
presents the study findings.
article discusses key findings, providing deeper analysis of case numbers over
time; case durations; the case types and legal
representation issues for BFMs;
and potential avenues for resolution.
sets out the implications of the
study for the conduct and management of coronial litigation, with a particular
focus on measures
that courts could use to bring about earlier and more
satisfying resolution of these cases. We also canvass the strengths and
limitations
of the study.
II DISPUTES IN THE CORONIAL SETTING: EVIDENCE
One of the distinct strengths of the coronial jurisdiction is its emphasis on
promoting public health and safety and the administration
These principles are
furthered by the practice of publishing coronial findings, recommendations and
research data.
In Victoria, this
quality is reinforced by the Victorian Coroners Court’s coverage by the
Open Courts Act 2013
(Vic), which ‘recognise[s] and promote[s] the
principle that open justice is a fundamental aspect of the Victorian legal
general acceptance by Australian courts of substantive open justice
As such, the Australian
coronial jurisdiction has reinforced and demonstrated intentions for
transparency.
Against the backdrop of this commitment to transparency, there is scarce
publicly available evidence about the characteristics of
complaints, disputes
and litigation in relation to coroners’ decisions and findings. The annual
reports of Australian Coroners
Courts almost never convey the numbers of
complaints and disputes the courts
Published coronial
findings following coronial investigations or inquests sometimes indicate that a
family member or other interested
party has made a complaint to a coroner, or
that a request for inquest has been refused. This insight provides only a very
view, and there are other kinds of objections, complaints or disputes
that are not mentioned in the findings. Periodical reports
and investigations
occasionally result in more information about disputes being made
but this is also not
regular or systematic.
In recent years there has been a considerable policy focus on the experiences
of family members of deceased persons and other stakeholders
in the broader
coronial system. The research evidence base has identified a range of
challenging experiences stakeholders have –
including in relation to
participation,
information,
and compounding of
trauma and grief through the legal
This research and
policy attention has most frequently been confined to the processes associated
with death investigations and inquests.
There has been very little attention to
the experience, nature or empirical profile of coronial litigation. Where
coronial litigation
has been studied, the focus is typically confined to
doctrinal analyses of the cases.
The main exception is the Coronial Council of Victoria’s 2017
Coronial Council Appeals Review
Council Appeals
This inquiry
identified the chief functions of coronial litigation as promoting access to
justice and facilitating high quality coronial
decisions and
It also presented evidence
of the substantial costs of coronial litigation, including the significant time
and resource implications
for workload-burdened courts; financial implications
for families and other stakeholders; emotional impacts on affected people; the
risk of undermining confidence in the original proceeding; and delay affecting
the implementation of recommendations designed to
protect the
Notably, the
Council Appeals Review
made apparent that the Coronial Council itself had
difficulty establishing the number and identity of cases appealed to the Supreme
Court in Victoria
and in other
In a rare insight
into applications made directly to coroners, the
Council Appeals Review
reported that from 2012 to 2017 there were 39 applications for review to
Victorian coroners and that 29 of these (74%) were
It is not known whether
or how many of these refused applicants went on to appeal in the Supreme Court.
Mapping the landscape of Australian coronial litigation advances our
understanding of the features of the cases, including who is
bringing the
appeals, what the cases are about, the outcomes being achieved and whether there
is inter-jurisdictional variation.
Against the backdrop of the considerable
costs associated with court proceedings and access to justice concerns, it also
us to understand the duration of the cases and the extent to which the
cases involve self-represented applicants. Given the research
establishing the
challenging nature of coronial processes and the continued policy and law reform
attention to these issues,
improved evidence base on coronial litigation will also be valuable for
informing consideration of changes to policy, law and
practice in this area. The
next part of this article introduces the research design we used to explore
coronial litigation.
III RESEARCH DESIGN
A Study Sample: Coronial Appeal or Review Proceedings
Study data were drawn from judgments across all Australian states and
territories, where the respondent in the proceeding was a coroner
or a Coroners
Court itself, in the years 1993–2022. The 1993 starting year was proximate
to the earliest Australasian Legal
Information Institute (‘AustLII’)
data across all jurisdictions.
To locate relevant judgments, the keyword ‘coroner’ was searched
within the AustLII Supreme Court case law databases
for each state and territory
as well as the District Court of Queensland database. The identified cases were
then reviewed to ensure
they involved a coroner or a Coroners Court as a
respondent.
The final sample
comprised 169 judgments. The corresponding coronial findings (where available)
were also collected and used as a
supplementary source of data in cases where
information such as date and circumstances of death were not set out in the
B Study Variables and Coding
We systematically collected data from the judgments on variables of
We began by creating a
tentative set of variables relevant to the study. Categories of claim types,
death circumstances and party
analysis of the judgments and condensed into the categories presented in Table 1
We coded cases by their main claim type, being the focus of the applicant
in terms of the coronial decision they were disputing.
The study was focussed on
the substance of the appeal rather than the formal grounds for appeal or
judicial review, and as such,
claim types were categorised by the specific
essence of their appeal, rather than according to which provision of the
Coroners Act
it fell under or whether it was an application for
judicial review provided by the Supreme Court Civil Procedure Rules in the
Similarly, commonalities between death circumstances allowed us to generate
meaningful categories. For example, deaths in ‘medical
care’ settings represented an array of locations and circumstances in
which inpatients, outpatients, aged care residents,
psychiatric patients or
maternity patients died. A similar process was undertaken for applicant party
of specific characterisations of the applicant
took place (with attention to factors including the applicant’s familial
relationship
with the deceased). These were synthesised into categories
capturing the applicant’s status as a BFM or other party type. Coronial
decisions or findings which are the subject of the applicant’s claim are
referred to as ‘coronial events’. A draft
coding guide was created
and tested through pilot coding of 10 judgments. The variables and guide were
refined and finalised
and data were then collected from the entire
sample. The key variables are presented in Table 1 below.
Table 1: Study Variables
Coding Details
Case jurisdiction
State or territory
Year of judgment
Date of coronial event
Date of litigated finding or decision
Time between death and coronial event
Time in months
Time between death and judgment
Time in months
Time between coronial event and judgment
Time in months
Main claim type
Challenging findings; inquest, autopsy or reportability decision; body
burial or release; administrative matters; limiting evidence
or potential
penalty; coroner role or jurisdiction; procedural fairness.
Circumstances of death
aged care; self-inflicted; criminal element; disaster;
Applicant party type
Individual, company, government entity
Applicant gender
Male, female or not specified
Applicant a bereaved family member
Applicant legally represented
Case outcome
Appeal dismissed or successful
C Data Analysis
Study data were analysed using STATA SE (Version 17). Our analyses mostly
involved calculating counts and proportions. We used chi-squared
appropriate to test for significant differences between variables of interest,
with significance set at 0.05. We also calculated
odds ratios to explore
‘the ratio of the odds of the outcome event in the exposed group compared
to the odds in the unexposed
In the report of
the findings that follows, we refer to ‘case’ as the unit of
analysis. Where we refer to the characteristics
of the applicant, we are
referring to the first-named applicant in a case.
IV FINDINGS
A Key Case Characteristics
Our review identified 169 coronial litigation cases in the period
1993–2022. The key characteristics of the cases are presented
below. The cases involve deaths occurring between 1968 and 2002. The greatest
share of cases (45%) are from the most recent
of the three decades
(2013–22), with the number of cases increasing over each decade of the
study timeframe. In fact, nearly
a third of cases were from the final four years
of the study timeframe in 2018–22 (n=54, 32%). Victoria was the
with the highest proportion of cases (n=61, 36%), followed by NSW
(n=27, 16%) and Western Australia (n=24, 14%). The number of cases
in Victoria
grew in each decade studied, from 15 in 1993–2002, to 19 in 2003–12,
and 27 in 2013–22.
Table 2: Characteristics of Australian Coronial Litigation,
1993–2022 (n=169)
Characteristic
Judgment year (range 1993–2022)
Death year (range 1968–2022)
Case jurisdiction
New South Wales
Western Australia
South Australia
Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory
Applicant type
Government entity
Applicant gender (individuals)
Applicant a bereaved family member
Applicant legally represented
Case outcome
Due to missing data for some variables and rounding some proportions do not
sum to 100%.
More than four out of five first applicants were individuals (n=141, 83%)
with government entities or actors (n=19, 11%) and companies
(n=9, 5%) making up
the remainder. In cases involving a natural person applicant, the applicant was
male in 78 cases (57%) and female
in 60 cases (43%). In 59% of cases (n=99), the
applicant was a BFM, including a deceased’s spouse, domestic partner,
sibling, parent, or step-relative. Non-BFM individual applicants
included medical staff, aged care service staff or management, alleged
murderers, members of the police force, employers, prison or correctional
facility staff and representatives of media outlets.
The applicant was legally represented in 82% of cases (n=139) and applicants
achieved some degree of successful outcome in 37% of
cases (n=63). The case
outcomes by year are presented in Figure 1 below, which illustrates a recent
upward trajectory in applicants’
cases being unsuccessful.
Figure 1: Case outcomes in Australian coronial litigation,
In fact, applicants were unsuccessful in three quarters of the cases decided
between 2013 and 2022 (n=57, 75%), compared with 53%
of cases in the two decades
from 1993–2012. The cases decided in the 10 years to 2022 were 2.7 times
more likely to be unsuccessful
than the cases in the previous two decades (OR
2.7, 95% CI 1.5–5.2, p=0.003). There were 25 self-represented applicants
the final 10 years of the study sample, compared with only five
self-represented applicants in the 20 years before that; only three
self-represented applicants were successful in their litigation, one in NSW in
2019 and two in Western Australia (in 2020 and 2021).
There were no significant
differences in case outcomes or legal representation by jurisdiction.
B Claim Types, Death Circumstances and Case
In Table 3 below we present the prevalence of claim types and death
circumstances in the cases. We also present data on the amount
of time that
elapsed between two key milestones: (a) the death and the coronial decision
being challenged; and (b) the coronial decision
and the court’s judgment.
The duration data were highly heterogeneous, as might be expected given the
variety of claim types
and death circumstances the cases involve. Accordingly,
we present the lapse of time between key case events in months, with the
median and interquartile range (‘IQR’) (which is the difference
between the first and third quartiles of the
Table 3: Case Duration, by Claim Type and Circumstances of Death
Case feature
Death to judgment (months)
Coronial decision to judgment (months)
Inquest, autopsy or reportability
Challenging findings
Limiting evidence or potential penalty
Body burial or release
Coroner role or jurisdiction
Procedural fairness
Administrative matters
Circumstances of death
Medical or aged care
Police or custody
Road trauma
Criminal element
Self-inflicted
Missing person
The most common claim types involved inquest, autopsy or reportability
decisions (n=57, 34%). Some of these cases challenged a coroner’s
coronial jurisdiction. The second most common
claim type involved attempts to
have findings set aside or for a further investigation to occur (n=42, 25%).
These cases included
applications to reopen investigations or inquests or to
challenge the language of a coronial finding. Cases in this second category
occasion overlapped with cases relating to autopsy, inquest or reportability
decisions (for example, where the applicant sought
to have an inquest reopened
and also for the coroner’s findings to be set aside). Cases were
categorised according to the claim
the claim (that is, they were counted only once).
In 29 cases (17%), the focus of the applicant’s case was an evidentiary
or procedural challenge that sought to limit evidence
or their exposure to
potential prosecution or a civil penalty. These cases also dealt with
evidentiary matters such as privilege
against self-incrimination; client legal
privilege; public interest immunity; propensity evidence; public access to
evidence; non-publication
orders; and excluding evidence. The next most common
claim type involved the release or burial of bodies of the deceased (n=19, 11%).
These cases were frequently brought by BFMs and often involved claims against
another person closely connected to the deceased, as
well as the coroner (for
example, a parent of the deceased who brought a claim against the coroner as
well as the de facto partner
of the deceased). Medical and aged care was the
most common setting for the deaths in the cases (n=43, 25%), including deaths in
hospitals and aged care services, or that occurred immediately after leaving
health services. The second most common death circumstances
were in police or
custodial settings (n=38, 23%), with road trauma accounting for a further 18
cases (11%).
The data paint a striking picture of the significant amount of time that
frequently elapses in coronial litigation. Concentrating
on the most common
claim types, the data show that a median of 77 months (more than six years)
elapsed between the death and the
coronial litigation judgment in cases
involving a challenge to the coronial findings; for cases involving procedural
or evidentiary
challenges, the equivalent period was just over three years (37
months). Turning to the period between the challenged coronial decisions
judgment in the litigation, a median time of 33 months elapsed in cases
challenging coronial findings; for procedural and evidentiary
claims it was much
less at five months. In contrast, cases involving disputes about release or
burial of the deceased’s body
had a median duration of two months from the
death to the court judgment.
If we consider these data by death circumstances, we see that in the large
number of cases involving deaths connected with medical
or aged care, the median
time between the death and the coronial litigation judgment was nearly three
years (35 months); for police
or custody deaths and road trauma deaths, the
equivalent median durations were 44 and 34 months respectively. For the medical
aged care, police or custody and road trauma death cases (accounting for 58%
of cases), the median time from the challenged coronial
decision to the
court’s judgment was between 10 and 13 months.
Closer inspection of the intersection of claim type and death circumstances
revealed some particularly prevalent combinations in the
study sample (Table
Table 4: Intersection of Claim Type and Death Circumstances
Death circumstances
Medical or aged
Police or custody
Road trauma
Inquest, autopsy or reportability
Challenging findings
Limiting evidence or potential penalty
Most of the 38 police or custody death cases (85%) were claims involving
procedural or evidentiary challenges (n=15) or challenges
to findings (n=13).
More than two thirds of the 43 medical and aged care death cases were either
inquest, autopsy or reportability
cases (n=20, 35%) or challenges to findings
(n=11, 28%).
C Characteristics of Cases Involving Bereaved Family Member
We explored the characteristics of cases involving BFM applicants (Table 5).
The applicant was a BFM in 59% of the cases (n=99). Their
legal representation
profile differed to other applicants: BFMs were 3.3 times more likely than
non-BFM applicants to be self-represented
(OR 3.3, 95% CI 1.3–8.6,
p=0.014). BFM applicants achieved successful outcomes in 33% of the cases they
were involved in (33
out of 99 cases) compared with applicant success in 42% of
cases where the applicant was not a BFM (29 out of 68 cases). This difference
was not statistically significant (p=0.22).
Table 5: Characteristics of Australian Coronial Litigation Involving
Bereaved Family Member Applicants, 1993–2022
Characteristic
Applicant legally represented
Case outcome
Applicant gender
Inquest, autopsy or reportability
Challenging findings
Limiting evidence or potential penalty
Body burial or release
Coroner role or jurisdiction
Procedural fairness
Administrative matters
Death circumstances
Medical or aged care
Police or custody
Road trauma
Criminal element
Self-inflicted
Disaster setting
Missing person
Workplace death
New South Wales
Western Australia
South Australia
Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory
BFMs were the first applicant in 72% of Victorian cases (n=43). The odds of a
case involving a BFM first applicant were 2.3 times
greater in Victorian cases
compared with non-Victorian cases (OR 2.3, 95% CI 1.2–4.5, p=0.016). The
highest number of BFM applicants was Western
Australia (n=19, making up 72% of cases from that state), followed by NSW (n=16,
of NSW cases) (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Frequency of BFM first applicants in Australian coronial litigation
(by jurisdiction), 1993–2022
Cases with BFM first applicants increased marginally over time as a
proportion of all cases (from 51% in 1993–2002 to 66% in
That growth was particularly driven by increasing numbers of BFM first
applicants in Victoria (22 BFM-led cases from
1993–2012 and 21 in the
single decade 2013–22) and Western Australia (four BFM-led cases from
1993–2012 rising
to 15 in the decade 2013–22).
The most common claim type for BFM-led cases were inquest, autopsy or
reportability decisions (n=50, accounting for 88% of such cases)
and the most
common claim type for non-BFMs was limiting evidence or potential penalty (n=24,
accounting for 83% of those cases).
The most common death circumstances in BFM
cases were medical or aged care related deaths (n=30, accounting for 71% of
those cases)
while the most common death circumstances in non-BFM claims were
policy or custody related deaths (n=30, 79% of those cases). The
vast majority
of female first applicants were BFMs (n=54, 92% of the 59 female first
applicants) whereas male first applicants were
more evenly distributed amongst
BFMs (n=45, 58%) and non-BFMs (n=32, 42%).
V DISCUSSION
Our analysis of 30 years of Australian coronial litigation provides new
insight into the characteristics of the cases, the parties
involved and the
outcomes achieved. We identified that the number of cases has increased over
time. The most common circumstances
of death in the cases were aged or medical
care and police or custody settings. The most common subjects of dispute varied
the applicant was a BFM: cases about inquest, autopsy or
reportability decisions were more commonly brought by BFMs than non-BFMs.
Non-BFMs were most commonly seeking to challenge evidence or their exposure to
penalty or prosecution. Cases involving BFM applicants
were more likely to occur
in Victoria than in other jurisdictions.
Our research also identified growth in the number of self-represented
applicants in coronial litigation. We found that more BFMs were
unrepresented
than non-BFM applicants. Successful outcomes were much more likely when an
applicant was represented. Only one third
of BFM applicants had successful
outcomes. There was not, however, a relationship between BFM status and case
In this part of the paper, we delve into the key findings, offering potential
explanations and making connections with the broader
literature on coronial
matters and the experiences of the stakeholders involved. We particularly focus
on the findings relating to
BFM and unrepresented applicants, with a view to
considering the implications for the design and operation of legal processes and
potential use of appropriate dispute resolution (‘ADR’) for coronial
litigation involving these parties.
Increasing Case Numbers Over Time: A Victorian
This study identified an increase over time in judgments in appeals against
coronial decisions in Australia. The greatest proportion
of judgments was in
Victoria, the second most populous
which accounted for 36%
of cases. In fact, the number of Victorian cases in the final of the three
decades studied (2013–22,
n=27) was the same as the number of cases in the
second-highest ranked state (NSW) over the entire period of the study
(1993–2022).
Why might this be?
We caution against leaping to the conclusion that the Victorian prominence in
the sample reflects problematic practice in that state.
Coronial litigation is a
very rare event in the context of the number of reportable deaths dealt with by
coroners each year, especially
over the extended period of the study timeframe.
The lack of published data about the number of disputes that are resolved
also makes it hard to interpret jurisdictional differences.
of a range of disparate factors that shape access to and decision-making about
pursuit of a case. The scholarly literature
on the selection of cases for
litigation (from its early law and economics focus and
is unlikely to be a good
fit in explaining interested persons’ choices about and pursuit of
coronial litigation and its frequently
very personal, non-pecuniary
This may particularly
be the case for family members of deceased persons, who we identified as more
likely to be the applicants in
Victorian cases than in other jurisdictions.
Differences in the availability of services and support for those considering
coronial litigation may play a part in preventing litigation
capability of persons affected by coronial decisions, together with their
capacity to fund litigation or bear the associated
costs risks, will also have a
bearing on their capacity to engage in coronial
litigation.
Another possibility
is that jurisdictional variation in the rules governing appeals has a bearing on
how easy it is to engage in
coronial litigation. Coronial legislation in
Victoria and Tasmania provides the clearest and greatest number of specific
for appeal to superior courts, compared with other Australian
It is possible
that in jurisdictions where the rules are less clear than in Victoria about
grounds for appeal there are impacts on
the ability of affected persons to
pursue coronial litigation, particularly given the increasing numbers of
self-represented applicants.
It is a stretch to expect that most family members
and others affected by a death are driven by the clarity of legislation itself
in pursuing their cases.
analysis was not designed to explore the relationship between the clarity of the
legislation and the number of cases. Further
analysis would clearly be required
to be conclusive on that point.
Specific awareness-raising campaigns by Coroners Courts may play a role in
generating coronial litigation. One example of this activity
in Victoria is in
relation to autopsy matters, a subset of the claim type ‘inquest, autopsy
and reportability decisions’
in this study, which made up the largest
proportion of Victorian claims. Objections to autopsy made directly to the
Coroners Court
reportedly increased significantly in the years 2000 to
Ian Freckelton and David
Ranson suggest that one reason for this increase was the widespread media
reporting at the time about the
alleged illegal retention of organs and tissues
at autopsy in the United Kingdom and Australia. These developments resulted in
communication by the Coroners Court of Victoria to families about their
right to object to autopsy
Following these
changes, objections to autopsy received by the Coroners Court of Victoria
increased from 134 in 2000 to 455 in
If some of these written
objections were refused, it is possible that they resulted in a subsequent
superior court appeal.
What we can say is that in view of the multiple potential drivers of
litigation, further attention is warranted to investigate the
impacts of reforms
that seek to improve access to coronial litigation. Recent legislative reforms
Coroners Act
sought to improve access to justice by
introducing measures ‘to clarify and enhance the way in which families and
other interested
parties can seek to re-open a coronial investigation or appeal
a finding’.
These changes,
which came into force on 28 October 2018, included:
● Extending the time limit for lodging an
appeal in the Supreme Court against a refusal by the coroner to reopen an
investigation
from 28 days to 90
● Enabling families to apply to the Coroners Court to change the
wording of a coronial finding (final
● Permitting appeals in the Supreme Court challenging coronial findings
where the weight of evidence does not support the
conclusion;
● Enabling persons to apply to the Coroners Court to allow coroners to
reopen cases and investigations due to the emergence
of new evidence or
The reforms followed the
identified stakeholder views that the former grounds of appeal (only on an error
of law) were too restrictive.
Our analysis suggests that even before these recent reforms, Victoria had
comparatively more coronial litigation than other jurisdictions,
with the number
of appeals in the most recent decade (2013–22) representing an increase of
more than 40% compared with the
previous decade (2003–12). The reforms are
recent, and given the case timelines this study identified, long-term follow-ups
will be required to understand whether the reforms play a part in driving case
numbers upward. Growth does not appear to have been
anticipated by the Coronial
Council of Victoria, which suggested that broadening the grounds of appeal was
‘very unlikely to
increase the number of appeals
significantly’.
The chief intention behind the Victorian reforms in 2018 was to improve
access to justice for families and other
stakeholders.
In practice, the
decade to 2022 saw an increased number of appeals, but with successful outcomes
in only 11% of cases (3 out of 27)
compared with 53% of cases in each of the
decades before that. It seems likely that the jurisdiction is seeing a higher
rather than quality of appeals, which raises questions about whether
this is the kind of access to justice that was envisaged by
reformers. In making
this assessment, we do not disregard the importance for applicants of procedural
justice and the right to be
this may have been part
of the objective of the law reform, and facilitating participation in litigation
has positive aspects. The
costs are also very considerable, however. A more
comprehensive evaluation of the impacts of the changes is needed and our
will provide a critical baseline for that work.
B Unpacking Delays in
Coronial Litigation
This study’s findings shed valuable light on the long periods of time
persons affected by deaths and associated coronial decisions
might spend engaged
in legal proceedings. Taken at its broadest, this exposure spans the date of
death, to coronial decision, coronial
litigation and the ultimate court
judgment. Delay is an unavoidable feature of the coronial
and can be a source of
considerable distress for family members and others affected by reportable
In some cases, extended
case durations are a product of the elapse of time between the death and the
coronial event (for example,
in cases involving missing persons). Delays between
death and coronial decision can prevent emotional, financial, administrative
legal resolution (especially with regards to dealing with the deceased’s
and they can also have
a detrimental effect on the efficacy and efficiency of investigations and
related public interest
recommendations.
Delay may also
be a feature of the complex investigation process which must be undertaken by
the Coroner in some cases, necessarily
in concert with other forensic bodies, in
this inquisitorial jurisdiction. For example, there is a requirement in
Australian jurisdictions
that criminal proceedings must be completed prior to
the conclusion of coronial investigations and the issuing of
Other factors also shape the duration of the parties’ exposure to the
legal process. Some disputes are urgent: we found the
shortest coronial
litigation centred on disputes about the release or burial of a body. In these
cases, the deceased’s remains
are in the custody of the coroner at the
time that the appeal is made. Our findings indicate that the coronial decision
is typically
made within a very short time following the death (a day or two)
and that on average two months elapses between the death and coronial
and the judgment which decides burial rites. Though this represents coronial
litigation moving at its fastest pace, the
elapse of time is still likely to be
perceived as considerable for the families involved.
In the broader sample, however, the median time between the coronial event
and the judgment for cases about setting aside findings
and reopening
investigations was substantial (three years and six months); deaths relating to
police or custody had a median time
lapse of one year and one month between
coronial event and judgment. It is difficult to make generalisations about the
reasons for
the durations given the diversity of the cases. Some of the delay
may be a product of the speed with which parties challenge coronial
for example where families initiate their case decades after the coronial
The time limits for
appeals to superior courts in relation to coronial decisions or findings vary
across jurisdictions; some even
have no time limit in relation to particular
As such, what
might appear to be delays may in fact be the time taken when appeals are brought
a long time after the coronial event.
The way cases are managed by courts may
also play a role. In any event, the length and variability of case timelines
suggests that
persons affected by coronial decisions who are considering
litigation could benefit from clear information about the likelihood that
process will be lengthy. Our findings are a useful contribution in that respect.
C The Distinct Profile of Appeals by Bereaved Family
Our findings provide valuable new information about the profile and trends
associated with coronial litigation by BFMs. They suggest
that BFMs engaged in
coronial litigation are disproportionately female, are more often
self-represented than other applicants in
these cases and rarely achieve
successful outcomes. BFM applicants are also concentrated in cases involving a
particular profile
of claim type and death circumstances.
1 The Types of Cases BFMs Bring (and Those They Don’t)
The most common claims brought by BFMs related to coroners’ inquest,
autopsy and death reportability decisions. Medical and
aged care deaths were the
most prevalent in this group of cases, often involving families seeking answers
aged, psychiatric and palliative care. The second most
common BFM claim type, accounting for a quarter of claims, involved applications
to set aside findings or seeking reinvestigation. The part of the
coroner’s findings that describes the circumstances of the
sometimes trigger objections from affected family members. For example, the
coroner might affirm that medical care was
appropriate when the family believes
this is not the case or describe activity the deceased was engaged in before
their death in
such a way that the family perceives an inappropriate implication
that the deceased contributed to their own
In contrast with BFM claims, the most common claims brought by non-BFMs
sought to limit evidence or potential penalty (a case type
almost entirely
brought by non-BFMs). Nearly three quarters of the 38 police or custody death
cases (both BFM and non-BFM claims)
were claims either of this kind (15 of the
38) or challenges to findings (13 of the 38). Despite their formal
non-participation in
these cases, BFMs are likely to be profoundly impacted by
what they might perceive as the efforts of police or others to avoid scrutiny
accountability for the circumstances of the death of their loved one.
2 BFM Self-Representation and Outcomes
We found that a quarter of BFM applicants were self-represented. BFMs were
3.3 times more likely than non-BFM applicants to be self-represented
applicants achieved successful outcomes in 33% of cases compared with applicant
success in 42% of cases where there was not
a BFM involved (a difference that
was not statistically significant). The prominence of self-representation and
unsuccessful outcomes
in cases involving BFMs requires further examination. It
is important to note that Coroners Courts are bound by the
principle, which defines the parameters within which a decision-maker must
conduct themselves within judicial review
proceedings.
The principle
effectively prohibits this decision-maker from taking an active role in its
response or defence, in case such a role
could damage their impartiality in
subsequent proceedings or dealings with the
(for example where a
decision gets remitted back to the Coroners Court). Given the Coroners Court is
not an active protagonist in
these appellate proceedings, judicial decisions are
not influenced by a respondent who advances ardent opposition to an
appellant’s
submissions. As such, a ‘successful outcome’ for
BFMs should be understood in the context of a judicial appraisal of
of their application, in light of the coroner’s jurisdiction and powers.
Cost is a critical factor shaping the pursuit of coronial litigation, as well
as legal representation. The
Appeals Review
found that for
many families, the cost of an appeal was a significant deterrent. One family
reported having received estimates of
the likely cost as being between $35,000
and $90,000
Beyond the cost for families, the Coronial Council identified that coronial
litigation also creates:
significant expense for other parties with an interest in the outcome. More
broadly, appeals to the Supreme Court come at a substantial
financial cost to
the community, and may divert attention and effort from other cases in the
Victorian justice system.
The risks of adverse costs orders are particularly concerning in light of our
study’s findings that there are increasing numbers
of unsuccessful BFM
applicants. Even where an applicant’s appeal against a coroner’s
finding is successful, the court
will typically make no order as to costs
– meaning that even a successful applicant may not be able to recover
costs to fund
their own legal
The prospect of paying
the costs of the other side in the event of unsuccessful coronial litigation is
imposing. The hazard is illustrated
Hallenstein
where a BFM
applicant appealed against the coroner’s finding that the BFM’s
brother, who had been shot by police, had
contributed to his own death. Not only
was this BFM unsuccessful in her
but she was ordered to
pay the costs of the eight police co-defendants who had been involved in the
incident leading to her brother’s
If the chief mechanism
for BFMs to understand the risk of adverse costs is being informed by their
representing barrister, then self-representation
is particularly
problematic.
What might the reasons be for the lack of BFM success in coronial litigation?
One consideration may be the ‘high bar’
of ‘Wednesbury
Unreasonableness’ whereby a coroner’s findings can only be quashed
if the decision is so irrational
or outrageous in its defiance of logic that
‘no reasonable coroner’ could have come to that decision or
The absence of
accessible and quality legal representation likely also plays a role –
whether in assessing the strength of
the case ahead of litigation, or in the way
it is presented to court. The underlying objectives of BFM applicants may not be
well-aligned
with the ‘narrow and
supervisory’
focus of the
court in coronial litigation, and legal advice would be an important corrective.
Crucially, self-represented applicants
will be unaccustomed to court procedures
and the demands of filing a substantive appeal in a superior court setting,
placing them
at an inherent disadvantage as an applicant in the Supreme Court.
The shift from the inquisitorial nature of the coronial setting
traditional adversarial nature of the appeal setting requires further
exploration in terms of the impact on applicants, particularly
those who are
self-represented. The less formal inquisitorial court room of the inquest (a
process in which they may be merely an
observer rather than a participant)
contrasts starkly with the formality of a superior court, where the applicant is
expected to
actively participate and understand the legal protocols and rules.
Furthermore, the necessarily antagonistic and partisan nature
of party roles in
an adversarial court setting can be taxing, especially for unrepresented BFMs.
There is wide variation across jurisdictions in terms of support for legal
advice for persons considering coronial
litigation.
Broadly, legal
assistance is limited to referrals to legal advice rather than representation,
and this assistance is usually only
in relation to inquests rather than ongoing
advice regarding appeals to a superior
There has been an
apparent increase in community legal centres and Aboriginal legal services
assisting families with appeals, however
this is not systematic nor widespread.
Family members with legal issues outside the scope of support, who cannot access
through other legal aid services nor afford legal representation, may
resort to self-representation or forego the appeals process
altogether. These
two results, brought about by unmet legal need, have implications for courts and
other stakeholders (in engaging
with self-represented applicants) as well as the
families themselves who may feel left with unanswered questions about the death
and face other impacts associated with the costs of self-representation in
litigation.
3 The Potential Role of Appropriate Dispute Resolution
Our analysis demonstrates that a significant proportion of applicants are
engaging in coronial litigation without success, and that
self-representation is
increasing over time. Participation in the courts is considered to be a facet of
access to justice which promotes
the values of liberal
democracies.
It is possible that
some applicants are using litigation to seek procedural justice,
including a chance to be
and these interests may
be met regardless of the substantive outcome of the litigation. It seems likely,
however, that alternatives
to the superior court process could play a greater
role in preventing the culmination of these disputes in superior courts. Writing
rapprochement between rigour of investigation, accuracy of
fact-finding and
maximisation of positive outcomes from the litigation process, on the one hand,
and minimisation of counter-therapeutic
consequences on the other
There may be scope
for this rapprochement to be further explored in the context of coronial
litigation through the use of ADR at
the Coroners Court level and, in very
limited circumstances, at superior court levels.
Where coronial litigation is underpinned by interests such as being heard or
seeking answers about a death, ADR or other therapeutic
communication
interventions could be well-placed to provide an additional avenue for
preventing the escalation of these disputes
and avoiding a zero-sum litigation
journey. The Coronial Council’s
into Improving the
Experience of Bereaved Families with the Coronial Process
restorative justice as a promising avenue for families involved in the coronial
in that it could allow
families to resolve issues and questions following the conclusion of a coronial
investigation.
Restorative
justice encompasses a range of practices and can involve informal discussions
between parties including perpetrators
and victims or administrative
decision-makers and those who have been impacted by crimes or situations which
have involved trauma
The use of restorative justice conferences at the stage when a family member
expresses an initial complaint or appeal directly to
the Coroners Court may
resolve issues early and divert parties away from embarking on coronial
litigation, including through the
use of explanations and
In recent years
protocols have been introduced in both the NSW and Victorian Coroners Courts
which provide for family meetings between
First Nations BFMs and coronial
personnel prior to the inquest or court process, to allow for information
provision about the coronial
process and discussion of relevant cultural
considerations.
context, the family meeting is designed to include discussion of findings of any
post-mortem examination
other issues the family wishes to raise regarding the coronial
investigation,
potentially
optimising understanding and acknowledgement which could result in diversion
from subsequent dispute proceedings. In
summary, ADR processes at the Coroners
Court level could facilitate the pre-investigative provision of more detailed
answers about
medical treatment and the death; apologies; or adjusted funeral or
burial arrangements.
mediated outcomes may be possible in relation to non-factual decisions of
Coroners (such as burial rites), but not in relation
to disputes regarding
finalised coronial findings.
The nature of the Coroners Court’s fundamental fact-finding purpose and
the Court’s limited participation in judicial
review as a result of its
obligations
places barriers to the comprehensive use of ADR at a superior court level to
complement the litigation process. Perhaps more importantly,
the fundamental
fact-finding purpose of the Coroners Court does not allow for flexibility in the
form of the kind of negotiated or
mediated outcome ADR
facilitates.
In some cases,
however, it may be possible to employ a form of ADR at a superior court level,
to allow applicants and (only) active
respondents to engage in discussion or
negotiations to achieve desired outcomes. One such example might be a case
involving co-respondents
such as family members in dispute over senior next of
kin status and medical practitioners defending their professional management
the deceased. The potential of this approach may extend to cases where non-BFM
applicants make claims to limit evidence or potential
penalty, causing BFMs to
become involved in the litigation as
intervenors.
There could also
be scope for coroners to participate in ADR purely as information providers,
fulfilling their
obligations while providing more detailed
reasons for decisions or findings (rather than negotiating or defending).
Within the limitations described above (involving BFM applicants and
non-coronial actors who are respondents or intervenors), judicial
mediation may
form a useful part of the superior court’s
This format of
mediation, facilitated by a judge who can also provide educative interventions
for parties about the parameters of
the law in this context, may result in
answers for the applicants, the delivery of procedural fairness, lower costs to
all stakeholders
and a potentially pro-therapeutic justice experience (through
reduced exposure to adversarial processes involving well-resourced
entities such
as government, corporate or police actors). Mediation can be actioned more
quickly than a court hearing,
is typically cheaper and might not require legal
representation.
It is also a
process which empowers parties to decide on their own outcomes in a more
therapeutic setting,
is not confined to a rights-based
where all evidence
and decisions must fall within the parameters of the relevant legislation.
Despite these features, mediation is
not currently a systematic aspect of case
management of judicial review and related proceedings in most Australian Supreme
This may partly be a
result of the constraints placed upon administrative decision-makers who are
bound by the
principle and as such are unable to be
contradictors in a litigation process and, for the same reasons, nor are they
able to exercise
an active negotiating role in a mediation.
There is little published evidence about the use of ADR in the specific
context of coronial litigation, but its potential as a preventative
measure (and
in a very limited and qualified way at a superior court level), is
compelling.
To maximise their
effectiveness, such processes should be co-designed with BFMs, pathologists,
coroners, lawyers, judges and others
who have participated in coronial processes
involving disputes. It is critical that the design of ADR processes accommodate
the motivations
of BFMs and other parties, and explores features that might meet
parties’ objectives in more fitting and less expensive ways
than through
superior court proceedings. The
Council Appeals Review
principles which underpin various forms of therapeutic jurisprudence are already
a focus in some Coroners
It seems likely,
however, that ADR is not a suitable default mechanism for resolution of all
coronial litigation, which is further
evidence of the distinct nature of this
sort of litigation, as compared with civil litigation, where parties can avail
of the ADR ‘off-ramp’. Nevertheless, in addition to
preventative ADR at a Coroners Court level, superior court case management
triage processes to gauge suitability of ADR between BFMs and active
respondents, could be an important addition.
VI STUDY STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
This study offers a range of valuable new insights into coronial litigation,
including the characteristics of the applicants and cases
and the outcomes
achieved. It is a strength of the study that the cases were drawn systematically
from publicly available material
from all superior courts in Australia over a
defined period to map the landscape of these proceedings over time. We were able
identify a greater number of cases than previous efforts to undertake this
and our findings are
likely to be of use to Coroners Courts, superior courts, parties and policy
makers in the field of coronial
litigation.
The chief limitation of the study is common to projects involving content
analysis of judicial decisions: judgments cannot be treated
as comprehensive
accounts of the facts, so it is possible that some data is
We sought to
mitigate this risk by focusing on variables that were reported consistently
across judgments and did not require significant
exercise of subjective
judgment. Where there were exceptions to this (for example, in relation to the
circumstances of deaths and
the claim types), we took care to develop and refine
the variables to enhance the accuracy of the data collection. It is a particular
absence that we were unable to conclusively identify whether there were First
Nations participants in the study cases because this
information was not
reported consistently or systematically in the judgments. In view of the
research evidence on the challenging
experiences Indigenous Australians have in
coronial processes,
their experiences in coronial litigation is an important area for future
research. Additionally, as our study used decided
cases, we are unable to
comment on the number and characteristics of cases that might have been
commenced and then abandoned or settled.
Further work is required to explore
coronial litigation that is commenced and abandoned, and the reasons why this
Given the dearth of research in this area, the use of content analysis in
this study helps to provide an empirical foundation for
future research and
As such, it is
important to acknowledge the limits of this approach. One can make findings
but it is not possible for us to draw
conclusions about what the families and other parties felt about these
experiences.
For example, we
assume that lengthy waiting times between coronial events and judgment impacts
negatively on parties and families,
but other research methods are required to
explore these matters. Future research involving direct engagement with parties
been involved in coronial litigation would provide a more comprehensive
picture of the impact of coronial litigation on participants
and affected
VII CONCLUSION
Coronial litigation is an important means of access to justice for
stakeholders in the coronial process. Crucially, through their
work, coroners
are able to support the overarching goal of this jurisdiction, which is saving
lives through prevention measures catalysed
by recommendations based on sound
and high-quality investigations. Coronial systems, like all legal systems,
require appeal and review
mechanisms to promote accountability. Such mechanisms
provide means to refine, correct or simply examine decisions and findings to
ensure their fairness, consistency and accuracy. As such, coronial litigation
complements the goals of coronial jurisdictions. In
practice, Coroners Courts
can ‘sometimes be forums of disappointment and anger’ because of the
life and death questions
Against this backdrop,
understanding the characteristics of coronial litigation is important for
informing the way these cases are
managed as well as the design and evaluation
of improvement initiatives.
By exploring the characteristics of coronial litigation, our research
identified opportunities to review the management of these cases
(including referrals to legal advice) and the potential relevance of ADR. Cases
involving BFMs appear to be the leading
contenders for those kinds of
interventions, on the basis of our findings in addition to what is already known
in the coronial context more broadly: that
‘despite the therapeutic ideal, many families and communities experience
the coronial
process and its aftermath as neither fair nor
Our findings
indicate that BFMs are increasingly engaging in coronial litigation and
achieving outcomes that are likely to be costly
and unsatisfying from their
perspective.
Coroners Courts, Supreme Courts, interested persons, practitioners and the
broader community could benefit from further attention
to coronial litigation as
an important and public part of the coronial process. As Freckelton has argued
in connection with inquests,
there is value in exploring how coroners (who may
inevitably become respondents in coronial litigation) might be able to have a
impact on the applicant
We argue that the
therapeutic prerogative of coroners and coronial bodies should be considered in
the context of the design and operation
of coronial processes. Given that
coronial litigation follows on from disputes which arise on the bases of
coronial decisions or
findings, it is sensible to consider how both Coroners
Court and superior court processes might be adjusted to better assist all
stakeholders, and especially BFMs. Candidate improvements could include the
establishment of more comprehensive sources of legal
advice for those
contemplating coronial litigation to advise on prospects of success and risks
regarding costs; case management practices;
provision of estimates about case
durations; and the development of ADR mechanisms (including restorative justice
processes at certain
junctures) designed to address the interests of all
stakeholders and potentially prevent or facilitate early resolution of disputes
before they lead to litigation. Such measures could provide valuable information
for applicants before they embark upon coronial
litigation, as well as
alternative and additional avenues for resolution of their disputes, which might
be better suited to meeting
the needs of all involved.
Appendix A – Appeal Rights in Relation to Coronial Decisions and
Findings in Australian State and Territory Jurisdictions
Superior court appeal type or grounds
Who can appeal
Coroners Act 2008
Appeal against decision that the death was not reportable
The person who reported the death
Application against direction for an autopsy
Senior next of kin
79(3)(a)-(b)
Appeal against a refusal to direct an autopsy (once requested)
Senior next of kin or person who originally requested autopsy
Appeal against direction to exhume body
48 hours or further period specified by Court
Senior next of kin or any person who has been informed by a coroner about
decision to direct exhumation
Appeal against refusal to authorise exhumation (once requested)
Any person who originally requested exhumation
Appeal against refusal to hold inquest (once requested)
The person who originally requested inquest
Appeal against the findings of an investigation
A person with sufficient interest in the investigation
Appeal against the findings of an inquest
An interested party
Appeal in the interests of justice: against refusal to reopen an
investigation and set aside some/all of findings (once requested)
Person who originally requested to set aside some/all of findings
Appeal against decision to release the body or terms of that release (once
Person who originally applied to have the body released to them
Appeal on a question of law: that the weight of evidence is such that no
reasonable coroner could have made that finding
Senior next of kin or person with sufficient interest (specified in
Coroners Act 2009
Request that an inquest be held
No apparent limit
The Minister or any other person
Application that an inquest or inquiry be quashed and a new inquest or
inquiry be held (in the interests of justice)
No apparent limit
Minister or any other person
96(4)(b) and 97(1)
Appeal against decision to conduct autopsy (including once requested that
no autopsy be done)
Senior next of kin
Coroners Act 1996
Appeal against refusal (or 3 months no response) to direct an inquest (once
Person who requested the inquest
Appeal against refusal to direct post-mortem (once requested)
2 working days or subject to extension of time by Court
Person who requested post-mortem
Appeal against decision to direct post-mortem (once it has been requested
not to direct post-mortem)
2 working days or subject to extension of time by Court
Senior next of kin
Appeal against decision to direct exhumation (once it has been requested
not to direct exhumation)
2 working days or subject to extension of time by Court
Senior next of kin
Appeal that some or all findings from inquest are void
No apparent limit
Coroners Act 1995
Appeal against decision regarding who is senior next of kin
No apparent limit
Appeal against decision not to direct an inquest
Senior next of kin
Appeal against decision to direct an inquest
Senior next of kin
Appeal against refusal to direct an inquest (once requested)
The person who requested inquest
Appeal against refusal to direct autopsy (once requested)
The person who requested the autopsy
Appeal against decision to direct autopsy (once it has been requested that
no autopsy be performed)
Senior next of kin
Appeal against decision to direct exhumation (once it has been requested
that no exhumation take place)
Senior next of kin
Appeal against refusal to reopen investigation (once requested)
No apparent limit
The person who requested the reopening
Application that all or any of the findings of the inquest are void
No apparent limit
Appeal of Coroner’s order to maintain an article which a person has
claimed ownership over
No apparent limit
Director of Public Prosecutions or person who claims ownership of article
Coroners Act 1997
Appeal against refusal to conduct hearing (once requested)
A person with sufficient interest who made the initial request
Appeal in the interests of justice: application for a hearing to take place
No apparent limit
Appeal in the interests of justice: application for an inquest to take
No apparent limit
Attorney-General or any person
Appeal on basis of public interest or interests of justice: that an inquest
or inquiry be quashed and another inquest or inquiry be
No apparent limit
Attorney-General or anyone else
Coroners Act 2003
Appeal against the findings of the inquest
Attorney-General or a person with sufficient interest
Coroners Act 2003
Appeal against decision about whether death is reportable
No apparent limit
A person dissatisfied with the decision
Appeal against decision about whether death is reportable (once a
submission regarding reportability status has been made)
The person dissatisfied with the decision who originally made a submission
regarding reportability
Appeal against refusal to hold an inquest (once requested)
Person who requested inquest originally
Appeal to set aside findings of inquest (on evidence related grounds)
No apparent limit
A person dissatisfied with findings
Coroners Act 1993
Appeal against decision not to hold inquest
Senior next of kin or any person
Appeal against refusal to direct an autopsy (once requested)
The person who originally requested autopsy
Appeal against decision to direct an autopsy
Senior next of kin
Appeal against decision to direct exhumation
Senior next of kin
Application that some or all of the findings of the inquest are void
No apparent limit
PhD Candidate, Faculty of Law, Monash University.
Associate Professor and Director, Australian Centre
for Justice Innovation, Faculty of Law, Monash University.
This reflects the combined
number of cases finalised (or cases lodged in Tasmania) in the available annual
reports of Coroners Courts
in Australian jurisdictions: see Coroners Court of
Annual Report 2022–2023
(Report, September 2023) 1
Vic Annual Report
’); ACT Coroners Court,
Annual Report
(Report, 20 December 2023) 5; Magistrates Court of Tasmania,
Annual Report 2022–2023
(Report, 20 November 2023) 16; Office of
the State Coroner for Western Australia,
Annual Report 2022–2023
(Report, 30 October 2023) 5; Coroners Court (SA),
2022–23 Annual Report
(Report, 31 October 2023) 9 (‘
SA Annual Report
Coroners Court of Queensland,
2022–23 Annual Report
(Report, 22
November 2023) 7; ‘Coroners Court Overview’,
Coroners Court of
New South Wales
(Web Page, 11 May 2023)
<https://web.archive.org/web/20241016065238/https://coroners.nsw.gov.au/how-the-coroners-court-work/coroners-court-overview.html>.
Coroners Act 1997
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 2009
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 1993
(definition of ‘reportable death’) (‘
Coroners Act 2003
Coroners Act 2003
(definition of
‘reportable death’) (‘
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 1995
(definition of ‘reportable
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 2008
Coroners Act
Coroners Act 1996
(definition of ‘reportable death’) (‘
The types of findings that
coroners can make are prescribed in the legislation: see, eg,
Vic Coroners
(n 2) s 67.
These cases are
‘disputes’ in the sense that applicants actively object to or
disagree with some aspect of the coronial
decision or finding.
Coroners as decision-makers in
the context of judicial review adopt a
position: see
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
Ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR
, 35–6 (Gibbs, Stephen, Mason, Aickin and Wilson JJ)
principle will be further
discussed in Part V(C)(2).
ACT Coroners Act
NSW Coroners Act
NT Coroners Act
Qld Coroners Act
SA Coroners Act
Tas Coroners Act
Coroners Act
WA Coroners Act
There are expanded common law
review pathways beyond the statutory appeal grounds in that there are also
common law obligations
on coroners which may be challenged via judicial review
in appellate courts: see, eg,
Annetts v McCann
(1990) 170 CLR 596
Hecht v Coroners Court of Victoria
Somerville v Coroners Court of Victoria
[2016] VSC 543
Mortimer v West (in his capacity as Deputy
State Coroner)
(2018) 56 VR 608.
See Ian Freckelton,
‘Editorial: Procedural Fairness and the Coroner’
(2018) 26(1)
Journal of Law and Medicine
Vic Coroners Act
(n 2) s 87(1A), which provides that an appeal to the Supreme Court on a
question of law includes an appeal on the grounds that the
finding which is
appealed is against the evidence and the weight of evidence is such that no
reasonable coroner could have made that
Tas Coroners
(n 2) ss 58(2), (7), regarding the reopening of investigations.
Vic Coroners
(n 2) s 83.
For example, an interested
party can apply for judicial review
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure) Rules 2015
(Vic) ord 56
Vic Civil Procedure Rules
of jurisdiction, which is outside of the specific grounds of appeal under the
Vic Coroners Act
Qld Coroners Act
(n 2) s 50.
Vic Coroners
(n 2) s 3(3).
WA Coroners Act
(n 2) s 38(1).
NT Coroners Act
(n 2) s 44A(2).
See Coronial Council of
Coronial Council Appeals Review
(Reference Report No 4,
November 2017) 4 (‘
Council Appeals Review
’); Coronial Council
of Victoria,
Review into Improving the Experience of Bereaved Families with
the Coronial Process
(Final Report, March 2022) 21–5
Improving Experiences of BFMs
’); Select Committee on the
Coronial Jurisdiction in New South Wales, Parliament of New South Wales,
Coronial Jurisdiction in New South Wales
(Report No 1, April 2022)
99–100 [4.116]–[4.120] (‘
Coronial Jurisdiction in
NSW Department of Communities and
Report on the Statutory Review of the Coroners Act 2009
December 2023) 59–62 (‘
NSW DCJ Statutory Review
Appeals Review
(n 17) 72–5. Other examples from the Victorian
reviews include establishing mechanisms to collect and analyse court performance
data and undertaking periodic client feedback surveys: at 85. Other examples
from the NSW reviews include the issuing of warrants
for the exhumation of the
deceased person’s body or remains:
NSW DCJ Statutory Review Report
See Stephanie Dartnall,
Jane Goodman-Delahunty and Judith Gullifer, ‘An Opportunity to Be Heard:
Family Experiences of Coronial
Investigations into Missing People and Views on
Best Practice’ (2019) 10
Frontiers in Psychology
2322:1–17, 5
<https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02322>.
See, eg, Belinda Carpenter,
Gordon Tait and Carol Quadrelli, ‘The Body in Grief: Death Investigations,
Objections to Autopsy,
and the Religious and Cultural “Other”’
(2014) 5(1)
165 <https://doi.org/10.3390/rel5010165>.
Council Appeals
(n 17) 57 [6.10].
See Rabeea Assy,
‘Taking Seriously Affordability, Expedition, and Integrity in
Adjudication’ in Rabeea Assy and Andrew
Higgins (eds),
Principles,
Procedure, and Justice: Essays in Honour of Adrian Zuckerman
University Press, 2020) 179, 179–80
<https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198850410.003.0009>.
(n 17) 67 [6.50].
Ibid 72 [6.72].
Law Reform Committee,
Parliament of Victoria,
Coroners Act 1985
(Final Report No 229, September
See generally
Appeals Review
We elect to use the term
‘bereaved’ on the basis that in every judgment in this study
involving a family member applicant,
the judgment indicated that they are
aggrieved by the death.
Vic Coroners Act
(n 2) Preamble.
The Australian Coronial Law
Library hosted by the Australian Legal Information Institute
(‘AustLII’) advances these
objectives by providing digital access to
coronial findings, case law and other legal materials: ‘Australian
Coronial Law Library’,
<https://www.austlii.edu.au/au/special/coronial/>. Additionally, the
National Coronial Information System is an
online repository of coronial data
from Australia and New Zealand:
National Coronial Information System
Page, 6 December 2024)
<https://www.ncis.org.au>.
Open Courts Act 2013
The Act also addresses reform and consolidation of provisions for
suppression orders relating to information derived from proceedings
to all Victorian courts including the Coroners Court: at s 1(a).
JJ Spigelman, ‘The
Principle of Open Justice: A Comparative Perspective’
[2006] UNSWLawJl 19
(2006) 29(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
One exception is the brief
and generically worded summaries of complaints in
SA Annual Report
The Coroners Court of
Victoria includes a small amount of reporting on appeals to the Supreme Court in
a recent annual report:
Annual Report
(n 1) 44. See also a
discussion relating to a rise in objections to autopsy in the early 2000s: Ian
Freckelton and David Ranson,
Death Investigation and the Coroner’s
(Oxford University Press, 2006) 376.
See Phil Scraton and
Gillian McNaull, Irish Council for Civil Liberties,
Death Investigation,
Coroners’ Inquests and the Rights of the Bereaved
(Research Report,
April 2021) 7.
See Dominic Aitken,
‘Investigating Prison Suicides: The Politics of Independent
(2022) 24(3)
Punishment and Society
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1462474521993002>.
See Mark Ngo et al,
‘Information Needs of Bereaved Families following Fatal Work
Incidents’ (2020) 44(8)
Death Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1080/07481187.2019.1586792>.
See Katy Snell and Steve
Tombs, ‘“How Do You Get Your Voice Heard when No-One Will Let
You?” Victimization at
(2011) 11(3)
Criminology and
Criminal Justice
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1748895811401985>.
See Belinda Carpenter,
Gordon Tait and Steph Jowett, ‘Managing Families’ Expectations in
the Coronial Jurisdiction:
Barriers to Enacting an Ethic of Care’
Journal of Law and Medicine
, 1041; Ian Freckelton
‘Minimising the Counter-therapeutic Effects of Coronial Investigations: In
QUT Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.5204/qutlr.v16i3.696> (‘Counter-therapeutic
Effects of Coronial Investigations’).
See Alon Januszewicz,
‘Appeal of Coroner’s Decision Not to Hold an Inquest Dismissed in
Trotta v The Coroners Court of Victoria and Anor
(2022) 30(3)
Australian Health Law Bulletin
; Freckelton and Ranson (n
34) 376–82, 680–710.
Ibid 57 [6.10].
Ibid 57 [6.11].
Ibid 14 [1.15]. The
Council Appeals Review
(n 17) provides an incomplete list of cases
appealed to the Supreme Court in the timeframes of 1991–2002 (at
G), and 2011–17 (at 91 app F). This was determined by
cross-checking all cases with those in this study (gleaned from AustLII)
demonstrated that some cases appearing on AustLII were not referred to in either
of the lists in the respective appendices.
Appeals Review
Statutory Review Report
Coronial Jurisdiction in NSW
Department of Justice (WA),
Statutory Review of the
Coroners Act 1996
(Final Report, July 2021).
Supreme Court of Queensland
judgments available on AustLII commence from 1994.
A small number of cases
were excluded for being outside the scope of the research, namely those that
related to a fire without a
death; involved a coroner other than as a respondent
(eg as amicus curiae); applications for sperm retrieval; and costs disputes.
See generally Mark A Hall
and Ronald F Wright, ‘Systematic Content Analysis of Judicial
(2008) 96(1)
California Law Review
For example, a challenge
regarding reportability status was categorised as ‘inquest, autopsy or
reportability’ for the
purposes of this study. However, the grounds upon
which the appeal was brought may have been related to defective exercise of
or jurisdictional error via an application for judicial review
under order 56 of the
Vic Civil Procedure Rules
Betty R Kirkwood and
Jonathan AC Sterne,
Essential Medical Statistics
(Blackwell Publishing,
ed, 2003) 159 (emphasis omitted).
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
National, State and Territory Population
(Catalogue No
3101.0, September 2023). The increase in cases over time is not proportionate to
the population increase in Victoria
versus other states: for the 2003–22
period, Victoria’s population increase rate was behind three other
states/territories
and for the period 2013–22, it had the second highest
population increase compared with other states/territories.
See, eg, Gregory Mitchell,
‘Why Law and Economics’ Perfect Rationality Should Not Be Traded for
Behavioral Law and Economics’
Equal Incompetence’
(2002) 91(1)
Georgetown Law Journal
(n 17) 76 [7.2] notes the common motivations of litigants in coronial
disputes, and these can be categorised as different to motivations
commonly and
historically associated with litigation – such as traditional pecuniary
interests. For a discussion about the
complexities regarding litigant
motivations, see generally John Griffiths, ‘The General Theory of
Litigation: A First Step’
(1983) 5(2)
Zeitschrift für
Rechtssoziologie, Heft
The Coroners Court of
Victoria website provides a list of support services for bereaved families,
including links to legal services:
see ‘Supports and Resources’,
Coroners Court of Victoria
<https://coronerscourt.vic.gov.au/families/supports-and-resources>.
Pascoe Pleasence and Nigel
J Balmer, ‘Justice and the Capability to Function in Society’ (2019)
<https://doi.org/10.1162/daed_a_00547>.
Vic Coroners Act
(n 2) for grounds of appeal to the Supreme Court, for example: at ss 83(2)
(findings of inquest), 84(1) (refusal to reopen an investigation),
(release of body), 87(1A) (appeal against finding on a question of law). See
Tas Coroners Act
(n 2) for grounds of appeal to the Supreme Court,
for example: at ss 3B (specifying senior next of kin), 26(2) (decision not to
an inquest), 38(3) (autopsy directed against senior next of kin’s
objections), 58(7) (Chief Magistrate’s refusal to reopen
investigation).
See app A of this article for a comprehensive list of possible appeals across
all Australian jurisdictions.
On the plain language
legislative drafting movement: see Jeffrey Barnes, ‘The Continuing Debate
Legislation: A Law Reform Conundrum’
(2006) 27(2)
Statute Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.1093/slr/hml004>; Jeffrey Barnes, ‘When
“Plain Language” Legislation is Ambiguous: Sources
of Doubt and
Lessons for the Plain Language Movement’
[2010] MelbULawRw 24
(2010) 34(3)
University Law Review
Freckelton and Ranson (n
Parliamentary Debates
Legislative Assembly, 21 June 2018, 2147 (Martin Pakula,
Attorney-General).
Vic Coroners Act
2) s 84(2).
Ibid s 76A.
Ibid s 87(1A). It should be
noted that this provision relates only to appeals in relation to a
, not to all coronial
present study encompasses. Appeals in relation to findings are a subset of the
judgments analysed, but they make up a significant
proportion of the claim types
(66%) for Victorian cases.
See Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 21 June 2018, 2147 (Martin
Pakula, Attorney-General).
See Ronald L Cohen,
‘Procedural Justice and Participation’ (1985) 38(7)
643, 645 <https://doi.org/10.1177/001872678503800703>.
Aitken (n 36) 488.
David M Studdert et al,
‘Duration of Death Investigations That Proceed to Inquest in
Australia’ (2016) 22(5)
Injury Prevention
Federation of Community
Legal Centres (Victoria), ‘Saving Lives by Joining Up Justice: Why
Australia Needs Coronial Reform
and How to Achieve It’ (Issues Paper,
March 2013) 19 (‘Saving Lives’).
Law Reform Commission of
Western Australia,
Review of Coronial Practice in Western Australia
(Discussion Paper No 100, June 2011) 82, 87, 118.
NSW Coroners
(n 2) s 78(2)(b).
For example, in
(n 7), the mother of the deceased brought the appeal 26 years
after the coronial finding seeking to change a finding that suggested
had contributed to the death of his sister when he was a child.
In Tasmania, Australian
Capital Territory, Western Australia and Northern Territory there is no time
limit relating to appeals to
reopen investigations.
See, eg, Amy Bainbridge,
‘Family of Volkswagen Driver Melissa Ryan Killed in Melbourne Freeway
Crash Continues Fight for Justice’,
(online, 10 February
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-02-10/family-of-volkswagen-crash-victim-continues-fight-for-justice/7155070>.
See Margaret Allars,
‘Reputation, Power and Fairness: A Review of the Impact of Judicial Review
upon Investigative Tribunals’
[1996] FedLawRw 9
(1996) 24(2)
Federal Law Review
242 <https://doi.org/10.1177/0067205X9602400202>. See also
(n 5) 35–6 (Gibbs, Stephen,
Mason, Aickin and Wilson JJ);
Comptroller-General of Customs v Disciplinary
Appeal Committee
(1992) 35 FCR 466, 473 (Gummow J), where the Disciplinary
Appeal Committee abided by the rule in
Dan Starr, ‘Federal
Court Judgments’
(2022) 49(6)
(n 17) 69 [6.59].
Ibid 74 [6.81].
Ibid 62 [6.30].
[2018] VSC 169.
Ibid [120] (Niall JA).
Spear v Hallenstein
[2018] VSC 207
, [15] (Niall JA).
Freckelton and Ranson (n
Trotta v Coroners Court
of Victoria
[2022] VSC 70
, [110] (Matthews AsJ); Januszewicz (n 40) 58.
For example, the NSW
Coronial Inquest Unit is provided as a service of Legal Aid NSW to provide free
legal advice to families, and
in Queensland, the Caxton Legal Centre and
Townsville Community Legal Service operate the Queensland Coronial Assistance
Legal Service
which provides families with advice and in some circumstances,
representation:
Appeals Review
[5.10]–[5.11].
In Victoria, the Coronial
Council recommended the creation of a Coronial Legal Advice Service through
Victoria Legal Aid, which
would provide advice to families about both the
original coronial investigation and Supreme Court appeals, including the
of indications regarding the likelihood for success in pursuing this
superior court legal action: ibid 74 [6.82].
Improving Experiences of
(n 17) app B s 7.4.
Jennifer A Leitch,
‘Having a Say: “Access to Justice” as Democratic
Participation’ (2015) 4(1)
UCL Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
See Cohen (n 72) 650.
Freckelton, ‘Counter-therapeutic Effects of
Coronial Investigations’ (n 39) 6.
Improving Experiences of
(n 17) 82 [7.25].
Michael S King,
‘Restorative Justice, Therapeutic Jurisprudence and the Rise of
Emotionally Intelligent Justice’
[2008] MelbULawRw 34
(2008) 32(3)
Melbourne University Law
The Coronial Council
refers to the potential for this process to contain an apology:
Appeals Review
(n 17) 81 [7.22].
Local Court of New South
Practice Note: State Coroner’s Protocol: Supplementary
Arrangements Applicable to Section 23 Deaths Involving First Nations
, 9 March 2022, 5–6 paras 10.1–10.8 (‘
Coroners Protocol
’); Coroners Court of Victoria,
Practice Direction
No 6 of 2020:
Indigenous Deaths in Custody
, 22 September 2020, para
5.2. In addition, in NSW, consultation initiatives such as healing circles,
facilitated by Impact Policy,
aim to ensure First Nations families are provided
with information they require that may not be included in the coronial inquest
process: see ‘Healing Circles in the Coroners Court’,
(Web Page) <https://www.impactpolicyau.com/healingcircle>.
State Coroners
(n 101) [10.2(b)].
Ibid [10.2(d)].
Hugh Dillon and Marie
Hadley discuss a NSW case where the father of the deceased appealed in the
Supreme Court of NSW after the
partner of the deceased objected to an autopsy,
noting that ‘[t]he case was resolved by compromise after two weeks’.
Whilst it isn’t clear which method of dispute resolution was utilised
here, ‘compromise’ suggests that the father
and partner of the
deceased were able to somehow negotiate between them, outside of, alongside or
within the process of superior
court review: see Hugh Dillon and Marie Hadley,
The Australasian Coroner’s Manual
(Federation Press, 2015) 68.
Allars (n 81) 242.
This limitation and
others are discussed in Varda Bondy et al, ‘Mediation and Judicial Review:
An Empirical Research Study’
(Research Paper, The Public Law Project, June
2009) 30. See also Varda Bondy, ‘Who Needs ADR?’
(2004) 9(4)
Judicial Review
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10854681.2004.11427327>, which discusses concerns
surrounding the use of mediation in cases involving
public law challenges.
Coroners Court of Victoria
[2024] VSC 304
, in which the applicant was a
medical practitioner appealing against the coroner’s adverse finding and
the family intervened
as a respondent in defence of the coroner’s finding.
JJ Spigelman,
‘Judicial Mediation in Australia’ (2011) 10(3)
Judicial Review:
Selected Conference Papers
Tania Sourdin and Naomi
Burstyner, ‘Cost and Time Hurdles in Civil Litigation: Exploring the
Impact of Pre-action Requirements’
(2013) 2(2)
Journal of Civil
Litigation and Practice
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2721423>.
See Isabel Roper,
‘Mediation: Good Faith, Bad Faith’
(2015) 40(1)
Alternative Law
, 50 <https://doi.org/10.1177/1037969X1504000112>;
Procedure Act 2010
(definition of ‘overarching
purpose’), 7.
Glen Cranwell,
‘Therapeutic Jurisprudence and Mediation: Natural Partners in Dispute
Resolution’
(2023) 32(3)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
Lola Akin Ojelabi and
Tania Sourdin, ‘Using a Values-Based Approach in Mediation’
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2721546>.
An informal survey of
court websites and communication was conducted by Naomi Burstyner on 23 November
2023 with the registries
of each state and territory indicates that Western
Australia is the only jurisdiction with an established court-based mediation
in these cases: see Supreme Court of Western Australia,
Consolidated
Practice Directions
, 14 February 2025, para 4.2.1. The Supreme Court of
Tasmania offers referral to mediation as part of the standard procedures in
disputes, subject to the urgency of the matter.
Bondy et al (n 106)
Appeals Review
See ibid 14 [1.15]. The
provides an incomplete list of cases appealed to the Supreme Court
of Victoria in the timeframes of 1991–2002 (at 92–3
app G), and
2011–17 (at 91 app F). This was determined by cross-checking all cases
with those in the study (gleaned from AustLII)
which demonstrated that some
cases appearing on AustLII were not referred to in these lists.
Hall and Wright (n 50)
See, eg, George
Newhouse, Daniel Ghezelbash and Alison Whittaker, ‘The Experience of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Participants in Australia’s Coronial
Inquest System: Reflections from the Front Line’ (2020) 9(4)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
Karen A Jordan,
‘Empirical Studies of Judicial Decisions Serve an Important Role in the
Cumulative Process of Policy Making:
Comments on a Paper by Professor William
(1998) 31(1)
Indiana Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.18060/3280>; Hall and Wright (n 50) 83.
For example, there is a
possibility that coronial litigation proceedings may, in some circumstances, be
used to distil evidence
which could be used to test the viability of civil
litigation. Our study did not encounter evidence of this in the judgments
Importantly, the motivations of parties engaging in coronial
litigation fall outside the scope of our research, which is centred
judgments as a data source. This consideration does not affect the study’s
findings or conclusions.
Philip Chung, Andrew
Mowbray and Graham Greenleaf, ‘Making Coronial Law Accessible: The
Australian Coronial Law Library’
(Research Paper No 23, UNSW Law and
Justice Research Series, 18 July 2023) 1
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4514700>, quoting
former NSW Deputy Coroner
Hugh Dillon, from his correspondence with the authors, Chung, Mowbray and
Lives’ (n 75) 17.
See generally
Freckelton, ‘Counter-therapeutic Effects of Coronial Investigations’
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (599 KB)
PDF format (561 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter