URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2009/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:41:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stephenson, M; Morse, B; Robertson, L; --- "International and comparative indigenous rights via videoconferencing" [2009] UMonashLRS 11
INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE INDIGENOUS RIGHTS
VIDEOCONFERENCING
MARGARET STEPHENSON,* BRADFORD MORSE,** LINDSAY ROBERTSON,***
MELISSA CASTAN,•
DAVID YARROW•• AND
THOMPSON•••
I INTRODUCTION
The authors are a team of legal academics who deliver an internationally
comparative Indigenous rights course to students in Canada,
the United States,
Aotearoa/New Zealand and Australia simultaneously via videoconferencing
technology. The international universities
involved include: University of
Ottawa, University of Saskatchewan, University of Oklahoma, University of
Auckland, Monash University
and the University of Queensland. Situated in six
sites in different parts of the globe and in various time zones, teaching
demonstrates the commonality of Indigenous issues. The four countries
involved in the course share a similar history of British colonisation
similar legacy of English common law, yet each country has, in relation to its
Indigenous peoples, developed differently from
that same origin. The course not
only explores similarities and differences in the experiences of the four
challenges both students and teachers to understand why
those differences have occurred. This article introduces and reviews the
experience of videoconference teaching in a comparative Indigenous law course.
There are two significant aspects to this course on
which this article will
focus. The first is a review of the dynamics and logistics of teaching and
delivering a course by way of
videoconferencing to a number of global sites. The
second is an analysis of the advantages of an internationally comparative
the article is to enable other law teachers to consider the suitability of
videoconferencing courses for international
and comparative areas of study, and
to learn from the authors' experiences of the benefits and difficulties involved
in this teaching
II TEACHING AND DELIVERY OF AN INTERNATIONALLY COMPARATIVE
INDIGENOUS VIDEO-LINK COURSE
The videoconferencing course comprises 10 weekly two-hour seminars, with
lecturers presenting material via high-definition video that
is projected onto
large screens, and facilitating discussion by flicking amongst the six
participating universities as needed. In
addition to the videoconferencing
teaching times, each lecturer has some teaching time with their local
The changeover
from expensive ISDN lines to Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) has allowed a
growing number of universities to become
involved since the course
A The Origins and Development of the Course
The course taught today grew from a mutual desire of Professor Bradford Morse
(University of Ottawa) and Professor Lindsay Robertson
(University of Oklahoma
College of Law), to teach an Aboriginal law subject together involving Canadian
and United States
Each had taught
a purely domestic law course on Aboriginal legal issues for many years and
thought it would be both fun and challenging
for them to try a comparative
version. They also thought it would be exciting for students to experience a
team-teaching and comparative
law environment. This comparative Canadian and
American Indigenous course was taught for the first time in
Consideration
was given to developing an online course but this was rejected in favour of
videoconferencing as a more interactive
method of involving student
participation. Video-link conferencing was chosen as the mode of delivery
because this facility was available
at both universities, although it had been
primarily developed to link classes in satellite campuses. The course grew
incorporate four jurisdictions, with Monash
the team in 2003 and Victoria University of
the following year. The University of
Queensland,
University of
University of
Saskatchewan
joined in 2006. The University of Waikato will be joining in 2010.
B Logistics and Dynamics of Teaching an International
Video-Link Indigenous Course
When the comparative Canadian and American course first started, the
universities were using a relatively primitive form of videoconferencing
today's standards). The latest VolP system has much higher quality and enables
transmission of PowerPoint (PPT) and videos, in
addition to the live video-feed
from the six classrooms. It is essential for each site to have the appropriate
technology installed
in the teaching room, and good technical backup is vital in
case of technological glitches. Video-linkages are managed through the
university (generally, the University of Ottawa). Once the equipment in the
classroom is activated, the University of Ottawa
dials in (similar to making a
phone call) and all six classes are connected to the videoconference link.
Today, commencing a videoconference
session is as simple as an academic
instructor activating the video equipment at the lectern desk and the host
university dialling
in to that classroom.
The logistics of such a course are less simple. Scheduling classes across an
18-hour difference in time zones (over a two-day period),
which is then
compounded by the impact of daylight saving time changes in some jurisdictions,
requires considerable adaptability
and creativity. These international classes
are live (as opposed to pre-recorded) and must occur simultaneously. North
American classes
are scheduled for the early evening while Australian and New
Zealand classes are scheduled for morning sessions on the next day.
Accommodating differences in the various universities' academic calendars is
also a challenge as most North American universities
commence a teaching
semester in early January while Australian and New Zealand universities commence
their teaching semester in late
February. Accordingly, a compromise commencement
for the videoconferencing class is in early February.
Various technical challenges are faced by the teachers of live video-link
classes. For example, in most classrooms, the cameras automatically
anyone speaking or any loud sounds. This means that the microphones should be
activated only in the room where a person
is designated as speaker so as to
avoid cameras flicking to any unnecessary noise. Forgetting to mute a microphone
can produce distracting
consequences. (However, at the less technologically
advanced sites, the instructor is required to focus cameras and mute
microphones,
which results in another kind of distraction/challenge.) Also, it
is important to remember that every site will always be visible
to the other
sites, although not in the main frame. The video screen will focus on the
speaker; however, all sites remain visible
to the others because of a series of
small boxes which surround the main picture and display each non-speaking site:
it is referred
to as continuous presence, or 'Brady Bunch', mode. Additionally,
while the technology is generally reliable, when organising for
class it is
important to factor in the possibility of technical failure or losing the
connection. If one site loses the connection
it is important to continue the
flow of the class while waiting for those who have dropped out to reconnect. It
is imperative always
to have a contingency plan for class-time in the event of a
lost connection.
Coordinating team-teaching in different jurisdictions on different continents
requires significant organisation and structure. As
is the case in any course, a
program of teaching is developed well in advance. The international comparative
Indigenous law program
allows each of the four jurisdictions to present one two
hour videoconference class exclusively on Indigenous issues in that jurisdiction
to afford students an introductory overview. The remaining six two-hour
videoconferencing classes address a series of topics on particular
issues in depth. These remaining teaching sessions usually allow for equal time
to be given to each of the four jurisdictions
to focus on their country's
perspective as well as to compare the experience on that issue amongst all four
nations. Due to the number
of jurisdictions and differing instructors, the order
of presentation, the timing of presentations and the material to be covered
agreed to in advance of the teaching session. Leadership of the seminars rotates
around all instructors. Student participation
is not only encouraged but is
mandatory in certain sessions.
C Website for Course Materials and Student
Interaction
The authors have found that a website supporting the course and providing a
central reference point for class materials and communications
is essential. The
course has a password protected website at the University of Ottawa (on
Blackboard Vista, which replaced WebCT
in 2009). This website is available to
all students registered in the specific course offered by their home university.
The website
contains all assigned readings so that students do not have to
purchase any materials, nor are there any logistical challenges in
producing and
distributing printed material amongst the law schools. This website also
includes significant background materials
(both of a published and unpublished
nature), relevant legislation, video clips, newspaper articles, and web-links.
Past student
papers are accessible on the website and these provide not only
examples for students to obtain a sense of the level expected, but
also serve as
highly valuable reference documents in their own right for current students
undertaking research. Students' research
papers complement the growing body of
comparative Indigenous research.
The website
enables new documents, such as the latest media articles or a last minute PPT
presentation, to be loaded at any time
– including during the class itself
– and be accessed immediately in all six sites.
In addition to the chat group and bulletin board functions on the main course
website, a 'Google group site' has been created on a
separate password protected
website, through the University of Ottawa, to encourage increased student
interaction and also to provide
an opportunity for students to contribute
additional information. This latter site allows all participants in the course
the opportunity
to suggest interesting websites or to post files they would like
to share. For example, it allows students to create an individual
biographical
page with something meaningful in the context of the course. Students may also,
as part of a 'regional team', post materials
that inform about their region, the
issues affecting Indigenous peoples and something of the history behind these
issues. The 'Google
group site' further enables both academic and student
participants to make announcements and to comment on existing web pages, thus
affording an opportunity for everyone to participate in activities that provide
some context for the class.
D Advantages for Students
Teaching international and comparative Indigenous rights through a multi-site
videoconferencing medium provides several advantages
for students. First, a
video-link course offers students a unique method of teaching and a very
different learning experience. One
of the major advantages of a videoconference
course is that it affords students the opportunity for interactive learning.
are able to engage with all the instructors conducting the sessions and
also with other students, both within their classrooms and
in the other
international classrooms. Importantly, students are encouraged to participate
and to discuss relevant matters with the
instructors in all jurisdictions during
class time. Real-time interaction between learners and instructors is regarded
as critical
to the success of any distance education model of
sophisticated videoconferencing facilities (at Ottawa and Oklahoma) allow
individual students direct access to a microphone
controller on the student
desktop, while in other classrooms the instructors control the muting and
activation of the microphone.
The interactive component of videoconference
teaching, the authors believe, makes it a preferable alternative to online
forms of distance education where students work from a book or on a
computer with no face-to-face contact with lecturers or other
students in the course described in this article have the opportunity of posting
materials (eg, recent media coverage of relevant
topics) on the web pages for
comment by all participants.
Secondly, students have the opportunity to interact directly with students
who are taking the course in other countries. Perhaps most
importantly,
videoconferencing facilitates communication among students at a
course described in this article certainly facilitates the linking of students
internationally. It does this in a number of ways:
by encouraging student
discussion of aspects of the course on the video-link during class time; by
listing students' areas of Indigenous
interest on the course's Google website;
and by encouraging students to collaborate and support each other in
individually writing
a comparative law paper. Students are thus 'matched'
whenever possible based on the common interests in their comparative research
papers. This creates an interactive international learning environment. Students
frequently initiate informal chats with one another
across the sites during the
'breaks' and these discussions have been known to continue informally through
personal email accounts,
openly through the course website visible to all
students and teachers, and in the 'chat rooms' on the websites. The 'chat rooms'
are, at designated times, monitored by a former student paid as a tutor by a
grant from the University of Ottawa. (By way of anecdote
students are
asked to introduce themselves and state their areas of interest in the first
class in the course. In the teaching 'break',
the students will usually rush to
the microphones and search other jurisdictions for students who share their
research interests
or just to talk to other law students across the borders.)
The literature supports the view that video-conferencing technology results
significant communication in the classroom between teachers and students, and
between students and other
Thirdly, students have the benefit of the combined international expertise of
their instructors. Students are not only learning about
Indigenous issues in the
different jurisdictions
they are also being taught by an expert, with
knowledge of the latest developments, in each jurisdiction. All students have
the opportunity
to contact (either by email or through the web discussion pages)
all members of the teaching team. As students are required (or encouraged)
write comparative research papers, they frequently avail themselves of these
opportunities to make contact with the instructors
in other countries (and all
instructors in the course can attest to this).
Fourthly, and importantly, this comparative and international
videoconferencing course broadens students' perspectives on how domestic
these four jurisdictions have impacted upon Indigenous peoples and how
international law in this field is rapidly changing.
This is evidenced in the
student essays and research
Fifthly, the authors' experience of videoconferencing teaching is that it
delivers the desired educational outcomes of learning law
for students; for
example, not merely teaching legal rules but rather fostering a broader
understanding of society, teaching students
to be independent learners and to
think critically.
Achieving such educational outcomes is possible because, in videoconference
teaching, students participate in the learning process,
rather than simply
learning from a teaching process
an approach that is more passive and
receptive, such as the traditional 'correspondence' methods of distance
suggests that distance learning can deliver at least similar levels of quality
in learning as some on-campus modes of
Furthermore, Bates cites studies which have concluded that videoconferencing
improved the quality of communication, increased satisfaction
with the course
and student motivation and that teaching via videoconferencing was equally as
good as teaching
face-to-face.
the international comparative Indigenous studies course, students benefit from
all of the above as the participating teachers
interact with their own students
and, through the videoconferencing, with the other international students.
Advantages for Teachers
Teaching in an international and comparative Indigenous law course by
videoconferencing offers a number of benefits for the teachers
as well as for
the students. First, as the instructors in this course have shared their
individual expertise in Indigenous legal
issues in their particular
situations that exist in the other
countries. Secondly, team-teaching keeps the
content current and topical. For example, when in 2008 the Australian Prime
made his apology to members of the Stolen Generations, the video and
text of the Australian apology were immediately available for
students (on the
Ottawa website). Discussions were then able to take place in the very next
team-teaching in an internationally comparative course creates a collegial
network for feedback on each instructor's comparative
research in Indigenous
issues and improves the potential for future collaborative research by team
members. Finally, team-teaching
via a video-link course minimises any hiccups
with technical failures, as any instructor, with the base of knowledge we have
in relation to all jurisdictions, can step in to teach the remaining
sites if one site drops out. Videoconferencing 'teaching wisdom'
suggests that
where teaching-team members are from distant geographical locations, they should
make every effort to meet face-to-face
to interact on occasions other than on
the video screen.
The team had the opportunity to do this through the extraordinary efforts of
Melissa Castan, who obtained a grant to co-host (University
of Hawai'i) an
International Indigenous
Conference,
well as through occasional sabbatical (special studies program) visits amongst
colleagues. The authors' experiences have been
that meeting face-to-face with
teaching colleagues at conferences and visiting the various sites where the
classes are conducted
have proved to be valuable in creating collegial
relationships and are to be recommended for those thinking to establish such a
F Student Feedback on the Course
The course's learning objectives are, in general terms, to broaden students'
outlooks in considering a global perspective on Indigenous
laws and to encourage
students to develop an understanding of the context in which developments in
Indigenous rights jurisprudence
have occurred. More specifically, the objectives
To examine the
comparative experiences offered by the four nations involved (Canada, United
States, Australia and New Zealand) in
their relationships with their Indigenous
To critically
evaluate and assess the performance of institutions and policies in the
different jurisdictions.
To consider
developments in relation to Indigenous peoples in the international law arena,
particularly the impact of the adoption
by the United Nations General Assembly
of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
To raise an
awareness of Indigenous legal issues both at home as well as in overseas
understanding.
To provide the
legal framework to allow a more detailed development of individual student
research interests in relation to comparative
Indigenous issues.
To promote the
importance generally of pursuing a comparative approach to any legal
Student feedback supports the view that the course meets
these objectives.
Student responses, as reflected in student surveys, have been consistently
positive about the videoconferencing experience and students
report that they
enjoy this course. Student surveys undertaken at the various universities
reflect student satisfaction with both
the course itself and the mode of
instruction.
Responses include the following comments, as representative of the international
cohort of students:
'This was one of
the best courses I've done for a long time: revolutionary to say the
videoconference course. It was great to be connected to students on the other
side of the world. It was great to be taught
by instructors, in each
interesting to get a more global perspective on Indigenous legal issues. The
course has definitely widened my interest in
this area of the law.'
'The opportunity
to videoconference with universities abroad and international aspects was
excellent, and unlike any learning format
I had ever participated in. The
comparative perspective also greatly enhanced my understanding of the Australian
native title component
and improved my analytical skills. I hope this innovative
format continues and is expanded to other courses.'
And from an
international exchange student in Australia: 'I would like to express my thanks
and appreciation. As a United States student
studying abroad, I was initially
apprehensive about law school in Australia. However, your class enabled me to
feel very comfortable
in the Australian legal education system. I learned
invaluable lessons about the role of the Indigenous peoples within the
legal system and Australian culture as a whole. I am deeply
appreciative of the exposure to the teachings of the videoconference
professors,
the understanding of native title, and lessons regarding Indigenous cultures in
Canada, New Zealand, and the United States
that I learned in your class. Thank
you for a wonderful semester.'
III WHY AN INTERNATIONALLY COMPARATIVE INDIGENOUS
LAW COURSE IS RELEVANT
Why a Comparative Course?
The international comparative Indigenous law course seeks to provide a
comparative and critical study of Indigenous laws and rights
jurisprudence in
four countries (Canada, United States, Aotearoa/ New Zealand and Australia) and
also to consider an international
perspective on Indigenous rights. A
comparative approach to the study of Indigenous rights is justifiable for a
number of reasons,
many of which have been noted by
general terms, comparative studies broaden our knowledge of what transpires in
other places, thus avoiding ethnocentrism. Undertaking
comparative studies
allows for an assessment of the performance of policies and institutions in the
different jurisdictions and a
determination of factors that contribute to the
success or failure of such institutions and policies. In light of these
comparisons,
we can each re-examine our own nation's context. A comparative
study allows for the identification of common themes in the different
themes. Further, such a study can facilitate the identification
of the variables
and other contextual factors that produce different developments in the
respective jurisdictions. For example, what
differences do treaties make? Why
does Australia not have Indigenous treaties despite so many historical
commonalities with the other countries and a shared common
law system? What is
the impact on Indigenous policies arising from the different constitutional
frameworks of each country? How does
federalism affect Indigenous affairs? A
comparative study can also provide an understanding of the context for
developments in the
different jurisdictions that assists in the analysis of
policy, in suggesting potential reform measures, and in anticipating future
developments and interpretations of the
Undertaking a comparative study of Aboriginal rights jurisprudence reveals a
shared foundation in early international policies. It
further demonstrates that
domestic legal principles in each of the four jurisdictions have not occurred in
isolation but against
a background of global influence and
comprehend and understand contemporary laws regarding Indigenous rights today
requires an understanding of both their historical
background and the
development of Indigenous rights jurisprudence in the international arena.
Imperial powers sought justification
for the colonisation of foreign lands, and
international legal policies and principles were invoked to justify the
colonisation of
North America, Aotearoa/New Zealand and
Variations of these principles were known as 'Doctrines of Discovery, Continuity
and Settlement'. Contemporary jurisprudence concerning
the recognition of
Indigenous land rights has evolved from these early international law doctrines
and from the ideology of settlement
recent decades, courts in the United States, Canada, Aotearoa/New Zealand and
Australia have continued to review questions
regarding colonisation, discovery
and settlement, and Aboriginal land
jurisprudence of Indigenous rights had its origins in the United States,
commencing with a trilogy of Supreme Court decisions
by Chief Justice Marshall
in the 1820s and 30s involving determinations of Indian title and Native
American tribal
sovereignty.
Indigenous jurisprudence emanating from the early United States decisions has
provided a basis for the formulation of substantial
aspects of Indigenous land
tenure doctrines in all four jurisdictions and, as Young argues, this has
resulted in the internationalisation
of Indigenous land
fundamental principles have been referred to by Canadian courts in the
development of Aboriginal title and by the Aotearoa/
New Zealand courts in
relation to Maori
The United States, Canadian and New Zealand Indigenous jurisprudence has
certainly influenced the development of native title law
although, more recently, Australian courts have become less inclined to refer to
overseas doctrine and more dismissive of the comparative
jurisprudence.
Contemporary courts in Canada and Aotearoa/New Zealand have referred to the
Australian jurisprudence on native
interaction among the members of the highest courts in each of these nations in
recent years may further nurture this proclivity.
An additional important reason to adopt an international and comparative
approach to Indigenous issues is that the
Declaration on
the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples
was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in
September 2007.
With the adoption of the Declaration, it is likely that the standards it
enunciates as universally accepted ones will influence
Indigenous rights
worldwide and will ultimately lead to the further internationalisation of such
B Commonalities and Differences in the Four Comparative
All four jurisdictions possess many basic commonalities which provide a
platform for comparisons. For example, all countries share
similar histories of
colonisation and
settlement.
Identifying significant differences of comparative relevance in the various
of the challenges of
comparative analyses include understanding which differences are of real
importance and what triggers those
distinctions; assessing the effect that these
differences have on the development of divergent Indigenous laws and policies;
the potential impact that these differences may have on future developments.
For example, Indigenous peoples in Canada (First Nations,
Inuit and Métis
peoples), Australia (Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders) and in the
United States (Native Americans)
all exhibit multiple languages, cultures and
political styles; but in Aotearoa/New Zealand, the Maori are one people
(although they
comprise distinct tribal groupings or
the differences among the Indigenous peoples themselves (in relation to the
development of state law and policy) are
less significant than their
similarities, such as their relationships with their traditional lands, their
oral histories and their
small-scale social
Understanding the different constitutional contexts of all jurisdictions is
also essential in a comparative analysis of Indigenous
Against this appreciation of key commonalities and differences in the
comparative countries, a 'thematic' review of comparative Indigenous
jurisprudence can then be undertaken. How this might occur is discussed
C Themes and Methodology of Comparisons
In any comparative study, Havemann suggests that choosing 'units of
comparison and contrast' that are operationally or broadly equivalent
methodology adopted in the videoconferencing course was to allocate a two-hour
session to each jurisdiction, by way of introduction,
early in the course to
provide some background and general context for later comparisons and
discussion. Adopting this methodology
restricts the number of thematic 'units of
comparison and contrast' that can be covered directly in depth in the 10-week
videoconferencing
part of the course; however, the authors have found that the
'introduction' given for each jurisdiction at the beginning of the course
worked well and, for the most part, the introductions incorporate aspects of the
thematic issues.
The general overview 'introduction' for each nation is usually presented
through a comparative lens with frequent references to the
other countries, and
especially those already analysed in detail in prior sessions. Most students
undertaking this course have some
familiarity with the legal aspects of
Indigenous peoples' rights in their own jurisdiction, so this part is generally
for the benefit
of international students. It also serves as an important
refresher for the students from that country, and places their existing
knowledge in a comparative context. For example, the introductory sessions on
Indigenous law in the United States and Canada both
include discussion
powers issues,
tribal or Indigenous jurisdiction, treaty making, economic development.
Introduction to Indigenous law in Australia includes:
History/demography,
settlement doctrine/dispossession, lack of treaty making, constitutional powers,
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth), native title and statutory
title/land holdings.
Introduction to Indigenous law in Aotearoa/New Zealand includes
Sovereignty, the
Treaty of Waitangi,
European settlement, dispossession and
subjugation.
These broad headings allow for a general discussion of the
historical development of Indigenous rights in the various jurisdictions.
also enable the incorporation of the constitutional context of each jurisdiction
as well as other issues such as criminal justice
issues involving Indigenous
peoples, the trust/fiduciary obligations owed by the settler society to
Indigenous peoples, and specific
issues such as residential schools in Canada
and Stolen Generations in Australia. Furthermore, they allow for the
incorporation of
current developments in relation to Indigenous issues in each
Territory in Australia and the 2008 apologies from the Australian and Canadian
Prime Ministers.
In selecting topics as 'units of comparison' for the balance of the teaching
time in the course described here, the authors have attempted
to identify broad
areas of strong interest in all four countries and then to compare these issues
across the jurisdictions. The authors'
approach to selecting units of comparison
is flexible and the selection is reviewed regularly and incorporates feedback
from students
regarding subjects of particular interest. Themes for comparison
and contrast are continually under consideration as potential areas
for in-depth
study for future years. This focus when discussing these topics allows for the
introduction of Indigenous issues of
currency, the latest court decisions,
legislation or government initiatives as well as media reports from any of the
countries, including
events arising on the day the common class is conducted. A
selection of units of comparison on a thematic basis includes the following:
The acquisition
of sovereignty by colonial powers under the Doctrines of Discovery, Continuity,
Settlement, Conquest and Cession and
the recognition (including the very late
recognition in Australia) of Indigenous land rights.
An analysis of
Aboriginal title/Indian title/Native title/Maori title
in terms of the
source of title that is recognised by the common law (occupation of land or laws
and customs), elements of required
proof, the key content of title,
susceptibility to extinguishment, and also compensation for the loss of
traditional lands.
The recognition
of Indigenous customary law. How Indigenous customary laws are recognised (or
not) in the different jurisdictions
could be considered here, as their
experiences differ and continue to
self-determination and residual sovereignty. In the United States, Indian tribes
retain inherent powers of self governance
that are circumscribed with the status
of 'domestic dependent
Canada and Australia, no formal recognition of Indigenous sovereignty has been
accorded by the courts; however, Indigenous governance
rights can be found in
many Canadian treaties and are implied in several leading cases. Sovereign
rights of the Maori of Aotearoa/New
Zealand are to be found in the
Treaty rights
(including historical treaties in North America and the
Treaty of Waitangi
in Aotearoa/New Zealand) and modem treaties and Indigenous agreements
(particularly in Canada, Aotearoa/New Zealand and Australia).
Self-governance
and jurisdiction.
government-Indigenous relationships.
Fiduciary duties
in Canada and Aotearoa/New Zealand, and the trust doctrine in the United States,
contrasted with the absence of any
recognition of fiduciary or trust obligations
in Australia.
intellectual property and cultural heritage.
Residential
schools in Canada, Native American boarding school in the United States, Church
Schools in Aotearoa/New Zealand and Stolen
Generations in Australia.
development and natural resources on Indigenous lands.
Criminal law and
Indigenous peoples.
The relationship
between individual human rights and collective Indigenous rights.
International
law and Indigenous peoples, including the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples as well as
other international developments and how
the respective countries have responded to these developments.
IV CONCLUSION
A comparative international study of Indigenous rights enables both the
identification of the basic consistencies in the substantive
legal principles
and the identification of differences in interpretations and divergences in the
development of the law and national
government policy in the four jurisdictions.
Potentially the comparative approach allows us to learn about the effects and
the impacts
of policy and direction as well as about errors and successes in
other jurisdictions. Further this approach enables us to avoid mistakes
the other jurisdictions and also to consider adapting positive experiences from
abroad as potential precedents to pursue
in our own jurisdiction. Undertaking a
comparative study of Indigenous rights affords a better understanding of the
development of
Indigenous jurisprudence in one's own jurisdiction. For those
interested in Indigenous rights and title in their own country, it
is important
to have an appreciation of the comparative jurisprudence as well as parallel
legal developments, not only to understand
more fully the foundations of these
principles and their historical developments, but also to predict what can
possibly be achieved
in the future.
Videoconferencing technology has been integral to the development of the
authors' comparative international Indigenous study as it
makes real-time
interaction and team-teaching possible. The international and comparative
Indigenous rights course demonstrates that
this technology can be used
successfully for a comparative international course taught in different parts of
the world where appropriate
'units of comparison and contrast' exist. The
authors have found that one of the essentials of teaching a course with global
is to have a shared course website, particularly for student access to
teaching and research materials, but also for ease of student
interaction with
both teachers and other students away from the classroom. Within the classroom,
the advantage of the combined video
and web technology is that it allows for
face-to-face teaching that promotes engagement and interaction between students
and instructors
and also between students themselves. The authors' experience
has been that the challenges in logistics and organisational dynamics
teaching across different time zones, in different hemispheres, and to different
groups of students with very diverse backgrounds
can be overcome with
appropriate planning and goodwill. The course discussed in this article has
provided an extremely positive experience
for students and also for the teaching
team. In the authors' experience, the use of this technology for the purpose of
teaching and
learning across borders promotes the internationalisation of the
curriculum for the institutions involved. The use of this technology
students an opportunity to learn in a 'virtual overseas classroom' without
having to leave their home institutions.
Nothing about videoconferencing technology is unique to Indigenous courses.
This technology exists at most universities today and
could be used for any area
of study that would benefit from an international or comparative approach. After
the initial establishment
of the videoconferencing facilities, a video-linked
course is not difficult to implement. The authors encourage others to utilise
the videoconferencing technology in their comparative and international
* Senior Lecturer,
Beirne School of Law, The University of
Queensland, Australia.
** Professor and Dean of Law, School of Law,
University of Waikato, New Zealand, (on leave from University of Ottawa,
*** Professor of Law, University of Oklahoma College of Law, United
• Senior Lecturer, Monash University Law School,
•• Barrister-at-Law,
••• Professor of Law, College of Law, University
of Saskatchewan, Canada.
The authors sincerely
thank our colleague, Dr Nin Tomas, Faculty of Law, The University of Auckland,
New Zealand, for her thoughtful
comments on an earlier draft of this article.
The authors would like to acknowledge and sincerely thank Ms Kirsten Hudak, B.A.
at the University of Ottawa and research assistant to Bradford Morse,
whose help reviewing the distance education literature was
invaluable, and Ms
Breanna Hamilton, student at the University of Queensland and research assistant
to Margaret Stephenson, whose
research assistance was also
invaluable.
generally in relation to teaching video-conferencing courses: The Knowledge
Network Explorer,
Videoconferencing for Learning
http://www.kn.pacbell.com/wired/vidconf/index.html
at 23 December 2009;
University of Idaho,
Guide 10: Interactive Videoconferencing in Distance
http://www.uidaho.edu/eo/distl0.html
at 23 December
additional class time each instructor has with their own classes varies in
accordance with the teaching requirements of the various
law schools involved.
For example, the non-videoconferencing component in an Australian jurisdiction
with a 13-week teaching semester
comprises one additional hour with the students
for each week of the 10-week videoconferencing component of the class with an
three weeks of three-hour seminars. In one of the Canadian classes,
the non-video-link class time comprises an additional two-hour
seminar for each
of the 10 weeks of the video
vary in each of the jurisdictions. Class sizes are generally small. Most
although one Australian class has
around 65 students. This type of teaching works well with smaller classes. The
classes are a mix
of graduate students (mostly in the North American law
schools) and undergraduate students, usually in the later years of the LLB
course (in the Antipodean law schools).
In 2000, Lindsay
Robertson read of the efforts of two legal history professors to teach an online
course to students at two law schools.
These professors concluded that their
effort suffered from the unwillingness of students to interact online. Lindsay
Robertson thought
to solve the problem of non-participation by allowing the
students to see each other through a videoconference course rather than
online course. The distance education staff advised that such a course could be
set up to run to a site out of the country, the
only cost being the cost of the
telephone connection. Lindsay Robertson and Brad Morse then offered the first
US-Canadian Indigenous
Peoples' Law class in 2001, which was a great
2001, Margaret Stephenson, whilst a Visiting Professor at Indiana University
School of Law, Indianapolis, USA, developed
an Indigenous Rights course
comparing the USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. From 2002-05, Margaret
taught a Comparative Indigenous
Rights course in the 'Online' LLM program
(University of
Queensland).
by Melissa Castan and David
Catherine Iorns with the involvement of Claire Charters and Andrew Erueti from
2004-05. Catherine Ions will rejoin the course
Stephenson.
Led by Nin Tomas, with the involvement of Khylee Quince in
by Paul Chartrand for two years and now led by Ruth
in relation to comparative published books: Anthony Connolly (ed),
(2009); Benjamin Richardson, Shin Imai and Kent McNeil (eds),
Indigenous Peoples and the Law: Comparative and Critical Perspectives
(2009); Simon Young,
The Trouble with Tradition: Native Title and
(2008); Peter Russell,
Recognizing Aboriginal
Title: The Mabo Case and
Indigenous Resistance to English-Settler
Colonialism
(2005); Barbara Hocking (ed),
Unfinished Constitutional
Business? Rethinking Indigenous Self-Determination
(2005); Paul McHugh,
Aboriginal Societies and the Common Law. A History of
Sovereignty,
Status, and Self-Determination
(2004); Marcia Langton et al (eds),
Among Nations? Treaties and Agreements with Indigenous People
(2004); Paul
European Conquest and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: The Moral
Backwardness of International Society
(2003); Garth Nettheim, Gary Meyers
and Donna Craig,
Indigenous Peoples and Governance Structures: A
Comparative
Analysis of Land and Resource Management Rights
Kent McNeil,
Emerging Justice?: Essays on Indigenous Rights in Canada and
(2001); Duncan Ivison, Paul Patton and Will Sanders (eds),
Political Theory and the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples
(2000); Paul
Havemann (ed),
Indigenous Peoples'
Rights in Australia, Canada and New
(1999); Richard Bartlett and Jill Milroy (eds),
Native Title
Claims in Canada and Australia: Delgamuukw and
Miriuwong Gajarrong,
(1999); Shaunnagh Dorsett and Lee Godden,
Precedents of Relevance to Native Title
(1998); and Richie Howitt, John
Connell and Philip Hirsch,
Resources, Nations and Indigenous Peoples
(1996). It is noted that the greater number of comparative published
materials are written from a western legal perspective rather
than from an
Indigenous perspective; that is, from an Indigenous person's point of view of
customary law. In an attempt to remedy
such shortcoming, in 2004, the Maori
staff in the Auckland Law Faculty, introduced
Te Tai Haruru, Journal ofMaori
Legal Writing
(editor Nin Tomas), the first Indigenous law journal in
Aotearoa/New Zealand.
See Michael
Moore and Greg Kearsley,
Distance Education: A Systems View
relation to the challenges of online learning, see the discussion in Tracey
Carver and Tina Cockburn, 'Making Law More Accessible:
Designing Collaborative
Learning Environments for Physically Remote Generation Y Students' (Paper
presented at the Online Learning
and Teaching Conference, Brisbane, 2006)
<https://olt.qut.edu.au/udf/OLTCONFERENCEPAPERS/index.cfm?fa-displayPage&rNum=3349801>
at 23 December
supported in the literature. See Tony Bates,
Technology, E-Learning and
Distance Education
(2nd ed, 2005) 7, 187. Moore and Kearsley, above n 13,
also regard real-time interaction between students as essential to the success
of distance
above n 15, 7.
Refer to the discussion below on why a comparative and international
Goldring, 'Coping with the Virtual Campus: Some Hints and Opportunities for
Legal Education' in John Goldring, Charles Sampford
and Ralph Simmonds (eds),
New Foundations in Legal Education
(1998) 88, 89,
above n 18, 91-2. Goldring suggests that external students operating under the
traditional model of distance education,
the 'correspondence model', may well
have received an academic foundation in law, but not all would have received a
Goldring, above n 18,
above n 15,
were able to compare the Australian apology with the United States Senate's
apology to Native Americans in 2007 and, later,
the 2008 Canadian government's
apology to the victims of Indian residential
Using Videoconferencing to Support Learning
(Teaching and
Educational Development Institute, 2007) 17; Trish Andrews, 'Videoconference
Teaching Workshop', Tertiary Education
Institute, University of Queensland
Conference was the International Conference on Comparative Federalism and
Indigenous Peoples, at the Center for Excellence in
Native Hawaiian Law, William
S Richardson School of Law, University of Hawai'i, USA, January 2007.
Resolution UN,
example, student surveys from the University of Queensland class have ranked
student satisfaction with the course as high as
4.83 out of a maximum of 5. The
student comments in the text above were taken from surveys undertaken at the
University of Auckland,
University of Ottawa and University of Queensland in
excellent discussion of the value of comparative Indigenous analysis
(particularly in relation to Indigenous title to land)
see Young, above n 12, cl
3. See also Donald Denoon,
Settler Capitalism: The Dynamics of Dependent
Development in the Southern Hemisphere
(1983) 8: ‘[o]nly one
analytical method is to be found anywhere in the social sciences: the
comparative
Havemann, above n 12,
Young, above n 12,
Getches, Charles Wilkinson and Robert Williams,
Cases and Materials on
Federal Indian Law
(5th ed, 2005) 1-37; Bob Miller and Jacinta Rum, 'An
Indigenous Lens into Comparative Law: The Doctrine of Discovery in the
States and New Zealand' (2009) 111
West Virginia Law Review
(forthcoming);
and Kent McNeil,
Common Law Aboriginal Title
(1989) 244, 301; Margaret
Stephenson (ed),
Mabo: A Judicial
(1993); Larissa Behrendt, Chris
Cunneen and Terri
Indigenous Legal Relations in Australia
See Greg Marks 'Sovereign States vs Peoples: Indigenous Rights and the Origins
of International Law',
Australian Indigenous Law Reporter
High Court of Australia:
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
the Supreme Court of Canada:
Calder v Attorney-General of British
[1973] SCR 313;
Delgamuukw v British Columbia
[1997] 3 SCR
v The Queen
[1984] 2 SCR 335
; in the New Zealand
Court of Appeal:
Attorney-General v NgatiApa
[2003] NZCA 117
[2003] 3 NZLR 643
Runanganui o Te Ika Whenua
[1994] 2 NZLR 641; and in the US:
Sherrill v Oneida Indian Nation of NY,
[2005] USSC 2713
Johnson v McIntosh,
[1823] USSC 22
(8 Wheat) 543
Cherokee Nation v
[1831] USSC 6
Worchester v Georgia,
[1832] USSC 39
(1832). For a
groundbreaking reconsideration of the extraordinary
background to the
Johnson v McIntosh
case, see Lindsay Robertson,
Conquest by Law: How the Discovery of America Dispossessed Indigenous Peoples
of Their Lands
See Young, above n 12, 36. For example, Kirby J stated in
Commonwealth v
[2001] HCA 56
(2001) 184 ALR 113
, 197-8: '[t]he recognition of the rights to land
to waters and fishing resources of Indigenous peoples is now an
international
question. It is one that concerns, but is not confined to,
the several nations settled
at one time under the British
Canada see, eg,
Hamlet of Baker Lake v Minister of Indian Affairs and
Northern Development
[1979] 1 FC 487
at 545, where Mahoney J noted the
'value' of these
American cases to the Canadian courts;
Guerin v The
[1984] 2 SCR 335
, where Dickson J viewed
Calder v British Colombia
(Attorney-General)
SCR 313 as consistent with the 'leading
American cases' of
Johnson v McIntosh,
[1823] USSC 22
(8 Wheat) 543
Worcester v Georgia,
[1832] USSC 39
(1832). In New
Zealand, see
Weehi v Regional Fisheries Officer
[1986] NZHC 149
[1986] 1 NZLR 680
Ngati Apa Ki
Te Waipounamu Trust v The Queen
[2000] NZCA 45
[2000] 2 NZLR 659
discussion in Young, above n 12,
example, in
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, the Court cited
inter alia:
the Canadian cases of
Calder v British Colombia (Attorney
[1973] SCR 313;
Guerin v The Queen
[1984] 2 SCR 335
Catherine's Milling
and Lumber Co v The Queen
(1888) 14AC 46;
Hamlet of Baker Lake v Minister of
Indian Affairs and Northern
Development
[1979] 1 FC 487
R v Sparrow
[1990] 1 SCR 1013
Van der Peet
[1996] 2 SCR 507
; the US Supreme Court decisions in
v McIntosh,
[1823] USSC 22
(8 Wheat) 543
Tee Hit-Ton
(1955); the New Zealand cases of
R v Symonds
(1847) NZPCC 387;
Re The Ninety-Mile Beach
[1963] NZLR
discussion by Richard Bartlett, 'Australia's Museum Mentality' in Bartlett and
Milroy, above n 12; and see Young, above n
12, 33. See also
[1998] HCA 58
(1998) 195 CLR 96
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
(1999) 201 CLR 351
, 402. Some exceptions exist: see, eg,
Western Australia
[1998] FCA 1478
Western Australia v Ward
[2002] HCA 28
(2002) 213 CLR 1
, [567] where Kirby J, when referring to certain native
title concepts of recognition and extinguishment, noted that the court should
'as far as it is possible ... take into account relevant analogous developments
of the common law in other societies facing similar
example, in Canada, see
Delgamuukw v British Columbia
(1997) 153 DLR
at 258; in New Zealand see
Attorney-General v Nagati Apa
[2003] NZCA 117
3 NZLR 643 (Court
Resolution UN, GAOR, 61
generally James Anaya,
Indigenous Peoples in International Law
2004); Alexandra Xanthaki,
Indigenous Rights and United Nations
Self-Determination, Culture and Land
(2007); Joshua
Castellino and Niamh Walsh (eds),
International Law and Indigenous Peoples
(2005); Sarah Pritchard (ed),
Indigenous Peoples, the United Nations and
Human Rights
(1998); Sarah Joseph, Jenny Schultz and Melissa Castan,
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights: Cases, Materials,
and Commentary
generally Havemann, above n 12; Dorsett and Godden, above n 12, 1-48; Young,
above n 12,
Havemann, above n 12, 6. In relation to Aotearoa/New Zealand, see Ranginui
Ka Whawhai Tonu Matou: Struggle without End
(1990); Michael King
Te Ao Hurihuri
(1975); Te Puni Kokiri,
He Tirohanga a Kawa kite
(2001); Mason Durie,
Te Mana, Te Kawanatanga
h e Politics of Maori Self-Determination
(1998); Rev Maori Marsden
and Te Aroha Henare,
Kaitiakitanga: A Definitive Introduction to the Holistic
Worldview of the Maori
(1992). In relation to Australia, see Peter Sutton,
Kinship, Filiations and Aboriginal
Land Tenure
(2003), in relation
to Canada, see John Borrows,
Recovering Canada:
The Resurgence of
Indigenous Law
(2002) and for the United States see Felix Cohen,
Cohen ' Handbook of Federal Indian Law
Young, above n 12, 34-6; Getches, above n 30,
above n 12, 3; see also Mattei Dogan and Dominique Pelassy,
How to Compare
Nations: Strategies in Comparative Politics
recent Canadian example of federal legislation recognising 'First Nations legal
traditions and customary laws', see
An Act to Amend the Canadian Human
Rights Act,
SC 2008, c 30. The conversion of customary Maori land tenure
in Aotearoa/New Zealand to alienable fee simple is another example of
be reviewed
Cherokee Nation v Georgia,
[1831] USSC 6
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (241 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter