URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2009/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greenleaf, G --- "Rudd Government abandons border security of privacy" [2009] ALRS 17; Australian Policy Online 23 October 2009
Five years of the APEC Privacy Framework: Failure or promise?
Graham Greenleaf
University of New South Wales, CLSR Editorial Board
Published in
Computer Law & Security Report
– Please cite
published version.
The APEC Privacy Framework was developed from 2003, adopted by APEC in 2004
and finalised in 2005. It was intended as a means of improving
the standard of
information privacy protection throughout the APEC countries of the
Asia-Pacific, and of facilitating the trans-border
flow of personal information
between those countries. In 2007 a number of ‘Pathfinder’ projects
for cross-border data
transfers were launched under the Framework. In the five
years since the process commenced, what has it achieved, and what is it
to achieve? This paper argues that the APEC Privacy Framework has had many flaws
from its inception, including Privacy Principles
that are unnecessarily weak,
and no meaningful enforcement requirements. Since its adoption in 2004, little
attempt has been made
to encourage its use as a minimal standard for privacy
legislation in developing countries (which might have been useful), and it
having little impact on the significant number of legislative developments now
taking place.
Instead, the ‘Pathfinder’ projects seem to be developing toward a
generalised version of the US ‘Safe Harbor’
scheme. What is known of
the Pathfinder projects leaves many questions unanswered, such as what standards
for data transfers they
aim to implement; whether compliance with all of
APEC’s own Privacy Principles will be required; and how
‘Accountability
Agents’ will be accredited. Consumer input into
APEC’s privacy processes has been belated and ad-hoc but business
omnipresent. Despite these flaws, APEC could still play a useful role
in the gradual development of higher privacy standards in Asia,
provided its
priorities are re-oriented. The major developments in Asian privacy protection
are likely to come from elsewhere, including
other regional groupings, and
attractions of standards originating in Europe. The paper concludes with
suggestions for other directions
APEC, Asia-Pacific, data protection, privacy
1. The APEC Privacy Framework
In November 2004 Ministers of the APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation)
economies, meeting in Santiago, Chile, adopted the
APEC Privacy
, which had been developed during 2003-04 by APEC’s
Electronic Commerce Steering Group (ECSG) Privacy Subgroup. The significance
the 21 APEC economies
adopting common information privacy standards cannot be doubted. The APEC
economies are located on four continents, account for more
than a third of the
world’s population, half its GDP, and almost half of world trade. The APEC
Framework could have become
the most significant international privacy
instrument since the EU privacy Directive of the mid-1990s (EU, 1995). This is
to be the case, though it may well have some positive effects. However,
compared with its potential, the reality seems more like
a missed opportunity.
Other commentators are less pessimistic (Tan, 2008).
The APEC Privacy Framework (APEC, 2004) originally consisted of a set of nine
‘APEC Privacy Principles’ in Part III, plus
a Preamble and Scope
note in Parts I and II. Part IV ‘Implementation’ included Section A
‘Guidance for Domestic
Implementation’ but did not include Section B
on the ‘cross-border elements’ (including data exports) until it
added in September 2005 Part IV(B) and the Framework completed (APEC, 2005). A
Commentary is included.
A brief critique of both the principles and the implementation mechanisms
follows. In summary, the Principles in APEC’s Privacy
Framework are at
best an approximation of what was regarded as acceptable information privacy
principles twenty years ago when the
OECD Guidelines were developed. Its
Principles are weaker than those of the European privacy Directive, or of most
existing data
protection laws in the Asia Pacific. In relation to
implementation, Part IV exhorts APEC members to implement the Framework without
requiring any particular means of doing so, or any means of assessing whether
they have done so. The Framework is therefore considerably
weaker than any other
international privacy instrument in terms of its implementation requirements.
The Framework does not explicitly
require data export limitations, nor permit
them, nor forbid them, but it does imply an approach to allowing data exports
very different from that adopted in Europe, and its implementation is
gradually making that more clear.
1.1. The status of APEC ‘agreements’
APEC is unusual in being an organisation of States which does
not have a constitution, operates by consensus, and undertakes commitments
voluntary basis. It claims to be ‘the only inter governmental grouping in
the world operating on the basis of non-binding
commitments’
APEC ‘agreements’ such as the Privacy Framework do not have any
legal status, and are best seen as agreed aspirations,
supported by
consensus-based commitments to cooperate (see Greenleaf 2005c, 2005d for
details). Nevertheless, their practical effect
is often very significant. This
factor limits to some extent what can be expected from the APEC Privacy
2. APEC Privacy Principles – A brief critique
The nine APEC Privacy Principles deal with most of the broad topics normally
found in international or national sets of privacy principles:
collection,
quality, security, use, access to, and correction of personal information.
1.2. A floor not a ceiling
The OECD privacy Guidelines explicitly state that they are only
minimum standards for privacy protection that may be supplemented
in national
laws by other principles (OECD 1981: 6). The APEC Framework does not explicitly
state that there may or may not be national
strengthening of its Principles,
though this may be implied by some provisions. This has been recognised at the
APEC implementation
seminars and meetings of APEC’s Privacy Sub-group
since 2005. It is also hard to see how the Framework could attempt to impose
such a ceiling, since almost every privacy law enacted in the region is stronger
than the APEC Privacy Principles in various ways
(as discussed later, and see
Greenleaf, 2005c, 2007 for details). It seems, therefore, that the APEC
Framework should be interpreted
as recommending a minimum desirable standard for
a ceiling for privacy protection (see Greenleaf 2005d for details).
2.1. Definitions and exemptions (Part II)
Before considering the Part III Principles, the Part II definitions need
brief mention though they are largely uncontentious. ‘
information
’ is defined as ‘any information about an identified
or identifiable individual’. The commentary clarifies only
information may be ‘put together with other information’ to identify
an individual and that legal persons are
not included.
Personal information controller
’ is defined as meaning
‘a person or organization that controls the collection, holding,
processing or use of personal
information’, so there can be multiple
controllers. However, organisations acting as agents for another are not to be
as responsible for ‘ensuring compliance’, but their
principals are. Agents appear to be exempt from any direct responsibility
data subject for breaches of the Principles (a) by actions contrary to their
principal’s instructions; and (b) even
if they are aware they are in
breach. . This definition is designed with the Accountability Principle (IX) in
mind, which makes principals
‘accountable’ for their agents but only
under certain circumstances which may easily be avoided by the principal (eg
obtaining the consent of the data subject). As will be discussed,
‘accountability’ does not give strong enough protection
subjects. The exclusion of agents from any direct liability to data subjects
weakens the APEC approach further, and will
often leave the data subject without
any remedy against any party. From the data subject’s perspective the
strongest position
is to have both principal and agent responsible for breaches
of the Principles caused by the acts of the agent.
Publicly available information
’ is given a broad
definition, including the flexible category of information ‘that the
individual knowingly makes or
permits to be made available to the public’.
However, such information is only excluded from the requirement that individuals
be given notice of its collection by third parties collecting it. The APEC
Principles do not give the collector of publicly available
information any
right, per se, to disclose the information to others. They can, however, use it
for the purpose for which they collect
it. They must also take reasonable steps
to keep it secure, as it is still personal information.
Personal, family and
household affairs
are excluded, but there is no further list of exemptions
for the press, national security, emergencies etc.
The wide differences between APEC economies are used to justify Member
Economies creating local exceptions to the Principles unconstrained
by any APEC
list of categories of allowable exceptions. Instead, the only limits on allowed
exceptions are that they should be (a)
proportional to their objectives, and
‘(b) (i) made known to the public;
(b)(ii) in accordance with
law’ (emphasis added). This last use of ‘or’ appears to be a
drafting error and should
say ‘and’, otherwise it would mean any
organisation could create exceptions merely by announcing them (see Greenleaf,
2005a, for details). For comparison, OECD principle 4 states that exceptions
should be as few as possible, and made public. It is
not clear whether these
limits on exceptions (weak though they are) also apply to those exceptions
already included in the Principles
(eg to Principle VIII Access and Correction).
They should apply, and it is a weakness that this is not clear.
2.2. The nine Principles – strengths and weaknesses
Each APEC Principle I-IX is now summarised, and main weaknesses or strengths
noted, but without detailed comparison to other laws
in the region (for which
see Greenleaf 2005c, 2007).
2.2.1. Preventing Harm (I)
The sentiment that privacy remedies should concentrate on preventing harm
(‘should be designed to prevent the misuse of such
information’ and
should be ‘proportionate to the likelihood and severity of the harm
threatened’) appears unexceptional
in sentiment but it is strange to
elevate it to a privacy principle because it neither creates rights in
individuals nor imposes
obligations on information controllers. To treat it on a
par with other Principles makes it easier to justify exempting whole sectors
not sufficiently dangerous (eg small business in Australia’s law or in the
2005 Chinese ‘Expert Draft’ proposals:
see Greenleaf, 2008a), or
only providing piecemeal remedies in ‘dangerous’ sectors (as in the
USA). Waters (2008a) considers
that the principle is similar to the use of the
‘such steps as are reasonable in the circumstances’ qualifier found
other sets of Principles, but a qualifier to some particular principles is
different from a blanket principle which could be interpreted
to qualify all
other principles.
It is not clear from APEC’s Principles whether ‘harm’
covers distress, humiliation etc. Although it has apparently
been assumed in
meetings of the APEC Privacy Sub-group that these should be included (Waters,
2008a), given that it has been elevated
to the status of a separate Principle it
should make this crucial matter explicit. It is also arguable that there should
to privacy in some situations independent of any proven harm, such as
where there is the intentional large-scale public disclosure
of private facts.
This ‘principle’ would make better sense in Part IV on
implementation, as a means of rationing remedies,
or lowering compliance
2.2.2. Notice (II)
APEC says clear ‘statements’ should be accessible to individuals,
disclosing the purposes of collection, possible types
of disclosures, controller
details, and means by which an individual may limit uses, and access and correct
their information. Reasonable
steps should be taken to provide notice before or
at the time of collection. APEC does not however require that
should be by some explicit form of notice (electronic or
paper) given to individuals (and nor do most existing laws in the region).
can be argued that in many cases this will be the only form that reasonable
steps can take. APEC is not explicit that notice of
collection must be given to
a data subject where their personal information is collected by a third party
but the Commentary clearly
implies that it should. APEC’s Principles are
stronger than the OECD’s on this point.
2.2.3. Collection limitation (III)
APEC requires only that information collected should be limited to what is
‘relevant’ to the purpose of collection, but
not that only the
minimum information should be collected. It shares the weaknesses of the
OECD’s collection principle which
only say 'there should be limits on the
collection of personal information'. Existing laws in the region are usually
stricter, with
collection objectively limited to where necessary for the
functions or activities of organisations. While APEC requires that information
be collected by ‘lawful and fair means’, it does not limit
collection to lawful purposes, in contrast with existing laws
in the region.
2.2.4. Uses of personal information (IV)
APEC has adopted the weakest possible test of allowable secondary uses that
they only need be for ‘compatible or related purposes’
(a version of
the OECD test of ‘not incompatible’ purposes. Most existing laws in
the region are stricter than this,
requiring that secondary uses be
‘directly related’ or within the ‘reasonable
expectations’ of the data
subject. In addition to the usual further
exceptions of individual consent and ‘where authorized by law’, APEC
adds another
exception ‘when necessary to provide a service or product
requested by the individual’. This could easily be abused if
could have the unrestricted right to determine what information available to
them was needed for them to decide whether
to enter into a transaction, with no
need to notify the individual concerned.
2.2.5. Choice (V)
APEC requires that, where appropriate, individuals should be offered
prominent, effective and affordable mechanisms to exercise choice
in relation to
collection, use and disclosure of their personal information. Since consent is
already an exception to the collection
and use and disclosure Principles (III
and IV), this Choice Principle only adds an emphasis on the mechanisms of
choice, and could
be seen as redundant. It is not found in other sets of
Principles. The elevation of choice to a separate principle carries with it
risk of interpretations in national laws that would support consent overriding
other Principles, namely the notice, security,
integrity, access or correction
Principles. Elevating ‘choice’ by data subjects is superficially in
their interests,
but can too easily be used by business and governments to have
individuals ‘agree’ to surrender their ostensible rights
Waters, 2008a). Properly interpreted, the wording of the Choice Principle
probably does not (and should not) imply that consent
can override other
Principles, so it does not imply that individuals should be able to
‘contract out’ of these Principles.
However, given the risk of
misinterpretation, it is hard to see what value it has at all.
2.2.6. Integrity of Personal Information (VI)
APEC requires that personal information should be accurate, complete and kept
up-to-date to the extent necessary for its purposes
of use. This is
uncontentious, except that (like the OECD), it does not include any explicit
deletion requirement, and it is difficult
to infer such a requirement from the
other integrity requirements.
2.2.7. Security Safeguards (VII)
APEC requires information controllers (but not their agents) to take
appropriate safeguards against risks to personal data, proportional
likelihood and severity of the risk and the sensitivity of the information. This
is uncontentious, except it is hard to see
why agents should not also be liable,
as discussed.
2.2.8. Access and Correction (VIII)
APEC’s access and correction rights are made more explicit than the
OECD’s, but are also subject to explicit exceptions
where (i) the burden
or expense would be disproportionate to the risks to privacy; or (ii) for legal,
security, or confidential commercial
reasons; or (iii) the privacy of other
persons ‘would be violated’. ‘Other persons’ seems to
mean natural
persons, not companies, because to assume otherwise would make the
exception for confidential commercial information unnecessary.
These exceptions
are very broad and it does not seem that APEC’s requirement of
proportionality for exemptions applies to them.
However, APEC says individuals
should have the right to challenge refusals of access. The dangers of incorrect
information are greater
where access is prevented by an exception, but APEC has
not addressed the question of whether the right of correction depends on
being a right of access. Nor have most existing laws.
2.2.9. Accountability (including due diligence in transfers) (IX)
APEC’s requirement that there be an accountable information controller
is uncontentious, except as previously noted in excluding
agents from any
Accountability is coupled in principle IX with a requirement that where
information is transferred to a third party (domestically
or internationally)
this requires either the consent of the data subject or that the discloser
‘exercise due diligence and
take reasonable steps to ensure that the
recipient ... will protect the information consistently with these
Principles’. Also,
IX only applies where there is an ongoing relationship
between exporter and importer. This sub-principle was proposed by the USA.
the incomplete Framework was announced in 2004, it was assumed that data export
limitations would be dealt with in Part IV ‘Implementation’
was completed. However, Part IV said nothing on the subject, leaving the
Accountability Principle as APEC’s only substitute
for a Data Export
Limitation principle.
Once the transferor has ‘exercis[ed] due diligence and taken reasonable
steps’ (which are not further defined), the transferor
has no further
liability to the data subject, no matter what breaches of the Principles occur
in the hands of the recipient (importer).
The data subject will have no remedy
against the exporter, and none against the importer if it is in a jurisdiction
without applicable
mechanism for compliance. A contractual clause between exporter and importer
requiring APEC compliance will not provide such a remedy, even in theory, unless
the importer is in a jurisdiction where consumers
can enforce such clauses
benefiting third parties (i.e. where doctrines of privity of contract do not
prevent this). The purpose
of the APEC ‘Pathfinder’ projects (from
one perspective) is to try to develop mechanisms in various APEC jurisdictions
(particularly those without data protection laws) to assist exporters to obtain
credibility for claims that they have exercised their
‘accountability’ responsibilities when they export data to those
2.3. Five bases for criticism
There are five distinct forms of criticism that may be levelled at the APEC
and which are
inherent in my above summary.
2.3.1. Weaknesses inherent in the OECD Principles
First, the APEC Privacy Principles are based on OECD Principles more than
twenty years old, and only improve on them in minor respects.
The inadequacies
of the OECD Principles have been identified by authors over the years (eg
Clarke, 2000 and Greenleaf, 1996). Even
the Chair of the Expert Group that
drafted them, Justice Michael Kirby, has stressed the need for their revision
before they are
suitable for the 21st Century Kirby, 1999).
2.3.2. Further weakening of the OECD Principles
The Framework is weaker in significant respects than the OECD Guidelines,
both in its principles but particularly in its implementation
requirements. APEC
states that the OECD privacy Guidelines ‘represent the international
consensus’, but only claims that
its Framework is ‘consistent with
the core values’ of the Guidelines (APEC, 2005, Preamble, para 5), not
that they reflect
them on all points. The APEC Privacy Principles improve on
some OECD Privacy Principles in minor ways, but are weaker than some other
principles. In particular, they do not include the OECD Privacy Principles
concerning Purpose Specification or Openness, and
are therefore weaker on those
2.3.3. Potentially retrograde new Principles
The only new principles, ‘Preventing harm’, ‘Choice’
and the ‘Due diligence in transfers’ aspect
of the Accountability
principle, while capable of benign interpretations, carry inherent dangers and
have little to recommend them,
as discussed.
2.3.4. EU compatibility ignored
While some countries in the region have difficulties in accepting that the EU
can judge the ‘adequacy’ of their privacy
laws, ignoring the EU
standard is not necessarily an approach that other APEC countries would prefer.
The principles in the EU Directive
are also the most widely implemented privacy
principles globally. They have considerable influence in Acts and Bills in APEC
economies, as seen in the Hong Kong SAR, Korean and Macau SAR
legislation, and bills in China and the Philippines. For at least these
they deserved consideration as contributions toward a standard for the
Asia-Pacific. New principles found in the EU privacy
Directive (EU, 1995), such
as its principle requiring human checking of automated adverse decisions, do not
seem to have received
any consideration by APEC, and the question of EU
consistency does not seem to have been explicitly addressed in their
considerations.
This might be considered a missed opportunity, to give it the
most benign interpretation, or an intentional avoidance of anything
coming from
2.3.5. Regional experience ignored
The most obvious source that an Asia-Pacific regional instrument could be
expected to draw from is the actual standards implemented
over twenty-five years
in regional privacy laws such as the laws of Korea, Canada, Hong Kong, New
Zealand, Taiwan, Australia, and
Japan. Principles stronger than those found in
the OECD Guidelines are common in legislation in the region, and many occur in
than one jurisdiction's laws. These include principles concerning
collection directly from the individual, data retention, notice
of corrections
to third party recipients, data export limitations, anonymity, identifiers,
sensitive information, and public registers
(for details see Greenleaf, 2005c
and Greenleaf, 2007). APEC has not adopted any of these ‘regional’
improvements. Without
suggesting that APEC should have embraced all of them, the
Framework’s failure to include any other new principles means that
ignores or rejects the experience of those Asia-Pacific countries that already
have privacy laws and have consistently included
beyond those of the OECD, and very often share these new Privacy Principles
across multiple Asia-Pacific
represent any objective ‘consensus’ of existing regional privacy
laws, unless it that of the lowest common denominator of every set of Privacy
Principles in the region.
2.4. What have the Principles achieved after five years?
The APEC Privacy Principles are of no positive domestic significance to the
economies in the Asia-Pacific region that already have
general information
and South Korea), because the Principles
in all of those laws exceed the level
of protection provided by the APEC Principles at various points. There may be a
few minor points
where specific APEC principles such as the Security Principle
may have better drafting than local laws, but in general these jurisdictions
have ‘nothing to learn’ from APEC.
Since 2003 when the first APEC drafts appeared, there has only been one new
APEC jurisdiction (or other Asia-Pacific country for that
matter) that has
brought into force an information privacy law, or any other known method of
implementing privacy principles. The
Macau Special Administrative Region of the
Personal Data Protection Act
(2006) is based explicitly on
Portugal’s data protection law, and is therefore the most EU-oriented law
in the region (see
Macau, 2006). The 2005 ‘Expert Draft’ proposed
national law for China (Greenleaf, 2008a, 2008b) does not seem to show
direct influence of the APEC Framework, but does show some EU influences such as
the use of ‘lawful processing’ and
inclusion of a data export
limitation referring to ‘sufficient’ protection in other countries.
It now seems unlikely
to proceed in that form. Bills are under development in
other jurisdictions such as the Philippines, where they are ‘influenced
the structure and language of the EU Directive’ (Parlade, 2008). In
Thailand the details of Bills under development are
not yet clear, but are said
to be EU-influenced (Raksirivorakul, 2008). Peru is apparently planning a
European-influenced law (Waters,
2008a). In a survey of Asia-Pacific
developments, Connolly (2008) concludes that, despite the APEC Framework,
‘an argument
can be made that the EU approach to privacy protection is
rapidly becoming the global norm’, and that the APEC principles
not be implemented as stand alone legislation in Asia-Pacific
countries’ and will have ‘minimum influence on the content
legislation’, with the possible exception of the Accountability principle.
The APEC Sub-group Chair notes (APEC, 2008a)
that six economies (Australia,
Canada, Korea, New Zealand, the Philippines and Vietnam) report intentions to
to the APEC Framework, but whether this amounts to anything
more than mentioning it in the Preamble is unknown.
As a means of encouraging the better protection of privacy protection across
APEC to a minimum agreed standard, the APEC Privacy Framework
cannot point to
any conspicuous successes after five years. If the APEC processes have helped
stimulate some more Bills in the region
(which is difficult to judge), then what
has been stimulated is more oriented toward the EU Directive than the APEC
Framework. Although
Waters (2008a) argues the APEC principles are ‘not too
bad as a floor’. But it is a floor on which no one seems to be
dancing, as
he admits in saying that ‘none of them, paradoxically, appear to be paying
too much attention to the APEC Principles
in their design’.
Waters argues that all international data protection agreements embody a
‘lowest common standard’. However, it is questionable
whether that
was so with the OECD and the Council of Europe over a quarter of a century ago,
when what they proposed was of a higher
standard than most jurisdictions at that
time. The same could perhaps be argued in relation to the European Directive,
which required
most European jurisdictions to change their laws to meet its
standards, but that is beyond the scope of this article.
2.5 Australia’s bad example
The first clear attempt in the region to implement a version of an APEC
principle comes from Australia’s current review of its
Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC, 2008). Although the APEC principles were
largely ignored by the ALRC,
the Accountability principle has influenced its
recommendations concerning data exports. The ALRC’s proposed Principle 11
replace a rather weak implementation of the EU approach (ie Articles 25
and 26 of the Directive) with a principle that allows personal
information to be
exported anywhere overseas (no ‘border controls’ is how the ALRC
puts it), provided the transferor
remains liable for any breaches that then
occur. However the data subject has the onus of proof that a breach of a
Principle has
occurred in a foreign county before there is anything to be
‘accountable’ for. This will often make ‘remains liable’
The ALRC then compounds the problem by grafting a number of EU-like
exceptions onto this approach, the effect of which is to extinguish
accountability wherever an exception applies. The exceptions include a
government-controlled ‘whitelist’; exemption
for transfers to
countries which the transferor ‘reasonably believes’ have
substantially similar protections to Australia;
and exemption where the
transferor gives the data subject notice that it is proposing to transfer
personal data overseas without
accepting liability, but with no obligation to
tell the data subject the proposed destination. If this is an allowable
interpretation
of APEC’s Accountability principle, then consumers will get
the worst of both worlds, and the concerns of APEC sceptics are
3. Implementation – Exhortations only
The Framework’s implementation aspects in Part IV Section A
(‘Guidance for domestic implementation’), provisions
are non-prescriptive in the extreme. They state that members ‘should take
all necessary and appropriate steps’
to identify and remove or avoid
‘unnecessary barriers to information flows’ (I), but do not include
any similarly strong
injunctions to take ‘all necessary and appropriate
steps’ to protect privacy. The bias is clear.
The Framework does not require any particular means of implementation of the
implementing the Framework
may differ between countries (‘Member Economies’ in APEC-speak), and
may be different for
different Principles, but with an overall goal of
compatibility between countries. (II).
In (II) it is made clear that anything ranging from complete self-regulation
unsupported by legislation, through to legislation-based
national privacy
agencies is acceptable to APEC:
‘There are several options for giving effect to the Framework and
securing privacy protections for individuals including legislative,
administrative, industry self-regulatory or a combination of these methods under
which rights can be exercised under the Framework.’
‘In practice, the Framework is meant to be implemented in a flexible
manner that can accommodate various methods of implementation,
including through
central authorities, multi-agency enforcement bodies, a network of designated
industry bodies, or a combination
of the above, as Member Economies deem
appropriate.’
There is mention of the value of complainants having a choice of remedies
‘commensurate with the extent of the actual or potential
individuals resulting from such violations’ (V).
Legislation is mentioned as one means of providing remedies but is not
required or even recommended (V). In contrast, even the OECD
Guidelines 'Part 4
National Implementation' state that ‘Member countries should in particular
endeavour to (a) adopt appropriate
domestic legislation’ (OECD 19(a)) and
a range of other means including 'reasonable means for individuals to exercise
rights' (19(c)), 'adequate sanctions and remedies' (including against data
export breaches) (19(d)), and for 'no unfair discrimination'
(19(e)). The OECD
support for legislation is tepid, but APEC’s is non-existent.
3.1. What verifiable implementation is there after five years?
What criteria are to be used to measure whether a chosen implementation
measure is sufficient to implement the APEC Privacy Principles?
APEC only states
that a country’s privacy protections ‘should include an appropriate
array of remedies for privacy protection
violations, which could include
redress, the ability to stop a violation from continuing, and other
remedies’, and these should
be ‘commensurate with the extent of the
actual or potential harm’. No external means of assessment are suggested.
now creates problems for the ‘Pathfinder’ projects, as
discussed below.
Nor does APEC require that there by any central enforcement body (no matter
what enforcement approach is adopted), but merely recommends
some central access
point(s) for general information. (II). ‘Pathfinder’ project 5 is
now supposed to document this.
Member economies are also supposed to provide to APEC periodic updates on
their Individual Action Plan (IAP) on Information Privacy
(VI). There are no
provisions for any third party assessments of these IAPs in terms of their
compliance with the Framework. Development
of this IAP content was supposed to
have started after the second Implementation Seminar in 2005, but as of the most
recent APEC
are renewed
exhortations from the Sub-group that the APEC Secretariat should overcome
whatever bureaucratic or technical obstacles
have prevented them from posting
documents on a website for three years, so that some unspecified number of IAPs
can be available,
but only New Zealand is known to have submitted one (APEC,
2008a). That aspect of external validation of compliance has also failed.
APEC advocates education and publicity to support the Framework (III). It
advocates ‘ample’ private sector (including
civil society) input
into the development and operation of privacy regimes (IV), but for much of the
history or the APEC Framework
this resulted in the inclusion of business
interests but exclusion of consumers.
In essence, Part IV exhorts APEC members to implement the Framework without
requiring any particular means of doing so, or any means
of assessing whether
they have done so. No means of assessment have yet been developed. The APEC
Framework is therefore considerably
weaker than any other international privacy
instrument in terms of its implementation requirements, and its practices.
4. Data export issues
A key purpose of the APEC Privacy Framework is to increase the free flow of
personal information among APEC economies. We first need
to see how other
international privacy agreements address this issue.
4.1. OECD and EU approaches – allowing and requiring
The OECD Guidelines require that member countries do not impede the free flow
of personal information to other OECD countries that
do ‘substantially
observe’ the Guidelines. They also explicitly set out three situations
when data export restrictions
are acceptable: where the importing country does
not ‘substantially observe’ the OECD Guidelines; where re-export
circumvent domestic laws (in effect, where the receiving country does not
have its own data export prohibitions); and to protect
sensitive data not
similarly protected overseas (OECD, 1981: ‘Part 3 - Basic Principles of
International Application’,
guideline 17).
The novel development in the EU Directive was that, while it required that
there be free flow of personal information to other EU
countries (on the basis
that they were all required to implement the standards of the Directive in their
national laws), it also
required member countries to prohibit personal data
exports to non-EU countries unless the standards required by the EU for personal
data exports were met (the best known of which is the ‘adequacy’
standard under A25 of the Directive, but other approaches
are required or
allowed under A26). In some cases, where the EU’s standards were met by a
non-EU country, the EU country concerned
was not permitted to forbid the export
to the non-EU country, thereby guaranteeing a certain degree of free flow of
personal information
even outside the EU. There is now an Optional Protocol
(CoE, 2001) to the Council of Europe privacy Convention 108 (COE, 1981) to
the same effect.
There is therefore nothing unusual in an international privacy agreement
including a guarantee of free flow of personal information
as an inducement to
meet an agreed minimum standard of privacy protection. Equally, there is nothing
unusual in international agreements
recognising that it can be justified to
prohibit data exports in some circumstances (OECD Guidelines), and even making
such restrictions
mandatory (EU Directive).
4.2. The APEC Framework’s approach – neutrality or Trojan
What approach is APEC taking to these issues? It is necessary to look at
both the final Framework, and its implementation through
the post-2007
‘Pathfinder’ projects. When the Framework was released in 2004, it
seemed possible that it might seek
via the missing Part IV (B) to discourage or
prevent data export limitations in regional privacy laws, or attempt to provide
of free flow of personal data within APEC despite existing or future
data export limitations. A number of factors supported such
an expectation (see
Greenleaf, 2007 for a summary), including that embodying such a
‘trade-off’ in the Framework was
suggested by then APEC Privacy
Subgroup Chair in his
accompanying version 1 of the APEC principles (APEC drafts, 2003-04; and see
Ford, 2003 and Greenleaf, 2003a).
However, such expectations were not borne out by the September 2005 final
version of Part (IV) B. It says nothing directly about personal
data exports
– either in terms of limitation rules or requirements to allow them. Part
IV (B) III ‘Cooperative Development
of Cross-border privacy rules’
only deals with ‘recognition or acceptance of organizations’
cross-border privacy
rules across the APEC region’ (APEC Framework Part B,
2005). The final version of the Framework does not explicitly take as
position as the
Consultant’s Issues Paper
(Crompton and Ford, July
2005) which proposed that one of three ‘implementation objectives’
of APEC is that ‘prevention
of data flow across borders should not be put
forward as a generally suitable remedy for privacy infringements that involve
more economies.’
The final APEC Framework, by itself, does
do any of the following:
(i) Forbid (or even discourage) data exports to countries without
APEC-compliant laws (contrast the EU Directive);
(ii) Explicitly allow restrictions on data exports to countries without
APEC-compliant laws (contrast the OECD Guidelines and the
Council of Europe
Convention);
(iii) Require data exports to be allowed to APEC economies that have
APEC-compliant laws (or equivalent protections) (contrast any
international privacy agreement).
The Framework’s Commentary encourages (iii), but does not explicitly
discourage (ii), unless you interpret Principle IX as providing
exports should be allowed provided the exporter remains
‘accountable’. The APEC Privacy Framework is therefore
non-prescriptive in relation to data exports, consistent with its general
non-prescriptive nature. Since APEC agreements
do not have any legal status, it
could not of course formally require or forbid anything, but if the Framework
had been stated in
more prescriptive terms this would have had an influence.
This apparently non-prescriptive result led some commentators, including
conclude that there was little risk that the APEC Framework might create a data
protection ‘bloc’ which is antagonistic
to the EU’s
‘adequacy’ requirements (Greenleaf, 2005c, 2005d). However, to
assess whether this is correct, it
is also necessary to consider how the APEC
framework is now being implemented by the ‘Pathfinder’ projects.
5. Cross-Border Privacy Rules (CBPR) and the ‘Pathfinders’
In September 2007 the relevant APEC Ministers endorsed the ‘Data
Subgroup. Such
projects must have the support of a majority of APEC economies, and no veto. The
Pathfinder project has ‘the
goal of developing and implementing an
accountable Cross-Border Privacy Rules (CBPR) system within APEC’, so as
‘to protect
the personal information of an individual no matter where in
the APEC region that personal information is transferred or accessed’.
Pathfinder proposal is described in its Executive Summary as:
Thirteen APEC member economies have agreed to develop a framework for
accountable flows of personal data across the region, focussing
on the use of
cross-border privacy rules by business. This will promote consumer trust and
business confidence in cross-border data
flows. It will support business needs,
reduce compliance costs, provide consumers with effective remedies, allow
regulators to operate
efficiently, and minimise regulatory burdens.
These proposals are not limited to intra-company transfers: they may deal
with data exports to any other company in any other (APEC)
5.1. The Pathfinder participants - tentative engagement?
The Project Work Plan says ‘An economy’s expression of support
indicates support for an overarching approach for developing
and implementing a
CBPR system. Economies may then consider whether they are able to support and
participate in the development
and implementation of specific projects.’
With Ministerial adoption, all economies now support the Pathfinder process, but
are not necessarily involved in projects.
Of APEC’s 21 member ‘economies’, 13 expressed interest in
participating in one or more of the nine Pathfinder projects
detailed below by
the time of the September 2007 Ministerial endorsement: Australia, Canada, Hong
Kong, Japan, Republic of Korea,
Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, Thailand,
Chinese Taipei (Taiwan), the United States, and Vietnam. Since then, the
Republic of China, and the Philippines have decided to
participate in some projects. Singapore is still not participating in any
project, though its ‘joining’ of the Pathfinders has been
re-announced (APEC, 2008a), so it should not be counted. The
economies which have apparently chosen not to participate in any of the
‘Pathfinder’ projects are Chile, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Papua New
Guinea, Russia, and Brunei. The business group Global Business Dialogue (GBDe)
has also become a participant
in project 9, and the Asia Pacific Trustmark
Association is also to be involved in Project 9 testing (though not formally
to Sub-group meetings).
Although the apparent involvement of two thirds
member economies is superficially impressive, it is necessary to look more
closely. There are three possible levels of involvement
in each of the 9
Pathfinder projects: leader, participant, and observer. From inception, the
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
and the USA have been participants in
all nine projects. The ICC leads Pathfinder project 1 and 3, the USA leads
projects 2, 4, and
9 and Australia leads the rest (5, 6, 7 and 8). Although
Australia is a participant in the other 8 projects, it is only an observer
project 9. Canada is involved in all projects except project 4 and to a very
limited extent in project 9.
Aside from the obvious enthusiasm of the ICC, USA, Australia and Canada to be
involved as participants, it is not obvious that there
is yet a high level of
‘buy in’ to the Pathfinder projects from other economies. As
discussed below, projects 5, 6 and
7 are non-contentious arrangements for
cross-border cooperation between data protection authorities, and while very
relevant to the
Pathfinder projects are independent of their more contentious
aspects. Leaving these three projects aside, the levels of participation
addition to that of the USA, Australia and Canada is thin: no other economies
are participants in projects 1 and 3; Hong Kong,
Japan, Mexico and New Zealand
are participants in project 2; only Mexico is a participant in project 4; Korea
and New Zealand are
participants in project 8; and China, Hong Kong, Chinese
Taipei, Mexico and Vietnam have agreed to participate in the testing processes
in project 9. This leaves Thailand and the Philippines only being involved
anywhere as observers, and Peru only participating in
projects 5 and 6. Other
than the ‘three amigos’ of the USA, Australia and Canada, only
Mexico (2, 4 and 9) is a participant
in more than one project outside of
projects 5, 6 and 7.
It could not be expected that all economies would be active participants in
all projects. While lack of active participation does
not equate to lack of
support, merely being listed as an ‘observer’ in a project may not
constitute much more than taking
a ‘wait and see’ attitude. It seems
that most APEC economies are still waiting to make up their minds as to how
they will be in these Pathfinder processes. Any talk of an APEC
‘bloc’ or common position in relation to the APEC Pathfinder
projects would seem to be a considerable exaggeration at this stage. Having said
that, it remains impressive and valuable that so
many APEC economies are meeting
twice a year to discuss data protection issues, with 17 economies having been
represented at the
August 2008 meeting in Peru.
5.2 The Pathfinder projects
There are nine Pathfinder projects
that economies can decide to join. Official publicly available documentation
projects is very limited, the most recent being a two page
summary of the August 2008 Sub-group meeting in Peru (APEC 2008a). There
numerous work-in-progress drafts in circulation about each of the projects
below, but they remain unpublished. Published accounts
by Waters (2008, 2008a),
Civil Society representative at Sub-group meetings, are the most informative.
His summaries of how the Pathfinder
projects are supposed to work are added to
the formal descriptions below (Waters, 2008).
CBPR self-assessment guidance for organisations
developed jointly with project 3). ‘A business seeking to participate will
prepare a document setting out how it
will comply with any applicable standards,
and how it will deal with any complaints about breaches; (i.e. a version of the
policy or privacy statements which are required by some domestic laws,
and by APEC principle II). In the Pathfinder this is known
‘self-assessment’ (project 1). This self-assessment will be based on
a standard set of questions, currently being
drafted by TRUSTe with input from
all participants.’ (Waters, 2008)
Guidelines for trustmarks participating in a CBPR system
(‘Develop guidelines for what a trustmark must do in order to be
recognised as an APEC CBPR accreditation provider’).
These are now called
‘accountability agents’. In some jurisdictions they will be
government bodies, and there should
be common standards for both public sector
and privacy sector Accountability Agents (Waters, 2008a).
Compliance review of an organisation's CBPRs
guidelines for trustmarks to use when assessing an organisation’s
compliance with the APEC Privacy Principles’).
‘Project 3 involves
developing guidelines for trustmarks to use when assessing the compliance of
organisations with the relevant
legal/self-regulatory criteria.’
‘The [self-assessment] document would be assessed by an
‘accountability agent’
which might be a regulatory agency or a
‘trustmark’ organisation. Private accountability agents (e.g.,
trustmarks) would
be approved based on a separate trustmark assessment process,
guidelines for which are project 2. TRUSTe has also provided a first
this document for review by participants.’ (Waters, 2008)
Directory of compliant organisations
(‘Develop a publicly
accessible directory of organisations that have CBPRs that have been accredited
as complying with the
APEC Privacy Principles’). ‘If assessed as
meeting the requirements, the business would be included in a publicly
directory of compliant organisations’ (Waters, 2008)
Data Protection Authority and Privacy Contact Officer
Template Enforcement Cooperation Arrangements
Template cross-border complaint handling form
‘Regulators will
establish mechanisms for cooperation on complaints that involve multiple
Guidelines and procedures for responsive regulation in a CBPR
(‘Develop guidelines and procedures (e.g. flowchart) to assist
in determining at which stage of the CBPR responsive regulation
cross-border privacy complaint should be handled and identify the triggers for
escalating a complaint to a higher level
of the pyramid’)
Cross-Border Privacy Rules International Implementation Pilot
(including participating economies identifying businesses willing to
participate) ‘Pathfinder project 9 will seek to test the
entire process,
starting with a number of volunteer businesses submitting self-assessment
results documents for ‘processing’
by accountability agents. The
complaints and enforcement mechanisms being developed in projects 6 & 7 will
then be tested on
hypothetical ‘breach’ scenarios.’ (Waters,
2008) Six economies, plus ICC and GBDe, have agreed to participate in
testing, and others are observers.
5.3. Unanswered questions about standards for data exports
Projects 5-8 aim to increase cooperation between all types of data protection
authorities, are not related specifically to CBPR schemes,
uncontroversial. Project 9 involves making elements of the other projects work
together. It is Projects 1-4 that raise questions
which are not answered by any
of the official APEC Pathfinder documents (Greenleaf, 2008).
Against what criteria does a company self-assess whether its CBPR procedures
are good enough (Project 1)? Similarly, what is the standard
protection against which a trustmark provider must accredit companies (Projects
3)? Further, are the only aspects of a
company’s privacy practices which
must meet the standards of the APEC Privacy Framework those that relate to
cross-border transfers?
The APEC Privacy Framework does not provide answers to any of these
questions, as it is quite open as to what standards different
economies may
require in order to allow cross-border transfers (see Greenleaf, 2005). The APEC
Pathfinder published documents are
still unclear as to where they locate the
standards against which particular organisation’s cross-border privacy
to be measured. Where countries have information privacy laws, there
may be limits as to what cross-border transfers can be allowed.
But where no
laws apply, are the standards for cross-border transfers those that consumers
would set, or governments – or
businesses?
It seems to be a reasonable assumption that the standard to be applied here
is that (except where a law forbids) any data export is
allowable provided the
exporter can claim to be adhering to APEC Principle IX
(‘Accountability’) which says any data
exporter must either obtain
consent or ‘exercise due diligence and take reasonable steps to ensure
that the recipient person
or organization will protect the information
consistently with these Principles’, plus any other Principles on which
with Principle IX is dependent. It appears to be assumed that this is
enough, and ‘accreditation’ should be provided
on this basis (at
least where local laws do not forbid this). The APEC Framework does not state
how the sufficiency of any compliance
measures are to be assessed, so there is
no objective standard of whether the information is ‘protected’. At
APEC needs to better communicate its intentions and its operating
assumptions.
One draft Pathfinder document states that an Accountability Agent is to
evaluate a company’s practices ‘against a set
requirements (Project 3) that encompasses all the principles of the APEC Privacy
with respect to cross border data transfers
as developed and
endorsed by APEC member economies’ (emphasis added). This seems to mean
that the ‘program requirements’
do not require companies to comply
with ‘all the principles of the APEC Privacy Framework’ at all, but
only Principle
IX (‘Accountability’). The rest of the document only
refers to enforcement of ‘program requirements against
Participants’,
not enforcement of the APEC Privacy Principles. However,
other draft Pathfinder documents do pose questions to potential company
Participants about their compliance with all of the APEC Principles, without it
being clear which aspects are essential for the evaluation
being carried out by
the Accountability Agent. It is not at all clear which principles are
‘with respect to cross border data
transfers’, as it is clearly not
all of them, but presumably more than just Principle IX. It is easy to see that
IV (Uses of personal information) is applicable in that any uses or
disclosures to an overseas organisation must comply with it,
and the same
applies to Principles VI (Integrity) and VII (Security) insofar as information
being transferred and the conditions
of its transfer are concerned (but not in
relation to any other information not being transferred). Some but not all
aspects of Notice
(II) may be relevant, but it is hard to see that Collection
(III), Choice (V), or Access and Correction (VIII) will normally involve
cross-border considerations.
Of course these are only drafts, but the implication of the Pathfinders
focussing only on CBPRs is that companies will be able to
be listed in the
‘Directory of compliant organisations’ (Project 4) even though they
do not comply with the all Principles
in the APEC Privacy Framework. For data
which they have no intention to transfer overseas, they might not need to comply
Principles. How will this ‘APEC Privacy Compliance
Directory’ (or whatever it will be called) make it clear to every
and business partner that just because a company is listed there, that is no
guarantee that it complies with the APEC Privacy
Framework? Of course, similar
approaches and similar issues have been seen before: as more details become
available, the Pathfinder
Projects look increasingly like a generalised version
of the US Safe Harbor approach.
5.4 Standards for accrediting accountability agents
Just as important, against what criteria would ‘accountability
agents’ be themselves ‘accredited’ or recognised
(Project 2).
To use the most obvious example, ‘how do we know that TRUSTe can be
trusted to refuse or remove accreditation
of non-compliant businesses?’.
As Waters (2008) puts it:
‘Another important element currently missing from the Pathfinder is the
mechanism by which the regulator in any one jurisdiction,
or collectively, would
assess the credentials of the ‘accountability agent’ in another
deliver assessment criteria for trustmarks, but
who will make the decision that a trustmark scheme (or a regulatory agency)
these criteria? As with organisational assessments, we [civil society
organisations] will argue for full transparency with respect
to trustmark
assessments.’
Is there any evidence that trustmark schemes can be trusted to provide
objective assessments of compliance with privacy standards,
free of any conflict
of interest? Connolly (2008) concludes after a detailed study that the track
record of English language trustmark
schemes in relation to privacy is poor.
Following the demise of the BBB Online Privacy Seal in 2008, TRUSTe is
‘the only remaining
large-scale privacy trustmark’. The
‘privacy seal graveyard’ is littered with corpses such as
controlscan
. Connolly concludes that TRUSTe’s own privacy
standards for their most common seal (with over 2,000 members) are ‘lower
than any privacy law, binding agreement or international privacy
standard’. In relation to the enforcement of these already
low standards
against its members, he concludes that ‘TRUSTe can only point to one
effective enforcement action in more than
11 years – against a company who
(sic) was already being taken to court by regulators’. Connolly considers
that TRUSTe
was actually the best of the trustmark schemes he considers.
Connolly’s conclusions echo those of earlier critics of trustmark
such as Gellman (2000) (who stated he could not think of a single reason to
advise a consumer to make a complaint against
a trustmark scheme) and Howes
(2002) (‘their standards were worthless, and ... their true sympathies and
interests lay with
the very companies they were supposed to be policing’).
Perhaps there are some successes outside the English-speaking world, but a
successful Japanese or Vietnamese language scheme, or even
one in Spanish, would
give rather limited scope for privacy seal operators to be the bedrock of
APEC’s Pathfinder. What basis
is there for trusting privacy seal or other
trustmark operators? APEC needs to explain this, not assume it. There is scope
for self-regulatory
and co-regulatory elements in regulatory schemes, but they
are not givens, and evidence of past failures should weigh heavily against
continuation.
Accreditation by a trustmark provider is not the only way to be included in a
directory (Project 4), because an ‘accountability
agent’ can also be
a ‘regulatory agency’ (Waters, 2008). Under what powers regulatory
agencies can carry out the
assessments required by Projects 2 and 3 also remains
to be seen. Will existing legislation be amended across APEC to allow regulators
to carry out this function? If it is, will the legislation also have to endorse
the standards adopted by the APEC Sub-group under
projects 3 and 4? Is this
likely to occur?
Who is going to ‘accredit’ these Accountability Agents? The
Pathfinder documents don’t explicitly say so, but since
there is no
collective process for accreditation across all Member economies, it can only be
that each economy will decide on its
own process for such accreditation. An
Accountability Agent will then accredit the CBPRs of, for example, businesses
headquartered
in its country. Then, by some process yet to be developed,
governments in one country will presumably recognise the accreditations
businesses made by Accountability Agents in other countries. It also seems that
if there is no Accountability Agent specified
in a country, it can choose to
make use of one from another country. If the USA accredits TRUSTe, will or
should other economies
accept that, and all the consequent accreditations of
US-based companies that flow from it? This is the type of question for which
there are no published answers as yet.
5.5 Will ‘adequacy’ evolve within APEC?
Waters is the Civil Society representative most actively (and positively)
engaged in the Pathfinder projects, but he still considers
that collective
‘adequacy’ assessments will eventually be necessary (Waters, 2008),
an argument first raised by NZ Assistant
Commissioner Stewart in 2003 (see
Greenleaf, 2003a):
‘If the APEC Framework is to achieve its objective of removing barriers
to the cross border flows of personal information, there
is no escaping from the
need, ultimately, for an ‘adequacy assessment’ mechanism similar to
the EU Directive’s
Articles 29 and 31 Committee processes. No economy, and
in particular no regulator in those economies with a legislated cross border
transfer principle ...will be able to avoid making a decision about which other
-both of substantive
rules/principles, and of compliance and enforcement mechanisms. There is
reluctance on the part of some participants
to acknowledge this fact; indeed
some participants seem to view the Pathfinder project as a replacement for
traditional “adequacy”
determinations, via a sort of “safe
harbour” approach, although it is not clear how this can be reconciled
acceptance of domestic legislative requirements.’
5.6. Potential advantages?
An optimistic approach is to hope that this CBPR work will encourage
economies with no current privacy legislation to adopt legislation
embodying the
APEC Principles, on the basis that this will then make it easier for them to
utlise the CBPR procedures to secure information
flows to their economy.
Waters (2008) also sees some advantages in the ‘self assessment’
‘The scheme would appear to offer the advantage of having businesses
conduct a level of self-assessment which goes well beyond
what is required by
most domestic privacy laws, which are almost all complaint-based and have a
default untested assumption that
data controllers are complying with the law.
From draft assessment criteria presented in the Lima workshop, the level of
provided to ‘accountability agents’ would also exceed even
that required by those European laws which require registration
controllers. A crucial unanswered question is whether the self assessment
details would be made public, or whether participating
business could provide a
lesser level of detail in its public privacy notices, statements or policies.
Civil society organisations
will argue for the former.’
Another crucial question, as discussed above, is whether companies seeking
APEC accreditation, will in fact have to comply with the
whole nine APEC
Principles, or only the Accountability Principle and those Principles on which
it depends (but only in relation to
some data). If only the latter, then the
APEC CBPR process will have the opposite effect in both cases: it will provide a
way out’ from complying with all the Principles (so why
bother with legislation to embody all of them), and the assessment
process will
not require businesses to demonstrate full compliance with all APEC Principles,
but will reward them nevertheless with
APEC accreditation (Project 4).
However, there are still some grounds for optimism. If the Pathfinder
projects result only in complexity and uncertainty, with no
obvious benefits to
economies overall but only to a few companies, it may be that some economies
will draw the conclusion that legislation
of international standards is a more
productive route forward.
6. Ongoing issues of consumer representation
What role do consumer interests have in APEC’s privacy processes? In
the development of the Framework, consumer organisations
were not invited to
participate in the negotiating process, though business organisations were. A
few national delegations (notably
that of the USA) included consumer
representatives. Most others did not. The one detailed and critical submission
by a consumer organisation
when public submissions were belatedly requested (see
APEC drafts, 2003-04: APPCC Submission), had no effect.
Has anything improved during the post-2004 implementation phase?
Representatives of consumer organisations have been invited to participate
all public seminars since 2005. The Pathfinder proposal approved by Ministers in
2007 says that one of its ‘main objectives’
will be ‘promoting
the development of consultative processes ... including ... consumer
representatives both in the creation
of the rules and processes and in their
operational review and optimisation.’ (APEC, 2007). These objectives are
repeated at
the outset of the Project Work Plan. However, the nine projects were
designed without any input from consumer organisations, in contrast
to extensive
input from business organisations.
At the time these objectives were under consideration, Privacy International
(PI) applied for accreditation to the APEC Data Privacy
Subgroup, in the same
way that the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and another business group
(Global Business Dialogue on
e-Commerce (GBDe)) are accredited to be
represented, with speaking and participation rights. As we have seen, ICC
participates in
all 9 projects, and GBDe in one. Other business organisations
such as TRUSTe and the Asia Pacific Trustmark Association are also
now involved
in project 9, on some unknown basis. PI’s application was declined by the
APEC Secretariat in June 2007, with
the comment that consumer representatives
could ask to join delegations from economies, ignoring the fact that this does
a right to speak at Subgroup meetings without consent of delegation
chairs or to formally participate in Pathfinder projects. Both
USA’s Electronic Privacy Information Centre (EPIC) made a further
application at APEC’s Peru meeting in February
2008 for guest membership
status. Although there was no apparent objection to this at the Privacy Subgroup
meeting, neither application
was approved by the ECSG, apparently because one
economy objected (APEC works by consensus). It was stated at the Privacy
Commissioner’s
Conference in Strasbourg, 2008, that the blackballing was
by China. The applications were deferred to the next ECSG meeting pending
organisations providing further background information (Waters, 2008), but have
been again refused. PI and EPIC are instead
invited to apply for guest status on
a meeting-by-meting basis.
Consumer groups in various APEC countries have been undecided whether to
engage with the APEC processes, or to oppose them. As Canada’s
(2007) says ‘the process looks very much like a cleverly disguised attempt
to establish a low international standard
through the back door’.
Australia’s Waters (2007) noted that although the Australian Privacy
Foundation proposed better
NGO input into APEC processes, ‘other NGOs ...
are still concerned that engaging formally with the APEC process may be a trap
that NGOs should avoid’. In 2008 the civil society organisations are still
testing the strategy of engagement. As noted, it
has not yet yielded subgroup
membership. However, at the February 2008 Privacy Subgroup meeting in Peru,
three representatives of
civil society
organisations
invited to speak in the public seminar. Even without permanent guest status, the
civil society organisations have been invited
to participate in conference calls
on the Pathfinder projects. All very well, but it is a bit late. In contrast,
the subgroup Chair
drafted the Pathfinder Work Plan in 2007 and noted that
‘ICC had the opportunity to consider the draft and circulated some
comments which identified areas where it is necessary to broaden the discussion
in the document. There was discussion about the projects’.
It is clear
from this, and from its participation in all projects, that ICC uses its
participation right aggressively to influence
every aspect of the
sub-group’s work. Consumer groups were at that time shut out from such a
level of participation. It is
of less value to be allowed to participate once
the principal rules have already been set.
The downside of Civil Society involvement in the Subgroup was apparent at the
2008 where the US
representative made effusive statements about the value of Civil Society
participation in the Pathfinder projects.
The comments were accurate, but were
potentially misleading to less informed listeners, who could easily have
concluded that Civil
Society groups were fully behind the APEC processes. None
are, as was subsequently made clear by a statement to the Subgroup by all
involved Civil Society groups setting out their limited ‘terms of
engagement’:
‘Civil Society has not endorsed either the APEC Privacy Framework
or the Pathfinder process. Civil Society has very limited
expectations
of the Pathfinder process and it remains unclear to us whether it
can produce anything of value other than better cooperation
national authorities, which would be very valuable. We also remain concerned
that the Pathfinder could lead to undesirable
outcomes in terms of either lower
standards of privacy protection and/or misleading compliance claims.
However, Civil Society considers
that it needs to be aware of what is
happening in the APEC privacy processes, and therefore welcomes opportunities
to participate
in sub-group meetings when limited resources
allow. While attending it is our policy to make constructive suggestions
where appropriate,
but these do not represent either support or expectations of
It may no longer be fair to joke that APEC stands for ‘All Present
Except Consumers’, but it is still arguable that Civil
organisations have more to lose than to gain from participation in the APEC
processes because they have been let in too late,
when the main rules are
already set. There is a danger that the reputations of Civil Society
organisations will be co-opted.
7. Does APEC offer a future for privacy protection?
The APEC Framework is supposed to be agnostic as to which route(s) economies
take to implement its Principles, whether the route is
via binding corporate
rules (BCRs), trustmarks, legislation or other means. But it is notable that,
while there has been some belated
recognition that enforceable remedies will be
necessary, the Data Privacy Subgroup’s work plan has never included
expressly to do with supporting legislative development (such as
seminars on options in drafting privacy laws to achieve different
goals). It is
now focused solely on developing a CBPR system. Waters (2008) notes that
‘APEC has confirmed that the CBPR approach
implementing the APEC Privacy Framework,
currently the main focus
of the Privacy Subgroup’.
When one of the principal drafters of China’s proposed data protection
gave details of what was then China’s proposed
Personal Information
Protection Act (see Greenleaf, 2008a, 2008b) at APEC’s public seminar in
Canberra in January 2007, this
attracted no public comment from anyone engaged
in the APEC processes who was present. That one of the two giant economies of
was proposing to protect privacy by comprehensive national legislation
almost seemed to be an embarrassment to APEC, even though
it is the most direct
route to complete compliance with the APEC Privacy Framework.
The APEC Privacy Framework and its processes often seems to be little more
than a vehicle for advancing the interests of those business
economies that seem to wish to deter and deflect as many countries as possible
from adopting information privacy laws,
and in particular from adopting any
legally enforceable restrictions on exports of personal data. As more Pathfinder
details emerge,
the priority of APEC’s Privacy Sub-group seems to be to
construct a generalised version of the Safe Harbor program, applicable
economies in the Asia Pacific. It benefits large companies, many of which are
US-based, who wish to transfer personal information
out of (or at least between)
APEC economies. It benefits operators of trustmark schemes. There are competing
claims that credit for
originating and driving the APEC Framework’s
development is primarily due to the Australian government (Ford, 2008), and to
American business organisations associated with the ICC (The Centre for
Information Policy Leadership website, cited in Connolly,
2008a). There is no
need to take sides, as the impetus seems to have come from both directions, and
from the US government, though
other economies’ representatives have
influenced its development (Greenleaf 2003a – 2005e).
The likelihood that companies will obtain ‘APEC privacy
accreditation’ without actually complying with all APEC Privacy
Principles, and without their being any guarantee that they are even complying
with local privacy legislation by such accreditation,
is potentially extremely
confusing to and deceptive of consumers everywhere across APEC. Privacy
Commissioners and other regulators
are being asked to be a party to this
(including through projects 2, 3, 4, 8 and 9) without their being clear benefits
to data subjects.
They run the risk of being seen as unduly influenced by
transnational business interests.
Until APEC gives the same priority to supporting both legislative and
non-legislative developments, unambiguously accepts the rights
of economies to
have reasonable data export limitations, and gives the same status to
consumer/privacy groups as it currently gives
to business groups, it is hard to
see its Privacy Framework as having any significant positive effect on the
development of privacy
protection in the Asia-Pacific. Even then, whether the
Pathfinder projects 1-4 and 8-9 can make a positive contribution remains to
Of course, the APEC Privacy Framework and its processes could be more than
they are at present. They could be a useful means of advancing
information
significance; of advocating a minimum standard
of privacy Principles to be
achieved by verifiable means; and of facilitating trans-border data flows within
a framework of national
laws. Europe has made significant progress toward these
goals over 25 years, though there is still a long way to travel. The APEC
process is showing little sign as yet that it is even pointed in the right
8. Alternative futures for Asia-Pacific privacy
If APEC’s Privacy Framework and its CBPR focus are unlikely be the
driver of major changes to privacy protection in the Asia-Pacific
region, where
are they going to come from? Four possible drivers include new national privacy
laws, possibly influenced by other
regional groupings (most likely), the
region’s privacy officials learning to act collectively (least likely) and
Europe Convention 108 developing as a global privacy Convention (only
recently a possibility). The final ‘elephant in the room’
Asia-Pacific is the continuing influence of the European Union privacy
Directive. None of these possible future major factors
exclude the APEC Privacy
Framework continuing to play a role.
8.1. New national privacy laws and regional initiatives?
A new wave of national legislation would make APEC less relevant,
particularly if it is origins had little to do with APEC. As already
there is new data protection legislation under development in China, Thailand,
the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Peru,
and perhaps elsewhere. The draft
Chinese law that was under consideration seemed to fit that description (see
Greenleaf 2008a, 2008b),
but China’s intentions are still a mystery.
Chinese legislation would change the whole regional privacy equation, providing
another model for emulation and a signal that privacy legislation is part of the
package of a modernising economy.
The Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has recently and
successfully placed significant emphasis on the drafting and
enactment of
e-commerce laws. As part of this, its members have a commitment to data
protection laws harmonised across ASEAN by 2015
(Connolly, 2008b). Its ten
member countries
have a partial overlap with APEC membership (Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar are not
in APEC), but have a combined population of
575 million and a combined GDP of
$US1.8 trillion. A coordinated ASEAN legislative initiative, drafted from the
perspective of facilitating
e-commerce, would have impact comparable to that of
China adopting national legislation. It is not difficult to envisage these quite
possible developments overshadowing anything arising from APEC.
Other regional groupings within the APEC area may also play a role in
diminishing the focus on APEC. Three APEC members (Chile, Peru
and Mexico) are
in the Ibero-Américan Data Protection network. In 2008 Uruguay adopted an
EU-modelled data protection law,
joining Argentina, Columbia and Paraguay. Chile
has a law before Parliament to adapt its current Act toward EU compliance. Laws
said to be proposed in Peru, Brazil, Venezuela, El Salvadore, Bolivia and
Nicuragua (Palazzi, 2008). Mexico may soon be quite out
of step with its
Ibero-Américan neighbours.
One APEC member (Vietnam) and three ASEAN members are also members of the
Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, in which
since 2004 there is a
commitment by Heads of State to develop data protection rules and to support
cooperation between data protection
authorities (Summit of Ouagadougou 2004).
This led to the francophone association of data protection authorities
8.2. The limited vision of the Asia-Pacific’s privacy Commissioners
As Stewart, Waters and others have suggested, collective judgments about
compliance with regional privacy standards may eventually
be inevitable. If this
occurs then it may require collective input from the region’s privacy
authorities. This is not a role
to which they are yet accustomed.
European data protection Commissioners have a long history of collective
deliberation, and in the last ten years, of collective action.
The EU national
Commissioners make up the Data Protection Working Party (‘Article 29
Committee’) established under the
European privacy Directive (A29
Committee website), and as such have a formal role in deliberating on the
adequacy of privacy laws
of non-EU countries, as well as on many other matters
of collective concern to privacy protection in Europe, and advising other
bodies on this. In their first decade they published 118 collective
Opinions, Annual Reports and Working Documents since 1997. The
Committee is
generally regarded as among the world’s most authoritative and influential
voices on privacy issues.
There is as yet nothing similar in the Asia-Pacific. The Asia-Pacific Privacy
Authorities Forum (APPA Forum, previously known as PANZA+)
includes the data
protection authorities of Australia (from four jurisdictions), New Zealand, Hong
Kong, South Korea and Canada (federal
and British Columbia jurisdictions). APPA
members have to be accredited to the international meeting of Commissioners and
Asia or the Western Pacific (Stewart, 2006). APPA and its predecessor
bodies have met six monthly for fourteen years. APPA’s
Statement of
Objectives (2005), other than being a general agreement to cooperate and
exchange information, has its most concrete
objective as ‘Promoting best
practice amongst privacy authorities’. In contrast, the ‘Tasks of
the Article 29 Data
Protection Working Party’ (A29 Committee, Tasks) is
replete with substantive objectives, including ‘To make recommendations
the public at large, and in particular to Community institutions on matters
relating to the protection of persons with regard
to the processing of personal
data and privacy in the European Community.’
The severely limited collective role of the Asia-Pacific Commissioners is
best appreciated by considering things it has not done.
It has never issued a
collective opinion on a privacy issue of regional or global importance, such as
on particular privacy practices
of global companies or on outsourcing practices.
The Article 29 Committee has given many such opinions. It did not provide any
input into the development of the APEC Privacy Framework, though
individual offices from some jurisdictions (eg NZ, HK) were significant
There are both good reasons and excuses for the differences between Europe
and the Asia-Pacific. The Europeans have more countries
with privacy laws, and
the A29 Committee has a formal collective role enshrined in a Directive which
gives them a mandate to stick
their collective noses into any privacy issue they
think is important enough, and to do so publicly. One of the many failures of
the process leading to the APEC Privacy Framework is that the creation of any
such collective body of privacy authorities was not
even on the agenda for
discussion. The Asia-Pacific Commissioners have never had sufficient courage of
their own convictions to invent
a role for themselves, possibly at risk of
upsetting national governments. It would be possible for some Commissioners to
find sufficient
mandate in their legislation to enable them to have some larger
collective role. However, there would be severe limits to this in
the absence of
a mandate from some regional agreement. Since 2005 APPA is becoming more
organized and purposeful, but has not yet
found a substantive role in the
region’s privacy protection.
8.3. The continuing influence of the EU privacy Directive
The European Union privacy Directive’s (European Union, 1995)
requirements concerning the ‘adequacy’ of the privacy
laws of third
countries before there can be unconditional exports of personal data to them
from EU member states has taken a lot
longer to ‘bite’ than many
expected. There are a number of reasons for this. It has taken a long time for
EU countries
to bring their own laws into line with the Directive, and some
still have not done so fully, to the extent that the European Commission
taking action against some of them. Individual EU countries have been reluctant
to prevent data transfers to third party countries.
The Commission has been very
slow to complete its determinations of adequacy, or lack of it, for very many
countries, no doubt being
very reluctant to find non-EU countries’ laws
inadequate when so many EU laws were still so manifestly lacking.
No Asia-Pacific country's law has yet been declared to not be adequate. There
has been a provision finding in favour of Canadian federal
law, which is now
being reviewed in the context of all Canadian jurisdictions. The US ‘Safe
Harbor’ scheme, of very limited
scope, was held adequate. A
consultants’ report to the Commission on all of Australia’s laws was
delivered in 2005 and
subsequently updated. The Commission is not known to have
commenced any formal investigation of the laws of New Zealand, Hong Kong,
Korea or Taiwan. The absence of adequacy findings in relation to some of these
laws, when contrasted with the adequacy finding
in favour of Argentina, have
quite rightly resulted in the European Commission and the Directive being held
up to ridicule by authors
such as Ford (2008).
Slow though it is in maturing, the EU adequacy issue is not going to go away,
and nor should it. The EU is not unreasonable in insisting
that the privacy of
Europeans whose personal data is being exported is provided adequate protection,
and the Directive is quite flexible
in how such protection can be achieved.
The attraction to most countries in the Asia-Pacific of a blanket finding of
‘adequate’ for their laws will persist, no
matter how much a few
countries may rail against the idea. The apparent motivation behind some of the
proponents of the APEC process
to form an ‘APEC bloc’ that either
explicitly rejected or ignored any European privacy standards (see Ford 2003,
and Ford 2005) has not yet succeeded, as APEC has not established
anything substantial of its own. The attraction of ‘EU adequacy’
likely to persist over time and will influence many aspects of future
Asia-Pacific privacy laws.
8.4. Globalisation of Council of Europe Convention 108?
world’s privacy and data protection Commissioners at their
International Conference in Montreux, Switzerland
agreed on a concluding ‘Montreux Declaration’ (2005) which issued a
number of challenges to global organizations and national governments. One was
their appeal ‘to the Council of Europe to invite,
in accordance with
article 23 [of Convention 108 on data protection] ... non-member-states of the
Council of Europe which already
have a [sic] data protection legislation to
accede to this Convention and its additional Protocol.’ Since 2001 a
similar approach
has seen the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention become an
international instrument with some adoption outside Europe, including
USA. In July 2008 the Council of Europe took up the suggestion in the
Commissioners’ declaration. The Council of Ministers
decided to invite
non-European countries with data protection laws ‘in accordance
with’ the standards of Convention 108
to request to be allowed to accede
to the Convention under Article 23(1). It may be that the Convention’s
Consultative Committee
will first examine such requests (see Greenleaf 2008c for
The Council of Europe initiative signals a possible way of sidestepping the
cumbersome process of developing a new UN convention on
with an instrument already adopted within the region with the most concentrated
distribution of privacy laws,
Europe. Forty European states have already acceded
to Convention 108. Twenty of them have acceded to its Additional Protocol which
requires a data protection authority and data export restrictions (with fourteen
more having signed it), and which seems to be heading
rapidly toward universal
accession within Europe. Five accessions are from outside the EU (Greenleaf,
The APEC region has the largest concentration of countries outside Europe
with existing data protection laws, and more so if pending
legislation is
considered. Accessions would therefore have considerable impact within the
region, and not only in relation to Europe,
because of the mutual obligations to
allow free flow of personal information (although this can be a complex question
if the Additional
Protocol is not acceded to). Accession to Convention 108 and
the Additional Protocol deserves serious consideration by Asia-Pacific
governments which already have privacy laws of international standards (or are
considering introducing same). Which countries could
qualify is beyond the scope
of this article. The pros and cons of accession for businesses, consumers and
government also require
more analysis than is possible in the conclusion of this
paper. It is in particular not clear whether there would be overall benefits
consumers. It could be counter-productive if non-European parties were allowed
to accede only to the Convention and not to the
Additional Protocol. However,
one considerable advantage is that the obligations of such a Convention would be
freely entered into
by non-European countries in return for perceived benefits,
not imposed upon them by the EU. This factor alone could help remove
‘log jam’ between some Asia Pacific countries and the EU.
The Convention and Additional Protocol could provide a reasonable basis (a
common and moderate privacy standard) for a guarantee of
free flow of personal
information between parties to the treaty, both as between Asia-Pacific
countries and as between those countries
and European countries. Such invitation
and accession to both would be likely to carry with it the benefits of a finding
of ‘adequacy’
under the EU Directive, or make one irrelevant.
Furthermore, the Directive allows a country’s international obligations to
be considered in determining the ‘adequacy’ of its laws.
Given that the APEC Privacy Framework has not attempted to provide such a
general mechanism for free flow of personal information
within the Asia-Pacific,
perhaps globalizing this European instrument is now the realistic way to do so.
It would also be a much
quicker solution than waiting for some new global
enforceable treaty to emerge from the UN or elsewhere, or waiting for the
slow process of adequacy assessment to grind onward. Even though we
may be unsure of its benefits, the globalisation of Convention
108 is likely to
play a role in shaping the future of data protection in the Asia Pacific.
9. Conclusion: A multi-tiered privacy system for the Asia-Pacific?
The result of some Asia-Pacific countries acceding to Convention 108 and the
Optional Protocol would be a multi-tiered system of international
protection in the Asia-Pacific. For the first tier countries, membership of the
Council of Europe Convention and Additional
Protocol would guarantee free flow
of personal information both between their Asia-Pacific peers who are also
members, and with European
countries. On the second tier, other regional
countries with existing privacy laws would be likely to have those laws regarded
‘adequate’ by other countries in the region for data export
purposes. For the remaining countries (‘economies’),
which economies with little or no existing
protection could adopt by whatever
means they chose, and a CBPR procedure which might give them some assistance in
relation to data
exports with similar economies or (with more difficulty), the
countries that are also in the second or first tier. It would be an
which would allow all Asia-Pacific countries to move forward.
Professor Graham Greenleaf
(g.greenleaf@unsw.edu.au) CLSR Editorial
Board, University of New South Wales
Earlier versions of parts of this paper have been published before, as the
APEC Privacy Framework has developed since 2003 (see Greenleaf
2003a-2008 in
references). This paper reconsiders and updates those arguments over five years.
An earlier version of this paper was
presented at the Asian Law Schools (ASLI)
Conference in Singapore, May 2008. Valuable comments were received from three
referees. Thanks also to Nigel Waters for earlier valuable
A29 Committee website at
http://europe.eu.int/comm/justice_home/fsj/privacy/workinggroup/index_en.htm
ALRC (2008) – Australian Law Reform Commission
Information
Report 108, ALRC, 2008
APEC (2008a) – APEC Privacy
Sub-group Chair (C Minihan)
APEC Data Privacy Sub-Group and related Meetings
- Summary of Outcomes 15 August 2008 Lima, Peru
(email to Australian APEC
APEC (2007) – APEC Privacy Subgroup (submitted by Australia)
Pathfinder Project Outlines: Possible Pathfinder Projects
implementing
Cairns, June
http://aimp.apec.org/Documents/2007/ECSG/SEM2/07_ecsg_sem2_003.doc
APEC (2005) – Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Privacy
Framework -[2005] PrivLRes 4
http://www.worldlii.org/int/other/PrivLRes/2005/4.html
APEC (2004)
APEC Privacy Framework
, November 2004 -Available from
http://www.apec.org/content/apec/apec_groups/som_special_task_groups/electronic_commerce.html
(PDF) (follow link); or in HTML from APEC drafts (2003-04) below
APEC drafts
(2003-04) -for both the final Framework and some of the previous drafts see
http://www.bakercyberlawcentre.org/appcc/
APEC Framework Part B -
APEC Privacy Framework International Implementation (“Part B”)
Final – Version VII ECSG Plenary Meeting Gyeongju, Korea, 8-9
September 2005
APPCC (2004) -Asia-Pacific Privacy Charter Council
Submission to the APEC Electronic Commerce Steering Group Privacy Sub-Group
31 May 2004 at
http://www.bakercyberlawcentre.org/appcc/APEC_APPCCsub.htm
and Ford (2005) – Malcolm Crompton and Peter Ford
Consultant’s
Issues Paper
, APEC Privacy Sub-Group, July 2005 (circulated to attendees at
the first APEC Implementation Seminar; copy on file with author)
Europe (1981) -Council of Europe
Convention for the Protection of Individuals
with Regard to the Automatic Processing of Personal Data
(Convention No 108)
1981 (Convention No 108)
Council of Europe (2001) -
Additional Protocol to
the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic
Processing of Personal Data regarding
supervisory authorities and transborder
, Strasbourg,8.XI.2001, available at
http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/181.htm
(2008) – Connolly, C ‘Trustmark schemes struggle to protect
http://www.galexia.com/public/research/assets/trustmarks_struggle_20080926/trustmarks_struggle_public.html
(2008a) – Connolly, C ‘Asia-Pacific region at the privacy crossroads
(2008)’ available at
http://www.galexia.com/public/research/assets/asia_at_privacy_crossroads_20080825/
(2008b) – Connolly, C ‘A new approach to privacy in the Asia-Pacific
(2008) Issue 95, 13-15
Ford (2008) – Ford, P ‘Asia-Pacific
, (2008) Issue 95, 11-13
Ford (2003) - Ford, P 'Implementing
the Data Protection Directive - An Outside Perspective' [2003] 9 PLPR141
Gellman (2000) – Gellman R ‘TRUSTe fails to justify its
role as privacy arbiter’,
No. 6, December 2000 at
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/PLPR/2000/53.html
(2008) – Greenleaf, G ‘APEC’s privacy Pathfinders – a
dead end for consumers?’
, Issue 91, February 2008
Greenleaf (2008a) – Greenleaf,
G ‘China’s proposed Personal Information Protection Act (Part I):
The principles’
, Issue 91, February 2008
Greenleaf (2008b) – Greenleaf,
G ‘Enforcement aspects of China’s proposed Personal Information
Protection Act’
, Issue 92, April 2008
Greenleaf (2008c)
– Greenleaf, G ‘Non-European states may join European privacy
Convention’
(2008) Issue 94, 13-14
Greenleaf (2007) – Greenleaf, G
‘Asia-Pacific developments in information privacy law and its
interpretation’
[2007] UNSWLRS 5
(bepress); presented at
, Wellington NZ, 30 March 2006
Greenleaf (2005e) – Greenleaf,
G ‘APEC Privacy Framework completed: No threat to privacy
standards’,
Issue 79, Sept/Oct 2005
Greenleaf (2005d) – Greenleaf, G
‘Implementation of APEC’s Privacy Framework’ in Datuk Haji
Abdul Raman Saad
Personal (Ed)
Data Protection in the New Millennium
LexisNexis, Malaysia, 2005
Greenleaf (2005c) – Greenleaf, G
‘APEC’s Privacy Framework sets a new low standard for the
Asia-Pacific’ in
M Richardson and A Kenyon (Eds)
New Dimensions in
University Press
Greenleaf (2005) -Greenleaf, G ‘APEC’s Privacy
Framework: A new low standard’ (2005)
Vol 11 Issue 5
Greenleaf (2004) - Greenleaf, G f
‘APEC’s privacy standard regaining strength’
(2004) 10(8) PLPR
Greenleaf (2003a) – Greenleaf G ‘Australia's APEC privacy
initiative: The pros and cons of “OECD Lite” ’
(2003) 10 (1)
Greenleaf (2003c) -Greenleaf, G 'APEC privacy principles: More Lite
with every version’
(2003) 10(6)
HK Seminar (2005)
-Website for at the first
APEC Electronic Commerce Steering Group (ECSG)
Technical Assistance Seminar: Domestic Implementation of the APEC Privacy
Hong Kong, June 2005, located at
http://www.pco.org.hk/english/infocentre/apec_ecsg1_2.html
(2002) – Howes E. ‘No Guarantee of Privacy’, 2002, at
http://www.spywarewarrior.com/uiuc/priv-pol.htm#no-guarantee
(1999) -Justice Michael Kirby ‘Privacy protection, a new beginning: OECD
principles 20 years on’
(1999) 6 PLPR 25
Lawson (2007) – Lawson,
P ‘APEC provides second class privacy protection’,
&Business International Newsletter
, Issue 89, October 2007, pgs 13-14
Montreux Declaration (2005) -‘The protection of personal data and
diversities’,
Declaration of the 27
International Conference of
Palazzi (2008) – Palazzi, P ‘New Argentine regulations, new
Uruguay law’ law’
, Issue 95, October 2008, 9-10
Parlade (2008)
– Parlade C ‘Philippines likely to adopt EU-style privacy and
95, October 2008, 16-18
Stewart (2003) – Stewart, B 'A suggested
scheme to certify substantial observance of APEC Guidelines on Data Privacy',
E-commerce Steering Group meeting, 2003
Raksirivorakul (2008)
– Raksirivorakul, W ‘Introducing Thailand's Data Protection
Law’, available at
http://www.mayerbrown.com/publications/article.asp?id=5053 & nid=6
(2005) -Stewart, B ‘Mechanisms for reporting on domestic
implementation’, paper at HK APEC Implementation
Seminar (2005)
(2008) – Tan, J ‘A comparative study of the APEC privacy
Framework: A new voice in the data protection dialogue’
Asian Journal
of Comparative Law
(2008) Vol 3, Issue 1, Article 7
Waters (2007) –
Waters, N ‘NGO view of DP Commissioners’ Conference, Montreal’
, Issue 90, December
2007, pgs 12-13
Waters (2008) – Waters, N ‘NGOs ‘cautious
optimism’ on APEC privacy initiative’
International Newsletter
, Issue 92, April 2008 (in publication)
(2008a) – Waters, N ‘The APEC Asia-Pacific Privacy Initiative
– a new route to effective data protection
or a trojan horse for
self-regulation?’ available in
University of New South Wales Faculty of
Law Research Series 2008
Working Paper 59.
[2008] UNSWLRS 59
http://law.bepress.com/unswwps/flrps08/art59/
to be published in
Australia, Brunei
Darussalam, Canada, Chile, People's Republic of China, Hong Kong, China,
Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Malaysia,
Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Chinese Taipei, Thailand, United
States, Viet Nam –
http://www.apec.org/apec/member_economies.html
“APEC is the only inter governmental grouping in the world operating on
the basis of non-binding commitments, open dialogue
and equal respect for the
views of all participants. Unlike the WTO or other multilateral trade bodies,
APEC has no treaty obligations
required of its participants. Decisions made
within APEC are reached by consensus and commitments are undertaken on a
voluntary basis.”
– ‘About APEC’ from APEC secretariat
http://www.apecsec.org.sg/apec/about_apec.html
basis, APEC
‘agreements’ such the Framework do not have any legal status, and
are best seen as agreed aspirations.
Nevertheless, their practical effect is
often very significant.
Sub-group Chair claims 16 (APEC, 2008a) claims 16, but this seems wrong unless
you count Singapore and the ICCC.
Nigel Waters
(Australian Privacy Foundation, representing Privacy International), Katitza
Rodriguez (Electronic Privacy Information
Centre (EPIC), USA) and Philippa
Lawson (Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic (CIPPIC))
Letter by N
Waters to Privacy Sub-group, 30 October
Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand
and Vietnam
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.7 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter