URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2004/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McQueen, Rob --- "English Lawyers: Between Market and State" [2004] AUJlLegHist 6; (2004) 8(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 133
BOOK REVIEWS
ENGLISH LAWYERS: BETWEEN MARKET AND STATE
RICHARD L ABEL, OUP, OXFORD & NEW YORK, 2003
Are professional bodies simply a glorified form of trade union committed to
restricting markets, or are they preservators of values
and ethics? Are the
claims professions make as to expertise and knowledge sustainable, and if so how
are consumers of legal services
to evaluate relative levels of competence before
engaging a lawyer to act on their behalf? Are many of these claims as to
spurious or exaggerated, thus simply acting as a smokescreen behind
which professions such as law can claim a monopoly over certain
tasks and at the
same time charge consumers’ extortionate rates for such services? If this
is the case and lawyers are not
necessarily better at performing some tasks
which have been traditionally regarded as requiring legal expertise why
these areas be opened up to competitors such as para-legals and
professionals in cognate areas of practice? Many of these questions
for the first time seriously addressed in the 1980s on the tide of market driven
reforms ushered in by reforming
laissez faire
administrations.
The wave of extreme liberalism ushered into mainstream political debate by
Thatcherism in the United Kingdom, and emulated by a number
conservative governments in various parts of the globe (including Australia)
during the 1980s and 1990s, therefore had significant
implications for a number
of professions, including the legal profession. The legal profession in the
United Kingdom prior to this
period had been largely exempt from provisions
prohibiting restrictive practices. Indeed, prior to Thatcherism, threats to the
professions privileged position had generally been perceived to lie with
reforming Labour administrations. The profession invariably
saw Conservative
governments as supporters of the status quo. This had remained the prevailing
view in the early years of Thatcherism.
During these years whilst many other
areas of business were being drastically reformed the legal profession was
largely left alone.
Lord Hailsham, the Lord Chancellor during this period was a
conservative in the ‘old sense’ of the word. He remained
resistant to any significant changes being made to the legal profession. Like
most of his predecessors Lord Hailsham strongly
believed in the retention of
restrictive practices on the grounds that these practices ensured independence
and integrity in the
profession.
This period of immunity from the
laissez faire
reforms sweeping the
rest of English society ended with the appointment of a new Lord Chancellor,
Lord Mackay, in 1987. In 1988 a
Green Paper was released which proposed sweeping
changes to the organization and practices of the legal profession –
the reforms proposed by the Green Paper were expanded audience rights
for solicitor advocates, the establishment of Legal Services
Ombudsman to
oversee discipline for the profession, the opening up the profession to
multidisciplinary and multinational partnerships,
the possibility of a
contingent fee system being introduced and an opening up of a number of areas in
which solicitors had traditionally
enjoyed a monopoly to non-lawyers –
conveyancing, the preparation of wills, and probate being areas particularly
singled out
for change.
Professor Abel’s study examines the way in which these new
policies embodied in Lord Mackay’s Green Paper and subsequent
legislation enacted by both the Conservative governments of Mrs
Thatcher and
John Major and by the Labour government of Tony Blair, impacted on the legal
profession, which had previously enjoyed
a range of privileges and protections
from the state, and the manner in which the profession itself responded to these
dramatic changes.
Professor Abel concludes his study with a number of theses as
to the possible future for the legal profession in the United Kingdom,
generally for the future of the profession elsewhere.
Abel’s account of these developments includes an examination of the
political environment in the United Kingdom within which
these major changes to
the legal profession occurred. The politics of Maggie Thatcher, John Major, Old
Labour and Tony Blair during
the period covered by this study (1988-1998) are
succinctly encapsulated in a concise account which provides a condensed analysis
of the motivations, electoral strategies, and policies in English political life
during this period and how and why, if somewhat
belatedly, such changes in
political thinking were to have significant implications for the English legal
profession.
Professor Abel’s account is presented principally in the form of a
narrative in which the words of the principal actors themselves
Society, Lord Mackay, the Bar Council, etc) are used to construct the
‘story’. This form of exposition works
well, imparting an
‘authenticity’ to the account that may have not been the case with a
third person narrative. Indeed
the voice of the author intrudes very rarely in
the early chapters, leaving the story to be effectively told in the ‘first
person’ by the actors themselves. Professor Abel has previously utilized
this method of accumulating evidence and narrative
in the ‘first
person’ to good effect in his account of various legal campaigns against
apartheid in South Africa in
Politics by Other Means: Law in the Struggle
Against Apartheid 1980-1994.
Professor Abel’s account is empirically grounded, with a level of
detail and rigorousness that is absent in many lesser studies
of Thatcherite
politics in action. Despite its empirical density the narrative is engrossing,
indeed often exciting, at times even
humorous; providing insights into
motivations, personalities and strategy which would not be possible in a third
person account.
It is also an account that places significant demands on the
reader. As one reviewer of Abel’s earlier text on the legal struggles
surrounding apartheid put it, when commenting on that text, it is a form of
narrative that occasionally lapses into detail that is
However, as that earlier reviewer
also noted there is a serious purpose to this superabundance of detail. This
of evidence underlines the veracity of the theses being
advanced by the author. Abel’s technique is to ensure the reader forms
their own view of events, rather than constantly being inveigled by a third
person narrator as to how they should interpret events.
As readers we are provided with contemporary accounts reported in the press,
professional journals and other media of the response
of the Bar Council and the
Law Society to the reform agenda proposed in Lord Mackay’s Green Paper and
to later legislation.
As we might expect these responses were largely hostile to
the proposed reforms, though the Law Society was somewhat more muted in
initial response than was the Bar Council. Critics from within the senior ranks
of the profession were wheeled out to defend
tradition. Judges, QC’s and
law lords all raised their voices in defence of the status quo. The former Lord
Chancellor, Lord
Hailsham, sprang to the defence of the profession he had once
overseen, going so far as to suggest that ‘there was no question
restrictive practices. There are already enough market forces built into the
system to do whatever market forces are capable of
A number of other
‘traditionalists’ such as William Rees-Mogg also sprang to the
defence of the profession suggesting
that if the Green Papers were adopted they
would ‘import a legal system like the one that exists in New
As Abel ruefully notes ‘if
the English profession was the embodiment of perfection, the American-which the
proposals threatened
to import-was evil
incarnate’.
This reaction to the Green Papers by the Law Society and the Bar Council
appears to confirm Abel’s thesis that in the last instant
profession, like other professions, is driven not by altruism or tradition, but
rather by a concern to maintain market
control in those areas where they
features of the ‘legal professions’ claim expertise, to limit the
numbers of new entrants
into the profession and to ensure the legitimacy of the
status claims of the profession.
One of the striking aspects of the legal professions reaction to the Green
Paper, was, however, the apparent strategic ineptitude
of the Law Society and
the Bar Council in responding to these proposals for sweeping changes. The
protestations of these bodies appear,
when collected together, as both patently
self-serving and empirically ungrounded. The potency of rhetoric invoking the
of retaining tradition and its alchemic relationship to the integrity
and independence of the profession was lost on Thatcherite
England. At our
remove, when reading these responses, one is struck by the shallowness of most
of the justifications advanced in
defence of the legal professions privileges,
and perhaps surprised at how those privileges could have been sustained for so
on such spurious logic. The public proclamations and newspaper reports of
the `professions’ response as documented by Abel
indeed demonstrates how
out of touch the profession apparently was with the
Abel’s account also exposes the fissures between segments of the legal
profession. The government, as Abel notes, quite cleverly
exploited the fault
lines between the upper and lower branches of the profession on issues such as
audience rights for solicitor
advocates or the issue of the composition of the
pool of candidates from which judicial appointments would be made. When
lost their conveyancing monopoly they in turn asserted an expanded
role for themselves in the courts as solicitor advocates, this
led, of course,
to conflict with barristers who saw their monopoly privileges as advocates in
superior courts being challenged. Quite
cleverly the governments policies
ensured that there was never a single voice of the ‘profession’, but
rather several
voices each contending with each other making claims that were
unsustainable in a society now more concerned with the price of legal
than with tradition.
Abel also examines other fissures within each branch of the profession in
some detail, particularly those related to the unrepresentative
nature of both
branches of the profession, particularly at their upper tiers. Despite a huge
change in their gender composition and
their ethnic composition both the Law
Society, and particularly the Bar Council, did not reflect this changing nature
of the profession.
Again, these fault lines effectively disabled both branches
of the profession, as embodied in their professional associations, as
to present themselves as representative.
At a more general level one of the significant questions raised by
Abel’s analysis is in respect to the possible lack of identity
between the
professional organizations purporting to represent solicitors and barristers and
their constituencies. This is particularly
striking in the case of the
‘lower branch’ of the profession where practitioners are required to
be members of the representative
body (the Law Society) as a condition attached
to their practicing certificate. Unlike unions where closed shops have been
professional associations have been permitted such arrangements, at
least until the current spate of reforms have called such arrangements
In many places, including the UK and Australia the Law Society has enjoyed
such a favoured status. Abel deals with strident internal
politics of the Law
Society during the period following the release of the Green Paper by Lord
Mackay in some detail. The `revolution’
in the politics of the Law Society
under the somewhat extravagant figure of Mears and his
narrated in some detail. Whilst this material certainly illustrates the strong
tendency amongst the then leadership of the Law
Society to pursue agendas
seeking to restore the professions favoured position, and to resist at any cost
proposals that might erode
the market advantages which practitioners have
traditionally enjoyed. However, revealingly, Abel notes the steady decline in
turnout for the election of officers of the Law Society during these
From 35% of the eligible members of the
‘lower branch’ of the profession voting in the elections for
President and other
officers of the Society the voter turnout rapidly declined
to just an 18% participation rate for eligible voters in the election
slightly above 50% of those voter who voted for the victors in the leadership
contest – ie, only around 9% of solicitors
(‘the profession’?)
in fact voted for those in charge of the Law Society and its agenda for
resisting the changes being
effected by government to the very nature of legal
practice. At times in his account Abel the ‘profession’ is embodied
in its professional associations and at others that the ‘profession’
is not truly represented by those organizations.
By relying on newspaper and
media sources, which as we have noted earlier enriches Abel’s account in
many ways, Abel also effectively
leaves us wondering what may be, for instance,
the views of the 91% of the Law Societies membership who did not vote for the
leadership. Abel, to his credit, recognises the problem of suggesting
an identity between the ‘profession’ and its ‘professional
associations’, but never quite properly resolves that tension.
For anyone interested in the recent history of the legal profession this book
is an essential reference point. It is rich in ideas
and information, both in
the areas focused on above and in many others, such as the sweeping reforms to
legal aid instigated by the
Conservative government in the UK 1980s and
concluded with the even more drastic reforms implemented by the Blair
administration
in the late 1990s. Professor Abel’s conclusions, drawing on
the material collected in the text are of relevance not only to
the English
legal profession, but also to Australia and other common law regimes. The
implications of many of the possible future
scenarios are so significant that we
would be foolish to ignore them. The future carries significant implications for
legal education,
the ability of the profession to maintain a foothold in many
traditional areas of practice, and the possible blurring of boundaries
different professional disciplines as (multidisciplinary practices) MDP’s
become more significant forces. Rather than
summarize all of Abel’s
conclusions I should, however, leave it up to the reader to judge those
conclusions on the basis intended
by Professor Abel himself, by reading and
evaluating the vast amount of empirical material brought together in this
important text
in support of those conclusions.
Rob McQueen
Professor of Law
Victoria University
Richard L Abel,
English Lawyers:
Between Market and State
Richard L Abel,
Politics by Other
Means: Law in the Struggle Against Apartheid 1980-1994
J Klaaren, Review of Richard L Abel,
‘Politics by Other Means’
(1995) 6(6)
Law and Politics Book
Abel, above n 1, 29.
Abel, above n 1, 407-470.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (217 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter