URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security (ANCORS) --- "Parliamentary Submission. Inquiry into Coastal Shipping Policy and Regulation: Submission to the House Standing Committee on Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government" [2008] MarStudies 12; (2008) 159 Maritime Studies 24
PARLIAMENTARY SUBMISSION
Inquiry into Coastal Shipping Policy and Regulation: Submission to the HouseStanding Committee on Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Developmentand Local Government
Introduction
Australia – a maritime nation?
Putting Australia’s shipping industry into perspective
Maritime workforce
Maritime culture
National security
Policy and regulation
Concluding summary
PARLIAMENTARY
Inquiry into Coastal Shipping Policy
and Regulation: Submission to the House
Standing Committee on
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development
Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security (ANCORS
Introduction
Australia must continue to strive to be a successful maritime nation because
it is vital to our national interests. We are blessed
with a vast maritime
geography and it is essential that we grasp the opportunities and address the
responsibilities this presents.
Effective fostering of all aspects of maritime
endeavour has profound implications for our national well-being into the future.
oceans are of fundamental importance to Australia as they directly impact
our national security, economic and environmental health.
The future of the
Australian coastal shipping industry must be considered within this broad and
very strategic context.
The terms of reference for the inquiry into coastal shipping policy and
regulation mainly invite a detailed focus on local matters
specific to the
Australian coastal shipping sector. This is understandable given the parlous
state of associated policies and regulations,
which are in desperate need of
reform. This submission will address components of the terms of reference that
invite consideration
of the broader aspects of the potential and essential
contribution Australia’s coastal (and international) shipping sector
be positioned to make toward our progress as a maritime nation into the future.
The submission will address aspects of the following
parts of the terms of
…enhance competitiveness and sustainability of the Australian coastal
shipping sector…the nature and characteristics
of the Australian shipping
industry and the international and coasting trades…and…the
implications of coastal shipping
policy for defence support, maritime safety and
security, environmental sustainability and
Australia – a maritime nation?
The extent to which Australia is or should aspire to be a maritime nation
must be a central consideration for Australian policy makers.
A brief summary of
some relevant facts can assist in forming a considered judgment.
Australia’s coastline, including islands,
is estimated to be almost 60,000
kilometres (km)
and we claim jurisdiction over the third largest Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) in the World
. At over 8.1
million square kilometres, our EEZ is greater in area than our
In addition, Australia has lodged an extended continental shelf submission
before the United Nations Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf,
which if agreed, will add approximately 3.4 million square kilometres of ocean
to the Australian EEZ.
Further, Australia has responsibility for one of the largest Maritime Search
and Rescue Regions in the World, which covers over one-tenth
earth’s surface, being 52.8 million square kilometres in area and
extending to the west for more than 1,800 nautical
miles into the Indian Ocean,
north to our maritime boundaries with Indonesia, south to Antarctica and east to
our maritime boundaries
Australia’s national security, in its broadest and multifaceted sense,
is largely dependent upon our capacity to effectively
control and utilise the
maritime domain. Our wider region is predominately maritime extending from the
vast Indian Ocean rimmed by
increasingly important regional powers like India
and South Africa; through archipelagic South East Asia that includes our largest
neighbour, Indonesia; the maritime dependent island states of the Southwest
Pacific; and the vast Southern Ocean down to Antarctica,
so important to the
World’s environmental and ecological health. The importance of the seas as
an enduring aspect of Australia’s
strategic geography has dictated a
‘fundamentally maritime strategy’ as the central theme for our
higher level national
Recognition of the importance of the seas to our national security was
underlined with the creation of Border Protection Command
in 2006, to exercise
the vital role of coordinating Australia’s maritime surveillance and
response effort, including control
of our maritime borders and the coordination
of peacetime security enforcement, resource management enforcement and maritime
Australia’s economy is also profoundly dependent upon the oceans: 99.9
per cent of trade by volume and more than 70 per cent
by value travels by sea.
In the year ending 2007 this amounted to more than 669 million tonnes of exports
by sea, worth $A141 billion,
and more than 80 million tonnes of imports by sea,
worth more than $A138 billion.
Other maritime sectors also make important contributions to the Australian
economy. For example: offshore liquid natural gas exports
have grown to
approximately $A7 billion in 2007-08, increasing to $A10 billion per annum over
the next few years,
and fisheries are worth more than $A2.2 billion to our economy every
The future of Australia and our regional neighbours will be heavily
influenced by our ability to exercise effective stewardship of
our maritime
environment. We need to embrace our responsibilities through developing
knowledge and capacity, including a major national,
integrated and
multi-dimensional commitment to promoting a positive maritime future. This very
brief and broad overview of the importance
of the maritime domain to Australia
provides background and context within which to consider Australia’s
approach to the national
shipping industry.
Putting Australia’s shipping industry into
perspective
The world can increasingly be seen as an integrated ‘system’
where security, economic, environmental and social factors
are intertwined, with
the oceans one of the central common denominators. Within this international
system the global reliance upon
maritime trade and maritime resources is
expanding. Maritime trade comprises approximately 90 per cent of global trade
one of the key factors in the global economic system.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
Maritime Transport 2007
reported that for 2006, the volume of world merchandising trade
increased by 8.0 per cent (double the growth of the world economy)
seaborne trade (goods loaded) reaching 7.4 billion tons; and the demand for
maritime transport services increased by 5.5
per cent. In 2005, global freight
costs represented 5.9 per cent of the total value of world imports, equating to
more than $US700
2006, dry bulk cargoes comprised more than 60 per cent of global shipments with
Australia providing 13.3 per cent of the total
Australia ranked as the
largest exporter in the world of iron ore (270 million tons amounting to 37.7
per cent of the world total)
and coal (32.3 per cent of the world total,
although increased coal exports were reported to be constrained due to
logistical problems
resulting from major congestion at some ports and
terminals), and the third largest exporter of grain (9.5 per cent of the world
World LNG shipments grew
11.6 per cent in 2006 with Australia ranked as the fifth largest
The world merchant fleet expanded by 8.6 per cent during 2006 to be 1.04
billion deadweight tons (dwt) at the beginning of 2007; the
average age of the
fleet fell marginally to 12 years, with container ships on average 9.1
A brief overview of the
ownership and registered flag of the global merchant fleet reveals some
interesting facts: the top ten shipping
countries by ownership (or ship
owners’ by country of domicile) are in Europe, Asia and the United States,
who control 68.7
per cent of world tonnage; the ten major open registry flags
(or ‘flags of convenience’) represent 54.5 per cent of the
fleet and 81.8 per cent of the tonnage of the top ten countries by
Specific examples of national ownership present a preponderance of open
registry flags with few exceptions, although there are some
notable moves toward
national construction and
Greece, Japan, Germany and China along with several other nations are
pursuing significant expansions and renewals of their
Orders for new ships are
increasing at a remarkable rate with a large increase in future tonnage supply
forecast for all shipping
markets. As of 1 July 2007, 7,433 ships totalling
415.8 million dwt were on order, with South Korea, China and Japan the leading
shipbuilding countries comprising 81.7 per cent of the world order
Australia is the last of the top 35 countries listed by shipping ownership in
Review of Maritime Transport 2007
, with 85 registered vessels
over 1,000 dwt (46 Australian flag and 39 foreign flag) and 53.37 per cent of
dwt operating under foreign
flag. Of particular interest to Australian policy
makers should be the fact that the
Australian Fleet represents only 0.29 per
cent of the world total dwt yet Australian exports by volume comprise around 10
of the world total
Australia’s exports of bulk goods are forecast to double over the next
10-15 years
and the world fleet
is expanding rapidly to meet rising global demand. Whither the ‘Australian
Fleet’ in this scenario?
The press release by the Minister for
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government that
announced the establishment
of the inquiry into Australian coastal shipping
implied that the issue of flag was a major concern when it stated ‘Between
1996 and mid-2006 the number of Australian registered trading vessels fell from
75 to just 46’.
However, given the realties of the nature of the global shipping industry
this concern may be misplaced or overly emphasised.
Maritime workforce
The preceding paragraphs have sought to outline the importance of the
maritime domain and the maritime shipping sector to Australia
internationally. One critical element underlies geography, trade and shipping
statistics: people. Effective maritime sectors
require adequate supplies of
trained, skilled, experienced and motivated people to meet demand. The
specialised nature of many of
the maritime professions and trades mean that
people largely need to be developed within the industry. The global merchant
workforce is one of the most internationally integrated occupation
groupings in the world. There are approximately 1.2 million seafarers
aboard ships or waiting to do so. A high percentage of seafarers work onboard
ships not registered in their own country and
ships typically operate with a mix
of nationalities.
One of the most prevalent concerns to the industry in Australia and
internationally is a looming shortage of people with maritime
skills. In 2005,
there were estimated to be 466,000 officers and 721,000 ratings worldwide,
representing a shortage against demand
for officers of around 2 per cent and a
surplus of ratings of approximately 20 per cent. The officer situation is
predicted to worsen
to around a 6 per cent shortfall by 2015 unless remedial
action is taken. Major labour supplying countries for ratings include the
Philippines, China, the Republic of Korea and Indonesia. An increasing number of
seafarers are also recruited from the Russian Federation
and Poland. Officers
are mainly drawn from Europe, North America, Japan and other OECD countries. The
officer group is ageing and
there are currently inadequate numbers of trained
and experienced replacements in the pipeline. There is a need to reduce wastage
and increase recruitment across the
There are reports of competition becoming intense between the major shipping
companies for qualified people in some specialised areas
like tanker
operations.
In Australia, the situation is more pressing. The decline in the Australian
flagged fleet has meant a decline in the numbers of qualified
seagoing officers
and training opportunities. Reports on the attractiveness of a seafaring career
for young Australians are mixed.
Some suggest there are diminishing numbers of
young people wanting to train as seafarers while other reports suggest that many
Australians express an interest in a seagoing career but the capacity to
train them and offer them worthwhile and rewarding careers
is a constraining
The nationwide ageing
workforce and skills shortage, exacerbated by the mining boom, are also likely
to be contributing factors.
In addition to service in seagoing vessels, qualified and experienced
mariners provide the pool from which many other maritime related
occupations
draw their people. The ageing and diminishing workforce issue for Australia is
now impacting upon the availability of
appropriately qualified and experienced
people to fill positions like marine pilots, surveyors, cargo planners, harbour
ship managers, maritime regulators, and tug masters. The burgeoning
Australian offshore oil and gas sector also needs many people
with seafarer
skills; maritime training institutions require a continuing throughput of
seafarer trainees to remain viable. Australian
Government policy and regulatory
agencies like the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) and the Office of
Transport Security
(OTS) also need a core staff of experienced maritime
professionals who understand the maritime industry and can effectively regulate
On the positive side of the ledger the shortage of officers internationally
may create employment opportunities for Australian-trained
officers and
up-skilled Australian ratings to serve as officers in the international fleet.
Given the international nature of the
maritime sector such opportunities are
important for building professional experience and for motivation. However, it
appears that
the Australian tax regime continues to present a disincentive
because Australian seafarers are required to pay domestic tax on income
overseas, in contrast to seafarers from some other OECD countries where
concessionary tax arrangements
From a workforce development perspective effective participation by
Australian seafarers, both officers and ratings, in the international
coastal trades is important. This factor should be a central consideration for
policy makers.
Maritime culture
A less tangible and more difficult to quantify aspect of the extent to which
Australia needs a coastal (and international) shipping
industry is the issue of
a national maritime culture. If Australia aspires to be a ‘maritime
nation’, and given the enduring
realties of the importance of the sea to
our national interests this submission argues unequivocally this should be the
the creation and fostering of a national maritime culture is
essential to our future. It is vital that we have a significant core
Australians who develop a deep understanding of and knowledge about the sea. A
fundamental way of achieving this is through experience
gained by participation
in a variety of occupations that derive their livelihoods from the sea.
Australia’s maritime sectors across the board are relatively small by
international standards and certainly so when contrasted
to the vastness of our
maritime domain, the importance of the national maritime agendas and the
challenges and opportunities this
presents. For example: we have a small
permanent Navy with a workforce of approximately 12,000 people, and recruitment
and retention
is an ongoing concern; our fishing industry is small, as are our
marine science and oceanographic communities. We have not developed
a pronounced
maritime culture probably due in part to our history and partly because of our
geography; the latter because Australia
is both an island nation and a
significant continent. Our short history since European settlement included an
early dependence upon
agriculture and mining plus the raising of significant
land forces to fight in distant wars. Indeed, when most Australians think
‘the sea’ such thoughts probably do not stray far beyond it being a
nice place to go for holidays. Some have suggested
blindness’ is a national disease and that our national anthem should be
amended from ‘Girt by sea’
to ‘Girt by beach’.
In the short and longer term national interest, policy-makers need to
carefully consider measures to proactively promote our engagement
with the sea.
For example: devising policies that would make the transition of increasingly
career-mobile young Australians between
the Navy and the merchant marine, and
vice versa, should be closely explored. The creation of a policy and regulatory
environment
that will encourage a viable and vibrant Australian merchant marine
sector to function on the coast and internationally is an essential
step toward
developing a national maritime culture.
National security
Access to commercial shipping to support national defence activities,
including disaster relief efforts, in the event of national
or regional
emergencies can be an important consideration. The nature of Australian and
world shipping is such that the availability
of general purpose cargo vessels
suitable to support logistic operations in places where either no or only
rudimentary port services
exist is declining. Options exist to charter or
purchase and re-flag, or commission ships into the Navy, if necessary in a
emergency. Depending upon the nature of the emergency, it may be
desirable or even essential that vessels be crewed by Australian
nationals. The
existence of a viable Australian merchant marine workforce that can be engaged
in an emergency may be more important
than maintaining Australian flag shipping.
The inherent skills and sea knowledge of Australian mariners are essential
commodities
in the national interest.
Policy and regulation
There have been a number of reviews dating back to 1996 that have identified
the need for a major overhaul of the policy and regulatory
regimes that control
the Australian shipping
This submission will
leave the detail of those concerns, which are generally well documented, to
others. Clearly, aspects of the
Navigation Act 1912
Registration Act 1981
need overhauling and updating as do provisions of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
that have been deemed to militate against
Australian seafarers working overseas.
A new or revised suite of legislation and accompanying regulations for the
Australian shipping industry should reflect the basic principles
underpinning
international conventions and agreements that have been accepted by the
Australian Government so that Australia meets
its obligations. The regulatory
burden upon industry should be minimised with the removal of unnecessary
regulation. Importantly,
revised legislation should aim to create favourable
conditions for the Australian shipping industry so that it can compete
effectively
on both the Australian coast and internationally. Government may
wish to consider incentives and practical measures, including government
internationally, to promote an Australian shipping industry that can not only
take on a reasonable share of the Australian
coastal trade, but also expand into
the international market.
On the issue of national flag, flexibility should be the key, consistent with
international practice. Australian ship owners and operators
encouraged, not mandated, to operate their vessels under the Australian flag.
And the Australian policy and regulatory
framework needs to be amended so that
ships flying the Australian flag can effectively compete nationally and
internationally, rather
than operate at a disadvantage, as is the current
situation. Choosing to fly the Australian flag should become an attractive
With respect to seafarers’ conditions, the International Labour
Organisation (ILO)
Maritime Labour Convention 2006
with its accompanying
Action Plan
would appear to be a major step in the right direction. The Convention seeks
to provide comprehensive rights and protection at work
for the world's seafarers
and consolidates and updates more than 65 international labour standards related
to seafarers adopted over
the past 80 years. The Convention aims to be globally
applicable, easily understandable, readily updatable and uniformly enforced.
has been designed to become a global instrument known as the ‘fourth
pillar’ of the international regulatory regime
for quality shipping,
complementing the key Conventions of the International Maritime Organization
Reconciling new and revised international maritime labour provisions with
evolving Australian work place reform to support, where
possible, a reasonable
level of international consistency would appear to be a desirable objective.
Following the current inquiry into Australia’s coastal shipping, rather
than conducting another independent review of the Acts
and Regulations
pertaining to Australian shipping, it may be worthwhile establishing an
Australian shipping industry stakeholder’s
reference group to advise the
Minister on reforms. This may assist in providing quick and effective resolution
of issues that may
arise, and may help facilitate expeditious and workable
policy outcomes.
Concluding summary
The following is a point summary of the key elements of this submission:
Strategic Considerations:
• Australia’s vast strategic geography is predominantly maritime
in nature and presents opportunities available to few
other nations on
• Australia’s national security, economy and environment are
inextricably linked to our capacity to effectively foster
and use the oceans
into the future.
• Australia must strive to become a maritime nation.
• These broader and enduring strategic factors should be vital
contextual considerations when determining the future of the
Australian coastal
(and international) shipping industry.
International and Australian Shipping Industry:
• The global shipping industry forms a vital and significant part of
the global economy.
• The top ten shipping owner nations control more than two thirds of
global shipping.
• Open register flags are used extensively by shipping owner
• The global shipping industry is expanding and modernising. North East
Asian countries, principally South Korea, China and
Japan, are the major
shipbuilders.
• Australian policymakers should take care not to over emphasise the
desirability of Australian flag vessels.
• Australia’s shipping industry participation level
internationally is very small in proportion to the extent of our international
trade, particularly in bulk exports. The Australian Fleet represents 0.29 per
cent of the world total dwt yet Australian exports
by volume comprise around 10
per cent of the world total. Australia is currently largely shut out of
receiving a reasonable share
of global freight revenues that comprise 5.9 per
cent of the total value of world imports.
• Australian policy makers should seek to create the conditions for an
Australian shipping sector that can operate and effectively
compete both on the
Australian coast and internationally.
Maritime Workforce:
• The global merchant marine workforce is internationally integrated.
Many seafarers work onboard ships not registered in their
own country and ships
typically operate with a mix of nationalities.
• There is a global shortage and ageing of officers.
• The diminishing size of the Australian Fleet has reduced the size of
the Australian seagoing workforce and seagoing training
opportunities. This will
increasingly have flow on effects to other parts of the Australian maritime
sector that require trained
and experienced seafarers.
• Participation of Australian seafarers, both officers and ratings, in
the international as well as coastal trades is important
and should be
facilitated.
Maritime Culture:
• Creation and promotion of a core maritime culture is essential to
Australia’s success as a maritime nation.
• A viable and vibrant Australian shipping industry is a vital
component of a maritime culture.
• Initiatives should be considered like devising policies that would
make the transition of increasingly career mobile young
Australians between the
Navy and the merchant marine, and vice versa, viable and attractive options.
National Security:
• The existence of a viable Australian merchant marine workforce that
can be engaged in an emergency may be more important than
maintaining Australian
flag shipping. Skilled Australian mariners are essential commodities in the
national interest.
Policy and Regulation:
• The policy and regulatory regimes that control the Australian
shipping industry are in a parlous state and require overhaul
and updating.
• Generally, new or revised legislation and regulations should reflect
the international conventions accepted by the Australian
Government so that
Australia meets its obligations.
• Unnecessary regulation of the industry should be removed.
• Revised legislation should create conditions for the Australian
shipping industry to compete effectively on the Australian
internationally.
• Incentives to promote an Australian shipping industry should be
considered.
• Flexibility should be a key consideration with Australian flagging of
shipping, consistent with international practice. Australian
ship owners and
operators should be encouraged, not mandated, to fly the Australian flag.
• Policies that control Australian flag ships should be amended so they
can effectively compete nationally and internationally,
rather than operate at a
disadvantage, as is the current situation. Choosing to fly the Australian flag
should become an attractive
• Reconciling new and revised international maritime labour provisions
with evolving Australian work place reform to support,
where possible, a
reasonable level of international consistency would appear to be a desirable
• An Australian shipping industry stakeholder’s reference group
should be established to assist with reform of the sector.
Submission prepared by
Associate Professor Lee Cordner AM, Principal Research Fellow, ANCORS, telephone
(02) 4221 4883, mobile 0427
333 034, email:
lcordner@uow.edu.au
www.ancors.uow.edu.au
The total estimated length is
59,736 km (35,877 km mainland and 23,859 km islands): Geoscience Australia
http://www.ga.gov.au/education/facts/dimensions/
coastlin.htm
Australia has the
largest EEZ in the world after the USA and France.
The Australian EEZ is 8,148,250
square kilometres which is greater in area than the Australian landmass, of
7,692,724 square kilometres.
Information is available on the Geoscience
Australia website:
http://www.ga.gov.au/education/facts/dimensions/oceans.jspwww.ga.gov.au/education/facts/dimensions/oceans.jsp
http://www.ga.gov.au/education/facts/dimensions/
areadime.htm
Summary information about the
Australian submission lodged on 15 November 2004 is available at
http://www.un.org/depts/los/clcs_new/submissions_files/submission_aus.htm
An Executive Summary of the claim is available at
http://www.un.org/depts/los/
clcs_new/submissions_files/aus04/Documents/aus_doc_es_web_delivery.pdf
Further information including a
map of the area and a summary of Australia’s responsibilities can be found
http://www.amsa.gov.au/search_and_rescue/Australian_Search_and_Rescue_fact_sheet.asp
See the 2000 Defence White
Defence 2000: Our Future Defence Force
, Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra 2000, p. 47, paragraph 6.6. While a new Defence White Paper is under
development to be released
later in 2008, it is unlikely that the requirement
for an overarching maritime strategy for Australia’s national security
Australia’s
International Cargo Statistics
are available at
http://www.btre.gov.au/Info.aspx?NodeId=82
Statistics are available in the
recently released document
Energy in Australia 2008
, produced by ABARE
for the Department of Resources, Energy and Tourism, Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra 2008 at
http://www.abareconomics.com/publications_html/
energy/energy_08/energyAUS08.pdf
Information available at
http://www.afma.gov.au/
fisheries/industry/default.htm
Review of Maritime
Transport 2007
, Report by the UNCTAD secretariat, United Nations New York
and Geneva, 2007 available at
www.unctad.org/en/docs/rmt2007_en.pdf
Ibid, at x-xi.
Ibid, at 5 and Table 4.
Ibid, at 15-19 and Table
Ibid, at13.
Ibid, at 23. This includes
vessels of 1,000 GT and above.
Institute of Shipping
Economics and Logistics (ISL)
Shipping and Statistics and Market Review:
Major Shipping Nations
, vol. 51, no. 11, Bremen 2007, paras 1-1.2 available
http://www.isl.org
. According to tonnage
rankings as of 1 July 2007, Greece, Japan, Germany, PRC, Norway, US, Hong Kong,
South Korea, Singapore and
the UK are the top ten countries of owners domicile.
The top ten and major open registry flags include Panama, Liberia, Marshall
Islands, the Bahamas, Malta, Cyprus, Antigua & Barbuda, Bermuda, Saint
Vincent, and Cayman Islands.
UNCTAD, 2007, supra note 10,
at 31-34, Table 16, 37-42, Table 19. Greece 29 per cent of dwt under national
flag and 71 per cent foreign
flagged; Japan 92 per cent foreign flagged; Germany
85 per cent foreign flagged; Norway 71 per cent foreign flagged; United States
53 per cent foreign flagged; China 46 per cent nationally flagged and 54 per
cent foreign; Singapore 42 per cent foreign flagged;
and India 90 per cent
nationally flagged. It should be noted that ‘country of domicile’ of
ships controlling interests
information is not always exact as companies may be
owned by a large number of nationals from different countries. China is reported
to be aspiring to have half of its LNG imports carried in Chinese built and
owned vessels by 2010.
ISL, 2007, supra note 16, at
paras 1.3-2.4.
Institute of Shipping
Economics and Logistics (ISL)
Shipping and Statistics and Market Review:
World shipbuilding and shipbuilders
, vol. 51, no. 9/10, Bremen 2007, pp.
6-12 available at
http://www.isl.org
UNCTAD, 2007, supra note 10,
at 31-34 and Table 16.
International and
Domestic Shipping and Ports Study
, Meyrick Consulting Group Pty Ltd,
Wollongong, Australia, 1 May 2007, pp. 6-8.
Media Release by the Hon
Anthony Albanese MP, Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development & Local Government,
12 March 2008, AA018/2008
Announced into Australia’s Shipping Future
http://www.minister.infrastructure.
gov.au/aa/releases/2008/March/AA018_2008.htm
Information is drawn from
BIMCO/ISF Manpower 2005 Update: The worldwide demand for and supply of
seafarers: Summary
, Bimco Denmark, International Shipping Federation,
London, December 2005, available at
http://www.marisec.org/resources/
Manpower2005UpdateSUMMARY.pdf
Taken in part from views
expressed by Teresa Hatch, Director – Maritime Operations, Australian
Shipowners Association at a
forum in Canberra on 26 March 2008.
It is reported that UK
seafarers, for example, pay no tax if they serve at sea in international vessels
for more than 181 days each
For example: most of the
issues identified in the
Independent Review of Australian Shipping (IRAS): A
Blueprint for Australian Shipping
, September 2003, remain to be addressed
(conducted for the Australian Shipowners Association and led by the Hon John
Sharp and the
Hon Peter Morris, both former Ministers for Transport from
opposite sides of government).
Maritime Labour
Convention 2006
was done by the ILO in February 2006. The Action Plan
presents a comprehensive global implementation strategy for the period
As at April 2008 the Convention has been ratified by Bahamas, Liberia
and Marshall Islands (all major open register flags). The Convention
into force 12 months after ratification by at least 30 ILO member countries with
a total share of at least 33 per cent
of the world’s gross tonnage of
ships. Find further details at
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/
dialogue/sector/sectors/mariti/shipping-iloact.htm
Information from
http://www.ilo.org/public/english/
dialogue/sector/sectors/mariti/shipping-iloact.htm
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter