URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legg, Michael; McNamara, Vicki --- "Addressing Unmet Legal Need - Is It Time to Deregulate Legal Services in Australia?" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 12; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 81
ADDRESSING UNMET LEGAL NEED – IS IT TIME TO
DEREGULATE LEGAL SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA?
Michael Legg
and Vicki McNamara
I Introduction
Annually, a significant proportion of Australians face one or more legal
issues, typically about consumer claims, criminal charges,
housing, government
decisions, or family matters.
problems often have other serious repercussions, including financial strain,
health problems, stress and relationship issues.
Despite these impacts, most
people try to resolve their issues without professional legal help or engaging
with formal justice systems.
behaviour reflects widespread ‘unmet legal need’ and is ubiquitous
across Australia and globally.
Unmet legal need was recently defined in the Australian context as
‘where a person is unaware they have a legal right, or where
like to defend a right but do not because they cannot access legal services for
various reasons, such as services being
too slow, too expensive or unavailable
as a result of inadequate supply of legal representation in the areas of law the
matters relate
Accurately measuring unmet legal need is difficult, partly because people may
not seek legal assistance, and partly due to inadequate
government support for
regular data collection and reporting in some
Access to legal services is vital for understanding rights and obligations
and making informed decisions. However, legal needs surveys
and studies
repeatedly indicate that unmet legal need disproportionately impacts
disadvantaged or socially excluded individuals and
communities.
In Australia, the
prevalence of legal problems and rates of unmet legal need are higher for
specific groups, including Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander peoples, rural
or remote area residents, people with disabilities or mental illnesses, the
and young people, and older
Traditional responses, such as increased government support for legal aid and
increased pro bono lawyer hours, have proven to be inadequate
to bridge the
legal needs gap.
The widespread
inability to access legal services has prompted support for greater access to
justice, innovation initiatives and
reforms across the
This article explores the potential benefits of partial deregulation of legal
services in Australia by allowing more ‘lawyerless’
legal services
for those with unmet legal needs, to increase access and affordability. These
services could be delivered in person,
through technology, or other innovative
approaches. Drawing on insights and lessons from existing legal services reform
and Wales and in Utah in the USA, we consider the potential for
similar reforms in Australia.
II Australia: Current Restrictions On Engaging In Legal
Legal Profession Uniform
‘unqualified entities’ from legal practice. This prohibition aims
‘...(a) to ensure, in the interests
of the administration of justice, that
legal work is carried out only by those who are properly qualified to do so; and
(b) to protect
clients of law practices by ensuring that persons carrying out
legal work are entitled to do
entities’ include Australian legal practitioners with current practising
certificates, law practices (sole
practitioners, law firms, community legal
services and incorporated/unincorporated legal practices), and foreign lawyers
foreign law.
Since 2001, New South Wales has permitted incorporated legal practices, a
form of alternative business structure (‘ABS’)
requiring at least
one solicitor director with an unrestricted practising
certificate.
This reform changed
who could profit from legal services, introduced greater professionalism in
legal practice management, and allowed
access to new forms of capital. Legal
services in Australia have also been previously deregulated through allowing
‘... non-lawyers
... [to] ... provide advice and representation in
conveyancing, intellectual property, workplace relations, taxation and migration
Despite these
reforms and other legal practice innovations, such as NewLaw which combines the
use of an ABS with technology and new
legal services are
insufficiently accessible for many Australians and the scale of unmet legal need
continues to increase in certain
areas of law and for particular
communities.
III England And Wales: Reserved (And Unreserved) Legal
The UK reformed its legal services regulatory framework with the introduction
Legal Services Act
regulatory objectives include ‘... protecting and
promoting the public interest ... improving access to justice ... protecting
promoting the interests of consumers ...[and]... promoting competition
defines certain legal work as ‘reserved legal
Rights of audience; 2. Conduct of litigation; 3. Reserved instrument activities
(for example, preparing an instrument
relating real estate); 4. Probate
activities; 5. Notarial activities; and 6. Administration of oaths. These types
of legal work can
only be carried out by an ‘authorised person’ or
‘exempt person’ as defined by the
It is a criminal
offence to carry on reserved legal activity without
entitlement.
provides for ABS entities, allowing a licensed body to carry on reserved legal
activities and other activities.
This provision ‘... substantially relaxes ... the traditional restrictions
on the business models within which lawyers can
practice and the financial and
managerial relationships they can enter into with nonlawyers without sacrificing
... professional
The Legal Services Board (‘LSB’), established by the
oversees the regulation of legal services in England and
The LSB’s website
notes that legal work falling outside of the regulatory framework of the
(and which is thus unreserved) includes:
● providing legal advice or assistance in connection with the
application of the law or with any form of resolution of legal
● providing representation in connection with any matter concerning the
application of the law or any form of resolution of
legal disputes; and
● any activity that does not fall within one of the six reserved legal
activity categories...
In summary, the
reform model allows a range of regulated and
unregulated non-lawyer providers to perform legal services outside the six
of reserved legal
activities.
Although access to justice issues persist, there are some signs of progress.
The model has increased legal services options and alternative
pricing models
for consumers by lowering traditional market entry barriers that required formal
legal training and qualifications,
and due to the ‘... acceptance of the
idea that useful legal help can be provided by a variety of legal and lay
professionals
... [with] ...options ... in the form of unbundled services to
support ... “DIY” law and a wide range of advisory services
people manage legal questions and issues that have not turned into lawsuits
Many non-lawyer providers are profit seeking commercial entities attracted to
a more competitive legal services market, providing
a range of services that are
complementary or ancillary to legal advice. By 2023, an estimated 3,800
unregulated providers were offering
unreserved legal services in England and
Unregulated providers
comprise a small proportion of the legal sector when measured by turnover
(around 6-8%),
but represent a
significant proportion of certain segments of the legal services market, such as
for small to medium sized enterprises
reform model has also influenced innovation and technology
trends that potentially improve access to legal services. A LSB report
legal services providers from 2015 to 2018 evaluated the impact on innovation
and technology use and found ‘unregulated
providers were twice as likely
to have successfully introduced new or improved
Furthermore,
26% of legal services providers overall introduced new or significantly improved
services, and 12% of unregulated providers
introduced new to market services
compared with 6% of solicitors and 4% of barristers’
These services
included ‘... new technology or new ways of using existing technology ...
moving into new areas of law ...’,
working with new types of collaborators
or cross-selling to provide services (such as with real estate agents and
architects), providing
services to new client groups, and new pricing models
such as fixed fee rather than hourly
A subsequent 2022 LSB report noted ‘unregulated providers are 1.5 times
as likely to have undertaken innovative activities as
providers’.
It identified
legal services that were ‘... affordable and convenient for consumers,
perhaps because they were offered at a
low or fixed cost, and/or offered
and pointed out
the ‘... unregulated market offers consumer benefits through some price
transparency ...[and]... also reduces
the up-front cost or risk through offering
fixed prices [or] percentage success
Digitisation of traditional in-person legal services by providers can
generate new revenue streams and reduce service delivery costs
while maintaining
or increasing client satisfaction. Digital self-service tools require initial
setup investment but can potentially
service an unlimited customer base. A 2021
Oxford University study of technology and innovation in the UK legal services
sector cited
firms who confirmed that digital revenue now constituted a
significant percentage of their overall practice
And many otherwise
underserviced clients are open to using legal technology solutions, particularly
for less complex legal needs.
reform model has been regularly evaluated since its
introduction and has attracted some criticism and calls for further reforms.
example, an independent review of legal services regulation in 2020 found that
the legal profession’s monopoly on reserved
legal activities was a
‘... historical feature of legal services regulation imported into the
2007 Act with no modern, risk-based
reassessment of whether or not they would
provide the correct foundation for 21
century, post-Brexit,
regulation’.
A 2020 Competition and Markets Authority review also noted complexity and
inefficiency issues with the regulatory framework, and the
lack of focus on the
risk profile of activities. It raised concerns about a ‘...
‘regulatory gap’ for unreserved
services ... exacerbated by the poor
alignment of the current reserved services to risks to consumers
Consumers purchasing
legal services often lacked understanding about whether a provider was regulated
or unregulated. They were also
uncertain about the consumer protections
available if issues such as poor or incorrect advice arose, or the potential
risks associated
with limited access to consumer protections, especially when
dealing with unauthorised
An illustration of how regulatory gaps may affect consumers is in the area of
wills and estate administration. This is an area of
legal services where
unreserved providers have a high level of market penetration, as the largest
group of unregulated providers
In 2011, the Legal Services Consumer Board conducted a ‘shadow
shopping’ study, which evaluated wills provided by will-writing
(unreserved providers) and solicitors (regulated providers). The study showed
that 25% of wills purchased were substandard
and failed a quality check. The
same rate of failure was consistent across both will-writing companies and
solicitors. However, as
solicitors are regulated, their clients can escalate any
issues to the Legal Ombudsman for investigation, and also benefit from
protections
like ethical and fiduciary duties and professional indemnity
insurance. In contrast, clients using a will-writing company might encounter
lack of professional standards or insurance coverage. Also, as the company may
sit outside the jurisdiction of the Legal Ombudsman,
costly litigation may be
the only recourse in the event of a
A recent report from
the Legal Ombudsman indicates that quality problems with wills persist, and
argued the disjointed regulatory
framework complicates consumers’
decisions about service providers and how to resolve
Despite criticisms, there has been no move to overhaul or reverse the
reforms since their introduction, although periodically adjustments
are made to certain aspects of the framework. Bodies such as
the LSB continue to
review the overall level of regulation and guidance required to improve access
to legal services while balancing
risk considerations. A recent example is LSB
statutory guidance which sets outcomes for the regulators that it has oversight
their delegated bodies,
to drive the use of innovation and technology in a way that is consistent with
existing regulatory objectives to improve access to
justice, consumer protection
and promoting competition in the provision of
When issuing this
guidance, the LSB stated:
Consumers have a greater appetite for technology that the legal profession
tends to assume ... Our guidance puts beyond doubt the
LSB’s commitment to
ensuring regulation does not hold back innovation whilst recognising that
regulators must continue to be
alert to the risks. From AI to videoconferencing,
we want the sector to embrace technology and innovate to better connect people
to legal services ... We now expect the regulators to embrace our ambition and
move with appropriate pace to understand the public’s
needs and develop
frameworks that balance the benefits and risks in the interest of people who
need legal services.
In summary, the
reforms offer valuable lessons, and the UK
regulatory environment has played a critical role in driving change in legal
Despite ongoing analysis and debate about factors such as risk for
consumers in some areas, it has supported a range of innovative
practices and technology advancements that aim to make legal services more
accessible, affordable and effective in England
IV Utah, USA: Legal Regulatory Sandbox And UPL Waiver
Utah’s 2020 legal services reforms also aim to increase innovation and
improve access to justice for its citizens. The state
is one of several US and
Canadian jurisdictions revising the ownership of legal practices and relaxing
rules prohibiting the ‘unauthorised
practice of law’
Utah’s reform approach includes a legal regulatory sandbox
(‘Sandbox’) trial with the primary goal ‘to improve
The Sandbox
provides a temporary UPL waiver to participants and enables non-traditional
legal service delivery experiments, including
through technology use and
non-lawyer involvement.
virtual and is managed by the Office of Legal Services Innovation (Innovation
Office) under the direction of the Utah Supreme
Pre-reform in Utah, only lawyers could own legal practice entities and
deliver law-related activities (such as legal advice, negotiation
representation). Post-reform, the Innovation Office assesses new applicants to
the Sandbox, including non-traditional entities
and traditional entities
proposing service methods previously banned. Initially, applications are
reviewed for scope, legal area,
innovativeness, and any potential risks
associated with the proposed activity. If successful, applications are then
reviewed by an
Innovation Committee, who votes on inclusion. The Utah Supreme
Court may then authorise or deny Sandbox inclusion.
Sandbox entities must report regularly and provide de-identified
service-level data. This data is evaluated for potential consumer
risks, such as
‘... inaccurate or inappropriate legal result ... fail[ure] to exercise
legal rights through ignorance or bad
advice ...[and the purchase of]...
unnecessary or inappropriate legal
consumer harm is identified, the Innovation Office can suspend or terminate an
entity’s authorisation.
Evidence of this reform’s success (as at January 2024) includes:
● 105 applications, with 51 Sandbox entities authorised to offer legal
● 76,216 legal services provided to 24,000 unique consumers; and
● services across various legal areas, primarily business (45.6%),
immigration (17.9%) and military/veterans’ benefits
A 2022 Stanford Law School study examined the impact of reforms liberalising
legal services on authorised legal service entities in
Utah and Arizona
(‘US’), and in England and Wales. The study found that the
‘majority of entities are using both
technology and other innovations to
deliver services in new ways, mostly to consumers and small
businesses’.
However, the
report also highlighted that different reform strategies led to different types
of innovation. UPL reform was crucial
in encouraging services for lower-income
clients, and only the Utah Sandbox led to ‘innovation in the nonprofit and
community-based
sector and in the development of new delivery models that serve
low- and middle-income
populations’.
Some examples of these types of entities are:
● Rasa Legal: Uses AI-enabled software and non-lawyer providers to help
eligible users clear a criminal record at ‘less
than half the price of
other lawyers ...for only $15... and ... in less than 3
● Timpanogos Legal Center (‘TLC’): A nonprofit entity
providing free legal services/clinics statewide and a legal
advice hotline. It
primarily services domestic violence victims and self-represented litigants,
providing legal advice, document
drafting, and referrals, but not in-court
representation;
● Holy Cross Ministries: A nonprofit Roman Catholic organisation
serving Salt Lake City families. It plans to offer legal services
alongside its
existing health services, delivered by non-lawyer Community Health Workers
(‘CHWs’). These CHWs, trained
as bilingual medical debt legal
advocates, will provide limited-scope legal assistance related to medical debt
and related issues.
The Sandbox has only been running for four years and this model is not
without challenges. Despite these reforms, a significant access
to justice gap
persists in Utah. A 2021 study estimated over 2.4 million civil justice problems
were experienced annually by low
and middle income people and small businesses
in Utah, and received no legal services at
The 76, 216 legal services
referred to above represents a fraction of estimated civil justice
Also, longer term
challenges to expansion and scalability may deter some potential investors in
Sandbox entities. If these are business
entities eventually seeking to operate
outside of Utah in one of the other 50 US states, they are currently subject to
a patchwork
of legal services regulations. This may constrain some business
investment.
However, other fears, such as poor-quality services from non-lawyers in the
Sandbox, have not eventuated.
of January 2024, Sandbox entities had a ‘harm-related’ complaint
rate of just 1 per 4,011 services delivered (a lower
rate than the typical rate
for lawyers according to work product
Upon review by
auditors, those complaints were found to pose no material or substantial harm to
In summary, Utah’s Sandbox is a work in progress. However, the early
signs are promising and if it continues to operate and
extend its impact, it may
provide a model for access to justice innovation elsewhere.
V Conclusion:
Progressing Legal Services Reform In Australia
Legal services reforms in the UK and Utah are designed to address unmet legal
need in their respective communities. Despite different
reform approaches and
ongoing challenges, both models offer valuable insights for Australia. The UK
model is broad, reserving certain
while allowing unregulated persons to provide unreserved legal services. In
Utah’s model is more targeted with individualised review of
Sandbox applicants. Both models seek to protect consumers and ensure
provision of reliable, quality legal services. They present alternatives for
addressing unmet legal need, potentially complementing
existing access to
justice initiatives in Australia.
A recent recommendation by the
Independent Review of the National Legal
Assistance Partnership
proposed a ‘Justice Technology Innovation Fund
to ... [support]... the development, trial and evaluation of technological
and digital tools for the legal assistance sector, including the
application of artificial intelligence technologies ...[and]...
technology partnerships between legal assistance providers, governments and
other community
organisation’.
implemented, this could potentially create an environment conducive to a legal
regulatory sandbox trial in Australia through a
combination of Federal and state
financial incentives and a governance framework.
However, any such initiative must also be complemented by additional legal
services reform, similar to those in the UK and Utah. This
is essential to fully
harness the potential of innovation and technology to improve access to legal
services and reduce the prevalence
of unmet legal need for a broader range of
individuals and communities.
A comprehensive review of legal services must consider not only potential
gains, but also what protections may potentially be diluted
or lost with
deregulation, what legal services could safely be deregulated, and which legal
services could effectively become ‘lawyerless’.
Compared to purely
commercial relationships, traditional modes of legal service delivery offer
additional protections to clients,
such as lawyers’ ethical and fiduciary
duties and professional indemnity insurance. However, these protections also
to the overall cost of delivering legal services.
Finally, further discussions about legal services reform in Australia should
be driven by legal industry regulators and law reform
bodies in conjunction with
other key stakeholders and will likely require amendment of the
Profession Uniform Law
approach will ensure the options are explored in a balanced and comprehensive
way, promoting the best outcome for those with
unmet legal needs.
Dr Michael Legg is a Professor and Director of the Centre for
the Future of the Legal Profession, UNSW Law & Justice.
# Vicki McNamara is a Senior Research Associate for the Centre for the Future
of the Legal Profession, UNSW Law & Justice.
Delphine Bellerose et al,
Data to Inform Assessment of Legal
Needs in New South Wales: Update on Vulnerable Community Groups
(Report, Law
and Justice Foundation of New South Wales, September 2023) 4. See also Warren
Independent Review of the National Legal Assistance Partnership
(Final report, 28 May 2024) 45, a review of the National Legal
Assistance Partnership (‘NLAP’) 2020–5. The NLAP
current agreement between Commonwealth and state and territory governments under
which the Commonwealth provides funding for
services provided by state and
territory legal assistance providers.
Bellerose et al (n 1) 6.
Christine Coumarelos et al
Legal Australia-Wide Survey: Legal Need in Australia
(Report, Law and
Justice Foundation of NSW, 2012) xiv. See also OECD and Open Society
Foundations,
Legal Needs Surveys and Access to Justice
(OECD Publishing,
Paris, 2019) 31 (‘
OECD and Open Society Foundations
Mundy (n 1) 34.
For example, in analysing the
current position in Australia, Mundy (n 1) 35 notes that ‘A well-founded
legal assistance framework
would start with an objective assessment of legal
need across geographies, population cohorts and legal matter types. This
would allow governments to assess which legal needs should be met, and
to allocate appropriate resources ... the absence of this
necessary statistical
base ... fails to define legal need and offer a framework for measuring
OECD and Open Society
Foundations
(n 3) 31. This guide reviewed more than 55 access to justice and
legal needs surveys conducted by governments and civil organisations
countries over the 25 years leading up to the guide’s publication in 2019.
The guide notes that surveys showed consistent
patterns in ‘justiciable
problems’ globally, that these problems are clustered and not randomly
distributed and that
there are ‘demonstrated associations between
disadvantage and justiciable problems experience.’ Other sources
illustrating
this issue includes data and research by the World Justice
Foundation, see, eg, Daniela Barba and Alejandro Ponce,
Disparities,
Vulnerability and Harnessing Data for People-Centred Justice
(WJP Justice
Data Graphical Report II, 2023).
For the Australian-wide
context, Mundy (n 1) 61 lists existing ‘national priority client groups
for which legal assistance
services should be planned and focussed’ and
observes that ‘certain cohorts of vulnerable people facing disadvantage
are more likely to experience legal problems, less likely to seek assistance,
and/or less able to access services for a range of
Resources addressing this issue
include: Gillian Hadfield and Deborah Rhode, ‘How to Regulate Legal
Services to Promote Access,
Innovation, and the Quality of Lawyering’
(2016) 67(5)
Hastings Law Journal
1191, 1193; Rebecca Sandefur, Thomas
Clarke and James Teufel, ‘Seconds to Impact? Regulatory Reform, New Kinds
of Legal Services,
and Increased Access to Justice’ (2021) 84(3)
and Contemporary Problems
69, 80; and for an overview of the current
Australian context see Mundy (n 1); and ‘Access to Justice For All’,
Law Council of Australia
(Web Page, 17 September 2024)
<https://lawcouncil.au/access-to-justice-for-all>.
The World Justice Project is an
example of a globally focused organisation committed to encouraging ‘...
regulatory and procedural
reform that creates a level playing field for legal
services and facilitates the expanded use of technology, paralegals and other
non-lawyer intermediaries, self-help services and tools, and other new
approaches ...’, from ‘World Justice Forum participants
their commitment to justice for all’,
World Justice Forum 2019
Concluding Declaration
(Web Page, May 2019)
<https://worldjusticeproject.org/world-justice-forum-vi/world-justice-forum-2019-concluding-declaration>.
Legal Profession Uniform
(NSW) s 10.
Legal Profession
Amendment (Incorporated Legal Practices) Act
(NSW) s 47E.
Vicki Waye et al,
‘Innovation in the Australian legal profession’
(2017) 25(2)
International Journal of the Legal Profession
, 219–20. See also
Productivity Commission,
Access to Justice Arrangements
(Inquiry Report
No. 72, 2014) 21.
Roger Quick,
Paradigm shift? NewLaw, ALSPs and NewMen’,
Quick on Costs
Reuters, Online) [120.90].
Mundy (n 1) 45.
Legal Services Act
(UK) s 1 (‘
Ibid s 12(1) lists the
Reserved Legal Activities and
sch 2 provides details about what each
of these activities constitutes. See also ‘Reserved Legal
Activities’,
Legal Services Board
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://legalservicesboard.org.uk/enquiries/frequently-asked-questions/reserved-legal-activities>.
Ibid s 18 defines an
‘authorised person’ as ‘... (a) a person who is authorised to
carry on the relevant activity
by a relevant approved regulator in relation to
the relevant activity ... or (b) a licensable body which, by virtue of such a
is authorised to carry on the relevant activity by a licensing
authority in relation to the reserved legal activity’.
19 defines an ‘exempt person’ as ‘... a person who, for the
purposes of carrying on the relevant activity,
is an exempt person by virtue of
... (a) Schedule 3 ...’. Schedule 3 of the LSA provides a detailed list of
Exempt Persons
and includes solicitors and barristers.
Hadfield and Rhode (n 8)
‘Who We Are’,
Legal Services Board
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://legalservicesboard.org.uk/about-us/who-we-are>. The Legal
Services Board oversees multiple legal
services regulators under the
some of whom are also licensing bodies, as well as the Office for Legal
Complaints which administers the Legal Ombudsman scheme.
For a map of all
current regulators under the
, see ‘Approved Regulators’,
Legal Services Board
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://legalservicesboard.org.uk/about-us/approved-regulators>.
‘Where can I get help?
Reserved Legal Activities’
, Legal Services Board
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://legalservicesboard.org.uk/enquiries/frequently-asked-questions/reserved-legal-activities>.
The Legal Services Board
recently released a report on the scale of the unreserved market, noting that
some providers are regulated
regulators other than the Legal
Services Board; some are regulated by other regulators such as the Financial
Conduct Authority; and
others are completely unregulated for the professional
services they provide. See Frontier Economics,
Understanding the Unreserved
(Report, June 2023) 17 (‘
Frontier Economics
Hadfield and Rhode (n 8)
Frontier Economics
Ibid 75 (as at June 2023
around 30% of SMEs received advice mainly from unregulated providers, and that
this demand was expected
to grow in the event of an economic downturn).
Legal Services Board,
Technology and Innovation in Legal Services – Main Report
Technology and Innovation in Legal
Legal Services Board,
Mapping Unregulated Legal Services – Research Report
(Report, June
Mari Sako and Richard
Technology and Innovation in Legal Services
(Final Report for
the Solicitors Regulation Authority, University of Oxford, July 2021) 77.
Legal Services Board and
LawTech UK,
Qualitative Research Into SMEs’ Legal Needs and the
Adoption of Lawtech
(Report, October 2021) 3. See also Legal Services Board,
Technology and Innovation in Legal Services – Main Report
May 2023) 18.
Stephen Mayson,
Independent Review of Legal Services Regulation: The Scope of Legal Services
(UCL Centre for Ethics and Law Working Paper LSR-2, March 2020)
Competition and Markets
Review of the Legal Services Market Study in England and Wales: An
Assessment of the Implementation and Impact of the CMA’s
Market Study
Recommendations
(Report, 17 December 2020) 100.
Market share is at June
Frontier Economics
Legal Services Consumer
Regulating Will-Writing
(Report, July 2011) 3.
Legal Ombudsman,
Complaints in Focus: Wills and Probate
(Report, 14 March 2024) 1.
‘Guidance on Promoting
Technology and Innovation to Improve Access to Legal Services’,
Services Board
(Web Page, 23 April 2024) <
https://legalservicesboard.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/Technology-and-innovation-guidance-for-publication.pdf
Legal Services Board’
). See also Neil Rose, ‘LSB
Tells Regulators They Need to Promote Tech and Innovation’,
(Web Page, 25 April 2024)
<https://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/lsb-tells-regulators-they-need-to-promote-tech-and-innovation>.
Legal Services Board
(n 44) [4].
Legal Services Board,
‘LSB Issues Guidance to Regulators to Spur Innovation and Widen Access to
Legal Services’ (Media
Release, 23 April 2024).
We have focused on Utah in
this article, as one of the earliest examples of legal services reform
successfully incorporating changes
to the ownership of legal practice and an
innovation sandbox in the North America region.
Utah Office of Legal Services Innovation
<https://utahinnovationoffice.org/our-history/>.
David Freeman Engstrom et
Legal Innovation After Reform: Evidence from Regulatory Change
(Report, Stanford Law School, September 2022) 6.
‘What We Do’,
Utah Office of Legal Services Innovation
<https://utahinnovationoffice.org/what-we-do/>.
Utah Office of Legal
Services Innovation,
Activity Report: January 2024
(Report, 20 February
Utah Office of Legal Services Innovation’
Engstrom et al (n 49) 7.
<https://www.rasa-legal.com/>.
Timpanagos Legal Centre
(Web Page, 2024) <https://www.timplegal.org/>.
Office of Legal Services
Innovation, ‘Amended Sandbox Authorization Packet Holy Cross
Ministries’,
Utah Innovation Office – Authorised Entities
(Web Page, 15 August 2022).
Sandefur, Clark and Teufel
Utah Office of Legal
Services Innovation
Kelli M Raker,
Founded to Funded: Challenges & Visions for Justice Tech
, (Report, Duke
Center on Law & Tech, 2023) 30.
‘Utah’s Legal
Sandbox is a Success, Easing Initial Fears’,
Legal Tech Guide
Post, 17 November 2021)
<https://legaltechguide.org/blog/utah-legal-tech-sandbox/>.
Utah Office of Legal
Services Innovation
Mundy (n 1) xix, 194.
Legal Profession Uniform
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (107 KB)
PDF format (360 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter