URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harris, Bede --- "Should Australia's Judges Resign'" [2021] CanLawRw 11; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 1
Should Australia’s Judges Resign?
Bede Harris
Should judges who are required to apply law that infringes human rights
resign, rather than participate in an unjust legal system?
This question is
relevant to Australia because of the scope that the
Constitution
Parliament to enact legislation that is contrary to internationally-accepted
human rights norms. This is particularly
the case in relation to liberty of the
person which can be abrogated without judicial authorisation in a wide range of
circumstances
and which, in the case of immigration detention, can be
indefinite. The question of whether judges should resign was the subject
academic debate during the apartheid era in South Africa. The particular focus
of that debate was the moral responsibility of
judges in the face of legislation
authorising detention without trial and the psychological harm detention
inflicted on detainees,
a question which also confronts judges in contemporary
Australia. The conclusion in South Africa was that resignation would, at
be of symbolic effect. However, as an alternative to this, judges have open to
them the option of refusing to apply such legislation
by developing a common law
bill of rights. Theoretical justification for this could be based upon a
restoration of the common law
to the position as enunciated by Coke CJ in
Bonham’s Case
, in which it was held that the courts had the power to
refuse to apply Acts of Parliament contrary to ‘right reason’.
alternative justification could be derived from the new understanding of the
rule of law emerging in the United Kingdom, to the
effect that the doctrine
requires not only that the law conform to formal rules of validity but also that
it should comply with external
human rights norms. Under this approach, the
rule of law imposes on the courts a duty to restrain Parliament if it enacts
legislation. This article argues that such a course should be adopted
by courts in Australia, thereby enabling judges to resolve
the moral dilemma
presented by legislation that infringes human rights.
I INTRODUCTION
This article examines the question of whether judges who are required to
apply law that infringes human rights should resign or whether
there is an
alternative to that course. Its title echoes that of an article published by
South African academic John Dugard in 1983
during a debate with fellow
constitutional law academic Raymond Wacks. The topic of the debate was whether,
by applying unjust law,
judges contributed to the legitimacy of an unjust legal
order and, if they opposed such law, ought therefore to resign.
article serves as a prelude to the debate in South Africa, by discussing the
resignation two decades earlier of Sir Robert
Tredgold, Chief Justice of the
then Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
gives an overview of the
deprivation of human rights in South Africa during the apartheid era.
discusses the Wacks-Dugard debate.
discusses breaches of human rights by
the Australian legal system, with a particular focus on liberty of the person.
poses the question of what courses of action are open to Australian
judges in the face of legislation that intrudes upon personal
liberty and
whether resignation would be a fruitful option.
offers an alternative
to resignation in the form of a judge-made bill of rights drawing both upon
common law doctrines of the 17
and on recent developments in rule
of law theory. The article concludes in
II PRELUDE: THE RESIGNATION OF CHIEF JUSTICE
The Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland was
formed in 1953.
Its component
elements were the British colonies of Nyasaland, Northern Rhodesia and Southern
Rhodesia. The reasons for its formation
were to create a strong economic bloc
in central Africa in which the different strengths of each member could be
The United Kingdom also
hoped that the Federation would serve as a liberal counterweight to South
Africa, which in the process of
erecting the legislative edifice of apartheid.
However, a fundamental problem underlying the Federation was the fact that the
constitutional
status of its constituent elements differed. Whereas Nyasaland
and Northern Rhodesia were protectorates in which executive power
was wielded by
a Governor, Southern Rhodesia was a Crown Colony which had enjoyed responsible
government since 1923. Legislative
power was vested in a Legislative Assembly,
elected under a heavily qualified franchise that excluded all but a small number
from the voters’
The government was headed by
the colony’s Premier who was responsible to the Legislative Assembly in
accordance with the Westminster
Throughout its brief 10-year history, the federation was wracked by political
disputes over its very existence. Although all three
countries had
overwhelmingly black populations, Southern Rhodesia had a white minority
population which, although comprising only
7.5% of the total, constituted a far
higher proportion than in the two
protectorates.
Black political
activists had opposed the establishment of the federation, fearing dominance by
Southern Rhodesia, while Southern
Rhodesian whites hoped that the Federation was
an avenue towards full independence – without the need to change franchise
qualifications.
Severe political unrest occurred in
in response to which the
Southern Rhodesian legislature responded by enacting the
Law and Order
(Maintenance) Act No 53 of 1960
which either removed or limited a wide range
of civil liberties and the
Emergency Powers Act No 48 of 1960,
which gave the government the power to declare a state of emergency and s
4(2)(b) of which empowered the government to detain
any person whose detention
appeared to the Minister of Justice and Internal Affairs to be expedient in the
public interest. In
addition, s 4(2)(a) of the Act conferred on the executive a
power to restrict people to designated areas of the country, a power
used to restrict people to areas so remote as to amount to detention under
another name.
It was in response
to the publication of these Bills that Sir Robert Tredgold, Chief Justice of the
Federation, resigned, stating
The [Law and Order (Maintenance)] Bill outrages almost every basic human
right, and is, in addition, an unwarranted invasion by the
executive in the
sphere of the courts. These are the custodians of individual rights and are my
special responsibility.
and later that that the Bill would ‘compel the courts to become party
to widespread injustice.’
The significance of the fact that Tredgold resigned even before the Bills were
passed served to emphasise the degree of repugnance
he felt for the inroads it
would make into civil liberties and for the erosion of judicial power it would
cause, as well as the clarity
of his view that to carry on in office would make
him complicit in the operation of an unjust legal system. Although no other
followed Tredgold, the precedent he set was referred to in the debate that
arose two decades later in South Africa on the role of
the judiciary in an
oppressive legal order, to which this article now turns.
III INDEFINITE DETENTION IN SOUTH AFRICA
The policy of apartheid made South Africa synonymous with the denial of human
rights. The legal rules by which the policy was implemented
were entirely
statutory in origin, and at odds with South Africa’s Roman-Dutch common
law, the principles of which are protective
of individual liberty, as is
indicated by a number of cases in which judges held that racial discrimination
was unlawful under common
The legislative measures through which apartheid was established were in part
enacted in order to displace these common law
principles.
The legislative edifice of apartheid covered almost every aspect of life,
from where one could live, whom one could marry or have
sexual relations with,
which school one could attend and which transport and public facilities one
could use. Furthermore, in order
to suppress the political opposition that
apartheid engendered, numerous pieces of security legislation were enacted that
severely limited or entirely abrogated civil
Perhaps most egregious of all of these were various measures that provided
for detention without trial of those who engaged in, or
were suspected of being
opposition.
authorising detention were found in a variety of statutes and were subject to
frequent change, but they shared the common
feature of the exclusion of the
interdictum de homine libero exhibendo
(the Roman Dutch
equivalent of habeas corpus).
addition, the statutes prohibited detainees being allowed visitors or access to
The first of these provisions was s 3 of the
Public Safety Act 3 of
which empowered the government to declare a state of emergency and to
issue such regulations as it considered ‘necessary or
expedient for the
safety of the public’, which it used to issue regulations permitting
arrest without warrant and detention
Subsequently, Parliament
enacted the
General Law Amendment Act 37 of 1963
, s 17 of which
authorised the executive to arrest without warrant any person who it was
suspected had committed offences against
specified Acts or who had knowledge of
such offences for the purpose of interrogation until the detainee had answered
all questions
to the satisfaction of the detaining officer. Although detention
was in theory limited to 90 days, new 90-day orders could be issued
succession. The 90-day detention regime was replaced by 180-day detention
contained in s 215
Criminal Procedure Act 56 of 1955
The 180-day detention law became largely redundant following the enactment of
Terrorism Act No 83 of 1967
, s 6(1) of which permitted a senior
police officer to detain a person without charge if they had reason to believe
that the person
had either committed an offence under the Act or had any
knowledge of such an offence and to keep them in detention for the purposes
interrogation.
The scope of state power to detain reached its zenith with the enactment of
Internal Security Act 74 of 1982
. Section 28(1)(b) authorised
indefinite preventative detention
on the extraordinarily broad
and subjectively determined ground that the Minister of Law and Order was
satisfied that the detainee
would endanger the security of the state or the
maintenance of law and order, without reference to suspicion that the detainee
our would commit any specific offence. Section 29 of the Act re-enacted s 6
Terrorism Act
by providing that where the police suspected that a
person had committed or would commit specified offences, or had knowledge of
commission of an offence or the intended commission of an offence by another
person, the first person could be detained for the
purpose of interrogation
until the police were satisfied that the said person had satisfactorily replied
to all questions or that
no useful purpose would be served by their further
The psychological effects of indefinite detention
in South Africa were the subject of several studies. One of them described the
mental condition of detainees as reflecting the D.D.D. syndrome – that is
a syndrome of debility, dependency and dread, in
which a person experiences
extreme helplessness, malleability in the hands of the authority which controls
his fate and a feeling
of dread both for himself and his
This in turn leads to
mental confusion, impaired concentration and suicidal tendencies. A study by
Mathews and Albino found that
the despair induced by the indefinite nature of
the detention that was a key contributor to the psychological injury it
and criticised judges for being party to a system that allowed human
rights to be abused in this way.
The study noted that had the detention been of limited duration, and had the
detainee had the prospect of eventual release before
some specified date in the
same way as does a convicted prisoner, the purpose of the detention –
which, apart from isolating
opponents of the regime from society was to get them
to speak to their interrogators - would have been undermined. In other words,
the study concluded that the infliction of psychological injury was a key
objective, rather than a by-product, of the process.
The reaction of the judiciary in South Africa to the over-ride of common law
rights by apartheid legislation reflected a broad spectrum
of what was possible
within the parameters of a system based on parliamentary
When faced with
statutory ambiguity, judges who were ideologically aligned with apartheid
resolved it in a manner supportive of
government policy, even if it was open to
them to apply the presumption that statutes are to be interpreted in such a way
as to avoid
deprivation of individual
By contrast, other
judges used the discretion conferred on them by rules of statutory
interpretation and principles of administrative
law to limit, to the extent that
they were able, the effect of legislation which infringed fundamental
– although in
such instances the government was quick to enact legislation to block loopholes
thus identified. In other cases,
when faced with statutes that allowed no
scope for interpretation, some judges made statements from the bench that were
of apartheid and in which they declared that they were applying unjust
legislation reluctantly. Typical of this was the statement
by Didcott JA in
in which he
Parliament has the power to pass the statutes it likes, and there is nothing
the courts can do about that. The result is law. But
that is not always the same
as justice. The only way that Parliament can ever make legislation just is by
making just legislation
The tensions faced by the judiciary in South Africa led to a famous academic
debate which confronted squarely the question of what
the moral responsibility
of judges was when called upon to apply statutes antithetical to civil liberty
enacted in an unjust legal
IV JUDGES AND UNJUST LAW – THE DEBATE IN SOUTH
The origins of the debate in South Africa on how judges should respond to the
unjust legal order lay in an inaugural lecture entitled
‘Judges and
Injustice’ by Raymond Wacks on his appointment as professor at the School
of Law at the University of Natal,
Durban, in 1983, which was subsequently
published in the
South African Law
In this article,
Wacks argued that the ever-diminishing scope of discretion left to judges by
legislation, and the ever-widening
powers granted by legislation to the
executive, meant that judges had been reduced to being ‘impotent
spectators of administrative
action’ which was a ‘grotesque
distortion of their
What Wacks was
essentially saying was that the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty meant that
judges had become the mere cyphers
of the other two branches of government.
This led him to state that
It is therefore self-evident that a judge who is unable morally to reconcile
himself to the injustice of the system willy-nilly lends
legitimacy to it.
Of course, judicial independence, the Rule of Law, freedom and equality of
the individual, are ideals of supreme importance; but the
law, by violating
them, fundamentally alters the very nature of the legal system. Of course,
judges adopt the positivist view that
Parliament is sovereign and that the law
is what Parliament declares it to be, this is a pervasive notion in repressive
law (though
it is not exclusive to it). Of course, the law may be employed to
control arbitrary power, but the courts are paralysed by legislation
every area pertaining to civil liberty. It is in this context that the
judge’s role (as well as the function of other
elements in the legal
system) needs to be analysed and evaluated.
This led Wacks to his ultimate conclusion, which he supported with a
reference to the precedent set by Tredgold CJ in the Federation
of Rhodesia and
Nyasaland, and which he expressed as
If the judge is to square his conscience with his calling, there would appear
to be no choice open to him but to resign. How have
I arrived at this
conclusion? First, by rejecting the positivist assumption that judges have
discretion in the strong sense. Secondly,
by recognizing that South Africa
conforms in many ways to the model of a repressive legal system. Thirdly, by
accepting that a judge
in such a system who is unable to reconcile his moral
standpoint with the law has three choices: to protest, to lie or to resign.
fourthly (by expressing doubts on whether protests would bear fruit, and by
pointing to the limitations of the judicial lie—caused
principally by the
severe constraints of the courts’ jurisdiction) concluding that there is
no compelling alternative to resignation.
In response to Wacks, John Dugard published an article entitled ‘Should
Judges Resign? A Reply to Professor
in which he argued
that, despite the relative powerlessness of the courts in the face of the
doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty
upon which the South African constitution
was based, judges still had sufficient room, applying the liberal principles of
Roman-Dutch
law and rules of statutory interpretation, to mitigate the harshness
of legislation that infringed individual
Dugard conceded
It may be that the scope for judicial discretion is so restricted that the
good that a moral judge may do is outweighed by the harm
done by his
participation in and legitimation of the system.
However, his counter to this was that resignation of judges 35 years after
apartheid was introduced would be ‘too little and
too late’ and
would be of minimal impact,
that the question was
... whether judges and lawyers do more for justice in South Africa by
actively participating in the system than by withdrawing from
it and thereby
depriving it of some measure of legitimacy.
This led him to conclude that since activism on the part of judges and
lawyers might advance the cause of justice (even as it conferred
legitimacy on
the legal order) it was the duty of lawyers to continue in their role of
offering their clients such defence as was
possible and on judges to become
sensitive to human rights values and to use them – again where possible
– to fill the
gaps left by unjust statute law. That such
consciousness-raising could occur was not mere wishful thinking – many
years after
the demise of apartheid Dugard credited Mathews’,
Albino’s and others’ criticism of judges in the 1970s with drawing
the attention of judges to their moral responsibility, which in turn led some of
them to adopt a more activist role in the 1980’s
in which they endeavoured
wherever possible to read race and security legislation down in accordance with
the values of the common
Wacks published a brief rejoinder to
In it argued that the
zone of discretion available to the just judge was so narrow as to give little
scope for the operation of
the values of the common law and that were a
substantial number of judges to resign, it might have significant impact –
that of course was a matter of conjecture.
In the event, no South African judge did resign but the Wacks-Dugard debate
had the effect of encouraging judges to enter into off-the-record
debates about
the future of the legal order
prior to the end of apartheid in 1989 and the holding of elections in 1992. The
debate in South Africa remains relevant as a parallel
to draw upon in discussing
what the response of judges in other jurisdictions should be when their judicial
duty compels them to
apply law that is inimical to fundamental rights. It is to
the situation in Australia that I now turn.
V HUMAN RIGHTS IN CONTEMPORARY AUSTRALIA – THE
SPECIFIC QUESTION OF LIBERTY OF THE PERSON
Limited constitutional protection for human
To what extent does the legal system in Australia put judges in the position
of having to apply unjust law? The answer to this is
a function of the relative
absence – when compared to other liberal democracies – of
constitutional protection for human
rights. The
Constitution
inconsistency when it comes to rights protection. On the one hand, it gives
express protection to five
and has been found to
give implied protection to three
while on the other it
denies protection to the many other rights recognised in the various
international human rights documents that
Australia has ratified. The reason
for this lies in the absence of debate on broad questions of principle, in
particular on the
power of the state vis-à-vis the individual, at the
Constitutional Conventions of the 1890s. Such rights as were included
Constitution
were incorporated not in order to give effect to any underlying
theory but rather to address concerns on the part of the colonies
balance of power in the federation and in order to defuse religious divisions
that were then current. Nevertheless, the
question should be asked as to why,
if such rights as have been included in the
Constitution
have not unduly
disturbed the balance between Parliament and the courts, the remining body of
fundamental human rights ought not
also be constitutionalised? Also of note is
the contradiction inherent in the views of conservative academic commentators
defend the constitutional right to some rights – for example
freedom of religion
rejecting constitutional protection for other fundamental
The absence of constitutional restraints has enabled legislatures to enact a
wide range of statutes which trench upon fundamental
rights. In a report on
rights and freedoms published in 2016, the Australian Law Reform Commission
found numerous examples of Commonwealth
legislation which infringed a range of
rights including freedom of expression, freedom of association, the right to the
presumption
of innocence, the privilege against self-incrimination, freedom of
movement and the right to a fair
Space does not permit an
analysis of the approach of the courts to the interpretation of all this
legislation, so this article focuses
attention on freedom of the person, in
particular on the ethical questions posed for judges by legislation that imposes
detention on refugees.
The decision in Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
The origin of the problem that forms the subject of this article lies in the
High Court’s decision in
Chu Kheng Lim v
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ held that while involuntary detention by the state
is penal in character and, under the doctrine of
separation of powers, can occur
only as the result of a determination of criminal liability by the
this was subject to a
number of exceptions, including detention after arrest pending a criminal trial
(noting that this was under
the ultimate supervision of the courts), detention
in cases of infectious disease or mental illness, the exercise of powers by
tribunals, and Parliament’s exercise of its contempt powers, all
of which the executive could effect without judicial
authorisation.
In addition to
these, and arising from the facts of
itself, the justices held that
the power of the executive to detain aliens ‘is neither punitive in nature
nor part of the judicial
power of the Commonwealth,’ although they also
stated that the power to detain under the
Migration Act 1958
... limited to what is reasonably capable of being seen as necessary for the
purposes of deportation or necessary to enable an application
for an entry
permit to be made and considered. On the other hand, if the detention which
those sections require and authorize is
not so limited, the authority which they
purportedly confer upon the Executive cannot properly be seen as an incident of
the executive
powers to exclude, admit and deport an alien. In that event, they
will be of a punitive nature and contravene Ch. III's insistence
judicial power of the Commonwealth be vested exclusively in the courts which it
designates.
In subsequent decisions the court held that the
executive might detain people for a number of other
including public
safety where noxious materials have escaped, drug treatment, detention pending
extradition (although extradition
would be as the result of judicial process),
detention for a person’s own welfare, detention during wartime when the
believes a person to be disloyal, detention where a person is believed
to pose a national security risk, detention where a person
poses a threat by
virtue of abnormality falling short of mental illness and detention for the
safety and welfare of the community
in general. Many of these – in
particular the last five – are cast in extraordinarily broad language and
raise the spectre
of executive detention for reasons which are wholly subjective
and, therefore, arbitrary. Furthermore, in a number of subsequent
cases members
of the court have held that the list of circumstances in which non-punitive
detention by the executive is not
Would the High Court
uphold as non-punitive legislation which provided for detention in order to
prevent some broad, yet arguably
important, interest such as the prevention of
social unrest, which was the reason for the enactment of the
Law and Order
(Maintenance) Act
Emergency Powers Act
in Southern Rhodesia?
Indeed two of the categories which case law has already identified as being ones
in which the executive may
detain - detention where a person is believed to pose
a national security risk and detention for the safety and welfare of the
in general – reflect the typical language used to justify
detention by the government in Southern Rhodesia and by governments
countries where civil liberties have been curtailed. In light of this, the
danger posed by executive detention can readily
be appreciated.
There are three reasons why the reasoning in
(and subsequent cases
in so far as they have applied or expanded upon
) is problematic. The
first is the way in which the court used the word ‘punitive.’
Whether an act – in this case
detention – is punitive depends on
one’s perspective. In the sense that the High Court uses the term, whether
is punitive depends on the intention of the detaining authority,
whereas from the perspective of the person subject to detention,
detention is punitive depends on its effect. Since detention obviously always
involves a deprivation of a right, one can
say that, from the perspective of the
detained person, it is always punitive, and that the concept of
‘non-punitive detention’
is therefore an oxymoron. This applies
even if the detaining authority is acting with beneficial intent – for
example, to
protect a person who is mentally ill from harming themselves. In
such instances the question should become one of determining whether
achievement
of the beneficial purpose outweighs the limitation of the right to personal
liberty, a question which obviously requires
adjudication by a court. The way
the High Court uses the word ‘punitive’ has the effect of immunising
from judicial
oversight a wide range of measures authorising detention, simply
on the basis of what is in the mind of the detaining authority.
Furthermore, in
Behrooz v Secretary, Department of Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous
the court held that
detention does not become punitive even if its conditions are inhumane – a
striking illustration of how
different is the meaning of the word
‘punitive’ when used by the court as compared to how it would be
used by a person
actually experiencing detention.
This brings one to the second problem with
and its progeny, which
is the failure of the courts to enunciate any underlying theory or set of
principles that would justify executive
It appears that the
court has simply identified a list of circumstances in which such detention has
historically been permitted.
Yet the fact that things have occurred
historically does not, of course, provide justification for why they
occur, still less why they should stand as exceptions to the
important general principle that separation of powers requires that
a person not
be deprived of liberty except by judicial process. Why should supervision by
the courts be more lax in cases of non-punitive
detention than they are in cases
of punitive detention? The effect on the person is the same, but the sting more
severe in the case
where the subject of the detention has committed no crime.
There is terrible irony in the fact that a person who commits a crime
arguably in a fact better position than one who is detained for some
non-punitive purpose. The former has the comfort of knowing
that his or her
deprivation of liberty resulted from an application of its mind by a court and
that that the duration of that deprivation
of liberty will be fixed, whereas the
latter has committed no offence and, as we shall see, may endure detention of
limitless duration.
The decision in
, and in particular the absence of any underlying
principle that could act as a limit on the capacity of the state to impose
non-punitive
detention, means that any of the Commonwealth’s legislative
powers could be used as the basis for non-judicially supervised
detention. As
examples of this, in
Gummow J said that
that on the basis of the
Parliament could enact a law under s
51(xxvii) providing for the administrative detention of bankrupts, or one under
s 51(xi) confining
everyone to their home on census night. Why the High Court
abandoned the field to the executive in relation to these (potentially
expanding) categories of detention is a mystery. The court could have said that
separation of powers requires that deprivation of
liberty is lawful only if
grounds there for are proved to a court. Its failure to do so means, with
respect, that the decision in
must be considered a blot on the legal
The third problem that arises from
is that by immunising a whole
range of categories of detention from judicial oversight, it laid the way open
for widespread deprivation
of liberty which might be unlawful even in terms of
the authorising legislation. The consequences of this are dire for people
unfortunate
enough to be caught up in the machinery of executive power: After
the chance discovery that an Australian citizen, Vivian Alvarez
Solon, had been
deported because she was unable to communicate after a head injury, and that
another citizen, Cornelia Rau, had been
held in immigration detention after she
was unable to identify herself because of mental illness, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman was
asked to conduct an investigation into immigration detention. His
report found that no less than 247 citizens and lawful residents
unlawfully detained under the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) over a period of
The fact that the
executive has the power to detain people under various pieces of legislation,
Commonwealth and State, without
needing to prove reasonable grounds – or
even the identity of the detainee - to a court, creates an obvious risk of
denial of rights, as the Ombudsman’s investigation shows. The
fact that, in theory, a detainee might be able to challenge
a detention decision
by means of judicial review provides cold comfort – for example, the
mental condition of the detainee
may be such as not to enable them to challenge
their detention, as was so in the cases of Solon and Rau. Furthermore, it is
to the presumed liberty of a person under the common law that the
detainee should have the burden of challenging detention rather
detaining authority having the burden of proving its lawfulness.
descendants
It is the application of
to migration law that has attracted the
greatest controversy and has generated a significant amount of litigation in the
High Court,
particularly in relation to those provisions of the
Migration Act
(Cth) which mandate detention of migrants deemed to have arrived in
Australia unlawfully.
Section 189
of the Act requires that an officer who knows
or reasonably suspects that a person is an unlawful non-citizen to detain that
Section 196(1)
states that such a person must be kept in immigration
detention until removed from Australia, deported or granted a visa.
Section 198
of the Act governs removal from Australia. Its various sub-sections govern a
number of circumstances in which a person must be removed
from Australia
‘as soon as reasonably practicable.’
As noted above, the majority in
stated that detention under the
Act was ‘limited to what is reasonably capable of being seen as necessary
for the purposes
of deportation or necessary to enable an application for an
entry permit to be made and considered.’
Similarly, in
v Minister for Immigration and Border
the court held
that detention could only be for
... one of three purposes: the purpose of removal from Australia; the purpose
of receiving, investigating and determining an application
for a visa permitting
the alien to enter and remain in Australia; or, in a case such as the present,
the purpose of determining whether
to permit a valid application for a visa.
So far as the duration of detention is concerned, in
Plaintiff M76/2013 v
Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and
Citizenship
the court stated
that the decision in
required that the
... the period of detention be limited to the time necessarily taken in
administrative processes directed to the limited purposes
identified. The
temporal limits and the limited purposes are connected such that the power to
detain is not unconstrained.
The constitutional holding in Lim was therefore that conferring limited legal
authority to detain a non-citizen in custody as an incident
of the statutory
conferral on the executive of powers to consider and grant permission to remain
in Australia, and to deport or remove
if permission is not granted, is
consistent with Ch III if, but only if, the detention in custody is limited to
such period of time
as is reasonably capable of being seen as necessary for the
completion of administrative processes directed to those purposes.
v Minister for Immigration and Border
the court held
Because detention under the Act can only be for the purposes identified, the
purposes must be pursued and carried into effect as soon
as reasonably
practicable.... The duration of any form of detention, and thus its lawfulness,
must be capable of being determined
at any time and from time to time.
Otherwise, the lawfulness of the detention could not be determined and enforced
by the courts,
and, ultimately, by this Court.
The court further held
... consideration of whether a protection visa may be sought by or granted to
the plaintiff had to be undertaken and completed as
soon as reasonably
practicable. Departure from that requirement would entail departure from the
purpose for his detention and could
be justified only if the Act were construed
as permitting detention at the discretion of the Executive. The Act is not to be
as permitting detention of that kind.
Unfortunately, the limitations that these dicta appear to impose on the
duration of detention proved to offer little protection to
individual liberty
when the question of what the legal position would be if the executive had not
achieved any of the statutory processes
contained in s 196(1) within a
reasonable time was considered by the court in
Commonwealth of Australia v
The court held that a detainee could be held in detention ‘until’
one of those purposes had
been achieved, not until one of them
ought reasonably
to have been achieved. In other words, the failure of
the executive to fulfil any of the purposes for which detention was authorised
within a reasonable time did not provide grounds for release of a
The court held that
in such circumstances, the appropriate remedy was
The court held that
the fact that in
Plaintiff S4/2014 v Minister for Immigration and Border
the court had
said that the duties of the executive under s 196(1) had to be performed as soon
as was reasonably practicable did
not mean that failure to do so changed the
purpose of the detention in such a way as to make it
Even more controversial has been the question of whether detention is lawful
when it becomes evident that there is no real likelihood
of a person being able
to be removed from Australia. In
the High Court considered the detention of the appellant who had unsuccessfully
applied for a protection visa and who had asked to
be removed from Australia.
This was one of the circumstances in which s 198 of the Act required that the
detainee be removed from
Australia as soon as was reasonably practicable.
However, the appellant was stateless, and the Commonwealth could not get any
country to accept him. The question was whether it was lawful for him to
be detained indefinitely. A majority of the Court, applied
that the appellant’s indefinite detention was necessary for the
non-punitive purposes of either removing non-citizens
or of separating them from
the community until they could be removed, and that this was so even if it was
not ‘reasonably practicable’
for them to be
The combined result of these decisions is that detention under immigration
legislation is lawful even if the executive has not discharged
reasonable time the purposes for which such detention may occur and that
detention may continue indefinitely even if it
is not possible for any of those
purposes to be achieved.
The willingness of the High Court in
to accept that the existence
of a wide range of categories in which the executive may detain without judicial
authority, in
that migration detention may continue even if the
executive has not achieved its purpose within a reasonable time and in
that a person may be detained indefinitely is all the more
surprising given how jealously the court has guarded separation of powers
other cases. To take an obvious example, in
Kable v Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW)
court declared unconstitutional a legislative scheme in terms of which judges of
the New South Wales courts were empowered to
order the continued detention of
the appellant after the completion of his sentence if they were reasonably
satisfied on a balance
of probabilities that the appellant was more likely than
not to commit a serious offence. The court held that the vesting of such
power in the courts was incompatible with the judicial function and that its
exercise would cause the confidence of the public
in the integrity of the courts
to be diminished, because it involved the detention of a person for what he
might do rather than for
what he had
As McHugh J
The Act seeks to ensure, so far as legislation can do it, that the appellant
will be imprisoned by the Supreme Court when his sentence
for manslaughter
expires. It makes the Supreme Court the instrument of a legislative plan,
initiated by the executive government,
to imprison the appellant by a process
that is far removed from the judicial process that is ordinarily invoked when a
court is asked
to imprison a person. The Act expressly removes the ordinary
protections inherent in the judicial process. It does so by stating
object is the preventive detention of the appellant, by removing the need to
prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt .... The
Act is thus far removed from the
ordinary incidents of the judicial process. It invests the Supreme Court with a
is purely executive in nature.
It is difficult to understand why, if the legislative scheme struck down in
was found to be inconsistent with separation of powers, legislation
which permits the executive to detain without any judicial authorisation
in the categories identified in
and subsequent cases does not offend
against the doctrine to a far greater degree. Equally, if the scheme in
was invalidated on the ground that it reduced the role of the
courts to that of a rubber stamp for the executive, surely the conferral
power on the executive to detain under the
Migration Act 1958
amounts to a far greater intrusion by Parliament into the judicial function in
that once it has been determined that an asylum-seeker
falls within the ambit of
the section, the courts have no option but to uphold his or her indefinite
detention, irrespective of whether
that detention is reasonably justifiable?
Detention, deterrence and psychological
As we saw in
of this article, a key objective of indefinite
detention in South Africa was to break the detainee psychologically in order to
the objective of making the detainee speak. The harmful psychological
effects of detention, documented by Mathews and
was therefore integral
to its effectiveness.
There is voluminous research containing evidence to the effect that mandatory
detention of migrants by the Australian government causes
severe psychological
Perhaps most damning of
all was a finding in 2013 by the United Nations Human Rights Committee that the
policy of indefinite detention
constituted cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, contrary to Article 7 of the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
and that the failure to treat detainees with dignity
violated Article 10 of the same
Convention.
In 2015 the United
Nations found that Australian was in breach of the
International Convention
Against Torture
because of its treatment of child detainees and the violence
to which detainees in general were
In 2018 Medecins Sans
Frontieres issued a report stating that the psychological harm inflicted on
detainees was akin to that sustained
by people who had been subjected to
There are obvious
parallels between the mental harm suffered by those held in detention by the
Australian government and those who
were detained under apartheid in South
Africa. A similar parallel can also be found between the defiant attitude shown
by the South
African government in response to criticisms of apartheid by the
United Nations – for example, Prime Minister John Vorster
memorably said
that United Nations criticism of South Africa was ‘devoid of all sense and
attitude of Australian governments to adverse reports by that organisation
– for example Prime Minister Tony
Abbott saying that Australia was
‘sick of being lectured to by the United Nations’ after the
publication of the report
which found that Australia had breached the
International Convention Against
It is notorious that one of the purposes of immigration detention is to deter
refugees from travelling to Australia. This is key
to understanding both the
cause and impact of the psychological harm suffered by detainees. Deterrence
has been a consistent theme
of government communication to would-be
asylum-seekers, who are told that their journey will end in immigration
That deterrence is
an objective of mandatory detention has been openly stated by the government.
As long ago as 1994, the Department
of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs conceded
that deterrence was incidental to the border control
Similarly, during his
tenure as Minister for Immigration, Philip Ruddock Attorney General stated
. detention arrangements ...have been a very important mechanism for ensuring
that people are available for processing and available
for removal, and thereby
a very important deterrent in preventing people from getting into boats ...
Similarly, while serving as Attorney-General he stated
... retaining the policies of excision, offshore processing and mandatory
detention that act as a powerful deterrent to unauthorised
Despite this, the courts have not characterised detention as having a
deterrent purpose – a finding which would, on the High
Court’s own
definition of the difference between punitive and non-punitive detention, in
terms of which detention which has
deterrence as one of its principal objects is
- have led to a finding
that migration detention was punitive and thus not lawful without judicial
authorisation.
What is crucial to understand is that this deterrent effect is achieved not
only by the fact that migrants will be placed in mandatory
indefinite detention
(a practice that sets Australia apart from other liberal democracies which
impose time limits on detention)
but also by intentionally creating a psychologically damaging environment for
them while they are in detention. In the words of
one former Department of
Immigration Officer, conditions in detention were designed to
... the deliberate and intentional removal of hope... As many asylum seekers
flee countries, which are so dangerous that death is
a very real and present
fear, the only other way to create a meaningful deterrent in practice, is to
actively remove a person's sense
of hope. The intention is that these hopeless,
broken people will then send a message back to any family members or friends who
be in transit towards Australia that it isn't worth coming.
It is therefore clear that whatever formal legal purpose mandatory detention
serves under the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), a key policy purpose is
deterrence, and a major part of the deterrent effect is the cruelty of the
system and the harm it inflicts.
In other words, just as the psychological harm
suffered by detainees in South Africa was an important component of detention
not merely an unfortunate by-product, so too in the case of migration
detention in Australia the harshness of its conditions is designed
current detainees to give up their claims for asylum and, equally importantly,
to deter other refugees from seeking asylum.
In other words, the adverse mental
effect of unending detention is an essential objective of the policy, because it
is that prospect
in which the deterrent effect lies. Therefore it can be said
that, as in the case of political detainees in South Africa, a key
immigration detention is the infliction of psychological harm. The harsher the
regime and the greater the hopelessness
it engenders the more effective it is in
achieving its objective. Furthermore, as was held in
Behrooz v Secretary,
Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
detention remains
lawful even if it crosses the line into inhumanity. If, as one must surely
agree, the enforcement of legislation
which authorised detention which caused
psychological harm to detainees in South Africa was damnable, so too must one
the inhumanity of the conditions to which asylum-seekers are subject
is something which presents a moral question which judges in
Australia must
answer. If one can agree that the infliction of devastating psychological harm
though prolonged detention described
by Mathews and Albino in South Africa was
repugnant to the rule of law, why should one not reach the same conclusion in
to mandatory indefinite detention under the
Migration Act 1958
VI SHOULD AUSTRALIA’S JUDGES RESIGN?
None of the foregoing is to suggest that breaches of rights in Australia
match either the seriousness or the scope of breaches that
occurred in South
Africa, but the indisputable fact remains that aspects of Australian law breach
a significant number of rights
to a serious extent, and that therefore the moral
responsibility of judges in enforcing such laws is, in comparison to judges in
those historical circumstances, one of degree rather than of type. The scheme
of mandatory detention authorised by the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) which
is the focus of this article, is arguably the most egregious of these laws.
If the law as stated in
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic
to the effect that
there are a wide number of grounds upon which the executive can detain without
judicial supervision, in
Commonwealth v AJL20
to the effect that
detention remains lawful even if the executive has not achieved its statutory
purpose within a reasonable time
Al-Kateb v Godwin
to the effect
that detention may be of limitless duration is correct, and that the judges in
those cases (or at least those in the
majority) had no option but to find as
they did (which one must presume, in light of the judicial oath, discussed
below) then a moral
dilemma arises for Australian judges just as it did for
judges in South Africa.
, Hayne J, one of the majority justices said that the
appellant’s situation was
while many had argued that the
Constitution
should contain a bill of rights, as
the law stood
... the justice or wisdom of the court taken by the parliament is not
examinable in this or any other domestic court ... it is not
for the courts to
determine whether the course taken by Parliament is unjust or contrary to basic
human rights.
However, apart from such rare instances where judges have expressed
reservations about the law they are required to apply, we cannot
know what is in
the mind of justices of the High Court when confronted with legislation that is
repugnant to human rights. For some
there may be no boundary beyond which
Parliament may not legislate so long as the legislation falls within the
Commonwealth’s
legislative power and therefore no law which they would not
apply. Others may apply such law because they are of the view that their
judicial role requires them to even though they may profoundly disagree with its
content. When taking office judges swear an oath
in terms of which, to take the
example of the oath prescribed for justices of the High Court, they swear to
‘do right to all
manner of people according to
What should a judge
do if they come to the conclusion that in all conscience they cannot apply
certain laws because of the unjust
consequences of doing so? Judges cannot
absolve themselves from moral responsibility on the basis of a constitutional
requirement
that they give effect to legislation enacted by Parliament, and I
would respectfully argue that there is an obligation on judges
to confront the
same question that was raised in relation to judges in South Africa –
whether they should resign.
Before discussing this, it is necessary in passing to anticipate and reject
the argument that because in South Africa the franchise
was restricted to
whites, parallels cannot be drawn with Australia where there is universal adult
franchise. Arguing in such a way
is to accept the fallacy – unfortunately
widespread – that the fact that an unjust law is the product of democratic
cures its injustice. The bankruptcy of the theory of democratic
positivism upon which the argument is based is easily demonstrated:
accepts that racial discrimination and the panoply of security laws required to
sustain it in South Africa were unjust, would
it have made any difference if,
instead of being legislated by a Parliament representing 20% of the population
which denied rights
to the remaining 80%, those laws had been enacted by
parliament, elected on the basis of universal franchise, in which MPs
representing
51% of the voters had enacted legislation depriving the other 49%
of their rights? Obviously not – the laws were inherently
unjust, and
majority support for them would not have altered that fact. Therefore, it makes
no difference to the moral dilemma facing
judges in Australia that the unjust
laws they apply are the products of a democratic system.
In addressing the question of whether judges should resign, the mere fact
that rights are breached in a society is, of course, in
itself not a reason for
judges to take such a step. Breaches of rights occur in every legal system, and
the existence of courts
and judges to staff them is necessary in order to
provide a remedy in cases of breach. But that is not the issue here – the
problem in Australia is the more fundamental one that the legal system protects
no more than a handful of rights, which means that
when the vast majority of
human rights are breached, there is no remedy to be had.
Of course, only a small part of the law that judges apply that does not
breach human rights. Most of the cases that come before the
courts involve
quotidian issues of criminal, contract and family law and so, to state the
obvious, a resignation of judges
would work great social harm.
Furthermore, the judge who resigns as a matter of principle will, in all
likelihood, be replaced by
a judge who has no such qualms, which means that the
resignation by the first judge would have been
counter-productive.
other hand, it is questionable moral reasoning for a person to say that there is
no point in refusing to take an office in
the discharge of which they must act
unjustly because if they do not someone-else will.
But even if one was to conclude that the correct moral response to unjust
legislation was to resign then, as in South Africa, next
question that would
need to be answered is the practical one of whether resigning (publicly stating
why that step is being taken)
would have any effect on the legal system.
Consistent with what Wacks concluded in respect of the South African judiciary,
regretfully conclude that in all likelihood it would not. Australian
governments are notoriously thick-skinned when it comes to criticism
failings with respect to human rights, and so the resignation of a judge who
opposed government policy would in all likelihood
be shrugged off – indeed
might even be welcomed – by the government. Furthermore, there is little
evidence of a deeply
held understanding on the part of the public that courts
are the final bastion of constitutionalism and the rule of law. Indeed the
that politicians
conservative academic
commentators
find it profitable
to refer in derogatory terms to ‘unelected judges’ when arguing
against the expansion of constitutional
rights protection suggests that, in the
event of a controversy arising between the government and the courts, most
members of the
public would be likely to side with the former.
So if resignation would not achieve the objective of making the legal system
more just, what course is left open to judges? The next
part of this article
offers an avenue by which the judiciary can resolve this moral dilemma.
VII A COMMON LAW BILL OF RIGHTS
Dr Bonham’s Case
The solution to the moral problem raised by the failure of the Australian
legal order adequately to protect human rights has its roots
in the doctrine of
common law supremacy over the will of parliament, enunciated by Lord Coke CJ in
his famous decision in
Dr Bonham’s
as re-cast in recent
The question in
Dr Bonham’s Case
was whether it was lawful for
the Royal College of Physicians to use a statutory power to impose a fine and
subsequently imprisonment
on Dr Bonham for practising medicine without a licence
in circumstances where half the fine would accrue to the College. Because
made the College in its own cause in breach of the common law rule
in sua causa
, Coke CJ held the statute to be invalid, stating
And it appears in our books, that in many cases, the common law will ...
controul Acts of Parliament, and sometimes adjudge them to
be utterly void: for
when an Act of Parliament is against common right and reason, or repugnant, or
impossible to be performed, the
common law will controul it and adjudge such Act
to be void.
The rule in
Dr Bonham’s Case
was restated by Coke CJ in
Rowles v. Mason
either followed or approved of throughout the 17
Sheffield v
R v Earl of
City of London v
R v Inhabitants
of Cumberland
and even into
The point at which
the principle in
Dr Bonham’s Case
was no longer considered good law
is uncertain. There was no express rejection of the doctrine until
decided in 1842.
Pickin v British Railway
Reid LJ stated
that parliamentary supremacy had been established by the Glorious Revolution of
1688. However, in light of the continued
application of the case in the
centuries, one cannot say that 1688 provides
a bright line demarcating when
no longer correctly reflected
the law. Nevertheless, appears that by the late 18
century the
prevailing view was that
Dr Bonham’s Case
was no longer
authoritative: In his
Commentaries on the Laws of England
, Blackstone
stated that while it was ‘generally laid down that acts of parliament
contrary to reason are void,’ his view
was that ‘if the parliament
will positively enact a thing to be done which is unreasonable, I know of no
power ... to control
So it may not
be possible to be more precise as to the timing of the abandonment of the rule
Dr Bonham’s Case
other than to say that, in the wake of the
Glorious Revolution, and at some point in the 18
century the
prevailing (although not universal) rule accepted by the courts was that they,
as much the Crown, were subject to the
supremacy of
Parliament.
One final point
to note is the significance of the fact that, in
attributed the origin of parliamentary supremacy to an historical event rather
than to changes in case law. This is consistent
with the way in which
constitutional law evolved in the United Kingdom, where rules are shaped as much
by changes in the balance
of power between the institutions of government as by
judicial decisions.
Contemporary theories on limits to legislative
1 New Zealand
The idea that the common law might allow the courts to override the will of
parliament received a new lease of life in New
where, in a number of
Cook CJ held (albeit
without mentioning
Dr Bonham’s Case
) held that common law rights
might limit legislative power. The most frequently cited of these is
v New Zealand Poultry
I do not think that literal compulsion, by torture for instance, would be
within the lawful powers of Parliament. Some common law
rights lie so deep that
even Parliament could not override them.
Cooke expanded on his ideas extrajudicially, stating that a free and
democratic society was based on the two fundamental pillars of
a democratic
legislature and independent courts and that if either of these was undermined
... it would be the responsibility of the Judges to say so and, if their
judgments to that effect were disregarded, to resign or to
acknowledge frankly
that they are prepared to depart from their judicial oath and to serve a state
not entitled to be called a free
More specifically in relation to the issue of human rights, Cooke referred to
hypothetical examples of legislation that deprived people
of the franchise on
the basis of religion or gender or which mandated that confessions be accepted
irrespective of whether they were
voluntary, and
Can any lawyer in all honesty accept as a viable principle that some
infringements of human rights are so grave that if enacted in
other countries
they will not be recognised as law at all by us, but that this would not matter
if they were enacted by our own legislature?
It would seem that hypocrisy on
that scale must be the ultimate result of taking Dicey undiluted. It is easy to
say that the hypothetical
examples are so unlikely that we need not bother about
the problem. That may be so. On the other hand, if honesty compels one to
that the concept of a free democracy must carry with it some limitation on
legislative power, however generous, the focus of
debate must shift. Then it
becomes a matter of identifying the rights and freedoms that are implicit in the
concept.... One may have
to accept that working out truly fundamental rights and
duties is ultimately an inescapable judicial responsibility.
That the idea of legislative subordination to fundamental common law rights
was also enunciated extrajudicially by retired New Zealand
Court of Appeal judge
Edward Thomas who stated
[t]he possibility that courts may review the validity of extreme legislation
is part of the ongoing development of a dynamic constitution...
The justification he advanced was based on the idea that under
Westminster-style constitutions both parliament and the courts have
play in upholding the rule of law and that if Parliament broke the convention
that it should not undermine the rule of
law by enacting legislation that
undermined democratic
government,
legislative power in a ‘tyrannical or oppressive
the courts might
decline to enforce laws breaching those conventions.
Thomas rejected the idea that the fact that a parliament that had enacted
tyrannical laws had been democratically elected would make
it illegitimate for
the courts to intervene,
An important qualification is at once required to confirm that the
sovereignty of the people may need to be augmented by the support
necessary, resistance of an independent judiciary. The qualification is that the
concept is not to be equated with the notion
of majority rule. It has been
widely recognised that the tyranny of the majority may be no less oppressive
than the tyranny of a
despot. Underlying the majoritarian principle, therefore,
must be a recognition of the fact that majorities may be transient, may
fully and freely informed, and may not be committed to the very democratic
precepts which the majority invoke to exercise
the power they hold. To the
extent that any particular majority contrives to enact oppressive legislation,
that majority simultaneously
strikes at the legitimate basis of its own exercise
of power. Its sway in Parliament is necessarily subject to the same limitations
as Parliament itself if the ultimate sovereignty of the people is to be
recognised through truly representative government. The constitutional
of the sovereignty of the people thus contains within itself a constitutional
canon that gives force to enduring democratic
values which may at any particular
time be at variance with the wishes of a transient, ill-informed, or indifferent
Subsequently he stated
Working within this framework, the possibility of judicial review of
oppressive legislation at a future date should be beneficial.
It is salutary for
Parliament to know that it works within legislative limits which are fixed, not
by the majorities or coalitions
within Parliament that may come and go, but by
the permanent constraints of a constitution. A mature conception of democracy
that citizenship in a free and democratic society is founded on the
observance of the rule of law and basic human rights, and that
these qualities
must therefore be placed beyond serious legislative encroachment.
In making his argument, Thomas did not rely on natural law theory as embodied
Dr Bonham’s Case.
According to him, neither the courts nor
Parliament should be seen as supreme, and the right of the courts to over-ride
the will of
Parliament derives not from common law authority but rather from a
contemporary analysis of constitutional structure, a view that
has attracted
increasing support in the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, there has since the 1990s been a growing trend towards
the view that the rule of law imposes limits on parliamentary
sovereignty.
Perhaps surprisingly, the charge has been led by judges in extra-judicial
writing. Thus Lord Woolf, stated
As both Parliament and the courts derive their authority from the rule of
law, so both are subject to it and can not act in a manner
which involves its
repudiation....if Parliament did the unthinkable, then I would say that the
courts would also be required to act
in a manner which would be without
precedent...I myself would consider that there are advantages in making it clear
that ultimately
there are even limits on the supremacy of Parliament which it is
the courts’ inalienable responsibility to identify and uphold.
Sir John Laws, positing a ‘higher order law’, superior to the
will of Parliament argued
The democratic credentials of an elected government cannot justify its
enjoyment of a right to abolish fundamental freedoms. If its
power in the state
is in the last resort absolute, such fundamental rights such as free expression
are only privileges; no less so
if the absolute power rests in an elected body.
The by-word of every tyrant is “My word is Law”; a democratic
having sovereign power beyond the reach of curtailment or review may
make just such an assertion, and its elective base cannot immunise
playing the tyrant’s role....the fundamental sinews of the constitution,
the cornerstones of democracy and of inalienable
rights, ought not by law to be
in the keeping of the government, because the only means by which these
principles may be enshrined
in the state is by their possessing a status which
no government has the right to destroy.
He went on to note that the doctrine of parliamentary supremacy was created
by the courts, even though its validity has been assumed,
rather than argued, in
recent centuries, and that the doctrine developed out of political
– an argument
which accords with the idea that it was a reaction by the courts to the Glorious
Revolution rather than a change
in legal reasoning, which led to the
establishment of the doctrine. This led him to conclude
My thesis is that the citizen’s democratic rights go hand in hand with
other fundamental rights; the latter, certainly, may
in reality imaginably at
risk in any given political circumstances, than the former. The point is that
both are or should be off
limits for our elected representatives. They are not
matters which in a delegated democracy - a psephocracy – the authority
the ballot box is any authority at all.
As justification for the need for judicial power to place restraints on
government, Laws noted the irony that despite the subjection
of the Crown to
Parliament as a consequence of the Glorious Revolution, the increasing dominance
by the executive over Parliament
and its lack of accountability to Parliament
meant that power had now moved back to the executive, albeit to ministers rather
to the monarch herself.
The control that the ministry had over Parliament and the absence of restraint
over what legislation it might use its power to enact
thus provided a rationale
for the courts’ adoption of a protective role.
Sir Stephen Sedley, Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal also rejected the
idea of legislative supremacy, writing of a new constitutional
... no longer of Dicey's supreme parliament to whose will the rule of law
must finally bend, but of a bi-polar sovereignty of the
Crown in Parliament and
the Crown in its courts, to each of which the Crown's ministers are answerable -
politically to Parliament,
legally to the courts.
and further that
... if in our own society the rule of law is to mean much, it must at least
mean that it is the obligation of the courts to articulate
and uphold the ground
rules of ethical social existence which we dignify as fundamental human
There was also academic comment to the same effect. T.R.S. Allan observed
It would clearly be absurd to allow a Parliament whose sovereign law-making
power was justified on democratic grounds to exercise
that power to destroy
democracy, as by removing the right to vote from sections of society or
abolishing elections. Moreover, an
appropriately sophisticated conception of
democracy would be likely to recognise the existence of certain basic individual
rights, whose importance to the fundamental idea of citizenship in a free
society, governed in accordance with the rule of law, will
properly place them
beyond serious legislative encroachment.
However of greatest significance was the fact that similar views were
subsequently expressed from the bench in
(Jackson) v Attorney
in which members
of the court suggested that in certain circumstances the courts might be able to
over-ride the will of Parliament.
Thus, pointing to the effect that the
incorporation into United Kingdom law of the European Convention on Human Rights
the law in the United Kingdom, Steyn LJ
The classic account given by Dicey of the doctrine of the supremacy of
Parliament, pure and absolute as it was, can now be seen to
be out of place in
the modern United Kingdom. Nevertheless, the supremacy of Parliament is still
the general principle of our constitution.
It is a construct of the common law.
The judges created this principle. If that is so, it is not unthinkable that
circumstances could
arise where the courts may have to qualify a principle
established on a different hypothesis of constitutionalism. In exceptional
circumstances involving an attempt to abolish judicial review or the ordinary
role of the courts, the Appellate Committee of the
House of Lords or a new
Supreme Court may have to consider whether this is a constitutional fundamental
which even a sovereign Parliament
acting at the behest of a complaisant House of
Commons cannot abolish. It is not necessary to explore the ramifications of this
in this opinion.
Similar views were expressed by Hope LJ who
Parliamentary sovereignty is no longer, if it ever was, absolute. ... It is
no longer right to say that its freedom to legislate admits
of no qualification
whatever. Step by step, gradually but surely, the English principle of the
absolute legislative sovereignty
of Parliament which Dicey derived from Coke and
Blackstone is being qualified. ... The rule of law enforced by the courts is the
ultimate controlling factor on which our constitution is based.
In the same vein, Baroness Hale
The courts will treat with particular suspicion (and might even reject) any
attempt to subvert the rule of law by removing governmental
action affecting the
rights of the individual from all judicial scrutiny
The idea expressed by Steyn LJ that the doctrine of the sovereignty of
Parliament was a creation of the courts and could therefore
be modified by the
courts received academic support from Jowell and O’Cinneide who
The classification of parliamentary sovereignty as a principle of the common
law suggests that it is not Parliament who is supreme,
but rather the courts.
Parliament only enjoys legislative supremacy to the extent that it is conferred
on it by the common law,
as determined by the courts. Although it may be argued
that legislation is able to override the common law, this too could also
construed as a principle of the common law. As such, it could be open to courts
to modify this principle, such that there were
aspects of the common law that
could not be overridden by legislation, even if this was the clear and specific
intention of Parliament.
The statements in
found justification for the idea that the
courts might over-ride the will of Parliament not in the theory of natural
rights embodied
Dr Bonham’s Case,
but rather in the need to
preserve the courts as a branch of government as a
sine qua non
rule of law. This reflects the development of the theory of dual sovereignty,
which Knight refers to as ‘bi-polar
sovereignty,’
of which sovereignty is shared by Parliament and the courts, rather than being
vested in an omnipotent legislature. According
to Knight, the theory has
developed as a pragmatic response to alterations in the power-relationship
between the branches of government
and is therefore consistent with the history
of constitutional evolution in the United Kingdom, which has been marked by
changes effected in order to address new political realities. Thus he
That the developments in the role of the judiciary illustrate the English
tradition of institutional pragmatism stem from the observation
expansion in judicial review has been a necessary corrective to what has been
described by Sedley as a "long-term dysfunction
in the democratic process".
There has been a gradual evolution in the role of the House of Commons away from
being a body which
genuinely scrutinises governmental measures with consistent
rigour. The courts have assumed the responsibility for providing the
check on executive use of power. The shift in apparent institutional
responsibility from the Commons to the courts is a pragmatic
development to
counter Lord Hailsham's fear of an "elective dictatorship”. (References
These statements by English courts and academicians reflect a new
understanding of the rule of law which goes beyond mere formalism
requirement that the institutions of government (such as a
democratically-elected Parliament and independent courts) be preserved
include a new requirement that the content of the law comply with extra-legal
values. Hitherto, the problem with the concept
of the rule of law is its
meaning is nebulous. According to the narrowest definition, it means that
government operates by law rather
than by arbitrary will, that law is made by a
defined process, that it is ascertainable, that it applies to everyone equally
prejudice and that it is enforceable by independent courts. As was
stated extra-judicially by Lord Bingham of Cornhill, former Lord
Chief Justice
of England and Wales
The core of the existing principle is, I suggest, that all persons and
authorities within the state, whether public or private, should
be bound by and
entitled to the benefit of laws publicly and prospectively promulgated and
publicly administered in the courts.
However, this minimalist definition, may in fact have harmful consequences
unintended by those who subscribe to it, in that it allows
the rule of law to be
used as a cover for denial of substantive freedoms. It is not difficult for an
oppressive government to comply
with the rule of law in its formal sense and yet
enact oppressive legislation. As Raz noted ‘The law may...institute
without violating the rule of
acknowledgement of this defect in traditional, narrow definitions of the rule of
law that Bingham formulated a broader
definition, consisting of eight points,
the fourth of which is that ‘The rule of law must, surely, require legal
of such human rights as, within that society, are seen as
fundamental.’
similar position was adopted by Lakin who, citing the dicta from the
case, argued that the basis of the power of both Parliament and the courts
is the rule of law, which requires not just adherence
to processes but also
conformity with the
that underlie the legal
This is consistent
with the argument advanced by Marshall who
Though it is rarely formulated as a conventional rule the most obvious and
undisputed convention of the British constitutional system
is that Parliament
does not use its unlimited sovereign power of legislation in an oppressive or
tyrannical way. That is a vague
but clearly accepted conventional rule resting
on the principle of constitutionalism and the rule of law.
Poole addressed squarely the question of why defence of extra-legal values
(which he based on Kantian notions of individual autonomy)
would make it
legitimate for the courts to over-ride the will of Parliament, stating as
...since in the non-ideal world we cannot rely on others not to interfere
with our autonomy-protecting rights, the existence of rights
institution capable of enforcing them against the powerful, and especially the
government .... the courts are ideal agents
for assuming this role. Ordinary
political institutions (like the legislature) cannot be trusted consistently to
respect autonomy
since it is their function to decide upon and implement
policies which further particular ends, a process which may well produce
that are antithetical to the autonomy of particular individuals. The common law
stands in stark contrast. Although courts
also wield considerable power, they
are unique in that they 'have no programme, no mandate, no popular vote,’
and are, for
that reason, in a position to prioritize autonomy in their
decision-making. (References omitted).
A definition of the rule of law which imposes obligations relating to the
content and not just the form of the law offers a justification
application of the principle in
R (Jackson) v Attorney
to the effect
that if Parliament enacts legislation that infringes fundamental rights, such
legislation may be invalidated by the
courts. How those rights are to be
ascertained is discussed later in this article.
An early challenge to the absolutist view of parliamentary sovereignty in
Australia was launched by Geoffrey de Q Walker, who argued
preservation of the rule of law might empower the courts to imply rights,
superior to the will of Parliament, to separation
of powers, freedom of
expression and freedom of
association.
A number of
other academics have expressed support for judicially-created
However, Australian
courts have not gone so far as have the courts in New Zealand and the United
Kingdom in suggesting that there
may be rights (outside what can be implied from
the text of the
Constitution
) that Parliament cannot over-ride, but even so,
they have not shut the door on the idea that common law rights might limit
legislative
Union Steamship Co v
the court, echoing
the words of Cooke J, said
Whether the exercise of ... legislative power is subject to some restraints
by reference to rights deeply rooted in our democratic
system of government, and
the common law ... is another question which we need not explore.
Similar statements raising but not deciding the question have been made in a
number other High Court
although it should
be noted that in
Kable v Director of Public Prosecutions
two justices
rejected the idea that there might be common law values capable of over-riding
the will of Parliament.
Support for the idea of a common law bill of rights has been expressed more
openly in other contexts. Thus, writing extrajudicially,
Toohey J stated
...there is an increasing recognition of the tension between deference to the
will of parliaments as expressed in legislation and
maintenance of the rule of
law. Parliaments are increasingly seen to be the de facto agents or facilitators
of executive power, rather
than bulwarks against it
He further wrote that
Of course, judicial review can directly and effectively influence the
protection of liberties if a written constitution enshrines
them in express
terms. However, in the absence of such express articulation, a question arises
as to whether a court which is established
as guardian of a written constitution
within the context of a liberal-democratic society may to any extent imply
limits upon the
powers with respect to subject matter granted by that
constitution so as to protect core liberal-democratic value.
...courts would over time articulate the content of the limits on power
arising from fundamental common law liberties.... In that
sense, an implied
"bill of rights" might be constructed.
Thus, although it would run counter to current orthodoxy for a court to find
that the common law vested the courts with the power
to invalidate legislation
which breached fundamental rights, in light of the discussion above one could
not say that it would be
beyond the range of contemplation. What remains to be
considered is the theoretical basis that would justify that step, how the
would identify fundamental rights and what the political repercussions of such a
development would be.
Justification for a common law bill of rights in
On what theoretical basis could an Australian court justify the step of
finding that it lay within its powers to invalidate an Act
which infringed
fundamental rights? There are two ways in which this could be done. The first
is to revive the precedent in
Dr Bonham’s Case
and its application
of ‘right reason’ in accordance with natural law. The second,
reflected in the views expressed
by judges and academics in New Zealand and the
United Kingdom, is that the rule of law has evolved in such a way as to require
only that the law be administered in accordance with formal rules relating
to the manner in which it is made and applied, but also
that the law be
consistent with human rights.
Dr Bonham’s case
route is conceptually uncomplicated – it
involves the courts doing what they have always done, which is to declare what
common law is. This means that the courts could say that they were
replacing the common law doctrine of legislative supremacy by
the common law
doctrine reflected in
. Such a step would not be as alien to
Australian constitutionalism as might be supposed. Writing extrajudicially in
The Common Law as the Ultimate Constitutional
, Dixon J stated that the common law ‘is the source of the
authority of the Parliament at Westminster’ and thus, as the
title of the
article stated, the ultimate foundation of the Commonwealth
Constitution
stated that although a court must give effect to an Act of Parliament,
‘the principle of parliamentary supremacy
was a doctrine of the common
given that the courts determine what the common law is, means that the courts
could change the common law by stating
that there are limits to what law
Parliament can enact.
A broad view of the rule of law
Taking the rule of law approach is more complicated and involves paying
attention to how the
Constitution
works in practice. A notable feature of the
decision in
R (Jackson) v Attorney
except for Steyn LJ’s mention of the incorporation into United Kingdom law
of the European Convention on Human
those members of the
court who stated that absolute adherence to parliamentary sovereignty was no
longer consistent with the rule
of law did not refer to any specific development
in the law itself as justification for their position. The only reason for the
change must therefore have been a result of developments in the way public power
was being wielded and the effect those developments
had on the balance between
the courts on the one hand and Parliament on the other. In other words, one
could argue that just as
political developments led to the need to restrain an overmighty Crown,
resulting in a shift in power from the Crown to
Parliament, the risk to liberty
made evident by the consequences (both actual and potential) of an unrestrained
Parliament now necessitates
another shift, this time from Parliament to the
courts in the specific circumstance where Parliament undermines fundamental
rights. Consistent with the evolutionary and incremental nature of
English constitutional law, one cannot fix a precise date at
which this new view
of the rule of law became established, less still any specific event that
precipitated it. All we have is the
evidence from the
that, at some point, views changed and that that change has now been articulated
by the courts.
Turning to Australia, there is ample evidence to show why here too it is
necessary for the courts to adopt a broad view of the rule
of law and why the
narrow view, which offers protection only to the purely formal aspects of the
doctrine, is no longer sufficient.
Apart from the fact that the Commonwealth
Constitution
offers protection for
only a handful of rights, as a consequence of which rights are frequently
breached (discussed in
, the institutional structure the
Constitution
creates an ideal environment for the unrestrained exercise of legislative and
executive power, to the extent that the claim that
Constitution
representative and responsible government no longer rings
So far as representative government is concerned, the fact that the
Constitution
provides no guarantee of equality of voting
has left Parliament
free to create an electoral system for the House of Representatives which, in
common with any system based on
single-member electorates, is both unfair to
individual voters and produces results that do not reflect the will of the
voting population
as a whole. The effect of a person’s vote on the
composition of the House is entirely dependent on the random circumstance
where their vote is cast relative to electorate boundaries. Election results
are significantly distorted in that they do not
reflect the relative support of
parties nationwide, frequently enable a government to win power with a minority
of first preference
votes and can even lead to a government obtaining power with
fewer votes than the opposition. Parliament is dominated by two major
with minor parties rarely able to obtain representation despite the fact that
they might gain a significant number of votes
nationwide, to the extent that the
system of government is best described as a duopoly rather than a democracy. The
fact that, in
comparison to countries such as the United Kingdom and New
Zealand, the Commonwealth Parliament has a small number of seats relative
voting population, has the effect of magnifying the distortion of results. So
far as the Senate is concerned, the fact that
an equal number of seats is
allocated to each State means that the influence wielded by each voter varies
widely according to which
State they are registered in, to the extent that a
voter in Tasmania has 13 times the influence of a voter in New South Wales. If
democracy is defined as government in accordance with the will of the voters,
the system created by Parliament can be described as
democratic only to a very
qualified extent. The
Constitution
vests an overwhelming preponderance of power
in Parliament, and supporters of that distribution argue that the will of the
as expressed through Parliament, provides optimal protection for rights.
It is therefore ironic that, in a constitutional order where
so much reliance is
placed on representative democracy, the electoral system fails to achieve what
is surely the most fundamental
objective of a democratic system, which is
accurately to reflect the national will. The arguments of those who support the
system of democratic supremacy would have more force if the
Constitution
did, in fact, guarantee true
As Toohey J
noted, writing
extrajudicially
the will which judicial review may frustrate is that of a current majority of
members of a legislature. This does not necessarily
coincide with the will of a
majority of citizens.
The following observation about British politics by Allan would be equally
true of politics in Australia today, requiring only the
substitution of the
words ‘House of Representatives’ for ‘House of
[i]mportant freedoms are at the mercy of a temporary majority of the House of
Commons, generally manipulated by the executive government,
which cannot even
claim the support of a clear majority of the electorate.
Next, although the
Constitution
is supposedly based on responsible
government, in reality the doctrine no longer operates. As former Clerk of the
Senate, Harry
Responsible government was a system which existed from the mid-19th century
to the early 20th century, after which it disappeared.
It involved a lower house
of parliament with the ability to dismiss a government and appoint another
between elections. This system
has been replaced by one whereby the government
of the day controls the lower house by a built-in, totally reliable and
on” majority. Not only is the government not responsible to,
that is, removable by, the lower house, but it is also not accountable
The government’s control of the parliamentary processes means that it is
never effectively called to account...
Lack of executive accountability is facilitated by the rigidity of party
discipline, which is far stricter in Australia than in other
Westminster
democracies,
and which means
that a government can always rely on both its front and back bench not to hold
it accountable. The duopolistic political
order created by the electoral system
ensures that no government minister has ever been subject to penalties for
refusing to answer
questions out by a parliamentary committee, even in
circumstances where the opposition controls the relevant chamber. The fact that
today’s opposition is tomorrow’s government means that opposition
parties are unwilling to establish the precedent of
a government minister being
compelled to answer questions and being subject to sanctions if they do not.
Crucial conventions upon
which the Westminster system depends, for example the
rule that ministers, not their staffers or public servants must take
responsibility
for malfeasance or maladministration, are no longer
The impunity with
which the executive defies the legislature can be illustrated by reference to
some of the more infamous examples
of recalcitrance, including John
Howard’s refusal to allow political advisors employed in his office and in
that of the then
defence minister Peter Reith to appear at the inquiry into the
Children Overboard affair,
the prohibition against a defence force officer appearing before the inquiry
into what knowledge ADF personnel had of torture of
Iraqi prisoners at Abu
and the prohibition
against public servants appearing before the inquiry into the AWB
Then Minister for
Migration, Scott Morrison, refused to answer questions posed by a Senate
committee on migration
and officials from
the Department of Immigration and from Operation Sovereign Borders refused to
answer a Senate committee question
as to whether the government had paid people
smugglers to return asylum-seekers to
In this environment of lack of governmental accountability, abuse of power
– for example as occurred in the Haneef affair, when
Dr Haneef was
unlawfully detained
and corruption in the allocation of public money – as exemplified by the
sports grants scandal
readily occur. Investigations into such events are conducted by government
appointees in accordance with terms of reference
carefully crafted by the
government to exclude key questions from being considered. Those conducting
investigations may be prevented
from accessing relevant documents or
interviewing witnesses
when reports are concluded they are often not
The obvious lack
of transparency and accountability inherent in the practice of governments
investigating their own wrongdoing could
be remedied by the establishment of an
independent anti-corruption commission, but this is a step which the current
government has
persistently
We are drawn therefore to the conclusion that the structure established by
Constitution
is minimally democratic and barely responsible. Although the
structural causes of these developments have existed since the
Constitution
into force, there can be no doubt that the evolution of political practice,
particularly over the last quarter century, has
accelerated the pace at which
virtually unbridled power is concentrated in the hands of the government, which
in turn has created
an environment in which breaches of human rights have been
able to occur. The failure of the text and structure to impose adequate
restraint on parliamentary and executive power means that self-imposed restraint
derived from the rule of law provides the only barrier
to abuses of human
rights, but the increasing willingness of governments to depart from that
convention – or, as one might
put it, their unwillingness to play the game
subject to conventional norms – means that they have breached the
compact between the executive and legislature on the one hand and the
courts on the other, and that therefore the argument made in
the United Kingdom
to the effect that a correction in the balance between the branches of
government is now necessary if the rule
of law (in the broadest sense) is to be
upheld, applies with equal force in Australia.
Identifying fundamental rights
Australian constitutional law textbooks are largely devoid of critical
discussion of the question of what values underpin the
Constitution
. Most state
that the drafters of the
Constitution
did their work on the assumption that the
Constitution
was founded on 19
century British constitutionalism,
including the idea that Parliament was not constrained by values external to the
law. This meant
that when the Australian colonists debated their constitutional
arrangements, they thought there to be nothing wrong in providing
States should be allowed to keep in force laws which restricted the franchise
based on gender, race and property-ownership.
Nor did they consider there to be
anything wrong in rejecting a proposal that the
Constitution
should contain a
right to due process, it being argued that since such a right could be read as
requiring equality before the law,
it would prevent the Commonwealth from
discriminating against Asian and Indigenous
In this values-free environment, how would judges create a common law bill of
rights? Academic writers have cautioned that in order
to avoid uncertainty and
subjective choice by individual judges some theoretical framework would need to
be developed in accordance
with which rights would be
identified.
This would be
true irrespective of whether a court relied on natural law underlying
Bonham’s Case
or an expanded rule of law concept.
Gummow J, writing extra-judicially, advanced a number of arguments against
the idea of a judicially-created common law bill of
that it would not be consistent with the understanding of the law at the time
Constitution
was adopted, that the
Constitution
over-rode the common law,
that it was uncertain how fundamental rights were to be identified, that the
common law should not be fixed
at a particular point in time, that the common
law was not the product of universal reason but was rather the result of human
and that it was unclear how to distinguish between ‘good’ and
‘bad’ rules of the common law. A discussion
of these arguments is
useful because it can highlight what are, with respect, misunderstandings about
the nature of the common law
bill of rights project.
First, proponents of a common law bill of rights would accept the argument by
Gummow J that that the creation of a common law bill
of rights would not be
consistent with the drafters’ understanding of the relationship between
the text of the
Constitution
and the common law. This is indeed why the theory
of implied rights is of such limited usefulness in enhancing human rights
protection.
As the courts have emphasised, the doctrine of implied rights
depends on a finding that such rights have some basis in the text
Constitution
, and so the courts have declined to recognise only such rights as
are strictly necessary to permit the
Constitution
to function, which currently
is limited to the implied freedom of political communication, the limited right
to due process and a
right to vote. But this is of little importance to the
argument in favour of a common law bill of rights, because those rights would
independent of, and unconstrained by, the assumptions underpinning the
Constitution
It is also conceded that the drafters operated on the basis that, to the
extent that there might be anything in the
Constitution
that was contrary to
common law, the
Constitution
, as a statute, would over-ride the common law. The
point is that because common law bill of rights theory is founded on the idea
that the common law can over-ride statute and that the courts are not
constrained by the text of the
Constitution
Constitution
, to that extent,
does not matter. The Commonwealth
Constitution
is, after all, just another
statute of the United Kingdom Parliament and so, consistent either with
Bonham’s Case
or with the new conception of the rule of law, can be
over-ridden just like any other. Furthermore, the development of a common
bill of rights would not involve freezing the common law at any point in time
– as has always been the case with the common
law, rules relating to
fundamental rights would evolve over time in accordance with understanding of
their content as they are applied
to novel fact situations.
Finally, as to the question of how fundamental rights would be identified for
inclusion in the new common law doctrine, the quest
is not one governed by
judicial subjectivity as was feared by Zines who said that the content of common
law rights would depend on
or Winterton, who
raised the spectre of as many common law bills of rights as there are
As a starting point it is important to state what the basis of such rights
be, and that is community values. As Winterton correctly
pointed out, if the courts used a common law bill of rights to over-ride
will of Parliament that supposedly reflects community values, it cannot
rationally be argued that the courts could refer to community
justification for their course of action, as fidelity to community values would
draw them in a circle back to the will
Parliament.
This also serves
to demonstrate that the justification for a common law bill of rights has
nothing to do with democracy. Democracy
is not, as is often mistakenly thought,
a source of rights – rather it is one of many rights dependant on an
underlying value.
Democracy itself is not in itself a value – it is
simply a mechanism for law-making. Any claim that there is a
democratic form of government is logically dependant on some value that is both
external - and superior - to,
elegantly put by Poole who, commenting on extra-judicial writing by Sir John
[Laws] accepts that democracy is the best form of politics in that it best
respects the cardinal value of individual autonomy: by
according citizens an
equal voice in the law-making process, democracy presupposes that individuals
are of equal worth. But Laws
is at pains to point out what he sees as the
secondary or derivative nature of democracy. Democracy is not good in and of
as it were, but by virtue of the fact that it is the mode of politics
that accords most closely with the cardinal value of autonomy.
The ideals of
the good constitution are, for this reason, Laws argues, 'logically prior to
democracy.’ (References omitted).
What theory would judges draw on identifying the rights that a common law
bill of rights would protect? Space does not permit an
exegesis on the
jurisprudential theories that underlie human rights. It suffices to say that
the argument that there is no objective
basis to human rights can be refuted by
reference to Kantian theory, which founds rights on the autonomy and equality of
each person
implied by the overarching value of
and which has been
adopted by modern philosophers such as
and which also
formed the basis of the dignitarian school of jurisprudence of Laswell and
Interestingly, the
Kantian idea of individual autonomy was suggested as the foundational value for
the development of constitutional
common law rights by the English judge Sir
John Laws, writing
extra-judicially.
theory which provides jurisprudential justification for the objective existence
and definable content of human rights can
be justified by reference to
Rawls’ theory of imagining people in the original position behind a veil
of ignorance who would
rationally adopt rules based on respect for fundamental
The most obvious sources in which these theories have received concrete form
are, of course, the numerous international human rights
documents – the
Universal Declaration of Human
International Covenant on Civil and Political
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
to name only the
most prominent – all of which, it should be noted, Australia has signed.
In addition to this, one would expect
the courts to draw on documents such as
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
contained in the
Constitution
(1982) and the Bill of Rights contained in the
Republic of South Africa
Constitution
Act 108 of 1996
, as well as the
case law in which those documents have been interpreted.
Of course, a common law bill of rights would not emerge fully formed as the
result of a single court decision. It would develop incrementally
arose. This would have the benefit of giving legislators and the executive the
opportunity, when either enacting or applying
law, to be mindful of the same
international human rights documents the courts would refer to, and thereby to
anticipate, and thus
avoid, breaches of the rights they protect. Politicians
would become mindful of human rights in a way that they never have before,
would act with abundant caution in order to avoid infringing rights, so as to
minimise the risk that legislation or executive
action would be invalidated.
The mere prospect of judicial review of legislation would have a powerful
educative effect and would
act as a deterrent against parliamentary over-reach.
Interestingly, the degree to which Parliament and the executive would need
moderate their conduct would be a measure of the truth or falsity of the
argument raised by some opponents of a bill of rights
to the effect that
Australia does not need a bill of rights because the government does not
infringe them. Given the evidence of
the extent to which, as outlined in
, Parliament already has infringed rights, the reality is that the development
of a common law bill of rights would require politicians
significantly to change their approach to their exercise of power.
Applying the new doctrine to migration
What would be the result if a court was to recognise a common law
constitutional right to liberty of the person and was called upon
to determine
whether that right was breached by mandatory detention under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth)? As discussed earlier,
requires that an officer who knows or reasonably suspects that a person is an
unlawful non-citizen to detain that person.
Section 196(1)
states that such a
person must be kept in immigration detention until removed from Australia,
deported or granted a visa.
As a first step, it would be necessary for the court to specify what the
elements of the common law right are. Liberty of the person
is a composite term
which has two aspects – procedural and substantive. The procedural aspect
is that any form of deprivation
of liberty, irrespective of purpose, requires
authorisation by a court, either prior to, or within a short period of, that
deprivation
occurring. Recognition of this aspect of the right would have the
consequence of over-ruling
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic
as it countenanced any exceptions to the need for judicial authorisation. The
practical effect on all people under any
form of detention under Commonwealth,
State or Territory law would be that their detention would need to be
regularised by application
by the detaining authority to a court of competent
in which the new common law right had been recognised). Consistent
with this, any statutory provision conferring a power of detention
as, for example,
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) – would
either be ruled invalid as written or, if its lawfulness was to be preserved, be
interpreted as being impliedly
subject to a requirement that the detaining
authority make application to a court within a reasonable time for authority to
The second, substantive, aspect of the right is that detention is lawful only
if the detaining authority could prove reasonable grounds
for it. Whether
reasonable grounds exist would depend on an application of a proportionality
test found in
McCloy v New South
The first element
of this test is that it must be shown that a constitutionally-protected right
has been limited. Assuming that
is the case, the onus then moves to the
authority that has limited the right to prove that the law limiting the right is
connected to a legitimate interest. Next it must be shown that the
law limits the right to no greater extent than is necessary to
achieve the
purpose. If there are other reasonably practicable ways which would have been
equally effective in achieving that purpose
but which would have had a less
restrictive effect on the right, then the law will be found invalid. The
practical effect of this
is that when Parliament enacts a law which has the
effect of limiting rights, it must take care to do so in a manner which
rights as little as possible. The third stage involves an inquiry as
to whether there is proportionality between the importance of
the purpose to
which the law is directed and the extent to which the law limits the right.
This requires a balancing of the benefit
conferred by the law against the degree
to which the right is limited. This will obviously be a matter of degree
– the greater
the importance of the purpose served by the law, the greater
the limitation of rights that will be found to be justified. Conversely,
serving a purpose of relatively low importance will not warrant a significant
limitation of rights.
Applying the first element of the
test to detention under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth), it is obvious that detention
involves a limitation of the right to liberty of the person.
In applying the next element, relating to legitimate purpose, a court would
be likely to find that detention
prima facie
does serve the legitimate
purposes of enabling the executive to assess the legal, health and security
status of those arriving in
the country without a visa. It would also be found
that detention is rationally connected to that purpose. Importantly, a factor
which would
be a legitimate purpose would be deterrence which, as
discussed earlier, is a purpose that governments have sought to achieve
even though deterrence lies outside what the courts have identified as
the non-punitive purposes of migration legislation. Deterrence
illegitimate purpose not only because it is inherently punitive, being one of
factors that taken into consideration in imposing
sentences for criminal
offences, but also because when making a decision as to whether to exercise
power in relation to a person,
a decision-maker is required to consider only
factors relevant to that person, and it amounts to the taking into account of an
factor to consider what effect that exercise of power will have on
It is when a court reached the requirement that a law must achieve its
objective in a manner that is least restrictive of the protected
right that the
impact of the new common law constitutional right would become apparent. The
fact that under
detention is mandatory and that under
its duration
is bounded by the achievement of certain purposes rather than being limited
either to a period that is reasonably necessary
to achieve those purposes or to
specific periods of time, means that the sections do not limit the right to the
least extent necessary
in order to achieve their legitimate purpose – in
essence, as written, the provisions are too broad. In applying the least
restrictive manner test a court would therefore be likely to read
authorising detention only for the purposes of verifying the identity of the
migrant, assessing their legal status (including,
obviously, whether they are
seeking asylum), and determining whether they pose a health or security
This is a far more
specific set of criteria than those justifying detention under current case
So far as the duration of detention is concerned, a court would depart from
current case law by reading
down to hold that detention would be lawful
only for such reasonable period of time as is needed to achieve those purposes,
detention for longer than that would amount to a greater limitation on
the right to freedom of the person than was necessary to achieve
the purposes,
and would therefore require the release of the detainee – a finding that
would obviously mean the over-ruling
Commonwealth of Australia v
What would be a
reasonable time beyond which detention was unlawful would depend upon the facts
of each detainee’s case.
Unlike under the current system of mandatory
detention where, as has been noted by the
a detainee’s
individual circumstances are irrelevant to the lawfulness of their detention,
the least restrictive measures test
would require that the specifics of each
detainee’s case be taken into account in assessing whether the legitimate
served by detention could be achieved by less restrictive means than
keeping them in detention. In determining which less restrictive
means would
achieve the relevant purpose or purposes in any particular case, one would
anticipate that a court would on the one hand
take into account factors such as
the flight risk presented by the detainee, the length of time it would take to
resolve their legal
status, whether they are suffering from communicable disease
and their age, among others, while on the other the court would determine
whether, taking those factors into account, the purposes of detention could be
achieved by means such as community release and supervision,
release with
surety, surrender of travel documents, residence at designated location, a
reporting obligation or electronic
monitoring.
This would mean
the over-ruling of
because the
monitoring of a person such as the appellant in that case who could neither be
granted a visa nor be sent to any other
country could be achieved by one of
these alternative means.
As can be seen from the above, in many, indeed probably most, instances, the
least restrictive measures aspect of the
test would be dispositive
of detention cases, rendering an application of the proportionality stage of the
test unnecessary. However,
for sake of completeness it is necessary to discuss
what would happen in a case where it was found that, in all the circumstances
a detainee’s case, there were no less restrictive means of achieving one
of the legitimate purposes of migration detention?
It is difficult to imagine
cases in which none of the measures falling short of detention would be unable
to achieve its legislative
purposes in the long term. However, one circumstance
which might arise would be where a detainee suffered from a psychiatric illness
of such seriousness that their health condition would a danger to themselves or
others if they were released into the community.
In such circumstances, an
application of the least invasive measures test would lead to the conclusion
that none of the alternative
monitoring measures falling short of detention
would be effective in achieving one of the purposes of detention – namely
of protecting the community from harm posed by a detainee’s health
condition. In such circumstances the least invasive measures
test would lead to
a result that there was no less invasive measure other than detention that could
achieve that legitimate purpose.
If a court then went on to apply the
proportionality stage of the
test, it would conclude that while
ongoing detention amounted to a complete limitation of the right to freedom of
the person, that
would be outweighed by the importance of the need to protect
both the detainee and society, noting of course that whether detention
justified in the future would depend on regular assessment of the state of the
detainee’s mental health from time to time.
This is the same reasoning
that would be adopted in cases where a court had to determine whether detention
under mental health legislation
constituted a justifiable limit on liberty of
the person.
As is clear from the above, a migration regime which protected the right to
liberty if the person and thus cast upon the detaining
authority the onus of
proving the reasonableness of detention in each individual case would have a
dramatic effect on levels and
duration of migration detention.
Political consequences
So far as the relationship between the branches of government are concerned,
a decision by a court to declare an Act of Parliament
invalid on the grounds
that it disproportionately limited of a fundamental right would be revolutionary
in the political sense and
would doubtless lead to outrage in some quarters.
However, the courts have previously successfully weathered the storms that
after decisions deemed controversial. In the wake of the decision in
Mabo v Queensland (No
Hugh Morgan,
Managing Director of Western Mining Ltd said that ‘The High Court has
plunged property law into chaos and has given
substance to the ambition of
Australian communists and Bolshevik left for a separate Aboriginal
The decision
recognising the implied right to political communication in
Capital Television v Commonwealth (No
led government
Senator Chris Schacht to accuse the court of ‘playing
and to refer
to the judgment as containing ‘political sophistry of the worst
while Minister
for Justice Michael Tate said that the government would not allow the High Court
to ‘usurp the power of
Parliament.’
journalist described the decision as one which imposed ‘weird and
wonderful meanings on the provisions of the
Constitution
more vituperative was the criticism the High Court endured in the wake of its
decision on native title in
Wik Peoples v
Queensland Premier Rob Borbidge, described members of the court as
‘self-appointed kings and
the statements
of Chief Justice Brennan as
‘pathetic,’
those of Justice Kirby as ‘rantings and
and that the
judges of the court were held in ‘absolute and utter
Australians.
However, to say that a decision by the court was ‘revolutionary’
in the political sense does not mean that it would amount
‘constitutional revolution’. By declaring a new rule of the common
law (or resurrecting an old one) the courts
would be doing precisely what their
role entitles to do, which is to enunciate a common law rule about the power of
Parliament.
What could the government ultimately do if a court declared that a
statute was invalid for breaching a common law right? If the
executive did not
acquiesce in the judgment, it would be faced with a choice of appointing
additional judges to the bench, replacing
the existing courts with new one or
simply defying the ruling – all of which certainly
an unconstitutional revolution by the executive itself, depriving it of the
argument that it was seeking to uphold the
Constitution
. What this reveals is
that in the final analysis, although all three branches of the government must
act in accordance with the
law, it is the judicial branch that declares what the
law is, which means that it is the judicial branch which is the most powerful
them, even if judges have hitherto been hesitant to acknowledge, and still less,
act, in accordance with that reality. Yet, as
the American judicial realist
Jerome Frank noted
When judges and lawyers announce that judges can never validly make law, they
are not engaged in fooling the public; they have successfully
themselves.
ius dicere, non facere
therefore does not amount to a
restriction on the power of the courts to the degree that one might think,
because to say
VIII CONCLUSION
It is useful to end this article where it began – with the resignation
of Sir Robert Tredgold from his position as Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court
of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in 1960. It will be recalled that
he resigned not because he was
already required to apply legislation that was
inconsistent with liberty of the person and which intruded upon judicial power,
anticipation
of such legislation being enacted. To many,
this would seem an unnecessary, perhaps even dramatic, gesture. But I would
far from reflecting excessive judicial punctilio, Chief Justice
Tredgold’s resignation was a necessary and principled step,
taken in order
to avoid his judicial office being co-opted to serve as a cog in the machinery
of an unjust legal order, even though,
as he himself admitted, given that no
other judge followed him and the legal system carried on unaffected, he
overestimated the effect
that his resignation would
What this article has
sought to do is to argue that when faced with legislation that infringes
fundamental human rights, judges
in Australia face the same moral question as
was faced by Tredgold CJ and later by judges in South Africa. I have argued
answering that question, they have the choice either of resigning or of
being open to the new approach to the rule of law that is
evolving in other
circumstances, the common law is superior
to the will of Parliament – a
rule which can be justified either by looking to the law as it stood in the
century or by giving effect to that new understanding of the
rule of law and the correct balance between branches of government that
, Senior Lecturer in Law, Charles Sturt
University. I would like to acknowledge the assistance I received from library
staff at Charles
Sturt University, who with great efficiency fulfilled the many
requests I made for inter-library loan material, and also to thank
Graham Glover of Rhodes University, South Africa, who sent me a copy of an
article on the history of the judiciary in Rhodesia
and Zimbabwe by John
Redgment. This article is dedicated to Professor Tony Mathews (1930 –
1993), whom I was privileged to
know both as a colleague and friend at the
University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg, and whose fearless commitment to the
struggle for
human rights remains an inspiration to me.
Lecturer in Law, Charles Sturt University. I would like to acknowledge the
assistance I received from library staff at Charles
Sturt University, who with
great efficiency fulfilled the many requests I made for inter-library loan
material, and also to thank
Professor Graham Glover of Rhodes University, South
Africa, who sent me a copy of an article on the history of the judiciary in
and Zimbabwe by John Redgment. This article is dedicated to Professor
Tony Mathews (
930 – 1993), whom I was
privileged to know both as a colleague and friend at the University of Natal,
Pietermaritzburg, and
whose fearless commitment to the struggle for human rights
remains an inspiration to me.
For a comprehensive history of the federation see J.R.T. Wood,
The Welensky Papers – A History of the Federation of Rhodesia and
(Graham Publishing, 1983).
Peter Baxter,
Rhodesia: Last
Outpost of the British Empire: 1890 – 1980
(Galago, 2010) 249-50.
Reginald Austin,
apartheid in southern Africa – Rhodesia
(The Unesco Press, 1975)
W V Brelsford (ed),
to the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
(Cassell, 1960) 783
James Barber,
Rhodesia: Road
to Rebellion
(Oxford University Press, 1967) 51. For a survey of oppressive
legislation enacted in Southern Rhodesia see Amnesty International,
Conditions in Rhodesia
(1966, Amnesty International) and Christopher
Zimmerli, ‘Human Rights and the Rule of Law in Southern Rhodesia’
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
Barber above n 5, 55-6.
Anon, ‘Resignation of the
Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Clarkson Tredgold, Chief Justice of the Federation of
Rhodesia and Nyasaland’
South African Law Journal
See also John Redgment, ‘Plus ca change .... Fifty Years of Judges in
Southern Rhodesia, Rhodesia and Zimbabwe’
South African Law
Robert Tredgold,
Rhodesia That Was My Life
(Allen & Unwin, 1968) 232.
R v Carelse
Tayob v Ermelo Local Road Transportation Board
1951 (4) SA 440 (A).
See also the dissenting judgment of Gardener AJA in
Minister of Posts and
Telegraphs v Rasool
1934 AD 167
Reservation of Separate
Amenities Act
49 of 1953, ss 2 and 3.
Lennox Hinds,
‘Apartheid in South Africa and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights’ (1985) 24
Crime and Social Justice
The ever-expanding scope of
legislative authority to detain is traced in John Dugard,
Human Rights and
the South African Legal Order
(1978, Princeton University Press) 108-23;
Anthony Mathews,
Freedom State Security and the Rule of Law – Dilemmas
of the Apartheid Society
(Juta & Co, 1986) 62-100.
Wood and others v
Ondangwa Tribal Authority and another
1975 (2) SA 294 (AD)
for a discussion
of the remedy.
Regulations 4 and 19, Proc
91 (GGE 6403 of 30 March 1960).
J J Riekert, ‘The
D.D.D. syndrome - Solitary confinement and a South African Security Law
Trial’ in A N Bell and R D
A Markie (eds),
Detention and Security
Legislation in South Africa
(University of Natal, 1985) 121.
A. S. Mathews and R. C.
Albino, ‘The Permanence of the Temporary – An Examination of the 90-
and 180-Day Detention Laws’
South African Law
John Dugard
Human Rights
and the South African Legal Order
(Princeton University Press, 1978) 367.
See, for example
1960 (4) SA 709 (AD)
Minister of the Interior v Lockhat and others
1961 (2) SA 587 (AD)
Rossouw v Sachs
1964 (2) SA 551
Schermbrucker v Klindt N.O.
1965 (4) SA 606 (AD)
South Afrucan
Defence and Aid Fund and another v Minister of Justice
1967 (1) SA 263 (AD)
Sobukwe and another v Minister of Justice
1972 (1) SA 693 (AD).
a survey of these cases see John Dugard,
Human Rights and the South African
Legal Order
(1978, University of Princeton Press) 303-65.
See, for example
1950 (3) SA 136 (AD)
1953 (2) SA 484 (AD)
1954 (1) SA 123 (AD)
Saliwa v Minister of Native Affairs
1956 (2) SA310 (AD),
Wood and others v Ondangwa Tribal Authority and
1975 (2) SA 294 (AD)
Magubane v Minister of Police
Hurley v Minister of Law and Order
1985 (4) SA 709 (D)
Minister of Law and Order v Hurley
[1986] ZASCA 53
1986 (3) SA 568 (A)
East Rand Administration Board and another
1982 (1) SA 257 (W).
1979 (3) SA 820 (N)
Raymond Wacks, ‘Judges
and Injustice’
South African Law Journal
Ibid 281-2.
Ibid 282-3.
John Dugard, ‘Should
Judges Resign? A Reply to Professor Wacks’
South African Law
Ibid 289-90.
John Dugard, ‘Tony
Mathews and Criticism of the Judiciary’ in Marita Carnelly and Shannon
Hoctor (eds),
Law, Order and Liberty - Essays in Honour of Tony Mathews
(2011, University of Kwa-Zulu Natal) 3, 6-7.
Raymond Wacks,
‘Judging Judges: A Brief Rejoinder to Professor Dugard’
South African Law Journal
Dugard, above n 31, 7-8.
The right to compensation
when property is acquired by the Commonwealth (s 51(xxxi), freedom of
inter-State trade commerce and intercourse
(s 92), the right to a jury trial for
indictable Commonwealth offences (s 90), the right not to be discriminated
against on grounds
of residence in another State (s116) and freedom of religion
Freedom of political
communication (
Australian Capital Television v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
177 CLR 106)
, the right to vote (
Roach v Electoral Commissioner
[2007] HCA 43
233 CLR 162)
and a qualified right to due process (
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1.
Greg Craven, ‘Deliver
us from hostility to freedom of faith,’
The Australian
(Sydney) 12
October 2018.
Greg Craven,
Conversations with the
Constitution
– Not Just a Piece of Paper
(University of New South Wales Press, 2004) 181-8.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Traditional Rights and Freedoms – Encroachment by
Commonwealth Laws
, Report No 129 (2016).
(1992) 176 CLR 1.
Ibid 33. Similar reasoning
was also advanced by McHugh J at 65-6, 71. The fact that the duration of
detention was limited to such
period as was required for processing an
application or deportation was also emphasised by the court in
M76/2013 v Minister for Immigration, Cultural Affairs and Citizenship
[2013] HCA 53
251 CLR 322
, 369 (Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ).
These categories and the
cases in which they were identified are listed in George Williams and David
Human Rights and the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University
ed, 2013) 345-6. For a discussion of them see Jeffrey
Gordon, ‘Imprisonment and the Separation of Judicial Power: A Defence
Categorical Immunity from Non-Criminal Detention’
[2012] MelbULawRw 2
University Law Review
Williams and Hume, above n
43, 346 n 149.
[2004] HCA 36
(2004) 219 CLR 486
(Gleeson CJ).
Williams and Hume, above n
43, 346, 350-1.
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Lessons for public administration – Ombudsman investigation of referred
immigration cases
(1992) 176 CLR 1
(Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ).
(2014) 253 CLR 219
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Keane JJ). See also
M76/2013 v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship
[2013] HCA 53
(2013) 251 CLR 322
[138] (Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ) and
M96A /2016 v Commonwealth
(2017) 261 CLR 581
[21] (Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane,
Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ), [126] Hayne J.
[2013] HCA 53
(2013) 251 CLR 322
, [138] (Crennan, Bell and Gageler
Ibid [140].
(2014) 253 CLR 219
[29] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Keane JJ).
[2021] HCA 21
(2021) 391 ALR 562.
Ibid [46] – [51]
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane and Steward JJ).
(2014) 253 CLR 219
[29] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Keane JJ).
Ibid [68] – [70].
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562.
Ibid 584-95 (McHugh J),
647-50 (Hayne J), 657-61 (Callinan J) and 662-3 (Heydon J).
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51.
Ibid 96-7 (Toohey J), 106-07
(Gaudron J), 120-4 (McHugh J), 132-4 (Gummow J).
Mathews and Albino, above n
Jane McAdam and Fiona Chong,
Refugee Rights and Policy Wrongs
(2019, University of New South Wales
Press) 104-09, 237 n 29.
United Nations Human Rights
FKAG v Australia
, UN Doc CCPR/C/108/D/2094/2011, 26 July 2013,
[3.12]; United Nations Human Rights Committee, UN Doc CCPR/C/108/D/2136/2012, 25
2013, [3.14].
United Nations Office for
the Commissioner for Human Rights,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Addendum:
Observations
on communications transmitted to Governments and replies
, UN doc A/HRC/28/68/Add.1 (2015), [19].
Medecins Sans Frontiere,s
Indefinite Despair - The tragic mental health consequences of offshore
processing on Nauru
, 2 December 2018
https://www.msf.org/indefinite-despair-report-and-executive-summary-nauru.
Kathleen Teltsch,
‘South Africa is Condemned by U.N.’
The New York Times
York), 23 December 1976.
Lisa Cox, ‘Tony
Abbott: Australians 'sick of being lectured to' by United Nations, after report
finds anti-torture breach’
The Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 10
March 2015.
See Sharon Pickering and
Leanne Weber, ‘New Deterrence Scripts in Australia's Rejuvenated Offshore
Detention Regime for Asylum
Law & Social
and Caroline Fleay et al, ‘Missing the Boat: Australia
and Asylum Seeker Deterrence Messaging’ (2016) 54
International
Parliament of Australia, Joint Standing Committee on Migration
Asylum, Border
Control and Detention
(1994) [4.12].
ABC Radio, ‘Interview
on the treatment of children in detention,’
Radio National
, 1 August 2002.
Joint Press Release,
Attorney-General The Hon Philip Ruddock and Minister for Justice and Customs,
Senator The Hon Christopher Ellison
‘Strengthening our Borders,’ E
140/04, 27 September 2004.
Re Woolley; Ex parte
Applicants M276/2003
(2004) 225 CLR 1
, [61] (McHugh J).
McAdam and Chong, above n
Greg Lake ‘What Kind
of Nation are we Building?’
Asylum Insight
(19 January 2015)
<https://www.asyluminsight.com/c-greg-lake>.
[2004] HCA 36
(2004) 219 CLR 486
(Gleeson CJ).
(1992) 176 CLR 1.
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562
Plaintiff M76 / 2013 v Minister for Immigration, Multicultural
Affairs and Citizenship
(2013) 251 CLR 32
[35] – [36], [130]
Schedule to the
Court of Australia Act 1979
Wacks, above 32, 282.
Warwick Stanley,
‘Rights bill to empower unelected: Howard,’
The Sydney Morning
(Sydney), 27 August 2009; Michael Gordon, ‘Tony Abbott and Bill
Shorten meet in private to nut out indigenous constitution
The Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney) 17 September 2014.
Frank Brennan,
Change: The Road to Recognition for Indigenous Australia
. (2015, University
of Queensland Press) 246; Greg Craven, ‘Heresy as Orthodoxy: Were the
Founders Progressivists?’
[2003] FedLawRw 3
Federal Law Review
Craven above n 37, 143, 150-1, 185.
[1572] EngR 106
(1610) 8 Co Rep 107a
[1572] EngR 106
Ibid 118a, 652.
[1612] EngR 19
(1612) 2 Brownl 192
(1614) Hob 85, 87;
[1792] EngR 643
(1615) Hob 334, 336.
(1651) 5 St Tr 43
(1653) 5 St Tr 366
(1673) Vaughan 330
124 ER 1098
(1694) Skin. 517
[1728] EngR 448
, 236 – where it was stated that “every day” judges
“construe and expound Acts of Parliament, and adjudge
(1702) 12 Mod 669, 687-88;
[1795] EngR 4052
(1795) 6 T.R. 194
[1795] EngR 4052
[1824] EngR 93
(1824) 2 B & C 448
(1861) 3 L.T. 642 (CP)
[1842] EngR 1123
(1842) 4 Moore PC 284
296. See also
Lee v Bude and Torrington Junction Railway Co
[1871] UKLawRpCP 50
(1871) L.R.
[1974] UKHL 1
[1974] AC 765 (HL)
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(Reprinted 2016, Oxford University
Press) vol 1, 66.
George Winterton
‘Extra-Constitutional Notions in Australian Constitutional Law’
Federal Law Review
For an overview of
Bonham’s Case
and its influence in New Zealand see Karen Grau,
Parliamentary Sovereignty: New Zealand – New Millennium
Victoria University of Wellington Law Review
, 78 (dissenting),
New Zealand Drivers’ Association v New
Zealand Road Carriers
[1982] 1 NZLR 374
Fraser v State Services
[1984] 1 NZLR 116
Taylor v New Zealand Poultry
[1984] 1 NZLR 394
[1984] 1 NZLR 394
Robin Cooke,
‘Fundamentals’
New Zealand Law Journal
also support for Cooke’s argument in John Caldwell, ‘Judicial
Sovereignty – A New View’
New Zealand Law Journal
Cooke, above n 106,
Edward Thomas, ‘The
Relationship of Parliament and the Courts: A Tentative Thought or Two for the
New Millennium’ (2000)
Victoria University of Wellington Law Review
Ibid 30-31.
Lord Woolf, ‘Droit
public – English style’
Sir John Laws, ‘Law
and Democracy’
Sir Stephen Sedley,
‘Human Rights: a Twenty-First Century Agenda’
T. R. S. Allan,
‘Parliamentary sovereignty: Law, politics and revolution’
Law Quarterly Review
[2005] UKHL 56
[2006] 1 AC 262.
discussion of this case see Jeffry Jowell and Colm O’Cinneide,
Constitution
ed, 2019, Oxford University Press)
[2005] UKHL 56
[2006] 1 AC 262
Ibid [104]. See also Hope
AXA General Insurance Ltd v HM Advocate
[2011] UKSC 46
[2012] 1 AC 868
, [50]-[51]
where he said ‘whether the principle of the sovereignty of the United
Kingdom Parliament is absolute or may be subject
to limitation in exceptional
circumstances is still under discussion.’ See also similar dicta in
Moohan v Lord Advocate
[2014] UKSC 67
[2015] AC 901
[2005] UKHL 56
[2006] 1 AC 262
Above n 121, 332.
C.J.S. Knight,
‘Bi-Polar Sovereignty Restated’
Cambridge Law
Ibid 362-3.
Thomas Bingham,
‘The rule of law’
Cambridge Law Journal
Joseph Raz, ‘The
Rule of Law and its Virtue’ in Joseph Raz (ed)
The Authority of Law
(Oxford University Press, 2009), 221.
Bingham n 128, 75-7.
Stuart Lakin,
‘Debunking the Idea of Parliamentary Sovereignty: The Controlling Factor
of Legality in the British
Constitution
Oxford Journal of
Legal Studies
Geoffrey Marshall,
Constitutional Conventions
(Clarendon Press, 1984) 9.
Thomas Poole ‘Back
to the Future? Unearthing the Theory of Common Law Constitutionalism’
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
[2005] UKHL 56
[2006] 1 AC 262.
Geoffrey de Q Walker,
‘Dicey’s Dubious Dogma of Parliamentary Sovereignty’
Australian Law Journal
David Feldman,
‘Democracy, The Rule of Law and Judicial Review’
[1990] FedLawRw 1
Federal Law Review
, 6-7; David Smallbone, ‘Recent Suggestions of
an Implied 'Bill of Rights' in the
Constitution
, Considered as Part of a General
Trend in Constitutional Interpretation’
Federal Law
(1988) 166 CLR I
Polyukhovich v
Commonwealth
[1991] HCA 32
(1991) 172 CLR 501
(Toohey J);
Momcilovic v The
(2011) 254 CLR 1,47 n 217 (French CJ), 215-6 (Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
South Australia v Totani
[2010] HCA 39
(2010) 242 CLR 1
, 29 (French CJ);
Holdings v New South Wales
(2001) 205 CLR 399
, 410 (Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow
and Hayne JJ), 433 (Callinan J).
[1996] HCA 24
(1996) 189 CLR 51.
Ibid 66 (Brennan CJ), 76
(Dawson J). The same was said by Kirby J, then sitting in the New South Wales
Supreme Court of Appeal in
Builders Labourers Federation v Minister for
Industrial Relations
(1986) 7 NSWLR 372
John Toohey, ‘A
Government of Laws and Not of Men?’
Public Law Review
Owen Dixon, ‘The
Common Law as the Ultimate Constitutional Foundation’
Australian Law Journal
[2005] UKHL 56
[2006] 1 AC 262.
Ibid [102].
For a full discussion of
the extent to which the Commonwealth
Constitution
fails adequately to provide
either for representative or for responsible government see Bede Harris,
‘Representative Democracy
and Responsible Government - Two Australian
Constitutional Myths’
Canberra Law Review
Bede Harris,
Constitutional Reform as a Remedy for
Political Disenchantment in Australia
(Springer, 2020) 65-71, 145-9.
Attorney General
(Cth); Ex rel McKinlay v Commonwealth
[1975] HCA 53
(1975) 135 CLR 1
McGinty v Western
(1996) 186 CLR 40.
For a full discussion see Bede Harris,
‘Does the Commonwealth Electoral Act Satisfy the Requirement That
Representatives Be
‘Directly Chosen’ by the People?’
Journal of Politics and Law
In this regard see also
Feldman, above n 136, 6-7.
Toohey, above n 142,
T R S Allan
‘Legislative Supremacy and the Rule of Law: Democracy and
Constitutionalism’
Cambridge Law Journal
Harry Evans, ‘The
Australian Parliament: time for reformation’ (Address to the National
Press Club, Canberra, 24 April
<https://australianpolitics.com/2002/04/24/harry-evans-parliamentary-reform-speech.html>
Frank Bongiorno,
‘Politicians’ inability to speak freely on issues that matter leaves
democracy all the poorer’
The Conversation,
21 June 2016.
Judy Madigan,
‘Ministerial responsibility: reality or myth?’ (2011) 26
Australasian Parliamentary Review
P Walters, ‘A
fearless public servant’
The Australian
(Sydney), 17 August
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation,
The World Today
1 June 2004.
Samantha Maiden,
‘Gag in Senate illegal, clerk warns’
The Australian
12 April 2006.
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation, ‘Immigration Minister Scott Morrison defies Senate order to
release information about
Operation Sovereign Borders.,’
19 November 2013.
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation, ‘Senior officials refuse to answer questions on payments to
people smugglers.’
, 5 February 2016.
Bede Harris,
Constitutional Reform as a Remedy for Political Disenchantment in Australia
(Springer, 2020) 5-6.
Ibid 12-13.
Christopher Knaus and
Josh Taylor, ‘Sports rorts: Coalition blocking release of Phil
Gaetjens’ secret report, citing
cabinet exemption’
The Guardian
(Online), 18 July 2021
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/jul/18/sports-rorts-coalition-blocking-release-of-phil-gaetjens-secret-report-citing-cabinet-exemption>
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation, ‘Scott Morrison defends blocking proposed federal corruption
commission after MP crosses
the floor,’
25 November
Official Record of the
Debates of the Australasian Federal Convention
, Melbourne, 1898, 687 (Isaac
Isaacs) and 690-91 (Patrick Glynn). See Geoffrey Robertson,
The Statute of
Liberty: How Australians Can Take Back Their Rights
(Random House Australia,
2009) 59 and Andrew Byrnes, Hilary Charlesworth and Gabrielle McKinnon,
of Rights in Australia: History, Politics and Law
(University of New South
Wales Press, 2009) 24-6.
Anne Twomey,
‘Fundamental Common Law Principles as Limitations upon Legislative
Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal
70-1; Williams and Hume, above n 43, 48.
William Gummow,
Constitution
: Ultimate Foundation of Australian Law?’
Australian Law Journal
Leslie Zines ‘A
Judicially Created Bill of Rights?’
[1994] SydLawRw 14
Sydney Law Review
Winterton, above n 102,
Bede Harris,
Constitutional Reform as a Remedy for Political Disenchantment in
(Springer, 2020) 90-5.
John Laws, ‘The
Constitution
: Morals and Rights’
Poole, above n 133,
Immanuel Kant,
Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals
(Herbert Paton, trans, Routledge
Classics, 2005) [trans of
Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten
published 1785)] 114-5, 161-2. For a general discussion of autonomy, including
Kant's contribution, see Joel Feinberg,
Harm to Self
(Oxford University
Press, 1986) 27-51.
Lon Fuller,
Morality of Law
(Yale University Press, 1964), 162.
Raz, above n 129,
Jeremy Waldron,
‘How Law protects Dignity’
Cambridge Law Journal
Harold Lasswell and Myers
McDougal, ‘Legal Education and Public Policy: Professional Training in the
Public Interest
Yale Law Journal
, 207; Harold Lasswell and
Myers McDougal, ‘Criteria for a Theory About Law’
Southern California Law Review
, 393 and Myers McDougal, Harold
Lasswell and Lung-Chu Chen,
Human Rights and World Public Order
University Press, 1980).
Laws, above n 174, 623.
John Rawls,
(1972, Clarendon Press) 17–22, 60, 136-42, 303.
GA Res 217A (III), UN Doc
A/810 at 71 (10 December 1948).
Opened for signature 16
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976).
Opened for signature 16
1966, 993 UNTS 3
(entered into force 3 January 1976).
GA Res 61 / 295 (13
September 2007).
(1992) 176 CLR 1.
[2015] HCA 34
(2015) 257 CLR 178
– [3] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ).
McAdam and Chong, above n
[2021] HCA 21
(2021) 391 ALR 562.
Al-Kateb v Godwin
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562
, 574 (Gleeson CJ).
McAdam and Chong, above n
66, 110-11.
[2004] HCA 37
(2004) 219 CLR 562.
In 2021 Independent MP
Andrew Wilkie introduced the
Ending Indefinite and Arbitrary Immigration
Detention Bill
to Parliament. Although the Bill was not proceeded with by
the House, it provides a useful template for legislation which would
the right to individual liberty. The Bill can be accessed at
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Migration/ImmigrationDetentionBill>.
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
Hugh Morgan,
(Sydney), 13 October 1992.
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106.
Margo Kingston,
‘Parliament Must Reclaim Role On Rights – Costello,’
(Melbourne), 7 October 1992.
‘An Implied Bill of
Australian Press Council News
Commonwealth
Parliamentary Debates
, Senate Hansard, 7 October 1992, 1280 (Michael
Les Hollings,
‘Don’t Let the Judges Govern,’
Sunday Telegraph
(Sydney), 4 July 1993.
(1996) 187 CLR 1.
Gervase Green,
‘Senator defies PM in attack on court’,
(Melbourne),
4 March 1997, 4.
Adrian Rollins,
‘Attacks “undermine” the role of the High Court,’
(Melbourne), 9 March 1997, 11.
James Woodford,
‘Borbidge steps up attack on High Court,’
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 1 March 1997, 7.
Jerome Frank,
the Modern Mind
(Stevens & Sons, 1949) 115.
Tredgold, above n 8,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (709 KB)
PDF format (656 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter