URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 16 - Capacity to Consent to Research" [2011] SydUPLawBk 18; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
16. 1. Introduction
16. 2. Research governance
16. 3. Australian legislation relating to those who lack capacity to consent receiving experimental treatment or taking part in clinical
16. 3. 1. New South Wales
16. 3. 2. Queensland
16. 3. 3. Victoria
16. 3. 4. The other States and the Territories
16. 4. The assessment of capacity to consent to research
16. 4. 1. Instruments
16. 4. 2. Patient predictors of capacity
16. 5. Research involving adults who have cognitive impairment
16. 5. 1. Facilitating the consent process and involvement of cognitively impaired subjects
16. 5. 2. Advance research directives
16. 5. 3. Proxy consent
Chapter 16 - Capacity to Consent to Research
16. 1. Introduction
Clinical research with cognitively impaired adults is important. It is
essential for improving the treatment of several conditions.
cognitively impaired adults should not be denied the opportunity to participate
in research from which they may benefit.
However, such patients should only be
enrolled in clinical research when their participation is consistent with their
competent choices.
This chapter
will address some of the principles of research governance designed to safeguard
the interests of adults who lack capacity
to consent to research as well as
providing guidelines as to the assessment of capacity to consent to
The chapter also discusses the legislation in New South Wales, Queensland and
Victoria relating to substitute consent to “experimental”
treatments and treatments available through clinical trials.
16. 2. Research governance
The relevance of capacity to consent to participate in research was first
recognised formally in the Nuremberg Code, which was an
attempt to codify
principles to guide human experimentation in response to the perpetration of the
Nazi atrocities.
The Code deemed
essential the voluntary legal consent of the subject, which meant that the
subject must have legal capacity to give
The next major attempt to codify research governance was the promulgation of
the Declaration of Helsinki in 1964 by the World Medical
Association. Hitherto
unacknowledged by the Nuremberg Code, a provision for involvement of subjects
lacking capacity to participate
in research was included in the Declaration.
Research was divided into two categories based on the researcher’s intent,
categories allowing for consent of a third party (referred to as a
‘legal guardian”) to be substituted for that of an
incompetent
subject. These categories included:
(i) Therapeutic research - procedures primarily aimed to benefit a particular
patient but incidentally also broadened knowledge of
the condition or its
(ii) Non therapeutic research - where the intent was to extend knowledge to
benefit future patients but made no claim to benefit individual
By 2000 it was increasingly argued that this distinction, developed in an
attempt to protect vulnerable patients by discouraging their
involvement in
non-therapeutic and theoretically more hazardous research, was outmoded and
misleading, and the World Health Medical
Association set out general standards
for all research to be assessed according to the same criteria of risks and
benefits. Nevertheless,
the distinctive risk- benefit context of research as
opposed to treatment and the notion of a risk hierarchy are important
considerations
in modern research codes.
Subsequently, research regulations have been developed in legislative
frameworks and policies of major health governing bodies in
and the United States, to implement uniform rules on clinical trials and
to protect those who cannot give consent. For example, the
National Institutes
of Health established the following guidelines for conducting research with
cognitively impaired
individuals:
1. The consent process must clearly differentiate between accepted treatment
and research,
2. The Institutional Review Board should include at least one member who is
independent of the proposed research project and has expertise
in issues of
decisional capacity,
3. Adequate assessment of participant capacity must be addressed in the
research protocol,
4. There should be safeguards for the additional protection of participants
as the severity of impairment increases,
5. Ongoing education should be conducted to enhance participant
understanding, and
6. Additional safeguards such as the use of advanced directives for research,
may be necessary when greater than minimal risk is involved.
Similarly, in the United Kingdom, the Medical Research Council published
guidelines for Ethical Conduct of Research on the Mentally
Incapacitated which
covered issues related to consent and safeguards for including mentally
incapacitated people in research in
and guidelines for good
clinical practice in clinical trials in
Medicines for Human
Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations
2004 (UK) came into force in the 2004 to
cover the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products. The latter allowed a
legal representative
of the person not connected with the conduct of the trial
to consent to the participation of incompetent adults in medical
Capacity Act
2005 (UK) which came into force in April 2007, governs
decision-making on behalf of adults who lack mental capacity, both where they
lose capacity at some point in their lives, or where the incapacitating
condition has been present since birth. It has clarified
and enshrined in
legislation the requirements for when adults who lack the capacity to consent
are included in medical research
In Australia, the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) has
published guidelines for ethical conduct in human research,
This statement emphasises
the entitlement of people with a cognitive impairment, disability or mental
illness to participate in
research and the need for care in the research design
both to take into account factors that may affect the capacity to receive
information,
to consent and participate, and to determine if the person’s
condition makes them susceptible to discomfort or distress. Because
person’s vulnerability, the risks to and burdens imposed on them by the
research must be justified by the potential
benefits of the research. The NHMRC
guidelines regarding consent for people with cognitive impairment, intellectual
disability or
mental illness include:
1. Consent must be sought either from the person themselves if they have the
capacity to consent, or the person authorised to consent
on their behalf;
2. Consent should be witnessed by a person who has the capacity to understand
the merits, risks and procedures of the research and
is independent of the
research team, knows the person and is familiar with their condition;
3. If the cognitive impairment is episodic consent should be sought when the
condition does not interfere with the person’s
4. The process of seeking consent should include discussion of any
possibility of the person losing their capacity to consent and
person’s wishes in that circumstance followed unless to do so would not be
in their best interests;
5. Where consent is sought by a proxy, the researcher should still explain to
the participant as far as possible what the research
6. Researchers should inform Human Research and Ethics Committees how they
propose to determine capacity (including how the decision
will be made and by
whom, criteria used and process for reviewing capacity during the research)
7. Refusal or reluctance to participate should be
16. 3. Australian legislation relating to those who
lack capacity to consent receiving experimental treatment or taking part in
16. 3. 1. New South Wales
Guardianship Act
(NSW) came into force in August 1989 well
in advance of the National Health and Medical Research Council’s
guidelines and
the inclusion of Australian hospitals and other medical
institutions in clinical trials particularly those that might involve those
unable to give a valid consent. Initially the Act dealt only with particular
medical or dental treatments that were “experimental”
in the sense
that they were new treatments that has not yet gained the support of a
substantial number of medical practitioners or
dentists specialising in the area
of practice concerned.
NSW Guardianship Tribunal and not the incapable person’s person
responsible could give its consent to such treatment.
Before it could give its
consent, the Tribunal had to be satisfied that:
1. the treatment was the only or most appropriate way of treating the person
and was manifestly in their best interests, and
2. in so far as the National Health and Medical Research Council had
prescribed guidelines that were relevant to the carrying out
treatment—those guidelines had been or will be complied with as regards
the person.
Amendments to the
Guardianship Act
which came into force in 1998,
after the Standing Committee on Social Issues of the New South Wales Legislative
Council recommended
The effect of these
amendments is that the NSW Guardianship Tribunal must give its approval to a
clinical trial before that clinical
trial may include among its patients people
aged 16 years and above who are unable to give a valid consent to their own
The Tribunal may not give its consent unless it is satisfied as to
all of the following.
First, that the drugs or techniques being tested in the trial are intended to
cure or alleviate a particular condition from which
the patients suffer.
Consequently, the Tribunal looks at the matter from the perspective of the
prospective patients and must be
satisfied from the Trial Protocol that only
those with the condition that the drug or technique being tested the trials is
to cure or alleviate will be included in the trial.
Second, that the trial will not involve any known substantial risks to the
patients or, if there are existing treatments for the condition
concerned, will
not involve material risks greater than the risks associated with those existing
treatments.
Thirdly, that the development of the drug or technique has reached stage at
which safety and ethical considerations make it appropriate
that it be available
to patients who suffer from that condition even if those patients are not able
to consent to take part in the
Fourthly, that having regard to the potential benefits, as well as the
potential risks, of participation in the trial, it is in the
best interests o f
the patients who suffer from the relevant condition that they take part in the
Fifthly, the trial has been approved by the relevant ethics committees of the
hospitals or other institutions in New South Wales that
intend to take part in
the clinical trial and finally that the clinical trial complies with any
relevant guidelines issued by the
National Health and Medical Research
As a matter of
practice, the Tribunal will not deal with an application to approve a clinical
trial until after proof that the relevant
ethics committee has approved that
clinical trial has been lodged with it.
The legislation specifically states that the fact that a clinical trial will
or may involve the giving of placebos to some of the
participants does not
prevent the Tribunal from being satisfied that it is in the best interests of
patients that they take part
If the Tribunal gives its consent to the clinical trial, that completes the
first part of the process. The second part of the process
is for the Tribunal to
decide whether it will decide in each case whether an incapable potential
patient can take part in the trial
or whether it will give the function of
giving or withholding consent for the carrying out of medical or dental
treatment on patients
in the course of the trial to the “person
responsible” for each of the incapable
It is the practice of
the Tribunal to give this consent function to the “person
responsible”. However, before deciding
to do so, it must be satisfied that
the forms for granting consent and the information available about the trial
developed by the
hospital or other institution taking part in the trial provide
sufficient information to enable the “persons responsible”
whether or not it is appropriate that the incapable patient they are
“person responsible” for should take part
in the clinical
The Tribunal is required to provide details of any clinical trial that it
approves in its Annual Report.
In fact it provides details of any clinical trial it is asked to approve,
whether it approves the clinical trial or not. Examples
of the kinds of clinical
trials that come to the Tribunal for approval are trials for patients who are
critically ill, who have sepsis,
suffer from a stroke or have Alzheimer’s
16. 3. 2. Queensland
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) follows the
approach of the New South Wales Act broadly in relation to experimental
treatment and closely in relation to clinical
In Queensland experimental treatment is called special medical research or
experimental health care and is defined as either medical
research or
experimental health care relating to a condition the adult has or has a
significant risk of being exposed to or medical
research or experimental health
care intended to gain knowledge that can be used in the diagnosis, maintenance
or treatment of a
condition the adult has or has
QCAT is the only consent
authority for such treatment and has to be satisfied about a substantial list of
matters before it may give
its consent to the research or health care. The
treatment could be consented to as health
In a 2006 case that is relevant to the question of experimental treatments in
New South Wales, the then Queensland Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal
held that the only treatment for a particular genetic condition that a 38 year
old man with severe intellectual
disability had was not experimental health care
(experimental treatment).
was because it had long been accepted by specialists in the field and by the
leading texts in the field. The Tribunal also considered
that the treatment was
not special medical research. There was no systematic inquiry or investigation
into the treatment and the
fact that it had not been the subject of approval or
included on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods established under the
Therapeutic Goods Act
(Cth) did not make it special health
In relation to clinical trials, the
provides that QCAT must first
approve the clinical trial, according to criteria essentially similar to the New
South Wales criteria.
not give the individual consents as to who may take part in a clinical trial
that it has approved. Those consents are to
be sought first according to any
relevant direction in a health care directive if the incapable person has made
one. If not then
the decision will be made by a guardian if QCAT has appointed
one for the incapable person. If that is not the case but the incapable
has appointed an attorney under an enduring power of attorney to deal with the
matter, then consent should be sought from
that person. No such attorney has
been appointed, then consent should be sought from the person’s statutory
health attorney.
Guardian is the default statutory health attorney for the incapable person who
would otherwise have no one to act as a
substitute decision-maker for them in
relation to this matter.
16. 3. 3. Victoria
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Vic) was amended, with
effect from July 2006, to provide for a four step process for authorising the
carrying out of a medical research
procedure on an incapable
However, unlike the New
South Wales and Queensland legislation, it does not require that VCAT approve
the medical research procedure
before any adult unable to give a valid consent
to their own medical treatment may take part. Also, the Victorian legislation
doctors to include an incapable person in a research project and to carry
out the research procedure on them without obtaining substitute
certain circumstances.
No adult unable to give a valid consent to their own medical treatment may be
treated according to a medical research procedure unless
it has been approved by
the relevant human research ethics
A medical research
procedure is a procedure carried out for the purposes of medical research. It
may be part of a clinical trial
or involve the administration of medication or
the use of equipment or a device; or it may be a procedure that is prescribed by
regulations to be a medical research
Both the incapable
person’s “person
responsible”
doctor proposing to carry out the procedure on an incapable person must satisfy
themselves that the required approval has
been given for the
The next step is for the treating doctor to determine whether the person they
are proposing to carry out the procedure on is likely
to become capable of
giving consent before that procedure would have to be performed. When deciding
this, the doctor must have regard
to the person’s the medical or physical
condition or the stage of their treatment or care at which the procedure would
to be performed or other relevant circumstances specific to the person. If
the doctor considers that the person is likely to be capable
procedure would have to be performed, they must not carry out the procedure on
the person.
If the person is not likely to regain their capacity to give a valid consent
to the procedure before it would need to be performed,
then the consent of the
person responsible, if there is one, is to be sought. However, before they may
give their consent, they must
believe that the carrying out of the procedure
would not be contrary to the best interests of the patient and that the consent
consistent with any requirements for consent specified by the relevant human
ethics committee in its approval or with the conditions
In order to assess
these matters, the person responsible would need access to the research project
proposal and the terms of its
approval by the by the relevant human research
ethics committee. In forming their opinion about whether the medical research
would or would not be contrary to the best interests of the
person, the person responsible must take the following matters into
1. the wishes of the person, so far as they can be ascertained,
2. the wishes of any nearest relative (if they are not the person
responsible) or any other family members of the patient,
3. the nature and degree of any benefits, discomforts and risks for the
person in having or not having the procedure; and
4. any other consequences to the patient if the procedure is or is not
carried out.
However, where the medical research procedure has been approved and the
person is unlikely to be capable of giving their own consent
but the person
responsible for the person cannot be ascertained or contacted after reasonable
steps have been taken, a doctor may
carry out a medical research procedure on
the person without consent.
doctor must believe, on reasonable grounds, that being the subject of the
procedure would not be contrary to the best interests
of the person, taking into
account the matters set out in the last paragraph and that having the procedure
carried out on them would
not be against the person’s
The doctor must also believe, on reasonable grounds, that:
1. the relevant human research ethics committee has approved the research
project in the knowledge that a person may participate in
the project without
their prior consent of the patient or the consent of their person
responsible,
2. one of the purposes of the research project is to assess the effectiveness
of the therapy being researched,
3. the medical research procedure poses no more of a risk to the patient than
the risk that is inherent in the person's condition
and alternative
4. the relevant research project is based on valid scientific hypotheses that
support a reasonable possibility of benefit for the
person as compared with
standard treatment.
The doctor must certify as to those matters and then inform the person
responsible as soon as practicable of the person’s inclusion
project and the option to refuse consent to the procedure or further
participation in the project.
number of other requirements must also be
Despite these complex arrangements and requirements, a doctor, acting in good
faith, may carry out, or supervise the carrying out
of, a medical research
procedure on an incapable person without either obtaining consent or going
through the processes outlined
if they believe on reasonable grounds that the
procedure or treatment is necessary, as a matter of urgency to:
1. save the person's life,
2. prevent serious damage to their health, or
3. prevent the person from suffering or continuing to suffer significant pain
or distress.
Doctors acting in this way are protected from civil or criminal proceedings
against them except in relation to breach of their duty
of care to the
16. 3. 4. The other States and the
Territories
At the time or writing, none of the other States or the two territories had
legislation dealing directly with
those who lack capacity to
consent to their own treatment receiving experimental treatment or taking part
in clinical trials. While
it might be arguable in some of those States or the
two Territories that incapable people could be given treatments that are new
treatments that have not yet gained the support of a substantial number of
doctors specialising in the area of practice concerned
or could be given
treatment available only if they took part in a particular clinical trial, there
are two immediate difficulties.
First, it may not be in the best interests of
the person that they receive the treatment or take part in the clinical trial.
be in the interests of others that they do. Second, in many clinical
trials some of the participants receive a placebo and not the
treatment. As many of these trials are randomized and double-blinded, it not
possible to work out who is receiving the treatment
and who is not.
Consequently, an incapable person may take part in such a trial and not receive
the medication being tested.
In Tasmania, for example, treatment without consent may only take place where
the treatment is necessary.
16. 4. The assessment of capacity to consent to
Capacity to consent to research is assessed in the same way as capacity to
consent to medical treatment but with additional safeguards.
Importantly, participants
involved in clinical research should understand the difference between treatment
and research protocols,
including such things as randomisation and the use of
A number of standards to define capacity to consent to research have evolved
over the last 25 years but most comprise various combinations
of four commonly
used elements which are conceptually similar to those used to define capacity to
consent to treatment. They are:
1. factual understanding of the issues including an understanding of the
procedure or treatment its risks and side effects, available
options and their
advantages and disadvantages and the consequences of participation and
non-participation;
2. rational manipulation of information or reasoning;
3. appreciation of the nature of the situation; and
4. evidencing a choice.
16. 4. 1. Instruments
A number of instruments have been developed to structure and standardise the
assessment of capacity. The MacArthur Competence Assessment
Tool for Clinical
Research (MacCAT-CR) is probably the most widely used instrument for the study
of decision making capacity in research.
This tool, administered by a structured
interview which takes approximately 15-20 minutes to administer, comprises 21
items assessing
all of the four elements of capacity: understanding,
appreciation, reasoning and evidencing a
The understanding
subscale, in particular, has been shown to have reliability and predictive value
in identifying patients with mild
to moderate Alzheimer’s disease who are
capable of giving consent.
MacCAT-CR also had predictive value in determining capacity for informed consent
in schizophrenia research.
Since the development of the MacCAT-CR there have been a number of attempts
to develop more parsimonious but still valid and reliable
tests for capacity to
consent to research participation, particularly for cognitively impaired
individuals who may have limited ability
to concentrate as a result of both
physical and cognitive problems.
Another commonly used measure is the California Scale of Appreciation (CSA),
which specifically assesses the "appreciation" component
of capacity. It
comprises 18 items which assess whether or not participants form adequate
beliefs about how the information provided
applies to them. The CSA is a
reliable and potentially useful instrument for measuring the appreciation
component of capacity in
persons with psychotic
although some doubt
has been cast about its validity because the majority of participants were found
to be fully "capable" on the
The Evaluation to Sign Consent (ESC) tool is a five-item measure developed to
better assess the “understanding” component
of capacity in response
to previous findings that suggested that study participants could not correctly
state the purpose of the
research study in which they had consented to
participate.
An even shorter 3 item decisional capacity questionnaire showed strong
correlation with the Mac CAT-CR understanding, and moderate,
significant correlations with appreciation and reasoning in subjects with
schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s disease and
the optimal cut-off score gave 100% sensitivity, specificity was only
In this study the
level of cognitive deficits measured with the Mini-Mental State Examination was
generally the best predictor of
decisional capacity, particularly in the
understanding component.
Differentiating capable from incapable subjects remains an issue despite the
aid of standardised tools.
currently identified goal of research in this area is to find markers of
potential impaired capacity. Ideally they are, sensitive,
brief questionnaires
targeting key aspects of disclosed information which effectively screen for
participants warranting more comprehensive
evaluations.
In many research
centres, the assessment of decisional capacity, particularly of subjects with
dementia, lacks uniformity, when it
is performed at all. Where decisional
capacity is either formally or informally assessed, a variety of methods are
used ranging from
clinical judgment to extrapolation from psychometric
performance.
In a study of
clinicians’ perceptions of videotaped capacity interviews involving two
scenarios of different risk (i.e. a
medication-randomized clinical trial and a
neurosurgical clinical trial), Kim and others showed that although clinicians
used a risk-sensitive
model of capacity determination (a higher degree of
capacity required in higher-risk situations), there is considerable unexplained
variability in their judgments.
16. 4. 2. Patient predictors of
Considerable discussion still surrounds issues related to the capacities of
patients with neuropsychiatric disorders to consent to
research. It is agreed,
however, that age and diagnosis should not be viewed as determinants of
decisional capacity.
presence of disorder does not imply impairment in capacity. Although some
studies have found, for example, that even relatively
mild Alzheimer's Disease
significantly impairs consent-giving capacity
there is considerable
heterogeneity in decision-making capacity even within each diagnostic group,
particularly amongst those with
schizophrenia, and sufficient to warrant
individualized consideration of
Of course, this will clearly
depend on how capacity is defined or tested, and on the capacity task. Using an
11 item test based on
the eight elements of informed consent stated in the
Unites States Code of Federal Regulations (1991), Buckles and others found that
92% of mildly demented subjects provided correct answers for at least 80% of the
items compared with 67% of moderately demented
However, this test
only assessed the understanding of consent information which is but one
component of the capacity construct and
probably the less cognitively demanding.
Accordingly, mildly demented subjects may perform as well as non-demented
subjects on the
less demanding standards such as making a choice to participate
and for appreciating the personal consequences of participation,
but be unable
to provide rational reasons for their choices or understand the treatment
situation, particularly associated with complicated
research protocols involving
placebo randomisation and serious adverse
Individual consideration of capacity is equally important for those with
mental illness. Although the presence of bipolar disorder
appears to be a risk
factor for impaired understanding of information disclosed under standard
consent procedures, the diagnosis
should not be equated with a lack of
competence to consent.
Further, it is difficult to find correlations between specific cognitive
deficits and the elements of capacity to consent to research.
In studies of
patients with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, although the strongest
correlates of capacity (particularly, understanding
and appreciation of
disclosed information) were cognitive test scores, there was little evidence of
differential relationships between
individual cognitive abilities on
neuropsychological testing and specific dimensions of capacity. Understanding
was correlated with
severity of negative symptoms and of general
psychopathology.
16. 5. Research involving adults who have cognitive
The evidence-base for the treatment of many of the conditions which affect
cognition and potentially impair capacity (particularly
involving older people)
is lacking and more research is needed. New medical treatments, whether they are
drug or procedure-related,
are discovered and proved effective and existing
are made more effective only through research. Research is
also necessary to develop new and improve upon existing treatments to be
alleviate or cure the conditions that render people permanently incapable of
giving a valid consent to their own treatment.
Such treatments cannot be proved
effective unless they are carried out on those who have the particular
conditions the treatment
is designed to address. It follows from this that
treatment must be carried out on incapable people, but only under controlled
circumstances.
One of the major areas of research is that of looking for
treatments that alleviate the impact of or prevent the development of dementia
in individuals. Thus limiting research to people who are able to decide for
themselves would deprive people who lack capacity of
proven therapies for the
conditions which specifically affect
People with cognitive impairment and mental illness should have the right and
be given the opportunity to participate in research,
even if they lack
Safeguards are however
needed to ensure that participants who lack the capacity to give informed
consent are protected.
been suggested that as a general rule of thumb, people who lack capacity to
consent for themselves should only ever be involved
in projects from which they
are likely to benefit or which benefit people in the same category and which
cannot be undertaken on
people who are able to
As already noted, the
New South Wales legislation requires that State’s Guardianship Tribunal to
be satisfied that, having
regard to the potential benefits, as well as the
potential risks, of participation in the trial, it is in the best interests of
patients who suffer from the relevant condition that they take part in the
trial before it may approve that trial as one in which
those unable to give a
valid consent to their own treatment may take
To meet this criterion,
the Tribunal has to be presented with some evidence that taking part in the
clinical trial will be of benefit
to the incapable participants themselves. The
evidence has to go beyond the suggestion that, if they had capacity, they would
good about themselves taking part in the trial.
There are a number of ways of supporting the involvement of cognitively
impaired adults in such research. The first is by facilitating
consent. The second is by considering their previously expressed opinions as
there is some scope for including those who
have made advance directives dealing
with the question of medical research. The third is by obtaining the consent of
proxy decision-makers.
However, the ways of using the second and third approach to include people in
clinicial trials are limited by the legislation in New
South Wales, Queensland
and Victoria as has already been seen and is further discussed
16. 5. 1. Facilitating the consent process and
involvement of cognitively impaired subjects
Decisional capacity is not necessarily an unmodifiable
A variety of
interventions can enhance understanding of informed consent for research.
Capacity may be enhanced by providing information
in an easily understandable
form. Even among individuals with psychiatric illness or cognitive impairment,
deficits in understanding
can be remedied with certain educational
interventions. Deficits in patients' understanding of informed consent may be
related partially
to poorly conceived, written, or organized consent materials.
These deficits may be remediable with educational interventions. Effective
interventions include corrected feedback, multiple learning trials, and more
organized or simplified consent
For example Jeste and
others found that an interactive dialogue between patient and investigator with
clarification of key elements
in the consent form and repeated presentation of
information is likely to aid understanding of disclosed information among
with schizophrenia.
The wording of questions in the consent process can affect the responses of
the participant. For example, in a study of 102 middle-aged
outpatients with schizophrenia or related psychotic disorders and 20 normal
comparison subjects, patients had more difficulty
than normal comparison
subjects on open-ended questions, including those asking about study procedures,
time involved, and potential
risks and benefits. Among patients, the enhanced
procedure was associated with better performance on questions about potential
and time required than the routine procedure. It is these “problem
areas” in the understanding of informed consent that
should be the focus
of attempts to improve the consent process for patient participants with severe
mental illness.
16. 5. 2. Advance research directives
Codes of conduct in certain states in America and Canada have proposed that
research involving cognitively impaired adults should
be restricted to those who
have completed a formal, documented research advance directive while competent.
Yet, this requirement may
impede the carrying out of important research. One study from the United States
found that only 11% of
adult inpatients had completed a research advance
directive, even when given the opportunity to do so in a clinical research
Of those who completed research directives, 76% were willing to
participate in research that might help them, 49% were willing to
participate in
research that would not help them and posed minimal risk, and 9% were willing to
participate in research that would
not help them and posed greater than minimal
risk. The authors suggested more flexible approaches to protect these
individuals such
1. developing advance directives that address both research and clinical
2. requiring research advance directives for subjects at high risk for losing
the ability to consent such as individuals with mild
AD enrolling in
longitudinal studies; and
3. developing mechanisms to allow individuals to reject future research
participation, while making them aware that formally documenting
a preference to
decline future research may preclude them from all research include research
with the potential to benefit them.
As has already been noted, in Queensland an incapable adult may be included
in a clinical trial if they have given a relevant direction
in a health care
The matter may only
be dealt with under that direction. Guardians, attorneys under enduring
documents and statutory health attorneys
may not override that direction.
16. 5. 3. Proxy consent
The role of persons responsible and other substitute decision-makers in
giving consent for incapable people to take part in clinical
trials and the
matters they must take into account before giving that consent are discussed
In Victoria, a person
responsible must take into account the views of the incapable person if they can
be ascertained.
incapable person has set out those views in an advance directive and wished to
take part in clinical trials of the type proposed,
then the person responsible
would, it is suggested, be obliged to give their consent to the person taking
part in the clinical trial.
In New South Wales persons responsible must, under the general principles,
take the views of the incapable person into account although
the welfare and
interests of that person must be given paramount
consideration.
Nevertheless, it
is suggested, particularly since the 2009 case
Hunter and New England Area
Health Service v A
they were faced with an advance directive as discussed in the last paragraph,
they would similarly be obliged to consent
to the incapable person taking part
in the clinical trial.
Research already undertaken in the United Kingdom and the United States shows
that future research involving incapacitated older patients
there is likely to
be heavy reliant on proxy consent
The research also
shows a burgeoning interest in, as an alternative to making an advance research
directive, appointing a proxy for
It is thought that
persons suffering from neurodegenerative disorders such as dementia may retain
significant abilities-including
sufficient capacity for delegating one's
authority for giving consent to research-even if they are not capable of giving
independent
consent themselves.
As with any situation of proxy
consent, in the absence of an advance directive as is often the case, surrogates
have to make research
decisions based on informal evidence of the person’s
preferences.
Yet, consent
decisions of legal representatives will not necessarily reflect those of
patients themselves and may result in under-recruitment
of patients, who if
given the choice themselves may have chosen to participate. From 2445
potentially eligible but incapacitated
patients, proxy consent from a relative
resulted in trial participation of only 3.6% patients. The reasons for this were
that a large
number of incapacitated patients had no relative available for
assent (i.e. 2286 out of 2445), but also 45% of relatives approached
provide assent compared with 18% of patients who declined participation in the
trial. Proxy consent allowed only a small
increase in trial recruitment of
incapacitated patients. The fact that a greater proportion of relatives than
patients refused to
provide assent implies that they were more cautious than the
patients themselves, or perhaps used different criteria, when making
decision. Conversely, proxies are not able to override the refusal of a
cognitively impaired patient to participate in
Similarly, Stocking et al interviewed 149 dyads of dementia patients and
family proxies about future enrollment in five types of research
and while they
found that patients chose to cede future decision making to their proxies in
82.9% of the trials, patients ceded decisions
to their proxies in 80.7% of those
trials about which the dyad had given opposite
Karlawish et al examined the views of Alzheimer’s disease patients and
their proxies at 13 research sites in the Unites States
and found that proxies
made research enrollment decisions based on what they thought would maximize the
patient's well-being as opposed
to a substituted judgment standard.
Reasons proxies give for
participating in research include: hope of direct or indirect benefits to the
patient, caregiver, or patient's
descendents; desperation; trust in the
investigator; belief in the goodness of research; and altruism, although these
reasons vary
according to the type of research such that in drug trials hope of
direct benefit prevails while in studies not evaluating a potential
therapy more
altruistic concerns predominate.
Muthappan P
advance directives: protection or obstacle?
Am J Psychiatry
Dec;162(12):2389-91.
British Medical Association and
The Law Society,
Assessment of Mental Capacity – Guidance for doctors
and lawyers
, London, BMJ Books, 2
. Ed. 2004, p. 137
Wendler, 2001
Internal Medicine
135:514-523.
Applebaum P.S. Roth L.H.
Competency to consent to research
Arch Gen Psychiatry
1982; 39, 951- 958.
British Medical Association and
The Law Society op. cit. (footnote 2) 136.
Ibid., p137
Lemaire F. The European
Directive 2001/20 for clinical research: friend or foe?
2006 32(11):1689-90.
Resnick B, Gruber
–Baldini A.L, Pretzer-Aboff, Galik E Custis Buie V, Russ K, Zimmerman S.
(2007) Reliability and validity
of the evaluation to sign consent measure
Gerontologist
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Utilities/Documentrecord/index.htm?d=MRC002409
Medical Research Council.
MRC Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice in Clinical Trials. London: MRC,
.Brief report
on the experience of using proxy consent for incapacitated adults.
2006 32(1):61-2.
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/PolicyGuidance/EthicsAndGovernance/InformedConsent/index.htm#P18_1070
National Health and Medical
Research Council, Australian Research Council Australian Vice-
Chancellors’ Committee. National
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human
Research, 2007, Australian Government: Canberra., p65-66.
Guardianship Act
Parliament of New South
Wales, Legislative Council, Standing Committee on Social Issues,
Trials and Guardianship: Maximising the Safeguards
, Report No. 13 September
Guardianship Act
The term “ethics
committee” is defined in
Guardianship Act
(1). The term “person responsible” is defined in
Ibid. s 76A(2A).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Qld) Schedule 2
[2007] QGAAT
Ibid. [37]-[39].
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Qld) Schedule 2
statutory health attorney is set out in the
Powers of Attorney Act
Powers of Attorney
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(Vic) s 42P(2).
Ibid. s 42T.
Ibid. s 42Q. The definition
of relevant research ethics committee is in s 3. The definition of relevant
research ethics committee
Ibid. s 3. At the time of
writing no procedures had been prescribed under the Act.
Ibid. s 37 for the
definition of person responsible and s 3 for definitions of spouse, domestic
partner, primary carer and nearest
Ibid. ss 42Q and
Ibid. s 42R.
Ibid. s 42S.
Ibid. s 42U.
Ibid. s 42T(1) and (2)(a)
Ibid. ss 42T(2)(c) and (d)
Ibid. s 42E(e)-(g).
Ibid. s 42T(3) and (4).
Ibid. s 42T(5)-(8). For
further information on this matter see, Office of Public Advocate,
“Medical Research for Pateints Who
Cannot Consent”,
www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au/publications/medical-consent/medical-research.
Ibid. s 42A.
Ibid. s 42A(2).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
(1)(c) in particular.
British Medical Association
and The Law Society op. cit. (footnote 10) 136.
Resnick B, Gruber
–Baldini A.L, Pretzer-Aboff, Galik E Custis Buie V, Russ K, Zimmerman S.
(2007) Reliability and validity
of the evaluation to sign consent measure
Gerontologist
Applebaum P.S. Roth LJ. op
cit. (footnote 4).
Applebaum P.S. Grisso T
The MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool for Clinical Research (Mac
Sarasota Florida: Professional Resource Press.
Interpreting the clinical significance of capacity scores for informed
consent in Alzheimer disease clinical trials.
J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2008 Jul;16(7):568-74.
. Determining when impairment constitutes incapacity for informed consent
in schizophrenia research.
Psychiatry.
2007 Jul;191:38-43
Resnick and others op. cit.
(footnote 50 )
Marshall BJ
California Scale of Appreciation: a new instrument to measure the appreciation
component of capacity to consent to research.
J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2002 Mar-Apr;10(2):166-74.
Resnick and others op. cit.
(footnote 50 )
Appelbaum PS
.Assessment of
capacity to consent to research among older persons with schizophrenia,
Alzheimer disease, or diabetes mellitus: comparison
of a 3-item questionnaire
with a comprehensive standardized capacity instrument.
Gen Psychiatry.
2005; 62(7):726-33
Assessing the competence of persons with Alzheimer's disease in providing
informed consent for participation in research.
Psychiatry.
2001 May;158(5):712-7
. Relationship
of individual cognitive abilities to specific components of decisional capacity
among middle-aged and older patients
with schizophrenia.
2006 32(1):98-106.
Karlawish JHT., Knopman D.,
Clark CM., et al Informed consent for Alzheimer’s disease clinical
trials: a survey of clinical
investigators.
IRB Ethics Human Research
2002; 24: 1-5.
. Do clinicians follow a risk-sensitive model of capacity-determination?
An experimental video survey.
Psychosomatics.
2006 Jul-Aug;47(4):325-9.
, Jeste DV,
op. cit. (footnote 61).
Kim et al., op. cit.
(footnote 63).
, Jeste DV,
op. cit. (footnote 61).
. Magnitude
of impairment in decisional capacity in people with schizophrenia compared to
normal subjects: an overview.
Schizophr Bull.
2006 ;32(1):121-8.
Buckles V.D. Powlishta K.K.,
Palmer J.L., Coats M., Hosto T., Buckley A., Morris J.C. Understanding of
informed consent by demented
individuals
. 2003; 61: 1662-
.Decisional capacity to consent to research among patients with bipolar
disorder: comparison with schizophrenia patients and healthy
Clin Psychiatry.
2007 68(5):689-96.
op. cit. (footnote 67).
.Decisional capacity to consent to research among patients with bipolar
disorder: comparison with schizophrenia patients and healthy
Clin Psychiatry.
2007 68(5):689-96.
British Medical Association
and The Law Society op. cit. (footnote 2) 136.
Katona C., et al WPA
Consensus Conference on Ethics and Capacity in older people with mental illness
(submitted document)
British Medical Association
and The Law Society op. cit. (footnote 2) 136.
Guardianship Act
s 45(2)(d).
See 16. 3. 1. above.
See 16. 3. 1, 2 and 3 as
well as 16. 5. 2 and 3.
Appelbaum P
Schneiderman L
collaborative model for research on decisional capacity and informed consent in
older patients with schizophrenia: bioethics unit
of a geriatric psychiatry
intervention research center.
Psychopharmacology
2003;171(1):68-74.
informed consent for research and treatment.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
2001; 24(6):595-607
. Magnitude
of impairment in decisional capacity in people with schizophrenia compared to
normal subjects: an overview.
Schizophr Bull
. 2006 ;32(1):121-8.
cit., (footnote 79).
areas in the understanding of informed consent for research: study of
middle-aged and older patients with psychotic disorders.
Psychopharmacology
2003 171(1):81-5.
Muthappan P
advance directives: protection or obstacle?
Am J Psychiatry
Dec;162(12):2389-91.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
See 16. 3. 2. above.
See 16. 3. 1., 2. and 3.
Guardianship and
administration Act
1986 (Vic) s 42U.
Guardianship Act
[2009] NSWSC 761.
.Brief report
on the experience of using proxy consent for incapacitated adults.
2006; (1):61-2.
. Speaking of research advance directives: planning for future research
participation.
2006; 66(9):1361-6.
Kieburtz K. Neurology Appointing a proxy for research consent after one
develops dementia; the need for further study
66(9): 1298-9.
.The capacity to appoint a proxy and the possibility of concurrent proxy
directives.
2006;24(4):469-78
Muthappan and other op. cit.
(footnote 84).
Mason and others op. cit.
(footnote 91).
. Speaking of research advance directives: planning for future research
participation.
2006;66(9):1361-6
.The views of Alzheimer disease patients and their study partners on proxy
consent for clinical trial enrollment
J Geriatr Psychiatry.
2008 16(3):240-7
Welsh-Bohmer
.How proxies make decisions about research for patients with Alzheimer's
Am Geriatr Soc.
2001 Aug;49(8):1110-9
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (236 KB)
PDF format (137 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter