URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Durston, Gregory --- "Magwitch�s Forbears: Returning from Transportation in Eighteenth-Century London" [2005] AUJlLegHist 8; (2005) 9(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 137
Magwitch’s Forbears: Returning from Transportation in Eighteenth-Century London
I Introduction
II The Transportation Act 1718
III Premature Return
IV Escape and Return
V ‘Returning’ from the Hulks
VI Coming to Notice after Return
VII Prosecutions
VIII Proving the Case
IX Identification
X Lawful Excuses
XI ‘At Large’
XII Disposal
XIII Conclusion
Magwitch’s Forbears: Returning from
Transportation in Eighteenth-Century London
I Introduction
This article will examine the prosecution of prematurely returned transports
between 1718 and 1799, focussing on their incidence,
motivation, method of
return, and the manner in which they were apprehended, convicted and punished.
The study is confined to the
Metropolitan area, which in this context
encompasses the adjacent cities of London and Westminster, and the surrounding
Middlesex. All these parts had their serious crimes determined at the
shared Old Bailey court, with its eight sessions per year,
rather than at the
provincial (and bi-annual) Assizes system used by the rest of England. In
practise, the Old Bailey court was the
only forum in the Metropolitan area that
tried returnees in significant
Although English penal transportation had a legal history dating back to
1597, it was very rarely employed until the middle of the
seventeenth century.
After 1650, however, the practice of reprieving prisoners from execution via an
exercise of the royal (or Lord
Protector’s) prerogative of mercy, on
condition that they agreed to transport themselves to the colonies, became more
Additionally, during the 1660s, transportation was made a punishment in
its own right (rather than being purely a condition of reprieve)
for a small
selection of very specific offences, such as burning hayricks and pillaging on
the Scottish Border. As a result, between
1655 and 1699 about 4 500 convicts
were sent to the Americas.
followed them in the opening decades of the eighteenth century. Nevertheless,
prior to 1718, transportation was largely limited
to those who had initially
been sentenced to death, and was plagued with problems of enforcement, which
discouraged its use. Convicts
who received benefit of clergy (a fiction allowing
most laymen to avoid execution for a range of felonies) could not be
transported,
usually being perfunctorily branded and then discharged. It was
also feared that many capitally convicted felons who were pardoned
on condition
of transporting themselves ‘neglected to perform the said
Condition’, in the words of the preamble to the
Transportation Act
Others committed further
crimes prior to their departure; thus, in 1678, Susan Banster stole goods worth
£13 ‘as she was
II The Transportation Act 1718
Despite such problems, the potential value of penal transportation was not
lost on the legislature. Many observers felt that clergied
convicts were treated
too leniently. As a result, there were two unsuccessful parliamentary attempts
in 1663 to stiffen the consequences
of committing clergyable felonies by
replacing branding with transportation. There was another unavailing
parliamentary bill to this
Success was finally
attained in 1717, when the Transportation Act received the royal assent, coming
into force the following year.
After this date, defendants convicted of
clergyable offences, especially those involving dishonesty (rather than
violence), were
usually sentenced to transportation for seven years.
Additionally, the Act allowed those convicted of petty theft (not punishable
death) or vagabondage to be sentenced to transportation rather than the
customary whipping or Bridewell incarceration. However,
although some minor
thieves, such as ‘Stormy’ Barnes, convicted at the Old Bailey of
stealing a 7d. wool cap in 1737,
and a few vagabonds from counties such as
Devonshire, were transported, it was a relatively rare disposal in England
(though not
in Ireland). The Act also placed on a sound statutory basis the
existing process by which those who were convicted of non-clergyable
and sentenced to death could be pardoned on condition of transportation, after
the King and his cabinet had reviewed their
sentences in the light of reports
from the Recorder of London. After 1718, most reprieves were on condition of
transportation for
14 years or life.
Finally, the new statute made effective provision for forcibly removing
convicts from the country after they had received their sentences,
significantly
reducing absconding and the commission of post-conviction crimes. This was
partly done by granting the sentencing courts
the power to transfer convicts:
‘… to the Use of any Person or Persons who shall contract for the
Performance of such
Transportation’. As a result, individual merchants
were given contracts to remove convicts from various judicial areas, such
Newgate and the Home Circuit.
Felons would normally remain in prison until their transportation date, when
they were handed over to the merchant agents who would
sell their labour on to
planters and other Americans on arrival in the New World. These contractors also
provided a bond to guarantee
that transportation would take place. Ships’
masters would certify the receipt of the convicts from jail, and obtained
certificates on arrival in America from the governor or chief customs
house officer of the appropriate colony. These certificates
were then returned
to the courts as evidence that the sentence had been carried out. Additionally,
after 1718, the initial cost of
transportation was borne by the state, not the
contractor, facilitating the removal of prisoners who were unlikely, because of
poor physical or mental condition, to secure a good price across the
Atlantic. Thus, in 1718, Jonathan Forward was awarded a contract
to take London
convicts to Maryland for five pounds a head, the fee to include guards and leg
irons to secure them in the ships.
It has been estimated that the average government expenditure for each
eighteenth century transport was at least six
As a result of these
changes, whole shiploads might be dispatched at a time, such as the 130 convicts
who were taken from Newgate
in September
Shipments that ran into
three figures were quite normal from London (though the city also acted as a
marshalling point for convicts
from adjacent
From the moment sentence was passed, any escape from lawful custody
constituted a ‘return’, the penalty for which was
death. Indeed,
early concern that those who escaped prior to arriving in America might claim
that they had not ‘returned’
from transportation, led to a statute
making it clear that
they, too, would be subject to
As a result, in 1782,
Thomas Nowland was convicted of returning from transportation after escaping
from Newgate, where he had been
sent shortly after receiving a sentence of seven
years transportation. At the same Sessions, Robert Sideaway was convicted of
despite having escaped from the Old Bailey Court itself, immediately
after receiving the same sentence. His counsel argued that,
as he had never been
returned to jail from the court, he should not be deemed to have been subject to
the sentence. This was swiftly
rejected by the presiding judge, who observed
that if the transporting ships ‘should be ready in the river [after
the court would probably prefer that
It is impossible to determine precisely how many convicts were sent to
America in total. Some figures place it at as many as 50 000
people from England
alone after 1650. The most plausible estimate suggests that 36 000 convicts were
transported from England between
the advent of the 1718 Act and the
Revolution of 1776. Whatever the figure, the proportion coming from London or
its immediate environs
(even if not originally born in the area) was
particularly high.
One assessment suggests that those from the
Metropolis and the South-Eastern counties made up half the total English
As a result,
Metropolitan penal practise was transformed after 1718, perhaps unsurprisingly,
given that the City and its Aldermen
had been a motive force behind the
Act’s introduction.
there were no sentences of transportation passed at the Old Bailey in the four
years prior to 1718 (as might be expected, given
the bucolic nature of the few
crimes for which it could be imposed). However, in 1718, almost 140 sentences of
seven years were passed.
The following year, there were nearly 200. Between 1718
and 1776, approaching 14 000 such sentences were handed down at this one
Of these, about 9 000 were given to men, and something under 5 000 to women. The
proportion of women is much higher than the
national pattern, where about 80 per
cent of transports were male.
However, given the apparently higher incidence of criminality (or at least
prosecution) found amongst eighteenth women living in
urban areas, it is not
surprising.
Additionally, of
course, the inferior Sessions for Middlesex (Hick’s Hall), Westminster and
the City of London (the Guildhall
Justice Room) all passed numerous sentences of
transportation pursuant to the 1718 Act. Thus, and typically, after the
Westminster
Sessions held in April 1750, 10 people were
transported.
Like the Old Bailey
Court, these inferior sessions would be held eight times a year in each of the
three locations. Given the incidence
of such sentences, it is not surprising
that the punishment swiftly entered popular consciousness. In 1724, after Ann
Southerwood
snatched a watch from a drunkard, ran off and was detained, she
immediately (and correctly) accepted that ‘she must cross the
Additionally, hundreds of other convicts who had been sentenced to death at
the Old Bailey were ordered for transportation (for 14
or more years) as a
condition of their sentences being commuted. Even the most serious offences
could be treated this way, in special
circumstances, including 11 per cent of
murders and 30 per cent of highway robberies committed between 1749 and
There were a variety of
reasons for such indulgence: youth, commission of a first offence, a minor role
in the crime etc. Some were
quite esoteric; in 1741, William Duel was reprieved
on condition of transportation after he survived his own execution at Tyburn
(strangulation not being complete). John Meth was reprieved after his trip to
Tyburn proved abortive when the hangman was arrested
en route. (Unfortunately,
he ‘quickly returned’ to London and resumed his criminal
In Surrey, between 1722
and 1749, it appears that 43 per cent of men, and 40 per cent of women,
convicted of non-clergyable offences
and sentenced to death were reprieved on
condition of transportation.
proportions were probably similar in the London area; within seven years of the
new Act coming into force, the Metropolitan based
Bernard Mandeville could note
that: ‘... for some years last past, on many occasions, [transportation]
has been substituted,
and inflicted in the room of capital
punishment’.
proportion of death sentences reprieved on condition of transportation increased
dramatically over the course of the eighteenth
century, so that about half of
those capitally convicted in London in the second half of the century had their
sentences commuted.
Ultimately,
almost a fifth of transports were convicts who had been reprieved in this
manner. The 17 Old Bailey sessions presided
over by Lord Mansfield between 1757
and 1768 are indicative of the punishment’s significance. These saw only
29 people being
clergied and branded, 102 were hanged, while fully 448 were
transported.
Strictly speaking, forced work in America was not part of the sentence; the
convicts’ labour was sold to help cover the merchant’s
transporting them, and to secure him a profit, not to match the sentence imposed
in England.
Those who could
afford it, such as the notorious perjurer Elizabeth Canning (who benefited from
a public subscription), could buy
their own freedom after arrival in America and
resume normal life in the colonies. This did not mean, of course, that they
discovered in 1763, after he had his freedom purchased
by friends. While on
board the Neptune, en route to America, he was given a paper witnessed by David
Ross from Maryland, one of the
men that prisoners were ‘consigned
to’, noting that as a result of their payment ‘Joseph Derbin is a
This also led to a colonial JP granting him a pass so that he
could travel freely in the New World. Foolishly, Derbin used his liberty
he had a ‘right to be here’, the court
was dismissive: ‘You
can’t be so weak as to imagine they [the American authorities] have power
to reverse the sentence
you received here’. He was sentenced to
However, given that even
unskilled but healthy convicts could sell for at least £10, and prices
could reach twice that, purchasing
their freedom was beyond the means of most
transports.
III Premature Return
Even before 1718, premature return by convicts had been perceived as a
problem. It was feared that many preferred to follow the example
Carleton, a notorious thief and bigamist who was convicted at the Old Bailey,
condemned, reprieved and transported to Jamaica,
but returned home after less
than two years.
Similarly, a man
who was arrested for shop-breaking in 1678, turned out to have been transported
and when: ‘… question’d
he alleadged several frivolous
This anxiety
increased greatly after 1718. By the 1730s, some observers were openly envious
of the penal galleys found in parts of
continental Europe, seeing them as a more
effective punishment. They feared that many convicts returned within a year as
incorrigible criminals, and proposed that a system of
‘laborious’ public works be implemented for them
Those who were ignorant
of the nature of convict labour professed to be astonished that felons in
America could prefer the ‘hazards
of Hanging, to the pains of
industry’. Some attributed it to their inherently malicious
In reality, efforts to
abscond from forced labour and return home were unsurprising. Convicts were
often kept under harsh discipline
by their new masters. This may even have got
stricter as the eighteenth century advanced and American attitudes towards them
Indeed, several colonies made unavailing attempts to prevent their
admission, though these were usually overturned in London. In
immediately after 1718, convict conditions sometimes differed only slightly from
those imposed on voluntarily indentured
labourers. Later in the century, they
increasingly came to be treated as on a par with black slaves and Indians,
sometimes being
bracketed with these groups in colonial
legislation.
They could be
whipped or chained, and any convict who ran away and was then caught might
expect to be especially severely flogged.
Some escapees fled wearing iron
collars, and many carried scars on their backs. Indeed, some advertisements for
their capture spoke
openly of these as an identifying feature, such as the marks
of ‘severe whippings’ borne by Sarah Davis in
The few surviving memoirs written by transports bear testimony to the
harshness of their lives (though some may have been apocryphal).
Among them is
that of William Green, a Londoner, who ran away from his apprenticeship to join
a criminal gang in Sherwood Forest,
was narrowly reprieved from execution
(probably in view of his youth) and transported in lieu. After being convicted
at the Nottinghamshire
Assizes, in 1762, he was sent down to London to board the
‘Sally’ near the Tower. This ship left for America on 1 May
year, Green being one of 26 felons onboard. A day out to sea, they were secured
below decks for ‘fear of rebelling’,
only six being allowed on deck
at any time. They arrived in Maryland two months later and were told to wash and
comb their hair before
disembarking. The convicts were then manacled in pairs
and marched to a small town, where the captain put them on public display
selling them. Potential purchasers examined them like cattle, scrutinising their
teeth and limbs, asking their trades and
the offences for which they were
convicted. Green was sold quite swiftly to a local planter. With several other
transports he worked
for this master for six days a week; they grew their own
food on the seventh. Any attempt to escape was punished by increasing their
of service by a multiple of their time at liberty (normal colonial practise), a
day for an hour, a week for a day, a month for
a week, a year for a month
John Lawson had
similar experiences when, at the age of 18, he was transported to Rapahannock
(now Essex) County in Virginia for
14 years. He was purchased by a tobacco
planter, forced to wear a canvas shirt and trousers in the fields, rather than
clothes, and was not even provided with shoes. He spent
his working day hoeing from sunrise to sunset with more work being provided
mill after dark. Significantly, perhaps, he was part of a joint team of 18 black
slaves and six transports. According to Lawson,
his treatment was
indistinguishable from that meted out to the
This is, perhaps, not
surprising, black slaves were normally at least twice the price of convicts,
because of their (usually) greater
physical capacity, unlimited period of
service and the fact that their progeny would also be slaves.
Of course, it is probable that those with more benign masters would be less
likely to attempt to escape, though even then, simple
powerful motive. William Barton, a Metropolitan robber, became the
‘darling’ of the master who
had purchased him (for £18), and
was given the easy task of supervising the black slaves on his plantation.
Despite this, the
loss of his wife, friends and ‘his beloved London’
led him to return.
Similarly, in
1744, Samuel Ellard, who was arrested three years into his sentence of
transportation, told his captor that he had
been comfortably employed as a
butcher while in America, and: ‘… lived very well, but could not be
easy till he returned
to his native country’. To escape, he had apparently
swum a river and lived on the flesh of a single squirrel for three
surprising that after 1718 concern swiftly grew that the deterrent value of the
punishment was being attenuated by such
individuals.
IV Escape and Return
Many, probably the majority, of those who ran away from forced labour
remained in America rather than attempting to go home, perhaps
moving to a
different colony where they were unknown and where the numerous advertisements
in colonial newspapers, giving personal
details, that usually followed escapes,
were unlikely to be widely read (though there were regular instances of
cross-border recapture).
However, others combined escape with a return to Britain. In the middle of the
century, John Poulter, a notorious professional thief,
explored some of the
means whereby this occurred. According to Poulter, those who had money or
wealthy contacts (perhaps fellow gang
members) would pay the ship’s
captain or merchant for the transport’s labour,
England; this usually cost about ten pounds. The convict would then get a
certificate stating that he was free to go when
he got to America. Once there,
he could buy his passage back to England on one of the ships that left every
week (though obviously
not the one on which he had arrived). Few questions were
asked about such people; if they had the money ‘they are refused no
ship’. This appears to have been the procedure used by Joseph Derbin.
Those without such resources could work their passages
back. If Poulter is to be
believed, there were even instances of convicts illegally purchasing their
freedom without going to America,
a view that was shared by Bernard de
Mandeville, who was convinced that the country’s ‘subtle
criminals’ had discovered
numerous ways to avoid their sentences
altogether. This is borne out by some Old Bailey cases. Thus, Edward Crawley was
to transportation in July 1732, but found at large a year later. The
Court asked whether he actually was ‘carried on board
or delivered to the
Care of the Merchant who was to Transport him’. The evidence was
Additionally, although
merchants who contracted to carry transports were supposed to take all convicts
offered by the courts, feeble
and unskilled prisoners yielded little profit, and
it is possible that some were quietly released. Convicts without the money to
buy even their freedom would have to escape following purchase. Even so,
according to Poulter, for many convicts being transported
was merely ‘four
or five months pleasure’.
As this comment also suggests, most convicts who went home appear to have done
so relatively early in their sentences: Bernard de
Mandeville was convinced that
many ‘returned again by the first
appreciated by their American purchasers; Lawson’s new master had him
chained while taking him up river to his plantation.
Despite such precautions, convicts proved adept at escaping, especially in
the early years, when the new system had ‘teething’
problems. Some
did not even reach America. As a result, in September 1720, the first cases of
returning early from sentences of transportation
passed under the new Act began
to crop up at the Old Bailey. Thus, James Holliday and Anthony Goddard escaped
from their ship following
an apparent convict mutiny, after which they forced
the vessel into Vigo in Portugal, before heading for
In March of 1721, a
group of eight returnees, were tried together and
Things did not
improve in 1722, when William Sladden failed to even get out of territorial
waters, having joined 19 other transports
in making a ‘rising and got off
in the Downs’.
take more drastic measures to escape. In October 1734, several convicts who were
embarked in Bristol, and secured below
decks, used a ballast stone to loosen a
plank in the ship’s hull, so that it sprang a leak; they then shouted out
vessel was sinking. This prompted the ship’s master to run the
boat ashore to save himself and his crew. The six convict survivors
that the holing of the vessel was done so that they ‘might have an
opportunity all to make their
Other convicts made the decision to abscond shortly after their arrival in
America, perhaps concluding that the masters who had purchased
their labour were
harsh, or that their own appetite for such work was low. However, escaping was
fraught with difficulties. The terrain
was often wild and plantations remote. In
the 1730s, a reward of between 30s and £5 might be offered for their
capture and a
system of magistrates’ passes meant that documentation was
often necessary to move any distance (at least in
After fleeing, convicts
would normally travel at night and hide in woods during the day, until they
reached New York, Boston or Philadelphia
‘in which [places] no questions
are asked them’.
escapees took weapons and disguises to increase their chances. Many others took
the tools of their trades, so that they could
secure future employment. About
half escaped alone, half in pairs or small
When they fled with
others, it was usually with fellow convicts, rather than with voluntarily
indentured servants or slaves. Unsurprisingly,
those aged between 20 and 35 were
most likely to escape from their masters. This was the most common age for
transports. Additionally,
they were physically best able to take care of
themselves while on the run; over 71 per cent of runaways from Maryland and
fell into this
Typically, in the
1740s, Henry Simms, who had been shipped to Maryland and sold for twelve
guineas, escaped within days, taking
his master’s horse one night and
riding thirty miles across bad roads to the coast. There, he abandoned the
animal and hailed
a ship that was lying off shore. This vessel, being short of
hands, picked him up and offered to let him work his passage home. Once
he resumed his criminal career as a
highwayman.
Similarly, William
Parsons, who was transported in 1749 for counterfeiting, escaped shortly after
reaching Maryland, turned highwayman
while still in America and, with the money
he robbed, returned to England where he continued his criminal
activities.
V ‘Returning’
from the Hulks
Before the American Revolution broke out in 1775, almost a thousand convicts
were being sent across the Atlantic every year, despite
the sentence having been
in decline since the early 1760s. This immediately became impossible, although
the courts, including the
Old Bailey, continued to pass sentences of
transportation that stipulated the American colonies until well into the 1780s.
as a temporary expedient, the government introduced the use of
‘hulks’, the hulls of old warships, moored in the Thames
in other harbours), as short-term receptacles for those sentenced to
transportation. Frequently, their inmates would spend
their days ashore,
employed in guarded working parties engaged in tasks such as embanking and
dredging, returning to the vessels
at night. By a statute of
any convict who was liable
to be transported could, ‘in lieu thereof’, be punished by being
sent to a hulk. In the case
of those transported to seven years, this could be
for between one and five years; for those transported for 14 years, for between
one and seven years. John Howard counted at least 1937 convicts as being aboard
such vessels in 1788. However, as the country’s
fortunes waned in the
American war it became obvious that these ships would not be a temporary
measure, and attempts were made to
find another permanent destination. The 1776
Act expressly provided that convicts liable to be sent to America could be
transported
to ‘any parts beyond the
The West coast of
Africa (especially the area around the Gambia River) was one of a number of
destinations considered, a few individuals
even being sent
Judges sitting at the Old
Bailey were aware of these attempts to find a suitable foreign location, and
several passed sentences during
the 1780s that stipulated Africa as the
prisoner’s allotted
destination.
However, few, if
any, went from London to that continent.
Eventually, Australia was selected and the ‘first fleet’,
carrying over 700 convicts, left England in May 1787, arriving
at Sydney Cove in
January 1788.
However, it seems
that few, if any, cases of returning from Australia came before the Old Bailey
prior to the end of the century.
This is not surprising, given the huge
distances involved and the much lower level of shipping making the arduous
journey around
the world. Nevertheless, several people did escape from Botany
Bay prior to 1800. Amongst them was Mary Broad, who sailed with the
first fleet,
escaped with several other convicts after stealing the governor's boat, and
reached East Timor. There, however, they
were arrested and taken back to
England. On arrival, Broad was sent to Newgate but, with the assistance of James
Boswell, secured
a pardon in May 1793. Others seem to have reached British
controlled Bengal, from whence they were formally banned by the Governor
Although John Fisher
was convicted in 1796 of returning from a seven-year sentence of transportation
to New South Wales, 14 months
after the original sentence, it seems unlikely
that he had actually gone to
Botany Bay took only a selection of convicts, chosen by reference to age,
health, skills, gender and sentence, so that the Hulks remained
in existence for
decades after 1788, and there continued to be numerous cases of convicts
‘returning’ from them; effectively,
given that they were only just
offshore, this meant any escape from a vessel, or working party when ashore,
constituted the offence.
It is not surprising that many of their inmates should
have attempted to get away. The conditions aboard such vessels were appalling.
In 1779, the magistrate Henry Zouch pointed out that a quarter of those who had
been committed to them in the ‘full vigour
of health and strength’
were dead within 20 months.
He was particularly alarmed at the
rumoured lack of bedding, general squalor, absence of divine service and reports
that the inmates
lived on rotting piles of offal. In these circumstances, he
felt: ‘… we cannot be surprised at the desperate attempts
made by the prisoners of restoring themselves into
Even when their
conditions improved slightly, in the 1780s, they were considered schools of vice
in which inmates corrupted each
other and were corrupted by their
Indicative of this, in
1799, Robert Richardson escaped from a hulk that was moored in Portsmouth
harbour, within days of his arrival.
He returned to Shadwell, where he gave
himself up to a local constable, asking to be sent to Botany Bay rather than
remaining ‘among
them that he was among’. Although convicted, the
jury recommended that his death sentence be reprieved ‘on account of
ingenuous conduct’.
same year, John Brown, who escaped within a couple of months of being committed
to a hulk, was less fortunate. Brown could
only advance in his defence that:
‘I was sent to Langston-harbour, and was there starving alive, and a
hundred of us besides,
and I found means to get away’. He was sentenced to
VI Coming to Notice after Return
Returnees were caught for a variety of reasons. Most commonly, though, it was
because they went back to their old ‘haunts’,
and were identified to
the authorities by those who already knew them, or because they came to notice
when detained after committing
fresh crimes. It is, perhaps, natural enough that
many would make the journey back to familiar surroundings, though this would
increase their risk of detection, especially if they had made enemies in
such areas. Thus, Jane Martin, a notorious fraudster who
returned to London,
found that she had: ‘… exasperated many people against her, who as
soon as it was rumoured that she
was come back again, never left searching for
her until they found her out’. She was arrested and convicted for
being executed in
However, for most
Metropolitan returnees, going to a different part of the country would have
defeated the very object behind their
escape. Additionally, the capital was more
likely to provide employment, whether legitimate or illicit. London was also a
for returnees from throughout the British Isles. Many would gravitate to
its relative anonynimity, as well as the criminal opportunities
offered by its
extensive underworld. There was no guarantee that they would be safe in the
capital. Nevertheless, it usually required
ill fortune (or a loose tongue) for
such convicts to be detected, especially if they refrained from further criminal
ventures. Thus,
Eleanor Conner was found in London in 1754, almost six years
into a 14-year sentence imposed at the Bristol gaol delivery in lieu
By enormous bad luck, James Perrit, the Bristol night constable who had arrested
Conner and seen her convicted, came to
London on business and noticed her in the
Financial incentives account for the exposure of many transports in the
Metropolis. In the 1760s, the standard reward for securing
the conviction of a
returnee was £20.
other felons, this made them the targets of professional
‘thief-takers’, as well as members of the general public
make some extra money. The value of such incentives was well known to the
authorities. Indeed, in 1751, a House of Commons
Committee led by Sir Richard
Lloyd appointed to ‘Revise and Consider the Laws in Being Which Relate to
Felonies’ recommended
enhancing the payment given for apprehending
returnees, as well as proposing that the: ‘Method of convicting of such
should be rendered more easy and less
expensive’.
transports, such as Samuel Ellard, were taken by Stephen McDaniel, one of the
capital’s most notorious thief-takers.
Some of them appear to have
specifically targeted returnees, making money from blackmail as well as rewards.
Thus, according to one
Old Bailey witness, James Sullivan made part of his
living in the 1760s as a specialist who ‘takes young fellows up for
from transportation’. The father of another suspected returnee
claimed that when Sullivan and an associate arrested his son
they tried to
extort money from him: ‘Sullivan proffered to let him go, if I would give
them five guineas’.
Claxton, a thief and, apparently, multiple returnee, was also captured in London
by such a bounty-hunter and prosecuted to his
James Hancock, caught by
thief-takers in 1772, did not even bother to deny his guilt: ‘… they
are determined to have
my life for the reward; it don’t signify opposing
them’. His candour, combined with popular distaste for his captors,
have prompted the jury to issue a rare recommendation for mercy with their
guilty verdict. Later in the century, the new professional
attached to Bow Street and other police offices, with their full-time
constables, also proved adept at catching
Of the 242 returnees prosecuted at the Old Bailey, perhaps three quarters had
received their original sentences from a London court.
Thus, of the 11 cases of
returning that were heard in the decade from 1760 to 1769, nine had originally
been sentenced at the Old
Bailey itself. The other two, Ann Perkins and William
Brown, had been sentenced at the Leicester and Hertford Assizes respectively.
The decade from 1740 to 1749 was somewhat more varied, but still showed a
preponderance of Metropolitan sentences. Of the 16 returnees
prosecuted whose
convicting court can be identified (out of a total of 18), 11 had been sentenced
at the Old Bailey. The remaining
five had been transported by Assizes and gaol
deliveries held at Thetford, East Grinstead, Abingdon, Chelmsford and Kingston
last two, of course, were within 20 miles of London). As this profile also
suggests, as a general rule, the risk of exposure declined
with the distance of
the convicting court from London, if only because identification was less likely
and it was harder to secure
evidence of a sentence of transportation from a
convicting court.
Re-offending was the other main reason for returnees coming to light in the
Metropolis. Typically, in March 1768, William Brown was
transported for life at
the Hertford Assizes, but appears to have returned swiftly to England and a life
of crime. He was caught
while burgling premises in London, and convicted at the
Old Bailey in June 1769.
returnees came to light after being apprehended for a crime, they would usually
be prosecuted for the ulterior offence (unless
it was very minor) as well as for
returning. This would increase the prospects of a conviction if there was an
evidential deficiency
on the main charge. Thus, in 1721, George Baker was
convicted of stealing beds, blankets and pillows as well as returning from
transportation.
Of course, many
returnees who re-offended and were then caught must have avoided identification
(especially if their convictions
were not from a Metropolitan court). In the
1730s, Richard Kibble was reported to have been transported, and then returned
to England,
as many as five times before being caught, convicted and
It was claimed that
the notorious pick-pocket Mary Young (Jenny Diver) returned from transportation
on at least two occasions; she
was certainly transported in April 1738 under the
name of Jane Webb.
Of course, not all returnees went back to crime, although they faced extra
hazards if they attempted to follow honest employment,
something that may have
made them vulnerable to
re-offending.
Some reformed. In
1792, Sarah Cowden, who had been capitally convicted in February 1788, and
received a conditional pardon the following
year, before being put on board the
hulk ‘Lady Juliana’, was found working in Spital Street in the silk
industry. The
constable who arrested her noted that she had had two children
since escaping and that his enquiries indicated that she had also
developed a
good character since leaving the vessel. Although convicted, she was recommended
to mercy by the jury. Their suggestion
was strongly supported by the presiding
judge, Lord Kenyon, who urged that if freed she continue her reformed
VII Prosecutions
Between 1718 and 1799, 242 people were indicted at the Old Bailey for
returning from transportation. Thus, the number of cases of
returning heard at
the Old Bailey made up only about two per cent of the number transported by the
same court. When sentences from
other Metropolitan courts, and those conditional
on reprieve, are taken into account, the figure is probably nearer one per cent.
Even allowing that most returnees went undetected, it seems that only a small
minority made the journey home, most remaining in America.
Of those prosecuted
for returning, the vast majority (221) were men. Only about nine per cent were
women, well below the 20 per cent
that were transported nationally, and the 35
per cent from the London area; this is, perhaps, unsurprising given the
difficulties
involved in fleeing from remote plantations. It also accords with
figures for American runaways. In Maryland, only four per cent
of runaways were
women, although they made up 40 per cent of the colony’s
transports.
It has been argued that returnees only became a statistically significant
problem in the latter part of the
There is some support
for this notion, at least in the Metropolitan area. However, in the 1720s, while
the system was taking root,
there were also serious problems, with about 40
returnees being prosecuted at the Old Bailey. Nevertheless, this then fell to an
average of just over 14 cases a decade between 1730 and 1770. By the 1770s (even
before 1776), the number of prosecuted returnees
was increasing; the impact of
the American Revolution, and the advent of the Hulks moored in the Thames, saw
an average of 50 cases
a decade in the last 30 years of the century. The last
convict prosecuted at the Old Bailey for returning, who actually reached
appears to have been William Herbert, tried in February 1780. After
this date, all defendants had, in reality, escaped en route to
Halifax, Canada,
following a convict mutiny on the ‘Swift’ in 1782, broken out of a
holding prison, or, most commonly,
been found at large after being sent to one
of the offshore Hulks, escape from which was relatively easy. The great majority
who returned and were prosecuted were also convicted: 184 people or
VIII Proving the Case
A typical indictment for a returnee apprehended in Middlesex would name the
defendant, and specify the offence, time and place of
the conviction for which
he had originally been convicted and sentenced and then note that the accused
feloniously, without any lawful cause, was at large within this Realm of Great
Britain, to wit, at the Parish of St. Martin in the
Fields, in the County
aforesaid, before the Expiration of the Term of Seven
The Crown had to establish that the ‘returnee’ was the same man
or woman as the one convicted on the earlier occasion,
that they were under a
sentence that had not expired, and that they could be shown to have been
‘at large’ in a public
With the ‘intent
that such conviction may be as little trouble as possible’ it was enacted
that the clerk of the
assize or clerk of the peace at courts where orders for transportation had
originally been made, would, at
the request of a prosecutor, ‘certify a
transcript’ containing brief details of the conviction and sentence which
‘… on production of it, be a sufficient proof of the former
conviction and order for
transportation’.
original sentence had been imposed at the Old Bailey, this posed few problems;
if outside the capital it could be harder,
with considerable logistical
difficulties having to be overcome. Thus, in 1796, Henry Alport, the keeper of
the New Gaol in Southwark,
came up to London, produced the certificate from the
Croydon Assizes where a prisoner had been convicted and sentenced to
transportation,
confirmed that he had been present that day at the court and
seen the defendant found guilty, and also that the certificate had been
personally signed in his presence by the clerk to the Croydon
A copy of the certificate
appears to have been inadequate.
The technical requirements of the offence provided an escape route for several
defendants. In 1765, Richard Swift, who had been transported
at the Old Bailey
for 14 years in 1764, was arrested in Coventry and put on trial: ‘…
but by some-mistake, either in
the indictment or record, he was there
Acquitted’. He was then returned to the Old Bailey, where he admitted that
person mentioned in the 1764 order, and was remanded back to Newgate,
to await re-transportation.
Defences were usually based on negating one or more of the crime’s
essential elements.
IX Identification
The most common and successful defence, especially in the first thirty years
after 1718, was for the accused man or woman to deny
that s/he was the same
person as the individual allegedly transported. Some, like John Creamer in 1772,
produced vague stories of
having spent their lives in remote parts, far from
London, or having moved about the country, presumably hoping that this would
establishing their true identity harder. During the 1750s, of the five
people acquitted at the Old Bailey of returning, three had
denied that they were
the convict sent across the Atlantic. In all of these cases, the accused stood
trial under the name of the
original transport, and also under the name that
they claimed for themselves. Thus, in 1751, Thomas Smith was indicted as being
In an era of very limited bureaucratic capacity, difficult communications and
devoid of access to fingerprinting, it could be hard
to confirm identity to an
appropriate standard.
To establish identity, the Crown would usually call one or more witnesses who
had seen the accused man sentenced at the earlier hearing.
This could be a court
officer, gaoler, or the victim of the original offence etc. Ideally, they would
call several of them to do
this. However, getting witnesses from provincial
assizes to confirm identification was particularly troublesome, and such
thoroughness
was most common where the transportation had been ordered (for at
least 14 years) in lieu of execution for a serious crime. Thus,
great pains were
taken to confirm the identity of Eleanor Conner, who was alleged to have
returned almost 6 years into a 14-year
sentence imposed at the Bristol gaol
delivery where she had initially been sentenced to death. Thomas Stokes, the
town-clerk at Bristol,
attended the Old Bailey to confirm that he had witnessed
her conviction at the original hearing. Additionally, John Mason, the gaoler
Bristol’s Newgate prison, attended court to give evidence that the
defendant had been held in his custody for almost two
years before being
transported, to say that he, too, had been in court when she was convicted, and
that he remembered her being put
on board ship for America. Similarly, James
Perrit, a night constable from Bristol was called to confirm her being tried and
of pick-pocketing there, that he saw her receive the death sentence
and was also present when she begged for a Royal pardon, and
received a sentence
of transportation. Given the plethora of evidence available, it is, perhaps,
unsurprising that the accused woman
was not successful in her claim that she was
‘not the person’, despite her strange claim that she had heard that
‘real’ Eleanor Connor had been drowned crossing the
In emergency, anyone
who might confirm identity could be pressed into service by the prosecution.
Thus, at Joseph Derbin’s
trial in September 1764, the Court found itself
short of a witness to ‘prove the prisoner to be the identical person
in this Record’. They decided to have recourse to the Court
Shorthand writer, Thomas Gurney (presumably there recording details
for the Old
Bailey Sessions Papers), on the basis that he ‘must remember the prisoner
being tried here’. Very reluctantly
‘considering the place I am in
here, I should be glad was I never to be call’d upon to give evidence on
such an affair
as this’ he agreed, and confirmed the
identification.
Occasionally, as with Mary Quin in 1751, the prosecution would fail to call
an identifying witness at all, so that: ‘There being
no proof of the
identity of her person, she was acquitted’. More commonly, even if a
witness was called, s/he would fail to
come up to proof, perhaps deliberately to
avoid having an execution on their conscience, or because the passage of time
had genuinely
clouded their memories. Thus, in 1751, the principal identifying
witness against Thomas Smith, the prosecutor from his original trial,
‘… believed the prisoner to be the person he had convicted in the
April sessions, 1749 but he would not swear
it, [so] he was
acquitted’.
Samuel Ellard, who was found three years into his sentence of transportation,
would also have escaped because the two witnesses
from his original trial who
were called ‘could not be positive he was the identical person’.
Unfortunately, the thief-taker
who arrested him, armed with his certificate of
conviction, claimed that the defendant had admitted to being the man identified
the document. This was enough to convict
X Lawful Excuses
Under the original Act, the King could ‘at anytime pardon, and dispense
with any such transportation, and allow the return of
any such offender or
offenders from America’.
However, in exceptional circumstances, less formal excuses would be accepted for
returning to England. This usually required the
cause to have been beyond the
convict’s control, and, preferably, some official involvement. The onus
for proving such a lawful
excuse seems to have been on the accused, something
that was becoming normal practise in English law where a defence was
‘peculiarly
within the knowledge’ of the
In September 1746,
Thomas Huddle was acquitted for returning from Virginia because he was able to
call two witnesses to prove that
he had been pressed into the navy there, and
had even attempted to run away from his allotted vessel before it sailed from
After his hearing, one of the sailors who had given evidence in his
support ‘took him away again immediately on board his
Similarly, in 1776,
Benjamin Payne was acquitted after being found ‘at large’. However,
it appeared that the ship in
which he was being transported to America had been
lost at sea, that he escaped from the wreck and got ashore in Portugal. He was
then sent back to England from Lisbon, with a pass from the British consul,
which was duly produced in
During periods of
conflict, French or other warships and privateers might attack vessels
transporting convicts, sometimes capturing
their crews. Thomas Sutton’s
ship had been taken by the French while en route for America and carried into
Port Lewis, from
whence he was sent back to England ‘in a cartel-ship as a
prisoner of war’. As a result, he, too, was acquitted, and
again ordered
for transportation.
Lee’s case was even more unusual. He was arrested with only a year to go
on his sentence and ran a double defence.
In the first place he denied that he
was the man sent to the Americas six years earlier. Additionally, however, he
pointed out that
he had been forcibly sent to England from the colonies to serve
a sentence in the Marshalsea prison for incompetence while serving
as pilot to
HMS Monarque while she was in the Halifax River in 1755, as a result of which
the ship was lost. Consequently, the prisoner
could claim: ‘I am not the
man, but supposing I was, I was brought back contrary to my inclination; by
sentence of a court
martial in America’. When his claim was confirmed by a
turnkey from the prison (traditionally used for Admiralty cases), he
‘not guilty’.
William Harding’s patriotic motives were also accepted. He had been sent
to America in 1773, but deserted after his purchaser,
an officer in the
Revolutionary armies, forced him to serve with the rebels. This seems to have
swayed the Old Bailey jury, which
Nevertheless, most ‘excuses’ were rejected. Unsurprisingly,
Richard Parsons was unsuccessful in 1751 when he claimed that
he had come back
to England to ‘get assistance from his friends, after which [he promised]
he’d return and abide there
for ever, pursuant to the sentence passed upon
However, more
ingenious excuses were also swiftly rejected. Thus, in 1753, Peter Ticknor
claimed to have been taken prisoner while
on his voyage to America, detained in
Hispaniola, pressed for an English warship, discharged during a truce, resided
in Boulogne
and only to have returned to London to warn the Duke of Richmond of
a murder plot. He, too, was
Even claims to
patriotism during the American Revolution were not necessarily effective. In
1780, William Herbert was convicted and
sentenced to death, five years after
being transported. Herbert freely admitted that he was the man sent across the
Atlantic, but
pointed out that he had been compelled by the revolting Americans
to take up arms against his own country, took the first opportunity
to desert to
the King’s troops, and accepted the offer of a free pardon (for
revolutionary activity) and permission to return
to England from Lord
Cornwallis. He produced a certificate to this effect issued by General Pigot.
However, it clearly did not extend
to convicts, and he was sentenced to
XI ‘At Large’
A crucial element in the offence was being ‘at large’ after the
sentence had been imposed. This meant being at liberty
in a public place. Thus,
a convict who was identified while in custody in England after being transported
was not guilty of the offence.
The Old Bailey court was a stickler for this
requirement, insisting on direct evidence on the issue and refusing to infer
convict must have been at large at some point in even quite blatant
cases. Edward Merriot, indicted for returning early from a sentence
transportation originally imposed at Hick’s Hall, appears to have come to
the authorities’ notice because he was arrested
and committed to the New
Prison for house-breaking. There, he was spotted by an observant turn-key, James
Emms, who had seen him
during his earlier incarceration in the same jail.
Merriott was well aware of the danger that he was in; as soon as he saw Emms he:
‘… ran and hid himself, because he knew that I knew him’.
However, and fortunately for Merriott, although the original
identified him as the same man as the one transported, and all the documentation
was in order, Emms, as he freely admitted,
had only seen the defendant in
prison, not ‘at large’. No other witness who had done so was
available at court. Consequently:
‘As no evidence was given of his being
seen at large since his being transported, he was
acquitted’.
The need for being seen at large seems to have been appreciated by many
prosecution witnesses. Thus, in 1774, Robert Angus was sentenced
transportation for seven years by the magistrates sitting at Hick’s Hall,
but was back in London within a year. There, he
picked a man’s pocket of a
watch, was pursued and detained. At the Old Bailey, the man who arrested him
stressed without prompting
that Angus ‘was not in custody till I stopped
However, because
it was what modern criminal lawyers would call a ‘state of affairs’
crime, an acquittal did not necessarily
preclude a subsequent prosecution, if an
individual was later seen at large and arrested. This produced some strange
consequences.
Thomas Brown was prosecuted in September 1765 for returning from a
sentence of transportation imposed at the Old Bailey in December
1763. He denied
that he was the same man, calling his father to establish that he was, and had
always been, known as William Dukes.
However, after his acquittal, he
immediately
acknowledged himself to be the person transported by the name of Thomas Brown,
tried in December sessions, 1763. … [and] desired
to be continued in
Newgate to go with the transports to serve out the remainder of his time.
As long as he remained in custody, he could not be prosecuted for
‘being at large’.
Occasionally, for some reason, a transport would return slightly early, but
after apparently spending a substantial period abroad
(or, alternatively, be
caught long after they had returned home). In these cases, the courts might be
more sympathetic, especially
if the period remaining on the sentence was very
short. Thus, in 1747, Thomas Butler was indicted for returning six years and ten
months into his seven-year sentence. However, the court decided that the
original order for his transportation was ‘flawed’
acquitted. It would appear that the judges had regard to legal nicety to serve
the interests of justice in this
XII Disposal
The original statute of 1718 imposed death as the automatic penalty for those
returning from transportation, in the same way that
it was for anyone else
accused of a felony outside benefit of
Obviously, those who
returned early were unlikely to get a second chance of mercy, especially where
their original transportation
was a condition imposed for commuting a death
sentence. Further clemency would have undermined the punishment. Thus, Richard
an old Etonian and the son of a Baronet, who had been sentenced to
death for forgery and pardoned on condition of transportation
to America for the
rest of his life, returned in 1751, was identified by a chance encounter and
indicted. At trial, he begged for
mercy, claiming that he came back temporarily
to get assistance. However, when he asked for a favourable recommendation from
presiding Judge, he was told that to those ‘guilty of such an offence
as his, mercy was very seldom
Although his
well connected father and wife used ‘all their interest’ to obtain
another pardon for him, they were unsuccessful,
and he was hanged at Tyburn the
month after his conviction.
Nevertheless, clemency
sometimes shown to returnees. Indeed, in
exceptional circumstances there might be a recommendation for mercy by the trial
occurred with John Bagnall in 1772. Bagnall had been convicted and
sentenced to seven years transportation at the Nottingham Assizes
in 1770, being
put on board ship near the Tower in the same year. However, it seems the vessel
was wrecked off the Scilly Islands
and he was saved by another ship, which
brought him back to Plymouth. From there he returned to his former master in
London. He failed
to surrender promptly to the authorities (which would have
provided him with a lawful excuse) though he claimed to have asked his
whether he should give himself up to a magistrate. He was eventually caught by a
thief-taker.
If John Howard
is to be believed, of the 31 people found guilty at the Old Bailey of returning
from Transportation between 1749 and
1771, only 22 (71 per cent) were actually
executed, the remainder being pardoned (probably contingent on
re-transportation) or dying
XIII Conclusion
Transportation provided an intermediate punishment between death and
immediate release that was almost as effective at ridding the
criminals as execution, yet without occasioning the considerable costs entailed
in long-term penal imprisonment, the only
realistic alternative and its eventual
replacement.
At a popular
level, it was widely feared, and there were even instances of convicts refusing
to accept it in lieu of execution. After
a troubled first decade, the system
appears to have settled down and worked relatively smoothly, from an English
perspective, until
the crisis engendered by the 1770s, though whether the
punishment was worth the acute ill feeling it engendered amongst many Americans,
and which contributed to that crisis, is, of course, another matter. The legal
framework established after 1718 was sufficiently
effective to be preserved, to
a significant degree, during the following century, when attention switched to
It is unsurprising that some transports found their lives in America
intolerable and sought to escape back to England generally, and
to London in
particular. The conditions were harsh and those from urban areas must have found
heavy agricultural labour especially
difficult. At the same time, escape was a
viable option. For professional criminals, at least, returning seems to have
problems, while for ordinary felons who were young, male and
sufficiently determined it was certainly a realistic ambition and for
remainder, a possibility. However, the number who actually returned to London
appears to have been relatively modest. Of course,
many, probably the majority,
of those who did come back must have avoided exposure in the Metropolis,
especially if they had originally
been convicted in the provinces, delayed their
returns, avoided re-offending and were constantly on their guard. Even so, the
paucity of prosecutions would suggest that it was not a popular option.
Doubtless, once the initial shock of relocating to foreign
shores had been
surmounted, the economic opportunities of the New World proved attractive, even
for runaways; as one defendant pointed
out, when claiming that he had been
returned to England against his will, American wage levels were almost twice
those available
in London. Escape from the hulks was, of course, much easier and
rather more common.
Exile was a novel punishment in England, unknown at common law, its only
historic parallel being the medieval abjuration process (like
transports,
abjurors faced execution if they returned). Because of this, the courts had to
work out its legal ramifications as they
went along in the years immediately
after 1718, gradually developing a complicated body of case law exploring the
punishment’s
parameters. Ostensibly, those who were caught could expect no
mercy, something that was necessary for deterrent purposes. However,
many contemporary observers felt that ‘few or none’ of those
prosecuted for returning escaped death, this was
not quite the
The courts observed
legal propriety fairly carefully, insisting that the considerable technical
requirements of the offence be met
and that the accused be firmly identified, so
that although (unsurprisingly) conviction rates were much higher than for other
almost a quarter of those indicted escaped. When the significant
numbers who were reprieved, after being convicted, are added to
the total, it
seems that about 40 per cent of those prosecuted avoided execution.
Understandably, however, this was not something
that the authorities chose to
MA, DipL, LLM, PhD, Barrister.
Senior Lecturer, Kingston University Law School, England.
The published reports of this
court’s proceedings, the Old Bailey Sessions Papers (hereafter cited as
OBSP), are now available
online at www.oldbaileyonline.org. However, some
caution must be exercised in using the site’s search engine, as,
in such a huge project, mistakes, such as ‘double
counting’ and mis-categorisation, have crept in. For a general discussion
of the value and limitations of these reports, see J H Langbein, ‘The
Criminal Trial Before the Lawyers’
The University of Chicago
J A Sharpe,
Seventeenth Century England
(1987) 147.
4 Geo I, c 11.
OBSP, 11 December 1678, Trial
of Susan Banster.
J M Beattie,
Crime and the
Courts in England 1660-1800
(1986) 471.
Ibid 504-505.
J M Beattie,
Policing and
Punishment in London: 1660-1750
(2001) 430. Because of their labour
intensive form of agriculture, Virginia and Maryland were the most common
convict destinations,
though Pennsylvania took a significant number, and most
American colonies took occasional batches. By 1718, the West Indies had largely
moved to a slave economy.
J Innes, ‘The Role of
Transportation in 17
Century English Penal
Practice’ in C Bridge (ed),
New Perspectives in Australian History
(1990) 14-15.
Grub-Street Journal,
30 September 1731.
J D Butler, ‘British
Convicts Shipped to American Colonies’ (1896) 2
American Historical
6 Geo I c 23.
W Hawkins and T Leach,
Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown
ed, 1795) vol 1, 403.
OBSP, 16 October 1782,
Trial of Robert Sideaway.
See on this A R Ekirch,
Bound for America: The Transportation of British Convicts to the Colonies,
Beattie, above n 7,
A R Ekirch, ‘Bound
for America: A Profile of British Convicts Transported to the Colonies,
1718-1775’ (1991) reproduced
Crime and Justice in American
, vol 1, 99.
J M Beattie, ‘The
Criminality of Women in Eighteenth Century England’ (1974) 8/4
of Social History
Sessions held at
Westminster 1750, Sessions Book No 1072, 44, held at Westminster City Archives,
OBSP, 26 February 1724,
Trial of Ann Southerwood.
Ekirch, above n 14, 35.
London Journal,
Innes, above n 8, 4.
B De Mandeville,
Enquiry into the Causes of the Frequent Executions at Tyburn
L Radzinowicz,
of English Criminal Law and its Administration from 1750
(1948) vol 1,
P Linebaugh,
Hanged: Crime and Civil society in the Eighteenth Century
(1991) 360.
B Kercher, ‘Perish or
Prosper: The Law and Convict Transportation in the British Empire,
(2003) 21(3)
Law and History Review
OBSP, 12 September 1764,
Trial of Joseph Derbin.
A G L Shaw,
Convicts and
the Colonies
(1966) 35. To put monetary value into some perspective, in the
early and middle years of the century, a male labourer’s weekly
in London ranged between 9s. and 12s. A highly skilled craftsman, such as a
jeweller or chair-carver, might earn over £3.
Hanoverian London:
J L Rayner and G T Crook,
The Complete Newgate Calendar
(1926) vol. I, 264-268.
OBSP, 16 January 1678,
Trial of unnamed man.
A Hayward (ed),
the Most Remarkable Criminals who have been Condemned and Executed for Murder,
the Highway …
(1927) 293.
Anon (undated),
Whereby Criminals liable to Transportation may be render’d not only honest
but Honest members of the Publick
, London, 2.
A Atkinson, ‘The
Freeborn Englishman Transported’ (1994) 144
Past and Present
K Morgan, ‘Convict
Runaways in Maryland, 1745-1775’ (1989) 23
Journal of American Studies
253-268, 259.
The Suffering
of William Green, Being a Sorrowful Account of his Seven Years Transportation
(1774) 1-12.
Felon’s Account of his Transportation At Virginia in America
(originally published c 1753) 6-9.
Hayward, above n 31,
OBSP, 17 October 1744,
Trial of Samuel Ellard.
Mandeville, above n 23,
Butler, above n 10, 27.
OBSP, 10 October 1733,
Trial of Edward Crawley.
Discoveries of John Poulter, alias Baxter
ed, 1753) 28.
Mandeville, above n 23, 47.
He suggested swapping Transports for white Barbary slaves held in Morocco as an
alternative punishment.
OBSP, 7 September 1720,
Trial of James Holliday.
OBSP, 1 March 1721, Trial
of John Filewood et al.
OBSP, 7 September 1722,
Trial of William Sladden.
Read's Weekly Journal,
or British-Gazetteer,
12 October 1734.
G Morgan and P Rushton,
Eighteenth-Century Criminal Transportation: The Formation of the Criminal
Discoveries of John Poulter, alias Baxter
ed, 1753) 28.
Morgan, above n 34,
Ekirch, above n 14,
Rayner and Crook, above n
29, vol III, 145-147.
Rayner and Crook, above n
29, vol III, 262.
19 Geo 3 c 74.
Hawkins and Leach, above n
Shaw, above n 28,
See, for example, OBSP, 10
April 1782, Trial of Patrick Madan.
The debate about its
destination had entered popular consciousness well before the fleet’s
departure. In December 1786, Joseph
Woolley, a soldier, stole garments from the
lodgings where he was billeted. When questioned by a JP, he said that he did it:
to go to Botany Bay; for he was tired of the military law, and
was determined to go there’.
September 1802, 3.
OBSP, 6 April 1796, Trial
of John Fisher.
Observations
upon a Bill Now Depending in Parliament
(1779) ix and 29.
An Account of
the Principal Lazarettos in Europe
(1789) 216.
OBSP, 11 September 1799,
Trial of Richard Richardson.
OBSP, 30 October 1799, John
Hayward, above n 31,
OBSP, 27 February 1754,
Trial of Eleanor Connor.
W Stubbs and G Talmesh,
The Crown Court Companion
ed, 1762) 511.
Journals of the House of
Commons (1803 reprint), 1751/04/23/ vol 26, 190.
OBSP, 18 September 1765,
Thomas Brown.
Hayward, above n 31,
OBSP, 28 June 1769, Trial
of William Brown.
OBSP, 6 December 1721,
Trial of George Baker.
Morgan and Rushton, above n
Innes, above n 8, 16.
OBSP, 31 October 1792,
Trial of Sarah Cowden. (Doubtless, her parish also did not want to be burdened
with her young children).
Morgan, above n 34,
Beattie, above n 5,
Stubbs and Talmesh, above n
OBSP, 5 December 1746,
Trial of Henry Thomas.
6 Geo 1 c 23 f 7.
Hawkins and Leach, above n
OBSP, 17 February 1796,
Trial of Thomas Atwell.
OBSP, 15 January 1777,
Trial of Thomas Floyd.
OBSP, 17 April 1765, Trial
of Richard Swift.
OBSP, 17 April 1751, Trial
of Thomas Smith.
OBSP, 27 February 1754,
Trial of Eleanor Connor.
OBSP, 12 September 1764,
Trial of Joseph Derbin.
OBSP, 17 April 1751, Trial
of Thomas Smith.
OBSP, 17 October 1744,
Trial of Samuel Ellard.
Hawkins and Leach, above n
See Bayley J in
[1816] EngR 587
(1816) 5 M & S 206.
OBSP, 3 September 1746,
Trial of Thomas Huddle.
OBSP, 21 February 1776,
Trial of Benjamin Payne.
OBSP, 15 January 1748,
Trial of Thomas Sutton.
OBSP, 13 September 1758,
Trial of William Lee.
OBSP, 15 July 1778, Trial
of William Harding.
OBSP, 16 January 1751,
Trial of Richard Parsons.
OBSP, 7 June 1753, Trial of
Peter Ticknor.
OBSP, 23 February 1780,
Trial of William Herbert.
OBSP, 5 April 1758,
Trial of Edward Merriot.
OBSP, 13 September 1775,
Trial of Robert Angus.
OBSP, 18 September 1765,
Trial of Thomas Brown.
OBSP, 29 April 1747,
Trial of Thomas Butler.
Hawkins and Leach, above
OBSP, 16 January1751,
Trial of Richard Parsons.
Rayner and Crook, above
n 29, vol III, 200.
OBSP, 9 December 1772,
Trial of John Bagnall.
. Howard, above n 62,
See on this J Willis,
‘Transportation versus Imprisonment in Eighteenth-and Nineteenth-Century
Britain: Penal Power, Liberty,
and the State’ (2005) 59
Society Review
Hayward, above n 31,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (306 KB)
PDF format (705 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter