URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zhou, Catherine --- "The Racialisation of Constitutional Alienage" [2024] MelbULawRw 16; (2024) 47(3) Melbourne University Law Review 723
THE RACIALISATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL ALIENAGE
II History of the Aliens Power
A The Racial Application of Alienage
1 The Framers
2 The Courts
3 The Legislatures
4 A System United: The Legitimation of Racial Alienage
B The Decline of British Subjecthood and the Ascent of Citizenship
1 Pochi v Macphee
2 Fracturing in Nolan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
3 Reconsideration of Nolan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
4 The Duality of Race and Subjecthood
III The Aliens Power as Juristic Classification
A Love v Commonwealth
1 The Interpretive Divide
2 Origins of Juristic Classification
B Refuting Juristic Classification as an Approach to Constitutional Characterisation of the Aliens Power
1 The Binary Implications of Juristic Classification
(a) Fluidity and Positive Law
(b) Legal Status
2 Limitations to Parliamentary Power
C A Proper Approach to Characterisation
IV Self-Identification and Communal Recognition
A The Relevance of Changes in Constitutional Facts
B The Evolving Legal Definition of Race
C Lessons for the Aliens Power
V Conclusion
THE RACIALISATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL ALIENAGE
Catherine Zhou
This article argues that the High Court of Australia has overlooked the
racial dimensions that were critical to the passage of the
aliens power at
Federation and central to its discriminatory application in the years beyond. By
tracing the legal history of s 51(xix)
Constitution
this article posits that subjecthood and race are dual dimensions of the history
of alienage. It then contends that recognition
of the role of race in the
interpretive evolution of the aliens power has critical implications for its
constitutional characterisation.
Applying a racial lens to the interpretive
Love v Commonwealth
reveals that juristic classification is
an untenable characterisation of the aliens power. This article concludes by
reflecting on
the ways that the racialisation of alienage can reorient
constitutional fact-finding to accommodate a more expansive conception of
political community, inclusive of self-identification and communal
recognition.
Introduction
The decision in
Love v Commonwealth
exposed a rift in the High Court of Australia’s characterisation of the
aliens power.
While the minority found that the power was tied to statutory
citizenship,
the majority characterised
alienage by reference to its ordinary
understanding.
The aliens power remains
unmoored, lacking a coherent characterisation and positive definitional content.
With changes to the composition
of the High Court and the discontinuation of an
appeal to overturn
questions remain unanswered. In
Alexander v Minister for Home Affairs
’), this ongoing obscurity led Edelman J to
declare that a series of decisions of the High Court has seen ‘an imperial
march of the application of the aliens power ... capturing more and more members
of the permanent population of the Commonwealth
Australia’.
The indeterminacy of constitutional alienage is particularly troubling given the
expansive terms in which the aliens power is expressed:
it permits laws that are
‘benevolent or repressive’, or ‘directed to any aspect of
even if they contravene international
Parliament is entitled to ‘enact special, discriminatory laws’ about
preclude their access to the implied freedom of political
communication
or to constitutional protections against ‘lengthy executive
detention’.
The aliens power now sustains increasingly significant concepts and
legislation. Critically,
is the head of power which supports statutory
citizenship.
Constitution
does not explicitly grant the
Commonwealth a power over citizenship,
is now a ‘settled position’ that
empowers Parliament ‘to create and define the concept of
citizenship’.
is as much a source of regulation over statutory citizenship
as it is over alienage. Before
, the High Court held that the
relationship between citizenship and alienage was dichotomous:
‘alien’ was seen as synonymous
‘non-citizen’.
‘Alienage’ has also been defined as the antonym of belonging and
membership of the
both definitions were qualified by reference to
citizenship.
Accordingly, alienage has historically been subject to statutory control rather
than substantive modes of belonging or community
membership. In contrast,
opens up the possibility of an intermediate category: the
‘non-citizen
non-alien’.
The recognition of this category affirms that alienage is a constitutional
concept, diverging from the statutory contingency which
has previously
characterised its
interpretation.
These emerging tensions have destabilised the relationships between citizenship
and non-citizenship, alienage and non-alienage, and
belonging and community
membership.
The concept of alienage is further problematised by the fact that it has both
legal and sociological dimensions. Its language intrinsically
calls attention to
the ‘otherness’ of its subject,
‘invok[ing] a racially, ethnically, and culturally specific image of the
immigrant/foreigner’.
‘alien spectre’ is constructed and represented by circulating
discourses,
and marked with historical
meaning. Critical race theorists in the United States have accordingly
challenged the dichotomy between
alienage and race, highlighting the unstable
boundaries between legal and social dimensions of
In Australia, however, the High
Court has largely refused to critically engage with the racial origins of the
aliens power, dismissing
race as irrelevant to the task of
construction.
This article refutes the High Court’s habitual dismissal of race in
characterisations of constitutional alienage. It argues
that the answer to
resolving the competing perspectives of the High Court in
the critical recognition of race as a legitimated and institutionalised aspect
of alienage both before and after Federation.
Race is enmeshed in the
Constitution
. It is a head of power in s 51(xxvi) of the
Constitution
that enables the Commonwealth to make laws with
respect to ‘[t]he people of any race for whom it is deemed necessary to
special laws’ — a power with which the aliens power is
inextricably interlinked.
It is also a
sociological force connected to the creation of s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
— with racially exclusionary desires motivating the
introduction of the aliens
this history, race indelibly suffuses the meaning of the aliens power and
prevents it from being read in an entirely formalist
or colourblind capacity, or
equated to non-citizenship. Constitutional characterisation must therefore
follow from a reckoning with
race and not an ignorance of its influence.
This article is organised into three main parts.
recasts the history
of the aliens power with two primary objectives. First, it seeks to prove that
the racialisation of ‘alien’
before and after Federation transcended
the subjectivity of the framers, becoming institutionalised within the
interpretation and
application of the aliens power. Second, it argues that the
High Court has turned to a more legalistic and formalist conception of
aliens power, without ever explicitly confronting its racial history.
outlines current divisions in the constitutional characterisation of the aliens
power, as expressed in
and affirmed in subsequent decisions. It then
challenges the justifications for characterising the aliens power as a juristic
classification
by reference to its racial origins.
concludes that
reckoning with the racial history of the aliens power can anchor alienage to a
more expansive conception of community,
using a comparison to the legal
definition of race to illustrate the ways in which changing societal attitudes
have directly affected
the characterisation and application of the
Constitution
. Inherent in this reckoning is the imperative to account for
self-identification and communal recognition in demarcating the boundaries
History of the Aliens Power
The Racial Application of Alienage
At Federation, the term ‘alien’ was associated with both
subjecthood and
early understandings of the aliens power included both meanings. Texts and
commentaries preferred to define alienage in
terms of subjecthood. In 1896,
Dicey stated that alienage was antonymic to
subjecthood.
‘Alien’ meant
‘any person who is not a British subject’, and ‘British
subject’ meant ‘any
person who owes permanent allegiance to the
In 1901, Quick and Garran
adopted this definition, stating that ‘[i]n English law an alien may be
variously defined as a person
who owes allegiance to a foreign State, who is
born out of the jurisdiction of the Queen, or who is not a British
In 1902, Salmond asserted that a person ‘is a subject of the British
empire in its unity, or else [they are] an
Despite this interpretation, the term ‘alien’ was most often used
in a racial manner, even by the writers of these texts
themselves. As Prince
argues, the concept of ‘alien’ in the 19
centuries was a default description for non-white inhabitants of
Australia but not for European colonists.
Prince observes that this racialisation of the term ‘alien’ was
subsequently adopted by Quick and Garran.
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
and Garran twice used the term ‘alien
As Sawer states, this term
does not refer to ‘“alien” in any sense of nationality law,
but merely people of a “race”
different from
Anglo-Saxon-Scottish-Welsh-Cornish-Irish-Norman ... mixture, derived from the
United Kingdom’.
Quick and Garran
also stated that s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
would enable
the Parliament ‘to prohibit Chinamen, whether naturalized or not, from
working in mines’.
naturalisation was supposedly the process by which alienage ceased, this
statement suggested that
could encompass subjects based on their race,
regardless of whether or not they were formally
The Convention Debates are replete with similar conflations of alienage and
stated that the race power ‘[gave] the Federal Parliament control over the
immigration of
Other delegates also used the concepts of ‘alien’ and
‘race’ conjunctively in the term ‘alien
Symon stated that
‘coloured races’ are ‘those whom we describe as
The expression ‘alien races’ was used interchangeably with
‘coloured races’,
counterpoint to ‘Australians and the British
Further, the purpose of powers
over both ‘aliens’ and ‘race’ was to regulate race.
While powers over aliens
related to ‘the introduction of foreign coloured
races’, the race power related to ‘people of certain races when
[were] within the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth’.
These powers were
viewed as ‘complementary’.
Barton cited the ‘preservation of the continent’ as a justification
for legislative powers over both aliens and
In his view, ‘the preservation
of the racial character of the white population’ was to be effected
through legislating
with regard to the introduction of ‘aliens’ into
Australia and to people of ‘races’ already settled in
accorded with the broader view that a primary role of the new Commonwealth would
be to implement the White Australia
The Convention Debates also undermine the prevailing view that alienage at
Federation was based on British subjecthood. The framers
specifically
contemplated targeting non-white British subjects as ‘aliens on
despite being aware that
non-white races were capable of being British subjects. Braddon stated that
‘it is quite possible
that it may come to be a grave question whether the
Hindostanese [sic] who are British subjects shall be allowed to continue the
practice of
Braddon also considered that ‘some 150,000,000 British subjects’ in
India were nonetheless ‘people of alien
These statements reflect a
widespread understanding that race was more dispositive of alienage than
subjecthood. Many colonies viewed
race as the overriding consideration in
alienage, deciding that ‘racial homogeneity and national unity were more
than British
citizenship’.
The aliens power itself only received ‘cursory attention’ during
the Convention Debates,
although it was
referenced during discussion of other
As Prince contends, the delegates
viewed the ‘“immigration and emigration” and
“races” powers as key
weapons for preservation of a “white
Australia”’ because this would enable the exclusion of
Prince posits that,
in contrast, the aliens power was an arguably ‘technical’ provision
focused on the ‘naturalisation
Nonetheless, the meaning of
‘aliens’ is equally significant both because it would determine the
scope of naturalisation
and because of the more expansive interpretations of the
aliens power which have emerged after the Convention Debates. It is notable
the choice of the term ‘naturalization and aliens’ for the
Constitution
was an express departure from previous drafts,
including the
Australasian Naturalisation Act 1897
, 60 Vict, which
included a provision for the ‘naturalisation of
And the High Court has since
held that the choice of the term ‘naturalization and aliens’
embraces a more general power
that is not limited to
naturalisation.
The ambit of this power is at odds with a narrower focus on
‘naturalisation of’ aliens in the years prior to
Federation.
Instead, it links the
interpretation of the aliens power with the way that the broader concept of
alienage was understood by the
framers. That understanding was deeply
racialised.
Many delegates in attendance at the Convention Debates, including Griffith,
Barton, O’Connor, Isaacs and Higgins, were later
appointed to the High
Their racial understandings of
alienage were subsequently imprinted onto early decisions of the Court. In each
of these cases, the
High Court considered that an ethno-racial term was
tantamount to alienage, without referring to subjecthood, nationality, positive
law or a lack of naturalisation.
Robtelmes v Brenan
’), the High Court
held that the aliens power validly authorised the deportation of Pacific
Islanders under the
Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901
Pacific Island Labourers Act
The Court’s approach reveals that their understanding of the term
‘alien’ was racialised.
Justice Griffith said that it was ‘indisputable’ that Pacific
Islanders were aliens.
Justice Barton
determined that the right to legislate was supported by the aliens power and the
external affairs power, but that
it was the external affairs power that enabled
Parliament to legislate ‘with respect to the exclusion or deportation of
of other powers’.
corresponding link was drawn between subjecthood and alienage. Justice Barton
also suggested that the race power could authorise
deportation.
The racialisation of alienage
is confirmed by commentary surrounding the legislation. In
1903, Deakin argued that allowing Pacific Islanders to remain in Queensland
would ‘impair the principle of a “White Australia”’ and
Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901
was justified on the basis of
‘preservation of’ the ‘purity of
‘Pacific Islander’ is an ethno-racial term, not a nationality. It
says nothing about subjecthood and makes no reference
to any legal status
enshrined in British or Australian law. It expressly ignores that some Pacific
Islanders were British subjects
at the time, being from British colonies such as
Fiji and British New Guinea.
The desire to
constitutionalise a power to deal with Pacific Islander labourers was originally
central to the inclusion of the race
ultimately institutionalised this racial purpose in the aliens
power. Justice Barton doubled down on this interpretation a year later
Yin v Christie
in which he identified
concerned ‘an alien — a Pacific
These decisions evidence
the judicial legitimation of the racial application of the aliens power.
Lower courts also reinforced the association between race and alienage. In a
1919 application made to the Queensland Court of Industrial
Arbitration for the
exclusion of ‘coloured aliens’ from the sugar industry, the Southern
District Secretary of the Australian
Workers Union stated that the main purpose
of the application was to ‘get rid of the aliens’, being
‘Chinese, Japanese,
This answer was unchallenged by the parties or the Court; instead, the
discussion proceeded to consider which of these ‘aliens’
‘menace’ to the industry.
Prince establishes, this association was furthered in
Brown v See Chin; Ex
Supreme Court of Queensland upheld a conviction under the
Sugar Cultivation
, 4 Geo V, for employing a person who had not first obtained a
certificate of having passed the dictation test — a charge described
‘employing coloured
Subjecthood was not prominent in any of the High Court’s considerations
of alienage until World War II, during which the High
Court began to explicitly
distinguish between categories of aliens (ie ‘allied aliens’,
‘neutral aliens’
and ‘enemy aliens’) and ‘British
Nonetheless, these distinctions did not displace racial alienage. For example,
Prince notes that the term ‘enemy alien’
was used against
naturalised persons
and Australian-born
persons of non-white races, such as ‘Australian-born
After the end of the World War II, the High Court considered the validity of
s 4(1)(a) of the
War-Time Refugees Removal Act 1949
Lau v Calwell
The plaintiffs were
‘of Chinese race’,
but not all
the plaintiffs were considered aliens. Most of the plaintiffs alleged that they
were British subjects by virtue of their
birth in Hong
Per Latham CJ, these plaintiffs would
‘not fall within the class of persons described in
[s 4(1)(a)]’ if born in Hong
Koon Wing Lau
is a departure from widespread assumptions that all
persons racialised as Chinese were aliens. Willard’s historical account
suggested that the Chinese were seen to be ‘permanently
— not because they had not been naturalised, but because they were
‘uninfluenced by the ideas and customs of the people
amongst whom they had
In his commentary on
Willard, Prince observes that descriptions of the Chinese as an ‘alien
race’ subsisted despite the
fact that ethnically Chinese immigrants from
British colonies in Hong Kong and the Straits Settlements would not be aliens
a definition anchored to subjecthood.
Koon Wing Lau
represents a shift away from this understanding and a
recognition of different statuses of subjecthood underneath the umbrella of
‘Chinese race’. However, the High Court did not renege on its
earlier decisions or expressly challenge previous racial
interpretations of the
aliens power. Particularly, no explicit statement of the Court addressed or
challenged the assumptions underlying
or refuted the
racialisation of the term ‘enemy alien’.
Legislatures
In conjunction with judicial decisions, alienage was being racialised in a
range of other legislative contexts in service of the White
The White Australia policy was
formalised at Federation through a series of laws facilitating racially
exclusionary immigration restrictions
in order to preserve racial
described the application of seemingly racially neutral laws in an article for
The Morning Post
, in which he stated that ‘[i]n fact, and in
effect, our colourless laws are administered so as to draw a deep colour line of
demarcation between Caucasians and all other
Deakin’s intent is reflected in state legislatures, and particularly in
Queensland. At the time, attempts to regulate race in
Australia were being
blocked by Britain based on a refusal to assent to openly discriminatory
legislation.
As set out by Prince, royal
assent was withheld from a proposal to include British Indians in immigration
restriction laws.
The Queensland Parliament
responded by passing legislation using the term ‘alien’ and
targeting non-European races with
the application of that legislation — a
mechanism which received royal assent.
included legislation mandating a ‘dictation test’, which —
although directed at ‘aliens’ —
‘operate[d]
specifically, in fact if not in form, against Asiatic
labourers’.
Between Federation and World War II, the Queensland Parliament approved 36 laws
aimed at ‘aliens’ in furtherance of the
White Australia
This interpretation of alienage was not localised to Queensland. Former
Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth, KH Bailey, wrote that
the dictation test
‘is clearly traceable to the Commonwealth Immigration
and that ‘the legal
discriminations against resident aliens in Australia are really the corollary of
the immigration policy
Commonwealth’.
Immigration
Restriction Act 1901
, 1 Edw 5, enshrined an analogous dictation
Willard observes that ‘except
in one or two isolated instances the test has never been applied to
Europeans’.
The racialisation of
alienage permeated each level of the federal structure, evidencing a consistent
and systematic racial application
of alienage.
System United: The Legitimation of Racial Alienage
The High Court has generally dismissed racial history in interpreting the
aliens power. In
Singh v Commonwealth
example, Gleeson CJ dismissed the relevance of race on the basis that the
subjective beliefs or intentions of the framers
were not relevant facts in
constructing s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
observed that alienage is ‘oblivious of race as that concept is now
understood’.
The extent of the racial application of the aliens power is significantly
understated. Although history should not be used to substitute
intention for
High Court has recognised since
Cole v Whitfield
that historical
materials such as the Convention Debates are relevant insofar as they identify
‘the contemporary meaning of
language used, the subject to which that
language was directed and the nature and objectives of the movement towards
federation’.
It has been
recognised in the context of the aliens power that the use of
‘constitutional expressions’ at Federation
has a bearing on the
inquiry of constitutional
construction.
The above history transcends ‘the subjective beliefs or
intentions’ of the framers,
representing the legitimation of racial application as a foundation of
Commonwealth power.
The Convention
Debates include examples of alienage being explicitly defined as racial in
The preservation of
‘racial purity’ was a key objective of powers directed at
‘aliens’ and drove the movement
Federation.
A threat to that purity was
precisely the constitutional ‘mischief and defect’ which historical
facts can be employed
to ascertain.
Further, the term ‘alien’ was consistently racialised by multiple
delegates at the Convention Debates — including
by future members of the
High Court — surviving even where no subjective belief or intention was
being expressed.
The aliens power can also be compared with the race power in s 51(xxvi) of
Constitution
, which empowers Parliament to make laws with
respect to ‘the people of any race’. The High Court has recognised
the relevance
of the Convention Debates in establishing that a discriminatory
licence inhered in the meaning of the race power at
Federation,
specifically in the context
of the terms ‘coloured
That degree of recognition
has never been extended to interpretations of the aliens power, despite the fact
that the exact same terminology
was used to justify powers targeted toward
‘aliens’ and ‘race’.
Outside of the Convention Debates, the institutionalisation of racial
alienage by Australian legislatures and the judiciary overshadowed
decades of the Commonwealth. When the
Pacific Island Labourers Act
was challenged before the High Court, its survival represented the
legitimation of the racial application of the aliens power. As
Prince notes, the
longevity of
has subsisted, with the Federal Court citing it as
‘good law’ in the 21
Equally, when Queensland used
the language of alienage to obfuscate its discriminatory practices, its
‘linguistic mechanism’
was only effective because the contemporary
legal meaning of alienage was capable of applying to both subjecthood and
Its legitimacy derived from the
duality of the definition of alienage.
By quarantining racial application to the subjective beliefs or intentions of
the framers, the High Court has ignored the codification
and recurrence of race
throughout the history of the aliens power. Accounting for that history is the
Court’s responsibility.
The Decline of British Subjecthood and the Ascent of Citizenship
Simultaneously, the importance of British subjecthood was diminishing in
Australia. A series of constitutional and political changes
radically reframed
Australia’s relationship to the United Kingdom, including the Balfour
Declaration of the Imperial Conference
Statute of Westminster 1931
(Imp) 22 & 23 Geo 5, c
In 1948, these events resulted in the
parallel passage of the
British Nationality Act 1948
, 11 & 12 Geo 6,
c 56 and the
Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948
Australian Citizenship Act
These events ignited a series of decisions on the application of the aliens
power to British subjects, beginning with
Pochi v Macphee
decisions affirmed an association between alienage and non-citizenship.
, Gibbs CJ ruled that the scope of the power conferred by s
51(xix) of the
Constitution
was ‘not determined by the
British Nationality Acts
of the United Kingdom’, and that British
subjecthood had ‘lost much of its former significance to Australian
Consequently, Gibbs CJ decided that British subjects were capable of being
Implicit in these statements was
the acknowledgment that the status of British subject had formerly been of
significance to non-alienage
at a time when every Commonwealth citizen was
believed to be a British subject.
The Court did not provide a positive or exhaustive definition of
‘alien’, stating instead that Parliament could ‘treat
alien any person who was born outside Australia, whose parents were not
Australians, and who ha[d] not been naturalized as
Australian’.
Further, Murphy J
expressed that the concept of ‘alien’ had not been explored by the
parties to his satisfaction.
Nonetheless, an association between alienage and non-citizenship was emerging.
In rejecting the argument that total absorption into
the Australian community
would exclude a person from the reach of the aliens
Gibbs CJ stated that ‘[i]t
was well settled at common law that naturalization could only be achieved by Act
of Parliament’.
By treating
naturalisation as the only avenue for the cessation of alienage, Gibbs CJ
effectively equated alienage with statutory
non-citizenship.
Simultaneously, the High Court also recognised the existence of limitations
on the aliens power. Specifically, the Court pronounced
that Parliament
‘cannot, simply by giving its own definition of “alien”,
expand the power under s 51(xix) to include
persons who could not possibly
answer the description of “aliens” in the ordinary understanding of
This constraint is
referred to in this article as the ‘
Nolan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
In the High Court’s next examination of the aliens power in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
the consequences of
’s failure to define alienage manifested
in an interpretive divide that subsists in the Court today.
The majority in
favoured the view that alienage was equivalent
to non-citizenship,
outlining an
etymological and relational definition of ‘alien’. From an
etymological perspective, the ordinary meaning
of ‘alien’ was
conceptualised through various frames of belonging, including ‘belonging
to another person or place’,
a ‘lack of relationship with a
or ‘not [being] a
member of the community which constitutes the body politic of the
Used to describe a lack
of relationship with country, alienage was ‘nothing more than a citizen or
subject of a foreign state’.
Consequently, the majority concluded that a British subject who was not
naturalised fell within the
reach of s 51(xix).
Although British
subjects were not ‘aliens’ in
citizenship superseded subjecthood when Australia became an independent
sovereign nation.
Justice Gaudron dissented. In her Honour’s view, ‘alien’
ought to be defined as ‘a person who is not a member
of the community
which constitutes the body politic of the nation state from whose perspective
the question of alien status is to
determined’.
Admission to the
community can depend on a particular criterion: if that criterion was
citizenship, then alienage could be
non-citizenship.
Justice Gaudron found
that the plaintiff was not an alien because his residence in Australia preceded
the date at which the criterion
for admission to membership of the community
constituting the body politic of Australia ‘changed from allegiance to the
to citizenship involving allegiance to the Crown in right of
Australia’.
The introduction of
statutory citizenship in the
Australian Citizenship Act 1948
insufficient to disrupt the constitutional meaning of
because it did not
precipitate a substantive sociopolitical change in the relationship between
individuals and the community constituting
the body politic of
That relationship, as opposed
to statute, was the central determinant of the constitutional meaning of
All judges in
ultimately concluded that citizenship was relevant
to alienage. However, Gaudron J’s approach favoured ‘a more
qualitative’
and ‘autonomous understanding’ of the aliens
It considered that citizenship is
not an exhaustive definition of the aliens power but is the chosen criterion by
which membership
of the community is assessed.
Reconsideration
Nolan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
Re Patterson; Ex parte Taylor
a majority of the High Court overruled
in concluding that a
non-citizen who had entered as a British subject was not an
The divide in
continued: while Gaudron J determined that Taylor was not an alien because he
was a ‘member of the body politic constituting
the Australian
community’,
McHugh J decided Taylor was not an alien because he was a ‘British subject
... living in Australia at the commencement of the
Royal Style and Titles Act
signalled a return to a ‘more complex notion of Australian
nationality’, rejecting the ‘supposed dichotomy’
citizenship and alienage.
That possibility was short-lived. In
Shaw v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
’), a majority of the High
Court held that
Re Patterson
did not overrule
determining that a British
subject was an alien in the constitutional sense at the time of their entry, as
determined by the commencement
Australian Citizenship Act
The conclusion in
created a new orthodoxy which associated
alienage with non-citizenship. In
, Gleeson CJ stated that
‘alien’ ‘ha[d] become synonymous with
non-citizen’.
The majority
in the recent decision of
Chetcuti v Commonwealth
’) also suggested that statutory citizenship
overtook the common law of nationality and rendered ‘British
a ‘derivative status, capable of enjoyment ... only in
virtue of possession of ...
citizenship’.
Conversely, Gordon J
and Edelman J have continued to advocate for a meaning of alienage that is
independent of citizenship.
Duality of Race and Subjecthood
It is now accepted that ‘alien’ had no fixed legal meaning
ascertainable by reference to the common law at
Federation,
and no common law notion of
‘British subject’ was ever enshrined as the law of the
Constitution
This is particularly
so given that subjecthood was in flux following a Royal Commission on
naturalisation and allegiance in
the importance of British subjecthood is still the premise from which the High
Court proceeds to characterise the aliens power
in a formalist capacity —
as fixed to the legal concept of citizenship. The recurrence of British
subjecthood in decisions
of the Court has consolidated its centrality in
interpretations of the aliens power, at the expense of recognition of its racial
Subjecthood and race are dual dimensions of alienage. Both had a
‘substantial effect on the early application’ of s 51(xix)
Constitution
prevented the other from exclusive monopolisation of the meaning of the aliens
power at Federation and beyond. Particularly,
the application of the aliens
power to non-Caucasian British subjects through mechanisms legitimated by the
Court prevented British
subjecthood from being the sole criterion by which
membership of the Australian community was
This is consistent with the
view of Edelman, who has argued (extra-curially) that the racial application of
alienage precludes ‘non-subject’
from being the essential meaning of
the aliens power.
This practice also
imbued the aliens power with a dual character: while one dimension of its
application was largely determined by
positive law, the other was based on
racial understandings capable of existing outside of the legal system.
Like British subjecthood, the High Court now recognises that race is not
dispositive of alienage. Many judges renounce that
connection.
But unlike British
subjecthood — and its decades-long history of contestation from
— the High Court has never reckoned with the
racialisation of the aliens power. As the above chronology demonstrates, the
centrality of subjecthood was not a longstanding interpretation of the
aliens power in Australia prior to
. Rather, the relevance of
subjecthood was constituted and affirmed by that series of decisions.
Analysis of the historical coexistence of race and subjecthood is crucial to
the present characterisation of the aliens power. As
a continuation of a
formalist conception of alienage, citizenship is an answer to subjecthood. In
contrast, the High Court has never
answered to the racial history of the aliens
power, and a framework of community membership grounded solely in citizenship is
fundamentally
unable to do so.
The Aliens Power as Juristic Classification
Love v Commonwealth
Interpretive Divide
In the present day, the High Court remains divided on the constitutional
characterisation of the aliens power. This divergence was
most prominently
demonstrated in
, the plaintiffs, Mr Love and Mr Thoms, challenged their
removal from Australia following visa cancellations by a delegate of the
Minister of Home Affairs under
Migration Act 1958
Neither plaintiff was an
Australian citizen, but both plaintiffs were Aboriginal persons. Mr Love was a
descendant of the Kamilaroi
group, and Mr Thoms was a member of the Gunggari
People and a common law holder of native
plaintiffs contended that they were ‘non-citizen, non-alien’ because
they were Aboriginal persons.
of the Court ruled that Aboriginal persons are beyond the term
‘alien’ in s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
Although their precise
formulations of the aliens power differed, each judge in the majority favoured
an approach grounded in ordinary
understanding. Justice Gordon argued that
‘alien’ referred to ‘otherness, being an
“outsider”’,
‘foreignness’.
Justice Edelman defined ‘alien’ as being a ‘foreigner to the
Australian political community’.
Justice Nettle stated that the ordinary understanding of ‘alien’
related to owing allegiance to another sovereign
Justice Bell determined that
‘alien’ can be traced to ‘belonging to another person or
These definitions echoed
the etymological understandings of alienage referred to by the Court in
although the majority in
did not consider that the ordinary understanding of alienage should
be evaluated by reference to the criterion of citizenship. The
majority also
agreed (albeit implicitly) that non-constitutional concepts, such as statute, a
historical common law position or foreign
law, cannot wholly determine the scope
of a head of power.
Pursuant to this
interpretive approach, the majority determined that Aboriginal persons were not
aliens to Australia because they
possessed a ‘cultural and
spiritual’ connection to their traditional
and because of the common
law’s acknowledgment of the traditional laws and customs of Aboriginal
However, the majority did not
examine the role of race in the historical interpretation of the aliens power.
Only Edelman J considered
that the application of the meaning of alien
incorporated race
at Federation.
In contrast, Kiefel CJ, Gageler J and Keane J determined that Aboriginal
persons were capable of being aliens.
Concerns about race recurred throughout their reasoning. Members of the minority
suggested that an implication of race in s 51(xix)
Constitution
‘problematic’,
and that it is ‘doubtful whether the adoption of ... a discrimen [of race]
is open to the Court as a matter of the exercise
of judicial
Keane J stated that
differentiation on racial grounds was ‘not a course that commends itself
in terms of the exercise of judicial
power given that justice is to be
administered equally to all’.
Justice Gageler expressed that the reintroduction of a ‘race-based
limitation’ on
would be equivalent to the words ‘other
than ... the aboriginal race’ in any state in the race power, as deleted
The preferred view of the minority was that the aliens power related to the
concept of belonging to a body politic or sovereign
and was therefore tied to
citizenship.
The relevance of the ‘body politic’ is not self-evident. Its use
as a frame of reference requires justification, in part
because its significance
relies on how the aliens power is characterised. Nor is it self-evident that
citizenship is the criterion
upon which the ‘body politic’ hinges,
noting that the ‘body politic’ was invoked by Gaudron J in
to suggest a more qualitative and autonomous understanding of the
aliens power.
The reasoning of the
minority therefore requires an explanation of the specific relevance of
citizenship, mediated through a choice
of characterisation. This explanation was
most explicitly provided by Gageler J, who argued that the aliens power
resembles powers
to make laws with respect to ‘a legal
bankruptcy,
Consequently, his Honour
viewed the aliens power as a topic of ‘juristic
classification’,
harbouring an ‘ineluctable fluidity in that the law on that topic was in a
process of legislative development before and after
It did not have an
‘established and immutable legal
rather, it was
‘itself a source of legislative authority to modify or replace the
pre-existing
Consequently, legal status can be ascertained ‘only through the
application of positive law, the enactment of which inheres
in the legislative
power itself’.
This judgment
, in which Gleeson CJ stated that the aliens power is a
concept that ‘can only be identified by reference
to legal usage and
understanding’.
The centrality of legal status is therefore
the link that ties alienage to membership of the body politic, as mediated by
citizenship.
of Juristic Classification
Justice Gageler’s approach is based on a framework of constitutional
characterisation originally propounded in
Attorney-General (NSW) ex rel
Tooth & Co Ltd v Brewery Employes Union of NSW
In that case, Higgins J — ‘[i]n an enduring and influential
— distinguished
between constitutional powers over subjects ‘fixed by external
nature’ and ‘artificial products
While the former cannot be extended by Parliament, the latter can
Justice Higgins consequently
determined that ‘trade mark’ belonged to the latter category, and
that Parliament was able
to extend the concept of ‘trade mark’ to
include the workers’ mark at issue in the
The approach of Higgins J in this dissent has been adopted in categorising
powers over bankruptcy,
as artificial subjects. In
Attorney-General (Vic) v Commonwealth
, Windeyer J described these
imprecisely demarcated matters as ‘topic[s] of juristic
classification’.
Another way of
conceptualising this distinction is that physical subjects are
‘exogenous’ (in that they are defined outside
of the legal system)
and artificial subjects are ‘endogenous’ (in that they are largely
defined by the law).
Notably, it has
never been argued that the race power pertains to a topic of juristic
classification. Rather, the race power in s
51(xxvi) of the
Constitution
is seen as ‘exogenous’, because it is viewed as
concerning ‘natural or physical’ subject matter, ascertainable
outside of the legal system by features that cannot be extended by
Parliament.
Refuting Juristic Classification as an Approach to Constitutional
Characterisation of the Aliens Power
The racialisation of constitutional alienage was not considered in detail by
the minority in
. Conversely, race was dismissed as
‘irrelevant’ to membership of the body
as well as to the acquisition
of statuses historically associated with non-alienage, such as British
subjecthood.
However, the ‘body politic’ or ‘British subjecthood’
only becomes a relevant frame of reference after the
aliens power is
characterised as an ‘endogenous’ subject largely defined by the law.
If alienage transcends formalist
‘legal’ meaning, then discussion of
race may be relevant to examining what kind of membership is required for
non-alienage.
This divergence highlights
the relevance of race as a justification or refutation of the choice of
characterisation. Contrary to
the reasoning of the minority in
cannot be dismissed as irrelevant without examining the justifications for a
particular approach to characterisation. The following
Part examines each of
these justifications, arguing that a racial lens reveals that juristic
classification is an untenable characterisation
of the aliens power.
Binary Implications of Juristic Classification
Juristic classifications are built on binary categorisations (either
something is a subject of juristic classification, or it is not)
consequences (either something is defined by Parliament, or it is not). There is
a danger in creating ‘separate
constitutional principles’ within s
Constitution
particularly where
these distinctions result in a dichotomous approach to constitutional
characterisation. All powers in
derive their meaning from both exogenous
and endogenous sources;
no power is
purely one or the other. For instance, the aliens power sits ‘at the
intersection of a “natural” subject
(a person) and an
“artificial” subject (a
Yet its characterisation
as a topic of juristic classification makes alienage entirely contingent on
statutory citizenship.
Consideration of the racial history of the aliens power challenges the binary
established by juristic classification. Specifically,
the racialisation of the
meaning of the aliens power reveals that the boundaries between categories of
constitutional characterisation
are themselves unstable. Historically, the
aliens power has transgressed the dichotomy between endogenous and exogenous
classification.
At Federation, this meaning was dualistic, comprising elements
of subjecthood and race.
Over time, the
High Court moved away from racial meaning, with the consequence that the meaning
of ‘alien’ progressively
lost an ‘exogenous’ attribute;
‘race’ has been defined as existing outside of the legal system in
the context
of the race power in s 51(xxvi) of the
Constitution
classification fixes a power to the ‘endogenous’ category,
permanently tying its meaning to parliamentary determination.
This approach is
static. It fails to recognise that categorisation is malleable, and that
subjects can move along a spectrum of naturality
and artificiality.
This binary is further destabilised by the lack of coherent and distinctive
features uniting topics of juristic classification. The
reasoning of the
minority in
contains a number of assumptions that do not themselves
support a formalist conception of alienage, but rather proceed from a formalist
that is already presumed. Two examples are analysed below, drawing on
comparisons to race.
and Positive Law
One rationale for categorising powers as topics of juristic classification is
their ‘ineluctable fluidity in that the law on
that topic was in a process
of legislative development before and after
‘ineluctable fluidity’ is a contingent attribute in this sentence.
It does not refer to fluidity in general,
but rather the fluidity of ‘the
law on that topic’.
specific context of the aliens power, ‘the law on that topic’ refers
to the law on naturalisation and allegiance,
which was in a process of
development before and after 1900.
The fact that law on a topic exists and was in flux at the time of Federation
does not affix its constitutional definition to that
legal definition of race has also been continually reconstructed as a mechanism
of colonisation and racialisation. McCorquodale
identifies 67 legal definitions
of Aboriginality among 700 separate pieces of legislation dealing with
Aboriginal matters.
Australian states
progressively introduced legislation using the assimilationist, derogatory
designations of ‘half-castes’
between 1839 and
‘quarter-castes’ in
definitions were often contradictory. For example, the
Aboriginals Protection
and Restriction of the Sale of Opium
, 61 Vic ‘deemed’ Aboriginality for persons who
were ‘the offspring of an aboriginal mother and other than an aboriginal
and who ‘habitually live[d] or associate[d] with
aboriginals’.
Later legislation
contradicted this approach, changing this categorisation to ‘a person who
has a preponderance of the blood
of an Aborigine
and subjecting ‘a
part-Aborigine [sic]’ to the test of habitual
association.
Muramats v Commonwealth Electoral
Officer (WA)
, Higgins J
specifically conceptualised Aboriginality as constituted by law, stating that
‘the present Australian black people’
were Aboriginal ‘from
the point of view of white settlers or of Australian
But that view did not make
race ‘endogenous’, with some members of the High Court later
adopting a non-technical approach
embracing an understanding of race beyond
statute when considering the race power in
Commonwealth v Tasmania
Tasmanian Dam
Several observations can be made here. First, fluidity — whether
before, during or after Federation — is not the exclusive
dominion of
topics of juristic classification. Second, the existence of law purporting to
provide a definition of a subject is not
dispositive of the definition of that
subject. Third, that same law is not dispositive of its constitutional
characterisation. Race
has remained ‘exogenous’, existing outside of
the legal system.
The fact that the
legal concept of race was in flux at and beyond Federation does not make the
race power a topic of juristic classification,
or vest control over its
development to the legislature. As Gaudron J argued in
because constitutional meaning must be based on an ordinary understanding that
cannot be displaced by statute.
can ‘deem’ a person a member of a race, but such a superficial
attribution does not itself reconstitute the social
facts critical to processes
of racialisation.
This comparison reveals a circularity in the reasoning used to analyse
alienage. Neither fluidity nor positive law distinguishes an
from exogenous subjects, as law can exist on the definition of a subject without
displacing its constitutional
meaning. The only way to conclude that the aliens
power is a topic of juristic classification is to erroneously begin with the
presumption
that positive law is exhaustively determinative of alienage.
Another rationale is that alienage is a legal
Under this premise, a status in law exists when a person ‘belongs to a
class of persons who, by reason only of their membership
of that class, have
rights or duties, capacities or incapacities, specified by law which do not
exist in the case of persons not
included in the
The High Court has previously favoured this framing, stating that Parliament
‘may make laws which impose upon those having
this status burdens,
obligations and disqualifications which the Parliament could not impose upon
other persons’.
These qualities are not exclusive to topics of juristic classification. Race
has also been treated as an ‘artificial legal
A person who belongs to a
racial class may also have rights or duties and capacities or incapacities which
may not extend to other
racial classes. Quick and Garran specifically described
the purpose of the race power as enabling the Commonwealth to
‘localize’,
‘restrict’ and ‘confine’ people
of ‘any alien race’.
recent history, Indigeneity has also formed the basis of a class entitled to
otherwise described as rights in land that do not extend to other persons.
Even though the language of ‘status’ formalises alienage, its
definition again fails to identify distinguishing features
that justify a
separate classification. Membership of a racial class also has legal
consequences in exactly the way that ‘status’
aims to describe. This
language therefore also proceeds from an assumption that the term
‘alien’ is formalist in nature.
Overall, these comparisons seek to illustrate the fragility of the binary
established by juristic classification. Such a framework
treats two historically
complementary powers as separate constitutional species. This outcome is
dangerous, as one power can be constrained
by exogenous understandings while the
other is left to continually expand in application based on a false premise of
formalism. It
also ignores the symmetric relationship between the legal system
and ordinary understanding, and the ways in which codification can
manufacture
divisions that deepen racial
difference.
Limitations
to Parliamentary Power
Separately, juristic classifications struggle to establish limitations to
parliamentary power. Even though justices who use the language
of juristic
classification recognise that Parliament’s choice cannot be
‘unconstrained’,
limitations have emerged. In the
Union Label Case
, Higgins J suggested
that Parliament would not be able to enact ‘sham’ laws where the
‘substance of the Act’
reveals that Parliament did not genuinely
apply itself to the exercise of power.
However, this approach has not been subsequently
, Gageler J
briefly listed possible limitations, but ultimately found that there was no need
to explore them.
The aliens power is an illustrative example of the difficulties of not
anchoring a limitation to anything beyond a legislative conception
of meaning.
Although the
limit has recognised that Parliament ‘cannot ...
expand the power under s 51(xix) to include persons who could not possibly
answer the description of “aliens” in the ordinary understanding of
the High Court has been
unable to imbue the limit with positive, definitional content. It is generally
recognised that the
limit imposes some constraint on
Parliament’s use of s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
the content of this limitation is contested. The majority in
limit as a reason why the class of ‘alien’ should
be defined by positive content and anchored to a ‘central point
within’ rather than a ‘boundary line
In contrast, the
minority in
suggested that
only imposed ‘outer
barring Parliament from
expanding s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
to include persons who
‘could not possibly answer the description of
minority’s approach has made consideration of limits to the aliens power
an assertive affair, in which a set of facts is
stated to not stretch ordinary
understanding without any reference to the meaning of ‘alien’ or its
‘ordinary understanding’.
, for example, Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ —
without explicitly explaining the ordinary understanding of alien or its
to enmity — asserted:
It does not stretch the ordinary understanding of the expression
‘alien’ to include within that category an individual
engaged in conduct exhibiting such extreme enmity to Australia as to warrant
being excluded from membership of the Australian
Australian community’ is interpreted as the ‘body politic’
defined by statutory citizenship,
reveals that any ordinary understanding of ‘alien’
anchored only to statutory citizenship reduces the
circularity: in other words, that citizenship-stripping legislation does not go
beyond the ordinary understanding of ‘alien’
where extreme enmity
warrants citizenship-stripping legislation. The only way to construe the
limit coherently is by attaching enmity to a broader sense of
community. Any other interpretation recites itself into its own justification,
in precisely the way that
does not allow.
A Proper Approach to Characterisation
A recurring objection in
was the illegitimacy of importing a
racial distinction into s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
However, redressing
the historic injustices of racial discrimination does not justify a language
that masquerades as neutral but
discriminates in its effect. As Gaudron J stated
Street v Queensland Bar Association
a ‘failure to accord different treatment appropriate to [a relevant]
... difference also constitutes
discrimination’.
Any proper approach to characterisation should be capable of reckoning with the
racial history of alienage. Recognition of racial
distinctions is necessary to
remediate the injustices that have historically prevented the equal
administration of justice. This
article does not attempt to unify the majority
judgments in
. Rather, it briefly identifies steps that a search for
definitional content should follow, based on the judgment of Gaudron J in
and grounded in racial history. This approach is twofold.
First, the concept of ‘alien’ should be defined expansively,
based upon a sense of community or a body politic grounded
in the ordinary
understanding of alienage.
It should not
be tied to statutory citizenship, as this approach would devolve into the
circularity outlined in
Part III(B)
and would fail to substantiate the
limit. This approach is consistent with the majority in
, and reflects the understanding that non-constitutional concepts
cannot determine the scope of a head of
Second, admission to the community can depend on particular
These criteria should
represent applications of the aliens power. An expansive understanding can
subsume both race and subjecthood
as two early applications — or criteria
by which membership of the community was adjudged — while recognising that
are dispositive of alienage. Final determination of these criteria is
vested in the High Court. They will likely be chosen through
an engagement with
the history and continuing relevance of the norms of community membership
‘that are treated as providing
the most fundamental connection with the
body politic which comprises territory, government and
This approach allows for the criteria of alienage to change or be deemed
irrelevant when they are no longer suitable for modern times,
because they are
not essential components of the power. The point at which a criterion becomes
irrelevant should depend on social
and political facts, rather than legislative
, for example, Gaudron J argued that only a ‘change
in the relationship between the individual and the community’ could
a transformation from non-alien to
Consequently, the criterion of British subjecthood could not be displaced by
citizenship legislation alone. As
argues, relevant relational changes
have occurred to displace the criterion of race. These changes should
precipitate an expansive
understanding of non-alienage.
Self-Identification and Communal Recognition
Juristic classification ties the definition of the aliens power to a
legislative mechanism, eroding the High Court’s role in
assessing its
changing application. An approach grounded in ordinary understanding better
enables the
Constitution
to act as a ‘living
Simultaneously, alienage has most often been interpreted by reference to its
history, as opposed to current values and
Any recognition of race must
therefore ensure that the colonial history of alienage does not preclude the
capacity for constitutional
renewal. This Part argues that reckoning with racial
history can itself provide an avenue for incorporating self-identification and
communal recognition into the meaning of alienage, drawing on a comparison to
the legal definition of race throughout history.
The Relevance of Changes in Constitutional Facts
Although the meaning of a constitutional power does not change, the
application of meaning does
Further, the applications of some heads of power are more dynamic than others,
particularly where they depend upon facts which are
relevant to constitutional
construction and validity (also known as constitutional
For example, the validity of a
law under the defence power will depend upon ‘the nature and dimensions of
the conflict that
calls it forth’, ‘the actual and apprehended
dangers, exigencies and course of the
The aliens power is also grounded in constitutional fact. In
Communist Party v Commonwealth
, Williams J explicitly stated that a person
must be ‘in fact and law an alien’ to enliven the aliens
It has been recognised that the
application of the aliens power may be affected by ‘changes in political
and social facts and
circumstances’.
For example,
‘changes in the national and international context in which
to be applied may have an important bearing upon its practical
operation’.
Re Patterson
McHugh J identified that the denotation of ‘alien’ can be
affected by ‘the gradual development of the Australian
Other circumstances may include
a change in sovereign identity or territory; breach by a naturalised member of
the political community of a reasonable condition
upon membership; and express
or implied renunciation of membership of that political
These changes
may attach to the community itself, or to the individual subject. If the
conclusion of the majority in
survives, there may be increasing
recognition of these factors as the High Court departs from the ‘strict
and complete legalism’
it has historically
As Gaudron J stated in
, the transformation from non-alien to
alien ‘requires some relevant change in the relationship between the
individual and the
— it is not open to Parliament to effect a transformation ‘by simply
redefining the criterion for admission to membership
of the community
constituting the body politic of
Australia’.
Consequently, the
framework for ascertaining changes in the application of the aliens power relies
on a broader conception of community
than that prescribed by Parliament. An
example of such a conception exists in the changing definitions of race.
The Evolving Legal Definition of Race
The legal definition of race is a useful comparison to the aliens power for
two reasons. First, the evolving application of race required
a confrontation
and revision of racial assumptions embedded in the law that the High Court has
almost entirely evaded in the context
of the aliens power. Its evolution in this
regard may be instructive for the future direction of the aliens power.
Particularly,
the legal definition of race exhibits how an
‘exogenous’ dimension of meaning can be interpreted and applied
differently
over time. Second, the comparison has a substantive foundation in
the similarities between the race power and the aliens power. Both
powers can be
characterised as powers to legislate with respect to a particular class of
They do not canvass a function
of government, an activity, or a
relationship.
A power based on a
particular class of persons is also ‘inherently less precise as to its
permitted subject-matter’,
allowing Parliament significant leeway and ‘necessarily authori[sing]
discriminatory treatment of members of that
In addition, both the race
power and the aliens power were included in the
Constitution
to regulate race.
Historically, biological descent was the central basis for legal definitions
of race in Australia.
Ofu-Koloi v
, the High Court recognised ‘pigmentation’ as ‘a
characteristic of race’ that ‘may be of cogent evidentiary
significance’.
The Court also rejected mixedness: in their view, to be regarded as
‘European’ required that a person be ‘from
European stocks
without known admixture of Africa, Asian or other
Further, these biological
indicators were adjudicated by the judicial beholder. The race of a child was
adjudged through ‘inspection’
Section 71A of the
and Discovery Ordinance 1913–1952
(Papua New Guinea) also stated that
in the absence of sufficient evidence of a person’s race, a judge
‘having seen the
person’ could determine the question. Another
definitional mechanism was the ‘blood quantum’ test, which was used
to classify First Nations persons based on the fraction of their
‘blood’ that was considered attributable to their
Biological characterisation was
pivotal in the extension of assimilationist policies, including the removal of
First Nations children
Genealogy and biology continued to be the crux of racial definition in
Australian law at least until the 1967
referendum.
Further, the perspective of
the person was less important than the way in which they were perceived. The
Pacific Island Labourers Act
placed the onus of proof on
individuals to refute the imposition of a racial identity, stating that ‘a
person alleged to be
a Pacific Island labourer shall be deemed to be a Pacific
Island labourer until the contrary is
Such racial distinctions
directly modified Australian citizenship. For example, Papuan Australians were
denied entitlements under
Australian citizenship on a racial
by the independence of Papua New
Guinea in 1975, Papuans who were Australian citizens could not exercise their
right to live in Australia,
while Chinese and mixed-race people who were
Australian citizens could.
historical distinctions were perpetuated in
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Ame
that the applicant (a Papuan Australian who held the legal status of citizen
Australian Citizenship Act 1948
) possessed a ‘largely
nominal’ Australian citizenship that could be permissibly
The Full Federal Court took a
different approach with regard to ethnically Chinese persons born in
pre-independence
Race has been described as a ‘false taxonomy of
notoriously slippery
Nowadays, it is well accepted that ‘race’ and
‘ethnicity’ are ‘social, cultural and political constructs,
rather than matters of scientific
There is ‘no meaningful genetic or biological basis for the concept of
Recognitions
of these dimensions of race are contained in the
Tasmanian Dam Case
considering the race power, Brennan J stated that biology is non-exhaustive of
race, and is supplemented by ‘a common history,
a common religion or
spiritual beliefs and a common
Nonetheless, Brennan J
stated that ‘[t]here is, of course, a biological element in the
Justice Deane stated
that the meaning of race is ‘wide and
non-technical’,
and imports
elements of ‘spirit, belief, knowledge, tradition and cultural and
spiritual heritage’.
judgments represented a marked movement away from historical understandings that
foregrounded biology in racial determination.
This emphasis of sociocultural,
historical and spiritual attributes signalled the emergence of a more
multidimensional conception
The relevance of biology does still subsist in recent judgments of the High
but there is evidence to suggest
that its influence may continue to diminish. Although the case was ultimately
discontinued, the
centrality of biology to race was challenged again in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
Affairs v Montgomery
in which the
respondent argued that Aboriginality could be established through cultural
adoption even in the absence of strict biological
This contention indicates that the concept of race may continue to evolve,
possibly resulting in the further decentralisation of
The evolution of race in the law indicates how the High Court’s
understanding of race has shifted from an identity that is unilaterally
upon a subject to an identity that is assumed by that subject and validated by
the recognition by their constitutive community.
It also evidences a shift in
proof from external indicators mediated through the gaze of the judiciary
‘pigmentation’
more metaphysical attributes mediated through the social formation of
communities — such as cultural heritage. Although
many aspects of
institutional power surrounding race remain unchallenged, this history
nonetheless supports a narrower conclusion
of ‘judicial willingness to
accept the popular meaning of an expression, other than one defined by
That same willingness has not extended to the aliens power, despite its racial
foundations.
Lessons for the Aliens Power
The characterisation of the aliens power converges with race at various
points. The comparison is most direct if one criterion for
non-alienage is
membership of a racial class, which is one interpretation of
Here, the operation
of the race power is a response to the concern that the majority in
would ‘concede capacity to decide who is and who is not an alien ... to
non-constitutional non-representative non-legally-accountable sub-national
In the context of the race
power, the High Court has already recognised self-identification and communal
recognition,
and has also established a
means of ascertaining Aboriginality in the form of the tripartite test in
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
This test provides that
[m]embership of the indigenous people depends on biological descent from the
indigenous people and on mutual recognition of a particular
membership by that person and by the elders or other persons enjoying
traditional authority among those
same test could be used to identify non-aliens under the aliens power. Its
extension to the aliens power is nothing more than
the application of the same
test to regulate the boundaries of a racial class, without ceding the capacity
for the High Court to
decide whether that class satisfies an appropriate
criterion for non-alienage.
However, this direct mode of comparison should not be the only lens through
which First Nations peoples are conceptualised. A racial
characterises First Nations societies ‘as racial communities, rather than
as political entities’.
legal definitions of race risk siloing the designation of First Nations identity
into settler legal constructs of Aboriginality,
without recognising the
diversity of First Nations polities or their laws and
Further, the application and
interaction of the tests from the
Tasmanian Dam Case
contested. Members of the High Court in
diverged in their approaches
to the tests. Justice Nettle adopted a narrow view, holding that a plaintiff
should be able to show
that they belong to an Aboriginal community whose laws
and customs ‘have relevantly maintained a continuous existence and
since the Crown’s acquisition of
sovereignty’.
Conversely, Edelman J observed that the
test may not necessarily be
an exhaustive means of ascertaining Aboriginality, particularly as the
test was created in the context of native
These conflicts pose problems for
future applications of the test. If the narrower view prevails, First Nations
non-citizens may
be obliged to show ‘“native title equivalent”
continuity’ to fall within the finding in
In this context, any lessons drawn from a comparison of alienage and race
must extend beyond race. Existing debates suggest that future
front lines of the
aliens power may include questions of dual citizenship (whether dual citizens
can be aliens)
or unconditional
absorption (whether alienage can cease upon integration into the Australian
community in the absence of
naturalisation).
Recognising the role of
race enables the extrapolation of an approach
that centres an expansive concept of community in each determination.
Additionally, the extrapolation of the evolving legal definition
of race to a
broader understanding of community can provide an alternative lens which enables
the recognition of First Nations societies
as polities, rather than racial
Historically, race was a unilateral imposition of identity upon a person.
This was achieved through judicial assessment of appearances
or statutory
‘deeming’ provisions which assigned racial categories based on
‘blood quantum’.
lenses deprived people of interiority. Identity was ascribed, rather than
assumed by its subject. Current understandings now
recognise that race is
‘highly relative in time and place’ and contingent on understandings
of group identity that are
fluctuating.
These fluctuations ultimately precipitated two changes to race in the law.
These changes did not arise because of upheaval in the
boundaries between
discrete races. One change is societal: a struggle toward equality caused
greater recognition of the self-determinate
capacities of historically
marginalised groups. Previous racial categorisations were unmasked as
legislative manifestations of a
belief in racial
superiority.
The tripartite test itself
‘was developed to mitigate against an overly rigid and unilateral logic of
A second and consequential
change was epistemic: a redistribution of discursive power has enabled knowledge
of non-biological factors
constituting the definition of race. Courts are now
more willing to give credence to individuals and the communities to which they
belong. That a group of people ‘regard themselves ... as having ... a long
shared history and a culture distinctly of their
own’ is now a significant
factor in establishing a race.
This trend is not exclusive to the concept of race. That fact has already
been recognised by courts in foreign jurisdictions, which
have applied it to the
concept of nation. In
King-Ansell v
Richardson J of the High
Court of New Zealand stated:
The real test is whether the individuals or the group regard themselves and are
regarded by others in the community as having a particular
historical identity
in terms of their colour or their racial, national or ethnic
These factors
were echoed again in the specific context of the concept of nation in
London Borough Council v Race Relations Board
, in which Lord Simon
determined that ‘Scotsmen’ constituted ‘a nation by reason of
those most powerful elements
in the creation of national spirit —
tradition, folk memory, a sentiment of
community’.
Like a race or a nation, non-alienage is also a sense of shared identity
derived from self-identification and communal recognition.
It was first
unilaterally imposed: exclusionary laws were applied to people of particular
races, without regard for British subjecthood
or other forms of community
Such an approach established
restrictive criteria of membership, analogous to the restrictive definitions of
race in legal history.
Simultaneously, if recognised in its ordinary
understanding as belonging to a political community or body politic,
non-alienage is
also culturally and temporally contingent.
In the same way that a trend toward societal equality and a diversification
of sources of knowledge recalibrated racial definition,
a similar recalibration
could also emerge in the context of the aliens power. Specifically,
incorporating self-identification and
communal recognition into non-alienage is
a necessary consequence of analogous changes in social facts: a struggle toward
and an epistemic change to understandings of community. Together, these
changes constitute a ‘change in the relationship between
the individual
and the community’
displacing the relevance of the historical racial criterion of alienage. This
occurs on two levels: through reconfiguring
the relationship between individuals
and the Australian community, as well as redefining the Australian community
itself. But this
redefinition is neither static nor complete. While the work of
repairing historic injustice is ongoing, recognition of self-identification
communal recognition produces an imperative to interpret non-alienage fluidly
and expansively, rather than restricting its scope
to statute. In this context,
communal recognition should not be interpreted as recognition by a unitary and
assimilatory Australian
polity; rather, it should move toward recognition by the
polity of its own pluralism, and recognition by discrete communities of
own members.
Emerging jurisprudence on s 51(xix) of the
Constitution
also acknowledges the relevance of self-identification and communal recognition.
, Edelman J concluded that a person may become an alien
through conduct incompatible with membership of the Australian political
The corollary of this
conclusion is that community belonging can be voluntarily maintained in a
self-identificatory sense, but also
severed even in the absence of subjective
intention where an action is communally recognised as inconsistent with
continuing membership.
Nettle J suggested that the conclusion that a person was an
alien if they were born abroad or were a foreign citizen was ‘at
the growing recognition of Aboriginal peoples as “the original inhabitants
of Australia” and the ubiquity of
Australian dual
This statement
highlights how legal orthodoxies surrounding alienage can be disrupted by the
recognition by a community of its constituent
members. The relevance of dual
citizenship also demonstrates how the pluralisation of community constitution
can render a narrower
definition of community untenable. Here, communal
recognition of the belonging of dual citizens encourages the expansion of the
of non-alienage; conversely, an approach based solely on citizenship
could exclude
dual citizens from non-alienage
contradict the reality of their self-identification. Overall, these comments
suggest that an imperative to account for self-identification
and communal
recognition inheres in the sociocultural character of the aliens power, as it
does in the context of race.
In recognising these factors, the High Court should also be aware that it is
often the majoritarian body politic that determines which
parts of culture are
recognised as constitutive of a race.
Analogously, majoritarian determination may also distort interpretation of the
aliens power. As such, the imperative to account for
self-identification and
communal recognition in the context of the aliens power does not only demand
that the High Court consider
these factors cursorily, it also requires
interrogation of their substantive content in the specific context of discrete
communities.
For example, the High Court’s understanding of community can
turn away from ‘abstract and formalistic’ senses of
membership and
participation in society.
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Te
formal rights (such as the right to vote or the right to participate in
political affairs) as opposed to substantive participation
in dismissing an
argument on absorption — an arguably ‘sterile view of
membership’.
Any approach that
recognises these factors should do so substantively and not superficially.
, the aliens power has often been conceptualised as a
contingency, defined only by reference to citizenship. As
demonstrated, that definition is fundamentally unsustainable and is unable to
accommodate realities of community membership that
exist beyond the confines of
A survey of the history of the
Constitution
reveals that
race was embedded into early conceptions of alienage. Contrary to the High
Court’s dismissals of its
that fact underpinned
understandings of alienage prior to Federation and subsisted throughout
interpretations of alienage by courts
legislatures.
The subsequent
entrenchment of an alienage defined by citizenship has perversely created
discriminatory conditions in which preserving
the formalism and neutrality of
alienage has come at the expense of the necessary recognition of difference that
Gaudron J called
Recognition of race evidences that the aliens power was never anchored to
British subjecthood at Federation,
continues to exist independently of formalist conceptions of political
community. The coexistence of race and subjecthood in
the history of the aliens
power demands a higher and more transcendent understanding of constitutional
alienage, capable of encompassing
each of its institutionalised applications.
That necessitates the understanding that both race and subjecthood were seen as
criteria to adjudge a broader sense of political community or
membership of the body politic, in accordance with the framework propagated
Gaudron J in
A comparison
to legal definitions of race also shows how adopting this approach to
characterising the aliens power enables a greater
role for self-identification
and communal recognition in the evolution of the power. As such, the racial
history of the aliens power
does not mean that the High Court is tied to racial
meaning. But it does demand the Court grapple with that history to construct
meaning of alienage that is capable of enduring.
* BA, LLB (Hons) (Monash). I thank Associate Professor Yee-Fui Ng and the
anonymous referees for their insightful comments.
(2020) 270 CLR 152
Constitution
) 173 [14], 175 [19] (Kiefel CJ),
196–7 [91], 212–13 [141] (Gageler J), 217 [166]
Ibid 186–7 [61], 187 [64] (Bell J),
240 [245] (Nettle J), 262 [296] (Gordon J), 288 [394],
293 [404], 296 [410], 298–9 [415] (Edelman J).
See Paul Karp, ‘Labor Drops
Coalition Bid To Overturn High Court Ruling that Indigenous Australians
Can’t Be Aliens’,
The Guardian
(online, 28 July 2022)
<https://www.theguardia​n.com/australia-news/2022/jul/28/labor-drops-coalition-bid-to-overturn-high-court-ruling-that-indigenous-australians-cant-be-aliens>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/B6R2-S5GQ>. See also, ‘Case
S173/2021’,
High Court of Australia
<https://www.hcourt.gov.au/cas​es/case_s173-2021>, archived at
<https://perma.cc/28YB-YKYA>.
[2022] HCA 19
(2022) 276 CLR 336
, 405 [183]
Koowarta v Bjelke-Petersen
[1982] HCA 27
153 CLR 168
, 209 (Stephen J) (‘
’). See also Asmi
Wood, ‘Australia and Pandemics v BLM: No,
Lost (at the High
Court)’ (Pt I)
(2021) 46(3)
Alternative Law Journal
179–80. Although
) concerned the ambit of the race power,
the High Court has recognised the extension of this principle to the aliens
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration
(1992) 176 CLR 1
(Gaudron J) (‘
Chu Kheng Lim
’). However, legislation enacted
under the aliens power may be limited further by its connection to issues
particular to the
aliens power, such as entitlement to remain in Australia and
the regulation of entry or facilitation of departure: see at 57.
Polites v Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 3
, 69 (Latham CJ), 80–1 (Williams J).
Belinda Wells, ‘Aliens: The
Outsiders in the
Constitution
[1996] UQLawJl 3
(1996) 19(1)
University of Queensland
Law Journal
Ibid, citing
Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
(1994) 182 CLR 272
) 45, citing
Chu Kheng Lim
It has also supported migration
legislation since 1984:
Chetcuti v Commonwealth
(2021) 272 CLR 609
[11] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane and Gleeson JJ) (‘
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v
[2006] HCA 50
(2006) 228 CLR 566
, 574 [10], [13] (Gummow and Hayne JJ), 600 [101]
(Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Kim Rubenstein,
Citizenship Law
(Thomson Reuters, 2
ed, 2016) 93.
Koroitamana v Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 28
(2006) 227 CLR 31
, 46 [48] (Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ)
Koroitamana
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Te
(2002) 212 CLR 162, 173 [31] (Gleeson
CJ), 180 [58] (Gaudron J), 188–9 [90], 192 [108]–[109] (Gummow J),
[193]–[194] (Kirby J), 219–20 [210]–[211] (Hayne
J), 229 [229] (Callinan J) (‘
Ex parte Te
Chu Kheng Lim
) 25 (Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ), 53
(Gaudron J);
Nolan v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1988] HCA 45
(1988) 165 CLR
, 183–4 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ)
) 313 (Brennan J), 374–5 (Toohey
) 189 (Gaudron J). See also
Commonwealth
[2004] HCA 43
(2004) 222 CLR 322
[59], 366 [100] (McHugh
183 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan,
Deane, Dawson, Toohey JJ), citing
Milne v Huber
, 17 Fed Cas 403, 406 (D
Ohio Cir, 1843) (‘
’). See also
) 189 (Gaudron J).
) 312 [447] (Edelman J).
This criticism extends to citizenship.
If ‘alien’ means ‘non-citizen’ and ‘citizen’
means ‘non-alien’,
citizenship will only have a statutory
definition. It would not be a constitutional concept: Helen Irving, ‘Still
Call Australia
Constitution
and the Citizen’s Right of
[2008] SydLawRw 8
(2008) 30(1)
Sydney Law Review
, 146 (‘Still Call
Australia Home’); Michelle Foster, ‘Membership in the Australian
Singh v The Commonwealth
and Its Consequences for Australian
Citizenship Law’
[2006] FedLawRw 6
(2006) 34(1)
Federal Law Review
(‘Membership in the Australian Community’); Elisa Arcioni,
and Exclusion under the Australian
Constitution
The Ongoing Story of Alien Status’
(2022) 33(1)
Public Law Review
and Exclusion’); Elisa Arcioni and Rayner
Thwaites, ‘Constitutional Law and Citizenship: Aboriginal Australians Not
to Deportation’
[2020] (65)
Law Society Journal
Gerald L Neuman, ‘Aliens as
Outlaws: Government Services, Proposition 187, and the Structure of Equal
Protection Doctrine’
(1995) 42(6)
UCLA Law Review
Dominika Baran,
Language in
Immigrant America
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 49.
See, eg, Ruben J Garcia,
‘Critical Race Theory and Proposition 187: The Racial Politics of
Immigration Law’ (1995) 17
Chicano-Latino Law Review
) 337 [21], 341–2 [31] (Gleeson
CJ), 385 [159] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ);
Kartinyeri v Commonwealth
(1998) 195 CLR 337, 366 [40] (Gaudron J) (‘
(Kiefel CJ), 221 [177] (Keane J). But see extra-curially James Edelman,
‘Original Constitutional Lessons: Marriage,
Defence, Juries, and
[2021] MonashULawRw 9
(2021) 47(3)
Monash University Law Review
, 16 (citations
Part II(A).
As at 2012, s
51(xxvi) of the
Constitution
has only supported Commonwealth
legislation directed towards First Nations peoples and no other
‘racial’ groups: Lisa
McAnearney, ‘Indigenous Recognition,
Section 51(xxvi):
Constitutional Law Conundrums and
Possibilities’ (2014–15) 18(2)
Australian Indigenous Law Review
88, 90, citing Expert Panel on Constitutional Recognition of Indigenous
Australians,
Recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in the
Constitution
(Report, January 2012) 146.
Part II(A).
of this article outlines
several illustrative examples of the history of the aliens power. However, these
are by no means exhaustive.
For a detailed history of the racial application of
the aliens power, see generally Peter Herman Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
Land: “Alien” and the Rule of Law in Colonial and Post-Federation
Australia’ (PhD Thesis, Australian National University,
(‘Aliens in Their Own Land’).
and IV of this article build
on this history to propose a new lens through which to approach the
interpretation of the aliens power.
A Digest of the Law of
England with Reference to the Conflict of Laws
, ed John Bassett Moore
(Stevens and Sons, 1896) 174.
Ibid 173 (citations omitted).
John Quick and Robert Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian Commonwealth
Robertson, 1901) 599.
John W Salmond, ‘Citizenship and
Allegiance: Nationality in English Law’ (Pt II) (1902) 18 (January)
Quarterly Review
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
) 24. For more context
on the use of the term prior to Federation, see generally at chs 1–2.
Ibid 154–5.
Quick and Garran (n
) 622, quoted in Prince, ‘Aliens
in Their Own Land’ (n
Geoffrey Sawer, ‘The Australian
Constitution
and the Australian Aborigine’
[1967] FedLawRw 2
(1966) 2(1)
Federal Law
, 19 (emphasis in original), cited in Prince, ‘Aliens in
Their Own Land’ (n
Quick and Garran (n
) 603, cited in Prince, ‘Aliens in
Their Own Land’ (n
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
See Elisa Arcioni, ‘Tracing the
Ethno-Cultural or Racial Identity of the Australian Constitutional People’
(2015) 15(2)
Oxford University Commonwealth Law Journal
(‘Tracing the Ethno-Cultural’).
Official Record of the Debates of
the Australasian Federal Convention
, Melbourne, 28 January 1898, 245 (John
Convention Debates (28 January 1898)
’). See also
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Convention Debates (28
January 1898)
) 251 (James
Howe), 252 (John Cockburn). See also Quick and Garran (n
Official Record of the Debates of
the Australasian Federal Convention
, Melbourne, 27 January 1898, 249 (Josiah
Convention Debates (27 January 1898)
’). See also
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Convention Debates (28 January
) 246 (Charles
Convention Debates
(27 January 1898)
(Josiah Symon), 251 (James Howe).
Convention Debates (27 January
) 251 (James Howe).
Convention Debates (28 January
) 245 (John Quick).
) 294 [406] (Edelman J).
Convention Debates (27 January
) 232 (Edmund
Ibid. It is notable that substantive
debate on the aliens power itself was minimal. Prince argues that it was
‘envisaged merely
as a technical power about the process of
naturalisation’: Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
) 152. However, racial justifications
were applied to the aliens power where it was referenced in debates on other
powers. For example,
Barton referred to the ‘preservation of the racial
character of the white population’ in the context of legislative powers
over ‘aliens and immigration’: ibid. Further, the racialised usage
of ‘alien’ infected subsequent interpretations
of the aliens power,
as discussed below in Part II(A)(2).
Graham Nicholson, ‘A Racist
Constitution
for a Nation: A Nation of Racists?’
[2000] AltLawJl 82
(2000) 25(5)
Alternative Law Journal
) 287 [392] (Edelman J).
Convention Debates (27 January
) 233 (Edward
Official Record of the Debates of
the Australasian Federal Convention
, Melbourne, 3 March 1898, 1791 (Edward
Braddon). See also Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Charles A Price,
The Great White
Walls Are Built: Restrictive Immigration to North America and Australasia
(Australian National University Press, 1974) 271, quoted in
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
See above n
and accompanying text.
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
) 294–5 [404] (Edelman J), citing
Australasian Naturalisation Act 1897
, 60 Vict, s 3.
) 294 [405] (Edelman J), citing
Australian Communist Party v Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 222 (Williams J) (‘
Australian Communist
Chu Kheng Lim
(McHugh J),
Western Australia v Commonwealth
[1995] HCA 47
(1995) 183 CLR 373
(Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ),
) 378 [81] (Gummow and Hayne JJ), and
Plaintiff M68/2015 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] HCA 1
(2016) 257 CLR 42
, 130 [259] (Keane J).
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
[1906] HCA 58
(1906) 4 CLR 395
(Griffith CJ), 415–17 (Barton J), 420–1 (O’Connor J)
’), discussing
Pacific Island Labourers Act
, 1 Edw 7, s 8.
See generally Prince, ‘Aliens in
Their Own Land’ (n
640 [63] (Edelman J). See also John Gava, ‘Losing Our Birthright:
v Commonwealth
[2016] AdelLawRw 15
(2016) 37(2)
Adelaide Law Review
Letter from Alfred Deakin to Lord
Tennyson, 29 September 1902, [29] (reproduced in Commonwealth,
Pacific Island
Labourers Act
: Correspondence Relating to
(Tabled Paper Register No 15/F
5965, 1 July 1903) 10), quoted in Tracey Banivanua-Mar,
Violence and Colonial
Dialogue: The Australian-Pacific Indentured Labor Trade
(University of
Hawai‘i Press, 2007) 115, and Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
See Raymond Evans, Kay Saunders and
Kathryn Cronin,
Race Relations in Colonial Queensland: A History of
Exclusion, Exploitation, and Extermination
(University of Queensland Press,
1993) 150; Peter Prince, ‘“Australia’s Most Inhumane Mass
Deportation Abuse”:
Robtelmes v Brenan
and Expulsion of the
“Alien” Islanders’ (2018) 5(1)
Law and History
Official Report of the National
Australasian Convention Debates
, Sydney, 8 April 1891, 702–3 (Samuel
Griffiths), quoted in Brian Galligan and John Chesterman, ‘Aborigines,
Citizenship
and the Australian
Constitution
Constitution
Aboriginal People from Citizenship?’
(1997) 8(1)
Public Law Review
, 51. See also Justin Malbon, ‘The Race Power under the Australian
Constitution
: Altered Meanings’
[1999] SydLawRw 3
(1999) 21(1)
Sydney Law Review
[1907] HCA 25
(1907) 4 CLR 1428.
Ibid 1433, discussing
‘Sugar Workers’
Conditions: Arbitration Court Sits at Cairns’,
The Cairns Post
(Cairns, 2 May 1919) 2, cited in Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’
See above n
[1923] QWN 38
’), cited in Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
) 87 (McCawley CJ for the Court);
‘Employment of Aliens Case’,
The Townsville Daily Bulletin
(Townsville, 27 December 1922) 5, cited in Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
Gonzwa v Commonwealth
[1944] HCA 12
, 476 (Latham CJ) (‘
’). Legislation enacted in
1939 provided that whether an alien was an ‘enemy’ depended on
whether the state of which
the alien was a national fought with or against
Britain in World War II: see
Defence (National Security — Aliens
Control) Regulations 1939
(Cth) reg 3(1) (definitions of ‘alien’
and ‘enemy alien’). The term ‘enemy alien’ was generally
applied to persons born in the boundary of an enemy state: David Dutton,
of Us? A Century of Australian Citizenship
(University of New South Wales
Press, 2002) 92.
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
) 40, citing Dutton (n
Christine Piper, ‘Japanese
Internment a Dark Chapter of Australian History’,
The Sydney Morning
(online, 14 August 2014)
<https://www.smh.com.au/opinion/japanese-internment-a-dark-chapter-of-australian-history-20140813-103ldy.html>,
archived at
​s://perma.cc/AB2H-3LNL>. See also
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
[1949] HCA 65
(1949) 80 CLR 533
Ibid 549 (Latham CJ).
Myra Willard,
History of the White
Australia Policy to 1920
(Frank Cass, 2
ed, 1967) 70.
See also Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
) 190. See also Prince, ‘Aliens in
Their Own Land’ (n
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
) 32, citing Willard
See Arcioni, ‘Tracing the
Ethno-Cultural’ (n
) 119–22. See especially at 121,
Immigration Restriction Act
(Cth) s 3(a)
Immigration Restriction Act 1901
Letter from Alfred Deakin to
Morning Post
, Sydney, 28 May 1906 (reproduced in Australian Parliamentary
From Our Special Correspondent: Alfred Deakin’s Letters to the
London Morning Post
(2021) vol 6, 128), as quoted in Marilyn Lake and Henry
Drawing the Global Colour Line: White Men’s Countries and the
International Challenge of Racial Equality
(Cambridge University Press,
2012) 164. See also Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
Ibid 214, citing Alexander T Yarwood,
‘The Dictation Test: Historical Survey’ (1958) 30(2)
Land Act 1910
5, s 59(1);
Leases to Aliens Restriction Act 1912
ss 3(1)–(2);
Miners’ Homestead Leases Act 1913
ss 3(i)(d) (definition of ‘qualified person’), 5;
Government Savings Bank Act 1916
, 7 Geo 5, s 25. For a detailed overview
of these legislative materials and their use of the term ‘alien’,
see Prince,
‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
KH Bailey, ‘The Legal Position
of Foreigners in Australia’ in Norman MacKenzie (ed),
The Legal Status
of Aliens in Pacific Countries: An International Survey of Law and Practice
concerning Immigration, Naturalization and Deportation of Aliens and Their
Legal Rights and Disabilities
(Oxford University Press, 1937) 32, 46, cited
in Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
Immigration Restriction Act
) 337 [21]. See also at 385 [159]
(Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ).
) 246 [256].
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
, 385 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ)
’). See also
v Federal Commissioner of
[2009] HCA 23
(2009) 238 CLR 1
, 148 [430] (Heydon J).
) 385 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ). See also Justice Michael Kirby,
‘Constitutional Interpretation
and Original Intent: A Form of Ancestor
[2000] MelbULawRw 1
(2000) 24(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
9–10. McCamish criticises this approach on the basis that there is no
workable distinction between subjective intention and
the permissible uses
outlined in
generally Carl McCamish, ‘The Use of Historical Materials in Interpreting
the Commonwealth
Constitution
(1996) 70(8)
Australian Law Journal
) 385 [159] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon
JJ). See also at 332 [12], 333 [14] (Gleeson CJ), 349–50 [54]–[56]
(McHugh J), 413
[249] (Kirby J).
Ibid 337 [21] (Gleeson CJ).
For a discussion on the framework
of legitimised racism, see Dwanna L McKay, ‘Masking Legitimized Racism:
Indigeneity, Colorblindness,
and the Sociology of Race’ in Kimberlé
Williams Crenshaw et al (eds),
Seeing Race Again: Countering Colorblindness
across the Disciplines
(University of California Press, 2019) 85,
Part II(A)(1).
Convention Debates (27 January
) 232 (Edmund
Baxter v Commissioners of
Taxation (NSW)
[1907] HCA 76
(1907) 4 CLR 1087
, 1105 (Griffith CJ, Barton and
O’Connor JJ). See also Willard (n
) 363 [33] (Gaudron J), 403
[135]–[136] (Kirby J).
Ibid 363 [33] (Gaudron J),
Convention Debates (27 January 1898)
) 240 (Sir John Forrest), and
Convention Debates (28 January 1898)
) 246 (John Quick), 248 (Charles Cameron
Ibid 363 [33] (Gaudron J),
Convention Debates (28 January 1898)
) 250 (Josiah Symon), 250–2 (James
Howe). See also Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
Li v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs
[2000] FCA 19
(2000) 96 FCR 125
, 128 [11] (Drummond J)
(citations omitted), quoted in Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’ (n
) 209. See also
Ruddock v Vadarlis
[2001] FCA 1329
(2001) 110 FCR 491
, 495 [6] (Black CJ, Beaumont J agreeing at 514 [95]), 543
[194] (French J).
Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own
) 26. See also at
See Jeffrey Goldsworthy,
‘Originalism in Constitutional Interpretation’
[1997] FedLawRw 1
(1997) 25(1)
Federal Law Review
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
, 230–1 (McHugh J).
United Kingdom,
Conference, 1926:
Summary of Proceedings
(Cmd 2768, 1926) 14,
discussed in
Shaw v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 72
(2003) 218 CLR 28
41 [24] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ) (‘
) 37 [12] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne
JJ) (citations omitted);
Kirmani v Captain Cook Cruises Pty Ltd [No 1]
(1985) 159 CLR 351
(Gibbs CJ).
See generally Helen Irving,
‘Citizenship before 1949’ in Kim Rubenstein (ed),
Community Nation: Fifty Years of Australian Citizenship
(Australian
Scholarly Publishing, 2000)
British Nationality Act 1948
& 12 Geo 6, c 56 (‘
British Nationality Act 1948
Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948
Citizenship Act 1948
[1982] HCA 60
(1982) 151 CLR 101
Ibid 109 (Mason J agreeing at 112,
Wilson J agreeing at 116), discussing
British Nationality Act 1948
British Nationality Act
) 109–10 (Mason J agreeing at
112, Wilson J agreeing at 116).
Ibid 111 (Gibbs CJ, Mason J
agreeing at 112, Wilson J agreeing at 116).
Ibid, discussed in Michelle Foster,
‘“An ‘Alien’ by the Barest of Threads”: The
Legality of the Deportation
of Long-Term Residents from Australia’
[2009] MelbULawRw 18
Melbourne University Law Review
“Alien” by the Barest of Threads’).
) 109 (Gibbs CJ, Mason J agreeing at
112, Wilson J agreeing at 116).
) 184 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ).
Ibid 189 (Gaudron J).
Ibid 183–4 (Mason CJ, Wilson,
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ), quoting
) 186 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ).
Foster, ‘An
“Alien” by the Barest of Threads’ (n
) 494, discussing ibid 189.
(2001) 207 CLR 391
), discussed in ibid 409
[39]–[40], 410–12 [45]–[51] (Gaudron J), 421 [90]–[91]
(McHugh J), 491 [300]–[302]
(Kirby J), 518 [376] (Callinan J). An
alternative framing of the decision is that it was not effective in overruling
[36]–[37] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ). Nonetheless, three
Justices of the majority in
Re Patterson
) did explicitly express their intent
to overrule
[90]–[91] (McHugh J), 491 [300]–[302], 493–4 [308] (Kirby
J), 518 [376] (Callinan J).
See also at 400–1 [7], 409 [39]–[40] (Gaudron J).
Re Patterson
) 412 [51].
Ibid 421 [91]. See also
) 187 [86] (McHugh J),
Re Patterson
) 54 [73] (Kirby J).
Ibid 44–5 [36]–[37], 45
[39] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ, Heydon J agreeing
at 87 [190]).
Ibid 42–3 [27]–[31]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ, Heydon J agreeing at 87 [190]).
Clive Parry,
Nationality and
Citizenship Laws of the Commonwealth and of the Republic of Ireland
& Sons, 1957) 92, quoted in
) 626 [21] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane
and Gleeson JJ). See also
) 108 (Gibbs CJ).
) 633–4 [47]–[48] (Gordon
J), 640–1 [64]–[65] (Edelman J).
) 384 [157], 395 [190] (Gummow, Hayne
and Heydon JJ), 418 [266] (Kirby J);
) 188 [69] (Bell J), 263 [301] (Gordon
) 42 [28] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne
United Kingdom,
Report of the
Royal Commissioners for Inquiring into the Laws of Naturalization and Allegiance
(No 4109, 1869) (‘
UK Royal Commission on Naturalization and
Allegiance Laws
’), cited in
) 639 [61] (Edelman J).
) 640–1 [63]–[64] (Edelman
See above Part II.
) 61 [94] (Kirby J);
) 398 [200] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon
(n 1) 169–70
[2]–[3] (Kiefel CJ).
Ibid 170 [3].
) 192 [81] (Bell J), 259–60
[284]–[285] (Nettle J), 286 [389]–[390] (Gordon J),
320–1 [466]–[468] (Edelman J).
Ibid 262 [296].
Ibid 288 [394]. See also at 293
[404], 296 [410], 298 [415];
) 635–6 [53]
(Edelman J). This formulation is less deferential to Parliament, but the
criteria for membership of this community are yet to be clarified:
and Exclusion’ (n
) 240 [245], quoting
) 398 [200] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon
) 187 [61], quoting
) 183 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ).
) 183 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ), 189
(Gaudron J). See also
) 351 [58] (Gleeson CJ).
) 185 [59], 188–9 [66]–[69]
(Bell J), 244–5 [251]–[253] (Nettle J), 264–9
[304]–[322] (Gordon J), 288 [394], 306 [433] (Edelman J).
Ibid 190 [73] (Bell J). See also at
256–7 [276]–[277] (Nettle J), 262 [296]–[297] (Gordon J),
[392], 289 [396] (Edelman J).
Ibid 253 [272] (Nettle J), 262
[298], 273 [337]–[339] (Gordon J), 313–14 [450]–[451]
(Edelman J).
[404]–[409].
Ibid 175 [19], 182 [47] (Kiefel
CJ), 213 [141] (Gageler J), 213 [147] (Keane J).
Ibid 181 [44] (Kiefel CJ). See also
at 200 [101] (Gageler J), 222 [181] (Keane J).
Ibid 229 [210] (Keane J). See also
at 208 [126] (Gageler J).
Ibid 222 [181], citing
[1934] HCA 49
(1934) 52 CLR 335.
) 208 [126]. See also
Constitution
Alteration (Aboriginals
(Cth) s 2. Separately, Bell J
observed that this concern was ‘overstated’:
) 190 [73]. Many commentators have also
characterised the central reason for the decision in
) as Indigeneity as opposed to race,
which provides a separate rebuttal of the minority’s reasoning: see, eg,
Peter Gerangelos,
‘Reflections upon Constitutional Interpretation and the
“Aliens Power”: Love v Commonwealth’
(2021) 95(2)
Australian Law Journal
, 113, 117. On the difficulties of defending
rights to self-governance from the perspective of racial discrimination, see
Kirsty Gover, ‘Indigenous-State Relationships and the
Paradoxical Effects of Antidiscrimination Law: Lessons from the Australian
Maloney v The Queen
’ in Jennifer Hendry et al (eds),
Indigenous Justice: New Tools,
Approaches, and Spaces
Macmillan, 2018) 27. See also below nn
–5 and accompanying text.
) 178–9 [32]–[33] (Kiefel
CJ), 196–8 [91]–[94] (Gageler J), 225 [193]–[195] (Keane
Ibid 173 [14], 175 [19] (Kiefel
CJ), 196–7 [91], 212–13 [141] (Gageler J), 217 [166] (Keane J).
See Foster, ‘An
“Alien” by the Barest of Threads’ (n
) 494, discussing
) 193–4 [86]. This is similar to
Prince’s argument that the aliens power was viewed by some delegates of
the Convention
Debates as a largely technical provision concerned with the
naturalisation
aliens: Prince, ‘Aliens in Their Own Land’
) 194 [86], citing
Constitution
s 51(xvii).
) 194 [86], citing
Constitution
s 51(xviii).
) 194 [86], citing
Constitution
) 194 [86], quoting
A-G (Vic) v
Commonwealth
[1962] HCA 37
(1962) 107 CLR 529
, 578 (Windeyer J) (‘
Marriage Act
Commonwealth v Australian Capital Territory
[2013] HCA 55
250 CLR 441
, 445 [14] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ)
Marriage Equality Act Case
) 194 [86].
Ibid, quoting
Koroitamana
) 37 [9] (Gleeson CJ and Heydon
) 194 [86] (Gageler J), citing
Pool (WA) v Commonwealth
(2000) 202 CLR 479
, 500–1 [40]–[41]
(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ) (‘
Marriage Equality Act Case
) 458–9 [21] (French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ).
) 195 [88] (Gageler J).
[10] (Gleeson CJ). See also
Foster, ‘Membership in the Australian Community’ (n
Chief Justice Kiefel and Keane J
were less explicit about the essential character of the aliens power in their
Honours’ approaches
to its characterisation in
): see James Stellios,
‘Constitutional Characterisation: Embedding Value Judgements about the
Relationship between the Legislature
and the Judiciary’
[2021] MelbULawRw 15
(2021) 45(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
, 313–15. However, their
Honours’ respective decisions to characterise the aliens power in a
formalist manner demonstrates
their Honours share the view that alienage is a
legal status contingent on positive law. Consequently, analysis of Gageler
approach extends to the reasoning of other members of the minority
insofar as they rely on the centrality of legal status: at 317.
Part IV of this
article provides additional reasoning for why any approach that centralises
definitional power in the legislature
does not accord with the changing
application of the aliens power.
[1908] HCA 94
(1908) 6 CLR 469
Stellios (n
Union Label Case
Ibid 610–11.
Storey v Lane
[1981] HCA 47
, 557–8 (Gibbs CJ, Mason J agreeing at 558, Wilson J agreeing at
564, Brennan J agreeing at 564).
) 492 [16], 493–5 [19]–[20]
(Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ) (citations
Stenhouse v Coleman
[1944] HCA 36
(1944) 69 CLR 457
, 471 (Dixon J).
Marriage Equality Act
) 456 [15], 458–9
[20]–[22] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ);
Marriage Act Case
577–8 (Windeyer J).
Marriage Act Case
) 578. Despite its subsequent
application to the aliens power, the concept of ‘juristic
classification’ was unfamiliar
to Australian constitutional law at the
time of the
Marriage Act Case
): Anne Twomey, ‘Same-Sex
Marriage and Constitutional Interpretation’
(2014) 88(9)
Australian Law
Stellios (n
Ibid 282 (emphasis omitted), citing
) 209 (Stephen
) 178 [31] (Kiefel CJ), 221 [177] (Keane
Ibid 201–2 [104]–[105]
(Gageler J).
See, eg, ibid 293–6
[404]–[409] (Edelman J).
) 407 [187] (Edelman J).
See ibid 407 [188].
Stellios (n
See above Part II(A).
See Stellios (n
) 282, citing
) 209 (Stephen J).
) 194 [86] (Gageler J).
UK Royal Commission on
Naturalization and Allegiance Laws
British Nationality Act 1948
Australian Citizenship Act
For a detailed history of the legal
classification of race from the time of European settlement to 1986, see
generally John McCorquodale,
‘The Legal Classification of Race in
Australia’ (1986) 10(1)
Aboriginal History
Legislation incorporating the term
‘half-caste’ was introduced in New South Wales in 1839, South
Australia in 1844, Victoria
in 1864, Queensland in 1865, Western Australia in
1874 and Tasmania in 1912: ibid 11;
Aboriginals Competent Witnesses Act
Aborigines’ Evidence Act 1844
, 7 Vic, s 1;
Statute of Evidence 1864
, 27 Vic No, s 42;
Industrial and Reformatory
Schools Act 1865
, 29 Vic, s 6(7);
Aboriginal Native Offenders Amendment
, 38 Vic, s 2;
Cape Barren Island Reserve Act 1912
, 3 Geo 5, s
McCorquodale (n
) 15, citing
Native Welfare Act
(WA) s 4(a) (definition of ‘native’), and
Aborigines’ and Torres Strait Islanders’ Affairs Act
(Qld) s 6(2)(d) (‘
Aborigines’ and Torres Strait
Islanders’ Affairs Act 1965 (Qld)
Aboriginals Protection and
Restriction of the Sale of Opium Act 1897
, 61 Vic, s 3 (definition of
‘Half-caste’) (‘
Aboriginal Protection Act
Ibid s 4(c).
Aborigines’ and Torres
Strait Islanders’ Affairs Act 1965 (Qld)
) s 6(1)(b).
Ibid s 6(2).
[1923] HCA 41
(1923) 32 CLR 500
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
(Deane J) (‘
Tasmanian Dam Case
King-Ansell v
[1979] 2 NZLR 531
King-Ansell
[1983] 1 QB 1
’). See also
Tasmanian Dam
) 243–4 (Brennan
See Stellios (n
) 282, citing
) 209 (Stephen J).
) 334 (Deane J), 374–5 (Toohey J);
) 35 [2] (Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Hayne JJ, Heydon J agreeing at 87 [190]).
Ford v Ford
[1947] HCA 7
(1947) 73 CLR
, 529 (Latham CJ) (‘
’), quoted in
) 193 [85] (Gageler J). See also
) 531 (Starke J).
) 35 [2] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne
JJ, Heydon J agreeing at 87 [190]).
McCorquodale (n
Quick and Garran (n
See generally
Mabo v Queensland
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, 42–3, 60–2, 76 (Brennan J,
Mason CJ and McHugh J agreeing at 15), 119 (Deane and Gaudron JJ), 216
(Toohey J) (‘
See, eg, Laura Tabili, ‘The
Construction of Racial Difference in Twentieth-Century Britain: The Special
Restriction (Coloured
Alien Seamen) Order, 1925’
(1994) 33(1)
of British Studies
) 200 [101] (Gageler J). See also
Marriage Act Case
(Windeyer J).
Union Label Case
Stellios (n
) 292, discussing ibid 615.
This includes, for example, a
requirement that exclusion from citizenship by reference to criteria of general
application would need
to be supported by ‘substantial reasons’:
) 200 [101] (Gageler
J). Justice Keane also recognised the existence of limits without specifying
their content: at 218 [168].
) 109 (Gibbs CJ, Mason J agreeing at
112, Wilson J agreeing at 116), discussing
Constitution
) 306 [433] (Edelman J), quoting
) 611 (Higgins J).
[50]–[51] (Bell J), 237 [236] (Nettle J), 266 [310]–[311], 282 [368]
(Gordon J).
) 218 [168] (Keane J), citing
) 109 (Gibbs CJ,
Mason J agreeing at 112, Wilson J agreeing at 116).
) 109 (Gibbs CJ, Mason J agreeing at
112, Wilson J agreeing at 116). See also
) 171 [7] (Kiefel CJ), 194–5 [87]
(Gageler J).
) 357–8 [35] (Gageler J agreeing at
The minority in
) has maintained that ‘a member of
the community’ has a technical meaning denoting belonging by legislative
definition:
at 178–9 [32]–[33] (Kiefel CJ),
196–8 [91]–[94] (Gageler J), 225 [193]–[195] (Keane J).
This position is upheld by the majority in
): at 376 [19] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler,
Keane and Gleeson JJ).
See above nn
–61 and accompanying text.
[1989] HCA 53
(1989) 168 CLR 461
’), cited in
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South
(1990) 169 CLR 436
, 478 (Gaudron and McHugh JJ)
Castlemaine
) 189 (Gaudron J).
) 264–9 [304]–[322] (Gordon
J), 185 [59], 188–9 [66]–[69] (Bell J), 244–5
[251]–[253] (Nettle J), 288 [394], 306 [433] (Edelman J). For a recent
affirmation of this point, see
) 387 [134] (Gordon J).
) 189 (Gaudron J).
) 193. This formulation was implicitly
340–2 [30]–[31] (Gleeson CJ), 398 [198] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon
JJ). See also Foster, ‘Membership in the Australian
Community’ (n
A Inglis Clark,
Australian Constitutional Law
(Legal Books, 1997) 21.
Chu Kheng Lim
) 25–6 (Brennan, Deane and Dawson
JJ), quoting
183–4 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ). See also
Andrews v Howell
[1941] HCA 20
, 278 (Dixon J) (‘
Ibid. For a detailed discussion on
‘constitutional facts’, see generally Justice JD Heydon,
‘Constitutional Facts’
Upholding the Australian
Constitution
: Proceedings of the Samuel Griffith Society
) 278 (Dixon J).
Australian Communist Party
) 635 [53], 651 [90]–[91] (Edelman
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ).
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Ame
[2005] HCA 36
(2005) 222 CLR 439
458–9 [35] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ)
Ex parte Ame
Re Patterson
) 428 [111], citing
) 184 (Mason CJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane,
Dawson and Toohey JJ).
) 421 [229] (Edelman J).
Sir Owen Dixon, ‘Address upon
Taking the Oath of Office in Sydney as Chief Justice of the High Court of
Australia on 21 April,
1952’ in Judge Woinarski (ed),
Jesting Pilate:
And Other Papers and Addresses
(Law Book, 1965) 245, 247. See also Wood (n
Chu Kheng Lim
) 55 (Gaudron J). The corporations power
in s 51(xx) of the
Constitution
can also be characterised as a
power over ‘persons’:
Actors and Announcers Equity Association of
Australia v Fontana
Film Pty Ltd
(1982) 150 CLR 169
, 181 (Gibbs CJ,
Wilson J agreeing at 215); Stellios (n
) 312. However, this article is
concerned only with powers over ‘natural’ persons. As Gaudron J has
recognised, ‘the
analogy between people and corporations is less than
perfect, particularly when it comes to laws authorizing executive interference
with the liberty of the individual’:
Chu Kheng Lim
) 315 (Brennan J);
) 209 (Stephen J).
) 209 (Stephen J).
Leeth v Commonwealth
174 CLR 455
, 489 (Deane and Toohey JJ). In 1901, Quick and Garran specifically
distinguished the
United States
Constitution
Constitution
. While racially discriminatory laws in the United States are
unconstitutional under the equal protection clause, the absence of a
corresponding provision in Australia empowers ‘special and discriminating
laws’: Quick and Garran (n
622–3, discussing
United States
Constitution
amend XIV § 1,
Wo v Hopkins
The difference was that the aliens
power related to ‘the introduction of foreign coloured races’ while
the race power
related to ‘people of certain races when they [were] within
the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth’:
Convention Debates (28 January
) 245 (John Quick). See
also Joe McIntyre and Sue Milne, ‘The Alien and the
Constitution
Legal History of the “Alien” Power of the Commonwealth’
(Working Paper, 29 July 2020)
<https://papers.ssrn.co​m/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3663533>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/CF4Q-HZYH>.
These factors were sometimes
coupled with ‘habitual association’: see, eg,
Protection Act 1897
(definition of ‘Half-caste’), 4(c);
Torres Strait Islander Act
, 3 Geo 6, ss 3(b)–(c) (definition of ‘Islander’).
[1956] HCA 64
(1956) 96 CLR 172
, 176 (Dixon CJ,
Fullagar and Taylor JJ) (‘
McCorquodale (n
) 10–16; John Gardiner-Garden,
‘The 1967 Referendum: History and Myths’ (Research Brief No 11,
Parliamentary Library,
Parliament of Australia, 2 May 2007) 4.
Aborigines Protection
(NSW) s 3 (definition of ‘Aborigine’);
Protection Amending Act 1915
, 5 Geo 5, s 13A. See also
Eatock v Bolt
[2011] FCA 1103
(2011) 197 FCR 261
300–1 [170]–[171] (Bromberg J) (‘
discussing John Gardiner-Garden, ‘The Definition of Aboriginality’
(Research Note No 18, Parliamentary Library,
Parliament of Australia,
5 December 2000) 3.
Peter Hanks, ‘Aborigines and
Government: The Developing Framework’ in Peter Hanks and Bryan Keon-Cohen
Aborigines and the Law: Essays in Memory of Elizabeth Eggleston
(George Allen & Unwin, 1984) 19, 30. Blood quantum tests were still being
legislated in
Aborigines’ and Torres Strait Islanders’ Affairs Act
6(1)(a)–(b),
(2)(a)–(b).
Pacific Island Labourers Act
Kim Rubenstein and Jacqueline
Field, ‘What is a “Real” Australian Citizen? Insights from
Papua New Guinea and Mr
Amos Ame’ in Benjamin N Lawrance and Jacqueline
Stevens (eds),
Citizenship in Question: Evidentiary Birthright and
Statelessness
(Duke University Press, 2017) 100, 101.
Edward P Wolfers,
Race Relations
and Colonial Rule in Papua New Guinea
(Australia and New Zealand Book, 1975)
134, quoted in ibid 104–5.
Ex parte Ame
) 470 [75] (Kirby J). See also at 459
[37]–[39] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ), 487
[130] (Kirby
Minister for Home Affairs v
[2021] FCAFC 89
, [104]–[107] (Logan, Kerr and
Banks-Smith JJ).
Robert French, ‘The Race
Power: A Constitutional Chimera’ in HP Lee and George Winterton (eds),
Australian Constitutional Landmarks
(Cambridge University Press, 2003)
Ibid 190. See also
Ealing London
Borough Council v Race Relations Board
[1971] UKHL 3
[1972] AC 342
, 362 (Lord Simon)
Ealing London Borough Council
Australian Law Reform Commission,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
(Report No 96, 2003) vol 2, 922 [36.42]. See generally Ian F Haney
López, ‘The Social Construction of Race: Some Observations
Illusion, Fabrication, and Choice’
(1994) 29(1)
Harvard Civil
Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review
Australian Law Reform Commission (n
) 922 [36.41], cited in
) 300 [169]
(Bromberg J). See also Joseph L Graves Jr,
The Emperor’s New Clothes:
Biological Theories of Race at the Millennium
(Rutgers University Press,
2001) 1–2; Arthur L Caplan, ‘Handle with Care: Race, Class and
Genetics’ in Timothy
F Murphy and Marc A Lappé (eds),
and the Human Genome Project
(University of California Press, 1994) 30,
Tasmanian Dam Case
Ibid 273–4, citing
King-Ansell
). See also ibid
243–4 (Brennan J).
Tasmanian Dam Case
) 276. See also at 244 (Brennan J).
) 229 [210] (Keane J).
Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v Montgomery
Court of Australia, Case No S192/2021, commenced 28 January 2022).
Shayne Paul Montgomery,
‘Amended Submissions of Respondent’, Submission in
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v
, S192/2021, 5 April 2022, 27–30 [89]–[96]. See also
Elisa Arcioni and Kirsty Gover, ‘Aboriginal Identity and Status
Constitution
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v Montgomery
[2022] SydLawRw 5
(2022) 44(1)
Sydney Law Review
Hirama v Minister for Home
[2021] FCA 648
’), for example, Mortimer
J accepted that cultural adoption satisfied the third limb of the tripartite
test for ascertaining
Aboriginality: at [39]–[40], [45]–[46]. See
also Arcioni and Gover (n
(citations omitted).
) 176 (Dixon CJ, Fullagar and Taylor
McCorquodale (n
The other interpretation being that
the decision in
principally based on Indigeneity: Gerangelos (n
) 211 [137] (Gageler J).
Tasmanian Dam Case
) 273–4 (Deane J), citing
King-Ansell
). See also
Tasmanian Dam
) 244 (Brennan J).
) 70 (Brennan J).
Ibid. This test includes both
self-identification (‘by that person’) and communal recognition
(‘by the elders or
other persons enjoying traditional authority among
those people’).
Arcioni and Gover (n
) 260 [287]. See also Arcioni and
Thwaites (n
) 70; Michelle Foster and
Kirsty Gover, ‘Determining Membership: Aboriginality and Alienage in the
Australian High Court’
(2020) 31(2)
Public Law Review
) 317 [458], discussing
) 70 (Brennan J). See also Foster and
Foster and Gover (n
) 405 [181]–[182] (Edelman J);
Ex parte Ame
) 482 [116]
(Kirby J); Foster, ‘Membership in the Australian Community’ (n
The High Court has explicitly
rejected the application of the doctrine of absorption to the aliens power:
) 111 (Gibbs CJ,
Mason J agreeing at 112, Wilson J agreeing at 116), 113 (Murphy J); Irving,
‘Still Call Australia Home’
) 149, citing
); Sangeetha Pillai,
‘Non-Immigrants, Non-Aliens and People of the Commonwealth: Australian
Constitutional Citizenship Revisited’
[2013] MonashULawRw 20
(2013) 39(2)
Monash University
589–90; Foster, ‘An “Alien” by the Barest of
Threads’ (n
However, Edelman J appears to favour reconsidering its applicability:
[204]–[211].
McCorquodale (n
) 11, discussing
Protection Act 1869
, 33 Vic, s 8.
Arcioni and Gover (n
) 334 [314] (Bromberg J). See also
) 253 [271] (Nettle J),
[337]–[339], 283 [371] (Gordon J), 287 [391]–[392] (Edelman J);
) [34]–[35],
[39]–[40] (Mortimer J).
King-Ansell
) 542. See also at 534–5
(Richmond P), 538–9 (Woodhouse J).
Ealing London Borough Council
See above Part II.
) 193 (Gaudron J).
) 422 [232]–[233]. See also at
430–1 [257], 434–6 [266]–[270], 440 [283],
441 [286] (Steward J).
See ibid 422 [233] (Edelman J). See
also at 441 [286] (Steward J). However, separate questions emerge in relation to
the extent to
which citizenship-stripping laws can deem citizens to be
‘non-allegiant’ based on their behaviour: Sangeetha Pillai,
‘Tiered Community Membership in Australia: The Impact of Constitutional
Concepts and Contemporary Developments on Refugee Access
to Citizenship’
(2019) 65(4)
Australian Journal of Politics and History
Constitution
As such, the term
‘conduct incompatible with membership’ is inherently uncertain.
) 248 [263], quoting
Bropho v Western
[1990] HCA 24
(1990) 171 CLR 1
, 12 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron and
McHugh JJ), and
Northern Territory v Griffiths
[2019] HCA 7
(2019) 269 CLR 1
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
) 405 [181]–[182] (Edelman J).
See Jennifer Clarke, Patrick Keyzer
and James Stellios,
Hanks Australian Constitutional Law: Materials and
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 9
ed, 2013) 158
Foster, ‘An
“Alien” by the Barest of Threads’ (n
Ibid, discussing
Ex parte Te
) 218 [201] (Kirby J).
) 337 [21] (Gleeson CJ), 385 [159]
(Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ);
) 366 [40] (Gaudron J), cited in
) 178 [31] (Kiefel CJ), 221
[177] (Keane J).
) 571. See also
Castlemaine
) 478 (Gaudron and McHugh JJ).
Cf Salmond (n
) 50–1, 58.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (431 KB)
PDF format (555 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter