URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2018/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vijeyarasa, Ramona and Bello y Villarino, Jose-Miguel --- "The Indicator Fad: How Quantifiable Measurement Can Work Hand-in-hand with Human Rights - A Response to Sally Engle Merry's The Seductions of Quantification" [2018] UTSLRS 10; (2018) 50 International Law and Politics 985
The Indicator Fad: How Quantifiable Measurement Can Work
Hand-in-Hand with Human Rights—A Response to Sally Engle Merry’s
The Seductions of Quantification
José-Miguel Bello y Villarino & Ramona Vijeyarasa,
I. Introduction
Indicators, understood
broadly to mean any type of organized categories that can be individually
assessed—quantitatively or
qualitatively—have received escalated
attention in the twenty-first century, both as a way of understanding legal and
environments and as a method of presenting information for further
evaluation. This heightened public interest in what are most commonly
institutionally-created numerical rankings or scores has been paralleled by
academic attention, with leading scholars, research centers,
international organizations, showing great concern for—and devoting
significant resources to—the question of
what can, or should, be measured
Among the social aspects which can be both measured and compared, human
rights—understood broadly—figure very highly.
If there are some
inalienable and global rights that are linked to the human condition and
dignity, measuring the enjoyment of those
rights in different parts of the world
should allow us to compare the extent to which different States are fulfilling
their human
rights obligations and assess both improvements and declines over
Some may argue that the core human rights standards were drafted at a
time when effective monitoring was neither intended nor
achievable.
Yet, monitoring of
global progress towards more equal, more just, and more sustainable societies is
a core component of the human
rights and development sectors today. As a result,
methods for counting progress have proliferated, triggering a substantial debate
against which all countries can be measured.
Developing such a universal
standard is not a simple endeavor. While global human rights treaties set out
agreed principles for what
are meant to be universally accepted human rights
norms, interpretation is an evolutionary process, responding to changes in
This is reflected in the issuing of General Recommendations and
General Comments, which the nine core human rights treaty bodies
have the power
Despite this global norm
setting, determining what should be measured in each case—as well as how
such measurement should occur—was
always likely to stimulate substantial
debate. The goal of this process may also be contentious. Do we undertake this
exercise for
mere comparison purposes, or are we serving the broader goal of
monitoring human rights towards their universal enjoyment? Should
the outcomes
of numerical ranking shape policy or, adopting a more extreme approach, be used
as the basis for a system of rewards
and punishments in response to a
State’s performance?
Regardless of the answers to these questions, the
span of this debate proves that we live in an “indicator-prone
which, perhaps, has been accepted without a thorough validation of the need for
and purpose of measuring human rights as a whole.
In this context, Sally Engle
Merry’s book,
The Seductions of Quantification
, raises valid
questions about how and why we have become surrounded by multiple systems of
country rankings. For example, there are
indices that seek to show us which
countries are more corrupt (e.g., the Corruption Perception Index), or less
protective of the
rights of women (e.g., the Social Institutions and Gender
Index, SIGI; or the Gender Inequality Index, GII), or better at guaranteeing
civil liberties (e.g., the Human Freedom Index or the Democracy Index), or
overall, simply a better place to live (e.g., the
Human Development Index). Such
indices have proliferated without the time to step back and adequately assess
what these figures really
mean, either individually or when placed side by
Merry’s book offers an anthropological and sociological take on
the issue of indicators in relation to the field of human rights.
She is not the
first, and will certainly not be the last, to discuss the intractable problems
with human rights compliance, application,
and enforcement—in theory and
in practice—of which, we believe, indicators are a part. Yet, we approach
arguments from a legal and practical point of view, as scholars
and practitioners in the field of international law.
A reply to her book
requires, first, an overview of her work, which we concede is limited for its
reductionist character. Merry offers
an overarching critique of the indicator
culture, both in terms of the process by which indicators are developed and the
which they are applied. The three dominant concerns articulated
throughout her book are (1) the roles played by
and knowledge in
the creation, establishment, affirmation, and reiteration of a limited set of
indicators for any one topic;
the assumed
nature of indicators and, in turn, their inability
to reflect important contextual and cultural differences; and (3) that the
and design of indicators
define the very problem
that is being
which alone is
problematic, but even more so if done in a way that is “decontextualized,
homogenized, and remote from local
Moreover, Merry
argues these indicators are often based on previous indicator projects and hence
reinforce the same understanding,
blocking out new notions
interpretations of the concept at
The Seductions of
Quantification
, Merry highlights why indicators have become so popular. As
articulated in her earlier critical pieces, Merry writes that it is often
considered easier to assess compliance with a treaty through
In concrete terms,
indicators simplify the process of evaluating progress and monitoring it
and they provide
comparability, both for individual countries over the years and between
countries. Hence, what has resulted from
this “seduction” is
numerous indices that rank and compare countries and show gains and losses and
winners and losers
in each area.
In response to this embrace of indicators,
Merry offers three indicator projects as examples to lay out her criticisms.
First, Merry
dedicates two chapters of her book to the issue of violence against
women, discussing the process by which the U.N. Statistical Commission
set out to develop a set of indicators and guidelines to collect data on
violence against women.
her point, Merry discusses four approaches to the topic of violence: a gender
equality approach, a human rights approach,
a criminal justice approach, and an
approach based on national statistical capacity. By comparing the four
approaches, she highlights
how while all purport to measure the same idea (i.e.,
violence against women) in practice, they are “not measuring the same
thing at all, even though they are calling it by the same
While Merry
concedes that the effort to quantify violence against women has helped to
advance women’s rights by bringing greater
visibility to the problem,
raising awareness, and displacing the belief that violence is a problem for only
the “unruly few,”
her biggest gripe with the attempt to quantify the issue is the suggestion that
any of these approaches can reveal an “objective
truth” about
To the contrary, any
approach—whether a feminist approach or a human rights
one—constructs our understanding of violence
in the first place. Merry is
concerned that the data may be viewed as the result of “an objective
scientific process of data
collection and
Merry’s second indicator project is the annual-produced United States
Trafficking in Persons report (“TIP report”).
The centerpiece of the
TIP reports is a system for ranking countries in terms of their efforts to
prevent and respond to human trafficking.
Tier 1 countries are considered the
most compliant, Tier 3 the
A fourth tier, the Tier 2
Watch List was added in 2004.
For those countries ranked Tier 3, there is a risk of “negative
consequences” in their relations with the United
Merry identifies
numerous problems with the TIP report indicators, including how they have
influenced what we understand to be trafficking
and lack of objectivity, given
the system is heavily intertwined with politics—and the political agenda
of the U.S. government
particular.
As will be discussed
in Part V, Merry is not the first author to highlight the clear agendas behind
how trafficking is framed and
understood. In our view, the TIP
report—heavily critiqued by feminist academics, policy analysts, and other
governments—is
a parochial evaluation, lacking a strong methodology and
with results that are too heavily influenced by the politics of the day.
such, the TIP report is perhaps a too convenient choice for Merry to demonstrate
the problems with quantification. Moreover, we
hardly consider the report to be
a quantitative indicator, having a more qualitative nature that is subsequently,
in a non-transparent
manner, transformed into a ranking with tiers.
third indicator project that Merry discusses is the development, between 2005
and 2012, by the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) of a
set of indicators to measure core human rights, such as the right to education
and the right to life.
example, Merry’s three neat categories become blurred. It is doubtful that
Merry intends to suggest that freedom
from violence against women is not a human
rights concern. A prohibition of gender-based violence has been established as a
key principle
of customary international
and one of ten human rights treaty
the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), just released a general
recommendation on gender-based
The first and third
indicators projects are thus naturally overlapping.
Similar reasoning could
apply to the second and third projects. The set of indicators developed by the
OHCHR, for instance, include
the “elimination of forced labour,”
with human trafficking offered as an
“Violence at
work, forced labour and trafficking” are specifically addressed as part of
the violence against women
indicators.
In the end, all
three projects are about measuring compliance with human rights standards,
looking into certain rights in more or
less detail. In relation to the OHCHR
project, Merry’s main concern seems to be a bias towards the global North
in the development
of those indicators. We will look into the underlying logic
of that argument in section II.A.
This article analyzes Merry’s main
critiques of the growing interest—Merry might say obsession—with
quantifying
progress on human rights and development. It assesses whether Merry
adequately defends and sustains her critiques through her three
examples, and it
questions whether these critiques are any different when it comes to other
mechanisms for accountability and tracking
change within the human rights system
at large. It also analyzes Merry’s choice of projects presented in the
book as examples:
for instance, are these particularly weak examples or are the
critiques directed at them equally sustained when it comes to other
examples of
accountability sought through quantification and rankings? We conclude by
arguing that Merry’s view, while raising
a valid point (i.e. the
enthusiastic use of indicators hides the significant shortcomings of
quantification) does not offer a balanced
evaluation of how to monitor human
rights through quantitative approaches, especially in terms of a cost-benefit
analysis and the
best means to ensure access to the relevant information
presented in a particular data set.
A. Defining the Concepts: What Are Indicators?
The term indicator is
used for many different kinds of numerical representations with no real
consistency. Its meaning ranges from
something that indicates or points to a
fact, such as that a person has been trafficked, to an elaborate combination of
data merged
into a single rank or
Merry defines
quantification as “the use of numbers to describe social phenomena in
countable and commensurable
Yet, in her
book—as in her previous works—Merry focuses on social phenomena
largely related to the enjoyment of human
rights rather than other measureable
phenomena. Unsurprisingly, an expansive number of social phenomena are currently
tracked and
quantified, many of which have only limited or indirect connections
with human rights. Some examples include patterns of wealth,
the use of social
media, penetration of smart mobile use, and demographic data related to sexual
orientation.
Given that a large body of existing indices, and particularly
the better known ones, tend to measure the enjoyment or protection of
aspects of human rights, we begin on the basis that that those indices are often
proxies for human rights accountability.
In other words, if we measure a
population’s access to drinkable water, we would be looking at compliance
with the right to
water and sanitation. If we rank countries on the basis of
access to contraceptives for their citizens, we would be trying to assess
enjoyment of sexual and reproductive rights. If we quantify how much corruption
is perceived in a country, we would be doing
so because we believe people should
live free of corruption and under the rule of law. In the end, we are
quantifying human rights.
And, yet, this says very little about what we mean
when we talk about quantification, because this concept covers many different
interpretations of complex processes that are analyzed with very different
lenses and at different levels.
In general, instead of discussing
“indicators” at large, this article, and most of Merry’s
related work, could be
more properly described as scrutinizing “human
rights indicators,” which have been defined as “information that
presented quantitatively and that can be related to human rights norms and
standards; that addresses and reflects the human rights
concerns and principles;
and that are used to assess and monitor promotion and protection of human
To help explain
what is meant by “quantitatively,” in the following section we
present five different levels of analysis
for how we understand indicators and
measurement.
B. Distinguishing Five Levels of Analysis
Indicators can be
analyzed from at least five different approaches, or “levels of
First is the
ontological
” level, which examines their nature of being and
becoming a reality. Put simply, this normative analysis looks into whether
why indicators should exist. Further, assuming that indicators add value, at
this level, we can also interrogate how indicators
can be grouped in order to
achieve a specific aim, especially if the goal is to establish some kind of
hierarchy or taxonomy for
the indicators developed. We can also ask whether
indicators and their ranks can be subdivided into smaller groups according to
similarities
and differences.
If we agree that indicators are useful or
necessary, as well as a valid way of assessing compliance with human rights, the
level focuses on
the construction of those indicators
human construction, the choices made in the process of developing an
indicator—or a system of indicators—are naturally
influenced by
cultural backgrounds and related biases. Given that we claim and defend that
human rights are by their definition universal,
we should be able to measure
compliance with them in a globally agreed upon way. At the same time, we should
recognize how cultural
biases affect those choices. Unlike Merry, who sees
indicators as failing to adequately respond to cultural
divergences,
this second level
of analysis enables us to see culture embedded in the choice of what gets
measured and how.
Third, assuming that an indicator is developed in a
globally accepted manner and that it is feasible to measure it (e.g.,
quantitatively
or qualitatively), we can move into the
procedural and
technical level
, where we need to understand how the necessary information
(i.e., inputs) to determine a performance for that indicator (i.e., output)
be collected, processed, validated and, finally, presented. Again, all such
steps towards collecting inputs to develop an output
are understood as a way of
assessing compliance with human rights in a comparable manner, with whatever
At the next level, the
evaluation level
we can assess what those indicators say about compliance with human rights in a
given jurisdiction. We must assess the reliability
of the information we have
obtained from the process. This is a prerequisite to undertaking a normative
analysis of those results,
such as is “performance x of country A, better
than performance y of country B?” or “what is the desirable/ideal
performance in relation to indicator N measuring—for
example—compliance with the right to a fair trial?”
Finally, the
fifth level is the
consequential level
. At this stage, we consider
whether it is fair and reasonable for performance of a given indicator to result
in practical repercussions.
One can think of punishments and rewards, or
“carrots and sticks” as possible legitimate consequences.
Having set out these five stages—the ontological stage, the
construction stage, the procedural and technical stage, the evaluation
and finally, the consequential stage—the next sections will assess
Merry’s arguments against the stages above.
At each of these points, we
analyze how Merry defends that indicators are failing to meet their expected
effect, how she sustains
these criticisms, and what alternatives exist for human
rights accountability.
II. The Ontology of Indicators: What They Are and Why We Need
Merry’s book opens
with a harsh critique of indicators: we have been fooled as to their
appropriateness, believing them to be
objective when they are not, relying on
them in our fight to address global problems, when in fact, they are not
universally applicable.
critique is extended not only to the human rights and the development sector
communities but also to the media and civil society
Once indicators are established and settled, they are typically portrayed in
the media as accurate descriptions of the world. They
offer forms of information
that satisfy the unease and anxiety of living in a complex and ultimately
unknowable world. They address
a desire for unambiguous knowledge, free of
political bias. Statistical information can be used to legitimate political
as being scientific and evidence-based in a time when politics is
questioned. They are buoyed up by the rise in bureaucracy and faith
in solutions
to problems that rely on statistical expertise. Such technocratic knowledge
seems more reliable than political perspectives
in generating solutions to
problems, since it appears pragmatic and instrumental rather than ideological.
These are the seductions
quantification.
criticisms are largely substantiated, Merry lacks the background analysis that
particularly during the
past two decades. Moreover, readers are left questioning whether some of
Merry’s legitimate critiques
are equally directed at other systems of
accountability. In other words, is the issue the indicators themselves or the
how States Parties respond when being held accountable for their
observance of human rights? Finally, does Merry merely present a
appraisal of the
or offer a potential and feasible
alternative? In the next sections, we seek to answer some of these questions and
offer a more balanced
and nuanced view of the use of indicators for the
monitoring of compliance with human rights standards and its current
shortcomings.
A. Indicators and Their Western Origins
It is hard to disagree
with Merry that the interest in and use of indicators is, to a significant
extent, a non-inclusive process,
or, if collaborative, often driven by
representatives of States Parties from Europe and the
The real question here
is if this is something particular to the development of indicators created to
measure rights and welfare
or part of a wider picture in which, as Merry
describes it, the “global
countries—generally rich and developed States—are at the origin of
the existing international system of human rights
and global governance. We
could go even further and claim that, in the end, the whole idea of human rights
is a Western (or European)
driven idea, shaped through the global and regional
international institutions created during the twentieth century. These were,
a significant extent, the result of a promotion of an understanding of human
rights supported by the global
Based on this
reasoning, to offer one example, we can measure political freedom according to
certain proxies such as access to information,
freedom to manifest political
ideas or freedom to vote. In doing so, we adopt a particular way of
understanding political freedom.
This particular understanding corresponds to
the ideas promoted by the bodies entrusted with their monitoring, such as the
Rights Committee, which monitors the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
It cannot be
surprising that the output of this Committee is rooted in the ways in which
global North countries understood these
rights in the first place and the role
they played in influencing the drafting of the treaties themselves.
respect, there is an intrinsic Western bias with the use of indicators because
they try to measure understandings of concepts
with a heavy Western influence.
Yet, does this problem—if it is indeed problematic—justify a shift
away from indicators
altogether? For Merry, her concerns with the Western
origins of indicators appear to be part of a broader critique of the power
inherent in the development of indicators. We therefore turn to the
construction stage—the identification of what gets measured
III. How Are the Indicators Chosen and Developed? Constructing
Merry draws on Foucault
to establish her critique of the tight knit relationship between indicators and
power. Power determines what
gets measured and the practices of measurement and
quantification, which in turn produce knowledge. In the words of Foucault,
and knowledge directly imply one
Moreover, once
indicators are established, normalized, and readily used, we tend not to return
to the initial concern of who played
the most central role in their development.
Merry argues, “[O]nce decisions about categorization and aggregation are
the categories may come to seem objective and natural, while the power
exerted in creating them
disappears.”
In turn, we
stop questioning why a certain measure is being taken —or, probably more
relevant here, on whose determination—and
the outcome is considered a new
A. The Voice of the North and Measuring Violence Against
When discussing the first
of the three projects—the development of indicators related to violence
against women—Merry
critiques how the process of developing indicators to
measure the gravity of and responses to violence shapes our understanding of
issue: “As the UNSC decided what to measure, how to categorize it, and how
to gather data, it defined the
phenomenon.”
effect is arguing that the indicators for violence set the boundaries for what
society understands to mean by the term violence.
However, for experts from
the field of women’s rights or, specifically, violence suffered by women,
Merry’s claim is a
stretch. Both rape and intimate-partner violence were
unquestionably recognized as a form of violence against women long before this
exercise. Her comment clearly speaks to the issues of child marriage, female
genital mutilation (i.e., FGM, although Merry uses the
“cutting”), sexual slavery during wartime, and violence while in
police custody, issues that tend to be included
in broader conceptions of
violence, rather than narrower approaches that focus on rape and intimate
partner violence.
again, it is a stretch to suggest that until this moment in time violence was
not associated with these rights violations.
We must recall that the development
of the indicators that Merry analyzes started in the mid-2000s, long after the
Convention on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) was
drafted (1989),
the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action issued
or the CEDAW
Committee’s General Recommendations No. 12
on violence against women
Take for instance the case of FGM. FGM has long been recognized as
not only a form of physical violence but also emotional
the violence itself
closely intertwined with the perverse control over women’s sexuality that
is exercised as a result of the
practice. Merry herself makes this point in the
pages that follow:
As the national and international focus on the issue developed, it gradually
expanded from a narrow concern with rape and domestic
violence to a broader
analysis of the way patriarchal social structures, cultural understandings of
gender difference, and social
and economic inequality contributed to a wide
range of forms of violence.
In many respects, for readers, the UNSC’s decision to develop a set of
indicators on violence seems an odd choice to sustain
Merry’s critique. In
fact, that process evidences how an extensive, well-debated, and open-minded
effort to develop a set of
indicators can result in a fairly strong outcome.
Merry explains how the initial list of indicators to measure violence against
set that were subsequently approved without further
discussion—was in fact very
While it included
it excluded a host of other
forms of violence, including state violence by police or the military and
harassment in the workplace.
However, after much negotiation, the final
guidelines, while recognizing the difficulty of measuring the severity of
violence, stretched
the categories of acts and consequences. The final list of
consequences of violence to be measured under that set of indicators includes
injuries, mental health repercussions, miscarriage, violence during pregnancy,
and fear of the perpetrator,
despite discussions during their development about the difficulty of measuring
The guidelines also
emphasize ethical and safety concerns during interviews, a major concern of the
World Health Organization’s
(WHO) study and feminist activists involved in
the project.
Overall, there was
an expansion in scope in terms of how violence was framed and experienced as a
controlling behavior.
As Merry herself states, “[G]ender equality
advocates worked hard to bring their perspective to the UNSC indicator project.
. . [and] succeeded in expanding the UNSC’s initial narrow view of
violence against women.”
Their more expansive questionnaire and detailed ethical and safety
recommendations were incorporated into the guidelines, facilitating
disclosure of the scope of the
Recognizing the
“triumph” of the feminists at the negotiating table, it is confusing
when Merry critiques the fact that
“[t]hrough the process of deciding how
to measure something like severe physical violence, the concept is established
and defined.”
contrary, Merry’s extensive discussion suggests that the process of
developing an agreed set of what can be measured
is a negotiation, creates a
dialogue about women’s experiences—in this case, of violence and
what matters for women who
experience violence—and considers the
feasibility of undertaking the measurement that is being proposed. Merry’s
exposure to the process, as described in the book, highlights that there
are many players involved in the development of indicators.
Perhaps, therefore,
it is less a question of critiquing the indicators themselves but more about
influencing the expertise of the
people at the table—ensuring for
women’s rights issues, for instance, that there are feminist perspectives
international human rights standards.
A more interesting approach
regarding bias in the development of indicators would be to analyze the possible
underlying reasons for
the assumptions that serve as the basis of indicators.
Merry, for example, shows her own interpretation of the drivers of trafficking
when she discusses her second indicator project, the U.S. State
Department’s
Trafficking in Persons Reports
When referring to the
TIP reports, she states that the reports “expose deficiencies in state
efforts to tackle rural poverty
or oppressive marriage practices, even though
both of these also fuel
trafficking.”
assumption contradicts existing research, which challenges the necessary causal
relationship between human trafficking and poverty
trafficking
and specific
manifestations of gender inequality that are often presumed to be relevant
substantiation.
Merry concedes that “experience in measuring violence against women
trumped the skepticism of the
statisticians.”
the preferred model of the feminists—even if a northern-dominated
perspective—was the only one annexed to the
UNSC guidelines published in
thereby giving the
suggestion that it should be preferred too globally when it comes to national
data collection. That a feminist
expertise “won” in the exercise of
developing indicators on violence against women reflects positively on the
of indicators to garner interest in measuring change in pertinent
women’s rights issues.
B. Expertise Inertia or Learning from Experience?
A final question
regarding indicator construction is the appropriateness of Merry's use of the
phrase “expertise
Merry highlights
how expert papers from past meetings often form the basis of future discussions
and new lists of indicators. She
uses the example of a 2007 discussion on
indicators related to violence against women, the substance of which was based
on formerly
used indicators from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, U.N.
Statistical Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC),
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the European Union, Canada, the United
States, United Kingdom, Italy, and
Similarly, a 2009
“Friends of the Chair” of the U.N. Statistical Commission (UNSC)
meeting in Mexico relied on a preexisting
national survey to finalize its list
of indicators.
In short, to
Merry, these examples demonstrate the tendency to rely on previously applied
indicators rather than generate new ones.
However, it is questionable that a
reliance on past lessons is necessarily a bad thing. Moreover, Merry notes that
not all indicator
projects are equally
and offers several
alternative approaches to measuring violence against women. For example, a
project initiated by the UNECE and
UNECLAC adopted a “feminist vision of
violence against women.”
The final survey model included controlling behaviors, emotional abuse, fear,
and their effects on everyday activities in addition
to physical and sexual
The WHO’s study
of domestic violence and women’s health from 2005 also helped to influence
the UNECE survey instrument,
which incorporated a public health perspective in
its focus on psychological harm and family
relationships.
notes the work of Yakin Ertürk, the second Special Rapporteur on Violence
against Women—successor to Radhika
Coomaraswamy—who had a broad
vision for what should be included when we measure violence against women. As
Merry notes, Erturk
proposed three broad indicators: “grave
violence,” covering issues like rape, intimate partner violence, sexual
harassment;
“femicide” (i.e., the murder of women); and third,
“social tolerance” (i.e., social and cultural contexts
violence to continue).
labels Ertuk’s approach as a feminist one, defining violence in its
broadest sense, and the battlefield broadly too,
to include, for example,
violence in the work
Readers are left with
a strong sense, therefore, that at least in the examples offered on measuring
violence against women, we have—particularly
with strong feminist
expertise at the table—come a long way to a more expansive and
gender-sensitive means of measuring experiences
of and responses to violence
against women and that cumulative processes do not necessarily mean
“expertise inertia.”
IV. How to Transform Information into Quantitative
Measurements: Universal Indicators and the Differences Lost in the Cracks
Merry shows great
concern with how local systems of knowledge “must be squeezed” into
global ones.
For example, to
measure violence against women, throwing acid in the face of one’s wife in
Bangladesh is equated to shooting
a domestic partner in the United
There is little scope
for nuanced and local difference. This is what Merry calls the problem of
commensurability.”
concerns echo the debates over the universalism of human rights which in part
explain the existence of universal indicators.
The strength of the normative
framework established by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) in
1948 is that it calls
on all states to accept that
human beings are
universally
entitled to the basic rights and freedoms contained in
Human rights are considered
universal. If we accept this, we should accept that we can create universal
systems to measure these
global principles.
However, some may still argue
that an indicator designed to measure a particular human right will only be as
universal as the right
itself. For instance, we have seen an extensive number of
reservations by Muslim States to the Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW), namely in relation to Articles 2, 9, 10
and, particularly, to 16 on family
This is despite the fact
that CEDAW is one of the most ratified and globally accepted
One could argue that
any indicator trying to assess compliance with those articles would not respect
the cultural differences of
certain countries. Yet, the problem would then lie
not in the indicator but in the (contended) “cultural insensitivity”
of the right itself.
A related but different issue appears when the right
itself is not under debate, but instead the proxy used to measure the right does
not adequately capture cultural or social
differences.
point—which Merry covers succinctly through examples—has been
explored in the context of indicators used in
the development-sector to measure
well-being and enjoyment of fundamental human rights. For example, former
Millennium Development
Goal (MDG) Three—on the promotion of gender
equality and the empowerment of
—has been criticized
for its lack of global
applicability.
indicators was gender parity in education (i.e., Target 3A) at the primary and
secondary level.
If we apply it
to the Latin American context, this region would be assessed as a champion of
gender equality, as disparity in school
enrollment and completion between boys
and girls has been almost
eliminated.
Yet, gender
inequality remains rife, to varying degrees and across a range of issues, across
the region.
This would suggest
the need for a Latin America-specific target on gender equality that does not
focus on girls in schools.
A third problem is developing an indicator that
ignores local manifestations of broader categories. When discussing her violence
women indicator project, Merry details the difficulty in developing a
global measure of violence against women based on severity.
In this context, she
points out that there are “national and local differences in what is
interpreted as a severe
giving the example
of Bangladesh. At a “Friends of the Chair” meeting, Bangladesh
suggested adding to the list of physical
violence actions like acid throwing,
dropping from a higher place, and a kick in the abdomen; and to the list of
psychological violence,
adding pressure for dowry, not paying attention to the
children, and rebuking the giving of birth to a female
All examples, Merry
points out, are particularly relevant to Bangladesh and South Asia in
and not including them
in an indicator means not measuring an egregious violation of the human rights
of women in the region. This
is a valid criticism—although it seems that
the final version of the indicator covered these situations—but the real
question is if non-quantitative existing human rights mechanisms would result in
more encompassing, culturally-sensitive measurements.
At the same time,
accommodating nuance and local difference, instead of relying on broader
categories, can be a problem. Merry does
not offer this critique, but a fourth
aspect of the issue of commensurability—and an equally problematic
one—occurs when
an indicator is developed for a country or region-specific
problem and then assessed on a global scale. For example, in 2009 the
Institutions and Gender Index—introduced in 2007 by the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
and only applicable to countries in
the global South—contained only two measures for barriers to women’s
enjoyment of
their civil liberties, one of which was an obligation to wear a
veil or burqa to cover parts of the body in
Such an indicator
reflects a bias from the outset targeting the Muslim religion and is an
indicator that makes no sense when applied
on a global scale. Similarly, the
choice to include a measure on the prevalence of Female Genital Mutilation
(FGM)—unquestionably
an egregious violation of the rights of women and
girls—is also open to critique as this too is not a globally prevalent
phenomenon.
Is measuring the prevalence of FGM more justified than measuring
rates of correctional rape of lesbian women or acid attacks on
In practice,
indicators designed primarily for the purpose of human rights accountability are
no more flawed in their attempt to present
a universal measure than the human
rights system itself. Having accepted the cons and many pros of a universal
human rights system—and
we are of the view that human rights are truly
universal and must be accepted as such if progress on their enjoyment is to
must accept that no global measure will be able to account for
the many micro nuances among countries. This is the space for country-based
indicators, which should be fully able to measure human rights accountability
but within a national context.
Merry’s critique is both passionate and understandable: “the
complexity of relationships—their histories, the interplay
of love and
fear, the role of kinship, and residence
patterns—disappear.”
Problematically, however, the only way to collect this type of data is
qualitatively, and it is hard to imagine how countries can
collect national data
on the scale intended by the UNSC, or the data necessary to allow for any kind
of commensurability, if all
subjective, qualitative considerations are to be
included. It is here that we turn to the next step of collecting and processing
data and related practicalities.
V. The Practicalities of Collecting and Processing the
Data—The Example of Human Trafficking
As discussed in Part
I, it is not enough to accept that an indicator is a valid way to acquire and
present information—at
the ontological level—and agree on what we
are measuring and how—at the construction level. Before creating an
it is also important to consider how the necessary information (i.e.,
inputs) to determine a performance for that indicator (i.e.,
output) can be
collected, processed, validated, and, finally, presented. At this procedural and
technical level, the purpose is to
produce a measure that can be compared
horizontally—among jurisdictions—or sequentially—in the same
but over a particular number of years.
Here, there are two
separate issues worth examining. First, there is the possible existence of an
intrinsic bias, where the process
of quantification is “adjusted” to
potentially achieve a more “palatable” outcome for those who
initiated—or
controlled or even paid for—the quantification. Second,
there is a more technical aspect, which looks into the methodology
transparency of the process itself. To consider these two aspects, we will use
Merry’s project on the TIP reports produced
by the U.S. Government.
is important to recall our previous comments on the particular choice of this
indicator and its reliability.
Despite this, the TIP report is a frequently cited source, precisely because the
U.S. Government is the only one that produces an
annual ranking of other
governments’ actions, something that other reports and organizations
operating in the field of trafficking
choose not to
However, considered by some
a moral crusade,
significant
questions have been raised as to whether the U.S. government has access to
sufficient data or the political independence
to make an accurate
assessment.
In fact, we suggest
that Merry is wrong when she lists other systems that measure trafficking,
including that of the ILO, UNODC,
and IOM but nonetheless concludes that,
“[a]t least for now, trafficking is what the
TIP Reports
these other organizations are more respected for their contributions to
trafficking and more readily turned to than the U.S.
government.
Moreover, it is
problematic to discuss a ranking process—calling it an indicator is
probably excessive—produced by one
actor about the performance on
trafficking in persons of its allies and enemies. Merry’s view is that
overtime the United States
TIP reports’ method of data collection has
improved and “it has acquired a more settled and legitimate
This is, at best,
questionable. As a result, Merry’s decision to dedicate an extensive
number of pages to critiquing what is
already a heavily critiqued system of
rankings is surprising.
therefore respond to Merry’s arguments concerning the development of
indicators to measure human trafficking but with reservation:
the TIP reports
are a poor example, an odd choice because it is somewhat self-serving to prove
the shortcomings of indicators at
The agenda of the U.S. government
necessarily permeates the whole exercise. Yet, this is not particular to the TIP
reports or other
indicators used to measure human trafficking. There are clear
agendas behind how trafficking is framed and
understood,
and as such, there
will also be agendas behind any process designed to measure trafficking. If we
undertake a qualitative analysis
of trafficking across a number of countries,
the reports of different State Parties, the accounts provided by different
people consulted
for the exercise, and the interpretation of a particular
country context—again, based on a set of consulted experts—will
always have an element of subjectivity. The best way to address the impact of
such subjectivity in the final assessment is to promote
transparency by
different actors about their potential interests in a particular outcome.
Yet in the case of the TIP reports, this subjectivity engulfs their utility.
The politics behind the tier system of ranking countries
is very clear and has
been critiqued elsewhere.
2012, for example, Kosovo, Moldova, and Mexico were ranked Tier 2, China was
ranked Tier 2 Watch List, whereas Cuba was ranked
Some authors note that the
report is “fused with the US’ foreign policy agenda” and
flawed by “messy slippages
with the use of numbers and
statistics.”
as Merry points out, the Tier system is used to determine the U.S.
government’s spending in this area, which is not
insignificant. Merry
notes that by 2005, the U.S. government had spent $295 million combatting
trafficking in 120
Therefore, when
Merry critiques the TIP report
as being “an apparently objective
way of understanding the
two responses
seem evident. First, the TIP reports are not actually believed to be objective.
This is suggested by the fact that
quite extensive critiques of the report
continue after the noted methodological improvements, even by several of the
authors that
Merry herself draws upon for her analysis. It is hard to believe
that any of the experts working in the field of trafficking would
reports as objective. Perhaps it is only the U.S. government that presents the
report as being objective, but many readers
know better.
It is also not new
to suggest, as Merry does, that there is a tendency within trafficking circles
to repeat the same stories and
statistics.
There is in fact
very limited space for researchers and practitioners working on trafficking to
debate outside of an “echo
chamber” of repeated
There have also been
challenges to the key players in the trafficking movement for defining the very
phenomenon under discussion:
the key stakeholders involved in trafficking
“not only analyse the phenomenon of human trafficking and debate among
through which society understands human
trafficking.”
“[s]uch assumptions easily become self-fulfilling: where Siddharth Kara
slaves; if we searched for
trafficked women who fit the victim archetype, we would indeed find
therefore left unsure about how to respond to Merry’s discussion of the
TIP reports. This project is a poor choice, particularly
compared to the much
richer discussion Merry offers on the violence against women indicator
—and here we emphasize “projects”—or in
her discussion of the initiatives to develop human rights indicators
in chapters seven and eight. Obviously, if all indicators—or even a
significant number of them—were developed
with the poor methodology and
blatant political bias present in the TIP reports, indicators would have never
acquired the success
myth of objectivity
Merry grants them.
However, this is no impediment to acknowledging the value
of Merry’s critique of indicators at the procedural and technical
Even some of the most known (i.e., “successful”) and
methodologically robust (i.e., “objective”) indicators,
analyzed carefully, show obvious shortcomings. One recent example has been the
publication of a compelling criticism of the
Corruption Perception Index
challenging the CPI
for its lack of objective grounding, despite a thorough review of its
methodology conducted in
With this in mind, it
is essential to always demand a transparent methodology for any kind of
quantification or measurement process,
so it can be scrutinized and evaluated
against the vested interests of those involved, and for the release of any
potential conflict
of interest in terms of funding, staff interests,
organizational values, and objectives.
VI. What Indicators Say About Compliance with Human Rights:
Where the Real Problem Lies
At the evaluation
level, we assess what a given indicator says about compliance with human rights
in a given jurisdiction and ask
how indicators have been used to measure human
rights compliance and to heighten accountability. Merry argues that a
“[p]roliferation
of indicators . . . springs . . . from the desire for
accountability.”
Accepting that accountability is desirable, we must therefore ask whether the
non-quantitative human rights mechanisms are any better
as monitoring systems.
The first question to consider is whether it is possible to monitor or track
human rights through other means. The answer is obviously
yes, as it was
traditionally done by the different human rights international mechanisms, such
as using envoys, commissioners, general
reporting, fact finding missions,
voluntary transmission of comprehensive reports, sampling, and media tracking.
We argue that the
issue is not the lack of alternatives for measuring and
quantifying a situation, but a cost-benefit analysis of these options in
of the adequacy of the portrait presented, fairness, costs, accessibility of
data, and comparability. This analysis is missing
in Merry’s book.
situation of the human rights mechanisms at the turn of the century described by
James Crawford is a perfect illustration of previous
attempts to assess human
rights compliance. In a well-known text from 2000, Crawford offered a detailed
list of problems with the
U.N. human rights system, posing to readers the
question of whether the system was in crisis. The problems Crawford listed
“corrosive effects” of the backlog in state reporting,
linked to delays in present-day reporting, such as a delay between
submission of a report and when it is finally
considered;
constraints in terms of personnel, and financial and technological capacities
faced by Committees;
procedural issues, such as lack of follow-up mechanisms for periodic reports and
communications;
substantive
concerns about the composition of
committees;
and limited
political support from
Many argue that the
introduction of the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) did not adequately address
these concerns,
although UPR
has somewhat heightened accountability and recognition of the universality of
human rights.
and more essential dilemma Merry raises is the problematic nature of judging
compliance based on information provided by
the organization being judged. She
goes on to highlight the problem of “gaming” the indicator: the ways
in which those
who are being evaluated present data or change their approach
purely to get a better ranking, with no substantial impact or change
issue at hand. Merry argues, “Rather than revealing truth, indicators
create it. However, the result is not simply a
fiction but a particular way of
dividing up and making known one reality among many
possibilities.”
acts to suggest the existence of one particular truth, despite the shortcomings
of the data collection itself; it is, therefore,
a misleading
“truth.” In addition, it then influences development and policy
concerns are valid. Data shows only one perspective on a situation, and the
concern is heightened because the data collector
can present the data in a way
that shows it in the best light. When it comes to human rights, however, surely
we can shed some of
our skepticism. We must recognize those States that
genuinely wish to improve the well-being of their residents and who have a real
interest in a system of data collection that would enable them to better
understand the situations they are grappling with and how
they can better invest
their own resources to improve enjoyment of human rights. However, no one wants
to be seen as a human rights
violator, and it is true that some States may abuse
quantitative indicators to diminish the problems reflected in their country
statistics.
However, in these instances, qualitative data proves similarly
problematic when it comes to unsupportive States. Those data collectors
more willing to honestly participate in a qualitative process to monitor their
performance are more likely to produce more
reliable quantifiable data as well.
The difference can probably be seen with those States who are reluctant
participants in qualitative
evaluation processes of their human rights
situations. In a given year, one can mislead others in qualitative and
quantitative terms,
but when the exercise is repeated year after year, it
becomes more difficult to coherently produce false quantitative data.
separate issue Merry raises—and perhaps a less explored one in the
literature on indicators—is the potential dependency
of the United Nations
on funding by the States subject to
evaluation.
Yet, one could
argue that there are many examples of countries threatening to withdraw funding
for the publication of facts or decisions
by U.N. bodies that have nothing to do
with rankings or quantifications. One can think for example of the finally
withdrawn report
accusing Israel of imposing an apartheid regime in the Occupied
Territories,
never-published report on the killing and maiming of children in warfare in
Yemen by Saudi Arabia.
fact, a more accurate view could be the exact opposite situation. In general,
countries are more willing to be subjected to global
exercises where there is
some naming and shaming for everybody than particular investigations into any
one pinpointed domestic context.
The very existence of the Universal Periodic
Review (UPR)—and the debates leading to its creation—would support
VII. Attaching Consequences to Indicators
Many of the criticisms
Merry highlights are not particular to indicators but relate to the
international system we have created to
protect human rights. Perhaps with the
exception of some regional systems—namely ECHR and IACHR—treaty
bodies using indicators
lack penalties or rewards for good or bad performance
beyond issuing public comments of praise or
The same could be
said for those that do not use indicators. The U.N. Trafficking Protocol for
instance was enacted in Palermo in
and having defined the
concept of trafficking,
arguably the origin of the U.S. TIP
The Protocol itself
suffers from a weak implementation mechanism, operating under a
“loose” oversight of a working group
of States Parties attached to
the broader Conference on Parties to the U.N. Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime.
words, the lack of consequences for non-compliance is a problem stemming from
the broader system of international human
rights law, or international law, and
cannot be solely attributed to indicators.
It is true as well that efforts to
promote indicators of human rights compliance face resistance from countries
concerned about mechanisms
that compare and rank them on the basis of their
compliance.
And yet, this is
no different from those reporting mechanisms that do not use indicators or
collect aggregated data. For example,
country-specific reports on their
fulfilment of conventions against torture often remained unpublished due to the
reluctance of those
Governments to accept them and make them
To the contrary,
indicators can offer individual states a baseline. Current performance can be
checked against previous performance,
based on general agreed-upon standards.
This would allow countries to be judged only against themselves, eliminating the
common claim
that developing countries are judged against developed
countries’ standards. Rewarding improvements and punishing deteriorations
would then seem fairer than attaching those consequences to reporting on
concrete incidents that may not be comparable. This could
also be a way of
implementing the evolving and improving nature of human
making it obvious if
a country goes backwards in its protection of human rights.
All of this is a
different scenario from the one Merry describes on the consequences that the
U.S. government attaches to its TIP
rankings. In fact, the U.S.
government—like all governments—is entitled to spend its donor aid
as it considers appropriate.
If the government feels more confident to do this based on a report that it has
produced itself, there is no legitimate reason to
stand in the way of such an
approach. Any country could do the same, basing its decisions on quantitative or
qualitative appraisals
conducted by them or on their behalf. All this proves
that this issue is not linked to quantification mechanisms or rankings, but
rather the gathering of data in order to make certain decisions which are
political in nature. It is the politics behind the decision
that should be the
subject of the critique.
It is also important to note that governments and
fellow States Parties are far from the only bodies that use data as the basis
establishing consequences for other entities. The media is also a massive
consumer of data. In this respect, it is important to distinguish
between how
governments or the United Nations, for instance, may attach consequences to a
particular system of ranking or performance
based on quantitative data and the
way in which the media may consume and report on such data. Merry fails to
adequately recognize
such a distinction.
For example, when she discusses the
quantification of corruption, she refers to the use of “expert opinion
surveys,” correctly
arguing that collecting data is expensive and expert
opinion surveys are a cheaper
alternative.
In this case,
she questions the idea of sending questionnaires to local experts to gather
their experiences of corruption, arguing
that while this is clearly less
expensive, it is “also less comprehensive and
Merry does not accurately represent this example. The index she refers to
measures “perception of corruption”
“corruption.”
methodology is designed to survey people on their perception of corruption and
Transparency International (TI), the entity which
created that index, presents
the results as such. In fact, TI has an alternative index—the Global
Corruption Barometer—which
surveys people about their corruption
experiences in the last twelve
assess the prevalence of corruption in a given jurisdiction.
This allows for data on corruption prevalence to exist alongside data
perceptions
of the levels of corruption.
The real issue here is how
the media—and particularly non-expert media—reports on data
developed from an index versus
what the actual index is purporting to measure.
This problem would be magnified if the reporting of those indices and
quantification
formed the basis of policy decisions or was used to apply the
“evidence-based governance” that Merry describes at the
beginning of
Yet, Merry fails to
provide an example of such a problem in practice.
VIII. CONCLUSION
As a general
observation, quantification is not intrinsically better or worse than other
systems of accountability in assessing compliance
with human rights, but it does
require a more robust methodology than other mechanisms to be useful. Here, the
term “useful”
denotes both a process and an end result that is a
fair representation of a body of data and where that data can be presented in
manageable format, allowing consumers of that data to assess a situation at a
particular moment in time but also changes over time.
Such rigor may not be as
demanding for some non-quantitative approaches.
Yet, there are some obvious
advantages of quantitative measurement. Merry is correct that it cannot all be
quantitative, but this
does not justify a widespread questioning of the
substantial interest in the quantification of human rights indicators that
today. There are bad apples and good apples, including within
Merry’s examples. In the same way that the TIP report is an example
bad apple, the outputs of the UNECE
and the work of
Yakin Ertürk
context of violence against women are examples of good apples in terms of how
they have defined the issue to be measured and
against which governments and
other actors will be held to account. The very process of developing such
indicators involved an open
and honest debate about what would get measured as
part of a reasonably global effort towards heightened accountability in relation
to violence suffered by
As a second
conclusion, Merry is also correct in stating that, “some human rights are
more amenable to quantification than
but this does
not mean that quantification should be excluded from monitoring compliance for
certain rights. In those cases, the
methodology should be defined to align as
closely as possible with the specific right. When proxies are used, these
choices should
be transparent and any necessary simplification clearly
understood by those collecting the data and later by those using it.
According to Merry, proxy measures, giving the example, among others, of
using investment in prison and police reform to assess compliance
with civil and
political rights, “provide far greater specificity to treaty obligations
but only focus on a few measures while
neglecting many other dimensions of a
given right.”
true, but needs to be compared with the alternative systems available to monitor
those “given rights,” especially
in terms of costs and benefits. A
thorough and systematic reporting on the use of unnecessary force and torture by
police officials
would be a much better way to track compliance with the
relevant articles of the Convention Against Torture, but it is unlikely to
feasible in the majority of developing countries, nor possible in the majority
of countries globally on a systematic and regular
basis, which is what is
required for ongoing accountability.
In connection to this point, we disagree
with Merry when she argues that “treaty bodies see their task as
evaluating compliance
with legal standards based on the data presented, not on
checking the quality of the data
themselves.”
be the case in some treaty monitoring bodies, but it is definitely not the case
for some others. In fact, in some instances,
treaty body concluding comments
address very specifically the process of collecting information and contrast
the data presented
in States Parties’ reports with submissions and reports
from NGOs, local and international, which allow members to challenge
with concrete examples.
true that “[b]y using apparently objective, scientifically produced
statistical data, treaty bodies can enhance their
authority in rendering
judgments about human
but as far as
there has been an adequate check of the underlying data, we do not perceive this
as a problem but rather as a legitimate
option in light of the
alternative—governments showing unwillingness to follow concluding
comments or denying their legitimacy
because such data is lacking.
Merry does not sufficiently explore the difference between quantification and
how the media reports on organized data. At
some point, it is necessary to
distinguish between the use of quantification by experts in the field of
international human rights
law and its use by the general public. Therefore,
concerns with what and how something is measured must be separated from concerns
Indicators may
appear objective from a distance, but when we look at them closely, it is easy
to see their flaws. Merry’s book
can be praised as an effort to make this
clear to non-experts who come across her work. Regretfully, this point is
well-known to
specialized practitioners who value indicators for their
practicality in helping to measure similarities and differences, advancement,
and gaps in our progress towards development and well-being. Merry has evidently
invested an enormous amount of work in analyzing
the three indicator projects
that are the subject of
The Seductions of Quantification
. As academics
and practitioners in international law, we would have hoped for a deeper study
of the trade-offs between the different
alternatives (i.e., the non-quantitative
ones) to assessing compliance with human rights and, potentially, a practical
more robust and useful ways to select and develop indicators.
José-Miguel Bello y
Villarino is a member of the Diplomatic Corps of Spain (on leave as of this
writing) and a PhD candidate
at the University of Sydney, researching corruption
and international law. Ramona Vijeyarasa is a Chancellor’s Post-Doctoral
Research Fellow at the University of Technology Sydney. Her scholarship focuses
on international women’s rights law, migration,
trafficking, sexual and
reproductive rights, and the role of women leaders in promoting
gender-responsive legislation. The views
expressed in this article are the
authors’ views alone and may not represent any of the entities they are
associated with.
The authors are grateful to the editorial staff at the
N.Y.U. Journal of International Law and Politics
, especially Yekaterina
Fomitcheva for her useful substantive suggestions. . As always, all errors are
See generally,
, Gauthier de Beco,
Human Rights Indicators for Assessing State
Compliance with International Human Rights
, 77 NORDIC J. INT. LAW 23 (2008);
Maria Green,
What We Talk About When We Talk About Indicators: Current
Approaches to Human Rights Measurement
23 HUM. RTS. Q. 1062
(2001); Angela
Hawken & Gerardo L. Munck,
Cross-National Indices with
Gender-Differentiated Data: What Do They Measure? How Valid Are They?
SOC. INDICATORS RES. 801 (2013); Johannes P. Jütting et al.,
Gender (In)Equality: The OECD Gender, Institutions and Development Data
, 9 J. HUM. DEV. 65 (2008); Debra J. Liebowitz & Susanne Zwingel,
Gender Equality Oversimplified: Using CEDAW to Counter the Measurement
, 16 INT'L STUD. REV. 362 (2014); AnnJanette Rosga & Margaret
L. Satterthwaite,
The Trust in Indicators: Measuring Human Rights
BERKELEY J. INT'L L. 253
(2009); Irene van Staveren,
To Measure is to Know? A
Comparative Analysis of Gender Indices
, 71 REV. SOC. ECON. 339 (2013); Boris
Branisa et al.,
New Measures of Gender Inequality: The Social Institutions
and Gender Index (SIGI) and Its Subindices
(Courant Res. Ctr., Discussion
Paper No. 10, 2009), http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:got:gotcrc:010;
ANNE F. BAYEFSKY, THE U.N.
HUMAN RIGHTS TREATY SYSTEM: UNIVERSALITY AT THE CROSSROADS 2 (1st ed.
There are nine treaties
but ten treaty bodies. The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (Dec. 10,
1984, 1465 U.N.T.S. 85)
own treaty body , as well as the
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and
other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (SPT)
established
pursuant to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (Dec. 18,
2010, 42 ILM
We prefer this term to
“indicator culture,” used by Merry, as we believe that there is an
inclination to favor information
supported or presented as indicators or
rankings, but not necessarily to conduct human rights work through indicators.
SALLY ENGLE MERRY, THE SEDUCTIONS OF QUANTIFICATION: MEASURING HUMAN
RIGHTS, GENDER VIOLENCE, AND SEX TRAFFICKING 9, 220
Sally Engle
Measuring the World: Indicators, Human Rights, and Global
, 52 CURRENT ANTHROPOLOGY SUPPLEMENT 3, S83, S84(2011);
THE QUIET POWER OF INDICATORS: MEASURING GOVERNANCE, CORRUPTION, AND
RULE OF LAW20 (Sally Engle Merry, Kevin E. Davis, & Benedict
Kingsbury eds.,
2015) discussing the issue in wider terms beyond human
note 4, at 16–19 (offering a few examples of
“successful indicators” as a simplified overview).
A brief overview of the
contents of the discussions in this process can be found in UN STATISTICAL
COMMISSION, REPORT ON THE MEETING
OF THE FRIENDS OF THE CHAIR OF THE UNITED
NATIONS STATISTICAL COMMISSION ON STATISTICAL INDICATORS ON VIOLENCE AGAINST
https://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/meetings/vaw/docs/finalreport.pdf.
(“Rather than revealing truth, indicators create
DEPARTMENT OF STATE,
TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT (2017),
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/271339.pdf.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE, TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 25 (2004),
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/34158.pdf.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE,
For a detailed discussion on the issue of politicization see generally
Kirstin Roster,
Politicization of the Trafficking in Persons Report; Is
Political Proximity to the US Associated with Better Rankings?
(McCourt Sch.
Pub. Pol'y, 2016),
https://repository.library.georgetown.edu/handle/10822/1040854.
supra note 4
at 194–206.
the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women,
General Recommendation No.
35 on Gender-Based Violence Against Women, Updating General Recommendation No.
, U.N. Doc. CEDAW /C/GC/35 2
The ten human rights
treaty bodies are the Committee on Civil and Political Rights; the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights; the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women; the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination;
the Committee on the Rights of the Child; the Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities; the Committee against Torture;
Committee on Migrant Workers; and the Sub-committee on the Prevention of Torture
and the Committee on Enforced Disappearance.
Comm. on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women,
also Ramona Vijeyarasa,
A Quarter of a Century Later: Violence Against
Women and CEDAW’s General Recommendation
(forthcoming 2018)
(manuscript at 35) (on file with
Comm'r for Hum. Rts.,
Human Rights Indicators: A Guide to Measurement and
Implementation
, at 95, U.N. Doc. HR/Pub/12/5
Malhotra & Fasel,
Merry et al. describe
four phases in the life of an indicator: conceptualization, production, uses and
effects, and impacts,
4, at 168 (citing Russel Lawrence Barsh,
Measuring Human Rights: Problems of
Methodology and Purpose
15 HUM. RTS. Q. 87
(1993), and Todd Landman,
Measuring Human Rights: Principle, Practice, and Policy
26 HUM. RTS. Q.
(2004)). Merry’s point is better explained in her own words.
note 4 at 1, 19–21.
See generally
Andrew Moravcsik,
The Origins of Human Rights Regimes: Democratic
Delegation in Postwar Europe
, 54 INT. ORG. 217 (2000) (offering an account
of the origins of the institutionalization of human rights regimes in the
example, the link between access to information, freedom to manifest political
ideas and the right to take part in the conduct
of public affairs is a
recurrent reasoning of the Human Rights Committee, often referring to these
concepts as closely connected.
See UN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTEE (HRC), CCPR
GENERAL COMMENT NO. 25: ARTICLE 25 (PARTICIPATION IN PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND THE
RIGHT TO VOTE),
THE RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN PUBLIC AFFAIRS, VOTING RIGHTS AND
THE RIGHT OF EQUAL ACCESS TO PUBLIC SERVICE 8 (1996); UN HUMAN RIGHTS
(HRC), CCPR GENERAL COMMENT NO. 34 ARTICLE 19: FREEDOMS OF OPINION AND
EXPRESSION 13 (2011),
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/gc34.pdf.
note 4 at 29 (quoting MICHEL FOUCAULT, DISCIPLINE AND
PUNISH: THE BIRTH OF THE PRISON 27
Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Woman, Dec. 18,
(entered into force Sept. 3,
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, Rep. of the Fourth
World Conf. on Women, U.N. Doc. A/CONF. 177/20/Add.1
U.N. Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, Beijing
Declaration and Platform of Action, Fourth World Conf. on Women
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/.
Comm. on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women [CEDAW], General
Recommendation 12 (1989),
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/recommendations/recomm.htm#recom12.
Comm. on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women [CEDAW], General
Recommendation 19 (1992),
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/recommendations/recomm.htm#recom19.
Ruth F. Lax,
Socially sanctioned violence against women: Female genital
mutilation is its most brutal form
, 28 CLINICAL SOCIAL WORK JOURNAL; NEW
YORK 403–412, 502 (2000)
DEP’T OF STATE,
RAMONA VIJEYARASA, SEX,
SLAVERY AND THE TRAFFICKED WOMAN: MYTHS AND MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT TRAFFICKING AND
ITS VICTIMS (2015).
at 141-144.
G.A. Res. 217 (III) A,
pmbl. & art. 2, Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Dec. 10,
Declarations,
Reservations and Objections to CEDAW
, U.N. WOMEN,
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/reservations-country.htm (last visited
Mar. 17, 2018);
Judith Resnik,
Comparative (In)equalities: CEDAW,
the Jurisdiction of Gender, and the Heterogeneity of Transnational Law
10 INT'L J. CONST. L. 531
, Footnote 78
See Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women: Status
NATIONS TREATY COLLECTION,
https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND&mtdsg_no=IV-8&chapter=4&lang=en
(last updated Mar. 31, 2018) (detailing ratification
note 4, at 77..
55/2, 20, United Nations Millennium Declaration (Sept. 18, 2000);
Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
, UNITED NATIONS DEV.
PROGRAMME, http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/mdg_goals/mdg3
(last visited Mar. 17,
Ceri Hayes,
the Margins: The MDGs Through a CEDAW Lens
, 13 GEND. & DEV. 67, 68
UNITED NATIONS &
2015 TIME FOR GLOB. ACTION, THE MILLENNIUM GOALS DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2015, 28
http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/MDG/english/UNDP_MDG_Report_2015.pdf.
See generally
SUZANNE DURYEA ET AL., THE EDUCATIONAL GENDER GAP IN LATIN
AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN (Social Science Research Network) (2007),
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1820870
(last visited Apr 10, 2018); see also
note 78, at
78, at 68..
note 4, at 77.
375. The other measure of civil liberties under the Social Institutions and
Gender Index was the freedom of women to move outside
of the home.
generally The OECD Social Institutions and Gender Index
, ORG. FOR ECON.
CO-OPERATION & DEV. [OECD],
http://www.oecd.org/dev/development-gender/theoecdsocialinstitutionsandgenderindex.htm#results
(last visited Mar. 17,
Vijeyarasa,
In Defence of CEDAW: The Need to Return to the Foundations of
Women’s Rights Law to Measure Progress on Gender Equality
(forthcoming
2018) (manuscript at 19) (on file with
Vijeyarasa proposes a quantitative accountability system, grounded in CEDAW,
where each article is translated into a measurable
indicator with direct
domestic relevance.
Introduction.
VIJEYARASA,
note 58, at 27.
See Laura Agustín,
TIP: Trafficking in Persons, the No Methodology Report, NAKED ANTHROPOLOGIST
(June 26, 2009),
https://www.lauraagustin.com/tip-trafficking-in-persons-the-no-methodology-report.
VIJEYARASA,
note 58, at 8.
note 4, at 138.
See for example Liz Kelly,
“You Can Find Anything You Want”: A
Critical Reflection on Research on Trafficking in Persons within and into
, 43 INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION 235–265, 254 (2005),
To her credit, Merry
makes a valid argument that the measurement of human trafficking has proven
particularly elusive. Trafficking
is indeed poorly understood and not well
defined. These factors make it harder to successfully develop a system of
measurement. MERRY,
VIJEYARASA,
note 58, at 19–39. While many stakeholders have a legitimate
interest in countering trafficking, we have also seen how human
trafficking has
been presented in a sensationalized or biased light to obtain particular gains.
This spans a host of agendas, from
a desire for abolition of prostitution to the
financial and readership goals of profit-driven media to government goals around
or closed borders.
VIJEYARASA,
note 58, at
U.S. DEP’T OF
STATE, TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT: JUNE 2012, 53 (2012),
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/192587.pdf.
JUST THE “TIP” OF THE ICEBERG: THE 2011 TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS
REPORT (TIP) FALLS SHORT OF EXPECTATIONS HUFFINGTON POST,
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/pardis-mahdavi/just-the-tip-of-the-icebe_1_b_888618.html
(last visited Apr 10, 2018);
see generally
on the politicization of global
note 4, at 149. Ramona Vijeyarasa has elsewhere noted the role that
the U.S. government has played as a donor in distorting global
priorities when
it comes to aid and anti-trafficking programs. VIJEYARASA, supra note 58, at
VIJEYARASA,
note 58, at xvii.
Alina Mungiu-Pippidi
& Ramin Dadašov,
Measuring Control of Corruption by a New Index of
Public Integrity
, 22 EUR. J. CRIM. POL'Y & RES. 369, 416, 417
Transparency
International, CPI 2017 TECHNICAL METHODOLOGY NOTE 1 (2017),
http://files.transparency.org/content/download/2183/13748/file/CPI_2017_Technical%20Methodology%20Note_EN.pdf.
James Crawford,
UN Human Right Treaty System: A System in Crisis?
THE FUTURE OF
UN HUMAN RIGHTS TREATY MONITORING , 4–5
See generally
Allehone Mulugeta Abebe,
Of Shaming and Bargaining: African States and the
Universal Periodic Review of the United Nations Human Rights Council
RTS. L. REV. 1, 19-30 (2009); Felice D. Gaer,
A Voice Not an Echo: Universal
Periodic Review and the UN Treaty Body System
, 7 HUM. RTS. L. REV. 109,
135-139 (2007).
Domínguez-Redondo,
The Universal Periodic Review—Is There Life
Beyond Naming and Shaming in Human Rights Implementation?
4 N. Z. L. REV.
, 694-705 (2012); Rhona Smith,
“To See Themselves as Others See
Them”: The Five Permanent Members of the Security Council and the Human
Rights Council’s
Universal Periodic Review
35 HUM. RTS. Q. 1
End Bias or Else, Israel Threatens UN Ahead of Chief’s
, TIMES ISR. (Aug. 27, 2017),
https://www.timesofisrael.com/end-bias-or-else-israel-threatens-un-ahead-of-chiefs-visit/.
Colum Lynch,
Saudi Arabia Threatened to Break Relations With U.N. over Human
Rights Criticism in Yemen
, FOREIGN POL'Y (June 7, 2015),
https://foreignpolicy.com/2016/06/07/saudi-arabia-threatened-to-break-relations-with-un-over-human-rights-criticism-in-yemen/.
This point is expressly made in the Preamble of the Resolution adopted by the
General Assembly which created the Human Rights and
“universality” and “non-selectivity”, as a recognition
of the focus on a few situations and countries
in the work of the Commission on
Human Rights, the predecessor of the Human Rights Council. G.A. Res. 60/251,
Preamble, U.N. Doc.
A/RES/60/251 (Apr. 3, 2006),
https://undocs.org/en/A/RES/60/251
Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
Supplementing the United Nations Convention
Against Transnational Organized
opened for signature
2000, 2237 U.N.T.S.
DEPARTMENT OF
STATE, TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS REPORT 8 (2001),
https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/4107.pdf.
Anne T. Gallagher,
Two Cheers for the Trafficking Protocol
ANTI-TRAFFICKING REV. 14, 22
For example, the
Assembly of the Council of Europe has recently called on the European Committee
for the Prevention of Torture and
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(CPT) to make public any unpublished reports concerning its member States. Eur.
Recommendation 2123 (2018) Provisional Version: Strengthening
International Regulations against Trade in Goods used for Torture and
, Doc. No. 14454, art. 10(6)
See generally
GENDER, NUTRITION, AND THE HUMAN RIGHT TO ADEQUATE FOOD: TOWARD AN INCLUSIVE
FRAMEWORK (Anne C. Bellows et al. eds., 2016) (arguing
for a more expansive
notion of human rights encompassing an affirmative right to adequate
For example the
U.S. funds abolitionists groups, but not NGOs favouring the legalization of sex
work. MERRY,
Perceptions Index 2016
, TRANSPARENCY INT'L (Jan. 2017),
https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2016.
People and Corruption: Citizens’ Voices from Around the World
TRANSPARENCY INT'L (Nov. 14, 2017),
https://www.transparency.org/_view/publication/8064.
Merry’s analysis sheds positive light on the process of indicator
development under the UN bodies for European (UNECE)
initiative, one that
“relief on social science scholars with extensive knowledge of
gender-based violence and survey techniques
developed for measuring it,”
was clearly “concerned with women who experience violence” and
adopted “a more
feminist political stance and an interest in maximizing
disclosure” at 67.
Cossette D. Creamer & Beth A. Simmons,
Ratification, Reporting, and
Rights: Quality of Participation in the Convention Against Torture
RTS. Q. 579
, 585 (2015).
note 4, at 170.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.07 MB)
PDF format (123 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter