URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:41:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Willheim, Ernst --- "Queensland's Pastoral Leases and Native Title: Wik Peoples v Queensland" [1997] AboriginalLawB 17; (1997) 3(89) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 20
Queensland’s Pastoral Leases And Native Title: Wik Peoples V Queensland
The Main Arguments
Test For Extinguishment
Tests For Inconsistency
Content Of Native Title
Pastoral Leases: The Historical Setting
Pastoral Leases And Exclusive Possession
Relevance Of Facts, Evidence: To Leases, Native Title And Extinguishment
Exclusive Possession And Ss 203, 204
Expansion Of Radical Title
Relevance Of Traditional Property Law
Approaches To Construction
Fiduciary Duties
The Special Bauxite Mining Leases
Queensland’s Pastoral Leases and Native
Wik Peoples v Queensland
Wik Peoples v Queensland
High Court of Australia
Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ
23 December 1996
Casenote by Ernst Willheim
In its second substantive decision on native title issues following
the High Court has decided, by a
narrow 4:3 majority, that the granting of certain pastoral leases in Queensland,
the Holroyd River
Holding Pastoral lease and the Mitchellton Pastoral leases,
did not confer on the lessees the right to exclusive possession, and
did not necessarily extinguish native title.
Separate questions, whether claims of alleged breach of fiduciary duty and
failure to accord natural justice could be maintained against
Queensland and two
mining companies, notwithstanding the enactment of authorising legislation, were
unanimously answered 'No'.
Mabo (No. 2)
the Court held that
native title survived the Crown's acquisition of sovereignty and of radical
title. Native title was, however,
subject to extinguishment where sovereign
power was exercised in a way inconsistent with the continuance of native title
175 CLR at 68). The principles relating to extinguishment were expressed
in general terms. Brennan J (as he then was), with whom
Mason CJ and McHugh J
agreed, held that native title was extinguished by the granting or renewal of a
lease to the London Missionary
Society ((1992)175 CLR at 71; see also at 117 per
Deane and Gaudron JJ) and, assuming it was validly granted, by a lease for a
factory ((1992) 175 CLR at 77; cf 117 per Deane and Gaudron JJ). Brennan
J (as he then was) also made broader observations to the
effect that, in
accordance with property law principles, when the Crown grants a lease, it
acquires reversionary title equivalent
to beneficial ownership ((1992) 175 CLR
at 68-see below under 'Expansion of radical title'). The formal orders of the
stated to be in a form which would not give rise to implications
affecting other land ((1992)175 CLR at 16).
Mabo (No. 2),
the Commonwealth Parliament enacted the
Native Title Act 1993
. The main objects of the Act were to provide for
the recognition and protection of native title, to establish a mechanism for
determining
claims, to establish mechanisms for future dealings affecting native
title, and to validate certain past acts
The Act did not deal with the
effect on native title of grants of statutory interests, but the Preamble
included the following recital:
'The High Court has:...
'(c) held that native title is extinguished by valid government acts that are
inconsistent with the continued existence of native
title rights and interests,
such as the grant of freehold or leasehold estates' (para
Pastoral leases are a major form of Australian land holding. Were such leases
inconsistent with native title, so as to extinguish
any title? This question,
left unresolved in
Mabo (No. 2)
, was at the heart of the
proceedings.
The Wik Peoples (the Wik) commenced proceedings in the Federal Court in June
1993 seeking a declaration as to native title rights
in relation to an area of
Queensland. They also claimed damages and further equitable relief in the event
that it was found that
such rights had been extinguished. One of the respondents
was the Thayorre People (the Thayorre). The Thayorre cross-claimed for
declarations in respect of lands which overlapped, in part, the Wik claim. The
land claimed included pastoral leases, the
Holroyd River Holding Pastoral lease
and the Mitchellton Pastoral leases. Central to the claims was the argument that
native title
rights survived the granting of these pastoral leases-in effect,
the applicants argued that native title co-existed with the interests
lessees. Following enactment of the
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth), the Wik
also applied for a determination under that Act.
In January 1996, Drummond J gave judgment on five preliminary questions
formulated for the purposes of the Federal Court
proceedings.
Considering himself bound by the
majority judgment of the Full Federal Court in North Ganalanja Aboriginal
Corporation v Queensland
('the Waanyi Case') ,
he held that the granting of each of the pastoral leases conferred on the lessee
'rights to exclusive possession, and that thereby
the grant of each lease
necessarily extinguished all incidents of Aboriginal
Drummond J did not decide whether the
evidence would otherwise have been sufficient to make out native title. In March
Wik and Thayorre were granted leave to appeal to the Full Court of the
Federal Court. In April 1996, the High Court granted an application
for removal
to that Court.
The case came before the High Court in the form of a series of questions.
These were framed in narrow terms. It was agreed that the
Court should confine
its attention to the particular leases in question (per Toohey J at 49, per
Kirby J at 189). Answering those
questions, the Court held, by majority (Toohey,
Gaudron, McHugh and Kirby JJ, each writing a separate, lengthy, judgment), that
pastoral leases did not confer rights to exclusive possession. Therefore the
grant of the pastoral leases did not necessarily extinguish
all incidents of
native title. Brennan CJ wrote a powerful dissenting judgment, in which Dawson
and McHugh JJ concurred.
The case attracted much public attention. Victoria, Western Australia, South
Australia and the Northern Territory intervened on behalf
of the respondents, as
did the Commonwealth and interests representing pastoralists. ATSIC, a number of
Aboriginal Land Councils
and Aboriginal Corporations and other Aboriginal people
intervened on behalf of the appellants. Thirty-six counsel appeared. No party
sought to re-open the basic principles of
Mabo (No. 2)
The main arguments
The respondents argued that the pastoral leases, granted under the
(Qld) and the
Land Act 1962
(Qld), were true leases and
conferred rights of exclusive possession inconsistent with the continued
existence of native title, thus
giving rise to extinguishment. The appellants
argued that the leases were not true leases, did not confer rights of exclusive
but conferred merely rights to use land for pastoral purposes, that
these rights were not necessarily inconsistent with native title
rights, and
therefore native title was not necessarily extinguished. The appellants also
argued, in the alternative, that native
title was merely suspended during the
terms of the leases and revived on expiry or forfeiture of the leases. The
respondents argued
that, upon grant of a pastoral lease, the Crown acquired the
interest in the reversion and its radical title was converted to full
The pastoral lease question turned in large part on the construction of the
legislation under which the leases were granted, the
Land Act 1910
('the 1910 Act'), the
Land Act 1962
(Qld) ('the 1962 Act'), and the terms
of the grants. Each lease covered a very large area, Holroyd 1,119 square miles
(2,830 square
kilometres), Mitchellton 535 square miles (1,385 square
kilometres). The first Mitchellton lease was granted under the 1910 Act for
'pastoral purposes only', subject to reservations for access for searching for
gold and minerals and the right of any person to go
upon the land for survey.
Originally granted in 1915, the lessee never took possession. A new lease was
granted in 1919 but surrendered
in 1921. In 1922 the land was reserved for the
use of Aborigines. The 1910 Act included a prohibition on ringbarking, cutting
destruction of trees (s198), and provision for the issue of licences to
persons to enter any pastoral holding to cut, get and remove
timber, stone,
gravel, clay, guano, or other material (s199). Section 205 allowed for depasture
of stock being driven on a stock
route or road passing through a pastoral
holding. The first Holroyd lease, granted under the 1962 Act, was expressed to
be 'for pastoral
purposes only'. This was surrendered. A new lease was granted
upon condition that the lessees carry out and maintain a number of
improvements.
While this lease was not specifically expressed to be 'for pastoral purposes
only', no other activity was authorised
(the lease was granted as a 'pastoral
holding'). Each of the leases was granted in the form the Crown 'Do hereby ...
Demise and Lease'
the land in question.
Test for extinguishment
That native title is subject to extinguishment was not in dispute. Toohey J
referred to the question he had raised in
Mabo (No. 2)
, whether the power
to extinguish was exercisable only with the consent of the titleholders or was
exercisable unilaterally ((1992)
[1992] HCA 23
at 195), but appeared to accept the
majority view, repeated in
Western Australia v The Commonwealth
[1995] HCA 47
183 CLR 373
at 422), that native title can be extinguished by an act that is
inconsistent with the continued right of Aborigines to enjoy native
72). Brennan CJ said that, in relation to pastoral leases, the question was not
whether the Governor intended to extinguish
native title, but whether the right
conferred by the leases (which he, in dissent, held to be the right to exclusive
possession)
was inconsistent with the continued right of the holders of native
title to enjoy that title (at 26; see also per Gummow J at 128).
Tests for Inconsistency
The majority judgments focused on the rights conferred by the legislation and
the lease. Native title is extinguished to the extent
that the rights of the
lessee are necessarily inconsistent with native title rights. Although the tests
for inconsistency are formulated
in different ways, there is clear indication in
each of the judgments that inconsistency will not readily be found.
Toohey J referred to Macfarlane JA in the leading Canadian case
v British Columbia
that one must be
satisfied that the intended consequence was that the two interests 'could not
possibly co-exist'. As Toohey J then
put it, 'If the two can co-exist, no
question of implicit extinguishment arises' (at 75). Toohey J said inconsistency
can only be
determined by identifying what native title rights are asserted in
relation to the land contained in pastoral leases. It is necessary
specifically on the traditions, customs and practices of the particular
Aboriginal group claiming the right, and to measure
those rights against the
rights conferred on the grantees of pastoral leases. To the extent of any
inconsistency, the latter prevail
Gummow J said it is necessary to show, at least, the intention manifestly and
plainly to achieve that result (at 128). 'Intention'
does not refer to any
particular state of mind. What is involved is the intention manifested by the
legislation (at 128). The question
is whether the existing right cannot be
exercised without abrogating the statutory right. If it cannot then, by
necessary implication,
the statute extinguishes the existing right (at 148). The
authorisation by the 1910 and 1962 Acts of activities amounting to physical
inconsistency with the continued exercise of what are now accepted as existing
rights of native title would manifest, as a matter
of necessary implication, the
legislative intention to impair or extinguish those rights (at 149). Impairment
or extinguishment would
also follow if the 1910 or 1962 Acts prohibited acts in
the exercise of native title (at 149). Later in his judgment, he held there
no 'clear, plain and distinct authorisation of acts necessarily inconsistent
with all species of native title which might have
existed' (at 168).
Brennan CJ said native title is liable to be extinguished by laws enacted by,
or with the authority of, the legislature, or by the
act of the executive in
exercise of powers conferred on it. Such laws may be of three kinds: (i) laws or
acts which simply extinguish
native title; (ii) laws or acts which create rights
in third parties in respect of parcels of land subject to native title which
inconsistent with the continued right to enjoy native title; and (iii) laws or
acts by which the Crown acquires full beneficial
ownership of land previously
subject to native title (at 24). A State or Territory law made or executive act
done since the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) came into force
cannot effect an extinguishment of native title if the law or executive act
would not effect the extinguishment
of a title acquired otherwise than as native
title (at 25).
In relation to his third category, Brennan CJ said the Crown, without
statutory authority, may have acquired beneficial ownership
appropriating land in which no interest has been alienated by the Crown (in the
case of a State or Territory, before the
Racial Discrimination Act
into force). Appropriation gives rise to the Crown's beneficial ownership only
when the land is actually used for some purpose
inconsistent with the continued
enjoyment of native title-for example, by building a school or laying a
pipeline. A mere reservation
of the land for the intended purpose, which does
not create third party rights over the land, does not alter the legal interests
in the land but the Crown's exercise of its sovereign power to use unalienated
land for its own purposes extinguishes, partially
or wholly, native title
interests in or over the land used (at 26). Although Brennan CJ was in dissent
on the pastoral lease issue,
these observations are likely to be cited and
closely scrutinised in relation to future native title claims. On the basis, as
found, that the pastoral leases conferred a right to exclusive possession,
Brennan CJ found also that inconsistency arises because
the rights of the lessee
and the rights of the holders of native title cannot be fully exercised at the
same time (at 27,28).
Content of native title
The case came to the High Court for determination of questions of law prior
to the taking of evidence and any determination as to
the existence of native
title. A number of members of the Court commented on the artificiality of the
process (per Toohey J at 76,
81; per Gummow J at 129). Toohey J said that at one
end of the spectrum native title rights may approach the rights flowing from
full ownership at common law. On the other hand, there may be an entitlement to
come on to land for ceremonial purposes. Gummow J
noted that the content of
native title, its nature and incidents, will vary from one case to another. It
may comprise personal or
communal usufructuary rights involving access to the
area of land in question to hunt for or gather food, or to perform traditional
ceremonies. This may leave room for others to use the land either concurrently
or from time to time. At the other opposite extreme,
the degree of attachment to
the land may be such as to approximate that which would flow from a legal or
equitable estate. The content
is to be ascertained by evidence (at 129).
In light of comments in the case, judges at first instance in native title
litigation may well be reluctant to determine questions
of law, particularly
questions relating to extinguishment, as preliminary questions prior to
determining the existence and content
of native title. Otherwise, the majority
judgments throw little new light on the content of native title. (Brennan CJ at
24 expanded
a little on
Pastoral leases: the historical setting
Each of the majority justices analysed the role of pastoral leases in
Australian land law, the historical setting, and the relevance
of traditional
principles of English property law in light of the applicable statutory
provisions. The majority considered pastoral
leases to be creatures of statute,
sui generis•(per Toohey J at 59, 63; per Gaudron J at 104,108; per Gummow
J at 163; per
Kirby J at 198).
Toohey J traced the history of disposition of waste lands. While the Royal
Prerogative was initially the source of grants of land
in Australia (at 54),
management and disposal of Crown land was subsequently brought under statutory
control (at 55) (see also per
Gaudron J at 92-93; per Gummow J at 134). The
legislation reflected a regime designed to meet a situation unknown to England,
the occupation of large tracts of land unsuitable for residential but
suitable for pastoral purposes (at 56-57, 80). Gaudron J similarly
pastoral leases were granted for vast areas, remote from settled areas (at 102,
110). The regime diverged significantly
from that which had been inherited from
England. It resulted in new forms of tenure (at 55, 57). These points were
emphasised also
by Gummow J (at 135, 138). It is necessary to look at the
relevant statutory provisions rather than simply apply feudal notions of
(at 58). Pastoral leases are a creature of statute, and the rights and
obligations that accompany them derive from statute
(at 59). The leases granted
under the 1910 Act were expressed to be for 'pastoral purposes only'. The rights
of the lessee were to
be determined accordingly (at 61).
Toohey, Gaudron and Kirby JJ each cited various contemporary documents, for
example, a despatch from Earl Grey, Secretary of State
for the Colonies, to the
Governor of New South Wales, that pastoral leases 'are not intended to deprive
the Natives of their former
right to hunt over these Districts' (per Toohey J at
67; per Gaudron J at 94-95; per Kirby J at 199).
Toohey J referred to the 'almost constant concern' expressed by authorities
in England 'that the grant of pastoral leases should not
be used to prevent
Aboriginals from using the land for subsistence purposes' (at 67). Similar
concerns were expressed in Australia.
Kirby J referred to historical materials which lie said demonstrated that it
was known that there were substantial numbers of Aborigines
using the land,
comprised in the pastoral leases, according to their traditional ways. It was
not government policy to drive them
into the sea, nor to confine them strictly
to reserves (at 219). It was not difficult to infer that when the Queensland
enacted legislation for pastoral leases, it had no intention thereby
to authorise a lessee to expel such Aborigines from the land
Gummow J referred to the difficulty in construing statutes enacted at a time
when the existing state of the law was perceived to be
the opposite of that
which it has, since then, been held to be (at 147).
Pastoral leases and exclusive possession
At the forefront of the case for the respondents was the argument that an
essential feature of a lease is that it confers exclusive
possession on the
Each of the majority Justices found that the leases did not confer a right to
exclusive possession. Brennan CJ (dissenting) found
they did confer such a
There was general agreement that the question whether a pastoral lease
conferred a right to exclusive possession is to be determined
by reference to
the lease and the legislation under which it was granted, not by reference to
what the parties called the instrument
(per Brennan CJ at 13-14; per Toohey J at
54, 64; per Gaudron J at 107). Pastoral leases are a creature of Australian
statute (per
Toohey J at 59, 63; per Gaudron J at 104, 106, 108; per Gummow J at
163; per Kirby J at 198), not of common law concepts. The majority
building on the historical setting, emphasised the need to apply the Australian
legislation, rather than simply apply feudal
notions of tenure or common law
principles relating to leases (per Toohey J at 58, 63).
Addressing the question whether a pastoral lease confers exclusive
possession, Toohey J rejected the respondents' argument that exclusive
possession is an essential element of a lease. To pose the issue that way is to
focus unduly on leasehold interests as known to the
common law, and to give
insufficient recognition to the fact that the pastoral lease is a creature of
statute (at 63). Rights and
obligations of a person holding an interest under
the relevant legislation are not disposed of by nomenclature (at 64). Pastoral
leases do not confer exclusive possession on the grantees especially in the
sense of excluding all holders of native title rights
(at 70, 81). Toohey J
cited with approval description by Windeyer J of a New South Wales mining lease
as 'really a sale by the Crown
of minerals reserved to the Crown to be taken by
the lessee at a price payable over a period of years as
royalties'.
The passage has implications for
the question whether a New South Wales mining lease extinguishes native
Against this background, Toohey J found that a pastoral lease granted to the
lessee possession for pastoral purposes. But nothing
in the statute which
authorised the lease, or in the lease itself, conferred rights to exclusive
possession, in particular possession
exclusive of all rights and interests of
the Indigenous inhabitants whose occupation derived from their traditional title
The continuation of native title is consistent with the disposition of
land through pastoral leases.
Gaudron J said there is no very secure basis for thinking that the pastoral
leases owed anything to common law concepts (at 108).
They were a novel concept,
and there was nothing to suggest that a right of exclusive possession was a
necessary or convenient feature
(at 108). Moreover, the vastness of the areas
and their inevitable remoteness militated against any intention that they should
a right of exclusive possession entitling pastoralists to drive away
native title holders. The argument for exclusive possession
was stronger in
relation to the 1962 Act, but clear words were required before that Act could be
construed as changing the essential
nature of the pastoral leases (at 124).
Gummow J also emphasised the statutory nature of the rights created by a
pastoral lease. The ordinary meaning of the phrase 'for the
purpose of pasture'
is the feeding of cattle or other livestock upon the land in question. The
phrase 'for pastoral purposes' would
include the feeding of cattle or other
livestock upon the land, but it may well be broader, and encompass activities
pursued in the
occupation of cattle or other livestock farming. Even upon this
broader interpretation, it cannot be said that there have been clearly,
and distinctly authorised activities and enjoyment of the land necessarily
inconsistent with the continued existence of any
of the incidents of native
title which could have been subsisting at the time of the grants of the pastoral
leases (Gummow J at 166).
Kirby J said the leasehold interests were of such a character and limited
intensity as to make it far from impossible for the Aborigines
to continue to
utilise the land in accordance with their native title (at 223). He left open
the possibility that, in particular
cases, and in particular places, native
title rights, in their operation, are inconsistent with rights under pastoral
leases. This
is a matter for evidence (at 224).
Key features of the statutory regime referred to by the majority Justices as
distinguishing pastoral leases from leases at common
(i) provisions conferring rights on authorised persons to enter upon the land
the subject of a pastoral lease, to remove timber,
stone, gravel, clay, guano or
other material;
(ii) provisions denying the lessee the right to ringbark, cut or destroy trees
and denying the lessee the power to restrict authorised
persons from cutting or
removing timber;
(iii) provisions authorising others to depasture stock if a stock route or road
passed through;
(iv) reservations in the leases of the right of authorised persons to go upon
the land for any purpose whatsoever, or to make any
survey, inspection or
examination (per Toohey J at 50, 70, 80; per Gaudron J at 91, 103-104, 109-110,
122; per Gummow J at 165; per
Kirby J at 201). Conferral of such extensive
rights on third parties was considered to be inconsistent with the submission
lease conferred rights of exclusive possession upon the lessee. Brennan
CJ (dissenting) considered that these reservations, far from
implying that the
lease did not confer a right to exclusive possession, implied that, without the
reservations, the lessee would
have been entitled to refuse entry to any person
(at 11). They were statutory exceptions to rights the lessee would otherwise
had (at 12);
(v) the provision in s6(2) of the 1910 Act that the making of a grant operated
to vest the interest granted whereas at common law
the interest would have
vested only upon entry into possession (per Toohey J at 80; per Gaudron J at
109-110; per Gummow J at 163).
Kirby J also relied on s6(2) to reject a submission for the Thayorre that, as
the successive lessees of the Mitchellton Holding never
went into possession,
the estates never vested in possession, with the result that the Crown never
acquired a reversion expectant
which was the postulate for the expansion of the
Crown's radical title to the
plenum dominium
that was said to extinguish
native title (at 215). Under the 1910 Act, execution of the lease alone was
sufficient (at 216). Brennan
CJ and Toohey J also held, on the basis of s6(2),
that execution of the lease was sufficient to vest the grant (per Brennan CJ at
23; per Toohey J at 79-80). The Thayorre argument may, however, be open in
relation to any leases, particularly leases in other States,
not governed by a
provision such as s6(2).
Brennan CJ, dissenting, gave weight to the use of terms that had acquired a
technical legal meaning (to demise, lease, vest estate
or interest, surrender,
etc: at 14-15). The use of the language of lease indicated agreement to give the
right of exclusive possession,
being the leading characteristic of a leasehold
estate (at 17, 20). His reasons relied on traditional property law authorities,
relevance and application of which was rejected by the majority.
Relevance of facts, evidence: to leases, native
title and extinguishment
The respondents argued the facts were irrelevant. The issue was to be decided
on legal principles, not factual evidence regarding
land use. Kirby J traced in
some detail the circumstances relating to the leases. Each was in a remote area.
In relation to the Mitchellton
leases, these lasted for only a short period. The
Thayorre asserted that they never left their ancestral land. There being no
by the lessees, they would have had no reason even to be aware of the
grant of pastoral leases. The position of the Holroyd River
Holding was not so
extreme, but it seemed to Kirby J a reasonable inference that traditional
Aboriginal life would have been little
disturbed by the grant of that lease (at
204). Kirby J considered the facts showed how Aboriginal law and tradition could
survive in such an environment because of the very limited contact
inherent in these pastoral leases. They were 'a far cry from the
situation in
settled and occupied areas of Australia where the extinguishment of native title
has a practical and necessary quality
sustaining a legal determination of
extinguishment by reference to the legal characteristics of common law or
residential leases'
(at 205). Clearly this analysis provides no support for
argument that suburban backyards are now at risk.
He rejected, however, an argument that whether native title had been
extinguished would depend in each case not on the legal instruments
evidence (at 208-210). He held that the question is not whether Indigenous
people have in fact been expelled from traditional
lands, but whether those
making claims to such lands had the legal right to exclude them. The search is
one which is directed at
the legal rights conferred on a landholder. Legal title
and its incidents should be ascertainable before the rights conferred are
actually exercised, and indeed whether they are exercised or not (at 210). Later
in his judgment, however, he noted that the ascertainment
of native title rights
is a matter for evidence (at 224). Brennan CJ (dissenting) expressed the same
view: the question of extinguishment
of native title by a grant of inconsistent
rights is-and must be-resolved as a matter of law, not of fact (at 9, 27).
Evidence is not, however, irrelevant. It is necessary to distinguish between
the relevance of facts/evidence to the ascertainment
of the rights of the
lessee, and the relevance of facts/evidence to the ascertainment of native title
rights. The legal interests
of the lessee are to be defined by the instrument of
the lease and the legislation under which it was granted. Native title is to
established by evidence. Because the issues came before the Court in the form of
abstract questions of law, whether the granting
of the leases necessarily
extinguished native title, the Court inevitably focussed on the legislation and
the terms of the grant.
It may be, however, that the general proposition, that
native title is extinguished by the grant of inconsistent rights, irrespective
of their exercise, does not necessarily mean that the conduct of the lessee is
in all circumstances irrelevant. Two members of the
majority, Gaudron and Gummow
JJ, suggested that compliance by the lessee with certain conditions, such as the
construction of an
airstrip and dams, would as a matter of fact exclude
enjoyment of native title (Gaudron J at 124, Gummow J at 168, cf also Toohey
at 83). (Semble, the right to construct the airstrip or dam does not constitute
a right to exclusive possession, but actual construction
is inconsistent with
native title.) The distinction between the grant of a right and compliance with
a condition, if followed by
other members of the Court, is likely to give rise
to difficulty. Importantly, questions of extinguishment necessarily involve
identification
of the relevant native title rights. That, it was accepted, is a
matter for evidence (per Toohey J at 75-76; per Gaudron J at 125;
per Kirby J at
Exclusive possession and ss 203, 204
Queensland also relied on ss203 and 204 of the 1910 Act (and the
corresponding provisions in ss372(1) and 373(1) of the 1962 Act)
as evincing
exclusive possession. Section 203 provided that any person found occupying any
Crown land not lawfully claiming under
a lease or licence was liable to a
penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
(Mason CJ and McHugh J agreeing) and Deane and Gaudron
construed the predecessor of s203, s91
Crown Lands Alienation Act 1876
(Qld), as not directed at
Indigenous inhabitants occupying land under native title because they were not
included in the class of
persons at whom s91 was directed. 'To construe s91 ...
as applying to the Meriam people ... would be truly barbarian' ((1992) 175
at 114). This construction was followed (Toohey J at 60, 69, Gaudron J at 101,
Gummow J at 155).
Section 204 provided a remedy in respect of unlawful occupation. Gaudron J
said once it was accepted that s203 did not render Aboriginal
people trespassers
on their own land, it followed that s204 did not, of itself, render them
trespassers on a pastoral lease (at 101).
Gummow J said the section did not render Indigenous inhabitants relying upon
their native title liable to removal, either because
s203 did not apply or
because 'unlawful' was to be construed as meaning without any bona fide claim of
right (at 158).
Expansion of radical title
The respondents relied strongly on the following passage in the judgment of
Brennan J in
Mabo [No. 2]:
'If a lease be granted, the lessee acquires possession and the Crown acquires
the reversion expectant on the expiry of the term. The
Crown's title is thus
expanded from the mere radical title and, on the expiry of the term, becomes a
plenum dominium ((1992)
[1992] HCA 23
If adopted and applied, this proposition would have been fatal to the native
title claim.
The majority judges each rejected this approach. Toohey J said that to speak,
in relation to the position of the Crown under the relevant
statutes, of a
reversion expectant on the expiry of a lease as expanding the Crown's radical
title to a plenum dominium was to apply
the concept of reversion to an
unintended end. The Crown was able to deal with the land as authorised by
statute. Under the statutes,
once a pastoral lease came to an end, the land
answered the description of 'Crown land' and could be dealt with accordingly (at
Gaudron J said a reversionary interest only arises on the vesting of a
leasehold estate. As the grant of a pastoral lease did not
confer a right to
exclude native title holders and thus did not confer a right of exclusive
possession, the leases were not true
leases in the traditional common law sense,
and thus did not operate to vest a leasehold estate. It followed that there was
for the contention that on the grant of the lease the Crown acquired a
reversionary interest, and its radical title was thereby expanded
beneficial ownership (at 111). Moreover, the effect of the provision in s135 for
a statutory reversion upon forfeiture was
to assimilate the previously alienated
land to land in respect of which the Crown had radical title, and not to land in
which it had beneficial ownership (at 112). Section 299 of the 1962
Act, which applied to the Holroyd lease, had a different provision
pointing to a
reversion extending beyond radical title (at 123).
Gummow J said the argument broke down when applied to the statutory schemes
for the disposition of Crown lands established by the
1910 and 1962 Acts (at
151). He referred to statutory provisions, originally enacted in 1867 and
repeated in successive statutes,
for the Governor in Council to grant in fee
simple or demise for a term of years any Crown land. These provisions displaced
the prerogatives
of the Crown: thereafter, all land in Queensland was to be
dealt with pursuant to statute (at 151-152). In respect of leases, there
need for the creation in the Crown of a reversionary estate out of which lesser
estates might then be granted. Rather, when
the lease expired, it again answered
the statutory definition of Crown land (s4(c)), and was liable to be further
dealt with by the
Crown. Reference was also made to a statutory provision that
if the lease is determined by forfeiture the land is to revert and become
land. Whilst entry was necessary to create a common law reversion, the statute
vested the land without the need for prior entry.
Further, at common law, entry
was necessary to create the estate in reversion. However, the 1910 Act operated
without the creation
of what at common law would be regarded as a reversionary
estate (at 164). The statute used the expression in s135 'shall revert
Majesty and become Crown land' in respect of determination of a lease before
expiry of the term. Under the common law, determination
would not ordinarily be
described as bringing about a reversion (at 165).
Kirby J noted that the actual orders made in
Mabo (No. 2)
excluded the
land the subject of the two leases. Therefore, the effect of the grant of
leasehold interests upon native title was
not authoritatively decided (at 196).
The passage in the reasons of Brennan J cited above was not part of the binding
rule established
Mabo (No. 2)
(at 196). Kirby preferred the analysis
of Lee J in the Waanyi Case to that of Hill J (Jenkinson J concurring).
Kirby J also distinguished the passage from Brennan J in
Mabo (No. 2)
In that passage, Brennan J implied that it was not the grant of the lease which
had the effect of expanding the Crown's title 'from
the mere radical title' to a
'plenum dominium', but the acquisition of the reversion expectant on the expiry
of the leasehold term.
This required legal analysis of the consequences of the
exercise of sovereign rights in respect of each dealing in land. Thus, a
grant of land in trust or dedication of land for public purposes was also an
exercise by the Crown of its rights as a sovereign,
but was not regarded by
Brennan J as sufficient to extinguish native title (at 207). The key objection,
for Kirby J, was that
Mabo (No. 2)
made it clear that not all estates and
interests in land could be explained by reference to the English legal doctrine
derived ultimately from the sovereign. A different source of title had
now to be accommodated by the recognition of native title
as a burden on the
Crown's radical title. Something more was needed to remove that burden, and to
extinguish native title, than a
mere exercise by the Crown of rights of dominium
in respect of that land.
Later in his judgment, Kirby J was more critical: ‘To invent the
notion, not sustained by the actual language of the Land Acts,
that the power
conferred on the Crown to grant a pastoral lease interest was an indirect way of
conferring on the Crown "ownership"
of the land by means of the reversion
expectant involves a highly artificial importation of feudal notions into
Australian legislation
(at 218). And towards the end of his judgment: The
suggestion that it was necessary and inherent in the special Queensland
legislation
creating the uniquely Australian property interest of a pastoral
lease to import the paraphernalia of English feudal leasehold notions
rejected' (at 224).
Relevance of traditional property law
One of the most significant features of
is the rejection, by the
majority, of the application of traditional land law concepts.
Toohey J in effect rejected analysis based on English property law relating
to leases (at 58, 59, 63). Thus at one point in his judgment,
he emphasised that
the rights and obligations were not to be disposed of by nomenclature (at 64).
Later he said '[t]hat a concept
of feudal tenure brought to Australia but
subjected to change through a complex system of rights and obligations adapted
to the physical,
social and economic conditions of the new colony, in particular
the disposition of large areas of land (often unsurveyed) for a limited
a limited purpose, should determine the fate of the indigenous people is a
conclusion not lightly to be reached' (70).
Gummow J noted that to meet local conditions, including vast areas of
unoccupied lands, colonial statutes created new forms of tenure
not known to the
common law. The terms 'lease' and 'licence' were applied in a generic sense (at
134-135). The issue in the case
did not concern the extinguishment of native
title by grant of a fee simple or a leasehold interest as known to the common
law. Rather,
the statutory grants of pastoral leases were
sui generis
Brennan CJ, in dissent, adhered to the view that the common law system of
land law, including the interlocking doctrines of tenure
and estates, applied in
Australia (at 30-31). Exercise of the statutory power of alienation of an estate
brought land within the
regime governed by the doctrines of tenure and estates.
Native title existed only in respect of unalienated and unappropriated land
32-33). Under the 1910 Act, on the issue of a pastoral lease, the reversion was
held by the Crown (at 33). Central to this analysis
is the view that grant of a
lease is more than an exercise of statutory or sovereign power: by reason of
applicable principles of
land law, the grant is an act of alienation.
Approaches to construction
Gaudron J held that the question whether pastoral leases conferred a right of
exclusive possession was concluded in favour of the
continued existence of
native title rights by application of the rule of construction identified in
Mabo (No. 2)
, that general legislation with respect to waste lands or
Crown land 'is not to be construed, in the absence of clear and unambiguous
words, as intended to apply in a way which will extinguish or diminish rights
under common law native title'.
simply a manifestation of the general rule which requires that clear and
unambiguous words would be used before there will
be imputed to the legislature
an intention to expropriate or extinguish valuable rights relating to property
without fair compensation
(at 111, citing
Mabo (No. 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
at 111; see also at 124). Gummow J referred to the burden borne by a party
seeking to establish the extinguishment of subsisting
rights not by express
legislative provision but by necessary implication (at 148).
Kirby J also emphasised that there is a strong presumption that a statute is
not intended to extinguish native title. This is a species
of a general
proposition: the presumption that Parliament would not normally take away the
rights of individuals or groups, without
clearly stating such a purpose (at
221-222; see also at 224).
These principles will of course be relevant in applying Wik to legislation in
the other States and the Territories.
Fiduciary duties
Toohey J, the only member of the Court in
Mabo (No. 2)
to hold that
the power of the Crown to extinguish native title gave rise to a fiduciary
relationship ((1992)175 CLR at 203), considered
it unnecessary to pursue this
aspect (at 71), as did Gaudron J (at 112, 125). Gummow J assumed, adversely to
the Wik Peoples and
the Thayorre People, that there was no fiduciary
relationship between them and the State of Queensland (at 128).
Brennan CJ rejected the application of a fiduciary relationship, holding that
the sovereign power of alienation was antipathetic to
the safeguarding of the
holders of native title-Parliament imposed no guidelines to be observed in its
exercise (at 22). The imposition
on the repository of a statutory power of a
fiduciary duty to individuals who will be adversely affected by the exercise of
would preclude its exercise (at 38). Canadian and United States
authorities were distinguished, for example the Canadian legislation
imposed on the Crown
the duty to act 'on the band's behalf'.
power of alienation conferred by the 1910 Act was inherently inconsistent with
the notion that it should be exercised as agent
for or on behalf of the
Indigenous inhabitants of the land to be alienated (at 38).
Only Kirby J gave scope to the possibility of a contrary view, referring to
'the duty which the Crown owed, in honour, to native people
who were under the
Crown's protection' (at 222, citing
and Toohey J in
The Special Bauxite Mining Leases
The appellants also challenged the validity of Special Bauxite Mining Leases
which had been granted by Queensland to two mining companies
under the authority
of Queensland legislation. The challenge failed, the Court holding, unanimously,
that because the relevant leases
and associated agreements were authorised by
legislation, the claims of failure to accord natural justice or to perform a
duty could not be made out (per Kirby J at 226-236; Toohey, Gaudron
and Gummow JJ concurring at 80,86,130; per Brennan CJ at 40-43).
The decision does not mean that the Wik and Thayorre have established native
title. Their claims will now go back to the Federal Court
for determination. In
that determination, the granting of the pastoral leases will not, however, be a
necessary obstacle.
In so far as pastoral leases are concerned, the rights and obligations of
each grantee depend upon the terms of the grant of the pastoral
lease and upon
the statute which authorised it (per Toohey J at 82, Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby
JJ concurring).
More generally, in the words of Kirby J, '[T]he holders of pastoral leases
are left with precisely the legal rights which they enjoyed
pursuant to the
leases granted under the Land Acts "for pastoral purposes only" '(at 225).
Whether there was extinguishment can only
be determined by reference to such
particular rights and interests as may be asserted and established. If there be
inconsistency
between native title rights and rights conferred under the
statutory grants, the rights under the statutory grants will prevail,
extent of the inconsistency (per Toohey J at 83; Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ
concurring; see also per Kirby J at 225). Co-existence
of rights under pastoral
leases and native title is possible because of the peculiarity of the legal
rights conferred by such statutory
leases, in the factual setting in which they
were intended to operate.
Traditional land law concepts based on feudal tenure will have limited
relevance. Unless leases clearly confer a right to exclusive
possession, they
will not automatically extinguish native title.
Also, that co-existence is not possible in relation to fee simple has been
confirmed (per Toohey J at 74; per Gaudron J at 87; per
Gummow J at 137; per
Kirby J at 225).
Whether native title is extinguished by other leasehold interests in
Queensland and by pastoral and other leasehold interests elsewhere
in Australia
will need to be resolved on a case by case basis.
The decision does not cast doubt on the validity of leases granted prior to
the commencement of the
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth). In relation to
leases granted after the commencement of the
Native Title Act
'future act' provisions apply. If leases over areas of land in respect of which
native title has not been extinguished have
been granted otherwise than in
accordance with those provisions, questions of validity will arise.
This casenote is submitted in a personal
capacity. It does not purport to reflect the views of the Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s
Department or of the Commonwealth Government.
. (1992)175 CLR 1. In Western Australia v
The Commonwealth ((1995)
[1995] HCA 47
183 CLR 373)
, the Court upheld the validity of the
Native Title Act 1993
(Cth), other than s12. Note also North Ganalanja
Aboriginal Corporation v Queensland ((1996)
135 ALR 225)
, which was decided on
primarily procedural issues, the High Court deciding, by majority, that it was
premature to determine the correctness
of the Federal Court's decision on the
pastoral lease question.
(1992)175 CLR 1.
Wik Peoples v State of Queensland
(1996)134 ALR 637.
(1995)132 ALR 565.
(1996) 134 ALR 637
, at 666, 669.
(1993) 104 DLR (4th) 470
Wade v New South Wales Rutile Mining Co
[1969] HCA 28
(1969) 121 CLR 177
(1992)175 CLR 1 at 66.
(1992)175 CLR 1 at 114.
(1992)175 CLR 1 at 111.
(1984) 13 DLR (4th) 321.
(1985)13 DLR (4th) 321 at 334, 310.
(1984)2 SCR 335 at 376.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter