URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawSymp/2006/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Magnusson, Roger --- "Law, Religion and Biomedicine: Consensus or Conflict?" [2006] MqLawSymp 6; (2006) 1(1) Macquarie Law Symposium 59
LAW, RELIGION AND BIOMEDICINE: CONSENSUS OR
ROGER MAGNUSSON
I INTRODUCTION
Professor George Smith has a bold vision. He argues that the ‘broad
ethical norms for purposeful living’
that emerge from religious texts share enough in common and are sufficiently
abstract that they can be distilled – or at least
interpreted – in
order to generate a broad consensus on how society, through law, should regulate
biomedicine. The belief that
the various faith traditions share common ground
and can act as a resource for identifying where the public benefit lies when
confronting
questions about new biomedical technologies, is perhaps the most
provocative hypothesis Professor Smith advances in his paper.
Let’s put Professor Smith’s grand vision in a clearer context.
For many scholars working in law and medicine, what is
exciting about this field
is the chance to explore the legal and ethical problems posed by the application
of technology to medicine
and the biological sciences. Often, scholars gravitate
towards a topic of interest – such as electronic medical records, prenatal
genetic testing, or cloning – and proceed to investigate how the
possibilities of the technology
, be shaped by the
policies that law embodies. In his paper, Professor Smith introduces a new
player – religion – into
the fray. He is clearly right to identify
religion as a force that influences and constrains both advances in
(bio)medicine itself,
and the way that law responds to them.
Yet Professor Smith does not limit himself to the way that religion
influences the law’s regulation of this or that biomedical
hot topic. His
interest is the broader, fundamental question of how religion, as a moral and
social force, should interact with the
law in shaping biomedicine and its
associated technologies. (Later in his paper, through a discussion of evolution,
creationism and
intelligent design, he raises the issue of religion’s role
in shaping science). Most commentators accept that in a free, democratic
society, organised religion should be free to argue its ideals in the
marketplace of ideas and to ‘influence policy as much
At the same time, there must
be limits. It is inconsistent with the idea of a pluralist society for this or
that religious organisation
– through its appropriation of political and
legal channels – to seek to ‘impose [its own] specifically religious
views of moral behaviour on those citizens who do not share their
Where religion ought to draw the
line, in influencing the regulation of biomedicine, is a permanent site of
conflict in bioethics
and medical law.
II WHERE DOES PROFESSOR SMITH STAND?
Professor Smith is well aware of the dilemma. ‘Invariably’, he
writes, ‘law supports some visions of how life should
be lived within the
community while, at the same time, undermining
We might sketch a rough
continuum. On the far right lies the ‘moral politics’ view: religion
competes for influence
in the political and legal arena and seeks to
institutionalise its own (‘morally right’) views. On the far left is
‘personal morality’ view: religion avoids intruding into the
political and legal realm, retaining a public presence,
no doubt, but seeking to
appeal primarily to personal conscience. The left hand view tries to avoid
mixing law with religion; the
right hand view tries to
make religion
Professor Smith appears to share with the right-hand side of the continuum
the assumption that it is appropriate for religion to express
its views through
political and legal processes. He is a believer, an optimist and – at some
level – a natural lawyer.
One of the challenges for bioethics, he
suggests, is to ‘restate the relevance of [Christian, possibly
Judeo-Christian] religious
principles to a skeptical secular
Religion and law both share
the same moral core: love, from which springs justice, and a concern for public
benefit. Religion
therefore aim to influence law, and indeed,
‘Without religion, law degenerates into little more than a mechanical
and religion without law loses its social
effectiveness’.
On the other hand, Smith is ecumenical rather than sectarian. He wants to
unlock the potential of ‘faith-based denominational
efforts’, to
move beyond their
abstractness
in order to identify useful guidance on
how to respond to the challenges of biomedical governance. He doesn’t say
many words, but Professor Smith’s approach reads as a strong
dissent from what is currently the most visible contribution of
religion to
biomedicine and health law: the ‘Biblical
BioPolitics’
of the American religious
Ultimately, Professor Smith’s implicit ecumenism poses some hard
questions. Can religion speak with
(as distinct from many), in
order to present a coherent response to the regulatory questions that biomedical
technology forces upon
society? Is it too optimistic to suggest that these
three domains – law, biomedicine and religion – can cooperate
effectively
to strengthen ‘what should be the ultimate goal of the state
namely: to secure the happiness, spiritual tranquillity and well-being
And above all,
version of medicine, and
capable of achieving this goal? Law, medicine and religion are all (besides
being many other things) sites for the expression
of political power. To ignore
that; to downplay religious differences and to over-emphasise consensus carries
the risk that we will
swallow a regulatory framework that expresses the moral
agenda of some, while claiming to represent all.
III THE CONVERGING ORBITS OF LAW, BIOMEDICINE, ETHICS AND
Stepping back for a moment, there can be no argument about the starting point
for George Smith’s dream of a rapprochement between
law, religion and
medicine. Law has become increasingly enmeshed with medicine, and this will
continue. As Ian Kennedy has argued,
legislatures may, for a time, sidestep hot
political issues. But inevitably, ‘the courts will be invited, urged or
to step in’.
Beset by problems which are immensely difficult, going to the heart of what
we want for ourselves and for others, and faced by public
institutions which are
reluctant to act, those with something to gain or lose will take their claim to
the courts, the one institution
which, once asked, cannot refuse to supply a
History demonstrates how the concerns of bioethics have evolved steadily into
issues. Following hot on the heels of the inter-disciplinary
conversations of the 1960-70s came recourse to the courts and the appearance
legislation: the rapid emergence of ‘medical
Physicians and scientists might
not like it, but law’s appropriation of
profession –
including, at times, their clinical discretion – reflects the exercise of
political power in our society.
While lawyers tend to take the blame for this,
it is not the power of the legal profession that is driving the
Rather, law is the system through
which the power is exercised. In so far as there is legislation, the State is
increasingly regulating
decisions that were once informal and discretionary.
Case law, for its part, illustrates how health consumers (aka
‘patients’)
are pressing their rights, and disrupting the historical
power (im)balance between doctors and patients.
Professor Smith points out that as medicine comes increasingly within
law’s gravitational pull, many of the issues that are
legislated or otherwise regulated, are
Law has coalesced around these issues
precisely because they are seen to have moral, and therefore religious
significance. This has
given rise to struggles for regulatory control. On
repeated occasions – as illustrated recently by the Teri Schiavo case in
the United States – groups who share moral and religious ideals have
sought to influence both the courts and the legislature.
politics’ is alive and well.
IV A CLOSER LOOK AT THE GRAND VISION
So what are the values that Professor Smith believes religion will bring to
biomedicine? As I read Professor Smith’s work, there
is an unmistakeable
emphasis upon public benefit (as distinct from individual interests), which is
ultimately to be achieved through
a form of cost/benefit analysis. The
underlying purpose is to identify (without privileging any particular religious
or denominational
tradition) the forms of regulation that will minimise human
suffering, while maximising human flourishing and genetic well-being.
utilitarian calculus, tempered with compassion, is an enduring feature of
Smith’s work.
Professor Smith is
neither a moral conservative, nor a libertarian, which explains his perspective
on genetic health. Worldwide,
a recent report suggests that 3.3 million children
under 5 years of age die each year from serious birth defects, causing an
burden, particularly on poorer
Professor Smith is well aware of
the problem: his proactivist view on displacing ‘man’s genetic
weaknesses from the line
inheritance’
[sic] reflects somewhat
non-libertarian opinions about ‘responsible’ parenthood and the
limits of reproductive freedom
(elsewhere, for example, he has advocated
mandatory genetic screening programs).
couples this with rather progressive views about experimentation in human
embryology and reproductive biology.
How, in a more mechanical sense, can biomedicine and religion establish the
communication channels necessary to generate the guidance
Smith believes
religion can provide? Smith invites religion to move beyond abstractions and
‘a recitation of traditional
‘interrogative’, entering a dialogue with biomedical science that
permits ‘fallibilism’ and a tentative
approach towards hitherto
established positions. Universal principles and rules are out: Smith advocates a
kind of virtue ethics,
arguing that ‘Perhaps it is best to see law as a
way in which both justice and love are translated into complex social situations
within various communities’.
For my money, I suspect that the larger, hierarchical denominations of the
Christian Church would opt for their own ‘moral politics’
to bioethics in preference to the process of dialogue Smith has in mind. More
fundamentally, I wonder if the values and
belief structures of the major
religions preclude commonality on bioethical issues, except perhaps at an
abstract, rather meaningless
V THE FIVE ‘NON-NEGOTIABLES’: CONSENSUS OR
In the United States, where Professor Smith has taught law for over 25 years,
the Christian Right – an active participant in
bioethics – has
focused its political activity on ‘five non-negotiables’: abortion,
gay rights, assisted suicide,
stem cells, and
As Dombrink notes, these five
‘take as their central point the contestation of certain facets of
personal autonomy and morality’;
their common theme is a ‘culture of
Belief in the sanctity of life
at, and from, the point of conception (a belief supported by the theological
notion of the soul),
together with belief in the sanctity of marriage and in God
as the creator and source of new life, provide pillar supports for this
‘culture of life’. The view that emerges is hostile to abortion
(typically seen as murder), and disapproving of assisted
conception (which
commodifies procreation, ignores the moral status of the foetus, and displaces
God’s role in the miracle
of new life). Similarly, stem cell research that
involves the destruction of embryos is regarded as murder, while whole body
is rejected since it dispenses with God-as-creator and with the
heterosexual union which is the proper context for procreation.
It is not correct to contend, however, that all faith traditions accept these
conclusions in an absolutist fashion, much less all
people who wish to behave
morally and approach bioethics in a thoughtful way. For some, a developing
foetus acquires greater moral
significance commensurate with its rate of
development; an in vitro foetus deserves respect as potential life, but not
necessarily
the respect accorded to live-born ‘persons’. God may be
the source of life, but few believers would dissent from the
way that medicine,
on a daily basis, supplements or supplants the body’s natural biological
processes: some feel no particular
discomfort when medicine’s
interventions relate to reproduction. Professor Smith would himself support the
screening of extracorporeal
embryos for genetic diseases, as well as their use
for research purposes, including stem cell
The point is, moral premises matter, and the moral implications of bioethical
issues are a matter of genuine debate, even within the
Judeo-Christian
tradition. For example, while the dualist belief in a soul that – from
conception – has a separate existence
from the body provides the
theological foundation for resisting abortion and stem cell research involving
the destruction of the
foetus, not all religious traditions (including Judaism
and Seventh-day Adventism) acknowledge such a distinction. Not surprisingly,
this significantly alters moral intuitions and permits more latitude on
questions of abortion and reproductive decision-making, while
generating a
tendency to balance the (evolving) moral significance of a foetus against the
interests of a pregnant mother or intending
mother. Turning to the end of life,
while the Catholic and Anglican churches supported the Commonwealth Act that
overturned the Northern
Territory’s brief experiment with euthanasia
legislation,
the Uniting Church criticised
euthanasia opponents for ‘simplistic and inaccurate views of
euthanasia’ and attacked the
legislation, arguing that it was ‘not
commensurate moral responsibility for the human beings who are affected
by their decision’.
To argue that
these views somehow ‘don’t count’, perhaps because they are
‘dissenting’ or ‘minority’
perspectives, is simply to
engage in moral politics. Could Professor Smith be exaggerating the capacity for
a consensus even within
the Christian churches, let alone elsewhere?
VI WHAT IS LEFT OUT OF THE VISION?
In conclusion, it is worth noting that religion’s influence upon
biomedicine, especially as illustrated by the ‘culture
issues of the Christian right, contrasts brightly with the lack of engagement
between religion and questions of
human health.
Religion’s concern
in biomedicine tends not to be the health of the body, but the protection of
certain moral principles. One
might well ask: if religion is concerned to
protect life (restricting abortion; over-riding personal autonomy by prohibiting
death), even to the point of requiring the continuation of ventilation
and life-prolonging hydration and nutrition for a person in
an incurable
vegetative state, why don’t the determinants of a
healthy life
assume greater moral significance for the organised religions? Why is
‘life’ itself such a distinctly moral matter, in
comparison to a
‘healthy life’? Why does religion focus its concern upon bioethics,
remaining largely unconcerned with
questions of public health?
The contribution of modifiable lifestyle risk factors to illness and death is
well established.
In Australia, tobacco
smoking has been estimated as responsible for 12% of the total disease burden in
men and 7% in women, mostly
due to lung cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, heart attack, and stroke.
voice of organised religion is much fainter here; indeed, counter-productive in
some cases. So it is, then, that newspapers
around the world carried pictures of
the Pope giving a private audience to the Marlboro Formula One motor racing
team, admiring a
model car emblazoned with the world’s best known
cigarette brand.
Back in Australia,
Sydney’s Catholic Archbishop has claimed that ‘Homosexual activity
is a much greater health hazard
It is not, of course, even
if one were to assume (erroneously) that all cases of AIDS in the world are
somehow caused by homosexuality.
Sometimes, I would suggest, religion’s
choice of what are the ‘moral issues’ (ie, those issues that have
weight of ‘morality’ attached to them), is curious if not
arbitrary. The challenge remains for religion, to adopt Professor
argument, to be a resource for
public health
, as well as for responding
to those issues that have come to be associated with the discipline of
Professor Smith’s vision of a rapprochement between religion and
biomedicine is a reminder to people of goodwill everywhere
to look for common
ground, and to pursue public benefit instead of private advantage. I suspect,
however, that organised religion
will continue to be a political actor,
jockeying for position as it seeks to influence law to do the ‘right
its regulation of biomedicine. Health law and bioethics will
remain interesting for some time yet!
Associate Professor of Law, University of
G P Smith, ‘Law, Religion, and
Medicine: Conjunctive or Disjunctive?’ (2006)
Macquarie Law Symposium
– Law, Religion and Medical Science
L Skene and M Parker, ‘The Role of
the Church in Developing the Law’ (2002) 28
Journal of Medical
215, 215-6. Skene and Parker accept that ‘the church, like
other institutions, legitimately competes for support in elaborating
living life and organising society in a public, not just a private sense’:
C Coady, ‘Religious Meddling: A
Comment on Skene and Parker’ (2002) 28
Journal of Medical Ethics
Smith, above n 1, 16.
Smith, above n 1, 17.
Smith, above n 1, 20. In the same way,
Smith argues that religion
to influence medical ethics: ‘When
a distinctly religious voice in, for example, medical ethics becomes passive or
this in turn encourages a form of moral philosophy for the market place
and thus places law as the dominant source of morality’:
The term belongs to Perry: See, J E
Perry, ‘Biblical BioPolitics: Judicial Process, Religious Rhetoric, Terri
Schiavo and
Beyond’ (2006) 16(2)
Health Matrix
http:// ssrn.com/abstract=775587
Smith, above n 1, 16.
I Kennedy, ‘The Medical
Frontier’ in L Howe and A Wain (eds),
Predicting the Future
96-117, 111. Kennedy continues: ‘Of course, when the courts do step in,
the subtle and difficult question of whether
the issue really does call for
legal regulation becomes moot. The court is stuck with the problem and must make
a decision. Public
policy there will be and it will be law’.
See, R S Magnusson, ‘A Short
History of the Next Thirty Years: Genetic Testing, Clinical Care and Personal
[2003] UNSWLawJl 49
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Lawyers are omnipresent, of course,
but rather like bankers, they assist interested parties to gain access to the
legal system (and
impose their tax for doing so), as distinct from being
directly responsible for what Hillyard and Dombrink call the ‘general
domestication of medicine’ that is being accomplished
through law
D Hillyard and J Dombrink,
Dying Right: the Death with Dignity Movement
Smith, above n 1, 16.
See, eg, J Eisenberg,
Using Terri:
The Religious Right’s Conspiracy to Take Away Our Rights
Charatan, reviewing this book, quotes Howard Ahmanson Jr, a prominent funder of
the religious right, as saying ‘My
purpose is total integration of
biblical law into our lives’
British Medical Journal
R C O’Brien, ‘The World of
Law, Science and Medicine According to George P Smith II’
Journal of Contemporary Health Law and Policy
J Zarocostas, ‘Serious Birth
Defects Kill at Least Three Million Children a Year’
Medical Journal
Smith, above n 1, 16-17.
See G P Smith,
Human Rights and
Biomedicine
(2000) 117ff.
See R S Magnusson, ‘Review of
Human Rights and Biomedicine by George P Smith II’
[2001] SydLawRw 27
Smith, above n 1, 18.
Smith, above n 1, 20.
See J Dombrink, ‘Red, Blue, and
Purple: The Paradox of American Views Towards Personal Morality and the
Law’ [Spring
J Dombrink, ‘Deepening Reds,
Contrasting Blues, and Various Purples’ (unpublished paper).
See Smith, above n 17, 38, 51.
The Rights of the Terminally Ill
(NT) was overturned by the
Euthanasia Laws Act 1997
H Pitt, ‘Churches Split in
Euthanasia Morality Clash’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 18
January 1997, 3. The Reverend Harry Herbert, Secretary to the Uniting
Church’s Board for Social Responsibility
said that ‘If people better
understood the issues, they would see the need for voluntary euthanasia in very
limited cases’:
Helen Pitt, ‘Uniting Church Divided on
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 26 March 1997, 6. By
contrast Gino Concetti, a Franciscan priest, writing in
L’Osservatore
, the Vatican’s official voice, states: ‘Man is not the
owner of human life but its wise administrator, as has been repeated
for centuries. Consequently he cannot be ‘Lord’ of death either.
Death has to come as a natural event. It
is not licit for anyone to accelerate
it by any means. To kill – to interrupt or suppress life – is always
a crime. It
is a crime whether it is executed out of pity or in order to avoid
the sufferings of an irreversible terminal condition’: G.
‘Life is Not Ours to Choose’, re-printed in
(Melbourne), 5 July 1996, A13.
For example, epidemiological research
confirms that certain risk factors (including smoking, physical inactivity,
obesity, high
blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, diabetes and inadequate
fruit and vegetable intake) are responsible for an alarming share
of the burden
of disease. The recent INTERHEART case-control study found that over 90% of the
risk of heart attack in men and women,
young and old, across all geographical
regions and ethnic groups can be predicted by the seven above-mentioned risk
factors, together
with an eighth factor, psychosocial stressors. A ninth factor,
alcohol consumption, had a modest protective effect: S Yusuf,
‘Effect of Potentially Modifiable Risk Factors Associated with Myocardial
Infarction in 52 Countries (the INTERHEART Study):
Case-Control Study’
C Mathers, T Vos and C Stevenson,
The Burden of Disease and Injury in Australia
(1999) 103, 107.
David Simpson, ‘Italy: Holy
Smoke! Pope Swerves Off Track for Marlboro’ (2005) 14(2)
D Marr, ‘For Whom the Pell
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 31 March 2001, 29.
See, eg, M Ghouri, M Atcha and A
Sheikh, ‘Influence of Islam on Smoking Among Muslims’
British Medical Journal
The authors argue that religious rulings
declaring smoking to be religiously prohibited (
) and not merely
discouraged (
), could have an enormous effect on public health in
Islamic countries, where smoking rates exceed those in English-speaking
In 2004, smoking prevalence in Australia was 17.4%; in Indonesia it
was 69% (for men), and 3% (for women): 292.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter