URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2001/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alpin, Tanya --- "When are compilations orginal? Telstra Corporation Ltd v Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd" [2001] DigTechLawJl 1; (2001) 3(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 1
When are compilations original? Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd
Tanya Aplin
Robinson College, Cambridge
Introduction
Subsistence
Infringement
Introduction
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd
is a recent first instance decision of the Federal Court of Australia
concerning the standard of originality required for compilations
attract copyright protection. Its significance lies in the fact that
Finkelstein J refused to follow the approach of the U.S.
Supreme Court
Feist Publications, Inc v Rural Telephone Service Co. Inc
('Feist'). Instead, his honour held that sufficient labour or
expense in gathering data, known alternatively as 'industrious
collection'
or 'sweat of the brow', could qualify a compilation as
Telephone directories were at
the centre of the dispute in this case. The applicant, Telstra
Corporation Ltd ('Telstra'), together
with its wholly owned subsidiary,
Pacific Access, is in the business of producing, on an annual basis,
white pages directories and
yellow pages directories for each of
fifty-five areas within Australia. The first respondent, Desktop
Marketing Systems Pty Ltd ('Desktop')
produced its own versions of
white and yellow pages directories on CD-Rom. The second respondent was
a director of Desktop. Telstra's
objection to Desktop's business
activities arose from the simple fact that Desktop's products used
primary data extracted from its
directories.
To appreciate the nature of
Telstra's claim of copyright infringement against Desktop, it is useful
to look in more detail at the
nature and production of their respective
Each white pages directory
produced by Telstra follows a standard format. The first segment of a
directory contains 'information pages',
which pages include useful
general information. The second segment is the true 'directory' part of
the publication, in which the
name, address and telephone number of
every subscriber in the area, barring those with a 'silent' number, is
Every white pages directory is
created by a combination of manpower and machine. The telephone number
and address of every telephone
subscriber is entered manually into a
computer program. This program classifies entries into those that do or
do not require manual
editing and then transfers the information to a
into alphabetical
order. An entry that is rejected by the program is
manually verified. The information is then transferred from the
graphics compilation and typesetting system. Editors
proof every line of the proof pages for errors. Corrected proof pages
sent to the publisher for printing, binding and publication.
The major difference in the
format of a yellow pages directory is that businesses are grouped under
headings that describe business
activity. These headings are listed
alphabetically and each business is listed under the appropriate
heading in alphabetical order,
together with its address and telephone
number. There is also the option of purchasing an enhanced entry,
namely, a listing formatted
in such a way as to attract special
attention. The sale of enhanced listings is what makes the production
of directories (both white
and yellow) lucrative for Telstra.
Compiling a yellow pages
directory also requires the appropriate heading for a particular
listing to be chosen. This is usually done
by the subscriber, with
occasional guidance from a Telstra salesperson. Headings are selected
from unpublished heading books, which
have been developed over many
years and which are revised annually.
Desktop produced three CD-Rom
directories, 'CD-Phone Directory', 'Phonedisk' and 'Marketing Pro'.
CD-Phone Directory contained the
name, address and telephone number of
every telephone subscriber in Australia. Names were listed
alphabetically within each postcode
number and postcodes were ordered
sequentially. A search by name could be conducted. Phonedisk contained
the same data as CD-Phone
Directory, but permitted the data to be
be saved or printed.
Marketing Pro was Desktop's
most sophisticated and commercially successful product. It consisted of
eight different editions representing
different geographical areas (one
national edition, four state editions and three city additions). As
well as grouping each business
by type, businesses were also
categorised by reference to the American Standard Industrial
Classification Code and its Australian
and New Zealand counterparts.
Advanced searching capabilities were available. There were twenty-seven
different ways to search the
data, amongst the more important being by
business name, business activity, industry classification and area.
also be saved and printed.
The primary data for Desktop's products
was extracted from the applicant's directories, however, it was not
directly extracted by
the respondents. Rather, a Sydney company
arranged for every directory published by Telstra to be sent to the
Philippines, whereupon
a team of persons entered the data from these
directories into a computer. The data was changed in various respects;
for example,
abbreviations were expanded, the name of the State was
included and the data was formatted so that it could be read easily by
a computer.
Desktop received this data in
electronic form and loaded it onto its own computer system. It
conducted limited verification of the
data, however, it did insert
additional information, namely, the appropriate industry code, number
of employees, fax number and Ausdoc
DX number. It used virtually
identical headings to those used by Telstra in each of its three CD-Rom
Telstra brought an action
against Desktop claiming infringement of certain directories published
between 1996 and 1999 and in certain
headings books produced between
1996 and 1998. Desktop denied that copyright subsisted in the
directories or headings books or that
it had infringed copyright. The
second respondent was alleged to have authorised the infringement by
Desktop, however, no finding
was made on this issue.
Telstra claimed that each
directory and headings book was an original literary work, being a
compilation, pursuant to sections 32
(Cth) ('Act'). The respondents conceded that each condition for
subsistence of copyright, apart from the requirement of originality,
had been satisfied. The respondents claimed that Telstra's products did
not demonstrate sufficient skill in their selection or arrangement
data and thus were not original works. Telstra, however, contended that
industrious collection of data could suffice to make its
original and that, in any event, they were the result of intellectual
The respondents admitted
copying from the applicant's works, however, they denied that the
CD-Rom products were substantially similar
to Telstra's directories and
headings books.
Subsistence
Finkelstein J did not doubt
that creative selection or arrangement of data would confer copyright
on compilations.
The question was whether copyright
could subsist in the presence of industrious collection of data,
despite the absence of intellectual
labour. In answering this question,
Finkelstein J reviewed a series of English cases
on compilations decided prior to the
1911 (UK), which Act was adopted in
Australia by virtue of the
(Cth). These cases, he said, supported an 'industrious collection'
approach to originality: "According to [them] copyright protection
be given as a reward for the author's investment of time and money,
even if there be no creativity in the work."
1911 (UK) was the first statute to grant express protection to
compilations as a form of original literary work.
In his honour's view, subsequent
English decisions did not reject the pre-1911 approach to compilations.
H Blacklock & Co Ltd v C Arthur Pearson Ltd
was an example of continued support for an 'industrious collection'
test of originality and the cases in which compilations were
did not undermine this test, since they were examples of insufficient
skill and labour.
According to Finkelstein J, the
effect of the English authorities was that copyright could subsist in
compilations where sufficient
intellectual effort was applied to the
selection or arrangement of the facts or where the author has engaged
in sufficient work or
incurred sufficient expense in gathering the
facts. The requisite amount of intellectual effort, labour or expense
was a question
of degree. Copyright protection did not extend to the
facts themselves, so that a third person could publish the same facts,
he collected the facts himself and did not copy them from
another work.
The respondents urged his
honour to depart from the English authorities and to follow
the US Supreme Court held that
original compilations required independent creation by the author and a
minimal level of creativity
in the selection or arrangement of data.
Finkelstein J discussed arguments of principle and policy in respect of
a Feist approach,
but he felt bound by the pre-1911 English authorities, which had been
incorporated into Australian law in 1912. Subsequent Australian
legislation had not eschewed the English approach and Australian cases
could not be explained solely by reference to creative selection
arrangement. Thus, his honour concluded, it was not possible "to
jettison the old law and replace it with the principles expressed
Finkelstein J had little
difficulty in concluding that each directory and headings book, when
considered as a whole,
was original.
Sufficient skill had been applied in producing the information pages of
each directory and
Lamb v Evans
supported the finding that the headings books were original.
Infringement
Telstra alleged that Desktop
infringed copyright in their directories and headings books by
reproducing a substantial part of these
Finkelstein J
stated that in considering whether a substantial part of a work has
been reproduced the originality of the part allegedly
copied is an
influential factor. This was clear from cases such as
(Football) Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd
Data Access
Corporation v Powerflex Services Pty Ltd
"Once it is accepted that
'industrious collection' will suffice to confer copyright, it follows
that the directory portion of the
white pages directories, the
directory portion of, and the headings in, the yellow pages
directories, and the headings in the headings
books, are original and
essential features of the respective works. This was not seriously in
However, Finkelstein J
indicated that, had he preferred the creativity approach to
originality, he would have found that the telephone
listings and
headings in the applicant's works lacked any trace of creativity.
Presumably, if
this had been the case, a real issue would have arisen over whether a
substantial part of Telstra's works had been
The respondents admitted
copying from the Telstra's directories and headings books, however,
they denied that their CD-Rom products
were sufficiently similar to the
applicant's products to constitute a reproduction. The respondents
claimed that the inclusion of
additional information and a different
visual presentation of data made their products sufficiently dissimilar
to preclude a finding
of infringement. In terms of additional
information, addresses were given in full (ie, street, suburb, state
and postcode), facsimile
numbers were sometimes included and the
Marketing Pro product included the position of the business and its
industry codes. In terms
of the visual presentation of data,
information did not appear within columns on a page, but as a separate
'record' of information.
In each record, information was listed next to
appropriate headings: eg, 'Company Name', 'Address', 'Telephone' and
'Facsimile'.
Because of the record format, the relevant headings
appeared with each business entry, as opposed to just once.
These differences did not
persuade Finkelstein J of non-infringement. His honour explained that
sufficient similarity did not relate
solely to physical appearance of
data, but to "whether the substance of the information that has been
taken from Telstra's works...has
been reproduced in the CD-Roms."
Finkelstein J
had little trouble in finding that the "significant recorded
facts...are the same, or substantially the same, as they
Telstra's works" and, thus, that the respondents had infringed
Finkelstein J was correct in
his view that prior to the
(UK) courts protected compilations that were a result of 'labour and
expense'. This is clear from the cases he relied upon, along
v Cater, Stoffell and Fortt Ltd
Walter v Steinkopff
Courts were also prepared to
protect compilations that resulted from intellectual skill.
The express
reference to 'original' works in the 1911 and 1912 Acts did not mark
the introduction of a higher standard of originality
previously the case.
However, Finkelstein J's
conclusion that originality may be conferred either by creative
selection or arrangement of data or by industrious
collection of data
oversimplifies the way in which courts have dealt with this issue since
1911. First, courts have avoided approaching
the originality issue in
this specific, alternative manner, but have tended to ask whether
sufficient 'skill, judgement and labour'
has been expended in producing
the compilation.
In other words, courts have generally avoided protecting compilations
solely on the basis of expenditure of effort and money.
At the same
time, however, courts have protected compilations that have displayed
marginal skill in their selection or arrangement,
but which have
involved considerable labour or expense.
application of the 'skill and labour' test is a highly flexible one and
it may operate as a pretext for protecting mainly
investment. Second,
courts have regularly looked beyond the physical process of presenting
and ordering information when assessing
whether a compilation is
original. Instead, they have been prepared to consider skill and effort
applied in gathering or calculating
data for a compilation.
effect of Anglo-Australian authorities may be more accurately stated as
follows: compilations will attract copyright where
there has been
sufficient skill and labour expended in the collection, selection or
arrangement of information
and the expenditure of skill and labour need not be proportionate.
In terms of whether a
substantial part has been copied, it is correct to say that the
originality of the part taken is highly relevant.
compilation has attracted copyright due only to its creative selection
or arrangement, failure to copy the collocation of
material has
resulted in non-infringement.
compilation has been copied wholesale, courts have found infringement
without having to isolate whether skill and labour
collecting, selecting or arranging information has been appropriated.
Where persons
have verified, rearranged or embellished data taken from earlier
compilations this has nevertheless amounted to infringement.
These cases may
be seen as examples of appropriation of substantial skill and labour
expended in collecting information. The finding
of copyright
infringement in Telstra may be justified on the same basis.
The interesting question to
emerge from Telstra is whether Australian law should follow
. This issue is likely to be at the heart of the respondents' appeal to
the Full Federal Court.
Finkelstein J concerned himself
with two main arguments of principle: is an 'industrious collection'
test contrary to the nature of
protection of raw data? After a lengthy digression into 18th and 19th
century English copyright
law, Finkelstein J observed that copyright
has largely protected creative works of art and literature. Therefore,
protection of compilations
resulting from 'industrious collection'
arguably conflicts with the nature of copyright. However, his honour
commented that compilations
necessarily involve a different type of
creativity because they consist of gathering, selecting and arranging
information and the
English cases have recognised this different order
of creativity.
One could also
add that Australian copyright law has long protected subject matter
that is the result of more labour and expense
than skill, or at least
the product of different (technical) skill.
Thus, the scope of protection has been of a neighbouring rights kind.
Future debate might therefore consider whether investment-driven
compilations should be recast in this vein.
Another criticism of the
'industrious collection' approach to originality is that it undermines
the fundamental principle that copyright
law does not protect raw
This criticism
held sway with the Supreme Court in
However, it is
important to recognise that courts have, on occasion, refused copyright
protection where this would otherwise protect
Further, as has
been emphasised by judges
(including Finkelstein J) and commentators,
third persons remain free to collect primary data. Of course, this
statement does not hold true where the first compiler is also
source of data. Examples of sole source information providers are
racing authorities who fix racing lists,
football authorities who compile fixture lists,
broadcasters who fix radio programmes
and telephone providers who compile lists of subscribers.
situations, there is legitimate concern about whether second comers are
wrongly inhibited from creating value-added or derivative
products. But
there are also mechanisms by which such monopoly effects could be
regulated, namely, compulsory licensing
and competition law.
As a matter of policy,
Finkelstein J highlighted two main objections to following
standard of originality is an
uncertain one and reduced protection for compilations will act as a
disincentive to producing them.
The Supreme Court in
described the originality requirement for compilations as
"a minimal level of creativity" in the selection or arrangement of
commented that the requisite level of creativity is "extremely low" and
"the vast majority of works" will meet this test.
Finkelstein J
remarked that the meaning of the
criterion is uncertain
and pointed to
Publications, Inc v Chinatown Today Publishing Enterprises
Advertising & Publishing Corp. v Donnelly Info Publishing Inc
as examples of the courts struggling to apply the standard
consistently.
The uncertain
application of the
standard does not
necessarily sound against its adoption in Australia. Rather, it
emphasises that courts would have to provide clearer
guidance on its
scope. For example, courts would have to clarify whether or not skill
in generating, calculating or collecting information
is to be entirely
A more important consequence of
is that compilations will receive
less protection. Finkelstein J commented that a 'creativity' approach
to originality would exclude
compilations in which functional or
commercial considerations determined selection, and in which data was
listed in obvious ways,
such as alphabetically, chronologically, or
sequentially.
Probably of
greater concern for database producers, however, is the fact that only
creative selection or arrangement of materials
would be protected.
Thus, second comers would be able to extract data from a compilation,
provided they rearranged the data and did
not copy a substantial part
of the first compiler's selection.
In the other
words, on a
approach, the respondents in
Telstra would probably avoid infringement.
Anxiety over the impact of
protection on incentives to create compilations, whether entirely
justified or not, is very likely to generate pressure for
Australia to
adopt sui generis protection for databases. The experience in the
United States tells us so: one need only look to the
number of bills
that have entered Congress post-
In addition, a
approach could rekindle the efforts of the European Union to make its
The likelihood
of national and international pressure to introduce sui generis
What it does suggest, though, is that debate should be cast in wider
terms to include the advantages and disadvantages of existing
protection of compilations as compared with possible neighbouring
sui generis
protection of databases.
wider debate gets seriously underway, it seems sensible to preserve the
status quo and to decline to follow
Finkelstein J indeed did. Whether the Full Federal Court will share
this view remains to be seen.
This case note was
originally written for publication in the EIPR. The author would like
to thank the editors of the EIPR for allowing
re-publication of this
note in the DTLJ.
[2001] FCA 61.
(Finkelstein J).
s32 states that
s10(1) defines
'literary work' to include a table or compilation, expressed in words,
figures or symbols.
Paras 44, 47.
v Stockdale
[1806] EngR 112
(1806) 12 Ves 270
(1866) 1 Eq 697
Morris v Ashbee
[1900] AC 539.
See s1 and s35(1)
[1915] 2 Ch
v J Young & Sons
[1894] AC 335
Cramp & Sons Ltd v Frank Smythson Ltd
Adopting the
approach in
Ladbroke (Football) Ltd v William Hill
(Football) Ltd
[1964] 1 WLR 273.
[1892] 3 Ch 462
[1893] 1 Ch 218 (CA).
Paras 90-91.
See s31(1) and
s14 of Act.
[1964] 1 WLR
[1999] HCA 49
(1999) 166 ALR
(emphasis supplied).
Paras 93, 102.
[1857] EngR 756
69 ER 1294.
LT(NS) 613.
[1892] 3 Ch
[1863] EngR 803
(1863) 1 H&M 603
& McDougall Pty Ltd v Robinson
[1917] HCA 14
(1917) 23 CLR 49
Newspapers plc v News (UK) Ltd
(1990) 18 IPR 201.
& Co Ltd v Cooper
(1923) 1B IPR 204
(Football) Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd
[1964] 1 WLR
Sands & McDougall Pty Ltd v Robinson
[1917] HCA 14
Skybase Nominees Pty Ltd v Fortuity Pty Ltd
(1996) 36 IPR 529.
Football League Ltd v Littlewoods Pools
[1959] Ch 637
, 656 (Upjohn J) and
Consolidated Press Ltd v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
(1964) 112 CLR 483
(Barwick CJ).
v Wireless League Gazette Publishing Co
[1926] Ch 433
Engineering Co Ltd v Sykes Boxall & Co Ltd
Kalamazoo (Aust) Pty Ltd v Compact Business
Systems Pty Ltd
(1984) 84 FLR 101
T R Flanagan
Smash Repairs Pty Ltd v Jones
[2000] FCA 625
(2000) 48 IPR 19.
(Football) Ltd v William Hill (Football) Ltd
[1964] 1 WLR
Football League Ltd v Littlewoods Pools Ltd
Winterbottom v Wintle
[1947] WALawRp 21
(1947) 50 WALR 58
Mirror Newspapers Ltd v Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd
(1982) 59 FLR 71.
(Oil Seals) Ltd v Beehive Spinning (A Firm)
Access Corporation v Powerflex Services Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 49
Cantor Fitzgerald International v Tradition
[2000] RPC 95
Film Productions Ltd v Eisinger
[1969] 1 Ch 508
FairFax & Sons Pty Ltd v Australian Consolidated Press Ltd
(1960) SR(NSW) 413.
v Cater, Stoffell and Fortt Ltd
(1898) 78 LT(NS) 613
Newspapers Plc v Liverpool Daily Post
[1985] 1 WLR 1089
Winterbottom
[1947] WALawRp 21
(1947) 50 WALR 58
Mirror Newspapers
Ltd v Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd
(1982) 59 FLR 71
(Aust) Pty Ltd v Compact Business Systems Pty Ltd
84 FLR 101.
(1868) 7 Eq 34
Waterlow v Rose
(1989) 17 IPR 493
Elanco Products Ltd v Mandops Ltd
[1979] FSR 46
Autocaps (Aust) Pty Ltd v Pro-Kit Pty Ltd
[1999] 46 IPR 339.
Eg broadcasts,
sound recordings and published editions.
already occurred to a limited extent: see Ricketson, 'Copyright and
Data Bases' in Hughes, G (ed), Essays On Computer Law
Professional, 1990), 67-98, 96-98 and Garrigues, 'Databases: A
Subject-matter for Copyright or for a Neighbouring Rights
(1997) 1 EIPR 3.
Newspapers Ltd v The Labour Daily
[1925] NSWStRp 15
(1925) 25 SR(NSW) 593
Press Ltd v London and Provincial Sporting News Agency Ltd
[1935] Ch 672
Victoria Park Racing & Recreation
Grounds Co Ltd v Taylor
[1937] HCA 45
(1937) 58 CLR 479.
(1866) 1 LR Eq 697
[1900] AC 539
, 549 (Halsbury LC) and 551 (Lord Davey).
Eg Ginsburg,
'Creation and Commercial Value: Copyright Protection of Works of
Information'
(1990) 90 Colum L R 1865
, 1922; Thakur, 'Database
Protection in the European Union and the United States: The European
(2001) 1 IPQ 100
[1934] SAStRp 12
(1934) SASR 87.
League Ltd v Littlewoods
[1959] Ch 637.
v Wireless League Gazette Publishing Co
[1926] 1 Ch 433.
(1990), 1924-1936.
'Copyright, Databases & Misuse of Market Power'
; Magill TV Guide
[1995] 4 CMLR 78.
345, 348, 358.
The standard of
'author's own intellectual creation' contained in Article 3(1) of the
EU Database Directive has also been criticised
for its ambiguity: see
Karnell, 'European Originality: A Copyright Chimera' in Kabel et al
(eds), Intellectual Property and Information
Law (Hague: Kluwer, 1998),
945 F. 2d (2d
Cir. 1991).
[1993] USCA11 1579
999 F. 2d 1436
(11th Cir. 1993).
Paras 75-78.
Ginsburg, 'No
"Sweat"? Copyright and Other Protection of Works of Information After
Feist v Rural Telephone'
(1992) 92 Colum L R 338
Investment and Intellectual Property Antipiracy Bill 1996 (HR 3531);
Collections of Information Antipiracy Bill 1998 (HR
2652); Collections
of Information Antipiracy Act 1999 (HR 354); Consumer and Investor
Access to Information Act 1999 (HR 1858). All
have fail to be
introduced.
The EU was a
main proponent of a Database Treaty, along the lines of the sui generis
provisions of its Databases Directive, at the
1996 WIPO Diplomatic
Conference.
Ricketson (1990) and Davison, 'Sui Generis or Too Generous: Legislative
Protection of Databases, Its Implications for Australia
Suggestions for Reform'
[1998] UNSWLawJl 63
(1998) 21(3) UNSW LJ 729.
Federal Court is listed to hear an appeal from Desktop in December,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter