URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ward-Brown, Vanessa --- "The Need for Law Reform to Combat Climate Change in Environmental Planning and Assessment Laws in New South Wales" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 16; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-16
THE NEED FOR LAW REFORM TO COMBAT CLIMATE CHANGE IN
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING AND ASSESSMENT LAWS IN NEW SOUTH WALES
VANESSA WARD-BROWN
I INTRODUCTION
Without a doubt, the most significant environmental concern of the
century is climate change. In the state of New South Wales
(‘NSW’) alone, temperatures have increased on average by 1.4
since 1910 and sea levels rose between 1991 and 2021 by
Furthermore, NSW has been
plagued in recent years with ‘one in 100-year’ floods and bushfires
that are becoming increasingly
more frequent and
In order to address the
concerns of climate change, the NSW government has implemented the Climate
Change Policy Framework as on
2016. The Climate Change Policy Framework has been
implemented in order to outline how the NSW government will combat climate
and eventually strive towards achieving net zero emissions by 2050.
Nevertheless, there has been little progress in reforming environmental
legislation in NSW to actively work towards this objective. Firstly, this
article will provide a brief overview of the capacity of
the NSW government to
legislate on climate change matters in conjunction with the surrounding
international context that has fuelled
discussions of ‘net zero by
2050’ goals. Secondly, this article will then discuss
Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Regulation 2021
and how these
instruments are largely incompetent in addressing issues of climate change.
Lastly, this article will examine how current
environmental planning and
assessment laws need to be reformed and summarise key recommendations that
through implementation, would
make the goal of achieve net zero emissions by
2050 more feasible and begin to combat the effects of climate change. Overall,
is no doubt that like other governments around the world, due to the
unfortunate inaction of the NSW Government, there is a continuous
implementing environmental planning and assessment legislation that is
necessary to combat climate change and its detrimental
effects. Therefore,
it is crucial that the NSW Government take action to implement legislative
changes particularly relating to environmental
planning and assessment
in order to address the damaging impacts of climate change that can no
longer continue to be ignored.
II CLIMATE CHANGE AND NET ZERO EMISSIONS
In 2016, collaborative international action to address climate
change was characterised by the creation of the
Paris Agreement
which 195 nation signed as a part of the
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
Paris Agreement
’s main objective is summarised as to achieve 'a
balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of
greenhouse gases in the second half of the
Thus, the underlying
practical goal of the
Paris Agreement
is to limit the global temperature
increase to 1.5 degrees by way of reducing anthropogenic carbon dioxide
’) emission
productions.
As such, the idea of
net zero emissions is the notion of reducing the production of CO
and greenhouse gases that ends up in the atmosphere to point in which the
that is naturally absorbed by the environment is equal or net
zero to the anthropogenic emissions that are added to the atmosphere.
net zero will require a significant reduction in the global anthropogenic
emissions. Thus, over recent years there has been an exponential
shift towards net zero policies and commitments by a range of state
corporation actors to implement net zero
The external affairs power under the
Constitution
for both Commonwealth and State/Territory governments to divide the
responsibility of environmental legislation between the
Thus, when it comes to the
Paris Agreement
, both levels of government are capable and also
conjointly responsible to implement environmental legislation that is to combat
change. As such, on a state level, the NSW government developed the
Climate Change Policy Framework in 2016 that summarises the ‘aspirational
long-term objective’ for NSW to achieve net zero emissions by 2050 and to
make NSW more resilient to a changing
The Climate Change Policy
Framework was created by the NSW government to detail the policy and plans to
combat climate change moving
forward. However, it is crucial to clarify
that this document is no more than what's contained in its title: a
framework that details
intentions and goals with the NSW government's
policy on climate change action. Consequently, it does not constitute a
legislative
instrument, nor directly impact NSW’s current
environmental planning and assessment laws. Therefore, it is highly
as to whether the intentions and goals detailed in this
framework will ever be legislatively committed to and reflected in
environmental planning and assessment instruments.
II NSW CURRENT APPROACH UNDER THE
The most prominent environmental legislative instruments in
NSW are the
and the subsequent
with, it is crucial to note that despite the above legislation, there is no
specific legislative instrument that directly
attends to climate
change in NSW.
For example, in
, even within the objectives of the act there is no
inclusion or mention of climate
Therefore, as an
instrument created under the act, there are no objectives prescribed in the
that considers climate change either. However, despite this,
the objectives of the act contained in section 1.3 does prescribe ways
climate change may indirectly be considered in the planning and assessment
For example, section
1.3 provides that in regards to decision making, planning and assessment, an
object of the act is ‘to
ecologically sustainable development’, taking into account
relevant environmental
considerations.
Furthermore, the
objects of the act also provides for the protection of the environment but
refers to that protection in terms of
conservation of species and ecological
communities.
There is no doubt
that climate change is a significant environmental factor that
crucially impacts the ability for achieving ecologically
sustainable development that should be considered in the assessment
and planning phase. However, there is no explicit requirement
that requires consideration of
climate change to be a mandatory part of the planning and assessment
process. Furthermore, there is
also no separate legislative instrument in
NSW that provides clear objectives of combating climate change. As a result,
without legal
justification to consider climate change, the NSW development
planning and assessment process continues to overlook the impact such
projects will have on climate change.
When it comes to the
, a unique function of regulations as
delegated laws is their ability to be created and reformed without the need to
go through the
same parliamentary process as it’s creating legislative
instrument. As such, in theory, regulations should be easier to be
provided that the changes have been made in accordance with the authority
provided in the governing act. However, there
are two major flaws particularly
in regards to the lack of consideration and action
towards climate change.
The first is that despite being enacted in 2021, there is no provision in the
regulation that relates to the Climate Change Policy
Framework and furthermore,
the net zero by 2050 goal. The amendment of this regulation replaced its year
2000 predecessor and was
implemented five years after the NSW government policy
committed to its net zero by 2050 goal. In the last two decades, there has
been significant developments, scientific advancements and social pressures to
do more to address climate change and the impacts
it has on planning and
development. Climate change in the 21
century is not only the most
prominent environmental concern, but its effects are becoming ever
more detrimental. The development
of the new regulation was an ideal
opportunity to enact and integrate provisions relating to the Climate Change
Policy Framework
into environmental planning and assessment processes. However,
fails to mention any climate change considerations or
of the ideas contained within the Climate Change Policy
Framework. Ultimately, despite the opportunity to make amendments, the
fails to legally solidify the policy made by the NSW
government and implement it into environmental law. This is a crucial downfall
of the environmental planning and assessment law in NSW. The
disregards one of its most crucial objectives, to protect the environment by
instead, failing to address the cataclysmic environmental
impacts climate change
is having on NSW. With the Climate Change Policy Framework not being adopted
into any vital legislation in
NSW, it severely questions whether NSW will have
the ability to achieve the net zero by 2050 goal. Ultimately, the
significantly lacks any ability to combat climate change in the
environmental planning and assessment process of NSW. A significant
opportunity
for the NSW government to address this significant absence will be in 2027 when
will be due to automatically be
The second major flaw of the
is that it fails to contain
any significant factors relating to climate change when planning and assessing
for development projects.
Contained within both the
, the purpose of these instruments is to promote and regulate
the planning and assessment of projects that promote various considerations
including to protect the
environment.
For example, in the
assessment process of a development that requires an Environmental Impact
Statement (‘EIS’), the
granting authority must give consideration to
relevant environmental factors that the development would likely impact
directs the authority to the
that then prescribes the
factors that must be considered within this
However, currently
, there is no specific consideration that needs to
be in regards to the proposed development’s impact on climate change.
there is no specific consideration that needs to be made in regards to
climate change in order to approve EIS
developments.
Although the
does make mention in regards to ‘projected climate
change conditions’, this is only relevant to be considered in coastal
development and hazards.
Although this is a welcomed inclusion, ultimately, its failure as a relevant
consideration outside of the development of coastal
There is also a
provision that allows for the consideration of ‘other relevant
environmental factors’ that can provide
an opportunity for climate change
impacts to be implied if deemed appropriate by the
Nevertheless, without
a specific consideration to climate change, EIS developments can go through the
planning and assessment process
without truly being scrutinised for the impact
they may have on our environment. It is crucial to note that the major
developments
and infrastructure that is being planned and assessed now under the
, are the same developments that will be built and be
operational leading up to 2050. Therefore, the impact these EIS developments
will have on NSW’s ability to achieve net zero by 2050 goals (being only
just shy of 25 years away) is beyond
significant.
prominent environmental planning and assessment instruments, the
can no longer continue to disregard the need for
explicit consideration to climate change.
III RECOMMENDATIONS AND REFORMS
As can be seen by the above flaws, it is crucial that the environmental law
in NSW be reformed. As such, there has been various recommendations
suggested by
the Environmental Defenders Office as to how NSW can actually work towards
achieving the net zero by 2050 goal and implement
laws that can actually combat
climate change. It is crucial to note that not every potential recommendation or
policy idea is discussed
in this article and the following recommendations are
not exhaustive. However, the five umbrella areas for reform detailed below
particular would be an excellent beginning foundation and would significantly
improve the effectiveness of environmental law in
A Making Climate Impact Statement Mandatory under an
The first recommendation as highlighted above is in regards to including
mandatory climate change considerations for developments
requiring an EIS under
Division 5.
This specifically
would include the implementation of a Climate Impact Statement as a mandatory
feature within the EIS process.
By introducing an additional statement under the EIS process, it would allow for
explicit consideration to be made when it comes
to the proposed developments
emissions and ability to adjust to a changing
environment.
For example,
introducing a mandatory Climate Impact Statement would make it a requirement for
the development to demonstrate how
it will ‘avoid, minimise and offset
emissions’, contributing to net zero by 2050
To demonstrate this,
developments would be required to estimate their emissions and explain how
emissions would be produced for example,
by way of electrical, gas or
Ultimately, by making
this a mandatory consideration under the EIS process, it would not only
explicitly require development planners
and assessors to turn their minds to
climate change considerations, but also create a conscious consideration on how
developments
can be planned and constructed to be more ‘emissions
efficient’.
Moreover, introducing a Climate Impact Statement will also assess the ability
for the proposed development to be climate change ready,
creating a required
standard the developments to make commitments and aims within the planning
For example, the
implementation of a Climate Impact Statement would require developments to
provide up front explanation as to whether
the development is consistent with
the NSW government’s net zero by 2050 goals and how it seeks to achieve
This reform would
remarkably revolutionise the way in which major developments are required to
reconsider and incorporate climate
change considerations within the planning and
assessment process. By creating a requirement for a Climate Impact Statement
the EIS process, proposed developments would provide a detailed and
thorough assessment of the project’s impact on climate
change and support
the assessment with evidence of emission production, appreciated risks and the
project’s ability to be future
climate adaptive.
B Implementing Assessment Guidelines and Mandatory
Considerations
The next recommendation involves the specifically targeted reforms for
planning and development projects that are not required to
provide an EIS under
. Therefore, based on the above recommendation, projects
not required to provide an EIS would also not be required to include a Climate
Impact Statement. Therefore, without implementing further recommendations,
there is a gap within environmental planning and assessment
law that can
allow approval of developments without the need to consider climate
change and the impacts the development would have
on climate change. Thus,
the idea of this recommendation is to close the gap for those developments that
are not required to have
an EIS. As such, this reform would implement
within the assessment process a requirement for proposed low impact
developments to
analyse the estimated greenhouse gas emissions under the
For example, if an EIS is not required under Division 5, this new
assessment process would allow for the approving authority to gauge
accordingly appreciate the impacts the proposal would have on climate
change. By creating a focus on greenhouse gas emissions,
this assessment process
would critically analyse the future cumulative emissions of the proposed
development and assess whether the
development would be adopting the best
practices in adapting to a changing
This reform would be a
significant turning point to creating an environmental planning and assessment
process that utilises evidence-based
emission production assessments.
Evidentially, this reform would close any loopholes between low and high
impact developments, guaranteeing
that all developments are required to be
assessed having regard to the impact they may have on climate change.
Accordingly, implementation
of this reform would ensure that the planning and
assessment process under the
be assessed with explicit consideration to the extent of emissions it would
produce, ensuring that net zero by 2050 emission
goal remains attainable.
C Improving Sustainable Building Standards
The third reform that is recommended is specifically in regards to the
sustainability and impacts of new buildings within the planning
and assessment
process. This is a particularly important area for reform as the buildings and
infrastructure that is being erected
now are the constructions that will be used
for the foreseeable future and will significantly impact the soon approaching
for NSW to hit net zero emission goals. These constructions are also the
infrastructure and buildings that need to be adaptive to
planning accordingly
for the increasingly detrimental symptoms of climate change. For example, better
foundation planning to counteract
flood and coastal erosion as well as
fireproofing materials for bushfire protection. This reform is a significant
consideration in
the recent amendment to the
Environmental Planning and Assessment Amendment (Sustainable Buildings)
Regulation 2022
Sustainable Building
This regulation
came into effect as of 1 October 2023. This regulation amendment and
accompanying State Environmental Planning Policy
(‘SEPP’) reflects
the crucial need for reform of NSW’s current environmental planning and
assessment laws.
To begin with, the aims of policy includes specific mention of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and minimising the consumption of
Not only does the
State Environmental Planning Policy (Sustainable Buildings) 2022
Sustainable Buildings SEPP
’) implement clear objectives
relating to the reduction of emissions, but it is also reflected within the
amended regulation.
For example, the
Sustainable Buildings Reg
the requirement for additional disclosures to be made in regards to net zero
emission targets, embodied emissions as well
as water and energy usage
declarations for larger non-residential and commercial developments under the
Sustainable Buildings
Provided by these
sections, applications for developments will be required to provide evidence in
regards to the use of low emissions
construction
technology,
on-sight fossil fuel
renewable energy production
and storage
as well as energy
consumption.
In addition to the above assessment requirements, the
Sustainable
Buildings Reg
also creates the requirement for the assessment authority to
appreciate whether or not certification from the Australian Carbon Credit
or Climate Active is relevant if a large commercial development plans to use
on-site fossil fuels.
Ultimately, the above amendments to the
Sustainable Buildings Reg
accompanying
Sustainable Buildings SEPP
is a welcomed reform that
mandates the planning and assessment process to understand the crucial impact
these developments will have
on climate change and emission goals. Despite the
crucial improvement this has made, a further welcomed reform would be to expand
relevant requirements to encompass differing developments including residential
dwellings. Nevertheless, this reform and the continuous
improvement of
sustainable buildings standards being actioned by the NSW government is a
significant step towards achieving NSW’s
net zero emissions goals.
D Public Voice, Transparency and Accountability
The fourth reform encompasses a range of recommendations that are aimed to
encourage accountability and improve NSW’s environmental
planning and
assessment law’s ability to address climate change impacts. One of the
main objectives for these collective recommendations
is to overall improve the
planning and assessment process when it comes to developments in NSW that will
have a significant effect
on climate change. For example, the first
recommendation calls for the mandatory requirement of appointing environmental
consultants.
Such environmental
consultants should be required to be accredited and independently appointed in
order to improve the objectiveness
and consistency of the planning and
assessment process.
this will significantly reduce prejudice and bias when conducting Environmental
Impact Assessments (‘EIA’) and
Climate Impact Statements as per the
first suggested reform.
will also ensure a greater level of consistency and crucially, accountability
with the planning and assessment process.
A crucial feature of these recommendations is also to create an avenue for
public opinion to be heard and given greater weight within
decision making
processes that have significant impacts on climate change. For example, reforms
such as the Climate Impact Statements
under an EIS would also be required to be
published for public viewing before approval as per the
Therefore, the potential risks and impacts the development would have on climate
change under the Climate Impact Statement would
be viewed by the public. This
allows for further transparency between developments, assessment processes and
the public as the public
would be able to view and appreciate the risks and
impacts of the development of climate change and emission goals.
Another recommendation in order to help improve transparency and
accountability is to improve the ability for third parties to initiate
appeals. For example, there are current restrictions on the merit appeals
process that restrict the ability for third parties
to lodge objections to
proposed developments. By removing these restrictions, proposed developments
within the planning and assessment
phase would be able to be legally scrutinised
by third party objectors, mainly the public of NSW that would be most effected
proposed development.
further consideration within this recommendation is removing the restrictions
currently in place in regards to public hearings
by the Independent Planning
Commission.
Another recommendation is expanding the types of proposed developments that
can be subject to a merits review, a recommendation consistent
suggestions of the Independent Commission Against
Corruption.
Ultimately, the
combination of these reforms will help refine the ability for the planning and
assessment process to be more accountable
and transparent to the public. Such
reforms will not only ensure the actions of the NSW government and developers
remain accountable,
but also provides a greater opportunity for public opinion
to be genuinely considered when it comes to new developments and the negative
impacts they may have on the NSW environment.
E Introduce a Climate Change Act
The last major recommendation for discussion opts to introduce a new
legislative instrument being a climate change specific act in
NSW. The benefit
of creating a new legislative instrument is to specifically address climate
change ‘mitigation and adaption
in a clear and coordinated
As a separate
legislative instrument and independent from the
, a Climate Change Act would legally ratify the current NSW
government policy and create a legislated course of action. For example,
independent legal instrument would contain its own objectives, duties,
responsibilities, monitoring, enforcement, risk assessment
and independent
expert advice all to specifically address climate change and emission targets as
well as interacting with a range
of other legal instruments and enforcement
Turning to other
Australian states, NSW falls considerably behind with no legislation in regards
to climate change, renewable energy
or net zero emission
Even the federal
government has taken action towards legally entrenching climate change
considerations and emission targets on a
Commonwealth level, introducing the
Climate Change Act 2022
As such, this recommendation would respond to the current lack of legally
entrenched climate change and emission goal action in NSW.
As explained
previously, the Climate Change Policy Framework is not a legislative instrument
and attaches no legal
responsibility.
recommendation is a call to the NSW government to solidify their policy into
legitimate and defined climate change legislation
that creates a clear and
enforceable approach towards combating climate change. This recommendation is
the number one reform advocated
by the Environmental Defenders Office. However,
this article stresses that climate change consideration in environmental
and assessment law needs to be address across multiple latitudes
including this reform in order to ensure a truly refined assessment
system that
prevents loopholing. Nevertheless, establishing a
Climate Change Act
provide a mechanism to address and resolve multiple concerns within the
environmental planning and assessment laws in NSW.
VI CONCLUSION
It is without a doubt that the NSW government, like many governments
throughout the globe, is failing to act out their plans to achieve
net zero by
2050 goals and instead continues to postpone the enactment of legislation that
would be vital in mitigating climate change.
The existing environmental planning
and assessment process for developments in NSW needs to be reformed as it is the
basis in which
the future of our infrastructure is to be built on. Although
recent amendments have been openly welcomed, it cannot be disputed that
environmental planning and assessment legislation in NSW needs to be enhanced in
order to make climate change a conscious and genuine
consideration in the
development approval process. The current absence of climate change specific
legislation and consideration in
NSW is extremely disappointing as it ultimately
fails to address climate change and emission concerns. Therefore, the
recommendations
and reforms outlined in this article provide at least five
avenues in which environmental planning and assessment laws in NSW can
revolutionised and provide a distinctive opportunity for NSW to be climate
conscious and progress towards net zero by 2050 targets.
In conclusion, it is
undeniable that NSW environmental planning and assessment law currently fails to
adequately consider and combat
climate change. As such, the need for reform is
beyond crucial as the foundation and ability for NSW to reach net zero by 2050
is defined by the assessment and planning process of today.
Environmental Protection
NSW State of Environment 2021
(Report, December 2021)
Environmental Planning and
Assessment Act 1979
Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulation 2021
(n 1); Paris
Agreement, opened for signature 22 April 2016,
[2016] ATS 24
(entered into force
4 November 2016).
Thomas Hale et al,
‘Assessing the Rapidly-Emerging Landscape of Net Zero Targets’
(2022) 22(1)
Climate Policy
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2021.2013155>.
Hale et al (n 5); Karen
Turner, Antonios Katris and Julia Race, ‘The Need for a Net Zero
Principles Framework to Support Public
Policy at Local, Regional and National
Levels’ (2020) 35(7)
Local Economy
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0269094220984742
Constitution
; Peter Williams (ed),
The Environmental Law Handbook: Planning and
Land Use in NSW
(Thomson Reuters, 6
ed, 2016) 470.
Office of Environment and
Heritage (NSW), ‘NSW Climate Change Policy Framework’ (Framework,
Environmental Defenders
Office (NSW),
Climate-Ready Planning Laws for NSW Rocky Hill and Beyond
(Report, 2019) 1 (‘
Rocky Hill Report
Ibid s 1.3 (b).
Ibid s 1.3 (d).
Status Information;
Subordinate Legislation Act 1990
(n 3) cl 171(1)–(2); Environmental Defenders
Submission to the NSW Department of Planning, Industry and
Environment on the EP&A Regulation Review: Proposed Environmental Planning
and Assessment Regulation 2021
(1 October 2021) 5 (‘
Regulation Review
EP&A Regulation Review
Ibid cl 171(2)(p).
Rocky Hill Report
cl 171(2)(r).
EP&A Regulation
Rocky Hill Report
EP&A Regulation
Rocky Hill Report
Environmental Planning
and Assessment Amendment (Sustainable Buildings) Regulation 2022
Sustainable Buildings Reg
State Environmental
Planning Policy (Sustainable Buildings) 2022
Sustainable
Buildings SEPP
Sustainable Buildings
(n 33) s 1.3.
Sustainable Buildings
(n 32) cls 35B–35D, 79A.
Ibid cl 35B(1)(b).
Ibid cl 35C(2).
Ibid cl 35C(3).
Ibid cl 35C(4).
79A(4)–(5).
Rocky Hill Report
See above Office of
Environment and Heritage (NSW),
NSW Climate Change Policy Framework
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (58.5 KB)
PDF format (261 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter