URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2008/52.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fitzgerald, Brian --- "Biographies" [2008] SydUPLawBk 52; in Fitzgerald, Brian (ed), "Legal Framework for e-Research: Realising the Potential" (Sydney University Press, 2008) 524
Anthony Austin
James Casey
Jessica Coates
Tom Cochrane
Terry Cutler
Paul Allan David
Claire T. Driscoll
Erin Driscoll
Anne Fitzgerald
Brian Fitzgerald
Fred Friend
Chris L. Greer
Andrew Hayne
Maree Heffernan
Richard Jefferson
Scott Kiel-Chisholm
Gaye Middleton
Kylie Pappalardo
David Ruschena
Peter Schröder
Michael Spence
Fiona Stanley AC
Dilan Thampapillai
Paul F. Uhlir, J.D.
John Unsworth
John Wilbanks
Biographies
Anthony Austin
Anthony.austin@qut.edu.au
Anthony Austin is a Research Officer for the OAK Law Project and the Legal Framework for e-Research Project at the Queensland University
of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
Anthony worked as a solicitor for 10 years in private practice before joining
the OAK Law Project
primarily in intellectual property and commercial law.
Anthony completed his Masters of Law degree at the Queensland University of Technology in 2007 and has worked and
advised on numerous
OAK Law and Legal Framework for e-Research publications including The OAK Law Project and The Legal Framework for
e-Research Project
Building the
Infrastructure for Data Access
and Reuse in Collaborative Research: An
Analysis of the Legal
, The OAK Law Project Report:
Authorship, Publishing Agreements and Open Access
and The Queensland University of Technology and ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Industries and Innovation Guide,
CCI Blog, Podcast, Vodcast and
Wiki Legal Guide for
Australia 2008.
In February 2008, he participated in an international
roundtable on Cyberinfrastructure, Innovation, and University Policy convened
by Professor Brian Kahin at the
Keck Center of the National Academies in Washington D.C. He has been accepted as
a presenter at the
Oxford Internet Institute’s e-Research conference in
September 2008.
James Casey
lawrev@hotmail.com
James Casey is the Director of Contracts and Industrial Agreements, University of Texas at San Antonio. He has worked at a variety
of research
and non-research intensive universities, including Northwestern University and
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. A
member of the Wisconsin Bar since 1990,
James also practiced law in Wisconsin and worked in local government.
James has been a member of the National Council of University Research
Administrators (NCURA) since 1995. He is currently a member
of the Board of
Directors, co-editor of the
NCURA Newsletter
, and a member of the
Professional Development Committee. His prior service to NCURA includes serving
as editor of the scholarly journal
Research Management Review
and serving
as a NCURA delegate to the University-Industry Partnership Project in
Washington, D.C. He has written articles for the
Research Management
and other publications on research administration topics and has
presented at NCURA and SRA conferences. He serves as an advisor
to the Program
in Law and Technology at the University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio.
In addition to research administration, Dr. Casey maintains an active
intellectual agenda in the areas of transportation and public
planning. He has
published two books through the American Public Works Association focusing on
freeway planning and history in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, and has presented on these
topics to a variety of non-governmental and governmental entities.
His academic credentials include: B.A.,
, University of
Wisconsin-Whitewater; M.A., international affairs, Marquette University; M.P.A.,
urban administration, University
of Dayton; and J.D., University of Dayton
School of Law, where he served on the
Dayton Law Review
Jessica Coates
j2.coates@qut.edu.au
Jessica Coates is the Project Manager of the Creative Commons Clinic, a program of the ARC Centre of Excellence for Creative Innovation
at Queensland University of Technology. The Clinic aims to further the
implementation of the international open content licensing
movement, Creative
Commons, through the promotion of Creative Commons research and usage in
Jessica joins the Clinic on secondment from the Commonwealth Department of
Communications, Information Technology and the Arts (DCITA),
where she has spent
most of the last decade as a copyright and communications policy officer. At
DCITA, Jessica worked primarily
in the Intellectual Property Branch, where she took a major role in the development and implementation of
the Digital Agenda Amendments and the
Australia-United States Free Trade Agreement. Whilst with DCITA, Jessica also
worked on the
ABC and SBS policy with the National Broadcasting Section and on
IT usage by museums with the Collections Development Branch.
Jessica has a Bachelor of Laws from the Australian National University, and
is currently undertaking a Masters in e-Law with Melbourne
University.
Tom Cochrane
t.cochrane@qut.edu.au
Professor Tom Cochrane is Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Technology, Information and
Learning Support) at the Queensland University of Technology.
The position
heads a Division which combines the services of the Libraries, Information
Technology Services, Teaching and Learning
Support Services, Integrated Help
Services and University Printing Services in the one structure.
In his current role Professor Cochrane’s external duties include Chair,
Australian Libraries’ Copyright Committee; Director,
Australian Digital
Alliance; Director, Queensland Cyber Infrastructure Foundation; and member,
Publications Board of the CSIRO.
He also chairs the Australian e-Research Infrastructure Council, as well as other cross sectoral committees.
He is co-leader of the Creative Commons project for which QUT is the institutional partner for Australia. This
project, together
with other open access initiatives locally based at QUT,
signal a long standing commitment to access to knowledge, and to research
Terry Cutler
: cutler@cutlerco.com.au
Dr Terry Cutler is an industry consultant and strategy advisor in the
information and communications technology sector. Terry Cutler
has authored
numerous influential reports and papers on the new Information Economy and
innovation.
He currently holds the following appointments: Director
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO); Chairman
of Board Commercial Committee; Chairman of ACID
Pty Ltd, (the Australasian CRC
for Interaction Design); Member of International Advisory Panel, Multimedia
Supercorridor (Malaysia),
1998 - ; Member of Innovation Economy Advisory Board, Victoria; Director of MSC Technology Centre Snd.
Bhd.,Malaysia; Director of
Multimedia University (Universiti Telekom Sdn. Bhd.),
Malaysia; Council Member of Queensland University of Technology; Director of
Innovation Xchange Australia Limited.
Terry Cutler's career started with Telecom Australia, now Telstra. During
the 1980's he was part of Telstra's top management team,
heading up major
corporate restructuring around a customer focus. As Executive Director
Corporate Strategy he oversighted Telstra's
handling of major regulatory change
and the introduction of competition.
Terry Cutler has had a longstanding engagement with public policy. He has
served on numerous Government Boards and advisory bodies.
Apart from his present appointments, from 1996
to 1997 he was Chairman of Australia's Information Policy Advisory Council.
Chairman of the Industry Research and Development Board from 1996 to 1998,
Terry Cutler spearheaded key initiatives in promoting
venture capital and
industry innovation and oversaw the licensing of the initial Innovation Investment Funds. In 1999 Terry chaired
Australia's National Bandwidth
Terry Cutler has had a longstanding engagement with cultural institutions.
He was President of the Australian Centre for the Moving
Image from 2002 to
2005. He served as Chairman of the Australia Council
having previously chaired its New Media Arts Board. He
also has previously served as a director of Cinemedia, Film Victoria, Opera
Australia, the Council of the Victorian College of the Arts, and the Library
Board of Victoria.
Terry Cutler is a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Management, a Fellow
of the Australian Institute of Public Administration,
a Member of the Institute
of Company Directors, the Market Research Society of Australia, and the
Australian Society of Authors.
In 2002 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by
Queensland University of Technology and in 2003 was awarded Australia’s
In 2008, Dr Cutler was appointed as Chair of the Review of the Australian
National Innovation System.
Paul Allan David
Pad@stanford.edu
Paul Allan David is the Professor of Economics and Senior Fellow of the
Institute for Economic Policy Research at Stanford University.
He is Professor
Emeritus of Economics and Economic History in the University of Oxford, Emeritus
Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford
and currently Senior Fellow of the Oxford
Internet Institute. David is the author of more than 150 journal articles and
contributions
to edited volumes, as well as of the author and editor of several
books including
Technical Choice, Innovation and Economic Growth
The Economic Future in Historical
Perspective
He was among the pioneering practitioners of the "new economic history," and
is known internationally for wide-ranging contributions
in the fields of
American economic history, economic and historical demography, and the economics
of science and technology. Investigation
of the conditions that give rise to
‘path dependence’ -- the persisting influence of historical events
in micro and macro
economic phenomena – is a recurring theme in his
research. Two main areas of contemporary economic policy research have emerged
in his work the past two decades: the evolution of information technology
standards and network industries, and the influence of
legal institutions and
social norms upon the funding and conduct of scientific research in the public
sector, and the interactions
between that latter and private sector R&D.
David currently leads an international research project on the organization,
performance
and viability of free and open source software.
Many professional honours have been bestowed upon David in the course of his
career, including election as Fellow of the International
Econometrics Society
(1975), Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions in the University of
Cambridge, as Fellow of the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1979),
Vice-President, and President of the Economic History Association
as Marshall Lecturer in the University of Cambridge (1992),
Ordinary Fellow of the British Academy (1995), Member of Council of the
Economics Society (1996–2002), and Member of the American Philosophical
Society (2003). He was made Professor of Economics
and Economic History by
University of Oxford, ‘in recognition of distinction’ (1997) and
awarded a Doctorate
Honoris Causa
by the University of Torino (2003).
David’s extensive service as a consultant to international
organizations has included work for the World Bank, the United Nations
Commission on Trade and Development, the United Nations University Institute,
the OECD, several directorates of the European Commission
of the EU, the
European Committee for Future Accelerators, the Economic and Social Research
Council (U.K.), the Treasury and the
Ministry of Science and Technology of New
Zealand, and the German Monopolies Commission. He also has had extensive
service-experience
as a consultant to U.S. government agencies and foundations,
including the National Academy of Science (National Research Council),
National Science Foundation, and the Departments of Commerce, and of Energy; the Rockefeller Foundation,
the Sloan Foundation
and other public and non-profit organizations. He has been
a non-executive director of La Compagnie de Saint-Gobain since 2002, and
recently was appointed to the board of directors of Science Commons, a not-for-profit organization founded by Creative Commons in
Claire T. Driscoll
cdriscol@mail.nih.gov
Claire Driscoll has served as the Director of the National Human Genome
Research Institute (NHGRI)’s Technology Transfer Office
since 2002. At the
U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), NHGRI is the focal point for research into the genetics of human
Ms. Driscoll is responsible for the overall oversight of the
Institute’s intramural patent and licensing portfolio as well
negotiation of a wide array of collaborative research agreements. She also
advises staff on technology transfer policy and
related matters. Prior to
joining NHGRI Claire was a Senior Technology Development Manager with the
NIH’s National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID).
Earlier in her career she conducted research in a National Institute of Child
and Development (NICHD) laboratory at NIH. Education: B.S. and M.S.
degrees in Biology from the University of Notre Dame.
Ms. Driscoll has given presentations, primarily on biomedical technology
transfer and related intellectual property and licensing
topics, at various
conferences including Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO)-, Association of
University Technology Managers
(AUTM)- and Licensing Executive Society
(LES)-sponsored events. Currently, Claire serves on the advisory boards of PXE
International,
a lay patient research advocacy organization, and the Genetic
Alliance’s Biobank, a centralized blood and tissue repository.
Erin Driscoll
erin.driscoll@nsfa.gov.au
Erin has significant expertise in copyright law and policy, and has
previously worked for the Attorney-General's Department, the
National Museum of
Australia and the Australia Film Commission. She was also a member of the
secretariat supporting the Copyright
Law review Committee in its inquiry into the relationship between copyright and
contract in 2002.
Since 2003 Erin has also chaired the Copyright in Cultural Institutions Group
(CICI), which is a working group of copyright and intellectual
property managers
across Australia, with membership including the Australian Digital Alliance,
Australian Film Commission, National
Museum of Australia, National Archives of
Australia and National Gallery of Australia.
Anne Fitzgerald
am.fitzgerald@qut.edu.au
Anne is a professor of law at QUT and recognised expert in the field of
intellectual property law, which is demonstrated through her
outstanding
contributions to research, publication, training, teaching and professional
practice. Anne has specialised for the past
15 years in intellectual property
law, in particular its application to information technology. During this time
she has gained extensive
practical experience in intellectual property and
technology contracting and recent hands on experience negotiating, drafting and
advising on information technology and biotechnology contracts for the
Queensland Government.
Anne has conducted extensive research in these fields, resulting in the
publication of several books, numerous articles and book chapters
intellectual property law (particularly as it applies to digital technologies),
and electronic commerce law. Since 1991, she has
taught courses in the areas of
intellectual property and e-commerce law to students in law, biotechnology,
information technology,
multimedia and electronic commerce courses, as well as
to information technology professionals, writers and designers. Each year
2003 she has taught the Intellectual Property Law course offered by Macquarie University’s School of Law as a summer
intensive and since 2004, she has been the co-coordinator (with John Stonier) of
the Patents and Commercialisation course in the
Master of Laws program at QUT
Law School. Anne teaches in the undergraduate Internet Law and E-commerce Law
and Technology Contracts
courses offered at QUT Law School and has taught in the
Cyberlaw course in Southern Cross University’s summer law school program
since 1998.
Anne was an initiator of the
Going Digital
series of seminars on legal
aspects of e-commerce, multimedia and the Internet which were held in Brisbane,
Melbourne and Hobart in
1997 and 1998 in association with QANTM Australia
Co-operative Multimedia Centre. The project culminated in the publication of
Going Digital: Legal Issues for Electronic Commerce, Multimedia and the
(Prospect Media, now LexisNexis/Butterworths) in August 1998. A
second, completely revised, edition of the book,
Going Digital
Legal issues for e-commerce, software and the internet
was published in
February 2000.
Brian Fitzgerald
bf.fitzgerald@qut.edu.au
Professor Brian Fitzgerald studied law at the Queensland University of
Technology graduating as University Medallist in Law and holds
postgraduate degrees in law from Oxford University and Harvard
University.
He is a well-known Intellectual Property and Information Technology/ Internet lawyer who has pioneered the teaching
of Internet/Cyber
Law in Australia. He has published articles on Intellectual Property and
Internet Law in Australia, the United States, Europe, Nepal,
India, Canada and
Japan and his latest (co-authored) books are
Cyberlaw: Cases and Materials on
the Internet, Digital
Intellectual Property and E Commerce
Intellectual Property in Principle
Internet and
Ecommerce Law
Brian is a Chief Investigator and Program Leader for Law in the ARC Centre of Excellence on Creative Industries and Innovation and
Project Leader for the DEST funded Open Access to Knowledge Law Project (OAK Law) Project looking at legal protocols for
open access
to the Australian research sector and the DEST funded Legal
Framework for e-Research examining the legal framework needed to enhance
e-Research. He is also a
Program Leader for CRC Spatial Information.
From 1998–2002 Brian was Head of the School of Law and Justice at Southern Cross University in New South Wales, Australia and
from January 2002 –January 2007 was Head of the School of Law at QUT in
Brisbane. He is currently a specialist Research Professor
in Intellectual
Property and Innovation at QUT. Brian is also a Barrister of the High Court of Australia.
Fred Friend
f.friend@ucl.ac.uk
Fred Friend grew up by the sea in Dover, read most of the books in his local
public library, and with the help of supportive parents
went to study history at
Kings College London. He had the good fortune to enter academic libraries at a
time of growth. His first
post was in Manchester University Library as a SCONUL
Trainee and then as Assistant Librarian. Fred worked at several
universities
in the UK and obtained his first library director post at the
University of Essex. This was followed by a move to University College
where he was library director for 15 years before transferring into a role
as Honorary Director Scholarly Communication,
which enables him to explore new
developments in information services. Fred is involved in many initiatives
through work for UK and
international organizations, his primary role being
as Scholarly Communication Consultant to JISC. He is one of the authors of the
Budapest Open Access Initiative.
Chris L. Greer
greer@nitrd.gov
Dr. Greer received his PhD degree in biochemistry from the University of
California, Berkeley and did his postdoctoral work at CalTech.
Dr. Greer was a
member of the faculty at the University of California at Irvine in the
Department of Biological Chemistry for approximately
18 years where his research
on gene expression pathways was supported by grants from the National Science
Foundation, National Institutes
of Health, and the American Heart Association. During that time, he was founding
Executive Officer of the RNA Society, an international
professional organization
with more than 700 members from 21 countries worldwide.
Dr. Greer has been a rotator and, more recently a member of the permanent
staff at the National Science Foundation. He is currently
Senior Advisor for Digital Data in the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure. Previously, he has served as Program Director in the Division
of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences, the Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Emerging Frontiers Division. Dr. Greer
recently served as Executive Secretary
for the Long-lived Digital Data Collections Activities of the National Science
Board and is
currently Co-Chair of the Interagency Working Group on Digital Data
of the National Science and Technology Council’s Committee
on Science.
Andrew Hayne
AndrewHayne@privacy.gov.au
Andrew Hayne is Deputy Director, Policy, in the federal Office of the
has carriage of issues such as shared electronic health records, genetic
identifiers and the Australian Government’s proposed health and social services Access Card. A range of recent
public submissions
on these topics is available on the Office’s website at
www.privacy.gov.au
. Andrew has been with the Office since 2003, and has a background in
regulatory and policy positions, as well as in management academe
consulting. He holds degrees in business management and international law.
Maree Heffernan
maree.heffernan@qogr.qld.gov.au
Maree Heffernan works for Queensland Government and was formerly a research officer with the Legal Framework for e-Research Project
and a Senior Research Officer with the Centre for Social Change
Research at QUT. Graduating from the University of Queensland with
first class
honours in psychology in the late '90's, she is currently completing a PhD in
the School of Humanities & Human Services
at QUT. The focus of her research
is the ‘human element’ in the uptake of new technologies, and she
has broader interests
in the areas of social justice and marginalisation. In the
Legal Framework for e-Research Project, Maree has worked with the project
to develop an online survey regarding legal and project agreement issues in
collaboration and e-Research and been responsible
for the statistical analyses
of survey data. Maree is also working with the OAK Law team on another online survey of Australian authors
regarding publishing
agreements. These projects build on a number of projects Maree has initiated,
including: digital storytelling
as a qualitative research methodology,
collaborative research frameworks (including working with Indigenous
communities) and the
use of geographic information systems in the context of
human service provision.
Richard Jefferson
r.jefferson@cambia.org
Richard Jefferson is the founder and CEO of CAMBIA-BiOS. He earned his Ph.D. at the University of Colorado, Boulder. In
1989 he joined
the Food and Agriculture Organization as their first senior staff
Molecular Biologist. He left the UN System in 1991 in order to
CAMBIA as an autonomous private research and development institute.
Richard was chosen as an Outstanding Social Entrepreneur
by the Schwab
Foundation. In December 2003 he was named by Scientific American to the
List of World's 50 most influential technologists,
and cited as the World
Research Leader for 2003 for Economic Development. He was nominated as a
finalist for Wired Magazine’s
Rave Awards for Scientist of the Year for
2005, and received the American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB)
‘Leadership in
Science Public Service Award’ in July 2005.
Scott Kiel-Chisholm
s.kielchisholm@qut.edu.au
Scott completed his Articles of Clerkship with Blake Dawson Waldron Lawyers in 2001, after working in the
Insurance, Projects, Intellectual
Property and Communications and Corporate Advisory practice groups. He then
travelled to Silicon Valley, California USA and upon
his return, Scott commenced
work in the Litigation practice group of McInnes Wilson Lawyers, concentrating
on the defence of professional
indemnity claims. In 2004, Scott joined the
Commercial Litigation practice group of Home Wilkinson Lowry Lawyers which
broader litigation experience in project management contracting,
retailing, construction, manufacturing and franchising. In an effort
progress a career in intellectual property law, Scott commenced work with
Colavitti Lillas Lawyers before becoming Project Manager
of The OAK (Open
Access to Knowledge) Law Project in November 2005. In September 2006 Scott also became the Project
Manager of the
Legal Framework for e-Research Project and has been involved in the development of an online survey and
international conference.
In December 2007, Scott was awarded a Master of Laws
specialising in intellectual property law from The University of Queensland.
Gaye Middleton
gmiddleton@uecomm.com.au
Gaye Middleton is an in-house counsel with Uecomm Operations, an Australian
telecommunications company. Previously, Gaye has worked
as a legal officer
for Griffith University in Brisbane, where she worked closely with the
University’s academics, Office for
Research and Office for
Commercialisation. While employed at McCullough Robertson Lawyers, she has
also advised IMBcom, the commercialisation
company for the Institute for
Molecular Bioscience at the University of Queensland, and various bioscience
companies in respect of
legal issues concerning the conduct of research.
Gaye has co-authored two legal texts concerning the Internet and e-commerce,
Internet and e-Commerce Law – Technology, Law and Policy
. She is also an Australian
news contributor to
Bioscience Law Review
Computer and
Telecommunications Law Review
. Gaye holds a Master of Laws, a Bachelor
of Laws (Hons Class I) and a Bachelor of Science from the University of
Queensland.
Kylie Pappalardo
k.pappalardo@qut.edu.au
Kylie Pappalardo is a research officer for the Open Access to Knowledge (OAK) Law Project, based at Queensland University of Technology
(QUT) and led by
Professor Brian Fitzgerald. She holds a Bachelor of Laws (Hons.) degree and a
Bachelor of Creative Industries (Creative
Writing) degree from QUT. She has
also completed a Graduate Diploma of Legal Practice at QUT.
Kylie is a co-author, along with Professor Anne Fitzgerald, of A Guide to
Developing Open Access through Your Digital Repository (2007,
OAK Law Project) and Building the Infrastructure for Data Access and Reuse in
Collaborative Research: An Analysis of the Legal Context
(2007, OAK Law
Project). She has also authored the recent publication, Understanding Open
Access in the Academic Environment: A
Guide for Authors (2008, OAK Law
Kylie has given numerous conference presentations on behalf of the OAK
Law Project, including the Australian Partnership for Sustainable
Repositories
(APSR) and the Australian Research Repositories Online to the World (ARROW)
Adaptable Repository Workshop in Sydney
in 2007. Kylie provides voluntary legal
advice at the Arts Law Centre of Queensland (ALCQ) and has taught Creative
Industries Legal
Issues to undergraduate students at QUT. In 2007, Kylie was a
recipient of the QUT Vice Chancellor’s Awards for Excellence.
mperry@uwo.ca
Professor Mark Perry is jointly appointed to the Department of Computer
Science and the Faculty of Law at The University of Western
Ontario in London, Canada. He is also
an Adjunct Professor of Law at QUT in Brisbane.
Professor Perry's research focuses on the nexus of science and law, and on
autonomic computing system development. He has most recently
in the areas of digital rights management, copyright reform and software
licensing automation. He holds grants from the
Natural Science and
Engineering Research Council, IBM, and the Social Science and Humanities
Research Council.
Prof. Perry is a frequent invited speaker at research-intensive
colloquia and classes at universities in Australia, India, New Zealand,
Kingdom, United States and Canada. He has been interviewed by the media around
the world for his ideas on technology law issues.
In addition to serving on the
Executive of ACM SiGCAS, he is a Faculty Fellow at IBM's Center for
Advanced Studies, a Barrister and
Solicitor of the Law Society of Upper Canada, and serves on many review and editorial boards.
David Ruschena
david.ruschena@healthlegal.com.au
David is a Consultant at Health Legal, specialising in legislative
interpretation and compliance. He has been practicing for six
has advised public and private corporations on the reconciliation of competing
obligations, in particular methods of ensuring
that research does not contravene
Hospital and was previously
an Associate to a judge of the Federal Court of
Australia. Prior to working as a lawyer, David conducted research for the
Health Research Institute in Victoria.
Peter Schröder
Peter.Schroeder@dans.knaw.nl
Peter Schröder (* 1943 The Hague) lives in Leiden, The Netherlands and
studied sociology (mental health and epidemiology as minors)
at the University
of Amsterdam. He worked as a journalist and critic of rock music before joining
the Ministry of Education and Science
as policy advisor for educational support
systems in 1980. After a stay at Utrecht University managing the
multidisciplinary research
program ‘Urban Networks’
(1986–1990), he rejoined the Ministry at the Directorate of Research and
Science Policy
as policy advisor. As coordinator for scientific information
policy he initiated several e-Science research programs for cultural
heritage and humanities. He took part in
various national and international committees advising on the updating the
regulatory and
legal framework of data access regimes for research from 1990 on.
Peter Schröder was co-chair of the CSTP/OECD group chaired
Arzberger (San Diego) that published the report ‘Promoting Access to
Public Research Data for Scientific, Economic
and Social Development’
(2003, see http://dataaccess.ucsd.edu and see also Science, Vol.303, 1777
– 1778, 19 March 2004),
the report that formed the basis of the OECD
Principles and Guidelines for Access to Research Data from Public Funding
(http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/9/61/38500813.pdf )
He now acts as an advisor at the newly established Data Archiving and
Networked Services institute DANS (www.dans.knaw.nl) established
jointly by the
Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and the National
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO).
Michael Spence
m.spence@vcc.usyd.edu.au
Dr Michael Spence is the Vice Chancellor and Principal of the University of
Sydney, formerly serving as Head of Social Sciences Division
at the University
of Oxford. He is a consultant to the London law firm, Olswang. Michael has a
comparative perspective on the law
of intellectual property. His work includes
articles and books on both intellectual property law and the law of obligations,
a critical focus on suggested ethical and economic justifications of the
existing regimes. Michael’s work on e-Science has
been undertaken in
collaboration with Professor Paul David of Stanford University and was first
published as a report for to the
Joint Information System Council of the UK in
Towards Institutional Infrastructures for e-Science: The Scope of
the Challenge.
Fiona Stanley AC
kristyl@ichr.uwa.edu.au
Professor Stanley is the Founding Director of the Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research; Executive Director of the Australian
Research Alliance for Children and
Youth; and Professor, School of Paediatrics and Child Health at the University
of Western Australia.
Trained in maternal and child health epidemiology and
public health, Prof. Stanley has spent her career researching the causes of
major childhood illnesses and birth defects. Her research includes the gathering
and analysis of population data for epidemiological
and public health research;
the causes and prevention of birth defects and major neurological disorders,
particularly the cerebral
palsies and spina bifida; patterns of maternal and
child health in Aboriginal and Caucasian populations; various ways of
determining
the developmental origins of health and disease; collaborations to
link research, policy and practice; and strategies to enhance
well-being in populations. She sits on the Prime Minister’s Science,
Engineering and Innovation Council as well
as the Australian Statistics Advisory Council. For her
research on behalf of Australia's children, she was named Australian of the
in 2003 and in 2006 she was made a UNICEF Australia Ambassador for Early
Childhood Development.
Dilan Thampapillai
Dilan.Thampapillai@vu.edu.au
Dilan Thampapillai is a Lecturer at Victorian University and is a specialist
in intellectual property law. From 2005 to 2007, he worked
at the Law Faculty at the Queensland University of Technology after working for three
years with the Attorney-General’s Department
in Canberra. Dilan has a
Master of Laws degree (LLM) from Cornell University where he specialised in
intellectual property. Dilan
has a Master of Commerce from the University of
Sydney and a BA and LLB from the Australian National University. Dilan has also
on a non-degree basis at Harvard University and at the National
University of Singapore. Dilan was admitted to practise as a solicitor
Australian Capital Territory in June 2003. Dilan is a researcher with Professor
Brian Fitzgerald as part of the Open Access
to Knowledge Law Project (OAKLAW). Dilan has published papers on peer to
peer copyright infringement, copyright in the digital era
and law and medicine.
Paul F. Uhlir, J.D.
puhlir@nas.edu
Paul F. Uhlir is the director of the Office of International S&T
Information Programs (ISTIP) and the U.S. National Committee
for CODATA at
the National Academies in Washington, DC, where he works on information
policy and management issues. He was the Associate
Executive Director of the
Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications from 1991 to
1999. From 1985 to 1991 he
was Senior Staff Officer for the Space Studies Board,
where he directed projects on solar system exploration and environmental remote
sensing programs for NASA. Before joining the National Academies, he was a
Foreign Affairs Officer at NOAA in the Department of Commerce,
where he worked
on remote sensing law and policy and on intergovernmental agreements in
meteorological satellite programs. Paul has
been the director and editor of
over 30 Academy studies and reports, as well as over 60 technical articles that
he has published
independently. He has been involved in numerous external
consulting and
activities, and speaks worldwide on a broad range
of information policy and management topics. In 1997 he received the National
Council’s Special Achievement award for his work in this area.
activities include serving as: official U.S.
representative to the OECD Working Party on the Information Economy; co-chair of
Global Alliance on Promoting Access to and Applications of Scientific Data
in Developing Countries project under the U.N. Global
Alliance for ICT and
Development; chair of the CODATA Task Group on Implementation Guidelines
for the GEOSS Data Sharing Principles;
and chair of the Legal Working Group of the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility. Paul has a J.D. and Master’s degree in
International Relations from the University of San Diego (1983, 1984), and a B.A
in World History from the University of Oregon (1977).
John Unsworth
unsworth@uiuc.edu
John Unsworth was named Dean of the Graduate School of Library and
Information Science (GSLIS) at the University of Illinois in 2003,
Urbana-Champaign, with appointments as Professor in GSLIS, in the department of
English, and on the Library faculty. During the previous
ten years, from
1993–2003, he served as the first Director of the
Institute for Advanced Technology in the
, and a faculty member in the English Department, at the University of
Virginia. For his work at IATH, he received the
2005 Richard W. Lyman
from the National Humanities Center. He co-chaired the national commission
that produced
Our Cultural
Commonwealth
, the 2006 report on Cyberinfrastructure for Humanities and Social Science, on behalf of the American Council of
Learned Societies,
and he has supervised research projects across the
disciplines in the humanities. He has also published widely on the topic of
scholarship, as well as co-directing one of nine national
partnerships in the Library of Congress's National Digital Information
Infrastructure Preservation Program, and securing grants from the National
Endowment for the Humanities, the National Science Foundation,
the Getty Grant Program, IBM, Sun, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, and
others. His first faculty appointment was in English, at
North Carolina State
University, from 1989 to 1993. He attended Princeton University and Amherst
College as an undergraduate, graduating
from Amherst in 1981. He received a
Master's degree in English from Boston University in 1982 and a Ph.D. in English
from the University
of Virginia in 1988. In 1990, at NCSU, he co-founded the
first peer-reviewed electronic journal in the humanities,
Postmodern Culture
(now published by Johns Hopkins University Press, as part of Project Muse).
He also organized, incorporated, and chaired the
Text Encoding Initiative Consortium
, co-chaired the
Language Association's Committee on Scholarly Editions
, and served as President of the
Association
for Computers and the Humanities
and later as chair of the steering committee for the
Alliance of Digital Humanities
Organizations
, as well as serving on many other editorial and advisory boards. He was born
in 1958, in Northampton, Massachusetts; in 1978, he
married Margaret English,
with whom he has three children: Bill, Thomas, and Eleanor. Further information
http://www3.isrl.uiuc.edu/~unsworth/
John Wilbanks
wilbanks@creativecommons.org
John Wilbanks is the Vice President for Science at Creative Commons. He comes to Creative Commons from a Fellowship at the World
Consortium in Semantic Web for Life Sciences. Previously, he founded and led to
acquisition Incellico, a bioinformatics
company that built semantic graph
networks for use in pharmaceutical research & development. Before founding
Incellico, John
was the first Assistant Director at the Berkman Center for
Internet and Society at Harvard Law School. His first technology work
was at fonix, where he researched
human-computer interface and pattern recognition. He also worked in US politics
as a legislative
aide to U.S. Representative Fortney (Pete) Stark and a
grassroots coordinator and fundraiser for the American Physical Therapy
Association.
John holds a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy from Tulane University and
studied modern letters at the Universite de Paris IV (La Sorbonne).
research affiliate at the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory in the project on Math and Computation.
He serves on the Advisory
Board of the U.S. National Library of Medicine’s PubMed Central and the
International Advisory Board
of the Prix Ars Electronica’s Digital
Communities awards.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (155 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter