URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Douglas, Roger --- "The Ambiguity of Sedition: The Trials of William Fardon Burns" [2005] AUJlLegHist 12; (2005) 9(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 227
The Ambiguity of Sedition: the Trials of William Fardon Burns
I Condemning the War
III Appeals
IV Who Won?
The Ambiguity of Sedition: the Trials of William
Fardon Burns
ROGER DOUGLAS
The prosecution of William Fardon Burns took place against two cold-war
struggles and relates to both. It arose from articles in the
communist paper,
, urging ‘resistance’ to Australia’s involvement
in the Korean war, and it coincided with the passage of the
Communist Party
Dissolution Act
1950 (Cth), and the subsequent constitutional challenge to
the legality of the Act. It was a classical political trial in a number
senses. It was political in the sense that the decision to prosecute was
political. It was also political in the sense that Burns’
defence was a
political one. And like many political trials, its outcome was unclear. On the
whole, the Commonwealth succeeded, but
it lost on one potentially important
legal issue, and came close to losing altogether. Moreover, while Burns was
imprisoned, he was
able to use the trial as a forum for communicating a critique
of the war to a far wider public than the readership of
I Condemning the War
On 24 June 1950, North Korean forces crossed the 38
the boundary between North and South
The next day, the United Nations Security Council (the Security Council) passed
a resolution condemning the attack. It called on
the North to withdraw its
forces, and sought the assistance of member nations in giving effect to the
resolution. Two days later
the Security Council passed a further resolution
recommending that member nations provide such assistance as might be necessary
enable South Korea to repel the attack. On 7 July 1950 the Council authorised
the United States and other countries to assist the
Republic of Korea in its
struggle against the North Korean forces. The assistance was to be led by a
commander designated by the
United States, and was authorised to act under the
flag of the United
In response to the resolution of 27 June, the Australian government decided to
contribute a number of ships, one RAAF squadron, ground
troops and assorted
These decisions were generally supported by the Labor Opposition, and by the
general public, although more by Liberal-Country Party
voters than by Labor
Of those who had an opinion as to the origins of the war, at least 80% blamed
the North Koreans and their allies.
The ACP naturally opposed any resistance to the North Korean forces. In July
1950, a series of articles appeared in
, the Party’s Sydney
These were predictably
hostile to Australia’s involvement in the war. In the first of the
articles, the North Korean invasion
of South Korea was described as a response
to incursions into the North by the puppet government of Synghman Rhee. American
for the South carried with it the risk of a third world war.
Menzies’ support for the Americans was ‘a major step in
capitalist sell-out to America and its criminal war’. ‘Australians
need peace, not war. Australian lives must not
be sacrificed in war to make the
world safe for the American millionaires’. Australians should fight for
withdrawal of foreign
forces from Asia; for the rights of self-determination of
the people of Korea, Malaya, and Vietnam; for recognition of the government
the People’s Republic of China; and for a world referendum against the
atom bomb. The second article developed similar themes.
America and its allies
should withdraw from Korea, and emulate the Soviet Union’s policy of
non-interference in the internal
affairs of other states. The purported decision
of the United Nations Security Council to authorise intervention was illegal.
third article praised the Seamen’s Union’s opposition to the war
as patriotic. The war was a war of aggression and imperialism.
It would entail
military and civilian conscription, repressive legislation, and surveillance by
a military-dominated security service.
mean the sacrifice of Australian lives in an unjust cause, and the sacrifice of
living standards as well. To pay for the war, and
the superprofits of the
warmongers, lives and living standards will be ruthlessly sacrificed.
For the publisher of the articles to be guilty of the offence of publishing
seditious words,
the Commonwealth
had to establish that the words were expressive of a seditious
a ‘seditious
intention’ being defined as an intention to affect any of a number of
listed purposes, including exciting
disaffection against the Government or
Constitution
of the Commonwealth’,
or promoting ‘feelings of ill-will and hostility between different classes
of His Majesty’s
subjects so as to endanger the peace, order or good
government of the Commonwealth.
Section 24A(1) was, however subject s 24A(2) which made it lawful for a
person to criticise laws and policies with a view to promoting
lawful change or
removing sources of conflict between classes of subjects, provided that the
person acted in good faith.
The articles used somewhat intemperate language. Western policy was described
as ‘imperialist, aggressive and criminal’.
Those responsible for
Australian involvement in the war were ‘the real traitors to Australian
interests’. But use of
intemperate language is and was an ubiquitous
feature of Australia political life. Moreover, the articles were relatively
in relation to what their audience was supposed to do. With a little
imagination, one could find interpret some of the language in
articles as a call to active resistance. The first article contended that
‘All Australians who love their country should resist
[Menzies’] policy to the utmost’, and urged Australians to
‘fight’ for peace and self-determination.
The second article
referred to world-wide protest strikes and demonstrations. The third referred
favourably to the decision by the
Seaman’s Union to refuse to man ships
carrying supplies to the Western forces in
Yet at the same time the articles were characterised by a degree of
moderation. The first article did not detail the form that ‘utmost
resistance’ should take, nor what was involved in the ‘fight’
called for. The second article was more specific:
The members of Parliament should be bombarded with letters and telegrams. Press
the Labour leaders to use their Senate majority against
This was scarcely a call to man the barricades.
The third article called for rather more than struggle-by-petition. While it
did not expressly call upon unionists in general to resist
military aid to the
governments of South Korea and Malaya, it certainly implied that such action was
worthy of emulation. However,
the seriousness of the exhortation should be read
against the fact that the government ultimately decided to take no action
the Seamen’s union for its stance (which it was subsequently to
tone down – in form if not in
substance).
If actual industrial resistance could be tolerated, it is not clear why
support for that action should be treated as a threat.
The phrase which was to receive most attention in the subsequent prosecution
was the slogan ‘Not a Man, Not a Ship, Not a Plane,
Not a Gun for the
Aggressive, Imperialist War on Korea and Malaya’, which appeared in the
first and second articles, and –
in a slightly varied form – in the
third. A variant had appeared as headline to a May 1950
following Menzies’ statement that he would seriously consider a British
request for assistance in
On its face, the slogan did not necessarily imply anything other than an
exhortation to oppose the war by lawful methods. However,
it was a time-honoured
slogan which came with a history capable of affecting its meaning both to
communists and to their adversaries.
The government’s planning for the
contingency of a war between the Soviet Union and the United States and its
allies had proceeded
on the basis that the Communist Party would actively resist
the allied effort by legal and illegal
Moreover, given the
Party’s unquestioning commitment to the Soviet
it was not unreasonable
to assume that the Party would favour any action – whether legal or
illegal – which might assist
a Soviet ally under threat from the West.
But another construction could be placed on the three articles. By 1950, the
Party was showing signs of bureaucratic ossification,
and of the ritualism which
frequently accompanies this. It is arguable that the three articles were
symptoms of a party torn between
revolutionary ideals and a complete inability
to do much to achieve them, other – perhaps – than bombarding
with form letters and reports of unanimously endorsed resolutions. They
were arguably a substitute for militancy rather than a call
This was not an interpretation which could be publicly espoused by the Party
and it was not the view of the government, which made
an almost immediate
decision to prosecute William Fardon Burns, the publisher of
publishing seditious words. It was to be the recently elected Menzies’
government’s first sedition prosecution,
and in deciding to prosecute, the
government could take heart from the convictions of Gilbert Burns and Lance
Sharkey for uttering
words which indicated questionable loyalties but little
Around the time of the decision to prosecute William Burns, the
Attorney-General’s Department had decided against prosecuting
a number of
other denunciations of the war. In July 1950, the Queensland Police Commissioner
drew to the attention of the Crown Solicitor’s
office allegedly seditious
comments made by two communists, V J Englart and J P Malos, in the course of
attempts to sell the
Queensland Guardian
. These were critical of
Australian involvement in the Korean war, and of Menzies’ failure to
deliver on his promise to put
value back into the pound. Waugh, the Crown
Solicitor, advised that most of the statements were completely harmless and that
only controversial ones did not advocate active disloyalty or any attempt to
frustrate the government’s attempts to implement
At about the same time, Waugh assessed a pamphlet,
Hands Off Korea
which argued that the Korean war was an imperialist exercise on the part of the
US government, designed to overthrow the People’s
Democratic Republic of
Korea in order to give it an advance base for war against China and the Soviet
Union. Australia was involved
only because Menzies had acted at the behest of
the United States in committing its armed forces to the conflict. I urged
[b]y mass meetings, demonstrations, signatures to the World Peace petition
against the atomic bomb, and other forms of activity the
people must impose
their will for peace on the governments that are heading for war.
The pamphlet concluded with a series of slogans, similar to those which had
been raised in
articles. Waugh concluded that while the pamphlet
could be said to be calculated to excite hostility against the government, it
not advocate violence to achieve this end. A prima facie case for publishing
seditious words could not be established. Bailey, the
Solicitor-General,
It is difficult to determine what distinguished the pamphlet from the
articles. The pamphlet seems to have contained fewer ‘ambiguous’
calls to action than the articles, but if the pamphlet
did not warrant a
prosecution, it was hard to see how the articles could do so.
The government nonetheless decided to prosecute William Burns on three counts
of publishing seditious
I have not been able to find who took part in the making of the relevant
decision, nor why they made it. It seems reasonable to conclude
government was advised that it had some chance of
It also seems
reasonable to assume that the government was under pressure to
It also seems reasonable to assume that the government would not have been
inhibited by concerns for communists’ civil liberties
in the event of its
having concluded that prosecution would otherwise be politically
But the prosecution
should be seen against the background of a string of suggested prosecutions
before and after the Burns case in
which its legal advisers had decided against
prosecution. One possible reason for prosecuting Burns may have lain in what
to have been a policy underlying sedition prosecutions: to aim for
relatively high profile targets
rather than rank and file. In Burns’ case, the target was probably
rather than Burns himself. If it succeeded, other
‘inflammatory’ articles might also attract
prosecutions.
would achieve far more than the trial and conviction of
those responsible for the allegedly seditious doggerel, statements and pamphlets
which were referred for legal advice, but which failed to lead to
prosecutions.
The hearing of the charges began on 10 August 1950 in the Special Federal
The case was heard before Magistrate Isles, who in 1949 had presided over
Sharkey’s committal hearing. J W Shand QC with H
J Henchman appeared for
the prosecution. Burns was represented by Fred Paterson, instructed by Jollie
Smith and Co, a venerable firm
of communist
solicitors.
Both Hnechman and Paterson had been involved in previous sedition trials.
Henchman had acted as junior counsel in the first instance
prosecution of
Sharkey. Paterson had had involvment both as a defendant and as counsel. In 1930
he had been charged under the sedition
provisions of the Queensland Criminal
Code and acquitted.
He had been
less successful in his defences of Gilbert Burns and Lance Sharkey, but he had
done his best to use the trials as political
forums and his legal arguments had
nearly prevailed in Gilbert Burns’ appeal. That his arguments had failed
may have reflected
the political rather than the legal weakness of his cases. In
the late 1940s, it was not easy to put a favourable gloss on statements
could easily be taken as confirming the widely held suspicion that the ACP would
welcome a Soviet invasion of Australia, even
if it regarded this as regrettably
improbable. But unlike Gilbert Burns and Sharkey, William Burns had not
suggested fighting on
the side of the Soviet Union, or welcoming Soviet
invaders. While
was effectively supporting what was widely
perceived as communist aggression, it was doing so in relation to a distant
country, and
in a political climate in which there was considerable support for
the proposition that Australian troops should not be sent to fight
for alien and
somewhat unsavoury governments in distant
On Burns being formally charged, Paterson argued that the prosecution had
failed to provide adequate particulars in that it had failed
to set out the
respects in which the articles were seditious. Shand argued that there was no
need to do so. It was enough that the
informations set out the articles which
were the basis for the charges. The magistrate, Mr Isles, ruled in favour of the
prosecution.
Burns then opted for summary trial and pleaded not guilty,
following which Shand outlined the case for the prosecution. The articles
within either paragraph (g) of
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 24A(1) (the
promotion of ill-will between classes of subjects) or paragraph (d)
(disaffection towards the government or constitution
of the Commonwealth). It
was a relevant consideration that Australia was involved in a war pursuant to
its international obligations,
and that this was a time of international
tension. There was no attempt to interfere with freedom of speech. He then
sought to introduce
as evidence a certificate from the Minister for External
Affairs in relation to the Korean war. Paterson objected: while the certificate
was valid as evidence of the existence of the government of South Korea, in
other respects it was making highly questionable claims.
A certificate could not
be conclusive evidence that North Korea had attacked the South, nor of the
validity of the Security Council
resolution under which the Western powers had
entered the war. Mr Isles ruled that the certificate in its current form could
be admitted, and Shand agreed to submit a re-drafted version of the
certificate.
The prosecution relied on only two witnesses, William Sweeney and Arthur
Ethell, both Commonwealth Investigation Officers. Their evidence
related to the
purchase of copies of
and an interview with Burns in which he
admitted that he was the publisher of
, the person referred to in
the publisher’s imprint, and that the articles had been printed with his
approval. Sweeney, under
cross-examination, admitted that he had made no
inquiries as to who was editor of
(He did know who the printer
The defence called no
evidence. Paterson then argued that the prosecution had failed to make out its
case. There was no evidence
on which the court could be satisfied that Burns had
known the content of the articles. He could not therefore be said to have
them with the requisite intent. Even if Burns were to be found to have
published the articles, knowing their content, the court could
not be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that his intention was seditious. The articles
criticised the government, but a person ‘had
the same right to criticise
fighting in Korea and the Liquor or Gaming Acts, or any other
legislation’. When the magistrate
asked whether this applied to a decision
to go to war, Paterson submitted that this was ‘as much open to criticism
as a decision
on, say, drinking
The articles did not advocate resistance to attempts to prosecute the war.
Further, in deciding whether the articles were seditious,
it would be necessary
for the court to decide whether the government’s actions in Korea were in
accordance with Commonwealth
law. In particular, while the UN Charter had been
adopted by Parliament, the intervention in Korea had not been pursuant to the
(It had not been approved by the Security Council with the affirmative
vote of the Soviet Union, which was boycotting meetings of
the Council in
protest against the non-recognition of the People’s Republic of China as
the government of China.)
Shand argued that the last argument as irrelevant, since this was not what
Burns had contended. Paterson then pointed out that one
of the charges against
Burns related to the contention that Australian involvement was in flagrant
violation of the UN Charter. In
reply, Shand argued that there was no evidence
that Burns had known that the UN action was invalid and that this was why he had
the articles. In any case, both Houses of Parliament had approved of
aid being given. (Paterson objected that this would not have
made otherwise
invalid behaviour valid.) The articles made it clear that opposition was not to
stop short of breaking the law. (Paterson
pointed out that since there were no
laws requiring support for the war or penalising statements prejudicial to the
war effort, Burns
could not be said to be advocating disobedience to any law.)
The magistrate, Mr Isles, found that all three articles were seditious and
that Burns had published all
To determine whether the
words evidenced an intention to arouse disaffection against the government, he
relied on the observations
of Latham CJ and Rich J in
He found that the
words were not mere criticisms of government policy, made in good faith with a
view to the rectification of an
error. They were ‘expressive in the most
emphatic and clearest possible terms of an intention or design to promote in the
of the people a feeling of hostility and disloyalty to the
Government’. They were made in the context not of a possible war,
an actual one. He found support for his conclusion that the statements were
seditious both in the language used to describe
the war, and in the explicit and
implicit calls to action contained in the articles:
What could be more strong, more clear advocacy of non-support or opposition to a
Government in relation to a war than the words:
‘Not a man, not a ship, not a plane, not a gun for war on the colonial
liberation movement of Asia’; or ‘for the
aggressive imperialist war
on Korea and Malaya’; or ‘Seamen’s Patriotic Lead. Stop War in
Korea,’ which was
printed in the ‘Tribune’ of July
It did not matter whether the United Nations Security Council
had exceeded its powers when it passed the resolutions to which the
government had responded.
I cannot see that I am concerned with the legality or illegality of the United
Nations’ actions in respect to the United Nations
The fact is that the Government of this country has taken certain action which
involves its participation in an armed conflict.
That is a decision which, whether rightly or wrongly made, could affect this
country’s existence.
In my opinion, whatever the decision, it does not afford justification for the
words published by the defendant and does not affect
my finding that the words
were seditious.
However, the Crown had proved that Burns had knowledge of only one of the
three articles (that of 12 July).
In mitigation, Paterson argued that a fine would be the proper penalty. Burns
had worked on the wharves since February 1948. He had
agreed to be publisher of
when he worked for the paper as a reporter prior to 1948. From
these facts the inference might be drawn that Burns did not write or
approve the
article. Mr Isles was not convinced. There had been recent convictions for
‘similar’ offences, and that these
ought to have deterred people
from making subsequent seditious
statements.
‘The country
had decided to take part in a war and in such circumstances was entitled to
command loyalty, which made sedition
He sentenced
Burns to 9 months imprisonment. Burns appealed, and was released on bail of
£500 with a similar surety. It was
by no means certain that an appeal would
fail. The decision that the words were seditious was arguably consistent with
loosely framed test in
Burns v Ransley
, but it seemed to
go beyond what Latham CJ envisaged as seditious. Even placing an uncharitable
interpretation on the language in
question, it is difficult to see how it could
be said that Burns was advocating that the Government should not only be
opposed, but
if possible destroyed.
But Waugh, the Crown Solicitor, suggested that the Commonwealth might also
consider an appeal against the acquittals and expressed
concern about the
implications of the relevant rulings: ‘There may ... be other seditious
articles in the “Tribune”
and if Burns cannot be prosecuted the
question will arise as to who can.’ Bailey recommended against an appeal.
The question
could be raised in the context of the hearing of Burns’
III Appeals
The hearing of the appeal in the Court of General Sessions began on 13
November before Judge Berne, as a trial de novo. The trial
did not progress in
the way the Commonwealth would have
His Honour immediately made it clear that he was concerned about several aspects
of the Commonwealth case. In particular, he was
concerned that the Australian
involvement in Korea might be illegal, in which case Burns might not be guilty
of sedition. When the
hearing opened, Judge Berne indicated that he wanted to
know whether the Commonwealth was at war in Korea, given that Ministers were
claiming otherwise, while it was clear that Australians were involved in
hostilities. If Australia was involved in war, he wanted
to know whether its
involvement was legal. He doubted whether the war (if there was one) could be
legal, since it had not been declared
by the King. He also wanted to know what
statutory authority existed for sending troops overseas. He also queried the
status of Australia’s
involvement in Malaya (which had also been discussed
article). He doubted that it was legal to use Australian
troops to quell uprisings in other
Following this argument, Paterson stated that he wished to re-call the two
prosecution witnesses who had given evidence at first instance.
Judge Berne was
not impressed by their methods or their testimony. He was critical of the fact
that Sweeney had let Ethel see the
notes he had made of his interview with
Sweeney’s memory
‘seemed to be very vague about things in general’, and His Honour
was ‘not the slightest
bit impressed with’
Paterson then called
Burns as a witness. Burns testified that he was a waterside worker and that he
had not written anything for
since January 1948. He exercised no
supervision over the paper, and had imagined that as registered publisher his
sole role was to
be the nominal defendant in the event of a libel
Cross-examination
produced a series of altercations between Shand and Judge Berne. The first
related to whether Shand could address
Burns as ‘Burns’. Judge Berne
said that this was insulting and derogatory. ‘In this court you will
address appellants
or defendants as either “appellant” or
“defendant” or “Mister”’. He said that Dwyer J had
checked Shand on that very point not long before. Shand objected that it had in
fact been he who had checked Dwyer J, and cited precedent
to justify his choice
of language.
Later Judge Berne
had warned Burns that he might incriminate himself if he took a certain line,
and that he need not answer a question
from Shand. When Shand expressed his
anger at this intervention, Judge Berne reportedly said ‘It is perfectly
obvious that
the Commonwealth Government is out to get this man’, and when
Shand protested that he had no right to say that, Judge Berne
repeated his
statement. After this altercation, Shand announced that he did not propose to
ask any further questions, to which Judge
Berne replied: ‘I don’t
care what you do, Mr
At the end of his evidence, Judge Berne stated that insofar as there was a
conflict of evidence between Burns’ evidence and
that of the police
witnesses, he had no hesitation in accepting
This meant that Burns would be guilty only if knowledge of the contents of a
seditious article was not an element of the offence.
Shand argued that knowledge
was not required since state legislation treated registered publishers as
legally responsible for the
contents of what they
This unconvincing
did not impress Judge
Even if it had merit it could not justify a heavy sentence:
I hope the Commonwealth does not expect me to give a man nine months gaol
because he was technically liable. It would be asking too
much to impose such a
punishment when he was only the nominal
Shand was unwilling to make any
concessions:
If Burns is not really connected with this paper, there is nobody to be blamed
but himself.
Judge Berne, however, wanted concessions:
Is the Commonwealth pressing for a conviction? If it is, I say now that I would
be shocked. The propaganda is that all Communists
are liars. If I make a mistake
it would be better to make it in the defendant’s favour than show an
unconscious bias against
him. I have no sympathy for this man, but I don’t
want to do him an
It was becoming clear that unless Shand could come forward with more
convincing arguments, Burns was either going to be acquitted,
worst – given a very light sentence.
After a submission by Paterson to the effect that the UN action in Korea was
invalid, Judge Berne asked Shand to put certain questions
to the Commonwealth.
Shand replied that the government might choose not to answer some of them on the
grounds that they were irrelevant.
Judge Berne replied that he would not be
dictated to by the Commonwealth and in atmosphere of acrimony between Judge
Berne and Shand,
the matter was adjourned for the
Next morning legal argument resumed, as acrimonious as ever. In the course of
argument about whether a publisher could be convicted
in the absence of
knowledge of the contents of a seditious article, Paterson gave the example of a
publisher stricken insane who
might be charged with publishing seditious
articles while in an asylum, and asked how such a person could be found guilty.
Berne replied: ‘Mr Shand says he could be. He’d probably hang
Further acrimony
arose in relation to a number of questions which Shand had asked be submitted to
the Supreme Court for answers.
These included whether words could be seditious
if no state of war existed; whether the prosecution must show personal intention
with regard to publication; and whether the judge had erred in rejecting two
. The last question was: ‘Whether his
Honour’s conduct of the trial has resulted in the respondent being
deprived of natural
justice’. Judge Berne demanded to know the basis for
the alleged denial of natural justice. Shand proceeded to provide details
including the judge’s interference with his cross-examination of Burns,
and his statements that the Commonwealth was clearly
out to get Burns. Judge
Berne denied having used those words. Shand said ‘I am not misreporting
you. Every reporter here knows
Judge Berne said
that he agreed with some of Shand’s submissions and would not clutter the
Full Court with them, but he refused
to put the natural justice question to the
Supreme Court.
Shand then gave the Court the Commonwealth’s written answers in
relation to the issues raised by Judge Berne on the previous
Commonwealth’s involvement in Korea was described as pursuant to Chapter 7
of the United Nations Charter. Australia
was at war de facto, and, depending on
how the Charter was interpreted, de jure. Involvement in Malay was for the
purposes of helping
His Majesty’s government suppress an armed insurgency.
There had been no declaration of war, but authority for sending forces
provided by the
Charter of the United Nations Act, 1945
, the instrument
of ratification of the Charter deposited on November 1, 1945, the
Naval Defence Act
Air Forces Act
, and under
the provisions of appropriations made by Parliament.
Judge Berne objected to the language in which some of the questions had been put
by Shand to the Commonwealth, stating that their
wording did not correspond to
that which he had wanted put. He described Shand’s handling of the case as
‘scandalous’.
During lunch, the judge read the Commonwealth’s answers. On the
resumption of the hearing, he reported that he was now persuaded
that there was
a de facto war, that it and Australia’s involvement in it were legal, and
that the article was therefore
However he reiterated
his objections to the language in terms of which one of his questions had been
transmitted to the Commonwealth.
The question put to the Commonwealth had been:
‘What is the nature of the warlike operations at present north of the 38th
He complained that if he had asked the question in those words
‘a sinister construction could be placed on it’. Shand
that he had indeed asked the question in those terms. He then produced a copy of
the transcript to prove this.
Judge Berne demanded to know how Shand had managed to get a copy, when he
(Berne) had not yet seen one. Shand refused to answer this
question and
continued reading.
Judge Berne
ordered Shand to cease implying that he was a liar.
I have a clear recollection of what I said. It is no use your junior checking
up with the transcript. I find it most offensive. If
he has the temerity to do
that I will order him out of
Shand replied that if so, he would go with him. His Honour replied that:
‘That would not upset me very much’.
Shand then repeated his claim. Judge
Berne then warned him that if he continued to contradict him, he would order him
out of court.
Shand repeated his allegation, whereupon Judge Berne said:
‘I will not allow you to contradict me. I will order you out of
court.’ Shand then left. Henchman announced that, consistent with English
precedent, he would follow suit. Judge Berne then
adjourned the case to give the
Commonwealth a chance to appoint alternative
The Commonwealth then applied to the Supreme Court for an order of
certiorari, to have the case removed from Judge Berne, and an order
prohibition to restrain him from further hearing the case, the basis for the
orders being his Honour’s alleged denial of
natural justice to the
Commonwealth. In supporting this claim, Shand argued that Judge Berne had
‘stepped down from the bench
and acted as the appellant’s
counsel’. On 17 November, the Supreme Court made an interim order
restraining the judge
from proceeding with the case, pending a full hearing.
Notice of the order was served on Judge Berne at his home that evening,
an acrimonious letter from his Honour to Waugh, the Crown
The matter was set
down for hearing on 29 November, but on that date, counsel for Judge Berne, Eric
Miller KC, sought a fortnight’s
adjournment. He drew the Court’s
attention to requests by the judge’s solicitors that either the state or
commonwealth
government provide legal aid for their client, citing the
seriousness of the allegation against their client, especially given the
international situation, and the atmosphere created by the passage of the
Communist Party Dissolution Act
. The New South Wales government had
refused on the grounds that the state was not a party to the proceedings. The
Commonwealth also
refused, since in matters of this kind it was normal for the
dispute to be handled by counsel for the parties involved in the relevant
proceedings, with the judge making no more than a formal appearance. Its refusal
had been received the previous day. Miller emphasised
that the stakes in the
case were considerable, Judge Berne’s judicial integrity and loyalty being
potentially at issue.
also the need to consider Shand’s conduct in the matter. He asked that
Judge Berne be allowed to proceed with the
appeal. The Court allowed a
week’s extension and refused the request that the judge be allowed to
proceed with the appeal.
December, the matter was adjourned yet
The case eventually came on for hearing on 13 February the following year.
The result was anti-climactic. Isaacs KC (for Burns) said
that it was his
understanding that once the Attorney-General applied for a writ of certiorari
the court had no discretion but to
grant it. He would not oppose the application
for prohibition, but ‘this did not mean he was critical of Judge
Amsberg for Judge Berne said that his counsel would submit to any
order of the Court. The Court then made an order that ‘any
Sessions appeal judge, other than Judge Berne’ should hear the appeal.
Amsberg had sought an order that the Commonwealth
pay Judge Berne’s costs,
but this was opposed by the Commonwealth which argued that the Crown
Solicitor’s Office had
given him ‘a great deal of help’. The
Court made no order as to costs. When asked to comment on the outcome, Judge
said that ‘At this stage I regret I am to discuss the
Isaacs’ concession seems a little odd. The application for certiorari
was based on the contention that in denying the Commonwealth
natural justice,
Judge Berne had exceeded his jurisdiction. How could it be that the
Attorney-General could succeed without an inquiry
into whether the allegations
against Judge Berne had been made out? The answer seems to be that Isaacs was
confusing two issues:
the right to an order nisi for certiorari, and the right
to an order absolute. There is ample authority for the proposition that
order nisi issued as of right if sought by the Attorney-General, but there seems
to be no basis for Isaacs’ conclusion
that the same applied for an order
absolute. There would be no point to the requirement that to show cause if that
were so, and in
Ex parte Attorney-General; Re
where an order for
certiorari had been made on the Attorney-General’s fiat, the Supreme Court
had declined to make it absolute.
This was certainly the law as the Commonwealth
understood it.
If the matter had
proceeded, it would therefore have been for the Commonwealth to show that Judge
Berne had either failed to accord
natural justice to the Commonwealth, or at
least that he was unlikely to do so in the future.
It is hard to believe that Isaacs did not know this, and it is possible that
his observation represented a face-saving way-out for
a judge who had treated
his client considerately. It may, moreover, have been to Burns’ advantage
not to oppose the Commonwealth’s
application. His failure to do so meant
that he was not in danger of having to pay the costs of a successful application
by the Commonwealth,
and there had been negotiations over the possible payment
by the Commonwealth of Burns’ costs thrown
Berne’s belated agreement to submit to any order that the court might
make meant that there was no danger of a positive finding
being made to the
effect that he had denied procedural fairness, and a consequent award of costs
against him.
On 4 April, the re-hearing of the Quarter Sessions appeal began before Judge
Lloyd. Paterson succeeded in exposing some inconsistencies
between the
prosecution evidence at the re-hearing and at the hearing before Judge Berne,
the CIS officers arguing that they had
been confused by the barrage of questions
at the earlier hearing. Burns said that he was publisher in name only, and had
had no connection
since he began work as a wharf labourer in
1948. He was registered as publisher solely so that he could be the nominal
in any libel action brought against the
Paterson argued that
Burns was wrongly convicted. First, he argued that the High Court’s
decision in the
Communist Party
meant that any citizen
was free to oppose Australia’s involvement in the Korean war. Second, the
sending of Australian troops
to Korea was illegal and therefore open to
criticism. Third, Burns, as nominal publisher, was not liable for the contents
paper. In reply Shand argued that as registered publisher Burns was
responsible for the contents of the paper. If he failed to carry
out his duties,
he had only himself to
In an oral judgment, Judge Lloyd stated that he had no doubt that the words
in the article evidenced a seditious intent. He accepted
the prosecution’s
evidence that Burns had stated that he had approved the publication of the
offending article. He therefore
found the charge made out. On sentence, Paterson
argued that Burns had no prior convictions and that as a result of the long
he had suffered severe stress and anxiety. He had also had to give up work
on the days he had appeared before the
The plea was partly
successful. Judge Lloyd reduced Burns’ sentence to six months on the
grounds of the eight months delay.
On Paterson’s application he agreed to
state a case for the Court of Criminal Appeal on whether the sending of
Australian troops
to Korea was legal in view of the fact that the relevant
United Nations decision had been made without the agreement of the Soviet
Nothing came of the
application. On 24 April, Burns’ solicitor informed Bennett, the Crown
Solicitor, that Burns did not intend
to proceed with the case stated, but that
an appeal might be made to the High Court. The appeal to the Court of Criminal
withdrawn by consent on 27
The question of the costs
of the abortive hearing before Judge Berne was finalised the following month.
The Commonwealth was willing
to pay two thirds of Miss Jollie Smith’s
solicitor’s costs; 80% of Isaacs’ fees; and a little more than half
the fees claimed by Paterson (who, in an ambit claim, had sought costs in
relation to Burns’ appearance in the Court of Petty
Sessions). It refused
to pay any fees for Gruzman, a third barrister who had been retained in the
case. Jollie Smith then claimed
£11 for Gruzman’s appearance in the
Court of Appeal. This was turned down on the grounds that it had nothing to do
the aborted hearing before Judge Berne. So Jollie Smith got £52.10.0.
Isaacs got £102.10.0 and Paterson £136.2.0.
Shand claimed and was paid
£677.4.6 and Henchman claimed and received
Burns served his
prison term (less remissions) and was released from Tumbarumba prison camp on 11
August. He flew (by ANA, the non-government
airline) to Sydney where he was
welcomed by a crowd of more than 50
IV Who Won?
In one sense the Commonwealth was the clear winner. Judge Berne was forced to
agree to a settlement, and emerges somewhat tarnished
from the case: his
concerns for liberty in a time of intense anti-communism deserve unqualified
respect, but in the end he allowed
Shand to get the better of him, and emerges
as someone over-concerned with protecting his honour in contexts where the
better course
would have been to recognise that when his and Shand’s
recollections diverged, Shand may sometimes have been right, and even
may have had reasonable grounds for his recollections. Moreover, regardless of
whether he had been legally at fault, some
media reports implied that this was
Burns was convicted, and imprisoned. There was no adverse finding in
relation to the legality of the Korean war.
But the Commonwealth’s victory was a qualified one. First, the Burns
case raised questions about the degree to which the sedition
law could be used
in cases where it was unclear whether the nominal publisher of seditious words
was aware of having published the
words in question. Burns was, after all,
acquitted on two out of three counts and was convicted on the third only because
found, on what Judge Berne regarded as unpersuasive evidence, to have
admitted knowing the contents of the third article. If publishers
convicted of publishing seditious words only if they were aware of the contents
of what they published, the Commonwealth
would, in future, be hard-pressed to
convict publishers.
Burns’ fate, communists and other radicals could be expected to take steps
to ensure that publishers of their literature
remained ignorant of the contents
of what they were publishing. Even printers might be able to show that they were
unaware of the
contents of what they were printing. Writers of seditious
articles could obviously not plead ignorance, but while press laws required
publishers and printers identify themselves, there is no requirement that
writers do so. If Magistrate Isles was correct, the
task of prosecuting those
responsible for seditious publications was harder than the Commonwealth had
believed. The law could, of
course, have been changed. But the fact that it
wasn’t suggests that even during the Korean war, the political costs
in doing so were not costs the Commonwealth was willing to pay.
Second, Burns’ appeal had the effect of postponing other sedition
prosecutions. As noted above, Spicer decided against instituting
a prosecution
based on a subsequent
article, pending the outcome of the
In another case, the
Commonwealth Investigation Service drew the Attorney-General’s
Department’s attention to several
mimeographed pamphlets authorised by A
Ogston urging opposition to the war, one of which included the time-honoured
call that there
be ‘not a man, not a ship, not a gun’ for Korea.
Waugh considered that the pamphlets were seditious. Bailey considered
was borderline, but analogous to Burns’ case. Given the pending appeal, he
recommended against prosecution. The file
was remitted following Burns’
conviction, but no action was
The file throws no light
on why this course was followed, but it is possible that the Commonwealth was
worried lest Ogston be able
to rely on the ‘ignorant publisher’
Third, Paterson was able to use the case as a forum for presenting the
communist line on the war to a broader audience. Both at first
instance, and on
appeal, Paterson was able to develop the party’s argument that the war was
illegal, and his language included
language which denounced the war in emphatic
Instead of Burns being charged with sedition, all those responsible for illegal
action in Korea should be called before the courts
He was also able to raise the civil libertarian issues posed the case, and
argued that if mainstream politicians were free to criticise
the war, Burns
should also have that
The media reports suggest that his efforts may have raised doubts as to the
legality of the war and Australia’s involvement
in it. Headlines relating
to the trial not infrequently suggested that the war was of questionable
legality, and many reports mentioned
Paterson’s argument that the Security
Council resolution was illegal, given the absence of the Soviet Union.
success was enhanced by the seriousness with which these
questions were treated by Judge Berne: the legality issue was more frequently
raised in headlines relating to the appeal before Judge Berne than in headlines
relating to the trial before Isles SM and Judge Lloyd.
It is hard to know the
impact of the headlines and the reports since these depend so heavily on the way
their audience reads, filters
and interprets them. But it is possible that they
sowed doubts in the minds of at least some readers, flowed into private
create a degree of disillusionment with the
Paterson’s civil libertarian arguments received less publicity, but
they may have struck a chord. The fact that Shand saw the
need to emphasise that
‘This prosecution constitutes no attempt to interfere with freedom of
strongly suggests
that he was sensitive to the possibility that it would be perceived as such.
Judge Berne was certainly sensitive
to the civil libertarian implications of the
case and his well-publicised allegation that the government was
or ‘out to get’ Burns may have kindled or
reinforced doubts about the propriety of the prosecution.
Despite ASIO’s close scrutiny of the activities of the communist party,
and despite frequent requests from ASIO for advice about
possible prosecutions,
Burns was the only critic of the Korean war to be prosecuted for sedition. But
the Burns case was not quite
sedition’s last hurrah. In 1953, the
Communist Review
published an article critical of the
ASIO sought advice as
to whether those responsible could be prosecuted, and, this time, the advice was
that they should be. One of
those whose prosecution was considered was none
other than W F Burns, in his role as registered proprietor and publisher of the
, but the advice to the Crown solicitor was that he should not be
prosecuted:
From the evidence adduced the last time he was prosecuted it clearly appeared
that he was not actively engaged in the publication
of the paper and to proceed
against him may detract from the seriousness of these
Three defendants were charged, and each was acquitted, but securing
convictions was only one of the purposes of the prosecutions.
The charges laid
the basis for wide-ranging search warrants, which were the basis for raids on
communist offices, and communists’
Thereafter, the Commonwealth seems largely to have lost interest in sedition
prosecutions.
Instead it pursued
its war against communists by other, less legally perilous means: surveillance;
the non-appointment of known and
suspected communists to government positions;
the Royal Commission on Espionage. The Vietnam war passed without a sedition
prosecution,
and not because opponents scrupulously complied with the letter of
the law. Indeed, the more militant opponents of the Vietnam war
supported union
bans on the supply of war materials, sought to sabotage the operation of the
conscription system, and even sought
to raise money to support the Viet
Current concerns about statements which could be construed as giving aid and
comfort to terrorists have prompted renewed interest
in sedition
It is difficult to
extrapolate from Burns’ case to what will happen in the event of renewed
interest in sedition-type prosecutions.
But it suggests several hypotheses, some
worrying; some less so. One is that sedition-like laws have traditionally been
used to punish
people for what they think (or what they are thought to think)
rather than on the basis of the degree to which their activities actually
threat to social order (however defined). A second is that sedition laws are
weapons which are used sparingly. The imprecision
which ensures they can be used
as the basis for convictions even where the language scarcely seems to disclose
a seditious intent
also means that judges and juries may acquit in cases in
cases where the prosecution might confidently have expected a conviction.
third, however, is that sedition prosecutions may be worrying not so much
because of their direct effects, as for what they symbolise.
Their use is a
guide to what governments are willing to tolerate, and even when prosecutions
are used sparingly, the fact that they
are used at all indicates that
governments are relatively confident that the political climate is sufficiently
tolerant of repression
for them to be able to get away, not only with political
prosecutions, but with the more subtle, more ubiquitous, and more effective
forms of repression which typically accompany prosecutions for political crimes.
BA(Hons) LLB(Hons) (Melb);
MPhil(Yale); PhD(La Trobe), Associate Professor, School of Law, La Trobe
University.
As to reasons why it did so,
see eg Robert O’Neill,
Australia in the Korean War 1950-53. Vol I:
Strategy and Diplomacy
(1981) 15-20.
Julius Stone,
Controls of International Conflict. A Treatise on the Dynamics of Disputes and
(1959) 228-230. Even before the ‘passage’ of the
resolution of 27 June, President Truman had ordered United States air
forces to assist South Korea: Brian Fitzpatrick and Rowan J Cahill,
Seamen’s Union of Australia 1872-1972: A History
(1981) 197.
‘Australia’s Commitments under the United Nations Charter’ in
D P O’Connell (ed),
International Law in Australia
(1965) 65, 70.
The decision to provide two ships was made on 29 June. The government agreed to
supply the squadron (which had been
publicly requested by Macarthur) on 30 June.
The sending of army observers was approved on 3 July, and after initially being
to the sending of troops, the government reluctantly agreed to do so on
26 July. On the negotiations and pressures which led to this
commitment, see
O’Neill, above n 1, 47-57, 63-76.
Chifley and Evatt had
supported Australia’s involvement in the war on the basis that it was a
United Nations operation, and
therefore worthy of support, given Labor’s
traditional commitment to collective security. However, other members of the ALP
were less enthusiastic, and the government’s response to the war suggests
that it considered that there were major political
and economic limits to the
degree to which it could contribute to the allied efforts. It did not regard the
Korean war as of central
importance. It was not prepared to introduce
conscription for Korea, and while it increased defence expenditure from 2.1% of
in 1949-50 to 5.1% in 1952-53, it was not prepared to put the economy on a
war-footing. See O’Neill, above n 1, 60, 82, 86-87,
104, 106-108, 123,
196; Les Louis, ‘“Operation Alien” and the Cold War in
Australia, 1950-1953’ (1992) 62
Labor History
1, 17. However
initial public support for involvement was considerable. In August 77% of Gallup
Poll respondents approved the sending
of the air force and naval contingents and
15% disapproved. 71% thought some Australian artillery infantry and artillery
to Korea, and 20% opposed their going: ‘Public Backs Govt on
Korea’ (1950)
Australian Gallup Polls
‘Not a Man, Ship,
’Plane for Korea or Malaya’,
1 July 1950, 1;
‘Korea for the Koreans! Withdraw All Aust Forces’,
July 1950, 1; ‘Seamen’s Patriotic Lead: Stop War on Korea’,
12 July 1950, 1.
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1914
Crimes Act 1914
24A(1)(d), (g).
On this, see Fitzpatrick and
Cahill, above n
There was considerable
public support for action against those who tried to stop supplies. According to
the August Gallup poll,
most respondents wanted punitive action taken against
people who tried to interfere with war supplies (31% favoured imprisonment,
wanted them dealt with severely; 10% wanted prosecutions, 6% deportations, 4%
dismissals, and 14% for the government to ‘do
something’). Only 16%
wanted nothing done: ‘Public Backs Govt on Korea’ above n
. Government reticence seems to have reflected government sensitivity to the
need to avoid alienating less radical unionists.
‘Not a Man, Not a Gun
for Monopoly’s Robber War against Malaya’,
5 May 1950, 2. This article did not give rise to a sedition prosecution. It
could perhaps be distinguished from the July
articles on the grounds that it was
not until 19 May a firm decision had not yet been made to commit forces to
Malaya: O’Neill
See eg, Joint Intelligence
Committee, Appreciation No 4/1949 NAA: A5799/15 43/1949.
As evidenced, inter alia,
in the statements which gave rise to the prosecutions in
Burns v Ransley
[1949] HCA 45
(1949) 79 CLR 101
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121.
Burns v Ransley
[1949] HCA 45
(1949) 79 CLR 101
R v Sharkey
[1949] HCA 46
(1949) 79 CLR 121.
For an excellent
discussion of these cases and their background, see Lawrence W Maher, ‘The
Use and Abuse of Sedition’
[1992] SydLawRw 21
Sydney Law Review
NAA: A432/82 1950/1411.
Waugh to Bailey, 3 August
1950; Bailey, file note 7 August 1950 NAA: A432/82 1950/1553.
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) s 24D(1). The Act has subsequently been amended, and sections
rearranged, For analyses of the law as it stood, see Michael Head,
‘Sedition – Is Star Chamber Dead’
Criminal Law
; Maher, above n
In the aftermath of
Burns’ first instance trial, an opinion was expressed about whether a
article published on 16 August 1950 was seditious. The article
‘American Party Trying to Bludgeon People into War’, provided
standard denunciation of the Western role in the war, but did not urge
resistance (peaceful or otherwise). The advice was nonetheless
the present circumstances of tension, words used in the passages quoted
be regarded as expressive of a purpose of inspiring or inflaming
hostility and emnity [sic] to the Government in its policy in relation
Korea’ and that ‘a prima facie case
could probably
established’: Assistant Crown Solicitor to Secretary 18 August 1950 NAA:
A432/82 1963/362 (my italics).
The CIS referred numerous
cases (often trivial) to the Attorney-General’s Department for
consideration for prosecution: above
, 306. Maher also highlights the pressures which explained sedition
prosecutions under the Labor government: 297-306. However, in
one respect the
pressures on Menzies were less: in comparison with Labor, the Menzies government
did not have to demonstrate its
anti-Communist credentials: it was already
demonstrating them by its attempts to secure the passage of the
Party Dissolution Bill
articles attracted little or no
media attention, although there was considerable coverage of the threatened
seamen’s boycott.
It had introduced the
Communist Party Dissolution Bill
on 27 April 1950, and after the Senate
had insisted on amendments unacceptable to the government, the Bill was laid
aside on 23 June.
Communist Party Dissolution Bill [No 2]
introduced on 28 September, was passed by the Senate on 19 October and received
Royal Assent the following day. Nor would it have
been concerned that the public
would oppose the prosecution. At the time, public opinion seemed overwhelmingly
in favour of tough
measures against communists and communism. Polls suggested
that 80% of Australians favoured banning the party. (Support was to decline,
the government did not know this.)
Sharkey was general
secretary of the party; Healy was state president of the Western Australian
branch, and Gilbert Burns, whom
Head (above n 17, 102) describes as a rank and
file member of the party, was nonetheless a member of the party’s
state committee.
Consistent with this
analysis is the memorandum referred to above n 16.
monitored for future possible prosecutions, notwithstanding their feeble basis.
A file-note appended to the memorandum indicated
that pending the outcome of the
Burns appeal, ‘articles published in this paper should be closely
scrutinized from time to
time’: J A Spicer (Attorney-General) 24 August
The trial was widely
reported. Accounts include: ‘Publisher on Trial for Sedition’,
(Melbourne), 11 August 1950, 7; ‘Defence Counsel Quotes
(Melbourne),
12 May 1950, 7; ‘Burns
Incited ‘Non-Support of Actual War’,
(Melbourne), 16
August 1950, 5; ‘Defence Queries Korea Decision’,
(Melbourne), 12 August 1950, 4; ‘No Evidence to be Called by
(Melbourne), 12 May 1950, 4; ‘Nine Months on
Sedition Charge’,
(Melbourne), 16 May 1950, 4; ‘Korea
Sedition Alleged’,
10 August 1950, 3; ‘Red’s
Reply on Sedition Charge’,
(Melbourne), 11 August 1950, 5;
‘9 Months Sedition Sentence’,
15 August 1950, 1;
‘Red Articles Aimed at Disaffection – KC’,
(Melbourne), 11 August 1950, 13;
‘UN Action in Korea
Challenged: Treason Case’,
(Melbourne), 12 August 1950, 11;
‘Red Gets Nine Months Gaol for Sedition’,
(Melbourne), 16
August 1950, 2. While accounts vary in the matters treated as worthy of
attention, they appear to be consistent with
each other.
reports both mentioned that Paterson himself was a communist:
‘Korea Sedition Alleged’ above n
; ‘UN Action in Korea Challenged ...’ above n
Ross Fitzgerald,
People’s Champion, Fred Paterson: Australia’s Only Communist Party
Member of Parliament
(1987) 49-52.
Even the government
considered that the fate of Korea was not of central strategic importance, and
in private it was unenthusiastic
the war on the need to resist aggression rather than on the merits of the
of South Korea: O’Neill, above n
, 106, 114-115.
‘Red Articles
...’ above n 23.
‘Red’s Reply
...’ above n 23.
As to whether Security
Council resolutions require something close to the affirmative support of
permanent members, see eg, Stone,
above n 2, 232-233; Leo Grossman,
‘Voting in the Security Council: Abstention from Voting and Absence from
Yale Law Journal
; and Norman Kogan,
‘United Nations – Agent of Collective Security?’ (1952) 61
Yale Law Journal
1, who argue that they do. Cf, Josef L Kunz,
‘Legality of the Security council Resolutions of June 25 and 27,
1950’ (1951
American Journal of International Law
Yuen-Li Liang, ‘Notes on Legal Questions Concerning the United
Nations’ (1951) 45
American Journal of International Law
S McDougal and Richard N Gardner, ‘The Veto and the Charter: An
Interpretation for Survival’ (1951) 60
Yale Law Journal
argues that the conduct of the Western powers in resisting the North Korean
incursion was nonetheless justifiable under
international law: 234-237, and see
too Gross, 255-256.
His reasons are to be found
in NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
[1949] HCA 45
(1949) 79 CLR 101.
not advert to the question of whether the two tests were more or less identical.
Arguably, Latham CJ’s test is a little
stricter than Rich J’s.
Latham CJ said (at 109): ‘exciting disaffection’ refers to the
implanting or arousing or
stimulating in the minds of people a feeling or view
or opinion that the Sovereign and the Government should not be supported as
Sovereign and as Government, but that they should be opposed, and when the
statement in question is made in relation to a war it
means that they should, if
possible, be destroyed. Rich J had said (123): ‘Disaffection connotes
enmity and hostility, estranged
allegiance, disloyalty, hostility to constituted
authority or to a particular form of political government.’
‘Burns Incited
...’ above n 23.
‘Nine Months
...’ above n 23.
Waugh to Bailey; and file
notes NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
Reports include: ‘Is
Australia at War with Korea?’,
(Melbourne), 14 November 1950,
3; ‘Wrong Emphasis on Question to Govt’,
(Melbourne), 15
November 1950, 4;
‘Are We Legally at War in Korea?’,
(Melbourne), 14 November 1950, 5; ‘Clashes in Sedition Charge
(Melbourne), 15 November 1950, 6; ‘Is
Australia Now at War’,
Courier Mail
(Brisbane), 14 November 1950,
3; ‘Must Apologise or Not Be Heard’,
Courier Mail
(Brisbane),
15 November 1950, 5; ‘Sedition Count Appeal by Tribune Publisher’,
Daily Mirror
(Country Edition, Sydney), 12 November 1950, 2; ‘Judge
Orders KC from Court. Sensation in Sedition Case’,
Daily Mirror
(Late Extra, Sydney), 14 November 1959, 1; ‘Judge Questions Legality
of War in Korea’,
Daily Telegraph
(Sydney), 14 November 1950, 9;
‘Judge Orders KC from Court’,
Daily Telegraph
(Sydney), 15
November 1950, 7; ‘Judge Asks: “Are We at War”’,
(Melbourne), 13 November 1950, 5; ‘Clash with Judge: No New
(Melbourne), 14 November 1950, 1, 3; ‘KC
Clashes with Judge: Quits Case, Court’,
(Melbourne), 15
November 1950, 1; ‘“Korean War Might be Illegal,” Says
(Melbourne), 14 November 1950, 19; ‘No Crown
Counsel after Clash with Judge’,
(Melbourne), 14 November 1950,
15; ‘Sedition Case Appeal’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
November 1950, 4; ‘Mr Shand KC Walks out of Court’,
Morning Herald,
15 November 1950, 5; ‘Judge Says Govt “Out to
Get Burns”’,
(Sydney), 13 November 1950, 2; ‘KC
Ordered Out of Court by Judge’,
(Sydney), 14 November 1950, 1;
‘Burns Appeal; Judge Flays Government and Police Witnesses’,
(Sydney), 16 November 1950, 7. Insofar as they canvass the same
issues, their reports are consistent.
‘Is Australia at
War?’ above n 35; ‘Are We Legally at War...’ above n 35;
‘Judge Asks ...’ above
n 35; ‘Judge Questions
Legality...’ above n 35; ‘“Korean War Might be
Illegal”...’ above n 35.
‘Is Australia at
War?’ above n 35; ‘Are We Legally at War...’ above n 35;
‘“Korean War Might
be Illegal”...’ above n 35;
‘Burns Appeal’ above n 35.
spelled ‘Ethell’ in reports of the first instance trial, and also in
reports of the subsequent
trial before Judge Lloyd.
‘Is Australia at
War?’ above n 35; ‘Burns Appeal’ above n 35;
‘“Korean War Might be Illegal”...’
above n 35.
‘“Korean War
Might be Illegal”...’ above n 35.
‘Sedition Count
Appeal’ above n 35. (This exchange is not reported in most newspaper
‘Judge Says...’
above n 35. The
Daily Mirror
Daily Telegraph
(‘Sedition Count Appeal’ above n 35; ‘Judge Questions
Legality...’ above n 35) used the word ‘after’
rather than the
phrase ‘out to get’.
‘Judge Orders KC from
Court. Heated Clashes...’ above n 35; ‘Judge Says...’ above n
35; ‘Burns Appeal’
above n 35; ‘“Korean War Might be
Illegal”...’ above n 35.
The newspaper accounts are
unhelpful. One (‘Judge Says...’ above n 35) refers to the
Newspaper Act
- an Act which did not exist under New South Wales or
Commonwealth law. Several reports implicitly advert to this question in their
reports of the questions which Shand sought to have stated for consideration by
the Supreme Court. The
Sydney Morning Herald
report (‘Mr Shand, KC,
Walks out of Court’ above n 35) refers to s 21 of the
Defence Act
which probably involved the mis-hearing of a reference to s 21 of the
Defamation Act
(NSW), which was expressly referred to in the
report: ‘Judge Orders KC from Court. Heated
Clashes...’ above n 35.
While parts of the relevant
legislation might arguably have extended to seditious libels as well as to
defamatory libels, it is
hard to read the legislation as providing that
publishers of seditious articles are,
, guilty of seditious
libel. Moreover even if this were the case at common law or under state law, it
is hard to see how state law
could affect the operation of an offence created by
Commonwealth law.
‘Is Australia at
War?’ above n 35; ‘Sedition Case Appeal’ above n 35;
‘“Korean War Might be
Illegal”...’ above n 35.
‘Sedition Case
Appeal’ above n 35.
According to some reports,
Judge Berne had said that to insist on a conviction would be ‘a wicked and
monstrous thing’:
‘Judge Says...’ above n 35; ‘Burns
Appeal’ above n 35.
‘Is Australia at
War?’ above n 35; ‘Judge Questions Legality...’ above n 35;
‘Judge Says...’
above n 35; ‘Sedition Case Appeal’ above
‘Burns Appeal’
above n 35.
‘Clash with
Judge’ above n 35; ‘Judge Orders KC from Court. Sensation in
Sedition Case’ above n 35; ‘Judge
Orders KC from Court. Heated
Clashes...’ above n 35; ‘KC Ordered out of Court’ above n
‘Wrong Emphasis on
Question’ above n 35; ‘KC Ordered Out of Court by Judge’ above
n 35; ‘Burns Appeal’
above n 35.
‘Clashes in Sedition
Charge Appeal’ above n 35; ‘Must Apologise’ above n 35;
‘Judge Orders KC from
Court. Sensation in Sedition Case’ above n
slightly different. It states that after the post-lunch altercation with Shand,
Judge Berne stated that he would no longer
hear Shand unless he apologised and
that he wanted further information about the provisions in the
Defence Act
Appropriations Act
which authorised the sending of troops to
Sydney Morning
Daily Mirror
Daily Telegraph
versions of what Judge Berne had asked were identical to Shand’s
assertion: ‘Judge Questions Legality...’
above n 35, and the the
reporter’s version was similar: ‘What are the present
warlike operations north of the 38
parallel?’ ‘Judge
Says ...’ above n 35. The report of the case in the International Law
Reports, which is based
partly on the
Sydney Morning Herald Report
the version of the question answered by the Commonwealth, and does not mention
Judge Berne’s contention that he had framed
the question differently:
[1951] ILR 596.
‘Wrong Emphasis on
Question’ above n 35; ‘Judge Orders KC from Court. Sensation in
Sedition Case’ above
n 35; ‘Burns Appeal’ above n 35.
‘Mr Shand ...’
above n 35; ‘No Crown Counsel...’ above n 35.
Apologise’ above n 35; ‘Judge Orders KC from Court. Sensation in
Sedition Case’ above n 35; ‘Mr
Shand...’ above n 35;
‘Judge Says...’ above n 35; ‘No Crown Counsel...’ above
‘Judge Orders KC from
Court. Heated Clashes...’ above n 35; ‘Judge Orders KC from Court.
Sensation in Sedition
Case’ above n 35; ‘KC Ordered out of
Court’ above n 35; ‘Mr Shand ...’ above n 35; ‘No Crown
Counsel...’ above n 35. These headlines may not be quite accurate. Several
reports note that while Sand claimed he was ordered
out of court, court
officials claimed otherwise: ‘Must Apologise’ above n 35; ‘KC
Clashes ....’ above n 35.
Judge Berne’s statement about ordering out
could be treated as an ultimatum rather than an order.
Berne to Waugh, Crown
Solicitor, November 1950 NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
This seems to have provoked
a letter from Waugh stating that the Commonwealth did not question Berne’s
loyalty and that it
would not be alleging political bias: draft letter NAA:
A432/80 1963/362.
‘Judge Berne’s
Case Adjourned’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
30 November 1950, 6.
‘Judge Berne Case
Adjourned’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
8 December 1950, 8.
See the following accounts
of the case: ‘Judge Barred in Red Case’,
(Melbourne),
13 February 1951, 5; ‘Supreme Court Orders Judge Berne Not to Hear
Burns’s Appeal’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
13 February 1951, 7.
(The case is not reported in any of the law reports, no doubt because, as
argued, it did not give rise to any
interesting legal points.)
(1923) SR (NSW) 111.
Henchman to Crown
Solicitor, 22 November 1950; Waugh to Secretary, Attorney-General’s NAA:
A432/82 1963/362.
See Bennett to
Solicitor-General, 22 Dec 50; and file notes NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
As evidence of the
importance of cost considerations, see Berne to Crown Solicitor 7 February 1951
NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
Sydney Morning Herald,
5 April 1951, 5; and see
‘Officers Admit Errors in Box’,
(Melbourne), 5 April
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1.
to see how the case had that effect. Indeed, it had been implicit in his earlier
arguments that they had had this right
‘Anti-Red Act Quoted
Sydney Morning Herald,
6 April 1951, 5; and see
‘Did Burns Mean to be Seditious?’,
(Melbourne), 6 April
Bennett, Deputy Crown
Solicitor to Crown Solicitor 9 April 51 NAA: A432/80 1963/362. The memorandum
and media reports leave unclear
the basis for Judge Lloyd’s finding that
the words evidenced a seditious intention.
‘Gaol Sentence on
Publisher Reduced’,
(Melbourne), 7 April 1951, 3;
‘Conviction for Sedition Upheld’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
April 1951, 5.
Bennett, Deputy Crown
Solicitor to Crown Solicitor 27 April 51 NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
NAA: A432/80 1963/362.
There was some dispute about the costs to be paid to Jollie Smith and the fees
to be paid to Gruzman, but
the Commonwealth did not budge from its original
‘Communist Ends
Prison Term’,
Sydney Morning Herald,
12 August 1951, 6.
Burns’ first appeal, Judge Berne ordered Mr J W Shand KC (Crown
Prosecutor) from the court; after which the
Full Bench of the Supreme Court made
an order restraining Judge Berne from hearing the appeal’: ‘Did
Burns Mean to be
Seditious?’ above n
As evidence of the
Commonwealth’s concern about this aspect of the case, see above n 34.
See above n 22.
NAA: A432/82 1950/1621.
‘Defence Counsel
Quotes Chifley’ above n 23. This passage was not reported in the
‘Defence Counsel
Quotes Chifley’ above n 23. Not everyone agreed that even mainstream
politicians had a right to criticise
the war. Consideration was given to the
prosecution of Senator Cameron, a Labor Senator, for comments he had made in an
: see Laurence W Maher, ‘Dissent, Disloyalty
and Disaffection: Australia’s Last Cold War Sedition Case’
[1994] AdelLawRw 1
Adelaide Law Review
Support for the war seems
to have fallen between August and December 1950. By
December, only 59%
favoured the continued presence of Australian troops and 28% favoured bringing
the troops home. However it is likely
that this swing in attitudes was largely a
result of the change in the war situation. At the time of the December poll,
United Nations
forces were retreating towards the 38
following the entry of China into the war, and poll data suggest that there was
little support for enlarging the war so
that China came under attack. (Only 36%
of respondents favoured bombing Chinese soldiers in Manchuria. See
‘Don’t Pull
Our Boys out of Korea’ (1950-1951)
(December-January)
Australian Gallup Polls
‘Publisher on Trial
for Sedition’,
(Melbourne), 11 August 1959, 7.
For an account of the
trials and the associated events, see Maher above n 82.
Joint Memorandum of Advice,
Shand and Henchmen to Crown Solicitor, quoted in Maher above n 14, 307.
A proposed Western
Australian prosecution was also used as the basis for raids, which, however,
were not associated with any prosecutions:
Maher above n 14, 289 (n 14).
There was, however, a
prosecution arising out of an allegedly seditious speech in Papua New Guinea,
which resulted in a conviction,
an unsuccessful appeal to the High Court: see
Head above n 17, 105-107.
Peter Edwards,
at War: Australian Politics, Society and Diplomacy during the Vietnam War
(1997) 167-173, 223-230, 308-312.
This is evidenced by
current proposals to re-write and toughen the sedition laws. Under the
Anti-Terrorism (No 2) Bill 2005
(Cth), Sch 7, it is proposed to repeal ss
24A-24D of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) and to create new sedition offences
Criminal Code 1995
(Cth) (s 80.2). In some ways the proposed
new offences appear to be broader than the current sedition offences, and they
carry higher
maximum penalties (up to 7 years imprisonment). Proposed s 80.2(5)
is aimed at the advocacy of inter-group violence if such violence
would endanger
the Commonwealth. It is more clearly expressed than the analogous old s
24A(1)(g), (and, like the post_Burns’
case amendment to the relevant
sections, applies only to the advocacy of violence). But the offending article
could now be caught
by s 80.2(7) (assuming the relevant proclamation) and s
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (193 KB)
PDF format (743 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter