URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlRRuralRLawP/2023/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hoffman, Tamaris; Lawson, Andrew --- "Throw the Bathwater; Keep the Baby: Reform of the Statutory Marketing Arrangement for Australian Rice" [2023] IntJlRRuralRLawP 1; (2023) 10(1) International Journal of Regional, Rural and Remote (RRR) Law & Policy, Article 1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
LIST OF ACRONYMS
1 INTRODUCTION
2 A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF SMAS IN AUSTRALIA
2.1 Competition policy and deregulation
2.2 Countervailing views on competition and reregulation
3 NSW RICE INDUSTRY AND ITS SMA
4 REVIEW OF THE SMA
4.1 Export Price Premium (EPP) and Freight Scale Advantage (FSA)
4.2 Options for reform, not repeal – keep the baby, throw the bathwater
5 CONCLUSION
6 BIBLIOGRAPHY
6.1 Articles/Books/Reports
6.3 Legislation
Throw the Bathwater; Keep the Baby:
Reform of the Statutory Marketing Arrangement for
Australian Rice
Tamaris Hoffman
and Andrew Lawson
Australian Centre for Agriculture & Law, School of Law,
University of New England, Armidale,
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the two representatives of two of the rice
industry’s peak organisations for agreeing to be interviewed
work. These interviewees remain anonymous in accordance with our research ethics
Marketing of rice in the Australian State of New South Wales (NSW) is
regulated by a statutory marketing arrangement (SMA) –
the last such
scheme in Australia. A key feature is the coupling of vesting (by which all rice
grown in NSW belongs to a statutory
board) with a single export desk. The rice
industry argues only this process can ensure export price premiums (EPP) and
freight scale
advantages (FSA). The SMA is subject to periodic review, which has
strongly advocated deregulated. Furthermore, there is increasing
grower demand
for liberalisation of the export market, and others argue the scheme is
unconstitutional. However, the NSW Government
has continually renewed the
arrangement. This article contends that the single desk arrangement no longer
accounts for the EPP and
FSA advantages cited by the industry. Vesting provides
non-economic benefits and it is argued that it should be retained, but the
single desk abolished. Blanket dismantling of SMAs and deregulation in other
agricultural commodities have had damaging social and
economic consequences.
These have been avoided by the rice industry through adaptation of their SMA
over the last century. While
the industry needs to accommodate greater
competition and transparency, this is best achieved through reform rather than
LIST OF ACRONYMS
Authorised Buyer’s Licence
Council of Australian Governments
Competition Principles Agreement
NSW Department of Primary Industries
Export Price Premium
Freight Scale Advantage
Rice Marketing Act 1983
Rice Marketing Board for the State of NSW
Sole and Exclusive Export Licence
Statutory Marketing Arrangement
1 INTRODUCTION
Rice is the world’s most popular grain for human consumption. Nine of
the ten leading global producers of rice are in Asia –
China, India,
Bangladesh, Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand, Burma, Philippines, and Pakistan. The
top non-Asian producer is Brazil in
tenth position globally. The leading
consumers show a similar pattern, though Japan consumes more than Pakistan.
Seven of the top
ten rice exporting countries are Asian, with the USA coming in
at fifth place as the leading non-Asian
Despite the dominance of
Asia in rice production, export and consumption, rice is grown in every
habitable continent, including Europe
and Australia. Rice has high water
consumption requirements, and is thus grown in regions with high rainfall or
reliable irrigation
water supplies.
Australia is a comparatively small player in terms of production, consumption
and exports, and rice growing makes up about 0.4% of
Australia’s
agricultural production by value. However, Australia exports about 75% of its
rice (depending on seasonal conditions),
and has a reputation for a high quality
product commanding premium prices. Australian rice comprises a modest 0.4% of
total global
rice exports. For the traditional rice-growing districts of
Australia, the industry has historically been a mainstay of local economies,
especially for communities in the towns of Leeton, Griffith, Deniliquin and
Coleambally.
Despite being grown in mostly dry temperate regions and reliant on irrigation,
Australian rice has a high water-use efficiency compared
In Australia, the industry is dominated by the Riverina region in the
southern part of the State of New South Wales (NSW), centred
primarily on the
Murrumbidgee and Murray River floodplains. As shown in Table 1, 99% of
Australian rice is grown in NSW.
: Australian rice production 2021-22
State/Territory
Production (tonnes)
% National Production
No. rice farmers
Northern Territory
Total Australia
Smaller quantities are grown in the State of Victoria (near its northern
border with NSW on the same Murray River floodplain), the
tropical States and
Territories of Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern
Within NSW, a small but
growing quantity is grown in the sub-tropical far north east of the State, in
the Northern Rivers district
near Lismore. As the Riverina region produces the
lion’s share of Australia’s rice, the production, management and
of the Riverina sector dominates the Australian industry.
The governance of rice production and marketing is unique in Australia, being
the last major agricultural commodity protected by a
statutory marketing
arrangement (‘SMA’). Under the distribution of powers under the
Constitution
, such arrangements are the purview of State Governments
rather than a Federal (Commonwealth) Government matter. The NSW Government
legislated the arrangement in in 1928 under the
Marketing of Primary Products
and now under the
Rice Marketing Act 1983
What makes rice remarkable is that, despite SMAs historically operating across
almost all Australian agricultural commodities, almost
all have been disbanded,
except for rice.
SMAs are specific schemes designed to regulate the marketing of commodities
using executive powers that fall outside the usual legislation
that governs
Their principal aim is to stabilise prices and incomes for producers. This is
achieved through a variety of methods that include:
(i) vesting – compulsory acquisition of the commodity by a statutory
(ii) single desk – the SMB has the monopoly on export rights;
(iii) pooling – an average price is offered for the commodity to all
(iv) reserve price schemes – minimum export prices are guaranteed;
(v) production quotas – through limits on land tenure and use and water
The first two in this list – vesting and a single marketing desk
– are the key methods used in NSW rice industry SMA.
This article explores the NSW rice industry SMA in four parts, beginning with
this Introduction
outlines the history of agricultural SMAs in
Australia. It highlights the important shift in the discourse in the 1990s as a
of the adoption of the National Competition Policy. This policy is
generally antagonistic to SMAs. Opponents of SMAs argue they breach
Constitution
and offend competition theory and policy, which
preferences deregulation of agricultural sectors, and abolition of any
impositions
on producers’ ability to sell rice to any buyer they choose in
both domestic and international markets.
Next the article explores the NSW rice industry SMA in particular. It
highlights the two key mechanisms underpinning the rice industry
vesting and the single marketing desk. It also introduces the main argument used
by the rice industry peak organisations
(e.g. Rice Marketing Board, and
Ricegrowers Association) to justify maintaining the current SMA for rice –
namely, that the
SMA results in valuable commercial gains for rice-growers in
the form of export price premiums (EPPs) and freight scale advantages
The fourth part of the article critically analyses this rationale for
continuing the SMA. This article argues that there are legitimate
regarding competition and concludes that the industry’s success in regard
to export price premiums and freight scale
advantages cannot be wholly
attributed to the SMA. However, the article also argues that other
justifications support the retention
of the part of the arrangements, and that
competition concerns can be adequately addressed by reform of the SMA, rather
than wholesale
dismantling and deregulation. Complete deregulation has had
damaging social consequences in other Australian farm sectors, which
industry has managed to mostly avoid.
The authors used a mixed methods approach comprising desk-top document
analysis and key informant interviews. Documents analysed include
legislation (
Rice Marketing
previous reviews (the
six NSW Government Rice Vesting Reviews from 2010-2022, Rice Marketing Board
Annual Reports from 2016–present,
and independently commissioned reviews),
and relevant literature relating to econometric analysis and modelling in the
agricultural
industry as well as socio-economic studies from other agricultural
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with two key informants from two
different rice industry peak organisations. Using key informant
interviews is an
effective means of gathering qualitative data to verify the on-ground experience
of findings of document analysis.
The number of interviewees was necessary
limited by the constraints of the research project, and interviewees’
views cannot
be generalised to industry participants as a whole. Nonetheless,
the participants were selected for their extensive knowledge of
the industry and
its marketing arrangements, and could be expected to augment the desktop review
with novel insights. Interviewing
can reveal previously unpublished issues and
opinions, which in turn helped to generate new insights to policy
The interviews were
approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the authors’
university.
The interviews were
conducted via video-conference (Zoom) by the first author in April and May 2022,
each taking about an hour. The
interviews and the reviews were uploaded to NVivo
software for coding and analysis by the first author.
2 A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF
SMAS IN AUSTRALIA
Australian Federal and State Governments have used SMAs as a means of
protecting fledgling agrarian enterprises since the early part
century. This was advocated on the basis that agriculture was
the main source of export revenue at that
By the 1920s, most Australian agricultural commodities were protected by
Protection enabled these industries to raise and stabilise domestic prices,
moderate international price volatility, minimise the
market power of middlemen
such as millers and traders and, offset the effect of import
Historically, SMAs had
the character of legislated co-operatives, designed to assist small, widely
dispersed primary producers market
their commodities using scales of economy in
areas such as freight, storage, milling and
SMAs relied on legal and
administrative procedures to establish and maintain them, to exempt them from
anti-competition legislation
and to finance their
The mechanisms used by SMAs for controlling production and marketing are
contentious in Australian constitutional law – particularly
in relation to
s 92 of the
Constitution
, which provides that ‘trade,
commerce, and intercourse among the States ... shall be absolutely free’.
In the 1932 case
the Privy Council
found that legislation enacted by the State Government of South Australia to
allow for compulsory acquisition of
all dried fruit grown within the State was
contrary to
It further struck down the Federal Government’s attempt
to limit the amount of dried fruit that a producer could sell interstate.
However, the High Court established a different position in the late 1980s in
the case of
The court adopted
a two-part ‘discriminatory protectionism’ test, which allowed for
SMA regulation, as long as it (i)
Did not discriminate against interstate trade
either on its face or in effect; and (ii) Had not been enacted for protectionist
The decision was confirmed in the 1990 case of
Barley Marketing Board
(NSW) v Norman
case, the Barley Marketing Board of NSW sued a NSW barley grower, alleging he
had sold his grain to a Victorian trader in
contravention of s 56 of the
Marketing of Primary Products Act
1983 – the same act that applied
to rice. Mr Norman defended his action on the basis the Act breached s 92. The
unanimously rejected his argument. While the High Court admitted that
the scheme had some protectionist element in that it gave producers
the benefit
of the marketing board’s bargaining power, it did not discriminate against
interstate trade as it applied equally
to all NSW barley
The court also
conceded that the regulation did confer a benefit on producers within the state
compared to those in other
Gray posits that the one of the main difficulties with the current
interpretation is the definition of protectionism and whether the
test looks at
its purpose or its effect.
argues that removing the test for protectionism would result in s 92
invalidating SMAs entirely. Gray also disputes the definition
of discrimination
claiming the High Court narrowed its interpretation beyond the intent and spirit
Instead, he argues, the
test for discrimination should be broadened to include how the rule in
contention influences the purchasing
decisions of an interstate
He also contends that any
smaller producer is automatically protected to a greater extent than the larger
grower and that this consequently
competition.
Court’s current position is one of a ‘reasonable regulation’
exception. In other words, the fact that
a law ‘imposes a burden upon
interstate trade and commerce that is not incidental or, that is
disproportionate to the attainment
of the legitimate object of the law, is
important in demonstrating that the true purpose of the law is not to attain
that object
but to actually impose the
At least for now,
the NSW rice industry SMA appears not to breach
Constitution
current High Court interpretation.
2.1 Competition
policy and deregulation
The major challenge to SMAs came in the form of arguments about economic
efficiency and the advent of policies fostering competition
and deregulation.
The Australian Productivity Commission argues that from the 1960s some SMAs were
having negative effects on Australia’s
agricultural economy including
over-production, poor use of resources (particularly land, water, and labour)
and stifling innovation.
that time, commentators agitated for economically driven reform of marketing
policy. Economist Jack Lewis argued that SMAs were
primarily a means of price
support that operated on the basis of narrowed interests and offered little to
improve overall market
performance.
Price support was
principally achieved by diverting most of the commodity to export markets.
Domestic prices were kept high through
quotas, tariffs and embargoes on
substitute product.
Furthermore,
the rise of the mining industry in the early 1970s diversified the Australian
economy and reduced the nation’s
reliance on agricultural exports to pay
off national debt. This consequently weakened the case for special protections
for agriculture.
The development of competition policy at a national level occurred around the
time of the collapse of the wool industry SMA –
the reserve price scheme.
Under that arrangement, the Australian Wool Corporation (AWC) set a floor price
for Australian wool and
AWC acted as buyer of last resort, which would buy wool
at the floor price, preventing it being sold for less. Historically, the
price was meant to underpin the minimum cost of production and buffer wool
producers against the vagaries of the global wool
market. However, a series of
changes to the governance of the floor price coincided with other macroeconomic
factors, which resulted
in the spectacular collapse of the scheme. The changes
in governance allowed the floor price to be raised above minimum cost of
to a more aspirational level. This distorted the price signals to
woolgrowers, who were effectively growing wool for the floor price,
rather than
a real market demand.
Moylan noted that over several decades, the Australian wool industry had
courted woollen mills and textile producers in communist
bloc economies such as
the USSR. These highly subsidised mills undercut the more commercially focussed
mills in Europe and Australia’s
own domestic woollen mills, sending many
of them out of business. The house of cards came tumbling down with the collapse
Soviet Union and the exposure of its wool processors to market forces.
These geopolitical developments and other trends affecting
consumer textile
preferences resulted in the accumulation of an enormous stockpile of wool for
which there was no immediate
In propping up the floor price, the AWC exhausted its cash reserves and
borrowing power maintaining the floor price, which was eventually
abolished in
1991. The slow sell-off of the stockpile took a decade, at the same time
depressing the wool market, and sending numerous
Australian farmers and
intermediaries to the wall. Such was the humiliating fall of the only globally
traded agricultural commodity
for which Australia was the world’s leading
producer and exporter – the industry that had vitally supported
Australia’s
economy from colonial times into the middle of the
wool industry’s fate was probably on the minds of the commentators and
policymakers who helped drive Australia’s
competition policy in the early
1990s. The reserve price scheme for wool epitomised the potential ills of
Lister outlines the worldwide ‘backdrop of economic rationalist
policies’ that informed competition policy in Australia
and promulgated
market approaches, ‘deregulation, privatisation, lower protection and
increased competition’.
These approaches were recommended by the Hilmer Inquiry – the
Independent Commission of Inquiry into National Competition Policy
chaired by Professor Fred Hilmer and commissioned by the Council of Australian
Governments (COAG – the ministerial forum representing
all governments at
the Federal, State and Territory levels of the Australian federation). In 1995,
based on the Hilmer Inquiry
recommendations,
COAG endorsed
three instruments to give effect to a National Competition Policy – the
Competition Principles Agreement
Conduct Code
Agreement to Implement the National Competition Policy
and Related Reforms
The ‘guiding principle’ of the policy is found in cl 5(1) of the
[L]egislation (including Acts, enactments, Ordinances or
regulations) should not restrict competition unless it can be demonstrated
(a) the benefits of the restriction to the community as a whole outweigh the
(b) the objectives of the legislation can only be achieved by restricting
competition.
Key initiatives of these reforms relevant to this article
• Regular assessment of Federal, State and Territory Governments’
progress on implementing the National Competition Policy;
• Tying payments of Federal grants to States and Territories to
satisfactory progress implementing the National Competition
• Establishment by every government in the federation of gatekeeping
mechanisms to ensure legislation complied with the policy.
The broad tenor of the Hilmer Report and development of the National
Competition Policy aligned with the recommendations of policymakers
reports and policy papers, which called for the deregulation of Australian
agriculture in line with the micro-economic,
anti-competitive and neo-liberal
reforms of this period.
Statutory support schemes were rapidly dismantled – 15 SMAs existed in NSW
in 1980, only seven remained into the
After Riverina Citrus was
dissolved in August 2013,
NSW rice industry remains the only major commodity supported by an SMA. The
regular reviews of the rice SMA referred to in more
detail below (six reviews
since 1995) are a legacy of the NSW Government processes put in place to
implement competition policy.
2.2 Countervailing
views on competition and reregulation
Watson comments that debate over the efficacy of SMAs ‘is a mixture of
arguments about questions of fact, economic theory and
measurement, and value
judgements’.
Some analysts point out that a purely economic approach to SMAs fails to
consider the entire picture. Export price premiums are derived
differentiation, which in turn comes from strong marketing
Whether this is
provided by an SMA or some other arrangement depends very much on the specific
characteristics of the commodity,
such as size of the industry, geographic
concentration, distance to milling, storage facilities and freight, as well as
value adding
processes. The fact that every NSW Government, despite their
political alliance, has consistently approved the arrangement simply
because the
majority of producers want it, speaks to reasons that transcend pure economic
rationalism.
Examining the SMA for the sugar industry in Queensland, Males found that the
natural monopoly of the industry meant that anti-competition
legislation made
little sense.
Watson was also
critical of the National Competition Policy that brought many SMAs under review,
noting the policy was better suited
to the reform of public utilities and
infrastructure where any economic gain was likely to be much bigger than
regulating smaller
Kolsen critiqued the
Hilmer Report arguing that its ‘one shoe fits all’ approach was
ill-suited for industries that required
specific subject matter
In 2018, Mick Keogh, the Deputy Chair of the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission stated that agricultural markets ‘unfettered
regulation do[n’t] always deliver good
He noted that
increased productivity and competition were hampered by poor market information
and bargaining power. Ironically, regulation
can be necessary to protect the
competitive process.
While the dismantling of some SMAs have benefited their industries, the
effect has not been uniform. In a comprehensive review of
SMAs in South
Australia, Cook charts the demise of several industries such as dried and canned
fruit following deregulation.
Other commodities such as citrus and honey have thrived since their industries
were deregulated.
In a review of
deregulation of agriculture in New Zealand, which occurred in the early 1980s,
Johnson found that while domestic markets
were freed up, there was a reluctance
to abolish export marketing
The speed at which
deregulation was introduced and its timing (coming at a period when world
commodity prices were weakened), led
to significant uncertainty amongst primary
producers, particularly with regards investment and
It is difficult to predict what would happen if the NSW rice industry is
deregulated. Its uniqueness in the sense of its geographic
concentration and the
way in which rice is traded globally makes comparisons to other deregulated
commodities difficult. The latest
vesting review summarises the successes
experienced in other industries such as the dairy and wheat commodity sectors
since deregulation,
citing higher farm gate prices, lower consumer prices, and
increased productivity largely through the reallocation of resources to
However, the marketing arrangement for rice is still supported by the majority
of producers not only because its financial returns
are satisfactory, but also
because it is perceived as a fair system inclusive of all
The dollar costs alone of deregulation are considerable. In 2016, following
the deregulation of the potato industry in the State of
Western Australia, the
state government spent $14 million in assistance to help farmers transit through
the process.
When the sugar
industry in the State of Queensland was deregulated in 2006, the Federal
Government paid out over $400 million in
assistance that included payments for
regional and community projects, income support, retraining, crisis counselling
and intergenerational
Ironically, the industry was partially re-regulated in 2015 following
growers’ concerns over milling profits not being passed
on – one of
the primary arguments that led to SMAs for sugar being established in the early
part of the 20
Cook also notes that while marketing arrangements for many SA agricultural
products in the State of South Australia were unfettered
due to deregulation,
paradoxically, they now face even more control in the form of phytosanitary and
hygiene standards and occupational
health and safety
regulations.
Vanclay observed
that deregulation led to a loss of about a quarter of all Australia’s
primary producers by the end of the
With that, has come the
loss or degradation of many small rural and regional centres who relied on
farming to keep them alive.
social costs are significant.
Wheat – one of Australia’s largest agricultural commodities
– underwent a series of policy changes between 1989
and 2012, and was
finally deregulated in 2013. In a study that focussed on the socio-economic
effects of deregulation, O’Keefe
and Naeve interviewed wheat farmers in
the western part of the State of Victoria a few years after deregulation. They
growers had less bargaining power as there were fewer traders who
could offer guaranteed prices. This decreased rather than increased
competition.
Furthermore, growers felt politically disempowered because deregulation had been
introduced against their wishes. Deregulation
meant that many farmers now had to
take on marketing roles that had previously been fulfilled by the SMA on their
behalf, including
navigating legislation, obtaining and interpreting market
information and negotiating deals. As a result, there was a feeling of
and social insecurity. Many farmers felt at the mercy of grain traders –
the very situation that had historically
led to the development of the
O’Keefe argued that
the use of econometric modelling came at the cost of ‘subtly marginalising
the significance of [grower’s]
concerns and the importance of social and
environmental consequences of industry
Buggle argues that while economic efficiency must largely determine the
survival of SMAs, the real answer lies in a delicate balancing
Alternative marketing
arrangements must be effective in meeting the particular economic conditions of
the commodity and, the cost
of entering and complying with any new arrangements
cannot be greater than those of the original
He also criticises the
definition and methodology of assessing the so-called benefits of removing
restrictive trade practices.
3 NSW RICE INDUSTRY AND
The NSW rice industry SMA provides for two main functions:
1. Vesting – whereby all NSW grown rice is vested in (belongs to) the
Rice Marketing Board (‘RMB’) except that sold
directly into the
domestic market;
2. A single desk marketing arrangement – whereby the RMB appoints a
sole and exclusive export licence holder (‘SEEL’)
as single desk
marketing agent
. The current
SEEL holder is Ricegrowers Ltd trading as SunRice. The RMB also regulates the
domestic sale of NSW grown rice by licencing
authorised buyers (Authorised
Buyers Licence –
Table 1 outlines the evolution of the NSW rice industry SMA and its key
organisations. The table shows the rice industry shares a
similar pattern as
other agricultural sectors, with statutory protections dating from the early
part of the 20
Century to nurture a fledgling industry. From the
mid-1990s, with the reforms in competition policy, the SMA came under increasing
scrutiny, with no less than six reviews, the latest in 2021/22.
Legislation for vesting dates back to the 1980s when the NSW Government
formalised the arrangement in response to a slump in international
rice prices.
At the time, heavily subsidised US farmers dumped large quantities of rice on
the global market and Australian rice
producers approached the Federal
Government for direct
assistance.
This resulted in a
Federal Industry Assistance Commission review that unequivocally rejected any
form of underwriting assistance
to the industry even in the short
In fact, it went further
and recommended that the SMA be entirely dismantled and hinted that
consideration be given to prosecuting
the RMB for breaches of the
Practices Act
In response, the NSW Government totally repealed the original 1928
Marketing of Primary Products Act
and took the opportunity in replacement
legislation to vest the RMB with ownership of all NSW grown
The rice industry itself
cut costs by reducing the duplication of functions (mostly in milling and
storage) between the RMB and the
Ricegrowers Co-operative. Under the new
arrangement, the RMB retained ownership of storage holdings and, following s
50(1) of the
new legislation, it appointed the Co-operative as its agent. This
effectively meant that the Co-operative (now known as Ricegrowers
directly with growers for the purchase of rice. This body now trades as SunRice
and in 2006 it was granted sole and exclusive
rights to export NSW rice.
: Evolution of the NSW rice industry
statutory marketing arrangement and review
NSW Rice Industry Development
Rice grown commercially in Riverina
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area Ricegrowers’ Co-operative Society
Marketing of Primary Products Act 1928
(NSW) enacted. Rice Marketing
Board established
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area Ricegrowers’ Co-operative Society
undergoes a series of collapses and disbanded. Formation of Ricegrowers’
Co-operative. Milling operations secured by ricegrowers.
Sunwhite brand launched. Rice growing expands in Riverina
World surplus of rice. Import tariffs on rice reduced. Decreased returns to
growers. Industry calls for government support.
Marketing of Primary Products Act 1983
(NSW) replaces 1928 Act
Relationship between Rice Marketing Board and Ricegrowers’
Co-operative rationalised to reduce costs. Board assumes vesting
powers. Co-op
becomes Ricegrowers Co-operative Ltd
Australian growers recover as world shortages of rice affect Asia.
Ricegrowers Co-operative Ltd forms joint venture with Japanese mill to form
review of the SMA
(‘Rice Vesting
Review 1995’) under the National Competition Policy Review
SunRice becomes trading name of Ricegrowers Co-operative Ltd
Ricegrowers Co-operative Ltd becomes Ricegrowers Ltd.
review of the SMA
(‘Rice Vesting Review 2005’)
Marketing of Primary Products Act 1983
(NSW) changed names to become
Rice Marketing Act 1983
(NSW). Domestic rice trade deregulated. Sole
& Exclusive Export Licence granted to SunRice.
review of the SMA
(‘Rice Vesting Review
review of the SMA
(‘Rice Vesting Review
review of the SMA
(‘Rice Vesting Review
SunRice listed as a public company on the Australian Stock Exchange.
Drought reduces production to lowest in a decade.
review of the SMA
(‘Rice Vesting Review
Kealey, Hedditch and Clampett 2000; Sunrice
However, it was clear that the SMA continued to breach the
Competition
Principles Agreement
(CPA) to which NSW was a
To maintain the
arrangement, COAG insisted it met the threshold test in the ‘guiding
principle’ of cl 5(1) – i.e.
the public benefits of the arrangement
must outweigh any costs, and the benefits must only be achievable by restricting
competition.
Just how public benefits were to be calculated and the costs compared were
never articulated in the CPA. In fact, under the CPA, the
party engaged in the
arrangement was free to provide whatever evidence they chose to demonstrate
compliance with the test.
only requirement was any legislation enacted to implement the arrangement had to
be reviewed at least once every ten
The current statutory
review requirements under the
and the obligations under the
Subordinate Legislation Act
mean the SMA for rice is re-evaluated every
five years.
The key indicators
used to measure benefits are export price premiums and freight scale advantages.
In 2006, the NSW Labor Government finally deregulated the domestic market for
This had followed mounting
pressure from the Federal Government and the National Competition Council in the
form of stiff financial
Although the new
legislation abolished vesting in the domestic market, it maintained partial
control through a licensing system.
The RMB vetted anyone wishing to trade on
the domestic market before issuing a licence. Licence fees consisted of a fixed
plus a variable charge based on the amount of rice purchased and were
issued annually. The legislation did not alter the single desk
arrangement and all rice not sold on the domestic market was still vested in the
Despite this, the 2016 Rice Vesting Review commented there was growing
discontent amongst the Northern Rivers rice growers in northern
NSW with regard
to the restrictions on domestic
Lack of warehouses and
mills in the north of the state meant that Northern Rivers rice producers were
becoming increasingly dissatisfied
with a system that forced them to sell to a
buyer (SunRice) several hundred kilometres away while incurring greater costs in
and handling.
alternative – to sell into the domestic market – was hampered by the
Authorised Buyer’s Licence system (ABL)
and competition from cheaper
overseas rice.
Previous reviews considered the variable fee an impediment to domestic market
growth and suggested that SunRice meet the deficit in
exchange for their
exclusive right to
They also advocated the RMB make more liberal use of its vesting exemption
provisions under s 57 of the RMA to encourage domestic
competition.
In response, during
the 2018-2019 season, the RMB abolished the $500 fixed annual ABL fee and
reduced the variable fee to
$2.50/tonne.
For the 2019-2020
period it reduced the variable fee to $2/tonne and drew on its own reserves to
meet its operational costs.
2021 Rice Vesting Review makes little reference to domestic marketing
arrangements except to note that Northern Rivers farmers
still perceive a
conflict of interest in the ABL
The RMB points to the fact that the number of authorised buyers has increased
steadily over the years and a 14
licence has been issued in the
last season.
The due diligence
involved in issuing the licences means that no rice grower has been left
stranded by a merchant unable to pay as
pledged as recently occurred in the NSW
cotton industry.
Licensing fees
have covered the RMB’s annual operating costs since deregulation, ensuring
there is no cost to the tax-payer
for maintenance of the SMA.
The current domestic market arrangements illustrate the flexibility of the
SMA and the ability of the RMB to respond quickly and appropriately
affecting the industry. The impartiality of the RMB also means that
consideration is given to factors affecting the whole
of the industry and are
not motivated by purely commercial interests. The knowledge and experience
acquired over the years in the
process of adaption would be lost if the industry
were suddenly deregulated – a situation seen repeatedly in other commodity
sectors after dismantling protective
legislation.
The latest Rice Vesting Review (2021) comments that while ‘vesting is a
nuanced and complex topic, identifying the costs and
benefits of the legislation
is imperative in making informed and objective recommendations on the future of
these arrangements.’
also acknowledges that every review to date has grappled with determining how
much vesting actually contributes to obtaining the
best export price for
Australian rice.
The rice industry peak organisations have always maintained that vesting and
the single desk arrangement have provided benefits primarily
in the form of
export price premiums and freight scale
advantages.
In addition, are the
many non-economic benefits that vesting confers which are difficult to quantify.
These include certainty for
producers by acting as buyer-of-last-resort,
efficient use of expensive storage and milling facilities, cost-effective use of
and development funding, support for regional economies through
employment and investment, and compensation for international market
distortions
due to state-controlled
Further, it argues, it
is only through vesting these benefits can be
4 REVIEW OF THE
The SMA for rice is controversial and all of the six reviews into the SMA
have highlighted competition and transparency concerns.
For example, the second
Vesting Review in 2005 argued that pooling and price equalisation (processes in
which rice is collectively
stored and milled according to variety and then an
average price paid to each producer after collective costs of marketing have
deducted) obscured market price
signalling.
The reviewers
proposed that SunRice report separately on payments made for different rice
grades and varieties and on bonuses given
to growers on the basis of crop grown
per hectare.
They also wanted
to see Sunrice provide an analysis of the individual costs to growers for
transport and milling
arrangements.
In 2021/22, the NSW Department of Primary Industries (‘DPI’)
completed the sixth review of the scheme claiming that vesting
is currently
restricting the development of both domestic and export markets and hampering
innovation within the rice
The report also
maintained it conferred no net benefit on rice farmers or the
Nevertheless, the
NSW Government has granted a five-year extension to the vesting arrangements to
30 June 2027.
With regard to industry claims that the SMA are necessary to secure export
price premiums and freight scale advantages, the authors
of this article argues
there is little evidence to support the RMB and rice industry’s claims
that vesting and the single desk
are responsible and vital in protecting these
export market benefits. Retaining vesting but abolishing the single desk would
retain the benefits of vesting but facilitate the development of more
competitive domestic and overseas markets. Export price premiums
and freight
scale advantages are discussed in more detail below.
4.1 Export Price
Premium (EPP) and Freight Scale Advantage (FSA)
A detailed analysis of the six vesting reviews reveals that, although the NSW
rice industry does deliver considerable economic and
social benefits to the
State, none of them can be directly correlated with vesting or the single desk
arrangement. Most of the econometric
modelling that has been used over the last
30 years to prove that vesting and price premiums are linked, has been flawed in
of incomplete data and reliance on inappropriate alternative models as
surrogates for a no-vesting
Furthermore, the
legislation mandates vesting as a pre-condition to the single desk arrangement.
The two provisions are actually
quite separate and can work independently of
each other.
As mentioned above, rice growers in the Northern Rivers region of NSW, well
outside of the traditional Riverina rice-growing districts,
were dissatisfied
with SMA, particularly the Authorised Buyers Licence scheme for domestic sales,
which was seen as an unnecessary
and costly bureaucratic
restriction.
However, as
niche rice-growing in the form of organic and special varieties has developed,
more and more growers became unhappy with
the SMA. In the 2016 review, only 7%
of all growers opposed the
arrangements.
In 2021 this
figure increased to 22%.
Growers’ discontent extended beyond the domestic market arrangements to
the statutory connection between vesting and the export
licencing mechanism
– the Sole and Exclusive Export Licence (SEEL). As one of the rice
industry peak organisation interviewees
[T]he Northern Rivers growers ... don't want vesting to be scrapped they
just want the ability to export as well ... [not independent
of the RMB] but
independent of SunRice who is the holder of the
Discontent with the SEEL is also becoming increasingly evident amongst
southern farmers. As part of its submission to the 2012 Review,
the Burrabogie
Pastoral Company Ltd, a large Riverina rice producer, independently engaged
Deloitte Access Economics to investigate
SunRice’s claims that export
premiums were linked to the single desk
arrangement.
On the basis of
the investigation, Burrabogie argued that the legislation prevented it from
developing export markets for its particular
It was joined by
organically certified rice growers who submitted they could earn higher returns
under their own export arrangements.
As part of the review, the NSW Department
of Primary Industries (DPI) independently assessed the Deloitte findings. It
analysis flawed largely due to a lack of reliable data on costs of
production and pricing to individual markets, as well as imperfect
modelling based on the Californian rice
Despite acknowledging its limitations, the DPI used the Deloitte methodology
as a basis for its econometric modelling in the 2021
On this occasion, the
DPI at least had access to individual market data but in every other respect,
the analysis was plagued by the
same shortcomings experienced in the 2016
vesting review report. It continued to use the Californian rice market to
simulate a no-vesting
situation even after admitting that SunRice actually
exported rice from California under its own
In other words, it was
impossible to discriminate between Australian and American exports into various
overseas markets. The NSW
Productivity Commission also appointed the Centre for
International Economics (CIE) to run an independent assessment. The CIE was
further stymied as it had no access to the DPI submissions and several
ricegrowing organisations (including the RMB, SunRice
and the Ricegrowers
Association) refused to release their data for
The inability to directly correlate vesting to export price premiums was an
issue as far back as 2001. Using confidential data provided
by Ricegrowers
Co-operative Ltd for four different export markets, a study conducted by the NSW
Department of Agriculture found although
price premiums existed in all markets,
these resulted from price discrimination practices – i.e. the ability to
sell the same
product at different prices to different
Griffiths and Mullen
found that SunRice was able to use market power in the form of ‘service
bundles’ in order to tap
into the higher end
These service
bundles included quality assurance, reliability of supply, provision of credit,
promotional visits, and transportation
costs. They concluded that a single
market desk was not responsible for price
The RMB is not opposed to change in the SEEL arrangements. Although SunRice
has held the SEEL since 2006, as one of the rice industry
peak organisation
interviewees commented:
[W]e are not wedded to SunRice being the holder of the sole exclusive
licence for time immemorial... if [a] party wanted a second
licence from the RMB
[it] would approach the RMB and give us a sense of their proposition, give us a
sense of how they're going to
finance it and how they're going to expand, what
they see their scale being over what time....
Then the RMB has to weigh up, whether or not that arrangement is in the
interest of the rice industry as a whole. But we're obliged
to act on behalf of
the industry as a whole, ... we would have to go to government and say, you
know, we think there's a case for
a second licence, and the government would
have to indicate that it was happy for that to
In response to mounting criticism in 2018, the RMB commissioned an
independent review into the viability of a rice industry in areas
outside the
Murray-Riverina area.
report differed from the DPI reviews in that it did not examine the merits of
vesting as a whole nor did it investigate any potential
benefits of a second
export licence to the Northern Rivers producers. The investigation found the
main constraints on expansion in
the upland area of NSW were unpredictable
rainfall, limited storage and milling facilities and lack of research into the
development
of suitable strains for the
The report could not
validate the significance of export markets largely because Northern Rivers
producers refused to share any commercially
information.
The latter is a
recurring theme. The RMB has encountered similar difficulties. The interviewee
[T]he extent to which the Rice Marketing Board can improve the arrangements
for the smaller growers who want to act independently
depends, in part, on them
providing reasonable information that we can work
According to this interviewee, part of the problem has been the historic
under-reporting by Northern Rivers farmers of crop
This is evidenced by
the discrepancy between the Research and Development (R&D) levies paid to
the RMB (which are on a per tonne
basis) and their reports of crop size to the
NSW Department of Primary
Industries.
While there is no doubt that NSW rice attracts export premiums, there is
little evidence to show a direct correlation to vesting or
the single marketing
desk. These mechanisms may have contributed to the success of the industry
during the early part of the last
century but it is evident now that brand
marketing is largely responsible for export advantages. Given the relatively
of the industry and the predominance of SunRice, it is highly
unlikely that abolishing the single desk will affect its market share.
however give a variety of producers the opportunity to test their market
strength independently and competitively. While
retaining a co-ordinated
approach may be important, it is not the same as a single desk arrangement. To
this end, continuing vesting
means the RMB would be able to maintain a
disinterested oversight at the same time as applying the considerable other
benefits from
vesting such as buyer-of-last-resort provisions. These
modifications are all possible within the current legislative framework without
the need to resort to total deregulation.
In its report on SMAs in 1991, the Federal Government Industry Commission
noted that while vesting may produce economies of scale
for freight, insurance
and market services, any benefits may be undermined by ‘cost padding
practices which can arise in the
competition.’
Federal Government’s Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional
Economics (‘BITRE’) notes that benefits
are highly dependent on the
volume of commodity shifted and that their value is a best-guess based on
discount ranges offered by
shows the export price premiums
and freight scale advantages reported by the RMB since 2015. Significantly, the
independent assessors
who verified these figures had no access to the individual
discounts applied to shipping to individual markets. Figures quoted are
based on the BITRE method and cannot be separated for commercial-in-confidence
reasons. Accepting these figures at face value
and assuming that between 70-85%
of rice produced is exported, it is difficult to discern any logical pattern
that links export price
premiums, freight scale advantages and production. This
suggests that other factors besides the actual amount of rice exported is
responsible for price premiums and lends support to the argument that vesting is
not necessary in achieving those premiums. It could
however, sustain an argument
for a co-ordinated approach to export arrangements ensuring a greater proportion
of the product is directed
to higher paying markets with little or none reaching
low paying markets during years of low production. However, even this does
necessarily rely on a single desk arrangement.
: Total rice
production, export price premiums (EPP) and freight scale advantages (FSA) for
NSW rice 2015-2021
: Total Production from ABS
No data available on
proportion of total production exported due to confidentiality restrictions. EPP
and FSA based on RMB Annual
Reports 2017-2021.
In addition to questioning the strength of export price premiums, the
Deloitte Economic Review commissioned by Burrabogie Pastoral
Company, challenged
the freight scale advantages.
They argued that it was Australia’s proximity to its major markets in the
Pacific (PNG and New Zealand) that provided shipping
The 2016 Rice
Vesting review did not address the issue of freight scale advantages, possibly
because its analysis relied heavily
on the Californian rice market to compare
California bulk ships
both long and medium grain rice. There is considerable market division between
the two varieties making it
almost impossible to adjust for
differences.
The latest vesting review notes the impact COVID-19 has had on global
trading, particularly the interruption to shipping timetables,
the accumulation
of containers in the US and the consequent premium prices demanded for
containers once travel restrictions were
The review was highly
critical of the RMB’s reliance and acceptance of freight scale advantages
based on a range of rebates
provided by a number of shipping lines rather than
the actual discounts applied.
It remarked that as SunRice also imported rice, any freight advantage it
negotiated must necessarily include this – a factor
that has nothing to do
with either vesting or the single desk
It also revealed that
as SunRice exports packaged product (anything up to 10 kg) ready for immediate
retail sale, it relies largely
on 20-foot food-grade
containers.
In calculating
freight scale advantages, most data is only available for 40-foot containers.
While the report did not openly dispute
SunRice’s assertions on economies
of scale used to calculate freight scale advantages, it certainly did not
support the contention
that removing vesting would affect any scale advantages.
In this regard, it is more than likely that freight scale advantages can
longer be used as an argument to support either vesting or the single desk
4.2 Options for
reform, not repeal – keep the baby, throw the bathwater
Although the legislative amendment in 2007 prevented the Board from granting
multiple export licences, there is no reason why this
cannot be reversed. It is
evident that any ability to extract export price premiums is now largely due to
pricing-to-market practices
and does not rely on single desk trading. By
legislating to separate vesting and the SEEL, the perceived anti-competition
could be removed at the same time as retaining many of the benefits
of vesting. These could include attaching a buyer-of-last-resort
stipulation to
any export licence issued. It would also allow confidential commercial oversight
of licensees to ensure that producers
were paid under contracts and not left
stranded if traders became insolvent.
Continuation of vesting would mean the RMB would retain control over the ABL
system while simultaneously scrapping the remaining fees
and charges, recouping
its operational costs through the export licencing arrangement instead. There
would be a potential for more
domestic traders once any financial barriers have
been removed.
More exporters mean more options for growers to sell their rice in different
ways. SunRice already offers fixed contracts to some
producers, but futures
contracts, contracts based on special characteristics such as organic
certification or rice variety and contracts
where one company undertakes the
milling and processing and another handles the marketing are all possible.
5 CONCLUSION
As Watson notes ‘the debate over the single desk is a mixture of
arguments about questions of fact, economic theory and measurements,
judgements.’
the steady attack on the rice SMA over the last 30 years, it appears there is
little appetite for its dismantling –
certainly not from the majority of
rice producers, their communities or the NSW Government. Reform, rather than
repeal, of the SMA
could address the main problems of the SMA. This article
argues the single desk policy could safely be abolished without the risk
losing export price premiums. The industry is secure enough to back producers
who want to test the waters in export markets for
themselves. The legislation
needs only be amended to shear vesting from the single desk policy and allow the
RMB to appoint exclusive
rather than a sole licensee to export.
Maintaining vesting however, provides the RMB with the mechanism to ensure an
independent and thorough licensing process is undertaken.
This further ensures
that no grower is left out in the cold for payment or for a market for their
crop. Concentrating on export licences
means that domestic licences could either
be abolished or be issued without charge.
Although the Australian rice industry is small, it has thrived despite the
vagaries of weather, global market collapses and government
policy. Although
this may have in large part derived from the protectionism afforded it by the
original marketing arrangements over
a century ago, it has demonstrated that
flexibility in those arrangements have enabled it to successfully adapt to
changing markets
and policies. This provides strong support for continuing to
use the existing framework to respond to new challenges. Totally dismantling
SMA would be akin to throwing the baby out with the bath water.
Deregulation is expensive in terms of government support required in
assistance during the transit period. It also results in the
loss of knowledge,
expertise and experience that inevitably accumulates through years of industry
development. Economic rationalism
is cold comfort for growers, their families
and communities when there is a loss of culture, a sense of abandonment and a
for missed opportunities. The marketing arrangement for Australian rice
can be changed to address issues of competition, through
consultation with those
on the ground and through considered and perceptive amendment to current
legislation and policy rather than
deregulation.
Australian rice industry, statutory marketing arrangements,
agricultural protection, deregulation
6 BIBLIOGRAPHY
6.1 Articles/Books/Reports
Abbott, Malcolm and Merrett, David, ‘Counting the Cost: The Reserve
Price Scheme for Wool 1970-2001’, (2019) 63
Australian Journal of
Agricultural and Resource Economics
, 790-813 DOI:
10.1111/1467-8489.12337
Aither Pty Ltd,
Expanding the NSW Rice Industry: Independent Review of
the Viability of Developing the Rice Industry Outside the Murray and Riverina
(Final Report for the Rice Marketing Board NSW, 31 May 2018)
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), ‘Cereal and other Broadacre
Crops: Cotton and Rice Production, 2015-16 to 2020-21’,
Agricultural
Commodities, Australia 2020-21
(Web page, 26 July 2022)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/agricultural-commodities-australia/2020-21#cereal-and-other-broadacre-crops>
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS),
Agricultural Commodities,
Australia 2021-22
(Catalogue no AGCDCNAT_STATE202122, 17 January 2023).
Australian Department of Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries,
(Web page, updated 4 November 2019)
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/crops/rice>
Australian Department of Agriculture, Water & the Environment,
Implementation Review- Competition and Consumer (Industry Code – Sugar)
Regulation 2017 (Sugar Code of Conduct)
(10 December 2021)
Freightline 6 – Australian Rice Freight Transport
(Australian Government, 2018)
Buggle, Geoff, ‘Is there a case for State Statutory marketing
Arrangements?’ (Conference Paper, Annual Conference
of the Australian
Agricultural Economics Society, 9-11 February 1993)
Cook, Venton,
Rural Market Regulation and Legislation in South
(Research Paper, South Australian History of Agriculture Group,
September 2021)
Fell, James et al, ‘Australian Rice Markets in 2020’, ABARES,
Agricultural Commodities
, June quarter 2020
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/agricultural-outlook/rice>
Gray, Anthony, ‘Compulsory Marketing Schemes and Section 92 of the
Constitution
[2014] UTasLawRw 17
(2014) 33(3)
University of Tasmania Law
Griffith, Garry and John Mullen, ‘Pricing-to-market in NSW rice
export markets’ (2001) 45(3)
The Australian Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics
323, DOI: 10.1111/1467-8489.00146
Hilmer, Frederick,
National Competition Policy
(Independent
Commission of Inquiry into National Competition Policy Report to COAG, 25 August
Industry Assistance Commission, Parliament of Australia,
(Parliamentary Paper No. 385, 23 October 1987)
Industry Commission,
Statutory Marketing Arrangements for Primary
(Report No. 10 to the Australian Government, 26 March 1991)
Integrated Marketing Communications Pty Limited (IMC),
Review of the NSW
Rice Marketing Act 1983
(Report for the NSW Department of Primary
Industries, October 2010), 4 (‘
Rice Vesting Review
Johnson, RWM, Schroder, WR and Taylor, NW ‘Deregulation and the New
Zealand Agricultural Sector: A Review’ (1989)
Marketing and Agricultural Economics
47, 58 DOI:
10.22004/ag.econ.12445
Kealey, Lucy, M R C Hedditch and Warwick Clampett, ‘History of rice
growing in Australia’ in L M Kealey and W S Clampett
of Quality Rice in South Eastern Australia
(Rural Industries Research and
Development Corporation, 2000)
Keogh, Mick, ‘Australian agribusiness law: sensible regulation, or
red tape gone mad?’ (Address, Third Annual Australian
Agribusiness Law
Conference, 17 May 2018)
Kolsen, Ted, ‘Microeconomic Reform and National Competition Policy:
Misconceptions and Problems’ (1996) 55(2)
Australian Journal of
Public Administration
83, 84 DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8500.1996.tb01205.x
Lewis, Jack, ‘Organized Marketing of Agricultural Products in
Australia’ (Address, Conference of Australian Agricultural
Society, 15-17 February 1961)
Lyster, Rosemary, ‘(De)regulating the Rural Environment’
Environmental and Planning Law Journal
Majchrzak, Ann, and Markus, M Lynne, ‘Obtain New Evidence’ in
Ann Majchrzak and M Lynne Markus
Methods for Policy Research:
Taking Socially Responsible Action
(SAGE online version, 2014) DOI:
10.4135/9781506374703
Males, Warren, ‘A Case for Statutory Marketing Arrangements’
(Annual Conference of the Australian Agricultural Economics
Society, 10-12
February 1992)
Massy, Charles,
Breaking the Sheep’s Back: The Political
Destruction of the Australian Wool Industry
(University of Queensland Press,
Moylan, Fred,
U-Turn for Wool: A Radical Solution to the Problems of the
Wool Industry
(New Street Books, 1991)
National Competition Council, ‘About the National Competition
National Competition Policy
http://ncp.ncc.gov.au/pages/about
NSW Department of Industry,
Annual Report on the Administration of
Agricultural Statutory Authorities
(30 June 2019)
NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI),
Marketing of Primary
Products Act 1983 – NSW Rice Marketing Board Review Report
2005), 40-1 (‘
Rice Vesting Review 2005
NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI),
Review of Rice Vesting
Proclamation
(December 2016) (‘
Rice Vesting Review
NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI),
Rice Vesting Review 2021
(April 2021) (‘
Rice Vesting Review 2021
NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI),
Terms of Reference:
Independent Report on the findings of the NSW Rice Vesting Review
NSW Trade and Investment Strategic Policy & Economics Division,
Review of Rice Vesting by the Rice Marketing Board under the NSW
Marketing Act 1983
(October 2012) 7 (‘
Rice Vesting Review
O’Keefe, Patrick and Melissa Naeve, ‘Experiences of wheat
growers in Australia’s western Wimmera following deregulation
export wheat market’ (2017) 26(1)
Rural Society
O’Keefe, Patrick and Naeve, Melissa, ‘Experiences of Wheat
Growers in Australia’s Western Wimmera Following Deregulation
Export Wheat Market’ (2017) 26(1)
Rural Society
1, 10-13 DOI:
10.1080/10371656.2017.1283736
O’Keefe, Patrick, ‘Creating a Governable Reality: Analysing the
Use of Quantification in Shaping Australian Wheat
Marketing Policy’
Agriculture and Human Values
10.1007/s10460-018-9848-6
Productivity Commission,
Regulation of Australian Agriculture
(Report to the Australian Government No 79, 15 November 2016)
Ricegrowers’ Association of Australian Inc.,
Submission to the
Productivity Commission’s Inquiry into the Regulation of Agriculture
August 2016
Ricegrowers' Association of Australia Inc.,
Submission to the Review of
the Rice Vesting Proclamation
, August 2021
Rice Marketing Board Annual Report 2017
<https://www.rmbnsw.org.au/annual-reports>
Rice Marketing Board Annual Report 2018
<https://www.rmbnsw.org.au/annual-reports>
Rice Marketing Board Annual Report 2019
<https://www.rmbnsw.org.au/annual-reports>
Rice Marketing Board Annual Report 2020
<https://www.rmbnsw.org.au/annual-reports>
Rice Marketing Board Annual Report 2021
<https://www.rmbnsw.org.au/annual-reports>
Sunrice (undated),
Detailed Historic Timeline of the Australian Rice
Thompson, Lyndal et al,
A Report on the Impacts of the Sugar Industry
Reform Program
(SIRP): 2004 to 2008
(ABARES report for the Australian Government,
November 2010).
USDA Economic Research Service, ‘Global Rice Production and
Rice Sector at a Glance
(Web Page, updated 20 December
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/crops/rice/rice-sector-at-a-glance/#Global>
Vanclay, Frank, ‘The Impacts of Deregulation and Agricultural
Restructuring for Rural Australia’ (2003) 38(1)
Australian Journal
of Social Issues
81 DOI: 10.1002/j.1839-4655.2003.tb01137.x
Watson, Alistair, ‘Grain Marketing Policy and National Competition
Policy: Reform or Reaction?’ (1999) 43(4)
Australian Journal of
Agricultural and Resource Economics
429, 430 DOI:
10.1111/1467-8489.00089
Barley Marketing Board (NSW) v Norman
[1990] HCA 50
(1990) 171 CLR 182
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia
(1990) 169 CLR 436
Cole v Whitfield
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360
James v Cowan
[1932] LR AC 542
6.3 Legislation
Constitution
Marketing of Primary Products Act 1928
(NSW) (repealed)
Marketing of Primary Products Act 1983
(NSW) (renamed
Marketing Act 1983
on 6 July 2004)
Rice Marketing Act 1983
Rice Marketing Amendment (Prevention of National Competition Penalties)
Subordinate Legislation Act 1989
Trade Practices Act 1974
Competition Principles Agreement
(Council of Australian Governments,
11 April 1995)
Government of Western Australia, ‘Potato Industry Moves to
Deregulation’ (Media Statement, 15 April 2015)
<https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/Barnett/2016/04/Potato-industry-moves-to-deregulation.aspx>
NSW Deputy Premier and Minister For Agriculture and Western NSW ‘Rice
vesting arrangements extended across NSW’ (Joint
Media Release, 20 April
<https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/about-us/media-centre/releases/2022/ministerial/rice-vesting-arrangements-extended-across-nsw>
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 18 November 2002,
18770 (Peter Black)
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 9 November 2005,
19319 (Sandra Nori)
thoffma6@myune.edu.au
Corresponding author:
andrew.lawson@une.edu.au
This article is based on an LLB
Honours thesis submitted by the first author in October 2022.
USDA Economic Research Service,
‘Global Rice Production and Trade’,
Rice Sector at a Glance
(Web Page, updated 20 December 2022)
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/crops/rice/rice-sector-at-a-glance/#Global>
James Fell et al,
‘Australian Rice Markets in 2020’, ABARES, 10(2)
Agricultural
Commodities
, June quarter 2020
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/abares/research-topics/agricultural-outlook/rice>
Australian Department of
Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries,
(Web page, updated 4 November
<https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/crops/rice>
Australian Bureau of Statistics
Agricultural Commodities, Australia 2021-22
(Catalogue No.
AGCDCNAT_STATE202122, 17 January 2023).
Fell et al (n
Aither Pty Ltd,
Expanding the NSW Rice Industry: Independent Review of the
Viability of Developing the Rice Industry Outside the Murray and Riverina
(Final Report for the Rice Marketing Board NSW, 31 May 2018) 12;
Marketing of Primary Products Act
1928 (NSW);
Rice Marketing Act
Industry Commission,
Statutory Marketing Arrangements for Primary Products
(Report No. 10 to
the Australian Government, 26 March 1991) 13.
Industry Assistance
Commission, Parliament of Australia,
The Rice Industry
(Parliamentary
Paper No. 385, 23 October 1987).
Ricegrowers' Association of
Australia Inc.,
Submission to the Review of the Rice Vesting
Proclamation
, August 2021, 6; Ricegrowers’ Association of Australian
Submission to the Productivity Commission’s Inquiry into the
Regulation of Agriculture
, August 2016.
Rice Marketing Act 1983
(NSW) (‘RMA’)
Ann Majchrzak and M Lynne
Markus, ‘Obtain New Evidence’ in Ann Majchrzak and M Lynne Markus
Methods for Policy Research: Taking Socially Responsible Action
(SAGE online version, 2014) DOI: 10.4135/9781506374703.
University of New England
Human Research Ethics Committee Approval No. HE22-008.
Venton Cook,
Market Regulation and Legislation in South Australia
(Research Paper, South
Australian History of Agriculture Group, September 2021) 12.
Productivity Commission,
Regulation of Australian Agriculture
(Report to the Australian Government
No 79, 15 November 2016) 613.
[1932] LR AC 542.
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360.
[1990] HCA 50
(1990) 171 CLR 182.
Anthony Gray,
‘Compulsory Marketing Schemes and Section 92 of the Australian
Constitution
[2014] UTasLawRw 17
(2014) 33(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v
South Australia
(1990) 169 CLR 436
Regulation of Australian
Agriculture
Jack Lewis, ‘Organized
Marketing of Agricultural Products in Australia’ (Address, Conference of
Australian Agricultural
Economics Society, 15-17 February 1961).
Malcolm Abbott and David
Merrett, ‘Counting the Cost: The Reserve Price Scheme for Wool
1970-2001’, (2019) 63
Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource
, 790-813 DOI: 10.1111/1467-8489.12337.
Fred Moylan,
Wool: A Radical Solution to the Problems of the Wool Industry
(New Street
Books, 1991) 99.
Charles Massy,
the Sheep’s Back: The Political Destruction of the Australian Wool
(University of Queensland Press, 2011)
Rosemary Lyster,
‘(De)regulating the Rural Environment’
(2002) 19(1)
Environmental
and Planning Law Journal
Fred Hilmer,
Competition Policy
(Independent Commission of Inquiry into National
Competition Policy Report to COAG, 25 August 1993).
National Competition
Council, ‘About the National Competition Policy’,
Competition Policy
http://ncp.ncc.gov.au/pages/about
The Rice Industry
Statutory Marketing Arrangements
for Primary Products
Regulation of Australian Agriculture
NSW Department of Industry,
Annual Report on the Administration of Agricultural Statutory Authorities
(30 June 2019) 3.
Alistair Watson,
‘Grain Marketing Policy and National Competition Policy: Reform or
Reaction?’ (1999) 43(4)
Australian Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics
429, 430 DOI: 10.1111/1467-8489.00089.
NSW Deputy Premier and
Minister For Agriculture and Western NSW ‘Rice vesting arrangements
extended across NSW’
(Joint Media Release, 20 April 2022)
<https://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/about-us/media-centre/releases/2022/ministerial/rice-vesting-arrangements-extended-across-nsw>
Warren Males, ‘A Case
for Statutory Marketing Arrangements’ (Annual Conference of the Australian
Agricultural Economics
Society, 10-12 February 1992) 7.
Ted Kolsen,
‘Microeconomic Reform and National Competition Policy: Misconceptions and
Problems’ (1996) 55(2)
Australian Journal of Public
Administration
83, 84 DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8500.1996.tb01205.x.
Mick Keogh ‘Australian
agribusiness law: sensible regulation, or red tape gone mad?’ (Address,
Third Annual Australian
Agribusiness Law Conference, 17 May 2018) 1.
Ibid 46, 50.
RWM Johnson, WR Schroder and
NW Taylor, ‘Deregulation and the New Zealand Agricultural Sector: A
Review’ (1989) 57
Review of Marketing and Agricultural Economics
47, 58 DOI: 10.22004/ag.econ.12445.
Ibid 59, 68.
NSW Department of Primary
Industries,
Rice Vesting Review 2021
(April 2021) 136 (‘
Vesting Review 2021
Government of Western
Australia, ‘Potato Industry Moves to Deregulation’ (Media Statement,
15 April 2015)
<https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/Barnett/2016/04/Potato-industry-moves-to-
deregulation.aspx>
Lyndal Thompson et al,
Report on the Impacts of the Sugar Industry Reform Program
(SIRP): 2004 to 2008
(ABARES report for the Australian Government,
November 2010).
Australian Department of
Agriculture, Water & the Environment,
Post Implementation Review-
Competition and Consumer (Industry Code – Sugar) Regulation 2017 (Sugar
Code of Conduct)
(10 December 2021) 1-2.
Frank Vanclay, ‘The
Impacts of Deregulation and Agricultural Restructuring for Rural
Australia’ (2003) 38(1)
Australian Journal of Social Issues
81, 87 DOI: 10.1002/j.1839-4655.2003.tb01137.x.
Patrick O’Keefe and
Melissa Naeve, ‘Experiences of Wheat Growers in Australia’s Western
Wimmera Following Deregulation
of the Export Wheat Market’ (2017) 26(1)
Rural Society
1, 10-13 DOI: 10.1080/10371656.2017.1283736.
Patrick O’Keefe,
‘Creating a Governable Reality: Analysing the Use of Quantification in
Shaping Australian Wheat
Marketing Policy’ (2018) 35
Agriculture
and Human Values
553 DOI: 10.1007/s10460-018-9848-6.
Geoff Buggle, ‘Is
there a case for State Statutory marketing Arrangements?’ (Conference
Paper, Annual Conference
of the Australian Agricultural Economics Society,
9-11 February 1993) 1.
Rice Marketing Act
(NSW) (RMA)
Industry Assistance
Commission (n
Trade Practices Act
Marketing of Primary
Products Act
1983 (NSW).
Kealey, Lucy, M R C Hedditch
and Warwick Clampett, ‘History of rice growing in Australia’ in L M
Kealey and W S Clampett
Production of Quality Rice in South Eastern
(Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation, 2000);
Sunrice (undated),
Detailed Historic Timeline of the Australian Rice
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 18 November 2002, 18770 (Peter Black).
Competition Principles
(1995) cl 5 (1).
Ibid cl 5(5).
Ibid cl 5(6).
Subordinate Legislation Act 1989
Rice Marketing Amendment
(Prevention of National Competition Penalties) Act
Parliamentary
, Legislative Assembly, 9 November 2005, 19319 (Sandra Nori).
NSW Department of Primary
Industries,
Review of Rice Vesting Proclamation
(December 2016)
Rice Vesting Review 2016
Review of the NSW
Rice Marketing Act 1983
(Report for the NSW Department of Primary
Industries, October 2010), 4 (‘
Rice Vesting Review
Ibid 3, 20.
Rice Marketing Board Annual
Report 2019, 4.
Rice Marketing Board Annual
Report 2021, 4.
Rice Vesting Review
Interviewee 1.
Rice Vesting Review
Submission to the Review
of the Rice Vesting Proclamation
; Submission to the Productivity
Commission’s Inquiry into the Regulation of Agriculture
NSW Department of Primary
Industries,
Marketing of Primary Products Act 1983 – NSW Rice Marketing
Board Review Report
(April 2005), 40-1 (‘
Rice Vesting Review
Rice Vesting Review
NSW Department of Primary
Industries,
Terms of Reference: Independent Report on the findings of the NSW
Rice Vesting Review 2021
Rice Vesting Review
Rice Vesting Review
Rice Vesting Review
Interviewee 2.
NSW Trade and Investment
Strategic Policy & Economics Division,
Review of Rice Vesting by the Rice
Marketing Board under the NSW
Rice Marketing Act 1983
(October 2012) 7
Rice Vesting Review 2012
Rice Vesting Review
Garry Griffith and John
Mullen, ‘Pricing-to-market in NSW rice export markets’ (2001) 45(3)
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics
323, 331, DOI:
10.1111/1467-8489.00146.
Interviewee 1.
Aither Pty Ltd (n
Ibid 34-36.
Interviewee 1.
Aither Pty Ltd (n
Interviewee 1.
Statutory Marketing
Arrangements for Primary Products
Freightline 6
– Australian Rice Freight Transport
(Australian Government, 2018).
Australian Bureau of
Statistics (ABS), ‘Cereal and other Broadacre Crops: Cotton and Rice
Production, 2015-16 to 2020-21’,
Agricultural Commodities, Australia
(Web Page, 26 July 2022)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/industry/agriculture/agricultural-commodities-australia/2020-21#cereal-and-other-broadacre-crops>
Rice Vesting Review
NSW Department of Primary
Industries,
Review of Rice Vesting Proclamation
(December 2016)
Vesting Review 2016
Rice Vesting Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.65 MB)
PDF format (476 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter