URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2022/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pistorius, Tana; Jordaan, Juan-Jacques --- "Whose Data is it Anyway? Copyright Protection of Databases and Big Data through the Looking Glass" [2022] ANZCompuLawJl 7; (2022) 94 Computers & Law, Article 7
I INTRODUCTION
II WHO OWNS BIG DATA?
A Big Data as an Asset
B Datasets as Training Data
III COPYRIGHT PROTECTION OF DATABASES
A Originality
B Authorship
C Sui Generis Database Right
IV THE DATABASE PROBLEM
V CONCLUDING REMARKS
WHOSE DATA IS IT ANYWAY?
BIG DATA THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS
TANA PISTORIUS
AND JUAN-JACQUES
This paper addresses a number of copyright issues that arise in relation to
the protection of data and databases in the data economy.
The paper questions
the copyrightability and the ownership of aspects of Big Data. A related issue
is the nature and scope of the
a common-law perspective. Is the recognition of computer-generated works in
Africa and New Zealand helpful in navigating copyright protection of
collections of data in the data economy? The lawful processing
of personal
information also gives raise to several new copyright issues. The paper
addresses the nature of data subject participation
rights and consumer data
rights and their impact on the copyright protection of databases. For example,
where data subject participation
rights allow data subjects, under certain
circumstances, to reach over the proverbial database-ownership copyright wall
the database owner to remove or amend personal information, it may
have the effect of amending the original work. It is questioned
whether new
legislation in the EU, which seeks to protect the public interest while
promoting private enterprise, should be adopted
Australasia.
INTRODUCTION
Technological advancement has for ever changed the protection and value of
data, datasets and databases. What was previously known
as the ‘database
problem’ has been compounded by the EU’s
Data Governance Act
. What used to be known as the
OWNS BIG DATA?
Data as an Asset
Businesses have come to realise the value of their data and are beginning to
treat it as an asset in itself and a means of creating
As businesses merge and
split, the data these businesses possess, is considered to have economic value
that form part of the businesses’
Mergers and business
takeovers are essential aspects of business and the economy and they affect many
stakeholders, including those
falling within the scope of various
regulators.
Businesses’ needs, which are essential to driving and developing the
modern data economy, encompass access to and the use of
The protection of the
intellectual property that vests in these databases and datasets is of
increasing importance. The ownership
of data, datasets and databases, however,
must be balanced against the data subjects’ right to privacy which
includes not having
their personal information exploited. Ultimately,
data-protection principles are conceptually and practically a fine balancing act
between individual rights, societal values, national security and economic
efficiencies, among other
considerations.
The ownership of Big Data
asset and its valuation is a topic of considerable discussion and
bargaining.
It has also been argued
that the universal principle of property ownership should extend to virtual
property, which exists only electronically:
so-called virtual property
By extension, this would
mean that any creation of Big Data made by computers and existing only in
electronic format should be recognised
as a form of property. The World Economic
Forum has even suggested that personal information in itself is a new asset
will require new interpretations regarding the individuals to whom
the information relates.
therefore remains to be seen whether Big Data will be classed as an asset or
whether the data subjects’ rights will trump
such ownership.
This exploitation of data brings up the debate about who owns Big Data, or
rather segments of Big Data, and therefore who is permitted
to exploit the data
contained in them. The debate about copyright ownership of Big Data is far from
over, especially considering
the rapid speed of technological development and
economic progress which is dependent upon this data.
Datasets as Training
The recent proliferation of bots that scrape datasets for the development of
artificial neural networks (more commonly known as artificial
intelligence (AI))
applications highlights the copyright issues related to the use of copyright
works as training
includes copyright works whereas the developers are
in favour of a license-less
Besides the question of the copyright ownership of databases, one may
question whether it is possible to have ownership and control
information and data.
recognition of consumers’ rights in data generated by connected devices,
discussed below, has compounded the issues.
The current position regarding raw data is to view a database as a storage
space which is capable of ownership; but the data contained
in the database is
not owned or capable of being possessed without a legal
foundation,
such as copyright or
data-protection laws that explicitly provide for such ownership or possession.
It must be borne in mind that
a vast part of the Big Data can comprise or at
least include personal
information
and that this may
have an effect on the legalities applying to a database.
From a copyright point of view, Big Data ownership is hampered if the
legislation compounds the meaningful ownership of that
and therefore reduces the
commodity value of the Big Data. In reality, the very purpose of using Big Data
to identify trends and
persons through the analysis of data may create a
situation where raw data becomes personally
identifiable.
This element of
identifiability in Big Data would lead to such data falling within the scope and
under the scrutiny of data-protection
again making ownership
protection difficult or impossible. Organisations that aggregate data generally
assume that they hold the
rights to the data they possess and, as such, have the
right to analyse it and exploit the results or findings of their
Similarly, some
organisations that exploit datasets for the purpose of machine learning also
operate under those assumptions. Hugh
Stephens has pointed to the fact that some
AI developers belong to the ‘better to ask for forgiveness after rather
than permission
before’ school of
It is not clear-cut whether the exploitation of datasets as data training
falls under the data mining exception under EU
The Digital Single Market
Directive defines text and data mining in article 2(2) as ‘any automated
analytical technique aimed
at analysing text and data in digital form in order
to generate information which includes but is not limited to patterns, trends
and correlations’.
Although one could argue that the use of training data to create AI
applications involve the analysis of data in order to recognise
patterns which
are then applied to parameters of the AI, the fact that a black box approach is
used in AI applications obscures the
The data mining
exceptions and limitations have neither been adopted in the copyright law of
Australia nor in New Zealand. This certainly
casts a longer shadow on the
lawfulness of the unlicensed use of copyright works as training data.
Despite the economic and copyright ownership and infringement debates, the
reality is that data already exists as a
Baron notes that in
the use of databases, a database owner could exploit the economic potential of
the data if the database contents
could be effectively structured in a manner in
which the owner could claim ownership of both the
and the information
contained in it.
PROTECTION OF DATABASES
Originality
an electronic or digital format from which data or information
may be accessed,
reproduced or retracted. Databases are generally protected in terms of copyright
law in the same manner as literary
works. In South Africa the
provides the definition of a ‘‘literary work’’,
which includes tables and compilations, including tables
and compilations of
data stored or embodied in a computer or a medium used in conjunction with a
computer, but shall not include
The definitions of ‘tables’ and
‘compilations’
include Big Data databases. Data and datasets, as would be the case in Big Data
Africa as ‘literary
works’, with the requirement of originality being the determining factor
for qualification in respect
or in this case, the data
or the dataset.
Some jurisdictions such as New Zealand and South Africa, still infuse the
originality requirement with skill and labour as opposed
to creative input
– also known as the the 'sweat -of-the-brow' approach to database
protection.
In New Zealand
courts held that skill, judgment or
or effort, skill and
were sufficient to impart
originality to the works.
Haupt t/a Softcopy v Brewers Marketing Intelligence (Pty)
Streicher JA
confirmed that, because the South African
originated from
the English law, creativity is not a requirement for copyright protection. The
court then confirmed the test for
originality in South African copyright law is:
‘Save where specifically provided otherwise, a work is considered to be
if it has not been copied from an existing source and if its production
required a substantial (or not trivial) degree of skill,
judgement or
This low threshold for originality suffices and neither a higher standard nor
any level of creativity is required. For example, a
directory of telefax
a catalogue and a price
and an electronic
qualified for copyright
protection. Dean
submits that
the skill and labour which go into the compilation must be such that the
compilation cannot simply be regarded as a
copy of existing subject-matter, but
rather as a work that contains features and qualities absent in the material
form from which
it was initially composed.
The arrangement and selection of data are critical components pertinent to
the originality requirement for the protection of databases.
However, the
selection aspect may be removed where a database is too comprehensive, with the
result that very complex databases will
protection.
The digital
embodiment of electronic databases meet the other intrinsic requirement for
embodiment requirement. It must be
noted, however, that the copyright protection of a database does not extend to
the raw data contained
in the database.
The question of human authorship is important as Big Data often exist of
machine-generated data. Guadamuz notes that creative works
qualify for copyright
protection if they are original, with most definitions of originality requiring
a human author. Most jurisdictions,
including Spain and Germany, state that only
works created by a human author can be protected by
There are two ways in which copyright law can deal with works where human
interaction is minimal or non-existent. It can either deny
for works that have been generated by a computer or it can attribute authorship
of such works to the creator
of the computer-generated work. In the United
States, for example, the Copyright Office has declared that it will
an original work of authorship, provided that the work was
created by a human being.’ This stance flows from case
which specifies that
‘are founded in the creative
powers of the mind.’
In Europe the Court of Justice of the European Union has also declared on
various occasions, particularly in its landmark
that copyright only
applies to original works, and that originality must reflect the
‘author’s own intellectual creation.’
This is usually
understood as meaning that an original work must reflect the author’s
personality, which clearly means that
a human author is necessary for a
Similarly, in an Australian
a court declared that
source codes were not original because they were generated by a computer, not
written by a human author or
by joint authors. Shortly, a work generated with
the intervention of a computer could not be protected by copyright because it
not produced by a human.
The second option, that of giving authorship to the programmer, is evident in
a few countries such as India, Ireland, New Zealand
and the UK. This approach is
best encapsulated in UK copyright law, section 9(3) of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act (CDPA),
which states: ‘In the case of a literary,
dramatic, musical or artistic work which is computer-generated, the author shall
be taken to be the person by whom the arrangements necessary for the creation of
the work are undertaken.’
Furthermore, section 178 of the
defines a computer-generated work as one that ‘is generated by computer in
circumstances such that there is no human author
of the work’. The idea
behind such a provision is to create an exception to all human authorship
requirements by recognizing
the work that goes into creating a program capable
of generating works, even if the creative spark is undertaken by the
Sui Generis Database
In Europe, the
EU Database
deals with the
matter of databases under copyright law and also provides database creators with
sui generis
right to databases. The European Union adopted a novel
approach in the
after nearly eight
years of deliberation. The Directive provides a two-tier form of protection. It
strives to create a harmonised
level of copyright protection for
A novel ‘sui
generis’ right to protect investments in databases was also
introduced.
Both rights differ
in terms of requirements for protection, duration of rights, scope of
protection, the exceptions or limitations
that apply and the determination of
the right holders (both natural and
extends copyright protection to databases that
constitute ‘the author's own intellectual creation’ -- databases
evidence some measure of ‘originality’ or
‘creativity’ on the part of the
Article 5 states that
compilations of data or other material, in any form, which by reason of the
selection or arrangement of their
contents constitute intellectual creations,
are protected as such.
When, from a qualitative or quantitative perspective, a substantial
investment has been shown to be made in a database, its makers
may claim a right
European legislation
therefore provides some protection for the contents of
which would also
apply to the protection of Big Data databases.
THE DATABASE
Big Data is premised on the collection of as much raw data as
In order to create a
commodity, private ownership of data must be possible. Technological advances
have facilitated the creation
of big databases which are becoming more efficient
and valuable. These databases often consist of vast collections of personal
information.
In such cases, their creation has raised questions about data
subjects’ rights to participate and to oversee or control the
which their data is being used in these databases – a phenomenon which has
become known as the ‘database
As society and businesses have developed, novel and previously unimaginable
threats to privacy have emerged. These include data matching,
where different
sets of unrelated data are compared using a common denominator to match records;
profiling, where historical information
or records are used to create a profile
of knowledge,
harvesting or the use of bots to scrape data and datasets from websites and
other online repositories of data. Given these
developments, it may be argued
that data subject participation rights is a mechanism to guard against these
modern harms.
Data subject participation
provided for in data
protection legislation are akin to giving data subjects a right of control over
their personal information.
A data subject has a
prima facie
exercise such rights over a database controlled and owned by a responsible
party, simply because the data subject’s
personal information is contained
in that database. In effect, they are exercising a right over someone else's
By way of example, where the data subject requests a database owner (i.e. a
responsible party) to remove or modify their personal
information contained in a
this will have the
effect of forcing the database owner to amend its intellectual property at the
instruction of the data subject.
This would then lead to the question if one may
argue that the data subject granted an implied licence to the database owner to
the data subject’s personal information in the database.
Consequently, a database may soon only be considered a collection of licensed
information that can be protected through contractual
agreements with data
subjects. These data subject participation
allow the data subject,
in certain circumstances, to reach over the proverbial database-ownership
owner to remove or amend their personal
information.
In the case of a large data processor, for example one of the tech giants,
the negative possibilities are considerable, especially
if all users
simultaneously request that their personal information be removed. Before data
protection legislation was enacted, it
would have been challenging, if not
near-impossible, for data subjects to unilaterally change the content of a
third-party database
owner’s database.
A dramatic shift has taken place in the EU regarding the ownership and use of
Big Data. In February 2022, the
was proposed to promote
the sharing of data, particularly data generated by the use of connected objects
and the Internet of Things,
between companies (B2B) and consumers
who can use what data
, and under
also enhances consumer
protection by allowing users to control their data generated by digital
technologies and to transfer it to
third parties. This has a positive impact on
competition in the digital markets as it curbs the data power of entrenched tech
creates legal certainty, for both consumers and
businesses, around access to data generated by products and
Data Governance
sets out a framework for
data intermediation service providers (DISPs). Data intermediation services are
defined in the Act as services
which aim to establish commercial relationships
between data subjects and data holders on the one hand and data users on the
for the purposes of data sharing through technical, legal, or other
means, such as infrastructure, platforms, or
Data Governance Act
crucial pillars of the European Strategy for
Data Governance
entered into force on 23 June 2022 and, following a 15-month grace
period, will be applicable from September 2023. The
Data Act Proposal
adopted by the European Parliament on 14 March 2023, and it must still be
approved by the European Council. These new instruments
aim to create market
fairness in the allocation of the value created by data. DISPs manage commercial
relationships between data
subjects and data holders on the one hand and data
users on the other, for the purposes of data sharing.
As noted above, the
Data Governance Act
form part of a European strategy for data. The
covers both personal and non-personal data (as opposed to the GDPR
which relates to personal data only) so both apply to mixed data.
Act Proposal
strengthens the
and existing rights and obligations
remains unaffected. It has been noted that the
also strengthens data portability and gives users the right to
access and port both personal and non-personal
Data Governance
Data Act Proposal
complement each other as the former
sets out rules for data intermediaries and data altruism and the
clarifies the rules related to the creation of value from
The commodification of information has been firmly entrenched in the European
Union. Provision is made for consumers’ ‘personal
spaces’. Furthermore, provision has been made in the
Data Governance
for the creation of ‘e-wallets’ to secure consumers’
personal data. This will also have a ripple effect and will
compound the
In summary, the question of data ownership has become more pertinent than
ever before. This is due, firstly, to the fact that much
of the data being
stored in huge databases are created and owned by a few dominant tech giants.
Secondly, the use of training data
and the proliferation of data scraping
techniques have become prominent due to the rise in AI applications. The
regulation of personal
information, consumer data and machine generated data
have become important building blocks of the European data economy. The
environment in Europe will enable organisations to move beyond
surveillance capitalism to data capitalism. In short, to innovate
through data.
To the exploit data for profit.
The copyright protection of databases continues to play an important role.
The same underlying policy objectives that support the
protection of literary
works also underlie the protection of databases, a species of literary works,
especially in jurisdictions
that have a low threshold of originality. However,
these assumptions should be questioned as far as the copyright protection of
Big Data is not a unique form of data, but simply vast amounts of data which
is difficult to process using traditional data-processing
methods. Big data is
immensely valuable to the data economy. With data processors using novel and
unique technologies to process
this Big Data and performing a vast amount of
work on the data, the question of the ownership, from an intellectual property
perspective,
arises, but it is one that remains unclear and unsettled. This is
something that the regulators would have to consider in dealing
with updated
proprietary forms of protection for data and databases in the future.
As the law currently stands, Big Data as such is not regulated in most
information
contained in Big Data – are regulated to ensure the personal information
of identifiable individuals are processed
lawfully. The regulation of data is
therefore based on the content of a database and not on a database as a system.
This position
has been described as a flawed basis for the protection of
personally identifiable
information.
This is especially
true if we consider the vast economic significance of consumer data.
EU Database Directive
deals with databases both as a copyright
work and as a
sui generis
right, whereas New Zealand and South Africa
view databases as literary works to be protected under traditional copyright
EU Database Directive
excludes, with good reason, single source
illustrate that the
anti-competitive manner to lock
out competitors. It submitted that the
underlying policy objective of copyright law is not being served where the
extensive protection
afforded to the owners of electronic databases are used in
a manner that deter competition. This is especially true where a database
sole source of information. Copyright protection may act as a barrier to
competitors especially where such a database has
become an industry norm or
where it is the single source of information; and it functions akin to an
essential facility. In these
circumstances it can be argued copyright abuse
rears its ugly head.
It may be argued that a
sui generis
right of ownership exists in
respect of any personal information belonging to the data subject. The data
subject may license such
personal information to the responsible party, which
licence is subject to revocation at any time if no other legitimate reason for
retention or use exists. The definition of property is changing, but the
question remains if the definition of property could be
expanded to include a
data subject's digital identity and thus provide for the concomitant protection
of such property. With the
increase in cybercrime, specifically that focused on
identity theft, it is these authors’ view that if identity is something
that can be stolen, and therefore something that must be capable of ownership,
it should be granted a
sui generis
right to its protection.
In respect of licensing considerations, many of the global social media
networks license the use of their databases to third parties
for a fee, but
without consideration being given to the rights of the data subjects that
provided the data. We question whether data
subjects’ rights to their own
data are being overridden by unilateral terms of use, and what that means for
the ownership debate.
Almost two decades ago writers have suggested that new
legislation which protect the public interest while promoting private enterprise
should be adopted; secondly that databases should be removed from the ambit of
It was argued
that such legislative approach would allow for the commercialisation of rights
in information property and simultaneously
require government oversight due to
the dangers inherent in allowing vast collections of data to be commercially
As society races into the future creating and collecting ever more data, the
need for data-protection laws has become abundantly clear.
However, while
adequately protecting the interests of data subjects, these laws must not stand
in the way of technological
Whether this is done
in the form of providing a
right of ownership to
protecting databases remains
to be seen. What is certain is that existing laws
do not apply to Big Data with ease.
Specific laws could be created to deal with the ownership of Big Data. A case
in point is the holistic approach in the EU through
Data Act Proposal
Data Governance Act
Collectively, these instruments provide innovative solutions that form a
legislative framework for the promotion of the growth of
the EU data economy. We
are of the opinion that the debate over the ownership of data has not been
adequately explained or justified
beyond Europe. The issues concerning the
ownership of data requires much more exploration and analysis in
Australasia.
In essence, the world is a borderless place where the free flow of data
between countries is commonplace and the quest for data is
the ultimate goal.
What is needed appears to be a global shared framework based on principles or
conditions for the protection of
data. In 2008 one author naively noted the
following regarding the protection of information with reference to the database
Policy considerations underlying the regulation of access to information and
access to knowledge should be heeded. It can never been
seriously proposed that
information itself should be protected (except by the law regarding trade
There is a long-standing principle that copyright should not
be extended to cover basic information or “raw” data. However,
evidenced by the ECJ’s differentiation between the “creation”
of data and its
demonstrate, the “sui generis”
right comes precariously close to protecting basic
information.
With the benefit of hindsight it is clear that their assumptions about the
value of data were naive. It is clear that technological
advancement has for
ever changed the landscape of database protection and our preconceived notions
Professor and Head of
Department of Commercial Law, The University of Auckland.
Legal Practitioner,
Durban, Kwa-Zulu Natal. This article is partially based on Juan-Jacques Jordaan
Legal Implications for the Processing of Big Data – a South African
Perspective
(LLM dissertation, University of South Africa, 2020). Funding
through the SARChI Chair (South African Department of Science and Technology)
acknowledged.
Ira Rubinstein ‘Big Data:
The End of Privacy or a New Beginning?’ [2013]
International Data
Jacques B Stander ‘The
Modern Asset: Big Data and Information Valuation’ (MSc thesis,
Stellenbosch University, 2015) 132.
MAL Phakeng ‘Deal
Protection Measures in Takeovers and Mergers: Break Fees’ (2018) 39(2)
A ‘dataset’ is
defined as a particular collection of data, gathered for a purpose. See
‘Introduction to data’,
Data.govt.nz
(Web Page, 23 April
2021) <https://www.data.govt.nz/toolkit/intro-to-data/>.
O Tene and J Polonetsky J
‘Judged by the Tin Man: Individual Rights in the Age of Big Data’
Journal of Telecommunications and High Technology Law
Big Data is the information
asset characterised by such a high volume, velocity and variety to require
specific technology and analytical
methods for its transformation into value.
‘’See Andrea De Mauro, Marco Greco and Michele Grimaldi ‘A
formal definition
of Big Data based on its essential features’ (2016) 65
Library Review
Stander (n 2) 2.
Wien Erlank
‘Don’t touch My Virtual Property: Justifications for the Recognition
of Virtual Property’ (2016)
South African Law Journal
World Economic Forum
Personal Data: The Emergence of a New Asset Class
(Initiative, January
Jan Bernd Nordemann and Jonathan Pukas
‘Copyright exceptions for AI training data—will there be an
international level
playing field?’ (2022) 17(12)
Intellectual Property Law & Practice
973, 973 where the authors note:
‘Music AI relies on audio recordings protected by the copyrights of the
composers and the
neighbouring rights of the performing artists and record
producers’. Recently two copyright infringement cases were filed in
United States District Courts for the Northern District of California and the
District Court for the District of Delaware respectively
related to the use of
Stability AI Ltd
(D Cal, Case no 3:23-cv-00201, 13 January 2023) and
Getty Images (US) Inc v Stability AI Inc
(D Del, Case no 1:23-cv-00135, 3
February 2023).
Stuart Dredge ‘UK
government rethinks plans for AI-training copyright exception’,
(News, 2 February 2023)
<https://musically.com/2023/02/02/uk-government-rethinks-plans-for-ai-training-copyright-exception/>.
MN Njotini ‘Evaluating
the Position of Information or Data in the Law of Property’ (2015) 26(1)
Stellenbosch Law Review
Protection of
Personal Information Act 2013
(South Africa) (
) section 8 sv
‘Personal Information’.
Xavier Seuba, Christophe
Geiger and Julien Pénin (eds)
Intellectual Property and Digital Trade
in the Age of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data
(CEIPI/ICTSD Publications
Series Issue 5, June 2018) 71.
Paul Ohm ‘Broken
Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising Failure of
Anonymization’
UCLA Law Review
, 1701; Moira Paterson
and Maeve McDonagh ‘Data protection in an era of big government: the
challenges posed by big personal
data’ (2018) 44
Monash Law Review
1, 1; K Krasnow Waterman and Paula J Bruening ‘Big Data analytics: risks
and responsibilities’ (2014) 4
International Data Privacy Law
Yvonne Mcdermott
‘Conceptualising the right to data protection in an era of Big Data’
Big Data and Society
1, 4; See also Seuba, Geiger and
Pénin (n 15) 71.
Marcus R Wigan M and Roger
Clarke ‘Big Data's Big Unintended Consequences’ (2013) 46
Hugh Stephens ‘Will
the Year of the Rabbit be the Year of Contentious Copyright Litigation over
AI-Generated Content?’
Hugh Stephens Blog
(Blog, 1 February 2023)
<https://hughstephensblog.net/2023/02/01/will-the-year-of-the-rabbit-be-the-year-of-contentious-copyright-litigation-over-ai-generated-content/>.
Nordemann and Pukas, above n
Herbert Zech
Tradeable Commodity – Implications for Contract Law
(Edward Elgar,
2017) 1; P Baron ‘Databases and the commodification of information’
(2002) 49(1)
Journal of the Copyright Society of the USA
Baron, above n 22, 144.
(South Africa) section 1(1)(g) of the sv ‘literary work’.
David Rüther
‘Government Data and Copyright Protection in South Africa’ [2015]
South African Intellectual Property Law Journal
Waterlow Publishers
The Times 8 Dec 1989;
Waterlow Publishers Ltd v Reed
Information Services Ltd
The Times 11 Oct 1990 as quoted by Morton
‘Draft EC Directive on the Protection of Electronic Databases: Comfort
After Feist’
Computer Law & Practice
38, 39; Cornish
‘1996 European Community Directive on Database Protection’
(1996-1997) 21
Columbia VLA Journal of Law & the Arts
Labroke (Football) Ltd v
William Hill (Football) Ltd
[1964] 1 All ER 465 (HL).
Bleiman v News Media
(Auckland) Ltd
[1994] 2 NZLR 673 (CA).
Haupt t/a Softcopy v Brewers
Marketing Intelligence (Pty) Ltd 2006 (4) SA 458 (Supreme Court of Appeal).
Haupt t/a Softcopy v Brewers
Marketing Intelligence (Pty) Ltd, above n 30, 473A–B.
Fax Directories (Pty) Ltd v
SA Fax Listings CC
1990 (2) SA 164 (Local
Payen Components SA Ltd v
Bovic CC and Others
[1995] ZASCA 57
1995 (4) SA 441 (Appellate
Haupt t/a Softcopy v
Brewers Marketing Intelligence (Pty) Ltd
above n 30.
OH Dean Handbook of South
African Copyright Law (Juta, 1987), 1-8A.
A Roos ‘Data Privacy
Law’ in DP Van der Merwe (ed)
Information and Communications Technology
(LexisNexis, 3rd ed, 2022) 363, 361.
Andres Guadamuz
‘Artificial intelligence and copyright’
WIPO Magazine
(Article, October 2017)
<https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2017/05/article_0003.html>.
Feist Publications v
Rural Telephone Service Company Inc,
[1991] USSC 50
Infopaq International A/S
v Danske Dagbaldes Forening
[2009] ECR I-06569.
Acohs Pty Ltd v Ucorp Pty
[2012] FCAFC 16.
EU Directive 96/
Directive 96/9/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11
March 1996 on the legal protection of databases,
OJ 1996 L77/20
See Articles 3-5 of the
See Articles 7, 10 and 11 of
See Articles 6, 8, 9 and 15
See recital 15 and art 3(1)
Article 7(7) of the
Julia Johnson
‘Database Protection a Reality? How the Professional and Fantasy Sporting
World Could Benefit from a sui generis
Intellectual Property Right’ (2015)
) Intellectual Property Journal
Joseph Jerome ‘Buying
and Selling Privacy: Big Data’s Different Burdens and Benefits’
Stanford Law Review Online
Neil M Richards
‘Reconciling Data Privacy and the First Amendment’
Anneliese Roos The law of
data (privacy) protection: a comparative and theoretical study (LLD Thesis,
University of South Africa,
Sections 23–25 of
articles 12-23 of the
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27
April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing
personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive
95/46/EC (‘
See articles 16-17, article
; see also section 24 of
Relevant data subject
participation rights contained in the
include the right to
rectification (section 16), the right to erasure (section 17), the right to
restrict processing (section 18)
and the right to data portability (section 20);
See also sections 23–25 of
For example through the
right to erasure (‘right to be forgotten’) in terms of article 17 of
Proposal for a Regulation
on harmonised rules on fair access to and use of data
[2022] COM 68 final.
‘European strategy for
data: the CNIL and its counterparts comment on the Data Governance Act and the
National Commission on Informatics and
Liberty (Web Page,
13 July 2022)
<https://www.cnil.fr/en/european-strategy-data-cnil-and-its-counterparts-comment-data-governance-act-and-data-act>.
Pascal D König
‘Fortress Europe 4.0? An analysis of EU data governance through the lens
of the resource regime concept’
(2022) 8(4)
European Policy
Regulation (EU) 2022/868
on European data governance and amending Regulation 2018/1724 (Data Governance
[2022] OJ L 152/1.
Article 10.
Francesco Vogelezang
‘The Data Act: five implications for the Datasphere’
(Article, 22 August 2022)
<https://www.thedatasphere.org/news/the-data-act-five-implications-for-the-datasphere/>.
Blanca Escribano and
Sofía Fontanals ‘The Data Act: new EU rules for data sharing’
EY Spain (Article, 8 November
<https://www.ey.com/en_es/law/the-data-act-new-eu-rules-for-data-sharing>.
Paul Ohm ‘The Broken
Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising Failure of
Anonymisation’
UCLA Law Review
Board of Healthcare
Funders v Discovery Life; Discovery Health (Pty) Ltd and the Council for Medical
(Unreported decision case number 35769/2011 Local Division decision
dated 2 May 2012);
Transunion Auto Information Solutions (Pty) Limited V
Autobid (Pty) Limited
, (Unreported decision case number 6494/2011 Provincial
Division decision dated 14 March 2012).
Jacqueline Lipton
‘Balancing Private Rights and Public Policies: Reconceptualizing Property
in Databases’
(2003) 18(3)
Berkeley Technology Law Journal
Asunción Esteve
‘The Business of Personal Data: Google, Facebook, and Privacy Issues in
the EU and the USA’ (2017)
International Data Privacy Law
Václav Janeček
‘Ownership of Personal Data in the Internet of Things’ (2018) 34(5)
Computer Law and Security Review
1039, 1052.
Tana Pistorius ‘The IP
protection of electronic databases: copyright or copywrong?’ in H Venter,
M Eloff, J Eloff and
L Labuschagne (eds) ‘Proceedings of the ISSA 2008
Innovative Minds Conference’ (ISSA Pretoria, 2008).
Pistorius, above n 71, 12;
See also Stone and Kernick ‘Protecting Databases: Copyright? We
don’t Need No Stinkin' Copyright’
The Computer
Lawyer 17; Fieldhouse and Bolton ‘Copyright? Wrong! – Copyright
protection of computer programs as literary works’
22, 25; H Sun ‘Copyright law under siege: An inquiry into the
legitimacy of copyright protection in the context of the global
International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law
; Tana Pistorius ‘Copyright in the Information Age: The Catch-22 of
Digital Technology’ (2006) 2
Critical Arts
47, 54; Michael J
Bastian ‘Protection of 'Noncreative' Databases: Harmonization of United
States, foreign and international
law’ (1999) 22
Boston College
Environmental Affairs Law Review
425, 426; Lionel M Lavenue ‘Database
rights and technical data rights: the expansion of intellectual property for the
of databases’ (1997) 38
Santa Clara Law Review
Christopher Kuner and others
‘The (Data Privacy) Law hasn’t even checked in when Technology takes
off’ (2014) 4
International Data Privacy Law
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (263 KB)
PDF format (298 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter