URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2022/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sunthar, Ram --- "AUSCL Contributions to Policy on Computers and the Law" [2022] ANZCompuLawJl 12; (2022) 94 Computers & Law, Article 12
I SUBMISSIONS
A AI Action Plan
B Online Safety Bill 2020 Exposure Draft
C Digital Advertising Services (“AdTech”) Inquiry
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2020
Data Availability and Transparency (Consequential
Amendments) Bill 2020
E Inquiry into Draft Critical Infrastructure Asset Definition Rules
F The Privacy and Personal Information Protection
Amendment Bill 2021
G Australian Government Digital Identity Legislation
H Australian Data Strategy Discussion Paper
I Modernising Document Execution
J Privacy Act Review Report
K Copyright Amendment (Access Reform) Bill 2021
AUSCL CONTRIBUTIONS TO POLICY ON COMPUTERS AND THE
AUSCL aims to be Australia’s leading interdisciplinary think-thank on
issues relating to the law, at the intersection of technology
and society. It is
a registered Australian non-profit charity with a charter to advance education
and advocacy at that intersection.
AUSCL provides a lively forum for debate and is committed to providing
balanced, informed and transparent advocacy on critical issues
and promoting the
education of its members and the wider community.
AUSCL members include legal and technology professionals, business leaders,
government officials, academics across all disciplines
and members of the bar
and retired judiciary
AUSCL hosts several training sessions and master classes. Some of the
sessions are recorded and hosted on AUSCL Youtube® channel.
There are a
total of 52 records sessions hosted within AUSCL Youtube Channel.
I SUBMISSIONS
The AUSCL has been actively providing submissions to state and federal
governments on various bills and amendments.
AI Action Plan
The AUSCL Policy Lab, together with the Allens Hub, The Law Society of New
South Wales Future of Law and Innovation in the Profession
(FLIP), and The
Disability Innovation Institute at UNSW (DIIU), has made a submission to the
Department of Industry, Science, Energy
and Resources in response to a call for
input into the development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) Action Plan.
The submission covered the full spectrum of AI capabilities, from defining
artificial intelligence to AI maturity. It addressed skills
and capabilities
that are required for AI enabled future, AI's contribution to legal sector, the
expected law reform action for AI
action plan and lowering the barriers to
Online Safety Bill 2020 Exposure Draft
This submission proposed establishing guard rails to address online safety,
including cyber-bullying, image-based abuse, harassment
and abhorrent violent
material, through policy development and draft legislation.
It proposed that the guiding principles must include respect for the rule of
law and human rights, including the right that individuals
not be subjected to
arbitrary interference with their privacy. An emphasis on these guiding
principles will promote human dignity,
natural justice, procedural fairness,
transparency and accountability, and predictability and consistency in the
application of law.
In circumstances where powers exist to limit an
individuals’ rights and freedoms, including freedom of expression, it is
to ensure adequate safeguards to ensure those powers, and the limits
they impose, are necessary, reasonable, proportionate and justifiable
grounds of public interest.
Digital Advertising Services (“AdTech”)
This submission reviewed ACCC’s Digital Advertising Services Inquiry:
Interim Report (‘Interim Report’) by focusing
on three issues
• The scope and focus of the inquiry;
• The analysis of issues at the intersection of competition and
• International (trade and conflicts of laws) considerations that
should be included in the analysis.
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2020 and
Data Availability and Transparency (Consequential
Amendments) Bill 2020
This submission acknowledged that the Bill contains some commendable
transparency measures such as the public availability of Data
Sharing Agreements
(‘DSA’). The submission covered following propositions.
Objects of Bill.
A reference to accountability should be inserted into
the Bill’s Objects. This would strengthen the functionality of existing
safeguards and ensure accountability plays a central interpretive role. In
addition, the Objects clause should note that consent
remains the primary basis
for sharing personal information.
Private Sector Research and Research Ethics.
Private sector
organisations seeking to use data for research should be required to prove a
rigorous ethics process.
New Data Attributes.
Interaction with the review of the
definition of “personal information” should be managed.
International Data Sharing.
Accreditation of foreign entities should
be subject to proof that the relevant foreign country has a comparable privacy
law framework.
Transparency.
Transparency measures should be put in place with
respect to the operation of Clause 15(4). Further, there should be ongoing
transparency
Interaction with Other Legislation.
Details of interaction with other
legislation should be published, ideally within the Bill. Consistent terminology
across legislation
should be a long term goal.
Handling of Data After Project Completion.
Requirements on termination
of a project or suspension of an accredited entity, such as data deletion,
should be specified.
Accountability.
Transparency and accountability should be enhanced
through additional language in privacy policies and a requirement for data
entities to raise complaints. Data subjects should also be encouraged to
make complaints.
The threshold for circumstances when it is unreasonable or
impracticable to seek consent should be incorporated as part of the ethics
function governed by the National Data Advisory Council.
Data Sharing Controls and Environment.
There should be minimum
standards for security and data protection practices, including training.
Guidelines to Address Data Procurement.
The scope of guidelines be
amended to cover data procurement and pre-processing as well as the operation of
clause 15(4).
Inquiry into Draft Critical Infrastructure Asset
Definition Rules
This submission focused on the following topics.
• The scope of what constitutes a critical infrastructure asset should
be narrowed to ensure proportionality with respect to
the grant of government
powers contemplated by the Bill.
• In deciding what is a critical infrastructure asset, it is important
to understand network interactions; dependencies are
relevant in determining
which components are critical.
The Privacy and Personal Information Protection
Amendment Bill 2021
AUSCL submission focused on seven issues:
• The scope and focus of the proposed changes
• Definition of ‘Eligible Data Breach’
• Resourcing the regulator
• Extensions to assessment periods
• Public Notification
• Exemption from Notification to affected individuals; and
• Reconciliation with other data breach notification obligations.
Australian Government Digital Identity Legislation
AUSCL contributed to digital identity legislation on Position Paper (Phase 2)
and Exposure Draft (Phase 3).
• Independent oversight of the system
• Onboarding to participate in the system
• Individual and User expectations
• Privacy and consumer safeguards;
• Security requirements and incident responses;
• Record keeping and data retention; and
• Liability and redress framework.
Australian Data Strategy Discussion Paper
AUSCL contributed to the Data strategy discussion paper covering the
following areas:
• Data sharing agreement
• International data sharing
• Data provenance
• Data sovereignty
• Data quality
• Data access
• Data traceability
• Standards for data
• Data integration
• Data lifecycle management
Further submission covered the expected top three outcomes from Australian
Data Strategy by 2025.
Modernising Document Execution
AUSCL submission focused on ensuring that regulations that govern the
execution documents are light-touch fit for purpose and reflect
businesses and consumers want to engage and communicate digitally.
1. The existence of policy issues remains beyond the scope of the
2. The fact that information cannot be cleanly divided into
‘personal’ and ‘nonpersonal’, but that much data
has undergone a de-identification process is reidentifiable with some measure of
risk (proposal 2);
3. Concerns about the relationship between the small business exemption and
Consumer Data Rights;
4. The importance of removing or narrowing the employee records exemption in
order to ensure cyber security requirements apply in
this context;
5. A requirement for privacy notices to be accompanied by code that can be
automatically processed by computers (so that privacy settings
can be used to
control what an individual agrees to);
6. The limitations of relying on consent as a solution to consumer issues
with privacy (proposal 9);
7. The importance of transparency about research uses (proposal 10.4);
8. How proposal 11 could be strengthened;
9. The ability to use a range of existing security standards to reduce
compliance costs in proposal 19.2;
10. Support and further suggestions for strengthening enforcement powers
(proposal 24);
11. Suggestions for a direct right of action (proposal 25); and
12. Specific issues around biometric identifiers.
The AUSCL submission on Copyright Amendment (Access Reform) bill addressed a
selection of the issues covered by the proposed legislation
in relation to
orphan works, namely, Schedule 1 – Limitation on remedies for use of
orphan works.
Architect, CitiPower, Powercor
and United Energy.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (211 KB)
PDF format (217 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter