URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:49:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ronan, Olivia --- "Transphobic Hate Crime by Joanna Jamel" [2018] CICrimJust 7; (2018) 29(3) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 283
Transphobic Hate Crime
by Joanna Jamel, Palgrave Macmillan, 2017,
115 pp (ISBN 9783319578798)
Olivia Ronan
Introduction
Hate crimes committed against transgender people are gaining mainstream
attention. In 2017, popular media outlets reported that 41
per cent of
transgender people in the United Kingdom (‘UK’) had experienced a
hate crime because of their gender identity
in the last 12 months (Stonewall
2017; Butcher 2018). In this context, Dr Joanna Jamel’s
Transphobic
is a timely contribution to hate crime literature. It presents a
critical opportunity to consider the attempts — and failures
legislatures, law enforcement agencies and
non-government organisations to prevent the incidence and support victims of
transphobic hate crime.
This work is the first to be dedicated solely to transphobic hate crime with
regard to the available literature (p. xi). This is of
great symbolic
significance, given the tendency for transphobic hate crime to be overlooked
when compared to hate crimes committed
against other victim groups, such as
racial and ethnic minorities, or the gay, lesbian and bisexual communities; this
work is a call
for these offences to be addressed ‘on an equal
footing’ with other forms of hate crime (p. 107). To do so, the work
covers three dimensions of transphobic hate crime. It provides: an exploration
of trans communities and their experiences of transphobia
generally; a typology
of transphobic offences and the victim-offender relationship; and a critique of
state and non-government responses.
An international approach to trans identities?
Jamel begins with nuanced consideration of the complexities in understanding
the trans community and hate crime, which are particularly
important as a
precursor to traversing the work. First, ‘transgender’ is used as an
‘umbrella term’ that
encompasses ‘transsexuals, transvestites,
cross-dressers and gender non-confirming individuals’, and is popularly
abbreviated
to ‘trans’ (p. xii). This is then compared with its
antonym, ‘cisgender’, which refers to those whose gender
identity is
consistent with their gender assigned at birth (p. xii). Jamel explains the
tensions inherent in the transgender-cisgender
divide, which some consider
enforce ‘yet another socially constructed binary’ (p. xii) that is
‘more divisive than
cohesive’ (Brydum 2015 cited at p. xii). Second,
Jamel provides important discussion of the linguistic implications of the
‘phobia’ in the context of transphobic offences, being that it
describes offenders as irrational. Instead, Jamel
advocates for an
interpretation of offences as a ‘focused attack’ against a minority
with a view to reinforcing a ‘hegemonic
social order’ (p. 58), which
provides a springboard for later analysis focussing on the role of social norms
in offending.
The first chapter seeks to disrupt popular understandings of trans identities
and transphobia as solely Western phenomena. It does
this by acknowledging the
long histories of communities such as the
sistergirls
of Aboriginal Australia, and
alyha, hwame, winkte
of First Nation Native
Americans (p. 2). The chapter is largely descriptive, and takes account of
Indigenous writings about the differences
between ‘third gender’ (p.
3) and ‘two-spirited’ identities (p. 13) as an antidote to
perspectives that foreground
Western trans identities. Starting the work by
framing trans identities and experiences as more than Western phenomena is
significant;
however, the analysis that follows almost entirely focuses on the
extent of the problem and responses to it in the UK, United States
(‘US’) and European Union (‘EU’).
The nature and extent of transphobic hate crime
The second chapter considers the extent, nature, type and context of
transphobic hate crime. It begins with an overview of statistical
research into
the prevalence of these offences in the UK and the US, and makes passing
reference to the rates of transphobic homicide
in Brazil and Mexico. The
strength of this chapter lies in its succinct summary of inhibitors to
reporting, including mistrust of
police, fears of being ‘outed’ and
a lack of victim support (pp. 26–7). This allows Jamel to question the
reliability
of police data, and corroborate Corcoran et al.’s (2015)
findings that transphobic offences are the ‘least commonly recorded’
hate crime in England and Wales (p. 26). At times, however, this chapter tends
towards assertion. For example, Jamel contends that
trans people of low
socioeconomic status, or trans people of colour, are more likely to be
victimised (p. 22). Jamel then provides
some explanation of the relationship
between material wealth and ‘passing’, rather than appearing as
‘crossing’,
which may allow trans people of greater socioeconomic
status to avoid higher rates of victimisation (p. 24). However, evidence that
trans people of colour are disproportionately victimised would have strengthened
this intuitively reasonable claim.
The fourth chapter challenges popular perceptions that strangers are the only
initiators of transphobic offences. The limited evidence
available, largely from
US sources, suggests that transphobic offenders span all levels of acquaintance
and intimacy (p. 60). This
explains the multiplicity of motivations that
offenders report, such as a need to ‘reaffirm one’s
heterosexuality’,
or feelings of ‘deception’ in trans people
not ‘declaring’ their trans status (p. 61). Because these
motivations
emerge from deeply institutionalised gender norms, Jamel makes the
argument that transphobic hate crime is the result of restrictive
pressures, more so than the individual pathology of offenders (p. 63).
The inadequacy of state and non-government responses
In the third chapter, Jamel considers the place of legislation as a
necessary, but not sufficient, limb of state responses to transphobic
crime. The chapter provides examples of legislation in the UK, US and EU that
may be useful in promoting attitude change and
facilitating policy-making
decisions to address transphobic hate crime. It covers legislation that may
improve the lives of trans
communities more generally, rather than specifically
address hate crime, such as the
Gender Recognition Act 2004
Police Reform Act 2002
(UK), and the ‘de-gendering’ of the
Sexual Offences Act 2003
(UK) (pp. 44–5). This approach highlights
the need for exhaustive research into those states with and without legislation
specifically
targeting transphobic hate crime.
The final two chapters critique responses to transphobic hate crime by
policy-makers and criminal justice agencies, and provide recommendations for
reform. Jamel’s thesis here is that the limited
charitable resources and
resources given to law enforcement agencies, support organisations and victims
results in a ‘needs-directed
approach exacerbated by ... extensive
underreporting’ (p. 77). This appears to be notwithstanding the
development of apps such
as True Vision and Self Evident, designed to provide
support and reporting infrastructure to victims, and the nascent creation of
specialist police services, such as queer liaison officers, to improve police
responses. However, Jamel’s provision of a sizeable
list of non-government
support organisations in the UK and the US, as well as descriptions of the role
of international organisations
such as the United Nations, is at times in
tension with Jamel’s broader claims of there being a lack of service
provision for
victims. It may be that, despite the existence of these services,
resource limitations and ongoing mistrust of the state limits their
Perhaps the most pressing recommendation for reform is Jamel’s call for
improvement in reporting process and practices. Jamel
argues that the criteria
for the recording of transphobic offences should be expanded, and that hate
motivations should be mandatorily
recorded against convictions, to ensure that
greater attention is given to these offences (pp. 105–6). This,
combined with
a more sensitive police approach alluded to throughout the work,
and more effective referral processes to victim support organisations,
assist in combating severe under-reporting and make victims of transphobic hate
crimes feel adequately supported.
Transphobic Hate Crime
deals with an impressive breadth of issues in
the commission of, and responses to, transphobic hate crime. Its thesis is
stark: transphobic
hate crimes receive too little attention from state and
non-state bodies, and victims receive too little support. The strength of
work lies in its capacity to move between disciplines, covering criminology,
anthropology, socio-politics, legislative analysis,
and queer and gender theory.
Jamel is explicit in the aim of the work, being to examine the complexities in
defining and understanding
the prevalence of transphobic hate crime in the
Anglo-American context (p. 4), which limits its capacity to move beyond a
non-Western
focus. Through international examples, which remind the reader of
the diverse experiences of trans people across cultures, the work
highlights the
need for research in non-Western jurisdictions to develop a truly international
understanding of state and community
responses to transphobic hate crime.
Legislation
Gender Recognition Act 2004
Police Reform Act 2002
Sexual Offences Act 2003
Brydum, S 2015, ‘The true meaning of the word “cisgender”:
it’s not complicated: cisgender is the opposite
of transgender’,
The Advocate
, July 31, viewed 5 April 2018, https://www.advocate.com/
transgender/2015/07/31/true-meaning-word-cisgender.
Butcher, R 2018, ‘More than a third of all trans people suffered hate
crimes in 2017, research suggests’,
The Independent
, January 19,
viewed 5 April 2018, http://www.independent.co.uk/news/
uk/crime/trans-hate-crimes-stats-figures-2017-more-than-third-a8166826.html.
Corcoran, H, Lader, D & Smith, K 2015,
Hate crime, England and Wales
, United Kingdom Home Office.
Stonewall 2017,
LGBT in Britain – Trans Report
, Stonewall.
Board Member, Inner City
Legal Centre, 50–52 Darlinghurst Road, Kings Cross NSW 2011, Australia.
Email: oliviajronan@gmail.com.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (106 KB)
PDF format (222 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter