URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2020/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:59:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hirst, Amelia --- "Director s Duties: Do They Encompass A Duty To Observe Human Rights?" [2020] WAStuLawRw 2; (2020) 4 Western Australian Student Law Review 28
DIRECTORS’ DUTIES: DO THEY ENCOMPASS A DUTY TO
OBSERVE HUMAN RIGHTS?
AMELIA HIRST
CORPORATIONS LAW—DIRECTORS’
CORPORATIONS ACT 2001
(CTH)—SECTIONS 180(1), 181(1)
HUMAN RIGHTS— DIRECTORS’ DUTIES AND THE
OBSERVATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
The relationship between corporate activity and human rights has become
increasingly intertwined as community expectations of corporations
have changed
throughout the 21
century. This article will focus on
(1)(a) of the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and explore how these sections
encompass a duty to observe human rights. Corporate social responsibility
practices are now
an important aspect of the changing corporate sphere. The
traditional view that the directors’ primary duty is to promote the
financial interest of the company and its shareholding is challenged by this new
dynamic, because of the potential consequences for
companies found to be
violating human rights. The relationship between the observation of human rights
and economic loss is explored
as a way of establishing the existing duty
directors have to observe human rights. Ultimately, it is argued that the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), in its current form, provides sufficient scope for
directors to observe human rights in discharging their duties to the
I INTRODUCTION
Human rights in corporate law is an emerging paradigm in a newly established
social and political climate. The emergence of human
rights in this context is
evident through increased self-regulated reporting on corporate social
responsibility by corporations.
This article will explore the notion that, through rising community expectations
and corporate social responsibility practices, there
is an expectation that
directors observe human rights. Under the existing framework, set out by the
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act
there is sufficient scope to establish that directors’ duties encompass a
duty to observe human rights. The relationship
between corporate law and human
rights is essential as platforms such as the internet and social media have
forced corporations into
being more transparent in their
Furthermore, Australian
shareholders are increasingly aligning their practices with human rights issues
in response to changing community
expectations.
of this article will explore the concept of human rights and the
relationship between human rights and corporate activity.
will analyse
(1)(a) of the
Corporations Act
and discuss how the
judiciary has interpreted the purpose and scope of directors’ duties
within the context of these provisions.
Modern Slavery Act
Modern Slavery Act
’) will be examined,
identifying the growing shift towards the observation of human rights in
corporate activity.
will analyse ‘soft law’ and its
relationship to directors’ duties and human rights.
will briefly
discuss the emerging trend of corporate social responsibility and the benefits
that flow from considering human rights
impacts in the context of a
company’s corporate governance. This essay will conclude with a discussion
of recent case law where
the need for directors to be conscious of human rights
has arisen. Ultimately, it is argued that while there is no express reference
human rights in the
Corporations Act
, case law supports the proposition
the legislation provides sufficient scope for directors to comply
with human rights in order to discharge their duties to the company.
II HUMAN RIGHTS
Human rights are defined as fundamental rights which are inherent in every
individual.
Human rights are based
on concepts of human dignity and
Declaration of Human Rights
discussion and awareness surrounding human rights have increased. Globalisation
is a leading factor in both the development and exploitation
of human rights
within a corporate context. On the one hand, it can be argued that globalisation
has led to the improvement of human
rights standards through the spread of
liberal ideas.
globalisation has contributed to an informal economy where workers are
exploited, and inequality has
This is particularly evident
amongst transnational corporations where companies are able to operate in
overseas jurisdictions with
lower human rights standards. The informal economy
comprises all forms of informal employment that are not legally regulated or
According to a United
Nations study, 61 per cent of the worlds employed population are employed
through the informal economy with
jobs including agricultural labour,
unregistered miners and garment
Examples of instances
where human rights and corporate law cross over include labour rights which
require corporations to pay fair
wages, the right to non-discrimination,
environmental factors such as access to clean drinking water, and the rights of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Modern Slavery
are two ways in which human rights are legislated for in Australia.
European Union law, Directive 2014/95/EU, explicitly require
companies with over
500 employees to publish reports on the social and environmental impacts of
their activities, including human
The government has
traditionally held the primary responsibility of protecting and promoting human
rights. However, as corporate
activity increases, and the impacts of such
activity on human rights are more prevalent, changing social attitudes have
highlighted
that there is scope under the current legislative framework to
impose this responsibility on directors.
III DIRECTORS’ DUTIES IN AUSTRALIAN LAW
The relationship between human rights laws, directors’ duties, and the
corporate governance framework is complex. It is important
to first identify the
relevant directors’ duties in Australian law. Directors derive their power
from the replaceable rules
Corporations Act
which state that
a company is to be managed by or under the direction of the
Directors may
exercise all powers of the company except where the
Corporations Act
the company’s constitution require a general meeting for the act to be
The powers that
provides directors are extensive and, because of this, directors
need to be regulated in order to ensure their duties are upheld
to contemporary
standards. Importantly in this context, directors of the company are separate
from the company itself. Companies
have the legal capacity and power of an
individual.
In Australia, directors’ duties exist at both common law and in
statute. Within the
Corporations Act
there are several provisions
relating to directors’ duties.
Section 180(1)
provides a statutory duty of
care—requiring directors to exercise their powers with care and
Section 181(1)(a)
requires that a director or officer of a corporation exercise their powers and
discharge their duties in good faith and in the best
interests of the
Section 184(1)
provides that if a director or officer is reckless or
intentionally dishonest and fails to exercise their powers and duties in good
faith or for a proper purpose, an offence will have been
The difference
(1)(a) is that the latter two are civil
penalty provisions; while
is a criminal offence. This is important to
note given the penalties will greatly differ depending on the provision.
Care and Diligence
The duty of care, skill and diligence is an objective test and while it will
depend on subjective factors, including the size of the
business and the
director's experience, a minimum standard of diligence
Section 180(1)
directors to perform their duties with the degree of care and diligence that a
reasonable person would exercise if they
were a director or officer of a company
in the same circumstances. If harm to the company’s interests is a
reasonably foreseeable
consequence of the director’s action, without the
benefit of hindsight, there will be a breach of
The importance of this
provision as it relates to human rights and directors’ duties can be
explored through reputational harm.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Cassimatis (No 8)
Edelman J explained that harm should not be constrained to financial harm and
can include reputational damage.
Recently, the Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation
and Financial Services Industry highlighted that even
financial institutions
must now accept that financial risks are not the only risks that
A prudent director, in
exercising care and diligence would give sufficient attention to non-financial
risks such as the exploitation
of workers in developing nations, and the impacts
this may have on brand value. It is therefore argued that where a
failure to observe human rights results in reputational damage,
there may be a breach of
Of course, directors may find safe harbour in
the business judgment rule as outlined in
A business judgment is defined as any decision to take or not take action in
respect of a matter relevant to the business operations
corporation.
Essentially, the
business judgment rule acts as a defence for directors who have not exercised
due care and diligence in relation
to honest, informed and rational business
judgments where all the elements of
In the context of human
rights, directors of companies who operate their supply chains overseas could
potentially rely on the business
judgement rule for acts which increase
productivity and lower costs but violate human rights such as labour rights.
However, in light
, it is arguably the case that no rational
business judgement could be made which infringes on human rights because of the
reputational damage.
Good Faith and Best Interests
Section 181(1)(a)
imposes a statutory duty which requires directors and
officers to exercise their duties in good faith and in the best interests of
company. Good faith is not defined in the
Corporations Act
; however, the
common law has interpreted good faith to mean acting bona fide in the interests
of the company as a whole and not for
any collateral
Traditionally, to act
in the best interest of the company meant to act in the best interest of
shareholders.
From a corporate
governance perspective, this is more commonly known as the shareholder primacy
The basis of this theory
is that corporations should maximise profits for
shareholders.
This is despite
the fact that a registered company is a separate legal entity distinct from its
shareholders.
This narrow
interpretation of good faith, therefore, excludes consideration of human rights
unless it directly relates to shareholder
interests or is specified in the
company’s constitution.
Determining whether there is a breach of the duty prescribed in
s 181(1)(a)
involves both subjective and objective
The statute is in
addition to the general law, not in derogation from
Justice Owen outlined that
the subjective element considers the state of mind of the director in
determining whether they honestly
considered the exercise of power to be in the
best interest of the company.
The objective element arises as the court may intervene in rejecting the
director's subjective beliefs,
which it will do in circumstances where the decision is such that no reasonable
person could think it was in the best interest of
The ‘enlightened
self-interest’
approach to
good faith, in contrast with the narrow approach above, acknowledges that
investing in corporate social responsibility
is in the commercial interest of
the company.
century the enlightened self-interest approach is the more
appropriate way to approach this duty. This approach allows directors
into consideration a broader range of interests including human rights to
deliver sustainable, long-term
A connection can then
be made that ensuring observance of human rights is in the best interests of the
company and thus warrants
consideration from directors.
MODERN SLAVERY ACT
The recent introduction of the
Modern Slavery Act
forms part of the
growing trend of accountability in corporate activity. The
Modern Slavery Act
requires entities based or operating in Australia, with a consolidated
revenue of more than $100 million, to report annually on the
risks of modern
slavery and any actions taken to address those
The importance of this
legislation is that it seeks to address the abovementioned statistics
surrounding the informal economy that
are, in many circumstances, adversely
impacted by corporate activity. The
Modern Slavery Act
requires entities
to report on the conduct of their supply chains, as opposed to simply reporting
on their operations in Australia.
Corporations are constantly in competition
with each other to produce new products at lower costs and to do so are heavily
on global supply chains to manufacture their
Global supply chains rely
on the informal economy, where employees work in unregulated conditions and
without protection, an environment
where modern slavey can ensue. The
introduction of the
Modern Slavery Act
recognises the argument that
corporations and their directors have a responsibility to observe human rights
in their operations.
Modern slavery is defined to include offences under Division 270 or 271 of
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) which include human trafficking and
child labour. It is not uncommon for large, well-known brands to infringe on
human rights
through the use of child labour in offshore
operations.
legislation does not compel entities to adhere to any human rights laws, the
mandatory reporting requirements ensure that
entities at least take into
consideration human rights. The external pressures from shareholders and
consumers are likely to have
a direct impact on how directors comply with human
rights laws through their existing duties in the
IV ‘SOFT LAW’ AND DIRECTOR’S DUTIES
Soft law is a term used to describe non-binding rules and
principles.
Soft law arise in
international law in the form of declarations which are often politically and
practically important.
expectations naturally change over time, and it is the court's responsibility to
apply a standard of care which reflects
contemporary views concerning corporate
Soft law can assist
the court in ensuring these contemporary values are reflected, as demonstrated
when Austin J determined that
evidence from books, articles and commentators was
relevant in determining the responsibilities of the
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations
(‘Governance Principles’)
Bearing the above comments in mind, the Governance Principles may have weight
in determining whether directors should consider and
respect human rights. The
Governance Principles recommend corporate governance practices for entities
listed on the Australian Stock
applying to companies listed on the ASX, they are useful for non-listed entities
in informing their corporate governance
standards. The ASX Listing Rules require
that listed companies include, in annual reporting or on its website, to what
recommendations have been
The relevant principles
concerning directors’ duties and human rights are as follows:
1. Principle 3 provides that listed entities should instil a culture of
acting lawfully, ethically and
responsibly;
2. Principle 7 provides that listed entities should establish sound risk
management frameworks and periodically review their
effectiveness.
The terms ‘ethically’ and ‘responsibly’ in Principle
3 give rise to the consideration of human rights as they
relate to moral
behaviour in a corporate context. In the third edition of the Governance
Principles, commentary made specific reference
to respecting the human rights of
a listed entity’s employees. Interestingly, Principle 3 in the fourth
edition, published
in 2019, has removed references to human rights. Principle 3
has been amended to recommend that listed entities disclose a statement
values which should consider the need for the entity to preserve and protect its
reputation.
Principle 7, in dealing with risk management, can be further related to human
rights. Companies face a variety of risks, which are
both financial and
non-financial and will differ depending on the context of the
As such, corporate
activity that may have human rights consequences should be treated by directors
as a significant risk. Not doing
so could result in labour risks (i.e. strikes),
damaged reputation and potential
litigation.
All of these factors
have the ability to impact the company and its shareholders negatively.
Therefore, the Governance Principles
as part of soft law do influence directors
of ASX listed companies to respect human rights.
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights 2011 (‘Guiding Principles’)
The Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights established the first
international standard for preventing and addressing the
risk of adverse
impacts, including human rights violations linked to corporate
These measures are an
important step toward acknowledging the responsibility companies have in
respecting human rights, particularly
as this is a consideration with increasing
value to shareholders.
While the guiding principles are not legally binding, companies may be forced
to comply with them through contractual
This may arise if a
company is a member of an association which imposes contractual duties to comply
with the Guiding Principles.
further example is where a company is providing services to the government,
which imposes commitments to respect human rights.
While this approach has yet
to be exemplified in Australia, examples can be found in other nations, such as
the Netherlands.
In 2013, the Netherlands introduced a National Action Plan on Business and
Human Rights as a way of implementing the Guiding Principles
which states that,
as part of their sustainable procurement policy, all companies supplying goods
or services to the government must
respect human
This is implemented via
the tender process where social conditions and potential supply chain risks are
identified in the application.
While the implementation of a national plan or strategy—like that
exhibited in the Netherlands—would likely strengthen
Australia’s
current Guiding Principles; the principles themselves are an important shift
towards recognising companies and
directors as having duties to respect human
II CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Corporations Act
does not deal expressly with any duty to
respect human rights, the way corporations and directors may engage with the
Governance Principles
is primarily through corporate social responsibility
practices. Corporate social responsibility can be understood to mean ‘the
responsibility of enterprises for their impacts on
The impact of
corporate activity is widespread and
significant.
Consequently, it is
important that an obligation arises for corporations to account for their impact
through corporate social responsibility.
As a key element of corporate governance, corporate social responsibility is
also relevant in the context of corporate disclosure
which allows investors to
make informed decisions.
stated previously, human rights and a social license to operate are becoming
increasingly important considerations for investors
due to rising community
expectations.
This growing
concern was highlighted in
McVeigh v Retail Employees Superannuation Pty
where a 23 year
old man, Mark McVeigh, commenced legal action against the trustee of his
superannuation fund for allegedly breaching
its fiduciary duties by failing to
adequately consider climate change risk in his investment. Whilst this does not
directly relate
to directors’ duties, it is important to note as it
highlights the changing attitudes of Australian investors and the role
community expectations play in informing these attitudes.
Corporations are responding to the argument that responsible social and
environmental conduct has a positive relationship with financial
performance.
This is evident
through increased voluntary acts of corporate social responsibility reporting
and the fact that it is unusual for
a large company in a developed nation to not
have a policy addressing the social and environmental impacts of its
operations.
Corporate social responsibility is voluntary and, with respect to human
rights, it is not driven by international law; but primarily
by the assumption
of responsibility by the
Nonetheless, increased
acts of voluntary corporate social responsibility indicates a rising trend in
the consideration of external
stakeholders and promotes ethical corporate
While corporate
social responsibility does not impose legal obligations on directors to respect
human rights, companies face a level
of public scrutiny, meaning that
transparency in corporate activity is in the company’s best interests.
Furthermore, case law
indicates that directors’ duties and the standard of
care are to be determined with reference to modern community
expectations.
If a corporation
has a corporate social responsibility policy, it is arguable that the judiciary
should consider this in determining
what the directors’ duties encompass.
V CASE STUDIES
In multi-national corporations where subsidiaries operate overseas, directors
are able to hide behind the separate legal entity
A recent Canadian
Das v George Weston
the complexity of cases surrounding offshore operations and provides an example
of how human rights can be violated.
Das v George Weston Limited
concerned the collapse of a garment factory, Rana Plaza in Bangladesh, killing
over 1100 people and injuring a further
Rana Plaza was constructed
in 2006 as a six-floor complex without the required approvals and was not
designed for the industrial
use it eventually became used
The building was later
expanded by three additional floors, and at the time of the collapse, the ninth
floor was nearing
completion.
The defendants, two Loblaws, purchased 50 per cent of the manufactured goods
produced by New Waves, a manufacturer that operated in
Rana Plaza, and had
engaged Bureau Veritas to conduct social
Firstly, the plaintiffs
attempted to advance the argument that breaches occurred in Ontario where the
entity held office. The Court,
however, held that this was not the case and
Bangladesh law applied to the
This finding was
significant as the statute of limitations under Bangladesh law required claims
to be brought within one year, which
this claim was
As members brought their
claim outside of the limitations period, the claims of the proposed class action
members, other than those
who were minors at the time of the collapse were
The plaintiffs argued that both defendants were liable for negligence and
that Loblaws was responsible for the negligence of its
The essence of this
argument was that Loblaws, knowing of the dangerous workplaces in Bangladesh,
had voluntarily undertaken the
responsibility to ensure that their garments were
produced in buildings that were structurally
Loblaws had retained
Bureau Veritas to audit factories, including the New Wave factory located in
Rana Plaza, to ensure compliance
with Loblaws’ corporate social
responsibility standards.
social audits performed highlighted failures relating to the safety of
equipment, emergency exits and fire alarm
Yet, the Court did not
find this sufficient to impose a duty of care. The plaintiffs also argued that
Loblaws breached their fiduciary
duty by failing to ensure that the social
audits were performed comprehensively to identify and remedy structural
However, the Court did
not consider the relationship between Loblaws and the class members to be of
sufficient proximity to establish
either a duty of care or a fiduciary
relationship.
The members of the
class action were largely employees of New Wave, which was a supplier to Loblaws
and not its subsidiary.
Finally, the Court held there was no duty of care grounded in the corporate
social responsibility.
determined that it would be unfair to recognise a duty of care in this case
based on Loblaws’ corporate social responsibility
because other purchasers
of goods from New Wave who do not have a corporate social responsibility
practice but are equally aware
of the conditions would have no duty of
Das v George Weston
illustrates the ways in which directors can evade their own
corporate social responsibility standards and highlights some of the
surrounding enforcement.
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Flugge (No 2)
important case with respect to human rights in the Australian context.
involved the export of wheat to Iraq by AWB Ltd, where disguised
payments were made to the Iraqi
government.
During the period of
the defendant’s sale of wheat to Iraq, Iraq was subject to United Nations
sanctions which prohibited payments
to Iraq in internationally traded
currencies.
These sanctions were
an important introduction in response to the First Gulf War, largely to promote
international peace by ridding
the nation of weapons of mass destruction. ASIC
alleged breaches of
Corporations Act
chairperson, directors and other
The defendant, Mr Flugge, who was the chairman and director of AWB Ltd, was
held to have breached
by failing to make inquiries about the payments
and advise the board of
The defendant was
disqualified by ASIC from managing companies pursuant to
Corporations Act
charges arose out of a Royal Commission, which also suggested the officers may
have committed criminal offences, liability for
which did not eventuate but is
nonetheless notable.
export of wheat itself is not a human rights violation, the context in which
these sanctions arose meant that human rights
were relevant. This is an
important case in identifying the importance of the United Nations, as well as
the Australian government,
in holding directors accountable. The case further
illustrates the identifiable connection between corporations and human
VI CONCLUSION
Corporations Act
does not expressly impose an obligation on
directors to observe human rights. Even so, this article argues that it is
within the scope
of the legislation to consider human rights as part of a
directors’ duty pursuant to
. The Corporations and Markets
Advisory Committee concluded that current legislative construction provides
sufficient flexibility
for directors to consider particular stakeholders or the
broader community without the need for
The judicial commentary
appears to support this, particularly in
ASIC v Rich
reference was made by Austin J to the fact that the standard of care of
directors has risen and ought to be considered with
respect to modern community
expectations.
A positive relationship between financial interests and human rights have
been highlighted in this article. It is evident that attitudes
of investors are
changing with factors such as human rights, climate change, and a social license
to operate becoming increasingly
important considerations. While financial harm
and reputational harm were distinguished in
unlikely that reputational harm would not also result in financial harm.
Therefore, a prudent and responsible director, acting
in the best interests of
the company, would consider human rights through the enlightened self-interest
This should not
necessarily be seen as a derogation from acting in the best interests of the
shareholder generally, as directors
will inevitably enhance shareholder profit
by managing reputational risk.
The soft law discussed throughout, as well as the rising trend of corporate
social responsibility implementation, supports the notion
that human rights
should be observed as part of a director’s duty. The influence of both
soft law and corporate social responsibility
may become more important factors
for the judiciary to consider in determining whether directors’ duties
have been breached
in future cases. However, it is suspected that difficulties
will continue to arise in relation to enforcement as well as establishing
breach of duty, given the majority of human rights abuses occur in overseas
LLB and BA (International
Relations), Curtin University, Perth.
Riana Cermak,
‘Directors’ Duties to Respect Human Rights in Offshore Operations
and Supply Chains: An Emerging Paradigm’
Companies and
Securities Law Journal
Encyclopaedic Australian
Legal Dictionary
(online at 1 October 2019) ‘human rights’ def
Universal Declaration of
Human Rights
, opened for signature 21 December 1965, 217 A (III) (entered
into force 25 September 2018).
Shabina Artfat,
‘Globalisation and Human Rights: An Overview of its Impact’ (2013)
American Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences
Martha Alter Chen,
‘Rethinking the Informal Economy: Linkages with the Formal Economy and the
Formal Regulatory Environment’
(Working Paper No 46/2007, United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs) 1.
United Nations News Centre,
Nearly Two-thirds of Global Workforce in the ‘Informal’ Economy
(Web Page, 2 May 2018)
<https://unaavictoria.org.au/2018/05/02/nearly-two-thirds-global-workforce-informal-economy-un-study/>.
Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Integrating Human Rights Into Australian Business Practice
(Web Page, 30 April 2018)
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/employers/business-and-human-rights/business-and-human-rights-factsheets/integrating-human-rights>;
Australian Human Rights Commission,
Corporate Social Responsibility &
Human Rights
<https://www.humanrights.gov.au/our-work/corporate-social-responsibility-human-rights>.
European Commission,
Non-Financial Reporting
<https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/company-reporting-and-auditing/company-reporting/non-financial-reporting_en>.
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act
s 181(1)(a).
Daniels v Anderson
(1995) 37 NSWLR 438
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
[2003] NSWSC 85
(2003) 174 FLR 128
, 140 [48] (‘
ASIC v Rich
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Vines
[2005] NSWSC 738
[2016] FCA 1023
Royal Commission into
Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
(Final Report, February 2019) vol 1, 406.
Corporations Act
13) s 180(3).
Explanatory Memorandum,
Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Bill 1998 (Cth) [6.1].
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Adler
(2002) 168 FLR 263
The Bell Group Ltd
(in liq) v Westpac Banking Corp (No 9)
(2008) 39 WAR 1, 584 [4623].
Shelley Marshall and Ian
Ramsay, ‘Stakeholders and Directors’ Duties: Law, Theory and
[2012] UNSWLawJl 12
(2012) 35(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
See generally Governance
Institute of Australia, ‘Shareholder primacy: Is there a need for
change?’ (Discussion Paper,
February 2014).
Salomon v A Salomon
[1897] AC 22;
Corporations Act
(n 13) Part 1.5.
Cermak (n 1) 128.
The Bell Group Ltd (in
liq) v Westpac Banking Corp (No 9)
(2008) 39 WAR 1, 583 [4619]
The Bell Group’
Corporations Act
The Bell Group Ltd
(n 32) 577 [4591].
Corporations Act
Cermak (n 1) 129.
Corporations and Marketing
Advisory Committee, Parliament of Australia,
The Social Responsibility of
Corporations
(2006) 40 (
‘The Social Responsibility of
Corporations’
Cermak (n 1) 129.
Modern Slavery Act 2018
Justine Nolan and Nana
Frishling, ‘Australia’s Modern Slavery Act: Towards Meaningful
Compliance’ (2019) 37
Companies and Securities Law Journal
See, eg, Australian
Broadcasting Company, ‘Australian Retailers Rivers, Coles, Target, Kmart
Linked to Bangladesh Factory
Worker Abuse’,
Four Corners
24 June 2013)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-06-24/australian-retailers-linked-to-sweatshop-abuse/4773738>.
Nolan and Frishling (n 41)
Andrew T. Guzman and
Timothy L. Meyer, ‘International Soft Law’
(2010) 2(1)
Legal Analysis
Encyclopaedic Australian
Legal Dictionary
(online at 21 October 2019) ‘soft law’ def
ASIC v Rich
[2003] NSWSC 85
174 FLR 128
, 147 [71].
Ibid 144 [75].
ASX Corporate Governance
Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations
ed, 2019) 16 (‘
Corporate Governance Principles and
Recommendations
Australian Securities
Listing Rules
(19 December 2016) r 4.10.3.
Corporate Governance
Principles and Recommendations
Risk Management
and Corporate Governance
(OECD Publishing, 2014) 13.
Patricia Dermansky,
‘Should Australia Replace
Section 181
Corporations Act 2001
With Wording Similar to Section 172 of the Companies Act 2006 (UK)?’
(Research Paper, University of Melbourne Centre
for Corporate Law, 2009) 16.
‘Business and Human
United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner
<https://www.ohchr.org/en/issues/business/pages/businessindex.aspx>.
Cermak (n 1) 139.
John Sutherland,
‘Human Rights and Business Lawyers: The 2011 Watershed’
Australian Law Journal
Ministry of Foreign
National Action Plan on Business and Human Rights
February 2014)
<https://www.business-humanrights.org/sites/default/files/documents/netherlands-national-action-plan.pdf>.
Dutch Public Procurement
Expertise Centre,
Step 1: Preparing the Invitation to Tender
<https://www.pianoo.nl/en/sustainable-public-procurement/spp-themes/social-conditions/getting-started/step-1-preparing>.
European Commission,
‘A Renewed EU Strategy 2011–14 for Corporate Social
Responsibility’ (Communication No 681,
European Commission, 25 October
Phillip Lynch, ‘Human
Rights and Corporate Social Responsibility: An Australian Perspective’
(2006) 1(4)
Corporate Governance Law Review
Tony Ciro and Ewa Banasik,
‘Socially Responsible Investments: Markets, Regulations and Compliance
Journal of Banking and Finance Law and Practice
Cermak (n 1) 139.
[2019] FCA 14.
Lynch (n 63) 415.
Paul Redmond,
‘Directors Duties and Corporate Social Responsiveness’
[2012] UNSWLawJl 13
(2012) 35(1)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
ASIC v Rich
Corporations Act
13) s 180(3).
[2017] ONSC 4129.
Ibid [130].
Ibid [208].
Ibid [117].
Ibid [121].
Ibid [127].
Ibid [435].
Ibid [533].
Ibid [533].
[2017] VSC 117
(2017) 342 ALR 478
ASIC v Flugge (No 2
Ibid 480 [13].
Ibid 481 [13].
Ibid 479 [1].
Ibid 481 [16].
ASIC v Flugge (No 2)
[2017] VSC 117
(2017) 342 ALR 478
, 503 [135].
[2008] VSC 473
(2008) 21 VR 252.
Responsibility of Corporations
ASIC v Rich
Cermak (n 1) 129;
Bell Group Ltd
(n 32) [4395].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
PDF format (489 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter