URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Paterson, Helen M; van Golde, Celine; Devery, Chris; Cowdery, Nicholas; Kemp, Richard --- "Iwitnessed: Capturing Contemporaneous Accounts to Enhance Witness Evidence" [2018] CICrimJust 6; (2018) 29(3) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 273
Contemporary Comment
iWitnessed: Capturing Contemporaneous Accounts to Enhance Witness
Helen M Paterson,
and Richard
Eyewitness testimony can provide critical leads in all types of
investigations and can be extremely persuasive in court. However,
inconsistencies or inaccuracies in eyewitness accounts can undermine the
perceived value of this evidence, leading to miscarriages
of justice. Research
shows that memory fades quickly after an event. Therefore, it is important for
eyewitness accounts to be collected
immediately after a critical incident.
Unfortunately, it is often unfeasible for police to conduct in-depth interviews
at the scene.
This has led to the development of immediate recall tools that
witnesses can use to record an initial account without the assistance
officers. Until now such recall tools have been limited by their inflexible
paper-and-pencil format. To address this issue, a
team of researchers in the
fields of psychology and law have worked with the New South Wales Police Force
to develop iWitnessed,
an evidence-based mobile phone application. iWitnessed
collects and preserves witness accounts, while providing the witnesses and
victims with information about support services. Users can record information as
text, images or audio recordings. This application
is the first of its kind and
represents a novel initiative to improve eyewitness memory evidence.
eyewitness – memory – immediate recall –
iWitnessed –
New South Wales Police Force – contemporaneous notes – smartphone
Introduction
Eyewitness testimony can provide critical leads for police investigating an
offence and can be extremely persuasive to triers of fact
in court. However,
limited police resources often restrict the ability of the police to interview
witnesses for several days or even
weeks after an incident has occurred.
Moreover, witnesses are sometime unwilling to provide a statement about an event
either because
of fear or because they feel that the circumstances are not
serious enough to report them to the police. In this comment we will
these delays and how they can negatively impact witness memory. We will then
highlight advances that have been made in psychology
to help preserve and
protect witness accounts.
In the aftermath of an incident, police resources are often stretched thin.
The key priority for police officers is to identify and
detain a suspect if
present (pursuant to the
Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act
(NSW)). They also have to attend to any injured victims and to secure
the scene for investigation. There may be multiple witnesses
present at the
scene. Many of these witnesses will be lost to the subsequent investigation if
they are not approached by officers
immediately, or if the investigators do not
discern how important they might be to the investigation. Some witnesses may
have a limited
command of English, and on-site translation services can be
difficult and costly to obtain. All of this is problematic since any
witnesses may hold potentially vital information about the event and/or
perpetrators; information that will provide both
critical leads for the
investigation or crucial evidence in a trial. Limited police resources often
restrict opportunities to thoroughly
interview witnesses until several days or
even weeks after the incident. Failing to identify informative witnesses or only
aware of the need to interview additional witnesses after a lengthy
delay is likely to hamper the investigation.
Further challenges are that sometimes witnesses feel they are not ready to
come forward immediately after an event, or that the circumstances
at the time
are not severe enough to report to the police (for example, in cases of domestic
violence). This can cause problems when
investigating or prosecuting cases. That
is, victims and witnesses are often unable to recall specific details of each
incident, making it difficult to establish the facts of the case.
Additionally, studies show that when a witness appears confused
or gives an
inconsistent statement in court, the jury believes them to be less credible and
accurate, which could reduce the likelihood
of a successful conviction (Berman
& Brian 1996; Bruer & Pozzulo 2014).
The psychology of eyewitness memory and the importance of immediate recall
Research on human memory confirms that forgetting occurs very rapidly and
that memory is fallible (Schacter 2001). For example, witnesses
influenced by post-event information (that is, information acquired after the
critical incident). Research shows that when
witnesses encounter misleading
information after an event, they can incorporate it into their memory of the
event (see Loftus 2005
for review). Witnesses may encounter such misinformation
information through leading questions, co-witness discussion or media reports
(Wright & Davies 1999). With increased delay between the incident and formal
interview, memories are more easily contaminated
by post-event information,
presumably because the original memory becomes weaker (Loftus, Miller &
Burns 1978; Mudd & Govern
2004; Paz-Alonso & Goodman 2008). Therefore,
it is extremely important to preserve eyewitness memory in the immediate
of an incident.
One way that eyewitness evidence can be preserved is through contemporaneous
notes —records made at the time or very soon after
the event. Police
officers and legal practitioners around the world have begun to appreciate the
value of such records. According
Evidence Act 1995
, contemporaneous notes or other contemporaneous recordings of events can be
used, with leave from the court, to prompt or support
the memory of a witness.
Indeed, the court may grant a witness permission to read from such notes during
their testimony (
R v Qaumi (No 38)
[2016] NSWSC 743
[2013] NSWSC 480
; Cassar & Sleiman
[1999] NSWSC 651
[2002] NSWCCA 289).
Consequently, contemporaneous notes can
strengthen the accuracy and trustworthiness of the evidence in court, which is
for fair outcomes.
Contemporaneous records come in all forms, ranging from a note scribbled on
the back of a napkin to a meticulous description of the
event. Naturally,
detailed contemporaneous records are more beneficial for law enforcement when
solving and prosecuting a case. Research
has shown that jurors are distrustful
of witnesses who add details to their account that they did not report
initially, so it is
very important to obtain contemporaneous accounts that are
as detailed as possible (Oeberst 2012). The quest to obtain comprehensive
contemporaneous notes from witnesses has led forensic psychologists to develop
immediate recall tools. For example, in the United
Kingdom (‘UK’),
the Self-Administered Interview (SAI©; Gabbert, Hope & Fisher 2009) was
developed to formalise
the process of eliciting an initial account from
witnesses. The SAI© is a paper-and-pencil booklet that can be given to
when police officers arrive at the scene. It contains a standardised
protocol of clear instructions and questions that witnesses
can complete
individually, without the guidance of an officer. When completing the SAI©
the witness is cued to record details
sequence of events, and the people involved.
The SAI© is based on empirical memory research. That is, it draws on
memory mnemonics from the Cognitive Interview (‘CI’)
Geiselman 1992), including instructions to mentally reinstate the context of the
witnessed event and to report everything.
The CI has been shown to elicit
significantly more accurate and detailed information than a free-recall request
(see Fisher &
Schreiber 2007; Wells, Memon & Penrod 2006 for reviews).
Like the CI, research has shown that the SAI© preserves the accuracy
completeness of memory over time (Gabbert, Hope & Fisher 2009; Gittins,
Paterson & Sharpe 2015; McPhee, Paterson &
Kemp 2014). Furthermore, it
can also protect against memory contamination from post-event information
(Gabbert et al. 2012; McPhee,
Paterson & Kemp 2014). However, timing is
critical: the benefits of the SAI© depend on it being delivered within 24
of the incident (Paterson, Eijkemans & Kemp 2015).
The effects of completing the SAI© in a non-native language have also
been studied. Approximately 22 per cent of the Australian
population speak a
language other than English at home (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016).
Language barriers, therefore, represent
a likely practical obstacle to obtaining
a coherent and accurate eyewitness account of an incident.
On-site translation services can be difficult and costly to obtain. Kemp
& Chew 2012 showed that completing the SAI© in a
second language
eliminates the benefits for memory usually seen when completing the tool. This
result suggests a better approach
would be to allow witnesses to record their
observations in their preferred language.
Field-based research within a UK police force has indicated that all officers
working with the tool found the SAI© to be useful,
and that 88 per cent
believed conducting an SAI© during the investigation saved time (Hope,
Gabbert & Fisher 2011, p. 221).
Further, officers reported that the
SAI© could be used to elicit a detailed account from witnesses before they
had forgotten
important details. Other benefits identified included the
opportunity to obtain an immediate account from multiple witnesses and
key witnesses efficiently while saving time and resources (Hope et al. 2011).
This suggests that immediate recall tools
not only serve to preserve and protect
memory, but also enable officers to prioritise the allocation of policing
resources during
the critical early stages of an investigation.
Limitations of the SAI©
Despite these promising research findings, the SAI© has several
limitations. First, the paper format means that the tool is generic
inflexible. That is, the tool is only appropriate for one-off events that are
attended by the police, and not incidents where
no police officers are present
and/or that are repeated or ongoing, such as domestic violence. Second, the tool
does not accommodate
the needs of different types of witnesses (for example,
those with lower literacy who do not feel comfortable with the written format
the tool or those who do not speak English). Our laboratory research shows that
witnesses prefer to give spoken rather than written
responses when using an
immediate recall tool, and that spoken responses are as accurate at preserving
memory (McPhee, Paterson &
Kemp 2014).
The solution: iWitnessed
In response to these limitations, we have worked closely with the New South
Wales (‘NSW’) Police Force to improve several
aspects of the
SAI© and develop a more contemporary practical tool. Consequently, we have
developed iWitnessed, a smartphone
application that is designed to collect and
preserve contemporaneous eyewitness accounts. Using our collective expertise in
memory research, policing practices, legislation and admissibility of
evidence, we developed an application that will facilitate
police investigations
and prosecutions, and also have application more generally. This project places
Australia at the forefront
of international initiatives to improve the
collection of eyewitness evidence and will help in the investigation and
prosecution
of incidents across the country. iWitnessed is available for free
and can be downloaded from both Apple and Android App stores. This
anyone with access to a smartphone or tablet can download the application.
There are several noteworthy benefits of iWitnessed. First, it will help
witnesses and/or victims record details of the event using
a guided recall
procedure that has been designed to enhance witness recall using our expertise
in witness memory. Second, since it
is easy and free to download, a police
officer does not even need to be present for witnesses to start using the tool.
Third, iWitnessed
can be used either by victims of one-off events or those of
repeated crimes to store details of each specific incident. Incidents
bullying, domestic violence, and sexual abuse are often ongoing and distressing
for the witnesses or victims involved. For
successful prosecution, details such
as dates, times and specific aspects of every individual incident are required.
However, witnesses
frequently have trouble recalling such details because they
typically confuse the incidents with one another. For example, research
adults indicates that when repeated events follow a similar
‘script’, individuals are incapable of remembering specific
of each event (see Hudson & Nelson 1986 for review). iWitnessed overcomes
this issue by providing a witness or victim
with the opportunity to update and
save details of each individual event. Each entry will be ‘stamped’
with information
on date, time and location, where user preference and internet
access allows. Hence, using this application witnesses can keep a
events until they feel they are ready, or that the circumstances have become
serious enough, to report them to the police.
A further advantage of iWitnessed is its flexibility, which allows it to
cater to the needs of a wide range of different witnesses.
For instance,
although the questions on the app are currently only available in English, users
are able to record their answers in
their native language. Furthermore,
iWitnessed allows users to update and save details of witnessed events as text,
images, screenshots
or audio recordings. Alternatively, users can employ
speech-to-text functions available on smartphones. Therefore, the application
can record both written and oral accounts, with the latter shown to be more
user-friendly (McPhee, Paterson & Kemp 2014). Some
civilian witnesses may
not have high literacy skills and therefore may struggle with reading or
writing. If required to write about
the incident, such witnesses may provide an
incomplete account. In these cases, providing witnesses with an oral version of
might increase testimony accuracy and completeness.
Due to the sensitive information that will be recorded using iWitnessed, the
application was created with built-in security features.
For example, iWitnessed
entries can be protected with a PIN. If the user enters an incorrect PIN code,
they will still be able to
access iWitnessed, however they will not be able to
see any of the information entered under the old PIN code. The information
by the app will be stored on the phone and can be emailed in PDF
format should the witness choose to report the incident to police,
or decide to
back up the information on a secure email account.
It is anticipated that iWitnessed will be used to record events that are
likely to be stressful or traumatic in nature. Individuals
who witness such
events are at risk of developing post-traumatic stress disorder
(‘PTSD’). Early detection of post-traumatic
symptomatology and
access to support networks can be extremely beneficial in helping victims
recover from the trauma (Bryant 2003).
The iWitnessed application helps with
this by providing users with direct links to support services and information
effects of trauma. Moreover, it is possible that simply
using the application as a structured recall tool may be beneficial for a
witness’s psychological wellbeing. According to cognitive theories of
PTSD, if a traumatic event is not properly processed,
then the memory is
vulnerable to being triggered by sensory stimuli (Ehlers & Clark 2000; Foa,
Steketee & Rothbaum 1989).
As a result, the witness is more likely to
experience PTSD symptoms such as anxiety and intrusive memories of the event
Clark 2000). Therefore, it is important for the traumatic event to
be processed and integrated into pre-existing memory frameworks
in order for
psychological wellbeing to be restored. It is conceivable that the use of recall
tools such as iWitnessed could help
with this process, but further research is
required to confirm this.
iWitnessed is, to our knowledge, the first attempt in the world to create an
electronic immediate recall tool. There are many advantages
of iWitnessed as
highlighted above, and the development of our tool could not have come at a
better time. Citizens are using advanced
technologies on a daily basis; indeed
the vast majority (84%) of Australians own a smartphone (Deloitte 2016). This
statistic explains
why more and more people are recording incidents they
witness, such as racist attacks on public transport (Aubusson 2015). In
recently there has been a dramatic increase in the use of new
technologies by Australian police forces to facilitate police procedures
investigative processes. For example, in 2015, 500 police officers in NSW were
issued with smartphones so that they could access
police databases to conduct
background checks (Francis 2015). Moreover, in 2014, the
Procedure Act 1986
(NSW) was amended to allow audio and video recordings,
known as Domestic Violence Evidence in Chief (‘DVEC’), to be used
evidence in domestic violence cases (see Ch 6
of that Act). Since the
introduction of this evidence, NSW Police have reported an increase in
successful prosecutions within domestic
violence cases (Harris 2016); however,
other research has shown that it has had little impact on guilty pleas or
conviction rates
in NSW (Yeong & Poynton 2017). These changes do not only
affect officers; civilians are now being asked to report minor traffic
online instead of calling the police (Partridge 2014). iWitnessed complements
these developments and the movement from
the Australian police forces to use
modern technologies in their everyday practices. Our immediate recall tool has
the potential
to revolutionise the way that memory evidence is collected.
While the use of mobile phones to record criminal incidents is rising,
legislation on how to use this evidence is lagging behind.
There is some
legislation on the admissibility of this type of evidence in court (for example,
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
Evidence Act 1995
, but it has not kept pace with the rapid development of modern
technologies and thus the evidence often may be used only upon strict
individual cases (
Huffman & Gorman
[2014] FamCa 1077
[2016] FamCa 345).
This can cause delays and/or complications
in prosecution. With the development of iWitnessed, important steps can be taken
in developing
suitable legislation on the use of evidence recorded on mobile
phones within the Australian legal system.
Possible future directions
Now that iWitnessed is publicly available it is important that we continue to
test and further enhance the app. We aim to evaluate
the app in terms of:
usability (for both police officers and witnesses/victims); memory enhancement;
and psychological effects. We
would also like to make the app available in
several languages. Although iWitnessed can be answered in different languages,
the questions
are currently only available in English.
iWitnessed is a new immediate recall tool that is based on empirical
research. It will facilitate police practices by helping them
prioritise the
allocation of resources during the critical early stages of an investigation.
Furthermore, the app is designed to
preserve and protect memories of those who
have witnessed an incident, providing police officers and prosecutors with
access to accurate
information regarding critical incidents. Ultimately, it is
expected that the information gathered by this tool will facilitate police
practice and investigation as well as litigation in both criminal and civil
Cassar & Sleiman
[1999] NSWSC 651
(9 July 1999)
Huffman & Gorman
[2014] FamCa 1077
(4 December 2014)
Janssen & Janssen
[2016] FamCa 345
(1 February 2016)
R v Abdollahi
[2013] NSWSC 480
(13 March 2013)
R v Oaumi & Ors (No 38)
[2016] NSWSC 743
(7 June 2016)
Yammine & Chami
[2002] NSWCCA 289
(23 July 2002)
Legislation
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Evidence Act 1995
Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
Aubusson, K 2015, ‘“We speak English in this
country’”: woman films racial tirade on Sydney train’,
Sydney Morning Herald
, December 18, viewed 28 April 2018,
https://www.smh.com.au/national/
nsw/we-speak-english-in-this-country-woman-films-racial-tirade-on-sydney-train-20151218-glr6kj.html.
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016,
2016 Census quickstats
28 April 2018, http://www.
abs.gov.au/websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/quickstats?opendocument&navpos=220.
Berman, GL & Cutler, BL 1996, ‘Effects of inconsistencies in
eyewitness testimony on mock-juror decision making’,
Journal of Applied
vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 170–7.
Bruer, K & Pozzulo, JD 2014, ‘Influence of eyewitness age and
recall error on mock juror decision-making’,
Legal and Criminological
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 332–48.
Bryant, RA 2003, ‘Early predictors of posttraumatic stress
Biological Psychiatry
pp. 789–95.
Deloitte 2016,
Deloitte Global Mobile Consumer Survey
viewed 28 April 2018, http://www.abs.gov.au/
websitedbs/censushome.nsf/home/quickstats?opendocument&navpos=220Deloitte%202016,%20Deloitte%20Global%20Mobile%20Consumer%20Survey.
Ehlers, A & Clark, DM 2000, ‘A cognitive model of posttraumatic
stress disorder’,
Behaviour Research and Therapy
, vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 319–45.
Fisher, RP & Geiselman, RE 1992,
Memory enhancing techniques for
investigative interviewing: the cognitive interview
, Charles C Thomas
Publisher, Springfield, IL.
Fisher, RP & Schreiber, N 2007, ‘Interview protocols to improve
eyewitness memory’ in MP Toglia, JD Read, DF Ross
& RCL Lindsay
The handbook of eyewitness psychology: volume 1: memory for
, Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
Foa, EB, Steketee, G & Rothbaum, BO 1989, ‘Behavioral/cognitive
conceptualizations of
post-traumatic stress disorder’,
Behavior Therapy
, vol. 20, no.
2, pp. 155–76.
Francis, H 2015, ‘NSW Police goes high-tech ... with mobile
The Sydney Morning Herald
, February 23, viewed 28 April
http://www.smh.com.au/it-pro/government-it/nsw-police-goes-hightech--with-mobile-phones-20150223-13m2g4.html.
Gabbert, F, Hope, L & Fisher, R 2009, ‘Protecting eyewitness
evidence: examining the efficacy of a self-administered interview
Law and Human Behavior
, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 298–307.
Gabbert, F, Hope, L, Fisher, RP & Jamieson, K 2012, ‘Protecting
against misleading post‐event information with a self‐administered
interview’,
Applied Cognitive Psychology
, vol. 26, no. 4, pp.
Gittins, CB, Paterson, HM & Sharpe, L 2015, ‘How does immediate
recall of a stressful event affect psychological response
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry
Harris, L 2016, ‘Domestic violence: conviction rate jumps 40 percent
after admission of video as evidence’,
The Sunday Telegraph
29, viewed 22 April 2018, https://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/
news/nsw/domestic-violence-conviction-rate-jumps-40-per-cent-after-admission-of-video-as-evidence/news-story/6b657f6967969f33cdc2b9c6cf0ebc67.
Hope, L, Gabbert, F & Fisher, RP 2011, ‘From laboratory to the
street: capturing witness memory using a Self-Administered
Interview’,
Legal and Criminological Psychology
, vol. 16, no.
2, pp. 211–26.
Hudson, J, & Nelson, K 1986, ‘Repeated encounters of a similar
kind: effects of familiarity on children’s autobiographic
Cognitive Development
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 253–71.
Kemp, RI & Chew, E 2012, ‘Interviewing witnesses: can retrieval
induced forgetting be induced by asking witnesses to describe
an event in a
non-preferred language?’, Paper presented at the 39th Australasian
Experimental Psychology Conference, Sydney,
Loftus, EF 2005, ‘Planting misinformation in the human mind: a 30-year
investigation of the malleability of memory’
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 361–6.
Loftus, EF, Miller, DG & Burns, HJ 1978, ‘Semantic integration of
verbal information into a visual memory’,
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 19–31.
McPhee, I, Paterson, HM & Kemp, RI 2014, ‘The power of the spoken
word: can spoken-recall enhance eyewitness evidence?’,
Psychology and Law
, vol. 21, no. 4, pp.
Mudd, K & Govern, J 2004, ‘Conformity to misinformation and time
delay negatively affect eyewitness confidence and accuracy’,
American Journal of Psychology
, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 227–38.
Oeberst, A 2012, ‘If anything else comes to mind ... better keep it to
yourself? Delayed recall is discrediting—unjustifiably’,
Human Behavior
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 266–74.
Partridge, E 2014, ‘Police to ignore minor collisions in order to cut
congestion’,
The Sydney Morning Herald
, September 30, viewed 28
April 2018,
http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/police-to-ignore-minor-collisions-in-order-to-cut-congestion-20140929-10nj95.html.
Paterson, HM, Eijkemans, H & Kemp, RI 2015, ‘Investigating the
impact of delayed administration on the efficacy of the Self-Administered
Interview’,
Psychology and Law
, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 307–17.
Paz-Alonso, P & Goodman, G 2008, ‘Trauma and memory: effects of
post-event misinformation, retrieval order, and retention
, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 58–75.
Schacter, DL 2001,
The seven sins of memory: How the mind forgets and
, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Wells, GL, Memon, A & Penrod, SD 2006, ‘Eyewitness evidence:
improving its probative value’,
Psychological Science in the
Public Interest
, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 45–75.
Wright, DB, & Davies, GM 1999, ‘Eyewitness testimony’ in FT
Durso (ed.),
Handbook of applied cognition
John Wiley & Sons
Ltd, Chichester, England, pp. 789–818.
Yeong, S & Poynton, S 2017, ‘Evaluation of the 2015 Domestic
Violence Evidence-in-Chief (DVEC) reforms’, viewed 28
April 2018,
http://www.bocsar.nsw.gov.au/Documents/CJB/2017-Report-Evaluation-of-the-2015-Domestic-Violence-Evidence-in-Chief-DVEC-reforms-CJB206.pdf
Senior Lecturer, School of
Psychology, The University of Sydney NSW 2006, Australia. Email:
helen.paterson@sydney.edu.au.
Lecturer, School of
Psychology, The University of Sydney NSW 2006, Australia. Email:
celine.vangolde@sydney.edu.au.
Lessons Learned Unit,
NSW Police Force. Email: deve1chr@police.nsw.gov.au.
Adjunct Professor, Sydney
Institute of Criminology, The University of Sydney NSW 2006, Australia. Email:
nicholas.cowdery@sydney.edu.au.
Professor, School of
Psychology, University of New South Wales NSW 2052, Australia. Email:
richard.kemp@unsw.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (347 KB)
PDF format (364 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter