URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2008/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hefferman, Maree; Kiel-Chisholm, Scott --- "Chapter 20 - Australian Survey on Legal Issues Facing e-Research" [2008] SydUPLawBk 51; in Fitzgerald, Brian (ed), "Legal Framework for e-Research: Realising the Potential" (Sydney University Press, 2008) 496
Introduction
Survey Results
Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
Collaboration Profile
Project Agreement Issues
Survey On Legal Issues Facing e-Research
Maree Heffernan and Scott
Kiel-Chisholm
Introduction
The Legal Framework for e-Research Project lead by Professor Brian Fitzgerald and hosted by the Queensland
University of Technology
(QUT) is funded by the Australian Commonwealth
Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR), formerly Education,
Science and Training (DEST), under the Systemic Infrastructure Initiative (SII), Research Information
Infrastructure Framework for
Australian Higher Education, as part of the
Commonwealth Government’s
Backing Australia’s Ability – An Innovation Action Plan for the Future (BAA)
The Project involves mapping out a sophisticated legal framework for
e-Research and collaborative innovation. As we transition into
the National
Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy
era it is vitally important that social and legal aspects of the e-Research
framework are developed in step with the rapid advances
in technology. Only
little work has been done in this area worldwide.
This project is linking with key international actors to provide an
internationally significant project. While the Open Access to
Knowledge (OAK) Law Project
aims to examine the role of open access to all in an Internet world, this
project also focuses on open innovation within secure knowledge
communities
– both are vital aspects of the e-Research framework. The critical issue is working out legal models for e-Research
that reflect the capacity of the technologies involved and can be implemented
quickly, effectively and (in many instances) in an
automated way.
The Australian Federal government has implemented the National Collaborative
Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) to provide greater
focus and strategic
direction for Australia’s research infrastructure. The NCRIS
identifies priorities
for investment in research infrastructure. In addition to 15 specific areas of
science and technology, ‘Platforms
for Collaboration’ are also designated as a priority capability
In addition to hardware and
software elements, this priority area includes copyright and other legal
considerations.
The conduct of research and the dissemination of its outcomes are greatly
enabled by recent and continuing development in communications
information and computing technologies. These new technologies not only improve
productivity and quality of research,
they also enable entirely different kinds
of research, organisational models and collaborations across every discipline,
new research domains that could not otherwise exist.
These capabilities serve to advance and augment, rather than replace
traditional research methodologies. It is important to understand
e-Research environment to ensure that any legal framework will serve to facilitate,
rather than inhibit, collaborative research
and innovation.
This chapter presents a brief summary of the results from a survey conducted
by QUT’s Faculty of Law as part of the Legal Framework
for e-Research Project.
The term ‘e-Research’ encapsulates research activities that use a spectrum of advanced ICT
capabilities and embraces new
methodologies emerging from increased access
broadband communications networks, research instruments and
facilities, sensor networks and data repositories;
software and infrastructure services that enable secure connectivity
and interoperability;
application tools that encompass discipline-specific tools, and
interaction
aimed to explore the nature of research collaborations and to identify
common legal and project agreement problems encountered in
forming research
collaborations in order to form strategies to facilitate and streamline the
process of e-Research in the Australian
context. Specifically, the aims of the survey were
identify e-Research
activities and levels of engagement;
understand the nature of the collaborative research landscape;
investigate characteristics of informal collaborations and
agreements; and
explore legal issues related to data and
Survey Results
Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
The questionnaire consisted of sections covering e-research (Section A),
organisational/research areas (Section B), collaboration
profiles (Section C),
project agreement issues (Section D), databases (Section E) and data (Section
Of the 176 participants, 85 (or 48%) were in research roles, 66 (or 38%) were
in research and/or organisational management and 25
(or 14%) were in legal or
contracts roles. The majority of participants were from the University sector
(64.8%), 9.1% from Industry/Commercial
and 9.1% from Government sectors, 10.8% from other Research Institutes and 6.3% from law firms.
One-third of the sample stated that they are extensively involved with
e-Research (only 10.3% stated that they are ‘not at all’
involved with
e-Research). Participants were asked to describe the types of e-Research
activities that their role involves. One-hundred
and fifty-four participants
described the kinds of activities that their e-Research involves and these were
coded into broad categories
based on the predominant theme of the comment.
Activities described by participants included: data
collection/management/modelling/visualisation
and the use of databases
(approximately 49% of activities); online or internet-based research
(approximately 15% of activities);
services to support e-Research (approximately
12% of activities); the use of communication tools (approximately 7% of
activities);
the dissemination of information (approximately 3% of activities);
and management of e-Research activities (approximately 3% of activities).
1. Web-Based Participant Contact Sources for Legal and Research
Collaboration Profile
Involved in Collaborative Projects
The frequency of involvement with differing parties involved in collaborative
research was explored by asking respondents how frequently
their collaborative
projects involved industry (including commercial laboratories/R&D
enterprises), universities, other research
institutes, government agencies,
colleagues within their organisation, clients/customers/users, suppliers and
consultants (on a scale
of 1 ‘never’ through to 4
As expected, there is a large degree of inter-university collaboration, with
universities cited as the party most frequently involved
respondents’ collaborative projects, 81.3% stating that their projects
often involve universities. Colleagues in their
own organisation were also
rated highly, with 72.2% of respondents identifying them as often being involved
in their projects. Suppliers
and consultants were the parties least likely to
be involved in respondents’ collaborative research projects. Six
participants
nominated parties other than those listed, such as
research/postgraduate students, patent/trade mark attorneys and lobbyists.
Participants were asked to specify the most important international
collaborators involved in their research projects and the results
are portrayed
in Figure 2. Of the specified list of countries, the USA (40% identified as
‘very important’), followed
by the UK (25% identified as ‘very
important’) were identified as the most important countries to the
participant’s
collaborative projects. Of the other countries specified by
participants, India, Israel, Singapore, Thailand and islands in the
Pacific were
the most common.
Figure 2. Importance
of International Collaborators
Collaborative
Project Agreement Types
Participants were asked to rate the relative frequency (on a 4–point
) with which their
collaborations involved a number of elements or arrangements, such as: informal
networks (including informal conversations,
conference interactions); informal
agreements leading to co-authored publications; confidentiality/non-disclosure
contracts; research
contracts (for one project); master research contracts
(involving multiple research projects); permanent research arrangements such
strategic alliances; multi-party research consortia; cooperative research
centres; joint ventures and cross-licensing; patents/software
intellectual property licences); technical assistance agreements; and consulting
agreements.
Figure 3 presents the relative frequency of responses to the 12
agreement/arrangement types for the total sample. ‘Informal
networks’ (including informal conversations, conference interactions),
‘informal agreements leading to co-authored publications’
‘single research contracts’ were the most frequent arrangements
cited. Approximately 70% of respondents stated that
their collaborations often
involve informal networks (including informal conversations, conference
interactions), 36% stated that
their collaborations often involve informal
agreements leading to co-authored publications and approximately 40% stated that
collaborations often involve single project-based research contracts.
Only 7% of the sample stated that their collaborations often
involve joint
ventures or cross-licensing (41% never) and technical assistance agreements.
Approximately one-in-three participants
stated that their collaborations never
involve patents, software, know-how or other intellectual property licences
(32.4%) or Cooperative
Research Centres (30.1%). ‘Commercialisation
agreements’ were mentioned as an additional type of agreement that is
in collaborative projects.
Figure 3. Relative
Frequency of Various Types of Collaboration Agreements/Arrangements
Researchers or managers (compared to those who have legal and contract roles)
stated that their collaborations more often involve
informal agreements leading
to co-authored publications. Those who have legal and contract roles are more
likely than researchers
to state that their collaborations involve master
research contracts or technical assistance agreements.
Managers are more likely than researchers to state that their collaborations
more often involve confidentiality/non-disclosure contracts,
multiparty research
consortia, Cooperative Research Centres (CRC), joint ventures, patents,
technical assistance or consulting agreements.
Respondents who have legal and contract roles are more likely than managers
or researchers to state that their collaborations more
often involve
confidentiality/non-disclosure contracts, joint ventures, patents or consulting
agreements.
Respondents who were from Science & Technology (compared to those from
Arts & Social Sciences) stated that their collaborations
more often involve
master research contracts, permanent research arrangement, multiparty research
consortia, or CRC.
We also wanted to gain an understanding of how informal collaborations or
agreements are ‘used’. Importantly, almost
half of the sample
stated that informal collaborations or agreements are sometimes used for
detailed disclosures, and 29.5% stating
that they are sometimes used to govern a
whole project.
This use of informal collaboration needs to be recognised and the advantages
and disadvantages need to be fully understood. Disadvantages
include uncertain
payoffs (barter and exchange), information gaps, credibility gaps in the
information that is disclosed, risks of
misappropriation and commercialisation
focus (threatens the research sharing ethos).
Participants were asked to specify the most important international
collaborators involved in their research projects. Of the specified
countries, the USA (40% identified as ‘very important’), followed by
the UK (25% identified as ‘very important’)
were identified as the
most important countries to the participant’s collaborative projects. Of
the other countries specified
by participants, India, Israel, Singapore,
Thailand and islands in the Pacific were the most common.
Collaborative
Research Project Outcomes
Participants were asked to rate the importance of 14 research outcomes
(entering formal research agreements; patents, copyright, intellectual
exclusive licences; non-exclusive licences; royalties, revenue, return on
investment; start-up companies; co-authored publications;
sharing knowledge via
public disclosure or publications; sharing knowledge to limited community;
student exchanges; product development,
or solutions for industry/market; inflow
of knowledge from industry; inflow of knowledge from researchers; better
equipment, facilities;
and improved research practices such as better quality,
cost control, scientific evaluation) to their collaborative projects (see
Almost two-thirds (62%) of the sample identified co-authored publications as
a very important outcome of collaborative projects (mean
importance=3.44); the
inflow of knowledge from researchers was identified by 60% of the sample as
being very important (mean importance=3.47);
and sharing knowledge via public
disclosure or publications was also viewed as very important by 60% of the
sample (mean importance=3.41).
Figure 8 displays the mean relative importance
of these research outcomes by organisational role. Three participants nominated
additional outcomes such as ‘improved networking’ and ‘rewards
for communicating with others’.
Figure 4. Importance of Research Outcomes to
Collaborative Projects
An examination of the potential differences in the importance of these
collaboration outcomes by organisational role, by disciplinary
area, level of
involvement in e-Research and organisation sector was undertaken and Figure 5 displays the
Figure 5. Importance of
Collaboration Outcomes by Role
Entering formal research agreements were more important for managers than for
researchers. Patents or IP, exclusive or non-exclusive
licences, royalties, or
start-up companies were more important for those who have legal and contract
roles than for managers or researchers
Co-authored publications, sharing knowledge via public disclosure or
publications or student exchanges were more important for researchers
who have legal and contract roles. Product development was more important for
those who have legal and contract roles
than researchers. Co-authored
publications or better equipment or facilities were more important for managers
than those who have
legal and contract roles.
Student exchanges and product development were more important for those who
are from Science and Technology than those from the Arts
& Social Sciences.
Inflow of knowledge from researchers was viewed as more important by those that
are moderately-extensively
involved with e-Research compared to those not at all-slightly involved with e-Research.
Formal agreements, patents/IP, exclusive licences, royalties, start-up
companies, product development, and inflow of knowledge from
industry were
viewed as more important outcomes by those in government/industry compared to
those in the university sector. Co-authored
publications and sharing knowledge
via public disclosure or publications were viewed as more important by those in
the university
sector compared with those in government/industry.
Factors in Successful Collaborations
Participants were asked to describe the critical factors in their most
successful collaborations via an open-ended question (a total
of 145 comments
were received). Comments were thematically coded using the following
descriptors:
Synergies and Shared Goals &/or Resources;
Relationships & Communication; and
Business Planning & Practice (see Appendix B of the Survey
Results for the complete list of comments).
A number of
participant’s comments referred to a variety of factors, thus for coding
purposes, the first factor specified was
used to classify responses.
Approximately half (49.0%) of comments made predominantly reflect the importance
of research synergies
and shared goals and resources, with approximately 40% of
comments predominantly referring to the importance of good relationships
communication.
Comments: What do you see as the critical factors in
your most successful collaborations?
Synergies & Shared/Goals Resources (approximately
49% of comments)
‘For commercial research collaborations - overlapping
and complementary interests, overlapping and complementary skills, business
planning, clear and honest communication paths, expectations of ongoing
relationships and partnerships, joint negotiation of research,
precise but
flexible milestones for purely curiosity driven research - complementary and
overlapping interests and skills, clear
delineation of responsibility,
reciprocity in interaction, good communication, opportunities for formal and
informal interaction,
reasonable time frames + flexible deadlines’
(Research Centre Manager, University; Arts & Social Sciences)
‘They were all run as classic skunk works where the
altruistic came together informally with … synergistic interests and
shear determination to make it work.’ (Research Manager, Government; Science & Technology)
Relationships & Communication (approximately 40% of
‘Knowledge of the people involved, the informality of
the processes, goodwill between collaborators, reputations of the participants
and recognition of the research outcomes likely to be achieved.’
(Researcher, Government, Science & Technology)
Agreement Issues
Almost one-third of the sample believe that formal agreements are always
necessary (31.1%), with approximately two-thirds stating
that formal agreements
are sometimes necessary (68.0%). Many comments emphasised the importance of
trust in collaborative arrangements.
As one participant commented: ‘
a hand shake and mutual respect won’t do it … contracts are not
going to save you from each other
(Research Manager, Research
Institute; Arts & Social Sciences). Thirty-six participants commented on
the necessity of formal
agreements.
The average time taken to finalise formal collaborative research agreements
(from initial contact) is 2.2 months for confidentiality/non-disclosure
agreements (range 1–12 months); 3 months for simple two-party agreements
(range 1–12 months); and 8 months for large,
complex or multi-party
agreements (range 1–30 months). As one participant commented:
Legal agreements represent the largest impediment to timely research.
The writing of proposals and obtaining funds is the easiest
and quickest part.
Legal agreements require early involvement of lawyers
(Researcher, University; Science & Technology).
The majority of participants felt that they have an understanding of what the
terms of their formal collaborative agreements mean.
There was also relatively
high agreement with a statement regarding knowing about the requirements of
intellectual property ownership.
A majority of the sample were satisfied with the level of input they have
into formal agreements (79.7%), with only 15.3% stating
that they would like
more input (5.1% stated that they would like less input). For those in research
roles, 22.4% stated that they
would like more input into formal agreements and
for research/organisational managers, 6.1% stated that they would like to have
Participants were asked to identify the frequency with which a range of
activities occur in the context of project agreements (see
Figure 6). Almost
two-thirds (62%) of the sample often consult with others such as managers and
legal/contracts advisors before
concluding formal agreements (5.6% never consult
and 7.9% rarely consult others). Almost half of the sample stated that they
initiate discussions with other researchers for possible collaborations
(44%) and 38.4% stated that they have input into the actual
form of the final
agreement (and 31.6% stating that they sometimes have input into the final
agreement). Over half of the sample
(56.5%) also stated that they never
conclude formal agreements without consultation or assistance.
Figure 6. Relative Frequency of Project
Agreement Activities
There were significant differences in responses by disciplinary area, whereby
those in Science & Technology fields are more likely
than those in Arts
& Social Science fields to ‘initiate discussions with other
researchers for possible collaborations’,
‘scope out collaborative
projects, negotiate milestones and outcomes and ‘have input into the
actual form of the final
agreement’. There were also significant
differences by organisational sector, whereby those from government/industry are
likely than those from the university sector to ‘assist in developing
terms sheets, heads of agreement or memoranda of understanding’.
Participants from universities are more likely than those from
government/industry to initiate discussions with other researchers
for possible
collaborations.
Commencing collaborative research projects prior to the signing of agreements
is a relatively common practice; with 26% stating that
they ‘often’,
and 54.2% stating that they ‘sometimes’, commence projects before
agreements are signed (only
6.8% stated that they never start projects prior to
sign-off). Comments indicate pressure surrounding timelines is often the reason
for the early commencement: ‘
Almost always, in fact. Generally, you've
got a short-ish timeline, and you can't afford to wait months for the haggling
If you don't start before the contract is signed, you'll won't finish
on time and end up in violation of the terms of agreement
(Researcher, University; Science & Technology)
legal and contractual processes can often be much slower than the time it
actually takes to complete the research!
(Contracts Officer,
Research Institute; Science & Technology).
Participants were asked to share their views on the commercialisation of
research. One-hundred and thirty-five participants commented
commercialisation of research. Many of these comments reflected the view that
commercialisation is an important part of the
research process (approximately
30% broadly supporting commercialisation) although there can be conflicts
involved. Almost one-in-four
participants commented that commercialisation
should play no role in research (or a limited role) or interferes with the
and/or integrity of the research.
Figure 7 depicts the relative frequency of a range of general problems
potentially encountered in negotiating formal agreements.
The most frequent
problems encountered by participants were ‘unreasonable delays in project
commencement’, ‘difficulties
with government agencies’,
‘difficulties with university technology transfer offices’ and
negotiation resulting
in something that ‘became too complex for what the
project was’. Over one-third of the sample (36%) stated that sometimes
negotiation difficulties prevented the project from proceeding and that trust
had been eroded.
An examination of the differences in frequencies of negotiation issues by
organisational role was undertaken. Respondents who have
legal and contract
roles (compared to those in research roles) more often encountered the problem
of the other party having all the
leverage or parties having differing
expectations and managers.
There were no significant differences by disciplinary area, with both those
in science and technology and the arts citing unreasonable
delays in project
commencement as the major negotiation problem.
Participants were also asked to rate the frequency of a range of specific
issues that can cause problems in negotiating formal agreements.
The highest
mean frequencies were attached to ‘intellectual property-ownership’,
‘data ownership and access’,
‘intellectual
property-licensing’, ‘intellectual property-overvaluing it’
and ‘liability/indemnity
clauses’. Half of the sample (53.1%)
identified that these problems can also be a problem during the performance of
the agreement.
Figure 7. Specific Problems in Negotiating
Formal Agreements
The majority of the sample (78%) stated that when negotiating agreements they
are generally able to resolve the issue of publication
or public release of
results (eg by a limited delay in release to allow preservation of intellectual
property rights) to their reasonable
satisfaction (9% stated that it was
resolved but that the delay had a serious adverse effect on their publication
and 6% stated that
it was resolved but there was a complete embargo on some
information).
The majority of the sample had not used mediation/arbitration or court
proceedings. Over half of the sample strongly agreed (16.9%)
or agreed (45.2%)
with the statement: ‘I rely on trust to resolve disputes rather than my
formal agreement’. Approximately
half of the sample strongly agreed
(8.5%) or agreed (45.2%) that they rely on the terms of their formal agreements
to resolve disputes.
Participants were asked to rate their level of agreement with 12 statements
regarding ways to improve the negotiation process (see
Figure 8). The highest
levels of agreement were: ‘Communication, making an express effort to
understand the other party’s
culture, objectives, drivers and
mission’, followed by ‘Parties have had prior dealings
together’ and then ‘Each
party’s organisation has a clear
intellectual property policy that balances issues of access, cost recovery and
return on investment.
‘A generally accepted working rule that
intellectual property generated in collaborative research should be divided
to relative inputs, measured by demonstrable relevance to the
generated property’ was rated next important then ‘A triage
approach, sorting agreements into those that need significant negotiation and
those that do not’.
The lowest level of agreement was with the statement: ‘Creating a new
government agency to develop and maintain a master database
of standard clauses
for research contracts, issue guidelines and oversee licensing
practices’.
Figure 8. Ways to
Improve the Negotiation Process
Managers were more likely to agree than researchers that communication or
increased resources, education/training for transfer offices
will improve the
negotiation process. Managers and researchers were more likely to agree than
those who have legal and contract
roles that a ‘working rule’ will
improve the negotiation process. Respondents who have legal and contract roles
more likely to agree than researchers that increased availability of
services or increased resources/education/training for transfer
offices will
improve the negotiation process.
Those who are from Science & Technology are more likely to agree than
those from Arts & Social Sciences that a ‘working
improve the negotiation process. Those who are moderately-extensively involved
with e-Research are more likely
to agree than those that are not at all-slightly involved
with e-Research that ‘increased availability of services similar
contracts/technology transfer offices on a fee-for-service basis’ will
improve the negotiation process.
To explore views on ways to streamline documentation processes, participants
were asked to rate their level of agreement with a range
of statements (see
Figure 7). The statement that drew the highest level of agreement was:
‘Master agreements that allow descriptions
of new projects to simply be
‘tacked on’ are useful’. There were also high levels of
agreement with the following:
‘Using simple confidentiality agreements
allows disclosures to occur quickly’, ‘Standard agreements would be
anyway’ and ‘Agreements generated by assembling standard clauses would be customised anyway’.
The highest levels
of disagreement were attached to the statements:
‘Standard agreements for different collaborations would be widely
‘A database of standard clauses for assembly into formal
agreements would be widely used’; and ‘Licensing based
‘free/open source software’ model (e.g. free access but limitations
can be imposed on use, re-use, dissemination,
commercialisation of content)
would be widely used’. There were no significant differences by
organisational role, disciplinary
area or level of involvement in e-Research.
Participants were asked to rate the importance of a range of contracting
issues in the context of an increase in the practice of e-Research
(see Figure 9). ‘Intellectual property (e.g. patents,
38% stating that it will be ‘somewhat important’) and ‘Data
ownership or access’ (51% stating that it
will be ‘very
important’ and 42% stating that it will be ‘somewhat
important’) were the issues that participants
felt would become most
important with the increase of e-Research. This was followed by ‘Ease and
speed of entering formal
agreements’ (42% stating that it will be
‘very important’ and 50% stating that it will be ‘somewhat
important’)
and ‘Flexibility of formal agreements’ (43%
stating that it will be ‘very important’ and 48% stating that
will be ‘somewhat important’).
‘Competition/anti-trust issues around research structures’ was seen as the least
important issue in the context of increasing
e-Research activities. The only significant difference between responses by
organisational role was in the view of the future importance
‘Liability’ whereby those who have legal and contract roles perceive
that the issue of liability will become more
important with the increase of
e-Research than those in researcher roles.
Figure 9. Future Importance of Various
Contracting Issues
A total of 95 participants completed the database section of the survey
(participants who selected the organisational roles of researcher
and research
manager). Just over three-quarters are located in universities, with
one-quarter of the sample in government or industry.
Approximately 37% of the 95
participants stated that they are extensively involved in e-Research (34% moderately involved; 20% slightly
involved and 9% not at all involved),
with 63% identifying science and technology fields and 37% identifying arts and
social science
fields as their area research.
Almost half (43.2%) of the sample access external databases in conjunction
with their research activities on a daily basis, 36.8%
on a weekly basis and
11.6% on a monthly basis. Approximately 20% are required to register for all
the databases they access, whilst
22% are required to register for more than
half of the databases they access, with only 20% stating that they are not
required to
register to access databases.
Awareness of, and compliance with, legal restrictions associated with
copying, extracting or re-using information from the databases
accessed was
relatively high, with 74.8% stating that they have an awareness of these
restrictions and 79.0% stating that they always
comply with restrictive notices
presented on databases. Almost half of the databases accessed are located in
Australia (47%), with
over one-third located in the United States (34%).
Almost three-quarters (70.5%) of the sample felt that clearer explanations of
what can be legally copied, extracted or re-used from
particular databases would
produce data or datasets
that are deposited into a database. Of these
participants, two-thirds (66%) created the database themselves (or their
organisation
created the database), and the remainder deposit into a database
created by another body or institution. In terms of the location
is made available for access and use by other
researchers (88% stating this is
For those that deposit data or datasets into a database, 46% stated that it
is on the basis of ‘open access’, whereby
data is freely accessible
with no restrictions on the use that can be made of it; 38% stated that it is on
the basis of restricted
access (such as to specific individuals or groups); and
8% stated that it is on the basis that it is subject to restrictions on the
that can be made of the data (see Figure 10).
Figure 10. Basis of
Availability of Data to Other Researchers
Many of the participants stated that their organisation does not have a
policy setting out the basis on which research data should
be deposited into
does not have a policy). Table
1 presents information related to organisational
policies by disciplinary area, extent of involvement in e-Research, and organisational
Table 1. Presence of Organisational Policy Regarding Depositing of Data by
Sector, Discipline and Extent of Involvement in e-Research
Does your organisation have a policy setting out the
basis on which research data should be deposited into databases for access by
other researchers?
Organisational Sector:
Disciplinary Area:
Science & Technology
Arts & Social Sciences
Extent of Involvement in e-Research:
Not at all-Slightly
Moderately-Extensively
For those participants whose organisation possesses a policy regarding the
depositing of data for access by others, 84.1% stated that
researchers are
provided with guidelines on how the policy is to be applied in practice. Just
over half (55.2%) of the 95 participants
stated that they (or their
organisation) prepare plans for the management and/or sharing of research data,
with 62.3% of these participants
stating that these plans are prepared at or
around the time that grant applications for project funding are prepared.
Approximately
38% stated that plans are prepared later (such as ‘during
the project sometime - after analysis’ or ‘once the value
data has been identified’).
Overwhelmingly participants felt that it would assist them to have access to
a ‘plain’ English ‘how-to-guide’
explaining the legal
restrictions associated with databases (89.6% stating this would assist). Of
those that stated that a how-to-guide
would not be of assistance, the following
comments indicate potential reasons: ‘
… because they are
already provided by the databases
most databases I use
have no restrictions
is likely to be a
large document
I don't have time to read yet more
documentation written in general terms that wouldn't tell me what I needed to
know about my specific
responsibility of the research office
A number of participants chose to comment on the utility of a how-to-guide:
This may well be useful in a day-to-day sense but it would also be
interesting from a digital scholarly practice perspective to see
how the legal
restrictions and or guidelines actually assist or impinge on scholarly
(Researcher, University; Arts & Social
Lately we've been trying to apply creative commons
licences in some cases, the availability of this licence has helped in some
negotiations
(Researcher, University; Arts
& Social Sciences); ‘
A fascinating question, given that Australia
is one of the very few jurisdictions relying on copyright as the relevant
property right
for databases (Europe has the database right, the US does not
recognise property rights in data)
(Research Manager,
University; Arts & Social Sciences).
A total of 95 participants completed the data section of the survey. Almost
all of the 95 participants use or generate alphanumeric
data (97%), 63% use or
generate images such as photographs, diagrams, graphs and/or video and 6% use or
generate audio/sound data.
Overall, 26% strongly agreed and 63.5% agreed with the statement ‘I
have a clear understanding of who owns the data I use in
my research
projects’ (10.4% disagreed or strongly disagreed). In terms of
understandings of ownership of data generated,
33.3% strongly agreed and 50.0%
agreed that ‘I have a clear understanding of who owns the data generated
in my research projects’.
For those in Science & Technology fields,
39% strongly agreed and 44% agreed with this statement. In the Arts &
fields, 26% strongly agreed and 60% agreed with this statement.
The majority of the sample takes steps to ensure research data is available
in a form which can be readily stored and accessed (81.2%)
and 56.3% stated that
their organisation currently has defined mechanisms to assist in the storing and
accessing of data in the long
term. Comments suggest that the storage,
preservation and accessing of material in the longer term can be a challenge for
organisations:
Though this is problematic … as there does not
exist the underlying infrastructure to manage this data beyond the life of the
Maintaining the data over the
long term can be difficult as versions of software change
Almost half of the 95 respondents (47 individuals or 49%) had reservations
having access to their
data. To explore potential reasons for these reservations, participants were
asked to rate their agreement
(on a scale of strongly disagree through to
strongly agree) with 9 statements. Figure 11 depicts the relative agreement
to each statement. The highest level of agreement was attached to the
statements: ‘You are bound by a formal collaborative
research agreement
not to disclose data’ (27.7% strongly agreeing); ‘Your projects seek
to commercialise the outcomes
and you do not wish to compromise this’,
‘You do not want to give away your ideas’ and ‘You do not want
data to be used in research that you oppose or personally disagree
with’ (12.8% strongly agreeing and 46.8% agreeing).
Managers had more reservations than researchers about people outside the
project or organisation having access to data because they
are bound by a formal
collaborative research agreement not to disclose data and reservations about not
compromising the commercialisation
of outcomes. Those who are from Science
& Technology fields have greater reservations than those from the Arts &
Sciences about people outside the project or organisation having access
to data because the project seeks to commercialise the outcomes.
Assessment of
the results explored the differences in reservations by disciplinary area,
organisational sector and extent of involvement
in e-Research. Participants in the university sector were also less likely to agree with
the statement ‘Your projects seek
to commercialise the outcomes and you
not wish to compromise this’ than participants from government and
Figure 11. Reasons for Reservations Regarding
External Access to Data
Almost three-quarters (74.5%) of those respondents who had concerns about
people outside their project or organisation having access
to data created as a
result of the research project stated that their concerns would be reduced by
having a legally binding agreement
that clearly defined legal ownership and
limited liability for the recipient’s use of the data. For those that
felt that such
an agreement would not reduce their concerns, the following
comments indicate potential reasons for this perception: ‘
No confidence
in the law binding such people
Because ownership
and liability aren't problems: ethics are
The issues of
control over the use of data would not be dealt with by this
Too difficult to obtain adherence
The major legal issues pertaining to establishing successful e-Research collaborations can already be broadly identified. Many of
these issues are
similar to those encountered in collaborative research programs using more
traditional collaboration modes. However,
the e-Research legal framework is
potentially more complex. Collaborations by e-Research will add further
complexities, which need
to be identified and understood to facilitate
optimisation of returns to the research participants, funding agencies and to
in general. The key points that will impact on what legal framework for
e-Research will emerge include:
1. international collaboration;
2. intellectual property and data ownership;
3. the need to reduce the friction that arises in negotiations and contracting;
4. the recognition that informality is a key ingredient and the need for the law
to accommodate and promote this dynamic elements.
To achieve its
overall goals the Legal Framework for e-Research Project will:
1. acquire information on e-Research
collaboration through many resources including this survey;
2. consider the institutional arrangements needed for best practice
contracting/team building; and
3. present legal models for e-Research
that reflect the capacity of the technologies involved and can be implemented
quickly, effectively
and (in many instances) in an automated
The survey provides a valuable insight into the Australian
collaborative e-Research community. If access to knowledge is a key driver
enhancing social,
cultural and economic development, any legal framework proposed should advance,
not hinder, such sharing. Accordingly,
the Legal Framework for e-Research Project will endeavour to integrate the findings of the
survey into further investigations and
considerations of the appropriate legal
framework for e-Research. This might include:
1. development of a dynamic collaborative e-Research
agreement system along the lines of that described by Professor Mark Perry,
during the Legal Framework
for e-Research
Conference;
2. development of a database of key intellectual property terms that can be
considered by those who are seeking to draft the appropriate
collaborative
3. development of guidelines for Data Management
and a Data Management Toolkit, as suggested by Anne Fitzgerald at the Legal
for e-Research
Conference;
4. a handbook to assist with the timely, efficient, effective and legally robust
collaborative e-Research
agreements.
In many ways, our work has only just begun. We value
the input received from those who participated in the survey, participated in
the Legal Framework for e-Research Conference
and will continue to provide guidance and support for our journey ahead.
Project Officer and Project
Manager, Legal Framework for e-Research Project (respectively)
This chapter is based on Maree Heffernan and Nikki David,
Project Agreement Issues in Collaboration and e-Research: Survey Results
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00008865/01/8865.pdf
The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of Professor Brian Fitzgerald,
Dr Amanda McBratney, Dr Anne Fitzgerald and Dr John
Abbot and thank them for
their efforts in developing and promoting the survey document.
The authors would also like to thank the following people for their valuable
contribution to the development and distribution of the
survey: Nikki David,
Shane Dalgleish, Amy Barker, Tanya Butkovsky, DVC Professor Tom Cochrane, Dr
Terry Cutler, Professor Mary O’Kane,
Margot Bell, Professor Ian W. Turner,
Ruth Bridgstock, Professor Paul Roe, Michael McArdle, Kerrin Anderson, Malcolm
McBratney, Dr
Evonne Miller, Steve Matheson, Dr Graeme Kernich, Dale Gilbert,
Ray Duplock, Michael Dean, Mike Finney, Associate Professor Gillian
Clare McLaughlin, Professor Mark Perry, Terry Bell, Ruth Bridgstock, Associate
Professor Chris Collet, Dr Joe Young, Karen
Barnett, Dr Vladimir Likic,
Professor Bernard Pailthorpe, Professor Stuart Cunningham, Professor Zee Upton,
Samantha Cobb, Gaye Middleton
and Professor Amanda Spink.
Special thanks to the many people who helped us disseminate the survey and
the individuals who took the time to complete the survey.
Australian Government, Department of Innovation, Industry,
Science and Research,
National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy
http://www.ncris.dest.gov.au/
OAK Law Project,
Open Access
to Knowledge
http://www.oaklaw.qut.edu.au
National Collaborative Research
Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS)
http://www.dest.gov.au/sectors/research_sector/policies_issues_reviews/key_issues/ncris/
NCRIS Strategic Roadmap:
Section 5.16 Platforms for collaboration
http://www.dest.gov.au/sectors/research_sector/policies_issues_reviews/key_issues/ncris/ February 2006
A full report on all of the
survey results entitled
Legal and project agreement issues in collaboration
and e-Research: Survey Results
is available at
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00009112/01/9112.pdf
Department of Education (DEST),
http://www.dest.gov.au/sectors/research_sector/policies_issues_reviews/key_issues/e_research_consult/
at 27 June 2007.
For details of the survey
description and methodology see: Maree Heffernan and Nikki David,
Project Agreement Issues in Collaboration and e-Research: Survey Results
(2007) 9–13
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/archive/00009112/01/9112.pdf
at 11 March 2008.
1=Never; 2=Rarely; 3=Sometimes;
Mark Perry,
‘Technology, Contracting and e-Research’ (Paper presented at Legal
Framework for e-Research Conference, Gold
Coast, 11–12 July 2007)
http://www.e-research.law.qut.edu.au/conference
Anne Fitzgerald,
‘Building the Infrastructure for Data Access and Reuse in Collaborative
Research: an Analysis of the Legal
Context’ (Paper presented at Legal
Framework for e-Research Conference, Gold Coast, 11–12 July 2007)
http://www.e-research.law.qut.edu.au/files/conference/audio/02_Second%20Session/02_Fitzgerald_Anne.wma
Legal Framework for
e-Research Conference, Gold Coast 11–12 July 2007
http://www.e-research.law.qut.edu.au/conference
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (30.1 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter