URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McIntyre, Juliette --- "Pyrrhic Victory or Inconsequential Loss? The International Court of Justice Judgment on Preliminary Objections in Ukraine v Russia" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 15; (2024) 25(2) Melbourne Journal of International Law 406
I Introduction
II Background and Summary of the Decision
III The Decision: A Story in Two Parts
A First Aspect of the Dispute: Ukraine’s Compliance with the
Genocide Convention
B Second Aspect of the Dispute: Russia’s Alleged Violations of the
Genocide Convention
IV A Contentious Result: Analysis of the Separate and Dissenting Opinions
A Dissent on Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae
B Abuse of Process
C Revision of Judgments
V Evaluation: A Substantial but Immaterial Loss?
VI Conclusion
PYRRHIC VICTORY OR INCONSEQUENTIAL LOSS? THE INTERNATIONAL
COURT OF JUSTICE JUDGMENT ON PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS IN
I Introduction
On 2 February 2024, the International Court of Justice (‘the
Court’) handed down its decision in respect of Russia’s
preliminary
objections in the
Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
Commentators
subsequently suggested that Ukraine had ‘lost pretty
perhaps even ‘scored an “own
This is certainly one
interpretation of the Court’s decision. In summary form, the Court
bifurcated Ukraine’s arguments
into two ‘aspects’ —
first, Ukraine’s submission that it has not committed genocide in the
Donbas region
and, second, Ukraine’s submission that Russia had breached
arts I and IV of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide
through its false allegations of genocide and resultant military
The Court held that it would proceed
to the merits on the first aspect of the dispute but not the second, which means
that Ukraine
is now faced with a case that might exonerate it from
Russia’s assertions that it committed genocide but will say nothing about
the legality of Russia’s invasion of its
The result was sufficiently
controversial that it compelled 11 of the 16 judges to write separately.
This note examines the preliminary objections judgment and its broader
significance. In particular, if we consider the proceedings
from a strategic
point of view rather than a substantive one, it may be that, despite a seemingly
poor result in this phase of the
case, Ukraine has already been victorious. A
summary of the Court’s conclusions is contained in
, followed by an
analysis of the Court’s bifurcation and additional points of interest in
provides an analysis of the notable points of divergence and
convergence in the separate and dissenting opinions. In
, I explain why
this loss is nevertheless a win for Ukraine and why a declaration from the Court
that, on the merits, Ukraine is not
committing genocide in the eastern part of
the country will be no more than the icing on the cake.
II Background and Summary of
the Decision
Instituted on 26 February 2022, a mere two days after Russia launched its
‘special military operation’ on the territory
of Ukraine, these
proceedings resulted in one of the fastest provisional measures orders in the
a hearing on 7 March 2022 in which Russia did not appear, the Court on 16 March
2022 ordered Russia to immediately suspend
all military operations in Ukraine.
In doing so, the Court found that it had prima facie jurisdiction pursuant to
art IX of the
Genocide Convention
entertain the case.
Subsequently, 33
European and western states submitted declarations of intervention pursuant to
art 63 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice
Statute of the
of which 32 were admitted on 5 June
European Union also furnished the Court with ‘relevant information’
pursuant to art 34(2) of the
Statute of the
All of the intervenors came to
support Ukraine and raised largely overlapping
leading Russia to argue (unsuccessfully) that Ukraine was engaged in ‘an
attempt to put pressure on the Court’ through
the mechanism of ‘an
abusive mass intervention in the
Subsequently, Russia raised six preliminary objections to the proceedings;
two related to jurisdiction and four related to
admissibility.
First, that the Court lacked
Genocide Convention
at the time of the filing of the application; second,
that the Court lacked jurisdiction
ratione materiae
; third, that Ukraine
had made new claims in its memorial and these should be found inadmissible;
fourth, that the Court’s judgment
would lack practical effect; fifth, that
Ukraine’s unusual request for a negative declaration of compliance with
Genocide Convention
was inadmissible; and, finally, that the
proceedings constituted an abuse of process.
In its judgment, the Court first addressed the dispute
requirement.
Reiterating the test for the
existence of a dispute that it has developed in recent jurisprudence, the Court
emphasised that:
The Court’s determination of the existence of a dispute is a matter of
substance, not of form or procedure ... It must be demonstrated
that, on that
date, the respondent was aware, or could not have been unaware, that its views
were positively opposed by the applicant
... it is not necessary that a State
must expressly refer to a specific treaty in its exchanges with the other State
to enable it
later to invoke that instrument before the Court ... Nor is it
always necessary for the respondent to have expressly opposed the
claims of the
applicant, since the silence of the respondent may be sufficient in certain
circumstances for the Court to infer the
existence of a
While the dispute requirement continues to evolve, in this instance the
parties agreed on the test and disagreed merely on whether
it had been met on
the facts. To that end, the Court held that ‘Ukraine has consistently
rejected accusations that genocide
was being committed in its territory’,
as far back as 2014 in some instances.
Coupled with Ukraine’s public statement on its Ministry of Foreign Affairs
website before proceedings were issued,
Court considered that Russia could ‘not have been unaware’ that
Ukraine categorically rejected any allegations that
it had committed
At several points throughout the judgment, however, the Court appears to be
quite explicitly confining its decision to the facts of
the case, seemingly in
an attempt to prevent future parties relying on similar practices. The Court
drew attention to the fact that
when the Ministry of Foreign Affairs statement
was posted, Russia already knew ‘that its views were positively opposed by
It was on such a basis that
Ukraine was permitted to seise the Court ‘without further
By comparison, in the
Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
South Africa v Israel
case, Israel argued at the provisional measures stage that no dispute could be
established because South Africa did not give
Israel ‘a reasonable
opportunity to respond to the allegations of genocide’ before instituting
proceedings.
While that claim was not
accepted at the time,
for a future
preliminary objections phase, the Court’s restriction of the Ukraine
situation to its own facts leaves such an
argument wide open.
Having found that a dispute between Russia and Ukraine existed at the time
proceedings were initiated, the Court went on to address
objections thematically, dividing the dispute into two ‘aspects’
— the first of which arose from
‘Ukraine’s request that the
Court declare that ... [it] has not committed
and the second of which
concerned Russia’s alleged contraventions of the
The Court found that these
two aspects of the dispute were ‘fundamentally different in
In the first aspect, the Court considered that Ukraine was not seeking
‘to invoke the international responsibility’ of
Russia but rather
sought ‘a judicial finding that it has itself not committed the wrongful
acts that Russia has, falsely in
Ukraine’s view, imputed to it in public
statements’.
This was the essence of
the claims made in Ukraine’s originating application, in which it sought,
inter alia, the following
orders from the
Adjudge and declare that, contrary to what the Russian Federation
claims, no acts of genocide, as defined by Article III of the
, have been committed in the Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts of
Adjudge and declare that the Russian Federation cannot lawfully
take any action under the Genocide Convention in or against Ukraine
preventing or punishing an alleged genocide, on the basis of its false claims of
genocide in the Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts
of Ukraine.
Adjudge and declare that the Russian Federation’s
recognition of the independence of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s
Republic’ and ‘Luhansk People’s Republic’ on 22 February
2022 is based on a false claim of genocide and therefore
has no basis in the
Genocide Convention
Adjudge and declare that the ‘special military
operation’ declared and carried out by the Russian Federation on and after
24 February 2022 is based on a false claim of genocide and therefore has no
basis in the
Genocide Convention
The second aspect of the dispute, according to the Court, concerned
Russia’s alleged violations of the
Genocide Convention
memorial, Ukraine had rephrased its submissions as follows:
b. Adjudge and declare that there is no credible evidence that Ukraine is
responsible for committing genocide in violation of the
Genocide Convention in
the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine.
c. Adjudge and declare that the Russian Federation’s use of force in
and against Ukraine beginning on 24 February 2022 violates
Articles I and IV of
Genocide Convention
d. Adjudge and declare that the Russian Federation’s recognition of the
independence of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s
Republic’ and
‘Luhansk People’s Republic’ on 21 February 2022 violates
Articles I and IV of the
The difference in the terminology not only birthed Russia’s third
preliminary objection but also seems to have driven the Court’s
bifurcation of the dispute; a decision that was ultimately critical to the
Court’s final order that it did not have jurisdiction
over the second aspect of the
As noted by President Donoghue,
the result for Ukraine may have been different if the case had proceeded on the
basis of the claims
as they were set out in the
application.
The judges were not unanimous as to the benefits of the Court’s
Judge Charlesworth in particular
pointed out that dividing the dispute in twain ‘complicates the
Court’s reasoning
unnecessarily’.
Her Excellency
observed that not only do the two aspects ‘arise out of the same factual
and legal matrix’ but, moreover,
‘the second question — the
lawfulness of the Russian Federation’s conduct — is premised on the
the allegation of genocide being
Nevertheless, it is
impossible to understand the Court’s reasoning without adopting the same
framework; as such, the analysis
will proceed to consider each aspect of the
dispute in turn.
III The Decision: A Story
in Two Parts
First Aspect of the
Dispute: Ukraine’s Compliance with the Genocide Convention
Regarding the first aspect of the dispute — Ukraine’s claims that
it has not committed genocide — the Court considered
that Russia’s
second preliminary objection did not concern this aspect of the dispute, seeing
‘no reason to call into
question its jurisdiction to entertain
The Court therefore turned to
the remaining four preliminary objections, all of which concerned
admissibility.
In respect of Russia’s third preliminary objection — the
introduction of new claims — Russia argued that Ukraine’s
reformulated submissions demonstrated a change of purpose ‘from confirming
that no acts of genocide were committed to seeking
to absolve itself from
responsibility for such acts’;
recalling of course that, due to the Court’s division of the dispute, the
analysis was only focussed on paragraph 178(b) of
Ukraine’s memorial.
Ukraine, meanwhile, argued that it had ‘simply added specificity to its
The Court confirmed that for
new claims to be admissible, they ‘must have been implicit in the
application or must arise directly
out of the question which is the
subject-matter of that application’,
and that additional or amended claims are inadmissible where they would
transform the subject of the dispute.
judgment on this front does not add much, if anything, to the Court’s
‘well-settled jurisprudence on the subject
of additional or amended
The Court ultimately
determined that ‘Ukraine’s amended submission
clarifies the claim as presented in its
Application’
and rejected
Russia’s third preliminary objection to the admissibility of paragraph
178(b) of the memorial.
Turning to the fourth preliminary objection, Russia raised a
suggesting that any judgment rendered by the Court which declares Ukraine to
committed genocide would be devoid of practical
This argument is somewhat
overlapping with Russia’s fifth preliminary objection, that
Ukraine’s request for a declaration
that it did not breach its obligations
was inadmissible.
However, a declaratory
judgment merely pronounces upon a legal relationship and need not contain an
order which can be enforced against
the respondent
be a declaration regarding the absence of legal justification and the Court
dismissed Russia’s fourth objection on this
basis, noting that a
declaratory judgment on whether there exists credible evidence that Ukraine is
responsible for committing genocide
‘would have the effect of clarifying
whether the Applicant acted in accordance with its
obligations’.
But while the Court may in principle order a merely declaratory judgment, the
more intriguing issue in this case was whether the Court
can issue a declaration
of ‘reverse compliance’:
judgment that the applicant state has not breached its obligations. This was the
question that most occupied the 32 intervening
states, amongst whom there was
absolute unanimity that art IX of the
Genocide Convention
bestows on the Court the competence to adjudicate upon disputes concerning the
commission of acts of genocide but also covers
non-violation complaints and the
alleged ‘fulfilment’ of the terms of the
Convention.
Russia raised five points in support of its position, the most convincing of
which was that upholding Ukraine’s claim would
‘exonerat[e] the
applicant from responsibility before other States have had the opportunity to
prepare their [respective] claims’.
Ukraine for its part pointed to two instances where it considered that the Court
had demonstrated it was willing to adjudicate an
applicant’s submission
that it had not violated its legal obligations:
Rights of Nationals of the
United States of America in Morocco
and the cases relating to the Lockerbie
aircraft bombing.
However, the Court
disagreed with Ukraine’s interpretation of these earlier cases and held
that a declaration for compliance
had not previously been accepted in its
jurisprudence.
This case would mark the
first time.
Article IX of the
Genocide Convention
is phrased in uncommon terms. In
full, it reads:
Disputes between the Contracting Parties relating to the interpretation,
application or fulfilment of the present Convention, including
those relating to
the responsibility of a State for genocide or for any of the other acts
enumerated in article III, shall be submitted
to the International Court of
Justice at the request of any of the parties to the
The Court held that art IX did ‘not preclude the possibility for a
State to seek a declaration that it is not responsible for
In particular, it pointed
to the unusual features of the clause: the inclusion of the term
‘fulfilment’ and the fact
of the parties to
the dispute’ may submit it to the
The Court thus adopted the arguments
of the intervenors, although without making reference to them. It is therefore
difficult to
know whether these submissions were of assistance to the Court or
not. On the one hand, it was possibly difficult for the Court,
in the face of
such an overwhelming concurrence from states party to the
, to arrive at a different result. States are, after all, the
masters of their treaties and the original intention of the drafters
Statute of the Court
had been for it to be used as a mechanism for
this form of harmonious
interpretation.
On the other hand, the Court in its judgment undertakes an initial textual
analysis and may have arrived at the same result regardless
interventions. Only Judge Charlesworth indicated, politely, that the
intervenors’ arguments had ‘enriched the
Court’s consideration
of the Parties’ arguments’.
It is this part of the judgment which offers the most potential scope for
future developments in the Court’s jurisprudence.
While the Court notes
that it is the ‘particular circumstances of the [present] case’
which lead it to the view (expressed
somewhat awkwardly in negative terms) that
‘Ukraine’s request for a declaration that it did not breach its
obligations
under the Convention is not
inadmissible’,
there were varying
degrees of concurrence amongst the members of the Court. This suggests that the
underlying principles are not
entirely settled.
In the Court’s opinion, a negative declaration of compliance does not
contradict the Court’s judicial
because it ‘is an integral
part of its judicial function to establish the facts in light of the evidence
presented’ and
apply the relevant legal provisions to those
Making such factual findings does
not, as argued by Russia, turn the Court into an ‘interim fact-finding
Moreover, a negative
declaration does not contradict the principles of judicial propriety and the
equality of the parties.
The Court cannot,
when deciding on the issue of admissibility, speculate on the effect of a
potential merits decision on future cases
that states may wish to bring against
Ukraine under the
While there is a
possibility that future claims might be covered by the
res judicata
effect of the negative declaration, this alone ‘does not per se provide a
basis’ for finding a negative declaration
inadmissible.
Vice-President Gevorgian, in dissent on all points save
opined that the Court on this point
had ‘not decided correctly’.
his Excellency’s view, the purpose of the
Genocide Convention
‘is not to exculpate States from an allegation of
Judges Abraham and
Bennouna shared similar views. Judge Bennouna considered that negative
declarations of compliance ‘are not
part of the Court’s judicial
function, which is to settle legal disputes between States concerning the
interpretation or application
of international
and moreover that ‘the
compliance request submitted by Ukraine could not have any practical effect,
even if it were upheld
by the Court at the merits stage of the
Judge Abraham likewise
considered the request to step outside the boundaries of judicial propriety,
noting that it is up to a state
to refute false allegations in appropriate
political or diplomatic fora and that a state ‘n’a pas besoin
à cette fin’.
While there might be special circumstances justifying the use of a negative
declaration in some cases, Judge Abraham did not consider
application to meet that threshold,
because his Excellency was not convinced that the
Genocide Convention
the rationale for Russia’s invasion.
Finally, Judge Abraham noted the impact of this case on the Court’s
workload, observing that:
En bref, la décision qu’est appelée à rendre la
Cour risque fort d’être frustrante pour les
Parties et assez vaine
dans ses effets; à un moment où la Cour est très
sollicitée, c’était
une raison supplémentaire pour
elle de ne pas s’engager dans un exercice sans grande
signification.
By contrast, Judges Tomka and Charlesworth disagreed with the Court’s
opinion but in the opposite direction. Judge Charlesworth
noted that requests
for declarations of compliance are ‘not uncommon’ and ‘do not
pose any particular issues of
admissibility’.
On this basis, her
Excellency considered that there was no reason to limit the possibility of
negative declarations to the
Genocide Convention
or the facts of this one
Judge Tomka likewise pointed to the
‘numerous occasions’ on which the Court and its predecessor, the
Permanent Court
of International Justice, had found ‘in the operative
parts of their Judgments, that a party appearing before it had not breached
obligations at issue’.
His Excellency
noted that the Court’s function is to ‘decide such disputes as are
submitted to it’ and that there
was no additional requirement that said
disputes come to the Court under a particular ‘party
configuration’.
Once there is a
‘clear opposition of views, it is immaterial which party institutes the
proceedings to settle the
In the author’s opinion, this is the preferable position. By way of
general definition, a declaratory judgment is a mere declaration
of the law, yet
a ‘final binding determination’ of the parties’
which has a ‘concrete
effect’ on the parties’
The ‘fundamental
purpose’ of the declaratory judgment is to ‘clarify and
stabilize’ the parties’ legal
It is a remedy of the widest
ambit, ‘potentially available in any situation where a right is infringed
or threatened’,
including in
situations where no unlawful act has taken
Thus, ‘if a declaratory
judgment is capable of effectively resolving a dispute concerning extant rights,
it is a suitable remedy’.
the principle is simple, its application in this particular case gives rise to
difficulties. The binding force of
res judicata
must be understood as not
only obliging the parties to comply with the judgment, but also requiring that
the judgment itself is capable
of binding the parties’ future conduct. In
Northern Cameroons
, the Court emphasised that a declaratory judgment must
be ‘capable of effective application’ and must have ‘some
practical consequence’ in the sense that it must affect existing legal
rights or obligations of the parties.
As I have argued elsewhere, the declaratory judgment is utilised by the Court
in state responsibility cases in two forms: as satisfaction
injunction.
In respect of the former, it
should be conceived of as a penalty; that is, the ‘condemnation of an
internationally wrongful
act by an impartial third party of recognized
which serves to punish previous and deter future
wrongdoing.
In the latter situation, the
Court’s order secures the parties’ future compliance with
now-clarified legal obligations.
Genocide Convention
continues in force between Russia and
Ukraine, Ukraine’s submission as phrased in paragraph 178(b) does not
require the Court
to directly interpret the treaty but rather to find that
‘there is no credible evidence’ of Ukraine’s responsibility
for genocide.
This is a predominantly
factual question and it is not clear that the answer, whether resolved in
Ukraine’s favour or not,
will bind either party’s future conduct.
Arguably the Court’s declaration will constitute a form of satisfaction
Ukraine in line with traditional modes of satisfaction such as apologies or
salutes to the flag that are the remedial response to
‘the perpetration of
some sort of
only in this case, there may well be no finding of fault whatsoever. All that
will exist is an implicit conclusion that if
there is no evidence of
Ukraine’s responsibility for genocide, Russia’s statements accusing
Ukraine of genocide have
been at least factually incorrect if not outright
fabricated. A merits judgment on the first aspect of the dispute will be, at
a moral victory.
Viewing the proceedings from the perspective of remedies also explains the
importance of the Court’s bifurcation. As we turn
to consider the
Court’s treatment of what it characterised as the second aspect of the
dispute — Russia’s alleged
violations of the
— it bears noting that Ukraine has made no claim for a
merely declaratory judgment or even for satisfaction. Rather, in its
application
and memorial, Ukraine sought coercive orders that Russia withdraw its forces and
pay compensation (to be assessed) for
the very real loss and damage that is
taking place on Ukrainian territory.
claims were premised on Russia’s conduct being unlawful because,
notwithstanding that the invasion may also and at the
same time breach various
rules of international law including the prohibition on the use of
it is in breach of the
because Ukraine is not committing genocide. As such, no
obligation to prevent genocide arises and Russia’s reliance on the
Convention as a justification for its war is a deliberately bad faith invocation
of the treaty. The first aspect of the dispute was
in this sense no more than
the logical prerequisite of Ukraine’s central claim.
Second Aspect of the
Dispute: Russia’s Alleged Violations of the Genocide Convention
In subparagraphs (c) and (d) of paragraph 178 of its memorial, Ukraine
requested the Court to declare that Russia’s use of force
and recognition
of the independence of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s
Republic’ and ‘Luhansk People’s
Republic’ violated arts
I and IV of the
Genocide Convention
The Court held that these claims were admissible, notwithstanding that they were
framed in quite different terms to the application.
It noted that ‘a
difference in wording is not in itself
and that fundamentally
‘from the very institution of the proceedings, Ukraine was not merely
requesting that the Court declare
that it had not committed genocide but was
also seeking a finding that the actions of the Russian Federation were
incompatible with
its obligations under the
Convention’.
However, this would prove to be Ukraine’s only win. On the question of
whether the Court had jurisdiction
ratione materiae
to proceed with this
aspect of the dispute, the Court’s answer was firmly in the negative.
As noted above, Ukraine’s argument was that Russia’s actions,
undertaken for the stated purpose of bringing a genocide
to an end and punishing
the perpetrators, were not in good faith, were abusive and went ‘beyond
the limits of international
Ukraine was supported by the intervening states on this point also, with the
Court making a brief summary reference to their arguments
to the effect that
‘the intervening States argue in general that any dispute relating to the
Convention falls within the scope
of Article IX, irrespective of whether the
parties also have a dispute concerning rights and obligations under other rules
of international
But the Court, relying on the ‘notoriously ambiguous’ test first
formulated in
held that for jurisdiction
ratione materiae
to arise it must assess
‘whether the facts at issue, if established, are capable of constituting
violations of obligations
The Court considered that
Russia’s alleged acts could not, under any circumstances, constitute a
breach of its obligations
under arts I and IV of the
Even presuming that
Russia’s claims against Ukraine were made in bad faith, this would not in
itself violate the Convention.
The Court drew a distinction between the substantive breach of a treaty and
the abusive invocation of such, which the Court seemed
to perceive as a separate
procedural question.
It held that while
abusive arguments will be dismissed as groundless, raising such points does not
constitute a standalone breach
As summarised by Yue Cao, the
Court effectively said that ‘although the
Genocide Convention
Russia to act abusively, in bad faith and/or in violation of
other rules of international law, etc, it does not
such conduct
So, in a counterfactual
world, had Russia submitted a case to the Court alleging Ukraine was committing
genocide, its case would
be dismissed, possibly even considered an abuse of
But making a bad, even
groundless, argument is not a violation of the
Genocide Convention
As is well known, however, Russia chose instead to launch military action in
Ukraine — the real issue was whether that military
action was a
permissible invocation and application of the
Genocide Convention
Court rejected Ukraine’s contention that ‘if a State seeks to fulfil
its obligation of prevention under the Convention
through an act that is in
breach of international law, such action by itself constitutes a violation of
the Convention’.
In particular,
the Court clarified that its statements in the 2007
Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
were intended to limit the scope of
states’ obligations to prevent genocide rather than create additional
legal boundaries.
The Court did not intend, by its 2007 ruling, to interpret the Convention as
incorporating rules of international law that are extrinsic
to it, in particular
those governing the use of force. It sought to clarify that a State is not
required, under the Convention, to
act in disregard of other rules of
international law. Nor can a State avail itself of the obligation of prevention
under the Convention
to act beyond the limits permitted elsewhere by
international law. Those limits are not defined by the Convention itself but by
rules of international law.
Despite reaching this conclusion, the Court was at pains to emphasise that
Genocide Convention
did not regulate the question of the
legality of Russia’s invasion, that did not mean it was
While not able to make a finding
one way or the other, the Court concluded its judgment with a stern warning
States are always required to fulfil their obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations and other rules of international law.
Whether or not they
have consented to the jurisdiction of the Court, States remain responsible for
acts attributable to them that
are contrary to international
For Ukraine’s main issue, however, this was the end of the road. The
Court held by 12 votes to four that Russia’s second
preliminary objection
must be upheld and on that basis did not consider the other objections
In effect, the Court narrowed
the merits phase to only two issues: whether there is credible evidence that
Ukraine has committed
genocide and whether Russia has breached the Court’s
earlier provisional measures order. Russia’s international responsibility
for invading Ukrainian territory will not be decided upon.
IV A Contentious Result:
Analysis of the Separate and Dissenting Opinions
As noted above, the Court’s decision appears to have been controversial
and the majority of judges also wrote separately. In
the interests of length,
not every argument raised in the separate opinions can be
however, there are several disparate points that merit attention. First are the
dissenting opinions on the question of the Court’s
. Second, the Court’s treatment of Russia’s abuse of
process arguments. Third and finally, a procedural point regarding
revision of
judgments raised by Vice-President Gevorgian. Each will be addressed in
Four judges voted against the Court’s conclusion that it did not have
ratione materiae
to proceed with the second aspect of the
dispute. Beginning with President Donoghue, her Excellency would have upheld
third preliminary objection that the claims as formulated in the
memorial were too different from those in the application and as
transformed the dispute rather than simply clarifying and adding
However, on the question of
ratione materiae
President Donoghue was of the view that the
unusual terms in which art IX of the
Genocide Convention
is phrased gave
the Court jurisdiction to proceed with the
Although concurring with the
Court’s view that Russia’s acts were not capable of constituting
standalone violations of
the Convention,
President Donoghue would have allowed the application formula to proceed on the
basis that ‘the Court has jurisdiction
ratione materiae
respect to both aspects of the dispute, which are closely
Judge Charlesworth went
further, noting that ‘there is no reason to assume that a specific type of
conduct (for example, the
use of force) is incapable by its nature of violating
Genocide Convention
Excellency went on to state that ‘it cannot be ruled out that the
Convention regulates, at least in part, the modalities
for the invocation of a
State party’s responsibility for failure to prevent or punish
This seems to be a key point, and one that is lacking from the Court’s
reasoning. Having found that the jurisdiction granted
by art IX of the
Genocide Convention
is broad enough to encompass requests by applicant
states for exoneration from false claims of genocide, the Court then appears to
contradict this conclusion by finding that acts which it considers cannot breach
the Convention (having heard no evidence on the
matter) deprive it of
Charlesworth points out, the parties
are in a dispute as to whether the facts
were such as to obligate Russia to take action to prevent
If the Court were to find that
said conditions are present, would not the steps taken by Russia to prevent the
genocide need to be
considered in assessing whether it had
obligation? Again, this is a question for the merits; the answer, regardless,
does not deprive the Court of jurisdiction.
Judges Robinson and Sebutinde, writing jointly, also consider that the Court
had jurisdiction
ratione materiae
to proceed and address the role to be
played by good faith in treaty interpretation much more
In their Excellencies’
view, the principle of good faith obliges the parties to a treaty to
‘apply it in a reasonable
way and in such a manner that its purpose can be
and, moreover, the
absence of a direct reference to good faith in the text of a treaty ‘is
not a legal bar to its application
in the relations between the States
The joint opinion also
observes that, since the scope of art I of the
Genocide Convention
encompasses an obligation to act within the limits of international
the question of whether
Russia’s invasion was in keeping with that obligation was a matter for the
Although the Court considered
this obligation to be a limitation on the scope of parties’ duties rather
than a positive obligation
in and of itself, once it exists as an intrinsic part
of the standard of conduct required by art I, state acts can be assessed against
it for conformity. The joint opinion concluded by observing that the
Court’s decision left Ukraine ‘without any reparations
for the loss
of life, injuries and damage to property resulting from the invasion. We find
this very regrettable’.
Russia’s contention that the proceedings amount to an abuse of process
also warrants separate treatment. While the Court perpetuates
impossible standard for abuse of
on the facts it was not
unreasonable to conclude that these proceedings, while certainly unprecedented,
were not abusive.
As noted by the Court, an abuse of process goes to the use by a party of the
available suite of procedural tools and concerns ‘whether
a State has
misused that procedure to such an extent that its case should be rejected at the
preliminary phase of the
proceedings’.
The Court noted that
the speed of the institution of proceedings was unimportant, because the Court
does not concern itself with
the ‘political motivation’ behind a
state’s decision to bring a case.
Moreover, having found the existence of a dispute, it would be counterintuitive
to suggest that the dispute was brought before the
Court too soon when there are
no other procedural hurdles such as, for example, the prior negotiations
requirement imposed by the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination
More intriguing was the Court’s treatment of the enormous number of
one-sided intervenors.
In objecting to
the admissibility, Russia had argued that the interventions were an abuse of
and raised the argument again at
the preliminary objections stage contending that the Court had not fully
addressed the point when
it admitted the
intervenors.
Vice-President Gevorgian
was sympathetic, observing that by admitting such a large number of intervening
states ‘the Court
has set a precedent that incentivizes States to
orchestrate politically motivated mass
interventions’.
The Court held that Russia had not ‘adduced any evidence regarding
Ukraine’s alleged abuse of process’ and had ‘not
demonstrated
that there are exceptional circumstances that would warrant rejecting
Ukraine’s claim on the ground of abuse of
This is, all in all, the
correct conclusion. As Carlotta Ceretelli notes, in order to qualify as an abuse
of process the procedural
rights in question must be being used ‘for a
purpose they are not intended
And although there is
evidence that states were collaborating behind the scenes to a degree not
previously seen,
it is not an improper
use of the art 63 mechanism of the
Statute of the Court
to unite behind a
particular interpretation of a multilateral treaty. The object of art 63 was to
acknowledge the ‘
res interpretata
effect’ of the
and to expand the ‘normative
legitimacy’
of such decisions by
enabling broader state participation in the act of
interpretation.
To that end, while the
interventions also offered an opportunity for states to join together in the
condemnation of Russia’s
transgressive behaviour, they are not an abuse of
the intervention procedure.
Revision of
Finally, Vice-President Gevorgian and Judge Brant raised an intriguing issue
regarding the role to be played by the Court’s
procedure for the revision
of judgments. Revision, governed by art 61 of the
Statute of the Court
is a remedy that enables the Court, upon the application of a party, to
reconsider an otherwise final and binding
An application for revision is
admissible when a new fact is discovered that was unknown to the Court and the
parties at the time,
and which would have the effect of overturning or altering
the Court’s original judgment.
Vice-President Gevorgian argued that permitting Ukraine to bring a case
effectively exonerating itself from any accusation that it
has committed
genocide had deprived Russia of the opportunity to prove that acts of genocide
have been committed with the effect
that it has only extremely limited recourse
under art 61 should such evidence become
In his Excellency’s
view, this contravenes both ‘judicial propriety and the equality of
Judge Brant, however,
considered art 61 to offer a more than sufficient protection to
His Excellency noted that
accusations of genocide had been made since at least 2014, giving Russia plenty
of time to gather evidence,
and in particular:
Si la Fédération de Russie souhaitait se prémunir contre
l’éventualité de l’introduction
d’une instance
sur la base de la convention sur le génocide avant qu’elle
n’eût réuni les éléments
de preuve pertinents,
il lui aurait donc suffi de s’abstenir de formuler de telles accusations
à l’encontre de
l’Ukraine ou de les différer
jusqu’au moment où elle se serait estimée en possession des
Now that it is clear states have the right to apply for negative declarations
of compliance with their legal obligations, it is unlikely
will be the last time the Court has to address this question of the
role to be played by revision. While Russia has both the opportunity
merits stage to present evidence of the genocide it accuses Ukraine of
committing and the option of using art 61 of the
Statute of the Court
should further unknown evidence come to light, on a different set of facts the
limitations of art 61 as a device to merely correct
a decision rather than an
appeal mechanism could become
significant.
V Evaluation: A Substantial
but Immaterial Loss?
The result of the Court’s judgment is that the merits phase of the case
will be dedicated to considering whether or not there
is credible evidence that
Ukraine has committed genocide. Ukraine did not win this round of the
proceedings, and it would not be
unreasonable for the average watcher of
international affairs to conclude that the merits phase will be, for want of a
better word,
a bit pointless. But such conclusions would be premature because
they fail to account for two of the most important (interrelated)
purposes of
international adjudication: symbolism and lawfare. When viewed from this
perspective, it is clear that Ukraine has already
emerged victorious.
In regard to symbolism, theories of expressivism tell us that what the law
does through its institutions is just as important as what
the law says about
one of the means of transmitting expressive messages, court procedures utilise
performance and aesthetics — Jeremy Bentham
called the courtroom a
‘theatre of justice’.
particular the oral phase of proceedings can be read as a type of
performance,
as it relies upon the same
key elements as a theatrical performance: ‘actors, stages, scripts and
audiences’.
The parties perform
for two audiences: the Court itself, and the general
relying on both verbal and
nonverbal forms of communication.
performance undertaken by the parties serves to generate important symbolic
capital for use both domestically and internationally.
The Court’s
proceedings generate a judgment output but are also in and of themselves an
output — one that places the
otherwise vastly unequal parties on a
symbolically important equal footing and validates their sovereign equality.
Litigation before
the Court thus levels the playing
and ‘affirms the formal
equality of small States and great
This leads us to consider lawfare. Court proceedings enable states to obtain
strategic outcomes, such as mobilising longer term political
support for their
Ukraine’s success in this
respect was already demonstrated during the preliminary objections oral
proceedings, when 32 states
stood alongside it to plead for their case. It was a
David and Goliath battle, but one in which David was allowed to bring
As the Norwegian Foreign
Minister stated, their intervention is a ‘signal to Russia and the outside
world that the international
community does not accept the aggression against
Focused through the lens
of the proceedings before the Court, Ukraine has been able to muster and
concretise political support for
The case overall is therefore anything but pointless. Symbolism and lawfare
may seem intangible, particularly when contrasted with
the very real loss and
destruction taking place on Ukrainian territory. But for Ukraine, emerging
victorious on stage is no less
important than winning in real life or, for that
matter, at the preliminary objections phase.
VI Conclusion
The judgment has offered some limited but important developments in the
Court’s jurisprudence and some practical lessons for
parties and the Court
alike. These lessons include a reminder to respondent states that participation
in the proceedings can pay
off. Russia has effectively avoided any judicial
pronouncement on the legality of its actions in Ukraine for the time being. A
for applicant states is on the inherent perils of strategic or creative
litigation. At the end of the day (despite the popularity
of your cause) the
Court is still in charge. For the Court, it has no doubt gained important
experience in the management of large-scale
art 63 interventions under the
Statute of the Court
; a trend that does not appear to be on the decline
given that seven states have intervened in
Application of the
Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
and 10 have applied to
intervene in
South Africa v Israel
Indeed, the phenomenon continues in
the present case as 23 out of the original 33 states have submitted new or
amended declarations
of intervention for the merits
As for the substantive legal
questions remaining, we await an entirely predictable declaration that Ukraine
has not committed genocide
in Donbas. But really, that was never the point of
the proceedings.
* BA (Flin), LLB/LP (Hons) (Flin), LLM (International Law) (Cantab), PhD
(Melb). Senior Lecturer in Law, Justice and Society, University
Australia. My sincere thanks to the editors of the
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
for their care and assistance.
Allegations of Genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v
(Preliminary Objections)
(International Court of Justice,
General List No 182, 2 February 2024) (‘
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Marko Milanovic, ‘ICJ Delivers
Preliminary Objections Judgment in the Ukraine v Russia Genocide Case: Ukraine
Loses on the
Most Important Aspects’,
EJIL: Talk!
(Blog Post, 2
February 2024) <
https://www.ejiltalk.org/icj-delivers-preliminary-objections-judgment-in-the-ukraine-v-russia-genocide-case-ukraine-loses-on-the-most-important-aspects/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/A963-XBPQ
William Schabas, ‘The Damp Squib of
Third Party Intervention in Ukraine v Russia’,
(Blog Post, 5 February 2024) <
https://www.ejiltalk.org/the-damp-squib-of-third-party-intervention-in-ukraine-v-russia/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7PXU-RGHJ
Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
, opened for signature 9 December
78 UNTS 277
(entered into force 12 January 1951) arts I and IV
Genocide Convention
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [149].
Allegations of Genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v
Russia) (Provisional
[2022] ICJ Rep 211, 212–3 [1]–[2]
Ukraine v Russia (Provisional Measures)
Genocide Convention
Ukraine v Russia (Provisional
) 223 [48].
Statute of the International Court
Allegations of Genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v
Order on Admissibility of the Declarations of Intervention)
[2023] ICJ Rep 354, 378 [102] (‘
Ukraine v Russia (Order on
Admissibility of the Declarations of Intervention)
’). The United
States was denied the right to intervene in the preliminary objections phase of
the case due to its own reservations
to art IX, which meant that the decision
could not be ‘equally binding’ upon it as required by art 63:
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary Objections)
International Court of Justice,
Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v Russian Federation)
Information Furnished by the European Union under Article 34, Paragraph 2, of
the Statute of the Court and Article 69, Paragraph
2, of the Rules of
Court’ (Press Release No 2022/29, 18 August 2022).
Kyra Wigard, Ori Pomson and Juliette
McIntyre, ‘Keeping Score: An Empirical Analysis of the Interventions in
Ukraine v Russia
(2023) 14(3)
Journal of International Dispute
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
On the distinction between
Admissibility’ in Gerald
Aksen et al (eds),
Global Reflections on
International Law, Commerce and Dispute Resolution: Liber Amicorum in Honour of
Robert Briner
(International Chamber of Commerce, 2005) 601. See also
Juliette McIntyre, ‘Put on Notice: The Role of the Dispute Requirement
Assessing Jurisdiction and Admissibility before the International Court’
[2018] MelbJlIntLaw 19
(2018) 19(2)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [38]–[40].
Application of the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip
(South Africa v Israel)
(Provisional Measures)
(International
Court of Justice, General List No 192, 26 January 2024) [23].
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [53]–[54].
‘Application Instituting
Proceedings’,
Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v Russia)
(International Court of Justice, General List No 182, 26 February 2022)
[30] (‘Application Instituting Proceedings’).
‘Memorial Submitted by
Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v Russia)
(International Court of Justice, General List No 182, 1 July 2022) 106
[178] (‘Memorial of Ukraine’).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [149]. See also
Milanovic (n
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [25] (President
Indeed, Judge ad hoc Daudet considered
Ukraine to have gone ‘jusqu’aux limites de
l’acceptable’: ibid [21]
(Judge ad hoc Daudet).
Ibid 3 [7] (Judge Charlesworth).
Ibid [5]. President Donoghue and Judge
Charlesworth were joined by Judges Sebutinde and Robinson in voting against the
second operative
paragraph of the Court’s order: see below Part III(A).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [68]. See also
Phosphate Lands in Nauru (Nauru v Australia) (Preliminary Objections)
ICJ Rep 240, 266–7 [69]–[70];
Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Guinea v
Democratic Republic of the Congo) (Judgment)
[2010] ICJ Rep 639, 656 [39],
Territorial and Maritime Dispute between Nicaragua and Honduras in
the Caribbean Sea (Nicaragua v Honduras) (Judgment)
[2007] ICJ Rep 659, 695
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Northern Cameroons (Cameroon v
United Kingdom) (Preliminary Objections)
[1963] ICJ Rep 15, 33–4
Northern Cameroons
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Juliette McIntyre, ‘Declaratory
Judgments of the International Court of Justice’
Yearbook of International Law
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [79]–[80].
Variously called, throughout the
proceedings, ‘a declaration of conformity’, ‘a declaration of
compliance’,
‘a non-violation complaint’ or a ‘negative
declaration’: ibid [93].
Wigard, Pomson and McIntyre (n
) 323; Juliette McIntyre, Ori Pomson and
Kyra Wigard, ‘We Read 22 Intervention Declarations so You Don’t Have
to: Reviewing
Key Themes and Arguments in Ukraine v Russia’,
International Law: National University of Singapore
(Blog Post, 27 October
https://cil.nus.edu.sg/blogs/we-read-22-intervention-declarations-so-you-dont-have-to/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/2NVX-GZ37
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Rights of Nationals of
the United States of America in Morocco (France v United States of America)
[1952] ICJ Rep 176;
Questions of Interpretation and
Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention Arising from the Aerial Incident at
Lockerbie (Libya v
United Kingdom) (Preliminary Objections)
[1998] ICJ Rep
Questions of Interpretation and Application of the 1971 Montreal
Convention Arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie (Libya v
United States
of America) (Preliminary Objections)
[1998] ICJ Rep 115.
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Genocide Convention
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [98] (emphasis in original).
Wigard, Pomson and McIntyre (n
) 310, 326–7; Juliette McIntyre,
‘Consenting to Be Bound or Co-operative Condemnation? Article 63
Interventions at the
International Court of Justice’
Australian International Law Journal
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [2] (Judge
Charlesworth).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
On the Court’s judicial
function, see generally Anna Spain, ‘Examining the International Judicial
Function: International
Courts as Dispute Resolvers’
(2011) 34(1)
Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review
Wittich, ‘The Judicial Functions of the International Court of
Justice’ in Isabelle Buffard et al (eds),
International Law between
Universalism and Fragmentation: Festschrift in Honour of Gerhard Hafner
(Martinus Nijhoff, 2008) 981; Gleider I Hernández,
The International
Court of Justice and the Judicial Function
(Oxford University Press, 2014).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [104]–[105].
Ibid [105].
Vice-President Gevorgian voted in
favour of operative paragraph 151(2) partially upholding Russia’s second
preliminary objection:
ibid [151].
Ibid [11] (Vice-President Gevorgian).
Ibid [7] (Judge Bennouna).
Ibid [11] (Judge Abraham).
Ibid [18]: ‘In short, the
decision to be handed down by the Court is likely to be frustrating for the
parties and rather futile
in its effects; at a time when the Court is very much
in demand, this was all the more reason for it not to embark on an exercise
little significance’ [tr author].
Ibid [27] (Judge Charlesworth).
Ibid [7] (Judge Tomka).
Edwin M Borchard, ‘The
Declaratory Judgment in the United States’
(1931) 37(2)
West Virginia
Law Quarterly and the Bar
Shabtai Rosenne,
The Law and
Practice of the International Court 1920–2005
(Martinus Nijhoff,
ed, 2006) vol 1, 1580.
As emphasised by the joint dissenting
opinion of Judges Onyeama, Dillard, Jiménez de Aréchaga and
Nuclear Tests (Australia v France) (Judgment)
[1974] ICJ Rep
253, 321 [21] (Judges Onyeama, Dillard, Jiménez de Aréchaga and
Rafal Zakrzewski,
Reclassified
(Oxford University Press, 2005) 158.
Enrico Milano, ‘Territorial
Disputes, Wrongful Occupations and State Responsibility: Should the
International Court of Justice
Go the Extra Mile?’ (2004) 3(3)
Practice of International Courts and Tribunals
509, 522–3.
McIntyre, ‘Declaratory Judgments
of the International Court of Justice’ (n
Northern Cameroons
) 33–4, 37–8.
Juliette McIntyre, ‘The
Declaratory Judgment in Recent Jurisprudence of the ICJ: Conflicting Approaches
to State Responsibility?’
(2016) 29(1)
Leiden Journal of International
Eric Wyler and Alain Papaux,
‘The Different Forms of Reparation: Satisfaction’ in James Crawford,
Alain Pellet and Simon
Olleson (eds),
The Law of International
Responsibility
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 623, 636.
Dinah Shelton,
Remedies in
International Human Rights Law
(Oxford University Press, 2
‘Memorial of Ukraine’ (n
) 106 [178].
Wyler and Papaux (n
) 623 (emphasis in original).
‘Application Instituting
Proceedings’ (n
‘Memorial of Ukraine’ (n
) 106–7 [179].
Charter of the United Nations
‘Memorial of Ukraine’ (n
) 106 [178].
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [128].
Ibid [133].
Ibid [134].
Oil Platforms (Iran v United
States of America) (Preliminary Objection)
[1996] ICJ Rep 803; Yue Cao,
‘The Preliminary Objections Judgment of Genocide (Ukraine v Russia):
Implications on “Packaging
and Shoehorning”’,
Opinio Juris
(Blog Post, 17 May 2024) <
https://opiniojuris.org/2024/05/17/the-preliminary-objections-judgment-of-genocide-ukraine-v-russia-implications-on-packaging-and-shoehorning/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/LA6E-NAPW
See also Massimo Lando, ‘Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae of the
International Court of Justice in Compromissory Clause Cases’
Law Quarterly Review
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [139].
Ibid [142].
On the Court’s
differentiation between substance and procedure, see generally André
Nollkaemper, ‘International
Adjudication of Global Public Goods: The
Intersection of Substance and Procedure’
(2012) 23(3)
European Journal
of International Law
; Matina Papadaki, ‘Substantive and Procedural
Rules in International Adjudication: Exploring Their Interaction in Intervention
before the International Court of Justice’ in Hélène Ruiz
Fabri (ed),
International Law and Litigation: A Look into Procedure
(Nomos, 2019) 37.
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) (emphasis in original).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
[142]–[143].
Ibid [146].
Application of the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzegovina v
Serbia and Montenegro)
[2007] ICJ Rep 43.
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [150].
Ibid [149], [151].
Not discussed here but worth
mentioning are Judge Tomka’s important question regarding the appropriate
burden of proof at the
merits stage and Judge Iwasawa’s useful exposition
on the reasons why WTO law does not provide assistance to the Court. The
of these points has been taken up by several of the intervening States: see
Juliette McIntyre, Kyra Wigard and Ori Pomson,
‘Interventions in Ukraine v
Russia: Plus Ça Change?’,
EJIL: Talk!
(Blog Post, 12 August
https://www.ejiltalk.org/interventions-in-ukraine-v-russia-plus-ca-change/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/BE4L-RKB4
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary Objections)
) [6]–[9] (Judge Iwasawa).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
) [4], [8], [17]
(President Donoghue).
Ibid [11], [23].
Ibid [14] (Judge Charlesworth).
Ibid [9] (Judges Sebutinde and
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [40] (Judges Sebutinde and
Immunities and Criminal
Proceedings (Equatorial Guinea v France) (Preliminary Objections)
Rep 292, 336 [150]. See also Andrew D Mitchell and Trina Malone, ‘Abuse of
Process in Inter-State Dispute Resolution’
in Hélène Ruiz
Fabri (ed),
Max Planck Encyclopedia of International Procedural Law
(Oxford University Press, online at December 2024).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [115].
Application of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v
Russia) (Preliminary
Objections)
[2011] ICJ Rep 70, 128 [140].
Juliette McIntyre, ‘Less a
Wave than a Tsunami: Procedural Implications for the ICJ of the Article 63
Interventions in Ukraine
Völkerrechtsblog
Post, 11 October 2022) <
https://voelkerrechtsblog.org/less-a-wave-than-a-tsunami/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9TKM-7W9A
Ukraine v Russia
on Admissibility of the Declarations of Intervention)
) 367 [54].
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
Ibid [17] (Vice-President
Gevorgian).
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
[117]–[118].
Carlotta Ceretelli, ‘Abuse of
Process: An Impossible Dialogue between ICJ and ICSID Tribunals?’
Journal of International Dispute Settlement
Wigard, Pomson and McIntyre (n
Alina Miron and Christine Chinkin,
‘Article 63’ in Andreas Zimmermann and Christian J Tams (eds),
The Statute of the International Court of Justice: A Commentary
University Press, 3
ed, 2019) 1741, 1743.
Robert G Bone, ‘Party
Rulemaking: Making Procedural Rules through Party Choice’
(2012) 90(6)
Texas Law Review
See Robert Kolb,
International Court of Justice
(Hart, 2013) 731; Robert Kolb,
Companion to the International Court of Justice
(Edward Elgar, 2014) 366;
Miron and Chinkin (n
) 1743. See
Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan (Indonesia v Malaysia)
[2001] ICJ Rep 575, 641 [22] (Judge Weeramantry): ‘The
pre-eminent position of the International Court, situated as it is at
of the international judicial structure, attracts special recognition to its
pronouncements’.
See also McIntyre,
‘Consenting to Be Bound or Co-operative Condemnation? Article 63
Interventions at the International Court
of Justice’ (n
Statute of the International
Court of Justice
art 60: ‘The judgment is final and without
appeal. In the event of dispute as to the meaning or scope of the judgment, the
Court shall construe it upon the request of any party’. See also Joan E
Donoghue, ‘The Role of the World Court Today’
(2012) 47(1)
Georgia Law Review
, 192; Justice Jens Evensen, ‘The
International Court of Justice: Main Characteristics and Its Contribution to the
Development
of the Modern Law of Nations’
(1988) 57(1)
Nordic Journal
of International Law
Statute of the International
Court of Justice
Ukraine v Russia (Preliminary
Objections)
(Vice-President Gevorgian).
Ibid [6] (Judge Brant).
Ibid: ‘If the Russian
Federation wished to protect itself against the possibility of proceedings being
brought on the basis
Genocide Convention
before it had gathered the
relevant evidence, it would have been sufficient for it to refrain from making
such accusations against
Ukraine or to postpone them until such time as it
considered itself to be in possession of adequate evidence’ [tr author].
See Juliette McIntyre,
‘Revisiting the International Court of Justice Procedure for the Revision
of Judgments’
(2021) 42(3)
Michigan Journal of International Law
Carsten Stahn,
Message: Expressivist Foundations of International Criminal Justice
University Press, 2020) 257.
Jeremy Bentham,
Scotch Reform:
Considered, with Reference to the Plan, Proposed in the Late Parliament, for the
Regulation of the Courts, and the
Administration of Justice, in Scotland
(Richard Taylor & Co, 2
ed, 1811) 42, reiterating the similar
arguments Bentham made in his 1791
: Jeremy Bentham,
Panopticon: Or, the Inspection House
(Thomas Byrne, 1791) 173. See also
Tommaso Soave,
The Everyday Makers of International Law: From Great Halls to
(Cambridge University Press, 2022) 269. Cf Hannah Arendt,
Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil
(Penguin, 1977)
8, warning against trials that descend into mere show.
Jonas Bens,
The Sentimental
Court: The Affective Life of International Criminal Justice
University Press, 2022) 24. For analysis of this approach as applied to
international criminal trials, see Kate Leader,
‘The Trial’s the
Thing: Performance and Legitimacy in International Criminal Trials’
Theoretical Criminology
Gabrielle Lynch,
Performances of
Injustice: The Politics of Truth, Justice and Reconciliation in Kenya
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 20. See also Mary Ellen O’Connell,
The Art of Law in the International Community
(Cambridge University
Press, 2019) 264; Pnina Lahav, ‘Theater in the Courtroom: The Chicago
Conspiracy Trial’
(2004) 16(3)
Law and Literature
Stefan Talmon, ‘Article
43’ in Andreas Zimmermann et al (eds),
The Statute of the International
Court of Justice: A Commentary
(Oxford University Press, 2
2012) 1088, 1171.
Milner S Ball, ‘The
Play’s the Thing: An Unscientific Reflection on Courts under the Rubric of
(1975) 28(1)
Stanford Law Review
Natalie Klein, ‘Iran and Its
Encounters with the International Court of Justice’
[2021] MelbJlIntLaw 7
(2021) 21(3)
Melbourne Journal of International Law
Douglas Guilfoyle, ‘Governing
the Oceans and Dispute Resolution: An Evolving Legal Order?’ in Leon Wolff
and Danielle
Ireland-Piper (eds),
Global Governance and Regulation: Order and
Disorder in the 21st Century
(Routledge, 1
ed, 2018) 173, 189.
Douglas Guilfoyle,
‘Litigation as Statecraft: Small States and the Law of the Sea’
British Yearbook of International Law
(advance) <
https://academic.oup.com/bybil/advance-article/doi/10.1093/bybil/brad009/7186911
archived at <
https://perma.cc/QZ3N-JE7M
Juliette McIntyre, Kyra Wigard and
Ori Pomson, ‘Goliath vs David (and Friends): A Recap of the Preliminary
Objections Hearings
in Ukraine v Russia’,
EJIL: Talk!
(Blog Post, 2
October 2023) <
https://www.ejiltalk.org/goliath-vs-david-and-friends-a-recap-of-the-preliminary-objections-hearings-in-ukraine-v-russia/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/V8LR-X27N
‘Norway Has Officially
Supported Ukraine’s Case against Russia at the International Court of
Justice (ICJ)’,
(online, 26 November 2022)
https://www.thelocal.no/20221126/norway-supports-ukraines-case-against-russia-at-the-international-court-of-justice
archived at <
https://perma.cc/7B6Z-47AJ
Via two declarations:
Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide (The Gambia v Myanmar)
(Order on Admissibility of the
Declarations of Intervention)
(International Court of Justice, General List
No 178, 3 July 2024) [16].
Using both arts 62 and 63:
International Court of Justice, ‘
Application of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South
Africa v Israel)
: Bolivia Files a Declaration of Intervention in the
Proceedings under Article 63 of the Statute’ (Press Release No 2024/67,
October 2024) 2.
McIntyre, Wigard and Pomson,
‘Interventions in Ukraine v Russia: Plus Ça Change?’ (n
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter