URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Galowitz, P --- "The opportunities and challenges of an interdisciplinary clinic" [2013] LegEdDig 34; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 8
The opportunities and challenges of an interdisciplinary clinic
International Journal of Clinical Legal Education
, Vol 17-18, 2012, pp
Law school clinics in many countries increasingly provide the major
opportunities that law students have to engage in interdisciplinary
collaborations with other professionals. These clinics teach students to
represent clients effectively and offer the possibility
to advance social
Typically, an interdisciplinary clinic is collaboration between or among law
students and other students in professional schools,
or other professionals, to
‘multidisciplinary model [that]
can respond to the myriad needs of those
who are poor or marginalised by their social, medical or psychological
circumstances.’
Professionals are increasingly aware that working together with other
professions can better serve clients and improve outcomes.
Certain attributes typify interdisciplinary clinics in which there are
integrated interdisciplinary teams. One is a shared expertise,
so that it is not
legally focused and lawyer-directed. In this model it is not just the other
professions assisting the lawyer, but
rather the lawyer and other professional
undertake a joint approach. In addition, the collaboration uses and relies on
the knowledge
of all of the participating disciplines. It is important that the
various professionals understand that there are many ways that
the law can be
part of a comprehensive approach to meet the needs of the clients: litigation is
not the only way. An additional component
of interdisciplinary service is a team
commitment to the importance of developing creative approaches to assist
clients. Moreover,
there should be a structure that formalises the relationship
between the professionals and anticipates the possible problem areas
service provision.
The opportunities and challenges of an interdisciplinary clinic for students,
clients and faculty teaching the clinic are discussed,
using the model of and
through the lens of a medical-legal interdisciplinary clinic that I co-teach.
The Medical-Legal Advocacy Clinic
at New York University School of Law
(hereinafter MLAC) is a medical and legal collaboration.
The MLAC employs a multidisciplinary and holistic approach to provide legal
advocacy in a medical setting for clients referred by
medical professionals.
Many legally-related issues can affect the health of low-income families and
many of the problems that affect
the health of the children and families have
legal remedies. This clinic is a medical-legal collaboration to improve health
for patients/clients by providing on-site legal advocacy and training
to medical providers.
In the first few years that the MLAC was taught, law students, who were in
their second or third (last) year of law school, and paediatric
residents (in the second and third year of a three year residency program after
completing four years of medical school)
collaborated to address more
effectively the health issues of their clients/patients. The medical residents
were in the Residency
Program in Social Pediatrics at Montefiore Medical Center
in New York City. These residents intend to practise in clinical practice,
community health and advocacy; they spend a significant part of their clinical
time in their second and third years of residency
in a federally- funded
community health centre serving primarily low-income African-Americans and
Latinos. The patients of the community
health centre present a multitude of
psychosocial issues, including family disruption (due to illness, incarceration,
violent injury,
child abuse and/ or neglect), poor housing, unemployment and
poverty, domestic violence, lack of access to health care, and immigration
problems. Many legally-related issues can affect the health of the patients of
the community health centre, such as: asthma triggered
by mould from leaky
ceilings or rodent infestation; lead poisoning from paint not removed; burns
caused by families heating apartments
with stoves; and children who suffer due
to insufficient nourishment. The patients of this community health centre were
by the medical residents to the law students for assistance.
The law students and the medical residents were trained together to practice
an interdisciplinary and holistic approach to their patients/clients.
program was planned jointly by me and Iman Sharif, M.D., M.P.H., who was then
Associate Director of Residency Training in Social
Pediatrics and Associate
Professor of Clinical Pediatrics at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine/
Children’s Hospital at
Montefiore Hospital. As part of developing the
program, Dr. Sharif and I had to learn to collaborate, including understanding
other’s language, culture, ethics, professional values, and
approaches to our clients/patients.
In the clinic seminar, the law students and medical residents learned
together. They met for eight two-hour joint seminars over the
course of the law
school semester, covering such topics as: collaboration and interdisciplinary
work; ethics and confidentiality;
asthma and environmental triggers; substantive
law training on advocacy; early childhood education advocacy; lobbying training;
advocacy; and health law. The joint seminars were co-taught with Dr.
Sharif. For each joint seminar, the law students and medical
residents were
given readings and learning objectives. Seminar speakers included practicing
doctors, ethicists, lawyers, social workers,
and leaders from child advocacy and
legal advocacy.
The fieldwork had a three-fold approach: (1) direct client representation;
(2) education of the medical residents and other health
professionals
treatment plans, as well as education
of the clients/patients about their legal
rights; and (3) identifying and exploring health care issues and presenting
interdisciplinary
strategies to address the issues. For the direct client
representation, procedures were implemented to enable the medical residents
faculty at the outpatient community health centre to refer patients to the law
students for legal advocacy. Each week, law students
provided a free legal
clinic for clients referred by the medical residents. A joint electronic account
was created to allow the doctors
to schedule the legal appointments for their
patients, after obtaining the consent of their patients. Legal assistance was
on such areas as housing, government benefits, education and other
issues that had an impact on the family’s health.
In addition to the joint seminar and the referral of cases, there were other
parts of the collaboration. The law students developed
policy projects by
identifying and exploring health care issues and presenting interdisciplinary
strategies to address those issues;
students presented those policy projects at
a joint seminar of the law students and medical residents. The law students and
residents, after receiving joint training on how to lobby legislators,
participated in an all-day lobbying effort of state legislators
at the New York
State capital in Albany, New York on an issue affecting their patients/clients.
At the beginning of the semester,
the law students and medical residents
together observed proceedings in Housing Court. In addition, there were a few
informal gatherings
outside of class to help build rapport and
relationships.
While there are many advantages for students in interdisciplinary clinics,
there are six categories that I think are the most important.
The first, and in
some ways the most important, is the broadening of perspectives. The law
students and medical residents learned
from each other and appreciated the
differing professional cultures and skills as well as the problem-solving
approaches of the other
profession.
The law students and medical residents began to understand what they had in
common and not just what separated them. They learned
boundaries and limits of each member of the collaboration, as well as a
familiarity with the knowledge base of the
other profession. We specifically
discussed some of the similarities in the two professions, including the shared
set of core social
and ethical values (including shared respect for the
individual, the commitment to reason, and using experience as a basis for
decision-making);
valuing of professional autonomy and decision-making; the
primacy of serving their patient’s/client’s interests; the
obligation each owes to their patient/client; and the aspiration of each
profession to provide services to the poor.
This broadening of perspective can lead to what is described as a higher
level of cognitive processing, what some psychologists define
‘wisdom’. Particularly for the law students, they learned the skills
and values to function in a variety of forums
(i.e. not just litigation) and
learned skills and approaches from the other disciplines. It helped the law
students and medical residents
to move away from the narrow approach of seeing
the patient’s/client’s issues as only medical or legal ones; it
remove the ‘blinders’ and minimise the ‘silo’
The second benefit is that it helps to build trust, understanding and respect
amongst the members. The third is that it teaches the
importance of
collaboration. The law students and medical residents in our joint seminars were
taught skills to help them collaborate
successfully. In the joint seminar, we
first discussed their own experiences in collaboration, including what they had
found to be
We also highlighted, based on assigned readings and their comments
in the class
discussion, some things that can be done to improve collaboration, including the
value of listening and effective communication;
understanding and appreciating
the ‘other’, including the competencies of each profession; clearly
stated role expectations;
attitudes of respect and openness; learning skills
for shared decision-making; and the importance of setting boundaries at
outset of the collaboration. (For our collaboration, one particular boundary
issue was differing approaches to confidentiality
and how it could limit what
client/patient information could be shared between the doctor and lawyer).
The fourth advantage of an interdisciplinary clinic is what I call a
‘window’. It is a window in two very different ways.
One is that it
can help students prepare for the ‘real world’ by modelling the
experience of practising law, which increasingly
uses interdisciplinary
collaborations.
The fifth point is that the collaboration can be a more satisfying and
fulfilling professional and personal experience for all. The
experiences and approaches to assist clients/patients can result in increased
satisfaction. It can also result in increased
comfort in being able to learn
from and rely on the other professionals. Collaboration can help reduce the
stress that lawyers can
experience. From their comments in class as well as
their written reflections, it was apparent that it was a more fulfilling model
for each of the professions involved.
The complementary skills of the other professions can help the lawyer
serve the client, as can the legal information assist
the doctor to be a
better medical provider and advocate for his or her patients. For example, the
medical residents became more familiar
with laws affecting their clients (such
as educational services for children with special health care needs and
eligibility for disability
programs) and developed practical skills for
advocating for their patients to receive the services to which they were
entitled. For
the law students, they understood the medical conditions that
could impact on their clients’ disabilities and were able to
information to argue more persuasively for the benefits for which their clients
were eligible.
Teaching in an interdisciplinary structure also has unique additional
advantages for the faculty. One is that it helps emphasise the
importance of
teaching creative problem-solving and collaboration. In the seminar and in the
fieldwork, the students can be helped
to see the issues that the client faces in
the broader context of the client’s life and the students can be helped
think about prevention of future problems, not just solving current
While there are many challenges in interdisciplinary clinics, there are five
categories that I think are the most significant. The
first (and an especially
pervasive) one was the differences in the language, customs, and norms of the
collaborating professions.
Each needed to learn and appreciate the other.
The second category is that of ethical obligations and professional values.
There are differences in ethical obligations such as confidentiality,
of interest and the professional independence of the lawyer that must be
addressed. While dealing with them can be challenging,
they are not barriers,
particularly if the anticipated issues are discussed and addressed amongst the
various professionals when
forming the collaboration. Guidelines and protocols
for the anticipated ethical issues (such as what information received from the
client can be shared with the other professionals) should be drafted together as
part of the development plan.
The third area is student discomfort and anxiety. Any discomfort and possible
anxiety can be compounded by working with other professions
when the students
may be unsure of their own professional roles and values.
Fourth, the nature of the professional norms in law school can create
challenges. Law students tend to be more competitive (which
would also make it
more difficult for them to collaborate) and that they have less experience in
collaboration than other professions
(such as students in business school).
Collaboration as an important skill and value for professionals needs to be
directly addressed.
Finally, there are many logistical and situational challenges in an
interdisciplinary clinic. For example, the law school schedule
definition of a semester differ substantially from medical schools and residency
training programs.
For the clients, there can be confusion about the roles and approaches of the
various professions. The client may not be sure which
issues should be addressed
with which professional. In addition, there may not be consistent information or
opinions conveyed to
the client by the various professionals who are interacting
with the client. The client may also have unclear expectations. The ethical
requirements of each of the professions need to be addressed, particularly the
varying definitions of who is the ‘client’,
confidentiality,
conflicts and capacity of the person to make decisions. As with many other
challenges, ethical and professional
value issues can be anticipated and dealt
with in the design and planning of the curriculum, including developing
protocols to address
There may also be different pedagogical goals for the students and different
learning experiences in the relevant professional schools.
One example is that
law school emphasises getting law students to think like a lawyer compared with
a business school focus on problem
An issue that I found particularly difficult was getting the law students
ready to be ‘lawyers’ in many different kinds
of subjects,
approaches and practice. While getting students comfortable in a variety of
subject areas can be a challenge in any
clinic that practices holistic advocacy,
it can be more difficult in an interdisciplinary clinic since the students need
some knowledge
collaborating. There were two things that Dr. Sharif and I did in
the MLAC to
the first few weeks discussing the substantive
law areas and professional
skills, including a simulation of a client interview for which the law students
reflected and received
clients. I was also at each of the fieldwork clinics when the law students
interviewed
their clients so that they could check-in with me before the
interview was completed. This ensured that critical issues, such as
and statute of limitations, weren’t missed.
An interdisciplinary clinic has many different advantages for the students,
faculty, professionals, clients and the professional schools.
While there are
challenges for all involved, they are far outweighed by the multiple benefits. I
have found that all, including myself,
were enriched by the interaction with
our medical colleagues. The clinic also helped model for the law students
and medical
residents the value of interdisciplinary approaches to help meet the
needs of our clients/ patients. Interdisciplinary clinics can
develop a cadre of future lawyers with the sensitivity and expertise to play a
leading role in addressing complex health
and human rights issues’.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (615 KB)
PDF format (3.23 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter