URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Evers, Maxine --- "Sole General Practitioners in Australia: Towards Definition, Knowledge and Service" [2024] JCULawRw 7; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 103
I Introduction
VI Conclusion
Sole General Practitioners in Australia: Towards
Definition, Knowledge and Service
Maxine Evers
Sole legal practitioners in Australia are a significant, but poorly
understood, cohort within the legal profession. Even less is known
of the sole
practitioner. In Australia, these solicitors appear as abandoned
and devoid of definition and understanding. Notwithstanding their
invisibility,
given their broad practice areas, they offer a significant contribution to the
legal needs of their communities.
This article argues that sole
practitioners are a discrete and
critical cohort within the broader membership of solicitors, yet their
contributions are lost in
the confusing definitions of sole and small firm
practitioners. In response to this void, this article offers a definition of
sole general practice
in acknowledgement of its unique place in the
profession. The examples of three sole general practitioners, discussed later in
article, support this definition and claim that these lawyers serve a vital
role in their communities.
This article also seeks to highlight the important contribution sole
practitioners make to their communities, providing access to the
law. Their contributions are, however, not defined as pro bono work.
into their experiences, individually and collectively, are essential to the
ongoing assessment of legal needs in the community
and the role of the
profession in meeting these needs. A call to redefine the pro bono framework in
Australia concludes this article.
I Introduction
In their significant global study of twenty-first century lawyers, Sommerlad
and Hammerslev observe that ‘virtually everywhere
the norm remains solo or
small firm practice’.
the case in Queensland
, as in all
states and territories in
Despite the perseverance
of the sole and small firm, general practice, as a form of legal practice
undertaken by these lawyers, remains
practitioners hold a curious position. In the Australian
legal profession they are subsumed within the significant population of
solicitors in sole practice. Indeed, sole practitioners are the largest cohort
of solicitors in Queensland
more broadly. In
contrast, the number of sole practitioners in general practice is unknown.
Despite this gap in knowledge about sole
general practitioners, they are active
contributors to their communities through the provision of access to legal
In response to this gap, this article examines the place of sole
practitioners within the solicitor population. These
practitioners are in private practice, managing their own
businesses.
Insights from three
sole general practitioners in New South Wales highlight the broad nature of
general practice and the dual role
of this cohort of solicitors, serving both
clients and communities. One practitioner explained the reason why she kept her
late husband’s
practice open after he died as: ‘I wasn’t
prepared to walk out on my staff and walk out on the community’. Another
equated the role of a sole practitioner to that of a general medical
practitioner, with the ability to discuss problems face-to-face
and provide that
‘little bit of extra service’. Given their shared experiences, these
practitioners’ insights have
relevance to the sole general practice
cohort, especially in regional areas.
The Australian legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers and
solicitors. In some states and territories, the profession
is fused, with legal
practitioners being able to practise as both a barrister and
Whilst it is
acknowledged that both solicitors in sole practice and barristers are sole
traders, barristers specialise in specific
legal areas. The other main
difference between barristers and solicitors is that barristers rarely work
directly with clients, but
rather take instructions from solicitors on behalf of
their clients.
Barristers are,
therefore, not included in this study.
2022 National Profile of Solicitors,
published by the Law Society
of New South Wales (‘NSW Law Society’), reported that in 2022,
13,871 of 16,514 private
practices were managed by sole
solicitors.
This equates to 84%
of the firm structures within the private profession. The population of sole
general practitioners is not recorded
nor reported. Sole practitioners are
united in their obligation of responsibility for the regulatory and financial
requirements of
their practice, yet, as a cohort, they are disparate, scattered
across communities from regional areas to cities, from commercial
premises to
practitioner, we know comparatively little about
them and less about sole
practitioners. Indeed, in contrast to the capacity of corporate
and international firms to market their services to commercial clients,
high-performing law graduates and pro bono evaluators, we have inadequate
information about both sole and sole general practitioners,
as well as small
practices. A lack of identification of who the sole
practitioner
is, provides an example of the fundamental gap in information about these
solicitors.
‘Sole practitioner’ is itself an umbrella term. It merges the
sole practitioner and the sole
practitioner into one. In
addition, the small firm practitioner is often twinned with the sole solicitor,
thus creating a cluster
of sole and small firm
practitioners.
A sample of
disciplinary decisions from Queensland and New South Wales contribute to this
confusion through an absence of clarity
and definition as to the practitioners
charged with misconduct.
This article adopts the below definitions:
Sole general practice
. A legal practice with one principal
solicitor or legal director,
offering legal services across a range of areas and having sole responsibility
for compliance with the legal and other obligations
of business owners.
Sole general practitioner
. References in literature and case
law also refer to solicitor, lawyer and legal practitioner and are used
synonymously. In the United
States of America, lawyers are referred to as
Sole practitioner
. References in literature and case law also
refer to solicitor, lawyer and legal practitioner. These lawyers practise in one
areas of the law, rather than across several areas.
Sole practice
. A legal practice with one principal solicitor
or legal director, having sole responsibility for compliance with the legal and
obligations of business owners.
Small firm practice
. A legal practice with two to four
. These lawyers are the larger cohort of legal
practitioners (or lawyers) in Australia, with barristers being the smaller
. This is the general term applied to solicitors,
barristers, in-house/corporate counsel, community lawyers and government legal
as the legal profession.
In this paper, the term ‘legal practitioners’ is used
synonymously with ‘lawyers’.
Much of our knowledge about sole
practitioners is built on
myth and fictional stereotypes. Sole practitioners are admired as entrepreneurs,
astute business owners
and brave fugitives from large firms. They are equally
slighted as swindlers, ‘failed’ corporate lawyers and misfits.
solitary lawyers also attract corresponding mythical images as heroes or
champions, represented vividly in fiction by characters
such as Atticus
or as crooks, such as
Tulkinghorne.
Cultural images of
lawyers are powerful, yet diverse representations of reality. Contrast the image
of a lawyer in an ultra-modern,
multi-storey tower with harbour
surrounded by expensive
artefacts and designer-dressed
to that of a
street-front office with a tidy reception area, the latter image often
visualised as a lawyer and
There is a paucity of literature and data on the role and work of the sole
practitioner, particularly in Australia. These practitioners are
sole traders, practising across several areas of the law in tandem,
for example,
conveyancing, wills and estates, personal injury, debt recovery, criminal,
family, civil and small business. We do know
that they practise in communities,
located in cities, suburbs and rural and remote areas. By way of example, in
Queensland, in 2023,
almost 40% of solicitors were sole practitioners, an
increase of 19.38% from 2022
with almost one-third in practice outside of
Being present in a
community and accessible to individual and small business clients enables these
solicitors to offer a broad range
of legal services. General practitioners have
a wide array of clients who seek out their services, some of whom have legal,
quasi-legal
or non-legal problems. There is a perception that, as
practitioners, they provide assistance in all matters related to ‘the
Law’. Additionally, as the local lawyer, they are
‘on hand’ to
solve legal problems, to provide the community with a pathway to legal services
and to enable access to
the law, as depicted in
This movie and
television series, respectively, centre on the comic plight of sole and small
firm lawyers who are sought out by individual
clients across a range of matters.
Yet, as a cohort, these solicitors are largely ignored.
In Part II of this article the invisibility of sole
practitioners in Australia is explored. Our absence of knowledge and information
identification. Despite their
abandonment, by professional associations in relation to acknowledgement and
reporting and by the scholarship
of the profession in relation to a gap in the
literature, sole general practitioners are a discrete and critical cohort within
solicitors’ branch of the legal profession.
Part III offers a definition of sole
practitioners that
distinguishes them from sole practitioners. The existing invisibility and gap in
acknowledgement of this cohort,
contrasted with the earlier recognition of
general practice in socio-legal studies in Australia, concludes this part.
In Part IV, studies in the United States and the United Kingdom are analysed
to highlight the contrast with the Australian literature.
For sole general
practitioners, recognition of the services they provide acknowledges the diverse
and important role they have in
the provision of access to the law. In order to
recognise the contribution of this cohort, this section offers a definition of
evidencing their distinctiveness.
The contribution of sole general practitioners to their clients and
communities is analysed in Part V, highlighting the critical role
solicitors, many in rural and regional
The anomaly of their
unexamined work falling outside the pro bono framework in Australia is also
considered. Reference to three sole
general practitioners practising in regional
New South Wales illustrates their role in facilitating access to legal services
in serving their communities more broadly. Regional practitioners were
selected as examples of private lawyers’ whose general
practice expertise
and pro bono work is disregarded by the profession, despite being a
‘face’ of the profession to their
clients and communities. Suburban
and city-based practitioners also provide free or discounted work; however, they
may be less visible
in their communities.
This article concludes with a summary of the abandonment of sole general
practitioners as a cohort. While they share common features
solicitors, the nature of their work offers a broad scope of legal services to
clients and communities. Insights into the
experiences of these solicitors as a
cohort is critical in the assessment of legal needs in the community and the
role of the profession
in meeting these needs.
This article draws on data and documentary evidence that informs our
knowledge and understanding of the solicitors’ branch of
profession in Australia. Data is published by professional organisations and
research centres. Documentary evidence consists
of socio-legal studies and
disciplinary cases against solicitors concerning alleged misconduct. These are
analysed for their methods
of capturing knowledge about sole general
practitioners. In addition, qualitative data is drawn from interviews with three
sole general
practitioners, based on the writer’s PhD thesis, which
centred on interviews with 23 sole general
practitioners.
Data is analysed numerically, primarily due to the lack of consistent data
sources to enable further analysis based on descriptions,
clusters or
statistics. The main source of data is statistics as to the solicitor population
in Australia published by the NSW Law
Society and discussed in Part 1. This
quantitative data relates to the population of solicitors practising in specific
structures,
for example, sole practice, small and large firms. These statistics
are provided by the law societies in the six states and two territories.
should be noted that the researchers engaged in the statistical analysis have
disclosed a concern with the absolute reliability
of the data due to firstly,
different reporting methods used across jurisdictions and secondly, changes to
criteria within individual
Despite this, reliance on
the data is of value in establishing the size of the cohorts within the
solicitors’ population.
Whilst documentary evidence provides insights into the work of sole general
practitioners, there are, however, constraints in this
method. Socio-legal
studies are dated and limited in number, further highlighting the lack of
attention given to this cohort. Disciplinary
decisions are inadequate in
reporting the practice type and structure (for example, sole practice, small
firm, large practice) of
the solicitors charged with misconduct matters.
Proceedings are determined by state-based tribunals and, on occasions, by state
Courts by way of appeal. The data from the disciplinary regime relating
to both sole and sole general practitioners is negligible.
In some decisions,
the facts recited in the case relating to the purported misconduct identify that
the respondent is a sole practitioner.
Rarely, is there reference to general
practice, thus demonstrating the invisibility of this cohort.
The experiences of three sole general practitioners are referenced in order
to illustrate the nature of some forms of sole general
practice and some
perceptions of the role of these lawyers in their local communities. This
analysis is examined in the context of
public documents addressing the skewed
evaluation of pro bono work and the gap in access to the law, particularly in
rural areas.
In summary, the method applied in this article provides evidence supporting
the thesis that sole general practitioners are invisible
within the broader
cohort of sole practitioners. As a result, this evidence discloses a deficiency
in our knowledge and understanding
of general legal practice as managed by sole
practitioners. Identifying and defining the sole general practitioner is
critical to
understanding their role in the provision of legal services.
II Identifying the Sole Practitioner
As represented in the diagram below, sole
general practitioners are a
separate practice group to both specialist sole practitioners, for example, in
family or criminal law,
and small two to four partner
General practice is not
defined, but rather harks back to the ‘traditional’ sole
practitioner who undertook a range of
domestic law, such as conveyancing, wills
and small business work.
practitioners offer a diverse practice in an era when
specialisation is considered by the profession to be the preferred option,
evidenced by the expanding areas of specialisation nominated by law
In Australia, there is no data as to the population of solicitors practising
practitioners. Knowledge of their population would
recognise their critical contribution to the service of clients as lawyers with
broad expertise in the law. Rather than acknowledgment as a discrete cohort,
analysis of the numerical data identifies the absence
of a delineation between
sole practitioners and sole general practitioners.
The most comprehensive data concerning solicitors and their practices is
published by the NSW Law Society through its commissioned
National Profile of
Solicitors.
Initially published in 2011, then 2014, 2016, 2018, 2020 and
the first attempt to gather a national snapshot of solicitors for the purpose of
accurately recording their population, including
the number of practitioners in
defined cohorts within the profession. The cohorts are private practice,
corporate legal, government
The private
practice category is divided into sole practitioner, two to four partners, five
to 10 partners, 11 to 20 partners, 21
to 39 partners and 40 or more
In each reporting
year, sole practitioners and sole practice firms constitute the largest cohort
of private practice solicitors and
firms. Table 1 shows the percentage of
solicitors in private practice by firm size from 2011 to 2022.
The first Profile in 2011 notes that 29.8% of solicitors were working in sole
practice compared to 23.1% of practitioners in large
law firms of 40 or more
By 2022, this
percentage had increased to 41% of sole practitioners, in comparison with a
decrease to 12% of firms of 40 or more
Percentage of solicitors in private practice in Australia by
firm size in 2011, 2014, 2016, 2018, 2020 and
Number of Solicitors
Sole practitioner
2-4 partners
5-10 partners
11-20 partners
21-39 partners
40+ partners
Despite the rise in globalisation of the profession through, firstly, the
increase of multi-partnered, large commercial firms with
international corporate
clients and secondly, mergers of overseas commercial practices with Australian
corporate firms, the reported
number of sole practitioners has increased notably
over the last 12 years, whilst the percentage of firms of 40 or more partners
has halved. This shift is puzzling, particularly as large corporate firms with
an international presence are seen as the prize for
top-performing law
and are the focus of
professional publications.
Possible reasons for the shift are the move of some solicitors from large
corporate practice to their own
businesses,
and the increasing
number of solicitors exceeding the available places in existing private firms,
thus compelling some to secure
their own position as a sole practitioner. There
may also be a correlation between the increase in the number of law schools in
and the greater
competition for available places.
In essence, whilst a statistical analysis is siloed in its impact, this data
reveals that sole practitioners dominate the private
profession. Notably, data
as to the percentage of sole
practitioners is not collected. The
bundling of sole and sole general practitioners precludes the ability to
identify the cohort
size of sole solicitors in general practice. This deficit is
significant, revealing a fundamental gap in knowledge of the profession’s
most public-facing cohort.
This has not always been the case. The cohort of general practitioners was
visible in earlier sociological studies. While studies
of lawyers in Australia
are uncommon, particularly in comparison to the United States where research
into the legal profession has
included sole practitioners (referred to as solo
attorneys),
two studies in the
1970s acknowledged general practice as a distinct form of practice.
Hetherton’s survey of 2,699 Victorian
solicitors in 1976/77 identified
different cohorts of solicitors categorised by six typologies –
‘Property Practitioner’,
‘Personal Plight Practitioner’,
‘Commercial Practitioner’, ‘Workers’ Compensation
Practitioner’,
‘Taxation Practitioner’ and ‘Residual
Practitioner’.
typology of Residual Practitioner is the
practitioner, who
Hetherton notes ‘failed to meet the classification criteria of other type
of practitioners’ based on
aggregate hours in specified practice
Similar to Hetherton’s methodological approach, Tomasic and Bullard
surveyed over 600 NSW lawyers in 1977 and proposed four
typologies:
‘Litigation Lawyer’, ‘Property Lawyer’,
‘Commercial Lawyer’ and
‘Generalist’.
to Hetherton’s ‘Residual Practitioner’, Tomasic and Bullard
define the ‘Generalist’ as ‘those
lawyers who could not be
allocated to any cluster’.
Referencing Hetherton’s study, Tomasic notes similarities between the
categories of solicitors and their proportions across
the two jurisdictions,
including 34.8% of NSW solicitors as ‘Generalists’ in parallel with
34% of Victorian solicitors
as ‘Residual
Practitioners’.
The relevance of this work is limited given its age. These studies must be
reviewed in the context of their time. They occurred prior
to the emergence of
the corporate client with a corresponding growth in career choices for graduates
and before governments’
removal of solicitor’ monopoly on
conveyancing
reduction of some areas of practice from solicitors, including personal injury
and workers compensation.
Notably, the value of these studies is their recognition of general practice as
a distinct category in contrast to the current non-recognition
practice. Regrettably, these studies did not result in the implementation of a
systematic method of data collection and
reporting of solicitors in general
practice, either as sole practitioners or in larger firms.
Interestingly, Queensland solicitors have been studied in relation to
disciplinary proceedings covering a seventy-five-year period
from 1930 to
Sole practitioners were
identified as the highest cohort in disciplinary proceedings in
Queensland.
Sole general
practitioners were not identified. This research aligns with the reporting of
disciplinary cases and the lack of reference
to the practice type of the
solicitors who are subject to complaints and proceedings.
III Defining the Sole General Practitioner
Reflecting this curious position of the sole general practitioner is the
deficit of reference in statute and case law. In contrast,
there is an
understanding that the sole practitioner has exclusive responsibility for the
commercial, regulatory and legal operation
of the practice and, by inference,
for many ethical obligations of employed lawyers, legal consultants and
non-legal staff. Whilst
sole practice may be considered a straightforward term,
general practice is limitless in its definition. Sole practice is defined
Australian statute and case law, whereas sole general practice is not. As
discussed below, the statutory definition of sole practice
highlights the
absence of acknowledgement of general practice as a form of sole practice.
In Australia, historically, the legal profession was regulated on a state and
territory basis. The introduction of a
Legal Profession Uniform Law
to date, resulted in New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia joining a
national system.
The Uniform Law
defines a sole practitioner as ‘an Australian legal practitioner who
engages in legal practice
on his or her own
this definition, sole practitioners must be operating their legal practice
without the assistance of another legal practitioner
(‘on his or her own
account’). They may employ non-legal staff, such as paralegals, clerks,
bookkeepers and conveyancers.
However, the legislation is ambiguous. In the same
‘Definitions’ section, a principal of a law practice includes a sole
practitioner,
legislating that a
principal may work with lawyers, such as employed solicitors, consultants or
Queensland is one of the states and territories that has opted, to date, to
not adopt the Uniform Law, remaining with the
Legal Profession Act
(Qld). Although Queensland has the third largest population of
solicitors (after NSW and
the reluctance to
join the national profession may be due to a concern that the costs of being
part of a uniform structure will be
more onerous compared with the financially
healthier states. The Queensland legislation does not define sole practitioner,
the Act defines principal of a law practice as including ‘a sole
practitioner if the law practice is constituted by the
practitioner’.
As shown in diagram 1, the sole practitioner manages a law practice, which
may be a specialist or a general practice. These two categories
of practice are
not defined in the legislation. Therefore, determining a definition for
generalist practitioner requires consideration
beyond the legislative framework.
Similar to the gap in legislation, regulatory decisions in case law add to the
confusion, offering
scant information to identify the practice details of the
respondent lawyer charged with a misconduct allegation.
Disciplinary case law demonstrates a skewed representation of the legal
profession where the sole or small firm practice appears to
be more prominent
and ‘less ethical’ than large law firm
practitioners.
While there is a
clear presence of lawyers from small and sole practices, the lack of intention
to identify practice structures confirms
a lack of interest in, and
understanding of, these cohorts. Reports of disciplinary cases do not commonly
or formally identify the
structure of lawyers’ practices or lawyers’
practice areas. The facts of the cases, whilst unclear as to the nature and
structure of the respondent
solicitors’ practice, imply that there is no oversight from any other
principal or employed lawyers. These cases bear out the
body of scholarship
attention given to solicitors in sole
and small firm practices as the main
offenders in misconduct matters.
Former Queensland Legal Services Commissioner, John Briton appropriately
describes this as the regulators’ ‘gaze’
being focused on
these practitioners rather than on corporate
The disciplinary proceedings are dominated by misconduct allegations arising
primarily from individual client complainants in the
traditional areas of
non-corporate practice. The invisibility and lack of acknowledgement of the main
offenders identified as small
and sole solicitors continues into the regulatory
sphere. The lack of consistency with reporting practice details, such as the
and type, demonstrates a disregard for these respondent solicitors. There
is no formal recording of these details on the case reports.
proceedings, solicitors’ practices are described as small or
In other proceedings, an analysis of the facts leads to the conclusion that
the solicitors were working in a small or sole
For example, in
Legal Services Commissioner v
the Tribunal found that
the respondent was guilty of professional misconduct for misleading clients, not
following clients’
instructions and forging a document. It appears from
the facts that there was no other lawyer in the practice to whom clients
or who was aware of the respondent’s matters. Similarly, in
Legal Services Commissioner v De
respondent’s ability to post information on social media that breached
client confidentiality appears also to have been
unchecked or unnoticed,
suggesting that he was in sole practice.
Occasionally, sole practice is emphasised for its challenges and the
solicitor’s level of competence. In
Council of the Law Society of NSW v
respondent solicitor submitted to the Tribunal:
This is the first time I have ever endeavoured to handle trust funds. In
hindsight, I should have attended some account-keeping courses
or engaged a
professional accountant to assist me in this regard. However, the stress and
pressure of my sole practice overtook all
my working hours (and most of my
personal hours) to the extent that I over-looked this. I accept this should not
be an excuse as
I am a sole
practitioner.
Legal Services Commissioner v
the Tribunal noted
that the respondent solicitor: ‘On all accounts, he had a very successful
practice, but carried a very heavy
workload which set the scene for some of the
difficulties which he subsequently
encountered.’
difficulties included separation and divorce, children with health challenges,
long working hours and personal litigation.
There is even less certainty in identifying whether a respondent is in
general practice. Many cases before the Tribunal relate to
trust account
breaches. In cases that relate to general mismanagement of the trust account, a
range of practice areas and matters
where clients’ monies have been
misappropriated, is often described. Solicitors are required to maintain a trust
account for
each of their clients’ separate matters. The extent of
clients’ monies in trust across a range of practice areas is an
of general practice.
References in case law report on duties rather than definitions. For example,
solicitors have a duty to be
Competence for a sole
practitioner means the ability to work capably across several
areas. A challenge with general practice is its potentially limitless
legal areas, and whether solicitors feel a duty to take matters on despite
unfamiliarity with an area to maintain their
clients’ patronage. Unlike
barristers who can refuse a matter if they do not practise in an area of
solicitors are considered
to have an ethical duty to act for a client in an area in which they are
competent. In the case of sole
practitioners, they are the lone assessor of
their competence.
IV Recognition Of General Practice As A Discrete Area Of Legal
In contrast to statute and case law, the international professional and
academic literature recognises general practice as an area
of legal work.
Descriptions of a general practice include ‘areas appropriate to
clientele’,
in a variety of areas’
and generalists
as practising in four areas
There are no similar contemporary definitions of general legal practice in
In contrast, general practice in medicine is well understood. Law and
medicine are often coupled, and lawyers and doctors often compared,
particularly
in relation to the power of their professional
associations,
achieved by entry to the
and the contributions
that they make to society.
possible reason for the lack of a well-used definition for general legal
practice is the assumption that general practice is akin
to the medical GP,
where the lawyer in general practice looks after ‘all things legal’.
This assumption aligns with the
popular comparison between doctors and lawyers.
The common feature shared by legal and medical
practitioners is
their role in providing access to services for individual clients and
A definition of
general practice will enable these legal practitioners
to be counted, and accounted for, within the broader solicitors’
profession.
Such a definition will also recognise that general practice, as with
medicine, is a discrete speciality and can be acknowledged as
one that provides
broad access to the law and meets the range of legal needs of clients.
Recognition of sole general practitioners
enables their unique experiences and
their contributions to their communities to be examined.
In order to define the sole
practitioner, the statutory
definition of sole practitioner must be contextually extended, beyond ‘on
his or her account’,
to allow for an additional category of criteria,
namely the scope of work attributed to general practice. Central to this
is the overarching question of what a generalist is expected to be
able to do. A ‘generalist’ is a solicitor who practises
areas of the law in order to meet the legal needs of a community, mainly
comprising of individuals and small business.
The community assumes the
generalist is competent in these areas of the law, and this expectation of
competence is embedded in the
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct
Drawing on empirical research from the US and UK, some headway can be made
towards offering a definition of the sole
practitioner in the
Australian context. The themes from this research, coupled with the rise of
solicitors’ specialisation
in legal practice leads to a proposed
definition of general practice as the provision of legal services in
three practice areas
This definition builds on others applied to general legal practice in the US
and the UK. Levin’s research into US solo and small
firm attorneys offers
a definition of general practice as four practice
Levin bases this
definition on interviews with 41 solo and small firm attorneys in 2001, finding
that one third were ‘true
practitioners’.
A general practitioner was a lawyer who often described himself as a general
practitioner or, when asked to ascribe percentages to
his practice, would do as
follows: ‘I would say thirty percent personal injury, another thirty is
real estate, another thirty
is criminal, and the other little stuff like
description of a mixed practice is an entrenched structure of US firms, despite
the growth of large international practices.
Hunter et al identify the
persistence of sole practitioners ‘with more generalised
intention of large firms to focus on specialising in the legal needs of
corporate and government
The 2012 UK report
A Time of Change:
Solicitors’ Firms in
England and Wales
categorises practice as ‘narrow’, being a single category of
practice where 90% of work is in one area, and ‘broad’,
than 25% of work in each area across all practice
Applying this approach,
broad practice also equates to a minimum of four practice areas. Sommerlad et al
have identified traditional
practice areas as conveyancing, non-continuous cases
and preparatory litigation matters. These constitute a mixed
Additionally, specialisation in particular practice areas has informed the
meaning of general practice. Accreditation in specific
practice areas was first
introduced in Victoria in 1985.
According to Lauw, this accreditation was intended to formalise the ‘de
facto’ specialisation that had developed as a
result of the
‘increasing volume and complexity of the
. The effect of
specialist accreditation may well have been a reduction in the number of general
practitioners, as some saw specialisation
in such areas as family law, criminal
law, or wills and estates as a viable option to general
practice. Specialisation allowed for
a narrowing of areas in which to
develop expertise, a decrease in possible complaints and the potential for an
increase in clients,
through referrals based on reputation as an expert.
A more nuanced approach to general practice takes into consideration the
increasing complexity of traditional practice areas, with
several developing
distinct adjunct areas. For example, wills have developed into powers of
attorney, trusts, testamentary intentions
and family provision claims; business
law has developed into greater compliance in relation to taxation and accounting
matters; and
family law has experienced an increase in matters involving
parentage and international treaties. Rather than the four areas of practice
applied by Levin in her study and hinted at in the UK report, it is proposed
that three areas acknowledge this complexity.
The increasing complexity of the law and the growth of adjunct areas has
necessitated lawyers having to expand their legal knowledge
and competency
beyond traditional core areas. Since the definitions of Levin (2004) and in the
UK report (2012), specialisation in
legal practice has
Three, rather than the
four practice areas proposed by Levin and the UK report, are suitable for the
definition of the minimum required
for a solicitor to be considered a
‘generalist’. The move to specialisation in legal practice
emphasises the non-specialist
lawyers who practise in more than one area of the
law. In an era of specialisation, solicitors who offer legal services in three
areas can be viewed as having a broad practice.
Furthermore, the criterion of three areas covers a diverse range of
transactional or litigious matters for which clients consult lawyers,
conveyancing, wills and estates, personal injury, family law, local court and
small business. Practitioners frequently advertise
the availability of three or
more practice areas on webpages or in the front window of their premises.
Finally, three areas provide
delineation from the specialist, who concentrates
on one or two areas of practice.
A definition of general practice will acknowledge this practice type as a
unique speciality akin to that of the medical profession,
where general practice
in medicine is regarded as a ‘specialty’.
V Contribution of Sole General Practitioners to Clients and
Communities
Private practitioners are not usually regarded as a sector of the profession
that facilitates access to legal services. Unlike legal
aid, government or
community lawyers, they rely on billings as their income source. However, access
to legal services is applicable
to these private solicitors given the range of
their practice and the possible need to secure additional income, albeit poorly
legal aid or pro bono work, with the intention of growing their presence
and reputation. Their presence is evidenced through advertising
in local papers
and virtual platforms, through shopfront displays of their practice areas and
through involvement in their communities,
for example, on school, cultural or
sporting committees or as members of local associations. As such, sole
practitioners provide a range of legal services to clients and
undertake pro bono work, thus facilitating access to the law.
Access to the law is not freely available to all groups within the community.
Many rely on legal aid, free assistance from community
legal centres, government
services and pro bono work. Access to the law can be categorised into three
cohorts. One cohort is those
who qualify for legal aid. Another is those who are
the recipients of pro bono work. The third cohort is the most relevant group
private practitioners, being prospective clients who are excluded from legal
services because of a lack of financial means, yet
they do not qualify for free
assistance. This third cohort, described by the Australian Government
Productivity Commission in its
Access to Justice Arrangements
the ‘missing
are those outside
... only 8 per cent of households would likely meet income and asset tests for
legal aid, leaving the majority of low- and middle-income
earners with limited
capacity for managing large and unexpected legal
groups fall within the ‘justice gap’, described by Daicoff as those
who are ‘too rich for legal aid yet too
poor for private
‘missing middle’, whilst not having the financial capacity to fully
fund legal services from the private profession,
may be able to afford the
services of sole
practitioners on the basis that fees will
generally be lower than larger private firms.
There is, however, piecemeal acknowledgement that the small and sole
practices within the private profession have a role in the facilitation
access to legal services.
likely that solicitors, particularly in rural areas, would be considered by
clients as the local lawyer in all matters, regardless
of whether the
practitioner is a specialist or generalist. The 2013
Affordable Justice
study conducted
by the RMIT Centre for Innovative Justice noted two
critical findings relevant to sole general practitioners. The first finding
highlighted
the piecemeal acknowledgement of the facilitation of access to legal
services by small and sole
Following, there was
a need to promote sole and small firms within their local communities,
‘including any discounted work
The work of the private profession in facilitating access to the law was
previously identified in 2009 by the Law Council of Australia
and the Law
Institute of Victoria in their study of 1,185 country solicitors. The
Regional and Remote Areas Lawyers’ Survey
, which found that rural,
regional and remote practitioners undertook significant pro bono and unpaid
voluntary work.
Over 64% of
firms undertook pro bono work and 71% of lawyers undertook unpaid voluntary
The findings describe
rural, regional and remote lawyers as ‘integral to country
communities’,
that the absence of solicitors will ‘impact negatively on rural and
regional commercial infrastructure and also
on the community life of country
The disregard for the contribution of sole and small firms in the reporting
of pro bono work was identified in the Productivity Commission’s
Pro bono work is defined
by the Australian Pro Bono Centre as ‘the provision of legal services on a
free or significantly reduced
fee basis, with no expectation of a commercial
Pro bono work is
considered the flagship of the private profession’s contribution to legal
services, although it is captured
in a way that promotes the work of the
corporate firms and ignores the contributions of sole and small firm practices.
The Commission
identified the evaluative model used to assess pro bono work as
the reason for a lack of understanding of the private profession’s
‘long tradition of providing legal services free of
Noting this restrictive model, Justice Connect submitted to the Commission
that individual recipients of pro bono work constitute
less than 3% of services
with most pro bono work being for not-for-profits. The significance of this was
acknowledged: ‘[S]mall
firm lawyers are valuable pro bono providers, as
their (paid) legal experience is more likely to be relevant to pro bono cases
can have a substantial impact, particularly in smaller, more disadvantaged
communities’.
In the Law Council of Australia’s 2018
Justice Project Final
, the contribution of sole practitioners, together with small and
medium firms, to pro bono services was recognised with the acknowledgement
reporting of this work is skewed towards large firms. The report noted that the
identification of pro bono hours by the Australian
Pro Bono Centre relates to
the work of large law firms.
The report also included a relevant submission from Regional Alliance West about
legal and non-legal work undertaken by the private
profession within communities
recognising:
... the unacknowledged contribution that many private practitioner lawyers make
to their communities through providing free or low
cost assistance to their
clients or contributing in other ways, such as being involved on the boards of
local not-for-profit organisations
or sporting
Recognition of pro bono work aligns with the National Pro Bono
Aspirational Target, which has a small number of signatories and is
primarily for firms that tender for Federal Government work and are required to
disclose their pro bono commitment as part
of the tender process. At the time of
the Commission’s report, the signatories to the Target were overwhelmingly
from the corporate
sector, with 95% being firms of 50 plus
In its 2023
reporting of national pro bono targets, the National Pro Bono Centre reported
that the 57 large firms (50 or more lawyers)
completed an average of 36.6 hours
per lawyer of pro bono services while small firms (fewer than 50 lawyers)
undertook an average
of 50.22 hours per lawyer. Reference was made to the hours
of ‘Individuals’ (defined as Solicitors and Barristers), although
details as to the nature and structure of their practices were
Recognition and evaluation of the contribution of sole and small private
practices to the delivery of low or no fee legal services
is key to the broader
discussion as to the meaning and purpose of pro bono targets. An inclusive and
balanced approach to the pro
bono framework in Australia will shift the paradigm
to encompass the entire private profession.
Case Illustrations
Three sole general
practitioners
in rural and
regional New South Wales offer insights into the key role that local solicitors
have in their communities, including
access to the law. A consideration of their
approach to their clients, particularly in relation to fees coupled with their
the community supports the finding that the provision of access to the
law is part of their practice, despite their private practice
business and its
reliance on income from fees. These practitioners offer an illustration of the
work of country solicitors and their
role in the community.
David was a sole general practitioner in a regional area of NSW. He practised
in wills and estates, powers of attorney, enduring guardianships,
conveyancing,
family provision claims, leasing and business law. David was involved in his
local community through service on boards
and committees. He also gave
community-based presentations in the area of wills and estates.
David likened the role of a sole practitioner to that of a general medical
practitioner, with the ability to discuss problems face-to-face
and provide that
‘little bit of extra service’. He spoke of the advantages of knowing
the community and being able to
provide additional service:
That’s part of being part of a community and partly because I’ve now
been here 30 years. So I’ve dealt with the
parents and now dealing with
kids, but you get to know them, and so there are shortcuts you can take, but
also some extra services
you can provide because you know enough about them to
be able to say, ‘What about this? What about
was also a sole general practitioner
in a regional area of NSW. He
practised in family law, business law,
conveyancing, litigation and wills and estates. He has been a sole practitioner
for 14 years;
prior to this, he was an employed solicitor for approximately 17
years. Gavin’s reason for opting for sole practice was as
an alternative
to his previous experience as an employed solicitor. He worked for a sole
principal who ran a large practice that,
as Gavin described, was
‘operating a meat-grinder where clients would be fed in one end’.
The majority of Gavin’s clients were referred from previous or existing
clients. He reduced his fees for clients who were not
able to afford full fees.
He had also previously undertaken legal aid work, although he ceased this work
because of its low remuneration.
Gavin described himself as having ‘fairly strong community
ethics’. Examples of this include locally-based initiatives
organised, supporting charities, sponsoring the local football club and
financially assisting a local athlete. His strong
interest in education had led
him to volunteer in the Law Society’s mock trial competition for high
school students, to give
lectures in legal studies at the local high school, as
well as teach in a community program for young entrepreneurs.
Lara was the sole principal of a practice in rural NSW. She was the only
permanent solicitor in the town. Lara practised in conveyancing,
attorney, wills and estates, land and environment court cases, water, rural
leasing, by consent family law matters and
elder law. In 2017, Lara became the
sole principal of the firm in which she had been an employed solicitor, as a
result of the passing
of her husband, who had been the sole principal. She had
worked in the firm from the commencement of her legal career as a clerk
ago. When speaking about the decision to continue her late husband’s
practice, Lara explained that she ‘wasn’t
prepared to walk out on my
staff and walk out on the community’.
Lara’s clients were individuals and businesses from across the state.
She did work for no cost as well as low fees. One of her
client bases were older
clients for whom she undertook non-chargeable work, such as assisting with
administration matters, for example,
dealing with Centrelink. Lara’s work
with the elderly included referrals from the local retirement village, where she
saw clients,
as well as home visits. Being mindful of elder abuse by families,
she was focused on protecting her clients. She provided initial
free advice to
‘walk-in’ clients and, given her street-front location, members of
the local community would ‘drop
in’ to her office. Lara singled out
the vulnerability of farmers during the drought who sought her advice, some of
quasi-legal. She assisted with free legal advice as well as providing
a space for these clients to confidentially express their grief
Like David and Gavin, Lara had a strong sense of community, which was
evidenced through her references to her staff, her children’s
school, the
church, and the generosity of the local community, particularly when her father
passed away.
These three sole general practitioners completed matters for clients at
either reduced fees or for no fee. As Gavin stated: ‘I
think almost every
sole practitioner does do reduced-fee work’. Gavin’s observation of
the common occurrence of reduced
fee work, coupled with the practice of not
charging some clients in particular situations, recognises the significant
amount of unacknowledged
pro bono work undertaken by sole practitioners.
VI Conclusion
practitioners are an invisible and abandoned cohort
within the solicitors’ branch of the Australian legal profession. Their
population is not known, they are not defined, their work as private
practitioners is inconclusive and their contribution to their
communities
untold. Despite this, they are an enduring cohort within the legal
profession.
Individually and collectively, these solicitors have a critical role in the
provision of legal services to non-corporate clients across
city, suburban,
rural and remote regions. These solicitors, despite their private practice
status, act for clients for reduced or
no fees. Their contribution to the
facilitation of access to the law is, to a limited extent, acknowledged.
However, the extent of
discounted work is not known. Compared with the
publicised pro bono work of the large corporate firms, the work of sole
practitioners (and sole and small firms) remains unidentified and
unacknowledged. This gap in our understanding of the contribution
of different
cohorts of lawyers, apart from the large corporate firms, to the facilitation of
access to the law is neither justifiable
nor reflective of the legal profession.
practice is a discrete area of legal practice that
differs from specialist sole and small firm practice. Sole generalists have
interests and needs, including sustainable client engagement,
efficiencies through technology and continuous professional development
range of areas. They are the lone decision makers in relation to client
engagement, areas of practice and their competency
to undertake work in
particular matters. Despite their distinctiveness, they are not regarded by
professional associations or regulators
as a separate cohort of legal service
providers. Indeed, their presence is hidden in the reporting on sole
practitioners more generally.
There is a deficit of knowledge and understanding
of their practice, their clients and their contribution to their communities,
their pro bono work. Whilst the population of sole solicitors in
known, the population of sole general practitioners is an enigma.
In order to
accurately report on the percentage of sole
practitioners within
the solicitor’s branch of the profession, there must first be a definition
of general practice. This article
proposes a definition as three or more areas
of legal practice.
The legal profession is facing change – rapid and unheralded. There is
an increasing acknowledgement that AI-driven innovation
‘disrupting’ society, prompting a shift from the ‘old
ways’ to a calling to embrace the ‘new world’.
In exploring
the impact of change, such as the extent and the likely consequences of
technology on access to legal services, it is
important to understand the
curious role of the sole
practitioner within the
solicitors’ profession, for the benefit of these lawyers, their clients
and their communities.
Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, University of Technology
Hilary Sommerlad and Ole
Hammerslev, ‘Introduction Studying Lawyers Comparatively in the
Century’ in Richard L Abel et al (eds),
Century Societies
(Hart Publishing, 2021) vol 2, 2.
In 2022, 77% of Queensland law
practices were a sole practice, whilst 12% were practices of two to four
partners or principals. Urbis
and Law Society of New South Wales,
National Profile of Solicitors: Final Report
(Report, 26 April 2023) 30
<2022 National Profile of Solicitors - Final.pdf (lawsociety.com.au)>
2022 National Profile of Solicitors’)
In 2022, 84% of law practices
across all Australian jurisdictions were a sole practice, whilst 9% were
practices of two to four partners
or principals. Ibid.
The solicitors, referred to in
this article, do not include law academics, lawyers in public service, community
or in-house lawyers
or lawyers who have moved into roles such as politicians and
political staffers.
These states and territory are
South Australia, Victoria, Western Australia and the Australian Capital
Territory. An independent
Bar is maintained in these states and territory.
Tasmania and the Northern Territory also maintain a fused profession with a very
small independent Bar. Australian Bar Association, ‘What is the
Bar?’ ABA Australian Bar Association (Web Page, November
https://austbar.asn.au/for-the-community/what-is-the-bar>.
Barristers are allowed to take
instructions from clients without an instructing solicitor.
Legal Profession
Uniform Law Australian Barristers’ Conduct Rules 2015
r 22. These
instructions are known as direct access. They are not common and are usually
restricted to local court and criminal matters.
See Dominic Toomey,
‘Direct Access Briefs – Avoiding the Pitfalls’ (Bar Practice
Course New South Wales Bar Association,
30 March 2016) <
Direct_Access_Briefs_-_Avoiding_the_Pitfalls1.pdf (nswbar.asn.au)>.
2022 National
Profile of Solicitors’ Final
This clustering is also
evident in academic literature. In the United States, references to solo and
small firm practices as a collective
are found in Carlin’s study of New
York lawyers referred to in Leslie C Levin, ‘Preliminary Reflections on
the Professional
Development of Solo and Small Law Firm Practitioners’
(2001) 70(3)
Fordham Law Review
A legal director is the
principal of an incorporated law practice.
Legal Profession Uniform Law
This is the definition of a
small practice applied in the ‘
2022 National Profile of
Solicitors’ Final Report
Harper Lee,
Mockingbird
(J B Lippincott & Co, 1960).
Entertainment/Miramax Films, Debra Choate, 1997).
Charles Dickens,
(Bradbury & Evans, 1853).
The image of the city-based
law firm with expansive, expensive views is represented in the novel and movie
Hell has Harbour Views
. Richard Beasley,
Hell Has Harbour Views
(Pan Macmillan, 2001);
Hell Has Harbour Views
(ABC Australia, Ian Collie
and Prue Fletcher, 2005).
The image of well-dressed
personnel was represented in the book by Lisa Pryor,
The Pinstriped
(Picador Australia, 2008).
Legal Services Commission
Queensland,
Annual Report 2022-23
(Report, 2023) 11.
In 2022 in Queensland, 21%
of solicitors practised in the suburbs and 8% practised in country areas.
2022 National Profile of Solicitors’ Final
2) 35. The Queensland Law Society has established 15 District Law Associations
outside of Brisbane.
<https://www.qls.com.au/Practising-law-in-Qld/Working-as-a-solicitor/District-Law-Associations>.
The Castle (n 14);
(Origma Productions Pty Ltd, Kitty Flanagan and Vincent Sheehan, 2021, 2022
In the National Profile of
Solicitors, these areas are referred to as ‘country/rural’,
2022 National Profile of
Solicitors’
Maxine Evers, ‘The
Long Lonely Road of the Sole General Practitioner: Towards Definition, Knowledge
and Endurance’ (PhD
Thesis, La Trobe University, 2021). Three regional
practitioners were selected because of their visible role in their communities,
with clients seeking their general services. Interviews with 23 practitioners
were conducted between 2017 and 2018. The interviews
applied a phenomenological
methodology and were approximately one hour in duration. The interviews with
Lara and Gavin were conducted
in person. The interview with David was conducted
The flawed data is because
of the lack of a common approach to data collection and reporting of the
participating seven law societies
and the Victorian Legal Services Board, and
the incorrect recording of data by some associations. Urbis and Law Society of
2018 National Profile of Solicitors: Final Report
(Report, 17 July 2019)
<https://www.lawsociety.com.au/sites/default/files/2019-07/2018%20National%20Profile%20of%20Solicitors.pdf>
2018 National Profile of Solicitors
’) 4. The 2022 National
Profile noted Note: ‘Sole practice includes sole practices and one
principal practices. Different
methods are used across jurisdictions for
defining sole practices and one principal practices, therefore these categories
combined.’ ‘
2022 National Profile of
Solicitors’
Small firms are defined as
two to four partners in the ‘
2022 National Profile of
Solicitors’
Margaret Thornton and Asmi
Wood, ‘Australia’ in Richard L Abel et al (eds), (n 1) 50.
The growth of specialisation
is evidenced by the number of areas of accredited specialisation. The Law
Society of New South Wales
(‘NSW Law Society’) offers 17 areas of
accredited specialisation – see ‘Specialist Accreditation
Law Society of New South Wales
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://www.lawsociety.com.au/for-the-public/going-court-and-working-with-lawyers/specialist-accreditation-scheme>.
The Queensland Law Society offers 11 areas of accredited specialisation –
see ‘Specialist Accreditation’,
Queensland Law Society
Page, 2024) < Specialist Accreditation - Queensland Law Society>. The Law
Institute of Victoria offer 16 areas of specialisation
– see Become an
Accredited Specialist,
Law Institute of Victoria
(Web Page, 2024)
<Become an Accredited Specialist (liv.asn.au)>. In 1985, Victoria was the
first state to offer specialist
accreditation with the one practice area of
family law. By 1994, there were eight areas of accredited specialisation. Inge
‘Specialisation, Accreditation and the Legal Profession in Australia
and Canada’ (1994) 1(2)
Murdoch University Electronic Journal of
Urbis and Law Society of New
South Wales,
2011 Law Society National Profile: Final Report
July 2012) (‘
2011 Law Society National Profile
’); Urbis and
Law Society of New South Wales,
2014 Law Society National Profile: Final
(Report, April 2015)
https://urbis.com.au/app/uploads/2015/05/2014-Law-Society-National-Profile.pdf;
Urbis and Law Society of New
South Wales,
National Profile of Solicitors
2016: Report
(Report, 24 August 2017)
<https://www.lawsociety.com.au/sites/default/files/2018-04/NATIONAL%20PROFILE%20OF%20SOLICITORS%202016.compressed.pdf>
2016 National Profile of Solicitors
’); Urbis and Law
Society of New South Wales, (‘
2018 National Profile of
’) (n 21); Urbis and Law Society of New South Wales,
National Profile of Solicitors: Final Report
(Report, 1 July 2020) (Report,
1 July 2021)
https://www.lawsociety.com.au/sites/default/files/2021-07/2020%20National%20Profile%20of%20Solicitors%20-%20Final%20-%201%20July%202021.pdf
20 National Profile of Solicitors
’); Urbis and Law
Society of New South Wales, (‘
2022 National Profile of
Solicitors’)
(n 2) 39. The 2024 National Profile has not been
published at the date of this article’s submission.
Urbis and Law Society of New
South Wales, (‘
2022 National Profile of Solicitors’)
Urbis and Law Society of New
South Wales, (‘
2011 Law Society National Profile
’) (n 27) 15.
Urbis and Law Society of New
South Wales
, (‘2022 National Profile of Solicitors’)
This table is based on the
data published in the NSW Law Society’s
National Profile of Solicitors
in 2011, 2014, 2016, 2018, 2020 and 2022. Urbis and Law Society of New South
‘National Profile of Solicitors 2016’
(n 25) 27, table
12. A different method for presenting the number of firm structures within the
private profession is utilised in
the 2018, 2020 and 2022 reports, which do not
include the percentage increase in firm sizes. Urbis and Law Society of New
South Wales,
‘2018 National Profile of Solicitors’
figure 22, Urbis and Law Society of New South Wales,
‘2020 National
Profile of Solicitors’
(n 27) 30, figure 22. Urbis and Law Society of
New South Wales
, (‘2022 National Profile of Solicitors’)
2) 32, figure 22.
Sommerlad and Hammerslev (n
Examples of professional
publications featuring large corporate firms include
Lawyers Weekly
Page) <About us - Lawyers Weekly>
and Thomson
State of the Legal Services Market
(Report, 2023) <2023
Australia: State of the Legal Market Report — Navigating towards
prosperity amid challenges - Thomson
Reuters Institute>.
Levin describes these
lawyers as ‘big firm refugees’. Levin (n 10) 849.
The website of the Council
of Australian Law Deans lists 41 law schools.
Australia’s Law
(Web Page) <Australia’s Law Schools – Studying Law in
Australia (cald.asn.au)>.
Jerome E Carlin,
on their Own: A Study of Individual Practitioners in Chicago
University Press, 1962); Jerome E Carlin,
Lawyers’ Ethics: A Survey of
the New York City Bar
(Russell Sage Foundation, 1966); Levin (n 10) ; Leslie
C. Levin, ‘The Ethical World of Solo and Small Law Firm
Practitioners’
(2004) 41(2)
Houston Law Review
; Carroll Seron,
‘New Strategies for Getting Clients: Urban and Suburban Lawyers’
Views’ (1993) 27(2)
Law & Society Review
399; Carroll Seron,
The Business of Practicing Law: The Work Lives of Solo and Small-Firm
(Temple University Press, 1996); Carroll Seron, ‘The Status
of Legal Professionalism at the Close of the Twentieth Century:
Chicago Lawyers
and Urban Lawyers’
(2007) 32(2)
Law & Social Inquiry
Julian Disney et al,
(Law Book Co, 2
ed, 1986) 66-67.
Roman Tomasic and Cedric
George Bullard,
Lawyers and Their Work in New South Wales: Preliminary
(Law Foundation of New South Wales, 1978) 103.
From the early 1990s, some
state and territory governments in Australia legislated for the licensing of
conveyancers to undertake
the sale and purchase of land. This was work that had
previously been restricted to solicitors. For example, NSW passed the
Conveyancers Licensing Act
From the late 1990s, the
assessment of damages for less serious personal injury and workers compensation
claims were transferred
from the courts and the work of solicitors to statutory
bodies. For example, NSW passed the
Motor Accidents Compensation Act
Workers Compensation Legislation Amendment Act
Linda Haller,
‘Solicitors’ Disciplinary Hearings in Queensland 1930-2000: A
Statistical Analysis’
[2001] BondLawRw 1
(2001) 13(1)
Bond Law Review
; Leslie Levin,
‘Building a Better Lawyer Discipline System: The Queensland
Experience’ (2006) 9(2)
Legal Ethics
187; Linda Haller and Heather
Green, ‘Solicitor’s Swan Song?: A Statistical Update on Lawyer
Discipline in Queensland’
[2007] BondLawRw 6
(2007) 19(1)
Bond Law Review
Haller Ibid 36; Haller and
Green Ibid 10.
Legal Profession Uniform
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
(Victoria);
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
Legal Profession Uniform
2022 National Profile
Solicitors’
Section 7(4)
Profession Act
See footnote 45.
In most disciplinary cases,
the solicitor facing misconduct charges is the respondent as the proceedings are
commenced by the regulator,
for example, in New South Wales (NSW), the NSW Law
Society or the NSW Legal Services Commissioner.
See John Briton,
Changing Face of Lawyer Regulation
(Presentation, 47th Annual
Vincents’ QLS Symposium, 28 March 2009)
<https://www.lsc.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/106195/changing-face-of-lawyer-regulation.pdf;
Tough Love: Professional Regulation of Lawyer Dishonesty
(Research Paper No 13–11, ANU College of Law, 9 August 2013).
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2307325>;
43) 1; Haller and Green (n 43) 151.
Briton Ibid.
For example, in
Investments Pty Ltd v Resolute Legal Pty Ltd
[2018] QCATA 77
, the respondent
was described as a ‘sole practitioner’. In
Legal Services
Commissioner v Loel
{2020] QCAT 326, the respondent was the ‘sole
signatory and operator of the trust account’. In
Legal Services
Commissioner v Sewell (No 2)
[2023] QCAT 374
the respondent was
identified as the ‘sole legal practitioner director’. In
Society of New South Wales v McElvenny
[2002] NSWADT 166
, the respondent was
described as ‘a solicitor in sole practice’ [1]. In
of the Law Society of New South Wales v Kernaghan
[2021] NSWCATOD 111
the Tribunal referred to the respondent’s ‘sole practice’
throughout the decision. In
of the Law Society of New South
Wales v Hunter
[2021] NSWCATOD 22
it was noted that the respondent
was the principal of his firm [1].
Council of the Law Society of
New South Wales v
[2022] NSWCATOD 111
, the Tribunal noted
that the respondent was a sole practitioner at [22 & 23].
For example, in
Society of New South Wales v Hinde
[2005] NSWADT 199
, there is no reference
to the respondent being a sole practitioner. However, the circumstances of his
misconduct, being failure to
honour an undertaking in a conveyancing matter, and
the fact that he submitted good character references from a sole practitioner
highlight that he may have been a sole practitioner.
[2016] QCAT 102.
[2024] QCAT 105.
[2012] NSWADT 159.
Legal Services
Commissioner v Loel
[2020] QCAT 326.
Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales v Davidson
[2020] NSWCATOD 71
practitioner misappropriated trust funds across various matters and intermixed
money. Whilst she had been a solicitor for
17 years, only three of those had
been in sole practice with her earlier practice as a government legal officer.
The Tribunal accepted
medical evidence, character references, the fact that
clients did not lose money and the respondent’s remorse. Findings of
professional misconduct and unsatisfactory professional conduct were made, and
the respondent allowed a restricted practising certificate.
Law Society of
New South Wales v Portale
[2001] NSWADT 68
, the respondent was found guilty
of misconduct in relation to breaches of the trust account in estate and
conveyancing matters as
well as a workers’ compensation and a lease
matter. His name was removed from the roll. In
Law Society of New South Wales
v Cornell No 2
[2006] NSWADT 308
, the Tribunal found wilful breaches of the
trust account leading to professional misconduct. Evidence from the Law Society
the respondent had taken ‘his eye off the ball with respect to
the Trust Account’ due to his increased interest in property
development
with his solicitor work reduced to a few matters [39]. The respondent was fined
$8,000 and given a public reprimand.
He also gave an undertaking not to apply
for a practising certificate for five years. In
Legal Services Commissioner v
[2019] QCAT 146
, the respondent was guilty of professional
misconduct in relation to estate and family law matters, as well as a power of
Orders were made for his name to be removed from the roll.
Solicitors have an ethical
duty to ‘deliver legal services competently, diligently and as promptly as
reasonably practicable’.
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian
Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
Barristers can refuse a
matter if it is an area in which they do not have the ‘capacity, skill and
experience’.
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Barristers’
Conduct Rules 2015
Solicitors have an ethical
duty to ‘act in the best interest of their client’ (r 4.1.1) and to
‘deliver legal services
competently, diligently and as promptly as
reasonably practicable’ (r 4.1.3.)
Australian Solicitors’ Conduct
Canadian Bar
Association’s definition of general practitioner quoted in Lauw (n 26)
‘Solo, Small Firm and
General Practice Division’,
American Bar Association
2020) <https://www.americanbar.org/groups/gpsolo/>.
Broad is defined as
‘less than 25% of work across all categories’, being eight areas of
work listed in Table 4 in Pascoe
Pleasence, Nigel Balmer and Richard Moorhead,
A Time of Change: Solicitors’ Firms in England and Wales
commissioned by the UK Law Society, Legal Services Board & Ministry of
Justice, July 2012) 14
http://www.pascoepleasence.com/_Media/A%20Time%20of%20Change.pdf
Levin (n 37) 325.
Dare notes the power of the
institutional roles of lawyers, doctors and police. Tim Dare, ‘Robust
Role-Obligation: How do Roles
Make a Moral Difference?’ (2016) 50(4)
Journal of Value Inquiry
See Robert Dingwall and
Philip Lewis (eds),
The Sociology of the Professions: Lawyers, Doctors and
(Macmillan, 1983).
JP Nieuwenhuysen,
Professions in the Marketplace: An Australian Study of Lawyers, Doctors,
Accountants and Dentists
(Melbourne University Press, 1982).
Solicitors’ Conduct Rules 2015
Levin (n 37) 325.
Rosemary Hunter et al,
‘Lawyers and Access to Justice’ in Richard L Abel et al (eds), (n 1)
Pleasence et al (n 69)
Sommerlad et al,
‘England and Wales A Legal Profession in the Vanguard of Professional
Transformation’ (n 1) 91.
Lauw (n 26) [6.4].
See also Sommerlad et al in
Richard L Abel et al (eds) (n 1) 98. Specialisation has also broader impacts
across the law. For example,
see Brian Opeskin, ‘The Relentless Rise of
Judicial Specialisation and its Implications for Judicial Systems’ 75(1)
Current Legal Problems
Productivity Commission,
Access to Justice Arrangements
(Report, Australian Government
Productivity Commission, 3 December 2014) 20
<https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/access-justice/report>.
Susan Daicoff, ‘The
Future of the Legal Profession’
[2011] MonashULawRw 1
(2011) 37(1)
Monash University Law
Centre for Innovative
Justice RMIT,
Affordable Justice – A Pragmatic Path to Greater
Flexibility and Access in the Private Legal Services Market
(Report, October
http://mams.rmit.edu.au/qr7u4uejwols1.pdf
Law Council of Australia and
Law Institute of Victoria,
Report into the Rural, Regional and Remote Areas
Lawyers Survey
(Executive Summary, July 2009) 1
<https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/publicassets/68bc466f-d839-e711-93fb-005056be13b5/Report%20into%20the%20Rural,%20Regional%20and%20Remote%20Areas%20Lawyers%20Survey%20-%20Executive%20Summary.pdf>.
Productivity Commission (n
‘Definition of Pro
Australian Pro Bono Centre
(Web Page, 2024) <Australian
Pro Bono Centre | Definition of Pro Bono>.
Productivity Commission (n
Law Council of Australia,
The Justice Project Final Report Part 2
(Report, August 2018) 13
<https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/justice-project/final-report>.
Productivity Commission
(n 87) 810.
Performance Report of the National Pro Bono Target September 2023 6
<16th-Performance-Report-of-the-National-Pro-Bono-Target-2023-FINAL.pdf
(probonocentre.org.au)>.
These practitioners have
been de-identified.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (271 KB)
PDF format (619 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter