URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2006/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cases + Complaints
Cases + complaints
NV v Randwick City Council
[2005] NSWADT 45
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal 4 March 2005
Letters of complaint, written by NV to the local council about her
neighbours, were disclosed by the council to the neighbours. Tribunal
have found breach of IPP 11 and ordered $40,000
compensation.
Background facts
NV had a long-running dispute with her neighbour, stemming from additions to
the neighbour’s home, which had been opposed by
NV. The alterations
included windows which looked onto NV’s property.
NV wrote letters to the Council both when the additions were first proposed,
and then after construction. Some of NV’s letters,
written in 2001,
included suggestions that the neighbours were peering into NV’s home day
and night from the new windows, and
that the neighbours were ‘peeping
toms’ or ‘voyeurs’.
The respondent Council placed copies of NV’s letters, and
Council’s responses to those letters, on the development application
relating to the neighbour’s property.
Some time later, the neighbour requested access to the development
application file, under s.12 of the Local Government Act. The Council
the neighbour with access to the file in May 2001, and again in August 2002.
In August or September 2003 the neighbours commenced defamation action
against NV in relation to the content of the letters. The defamation
settled in February 2004, with NV paying $25,000 to the neighbours, the
neighbours installing opaque glass on their windows,
and each party paying their
own legal costs.
The internal review
NV lodged her request for an internal review in October 2003. When asked by
the Council when she had first become aware of the alleged
disclosure, she
replied that it was around September 2003, when she first received the
defamation statement of claim from the neighbours’
solicitors, which
included copies of her letters.
The Council conducted its internal review and advised NV that it had legal
advice suggesting it had not breached the PPIP Act, on
the basis that (i) the
letters were unsolicited, (ii) the letters did not contain ‘personal
information’, and (iii) s.12
of the Local Government Act authorised the
disclosure.
Two months later the Council sent a further letter to NV in relation to her
internal review request, noting that there was no public
interest reason not to
disclose the letters to the neighbours, and thus it was obliged to make the
disclosure under s.12(6) of the
Local Government Act.
Was there a valid request for internal review?
Requests for internal review must be lodged within 6 months of the applicant
becoming aware of the conduct at issue, unless the respondent
allows additional
time (s.53(3)(d) of the PPIP Act).
NV lodged her request for internal review in October 2003, and thus for her
internal review request to be valid, NV needed to show
that either (i) she first
became aware of the conduct complained of some time after April 2003, or (ii)
the Council had allowed her
an extension of time.
There was evidence to suggest that the applicant may have first discovered in
August 2002, during an argument, that her neighbours
had read (or at least knew
of the content of) her letters, but the applicant argued that she did not know
that the neighbours had
of those letters until September 2003.
The Tribunal defined the scope of the conduct at issue as being the
disclosure of information to the neighbours – a broader
concept than the
provision of a copy of documents to the neighbours – and thus found the
applicant NV had definitely ‘become
aware’ of the conduct by March
2003, if not earlier in August 2002. In either case, it was more than six months
before NV lodged
her request for internal review.
The respondent Council argued that it had not knowingly permitted NV to lodge
her request for internal review out-of-time (having
relied on NV’s
assertion that she had first become aware of the alleged disclosure in September
2003), and thus had never granted
an extension of time. The Council therefore
argued that there had never been a valid internal review application that could
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
The Tribunal found that there had not been a valid request for internal
review made by NV, as her application was not lodged within
time or within the
terms of a granted extension of time. The Tribunal therefore found that it had
no jurisdiction to review the case.
However Robinson JM went on to deal with other matters, in case his decision
in relation to jurisdiction is found to be wrong.
Whose personal information was it?
The respondent Council argued that the content of the letters written by NV
was not ‘personal information’ about NV, but
information’ about the neighbours. The Tribunal accepted that the letters
contained personal information about
NV and her neighbours, although it did not
provide comprehensive reasoning on this point.
Does s.12 of the Local Government Act authorise non-compliance with the
disclosure principles?
Section 25 of the PPIP Act allows non-compliance with certain IPPs, including
the disclosure principle IPP 11 (s.18), if another Act
or law lawfully
authorises, requires, permits, necessarily implies or reasonably contemplates
non-compliance.
The respondent Council argued that s.12 of the Local Government Act is such a
Section 12(1) of the Local Government Act allows any person to inspect
certain listed documents, including development applications
associated documents”, free of charge. “Associated documents”
is not defined. Section 12(6) applies
to all other documents held by councils,
and requires that access be given subject to a ‘public interest’
The neighbour demonstrated to the Tribunal that the Council had first
disclosed the information to her (by way of allowing her to
access and photocopy
the development application file) in May 2001. The respondent Council
nonetheless had no record of that disclosure,
only the second access in August
The Tribunal found that the Council had not considered the ‘public
interest’ test in either May 2001 or August 2002, prior
to disclosing
information to the neighbour.
The Tribunal did not make a finding on whether or not s.12 of the Local
Government Act authorised non-compliance with IPP 11, as it
found that the
Council had not formally applied s.12, in that the ‘public interest’
test in s.12(6) had not been followed,
and therefore could not “call
section 12 in aid” [36].
A breach were it not for being out of time
The Tribunal concluded by noting that had the internal review been lodged by
NV within the time limits required by the PPIP Act, it
would have found that the
Council had breached IPP 11.
The Tribunal further noted that it would have ordered the payment of the
maximum amount of $40,000 in compensation, having found that
the disclosure of
the information to the neighbours caused NV to suffer financial losses of
$25,000 by way of settlement of the defamation
proceedings, and more than
$15,000 by way of her own legal costs in relation to the defamation
proceedings.
This case is notable for the conclusion that the Tribunal would have been
prepared to order the maximum limit of compensation allowable
under the Act,
were it not for the procedural issue that barred its jurisdiction.
It thus demonstrates the risks to councils of allowing relatively open access
to council files, without subjecting requests to access
such files to further
scrutiny in the context of the ‘public interest’ test in the Local
Government Act and the privacy
principles in the PPIP and HRIP Acts.
Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co.
GA v Department of Education and Training
[2005] NSWADT 47
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal, 4 March 2005
Interlocutory decision re scope of conduct to be reviewed at
GA had previously made a privacy complaint about the disclosure of
information by a school principal to the police. In the course
of a hearing into
that incident, GA summonsed material from the Department. The material included
hand-written notes written by a
Departmental investigator following an interview
with the school principal. That report suggested or reflected other conduct by
school principal, which GA, in this case, then sought to review as well.
Scope of conduct at issue
GA framed this current privacy complaint by way of naming a number of the
IPPs, and then quoting 15 passages from the hand-written
notes, which he claimed
breached one or more of those IPPs.
The Tribunal therefore had to draw inferences about what conduct GA was
complaining about, but noted that GA would have to identify
the “precise
nature and extent of the conduct” prior to the hearing of this matter.
Is GA aggrieved by the conduct?
The passages in the report highlighted by GA included information about GA
himself, but also passages about his sons, the girlfriend
of one of his sons,
and her family.
The Tribunal noted the beneficial intention of the PPIP Act, and a line of
cases suggesting a broad interpretation is appropriate.
However Hennessy DP also
noted at [8] that “the person must nevertheless be “aggrieved”
because he or she believes
that the conduct constitutes a breach of the PPIP
Act, not for any extraneous reason.”
GA alleged that inaccuracies about his son’s girlfriend affected the
credibility with which he and his family members were treated
by the respondent
agency, and that this “negative attitude of the Department ... generally
tainted the Department’s response
to his complaints” [10].
The Tribunal found that GA is aggrieved “not because he believes that
the conduct constitutes a breach of the PPIP Act in relation
to the student, but
because of the way he says the comments have affected the Department’s
attitude to his complaints”.
The Tribunal found that GA’s complaint
did not relate to concerns about the protection of personal information or a
The Tribunal therefore found GA had no standing to pursue that aspect of his
complaint which related to passages in the hand-written
notes which were about
his son’s girlfriend.
The conclusion drawn by the Tribunal in this case suggests a narrow view of
the purpose of the IPPs in protecting ‘personal
information’ and
In framing this case, GA appears to have identified not only the alleged
breach of privacy (breach of the accuracy principle), but
also the harm that
flowed from the alleged breach (prejudice).
Yet in describing the harm as part of his framing of the
‘conduct’ complained of – the prejudice he suffered, or
“the way he says the comments have affected the Department’s
attitude to his complaints” – the Tribunal believed
describing conduct that is reviewable.
GA identified the nub of why the ‘accuracy’ principle is one of
the IPPs: reliance on inaccurate information (whether
inaccurate or out-of-date
in factual terms, or misleading, irrelevant or intrusive) can, just like an
unauthorised disclosure of
private information, result in prejudice to the
subject person. Unfortunately for GA, the Tribunal did not see this as a
issue.Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co.
NZ v Director General, New South Wales Department of Housing
[2005] NSWADT
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal, 18 March 2005
Investigations into applicant, and into her sister. Disclosure of
conclusions drawn about applicant, to her sister, were not necessary
investigation.
The respondent agency, the Department of Housing, had undertaken some
investigations into whether their tenant, NZ, had undisclosed
property assets or
undisclosed income. As a result of their investigations the Department increased
NZ’s rent, and later obtained
eviction orders.
Both these decisions were overturned following appeal. However NZ claimed
psychological harm from these events. NZ claimed the Department
had taken this
action against her on the basis of misunderstandings and mischievous allegations
made against her by her estranged
family members.
NZ’s sister, X, was also a tenant of the Department of Housing. The
agency had received some anonymous complaints about X, which
it had investigated
and concluded were false.
The two letters
X had sought an AVO against NZ, and the agency received a subpoena to produce
documents to those court proceedings. Amongst the documents
produced to the
court under subpoena were copies of two letters written from the agency to
The first letter to X was to communicate the results of an investigation by
the Department into the anonymous complaints made about
X. The letter stated in
“I am satisfied that the allegations are false. On balance I am
satisfied with your explanation that the information has come
from your sister
[NZ]. I confirm we discussed the possibility that [NZ] may be a vexatious
complainant.”
The second letter did not make any reference to NZ in the text of the letter.
However the copy from the court file included a handwritten
note at the foot of
the letter, apparently written by X’s daughter about a meeting she and X
had with the author of the letter.
That handwritten note mentioned NZ in the
context of making “false claims”.
Narrowing of issues
NZ’s claim related both to the Department’s investigation of her,
and in relation to the accuracy and disclosure of the
information contained in
the two letters to X. Her original application claimed breaches of IPPs 5, 9, 10
Following planning meetings the issues that remained to be determined at
hearing were:
• the collection of information about land titles relating to NZ in
relation to a rental investigation
• the use of that information about land titles relating to NZ
• the disclosure of information to X
The collection and use
The Tribunal was satisfied that the Department’s investigation was a
lawful purpose warranting collection of personal information
form of land title information.
The Tribunal was likewise satisfied that the Department took reasonable steps
to ensure the accuracy of that information before relying
upon it to make its
decisions. President O’Connor noted that the Department had held several
meetings with NZ, and engaged
in other contact with her, as part of their
attempt to establish the true nature of her land holdings. The Tribunal also
the Department used the information for a lawful purpose.
Thus the Tribunal found no breach of IPPs 1, 9 or 10 in relation to the
agency’s investigation activities.
The disclosure
The Tribunal was satisfied that the second letter, as amended with the
handwritten note, was not disclosed by the Department to the
local court. (It
appeared it had been provided to the court by X as part of her evidence.) The
not contain any personal information about
NZ, and therefore no breach was found.
However in relation to the first letter, the Tribunal found that the
information contained in the letter contained two opinions about
NZ, which were
not strictly necessary to have been communicated to X.
The agency argued that there was no disclosure of information about NZ to her
sister, because it was merely a ‘reporting back’
of what the sister
had told the agency officer. The Tribunal rejected this argument, noting that
the agency’s officer “clearly
communicated an opinion formed in her
capacity as an officer of the agency, after investigation, one that was negative
to the applicant”.
The Tribunal thus found that personal information was
disclosed about NZ to her sister.
The agency argued the disclosure was authorised by an exemption, being a
Direction issued by the Privacy Commissioner under s.41.
The Direction related
to investigative functions, and the version that applied at the time of the
conduct allowed non-compliance
with the disclosure principle (IPP 11) if it was
‘reasonably necessary for the proper exercise of any of the agency’s
investigative functions’.
The Tribunal accepted that the Department was conducting a lawful
investigation, however found no evidence to suggest that the investigation
have been hampered had the letter to X not included the final two of the three
quoted sentences:
“The investigation into the allegations against X could have been
concluded simply by the finding that the investigator was
satisfied that the
allegations were false, without conveying to X the views in relation to a
possible source of the allegations or
the behaviour of that source.”
President O’Connor therefore found a breach of IPP 11.
This matter is yet to be determined in relation to an appropriate remedy. The
applicant has claimed compensation for psychological
harm, and has tendered a
report attributing the cause of her agoraphobia to conduct by the agency.
However in the course of planning meetings prior to this hearing, the agency
agreed to remove the two letters and any copies from
NZ’s tenancy file.
The Tribunal described this as a “significant agreement” in seeking
to meet NZ’s concern
correspondence.Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co.
GA v DET & Police (no 3)
[2005] NSWADT 70
NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal, 31 March 2005
Disclosure by school was for ‘law enforcement purposes’, even
though information not relevant. Collection by police was
‘unsolicited’ exemption. Information was not ‘used’ by
either respondent.
Background facts
This case followed on from previous cases including an appeal case. The only
remaining matter to be reviewed was a paragraph in a
letter from a school
principal to a police officer investigating a complaint by GA. Other paragraphs
in the letter had been found
in earlier cases to not contain ‘personal
information’, because of the exemption to the definition for information
out of a Part 8A complaint about police.
Complaints regarding the Police
The Police argued the relevant paragraph in the letter did not contain
‘personal information’, arguing the Appeal Panel
had erred in
finding this one paragraph was not also covered by the exemption for Part 8A
complaints. The Tribunal was not willing
to re-open the Appeal Panel’s
earlier finding, and therefore examined GA’s allegations.
GA claimed the Police breached IPP 1 (relevant collection) in its collection
of the information from the school principal, in that
the information was not
relevant to their investigation. The Tribunal agreed that the information was
not directly relevant, but
found the information was “gratuitous” or
unsolicited. Thus the ‘unsolicited’ exemption from the collection
principles could be relied upon by the Police.
GA also alleged a breach of IPP 2 (indirect collection) and IPP 3 (collection
notification) by the Police. Again the Tribunal found
the respondent could rely
on the ‘unsolicited’ exemption.
GA alleged a breach of IPP 9 (accuracy) by the Police. The Tribunal found the
Police did not ‘use’ the information contained
in the particular
paragraph of the letter, as it was not relevant to their investigation. Thus IPP
9 did not apply, as it requires
checking the accuracy of the information before
Therefore no breaches by the Police were found.
Complaints regarding the Department of Education
In contrast to the Police, the Department of Education accepted that the
letter included personal information about GA.
GA argued breaches of IPP 5 (security) and 9 (accuracy) by the Department of
Education but failed to produce evidence to support his
claims, and these
aspects of his complaint were dismissed.
GA also claimed a breach of IPP 10 (use). The Department of Education argued
that the school principal had disclosed the information
without using it. The
Tribunal accepted this assessment, noting the distinctions drawn between
‘use’ and ‘disclosure’
in earlier cases such as FM v
Macquarie Uni
[2003] NSWADT 78.
Therefore no breach of IPP 10 was found.
The Department of Education accepted that the letter disclosed personal
information about GA to the police, and that the disclosure
did not comply with
IPP 11 (s.18). However the Department argued that the non-compliance was
authorised by an exemption.
The Department claimed exemptions relating to law enforcement
(s.23(5)(a)-(b)), investigations (s.23(5)(d)(ii)), the ‘other
exemption (s.25) and a direction by the Privacy Commissioner under s.41.
The Tribunal followed an earlier interpretation of ‘law enforcement
purposes’ from the case of JD v Department of Health
[2004] NSWADT
, which included disciplinary action under an Act for breaches of
professional standards.
The Tribunal found the school principal supplied the information for the sole
purpose, “rightly or wrongly”, of assisting
the police investigation
– even though the information was neither relevant nor used in the
investigation. The exemption in
s.23(5)(a) did not require relevance, necessity
or “reasonable belief” – only a purpose for the disclosure of
enforcement purposes. The Tribunal accepted the exemption was made out in
GA’s claim in relation to IPP 11 was therefore dismissed.
Anna Johnston, Salinger & Co.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter