URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:03:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Backe, Emma Louise; Moult, Kelley; Waldman, Jessie --- "Dissonance, Discordance, and Disparity: The Impact of Differences in Papers, Processes, and People on Justice for Domestic Violence Survivors in South Africa" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 28; (2025) 14(3) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 80
Dissonance, Discordance, and Disparity:
The Impact of Differences in Papers, Processes, and People on Justice for
Domestic Violence Survivors in South Africa
Emma Louise Backe
George Washington University, United States
Kelley Moult
University of Cape Town, South Africa
Jessie Waldman
University of Cape Town, South Africa
Domestic violence; South Africa; criminal justice;
protection order; court; local legal culture.
Introduction
violence (DV) survivors who access South Africa’s criminal justice system
for assistance and protection are often instructed
to “follow the
process”. According to South Africa’s Domestic Violence Act (DVA),
the “process” involves
visiting their local magistrates’ court
to apply for a protection order (PO). They also have the option to attend the
station to lodge a criminal complaint against their
This PO is supposed to
offer the “maximum amount of protection” to survivors within the
law. The DVA also sets out the
obligations of the South African Police Service
(SAPS) and the courts around the implementation of the PO, obligations further
National Strategic Plan on Gender-based Violence and
(Republic of South Africa, 2020) which articulates a
“victim-centred” and accessible system of empowerment. Instead of
streamlined, accessible and transparent process, most survivors encounter a
highly idiosyncratic and variable legal system. Differences
and often competing
approaches are apparent between and across courtrooms in the protection order
documents used, the actors operating
within the court space, and the processes
that determine the survivor’s chances of successfully securing a PO and
some measure of support from the criminal justice system.
The perception that the DV legal system is fair, consistent, and easily
accessible for all members of the public is fundamentally
ruptured by the unique
confluence of variability across magistrates courts, and the extent to which
each court seems to follow discordant
and differing procedures. These include
what courts accept and require in a PO application, how magistrates determine
the outcome
of an affidavit, and the intercession of formal and informal court
actors. Survivors who do not complete their applications properly,
or who fail
to “follow the process” to the letter of the law, are often blamed
for institutional failures. In this paper,
we argue that the South African DV
legal system is a patchwork of processes contingent on the particular workflows,
cultures, temporalities,
and preferences operating within magistrates’
courts. Rather than the uniform, responsive, and “protective”
promised by the DVA, the reality reveals silos and multiple systems of
justice which fail to communicate with one another, leaving
survivors with
limited and often unpredictable allies within the legal sector.
In the 25 years since the passage of the DVA (1998), a number of scholars
have indicated the shortcomings of the Act’s implementation.
has often focused on the poor training, preparation, and accountability of the
police and the responsiveness of the court
staff (Artz & Smythe, 2005;
Mathews & Abrahams, 2001; Parenzee et al., 2001; Vetten, 2017). We build on
this rich corpus
of research to argue that justice has not only been delivered
“at a snail’s pace” (Naidoo, 2006) but to illustrate
slow and piecemeal method of implementation of the DVA has created discordant
networks of justice, each configured around
different manners of handling POs.
These differences between and across magistrates’ courts matter in
material and procedural
ways—they impact the extent to which DV survivors
are able to make use of the law and receive assistance around protection
violence. Indeed, we have even heard survivors accused of “abusing the
system”—recasting victims of violence
as perpetrators. This
accusation presumes a transparent, coherent, and accessible set of legal
procedures, failing to account for
the reality of the legal variabilities
survivors encounter, which we outline in this paper. Instead, greater attention
needs to be
paid to the pernicious pluralities that determine which survivors of
DV are granted protection across the country.
In our analysis, variations of justice for DV survivors in South Africa are
understood through three frames: paper-based disparities,
process-based
disparities, and actor-based disparities. We draw upon data collected as part of
several separate research projects
on DV service provision carried out between
1999 and 2022 in the Western Cape province of South Africa. These projects
involved ethnographic
fieldwork, including participant observation at 10
magistrates’ courts to document the procedures involved in PO
applications;
in-depth interviews with criminal justice personnel (police and
courts) and DV survivors; and focus groups with non-governmental
organisation
(NGO) staff providing services in courts. A mix of urban, peri-urban, and rural
courts in the study included Cape Town,
Mitchell’s Plain, Khayelitsha,
Philippi, Wynberg, Paarl, Wellington, Atlantis, Bellville, and
We recognise that courts
and communities across South Africa are not uniform. There remain immense
disparities and inequities in
access to services across the country, organised
along geographical, race, and class lines—the enduring remains of
that persist even in the current democratic context. However, under
the law, all survivors should have equal access to protection
from the court, as
a life of freedom from violence is accorded to all South African citizens. We
show that the idiosyncrasies of
actors, procedures, and the court spaces shape
access to justice for survivors, thereby creating—if not
reinstating—deep
inequalities and inexplicable processes, often to the
peril of survivors.
The Law in Action: Unstable, Adaptive, and Refracted
Social scientists studying legal and juristic processes posit that the law is
not always as stable, objective, or coherent as it claims
to be. Rather, it
should be understood as a multi-scalar social field occupied by various actors
wielding differential forms of power
depending on their positionalities within
the legal system. These actors also carry with them cultural beliefs and values
which inform
how law is interpreted and practised, creating sites of
contestation around the meanings and proper mechanisms of justice (Das &
Poole, 2004; Sharma & Gupta, 2009). This approach to legal anthropology is
informed by ethnographic understandings of the state.
Such an orientation
considers people’s perceptions of the state (and state institutions like
the criminal justice system) and
how these interpretations and adaptations of
state-sanctioned institutions are leveraged by citizens whose legal
subjectivities are
necessarily informed by other cultural, historical, and
political understandings of justice (Basu, 2015; Hlavka & Mulla, 2020).
Inherent in this approach is an attention to the everyday practices and
individual actors who instantiate how law is practised, interpreted,
and carried
out at international, national, provincial, and local levels. This includes
government officials and state agents situated
within a legal bureaucracy who
translate legal documents or procedures into tangible practices and outcomes of
the law (Das &
Poole, 2004). Theorists in criminology and public
administration highlight how implementers’ decisions and actions are
by discretionary and sometimes “hidden” powers which are a
central and inevitable part of legal systems (Hawkins, 2001;
Scott, 1990).
Maynard-Moody and Musheno (2003) argue that normative, personal, organisational,
and political factors influence the
decisions of so-called “street-level
bureaucrats”. These individuals craft unique
responses to
individual clients and their situations, and their decisions impact outcomes for
participants in the criminal justice
process. As such, the routines and
adaptations emerging from interactions between workers and clients are not fully
explained by
top-down policy imposition (as described, for example, by Lipsky,
1980). In this way, ordinary people have a unique role in shaping
what policy
means in practice. They (re)move power from the “centre” (government
departments or the legislature) to the
“periphery” (local service
offices), where implementers use their discretion to meet the needs of the
community. Outcomes
are, therefore, not only shaped by law and policy but also
by cultural context, organisational structure, and social and local pressures
(Bottomley, 1973; Gelsthorpe & Padfield, 2003; Merry, 2009).
Street-level bureaucrats’ morals and values are critical factors in
these legal interactions. Workers base their decisions about
what to do on their
personal client assessments (for example, a survivor “deserving”
assistance), and their own sense
of what is right or fair (Moult, 2019;
Maynard-Moody & Musheno 2003). They make discretion-based judgments to use
policy as a
barrier (for example, by avoiding, dismissing, or reducing contact
with difficult cases) and may bend the rules to help selected
clients (Ohlin
& Remington, 1993; Walker, 1993). Importantly, their decisions have
far-reaching implications for individuals,
the state, and the social order.
Street-level bureaucrats replicate, define, and enforce dominant community
values, rights, and
order, instigating informal, but nevertheless powerful,
legal norms and procedures. In the case of gender-based violence (GBV), cultural
norms and stereotypes of sexual violence and DV also inform how law is practiced
by these legal role players and taken up by both
claimants and defendants
(Adelman, 2017; Baxi, 2014; Hlavka & Mulla, 2020).
Navigating the assemblages of official and unofficial norms, and the actors
who shape, define or mandate them, complainants must be
conversant in the rules
of certain legal genres to become legible to the court or the state as
compelling victims. This includes
the formal ways of speaking and documenting
evidence accepted by the court (Lazarus-Black, 2007; Mulla, 2014; Trinch, 2010).
Institutions
of justice are additionally comprised of non-state actors like
NGOs, organisations which are nevertheless accountable to their own
institutional mandates and procedural habitus (Moore, 2001). Essentially, rather
than talking about a country’s legal system
as a singular,
self-explanatory unit, we should instead consider the multiplicities which occur
within these legal assemblages. In
South Africa, magistrates’ courts often
operate through a constellation of formal and informal legal actors, including
guards, court clerks, and NGO staff, as well as referral to customary
and tribal procedures. Thus, this more pluralistic and porous
understanding of
the systems and legal spaces that DV survivors occupy is critical to our
South Africa’s Domestic Violence Act
The South African Domestic Violence Act (DVA) was first promulgated in 1998
and amended in 2021. When it was introduced, the DVA was
considered a highly
progressive piece of legislation which reflected contemporaneous developments in
international human rights law
recognising DV as a human rights violation
(Parenzee, 2018).
Prior to the
1990s, violence against women was largely conceived and addressed in contexts of
war and repression (Thomas & Beasley,
1993). DV had largely been neglected
in human rights discourse internationally—the private sphere of the home
was seen as effectively
outside the reach of human rights law. Between 1990 and
2000, persistent activism from women’s movements in the Global South
contributed to a paradigm shift in human rights discourse (Jaleel, 2021),
institutionalising the state’s duty of care to survivors
of DV (United
Nations Human Rights Council, 2015).
Accordingly, the DVA provides for individuals who are experiencing DV to both
obtain a PO and lodge a criminal complaint against their
abuser. It also sets
out the obligations of the police and courts to inform the public of their
rights and to assist survivors to
and enforce a PO. The DVA
defines DV as physical, sexual, emotional, verbal, psychological, and economic
abuse; intimidation and
harassment; controlling and abusive behaviour; stalking;
damage to property; and entry into the complainant’s residence without
consent (DVA, s. 1). To apply for a PO, the
complainant
and the alleged
perpetrator must be in a “domestic relationship,” which includes
married or previously married couples
(married according to any law, custom, or
religion); cohabiting people; family relationships; and those in current or
former intimate
relationships (DVA, s. 1).
This broad definition
encompasses a diverse range of domestic dynamics, aimed at tackling the manifold
forms in which domestic abuse
can manifest.
A complainant seeking a PO must apply at the closest magistrates’ court
by completing an application form and writing an
Survivors may receive
assistance from a DV clerk or an NGO in preparing these documents. The clerk
must “immediately”
pass these documents to the magistrate, who
considers whether to grant an interim protection order (IPO) (DVA, s. 4(7);
Violence Amendment Act
(DVAA), s. 12). An IPO is an order which
provides temporary protection until the “return date”. The court
decides whether
to grant a final PO at this oral hearing before the magistrate,
which both the complainant and respondent are requested to attend.
The decision
of whether to grant an IPO is usually reached based on the information provided
in the complainant’s application
alone, although some magistrates call the
complainant in to answer questions in person (Rehse et al., 2022; Waldman,
2021). At the
interim stage, the magistrate is obliged to grant an IPO if they
find that there is
prima facie
evidence that the complainant is
suffering, or may suffer, harm as a result of the DV (DVA, s. 5 and DVAA, s. 8).
If the magistrate
does not find this
prima facie
evidence, they will
issue a notice of application to the complainant and respondent with a return
date where the evidence can be
tested at an oral hearing. Where the application
appears to be unfounded or vexatious, it is dismissed (DVA, s. 5, as amended by
Once the IPO or PO has been granted, it must be served on the respondent, at
which time it comes into effect. Upon receiving a report
that a PO has been
breached, the police are obliged to arrest the respondent where DV is alleged to
have taken place and reasonable
grounds exist to believe that the complainant is
at risk of harm (DVA, s. 8, as amended by the DVAA). The law, therefore,
a system where the different organs of state work together effectively
to provide a coordinated and responsive service to complainants.
Albie Sachs states, “The interdict process is intended to be accessible,
speedy, simple and effective” (Constitutional
Court of South Africa, 1999,
p. 21). The situation on the ground, however, is far from this ideal and
complainants endure a disjointed
and disparate experience where fairness and
consistency—cornerstones of the law—are lacking. Survivors seeking
protection at a desperate and vulnerable time of need are instead subject
to the local legal practices of the court where they apply,
as well as the
attitudes of the personnel that assist them.
Paper-Based Disparities
The DVA states that an application for a PO must be made on prescribed
Department of Justice (DOJ) forms. Yet, we observed numerous
differences between
the PO application forms used in the courts where we conducted fieldwork. These
differences ultimately impact
how effectively complainants can navigate the PO
process and the kind of protection that is specified in the order they receive.
The form is supposed to be simple enough for any survivor to use without a
lawyer, but, in reality, this is often not the case (Parenzee
The PO application form is a complainant’s first, and
most important, opportunity to convey their story and the urgency of their
accurately to the court to request the specific protections that they require.
Disquietingly, we observed that the actual appearance, format, tone, and
content of the PO application form varied significantly between
Important differences in wording and layout were noted between the version
provided by the police (and downloadable from
the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development’s website) and those available at different
magistrates’ courts
across the Western Cape. This variation in paperwork
is significant for several reasons. First, a complainant who is given the form
elsewhere than the court (for example, by the police or a social worker) can
find that the court does not accept their version of
the application. Thus,
court staff may ask the complainant to recomplete the whole form. This uses
precious time in an urgent situation,
risks retraumatisation, and can make the
court process feel hostile and obstructive for the survivor. Second, the
different forms
can increase or decrease the likelihood of an IPO being granted.
The various iterations of the form asked non-standardised
questions—placing
emphasis on different aspects of the complainant’s
history—or provided additional, critical detail that may increase
likelihood that the order is granted. These differences also create disparities
in the information placed before the court, aspects
of breadth, depth and
specificity that can materially affect the way safety is assessed. For example,
one version of the form had
a section specifically on why the application was
urgent, such as whether the complainant felt unsafe to go home. Meanwhile, the
other versions of the form did not offer an opportunity for the complaint to
express if, and why their case was urgent.
Another key difference in PO forms related to the space provided for the
complainant’s affidavit. Forms with less space inevitably
lead to fewer
details being provided about the violence an applicant has experienced.
Survivors are often uncertain about what is
most relevant—whether to
detail all their experiences of violence, only the last incident, or the most
serious. Limited space
creates the impression that complainants should be brief
which, in turn, affects the likelihood they will receive a PO if their statement
is considered lacking or insufficient. The different forms also lacked
uniformity in what is constituted as DV. Some forms illustrated
the wide scope
of DV by providing 20 subtypes of DV, whilst others gave a narrower list,
summarily limiting who might be considered
to “count” as a survivor.
Another form had an annexures section, which encouraged the complainant to
supply additional
documents as evidence, if available.
Disparities between different forms may also make certain legal provisions
around protection and support more or less likely to be
included on the PO. Most
forms we viewed invited the complainant to list the children in the home who
were affected by DV, whereas
one form did not have this section. Under the
“Additional Orders Sought” section, one version of the form
highlighted
that the complainant could apply for maintenance (in addition to, or
as an alternative to, emergency monetary
while others did not. In
some courts, NGO volunteers provided additional sheets of paper for the
complainant to write her affidavit,
which means that the magistrate is presented
with a more in-depth, detailed description of the facts on which to base their
These might seem like small differences, however, the material
affordances enabled or restricted by these forms circumscribe how
violence is
described, how convincing a survivor’s testimony might be to a magistrate,
and the extent of the protection that
the survivor (and her children) may
receive. The application form is, therefore, vitally important as it represents
a list of options
available to the complainant within the courts. If an avenue
of potential relief is missing from the application form, the survivor
have recourse to access it, with potentially life-threatening consequences.
Additionally, the contact details requested on the PO form may increase or
decrease the probability of attrition, i.e., the likelihood
of a case falling
out of the system before it has been finalised. For example, some forms
requested additional personal details from
the applicant, such as their work
address and work telephone number. This increases the chance that they could be
occurs frequently in South Africa—their mobile
number changes. Some forms asked the complainant for clues regarding how to
trace the respondent, beyond their address and phone number, increasing the
chances of successful service of the application. Without
this information, SAPS
may have difficulty tracking down the respondent to serve the IPO and warrant of
arrest. Both the complainant
and respondent also risk missing crucial updates,
for example, if court dates for the finalisation of the IPO is changed.
Within the idiosyncratic operations of each court, unofficial forms have also
been developed by different role players. These serve
to make their jobs more
manageable and channel cases to other departments or institutions, often outside
of the court. For example,
certain magistrates develop their own memoranda which
are issued to the police regarding cases which are not perceived to fall within
the PO process. Other forms have been used to define cases outside of the PO
system. One memorandum we documented stated that certain
offences, such as
assault and kidnapping, were “not a protection order” but should
rather be treated as a criminal complaint.
The creation and circulation of this
document led to the mistaken impression that a PO cannot be obtained whilst a
criminal complaint
is underway. Consequently, the clerk would be encouraged to
turn away complainants who were victims of serious criminal offences
them back to the police. These types of
documents produced by role
players contribute to divergent local legal cultures (Currul-Dykeman, 2014), or
circumstances in which
each court operates within its own unique ecosystem.
While these forms are created for practical purposes, their effect is less
Complainants essentially face a lottery, where their chance of
obtaining an IPO is contingent on the material affordances provided
by one form
over another.
Courts need to be responsive to local contexts and will necessarily tailor
managerial processes accordingly. However, within the PO
process, these
paper-based variations have substantive impacts on survivors’ access to
justice, particularly during a highly
precarious period when survivors are at
great risk of retribution (and even intimate femicide) from their partners
(Mathews et al.,
2015). Whilst trying to adapt to these
differences—especially in contexts where literacy is not always
assured—survivors
are regularly accused by court clerks and police
officers of “abusing the process”. This double standard—where
justice officials can alter and manipulate procedures and paperwork, yet
survivors are expected to be able to understand and respond
to these variances
during a highly stressful and vulnerable period—necessitates reflection.
Far from realising the “maximum
protection” that the DVA promises,
current iterations of its implementation often fail to offer the bare minimum to
Process-Based Disparities
Paper-based differences are compounded by marked variations in the way that
courts handle the PO application process itself. Despite
the clear stipulations
laid out in the DVA, evidence shows wide variability in how the law is
interpreted and used to grant IPOs
and POs to applicants across courts. This, in
turn, has important implications for case outcomes and survivors’ rights
protection.
Firstly, there are differences in critical access or assessment points within
the court that may affect complainants’ experiences
and the likelihood of
obtaining a PO. Some of these are formal, such as the availability of a clerk or
volunteer to provide information
on the process and confirm whether a survivor
qualifies to apply for an IPO. Others are (problematically) informal. For
security guards may screen complainants as they enter the court,
assessing whether survivors should be directed to the DV office,
section of the court, or turned away because their complaint is “not
domestic violence” (see also Rehse et
al., 2022). These decisions can be
critical in facilitating or impeding someone’s access to justice. They
also create key,
but often hidden, points for defining the parameters of
legitimate claims.
Other differences across courts arise from staff’s working routines,
rules, and interpretations of the DVA’s requirements.
For example, some
courts will see all complainants present before court on any given day, with the
magistrate spending the afternoon
in the clerk’s office to ensure that all
applications are processed expeditiously. Other courts do not accept
applications
after 1 pm and magistrates are seldom available in the afternoons.
In some courts, applicants will receive the IPO on the day of
application,
whereas at others, survivors must return to court the following day or later in
the week to collect their order. These
varying temporalities highlight how legal
bureaucracies enact control through time (Greenhouse, 1989) and create
structures where
it seems easier to obtain an interim or final PO at some
courts, and more difficult at others. Due to these variable timeframes,
police may refuse to respond to further violent incidents because an order is in
process at the court but is not yet finalised
(Moult, 2010; Vetten et al., 2010;
Waldman, 2020).
In response to the high number of applications they receive, courts also
develop their own routines by referring cases
of the system to other
government structures like social services or separate sections in the court.
Court staff make referrals to
other organisations—both state and
non-state—that will first attempt to resolve the problem, after which the
consider granting the order (Moult, 2010). These referral processes,
however, are not uniform across courts, nor are they provided
for in official
law or policy. Court staff exercise relatively unfettered discretion over where
cases go for resolution, if resolution
is offered at all. As such, these kinds
of idiosyncratic court practices and referral procedures create obvious risks of
abuse within
the process.
There are also important differences in the kinds of applications the courts
will entertain, particularly regarding the conditions
requested to be considered
as part of a PO. Some courts will allow adolescent minors to apply for POs,
while others will not. Some
courts will make orders that evict an abuser from
the shared home, while other courts are much more reluctant to do so. Some
magistrates
will make orders that prohibit sexual abuse based on a
complainant’s allegations in the PO application. Others will require
that a case of sexual abuse or rape has been opened with the police. Most courts
are reluctant to order that the police confiscate
weapons used by an alleged DV
perpetrator (Moult, 2010; Parenzee et al., 2001; Smythe, 2004), even where there
is evidence of ownership.
These process-based differences are critical as they
create variable, and sometimes unpredictable, protection for a complainant,
depending on where they submit their PO application.
POs only come into effect after they have been officially
“served” by being handed to the respondent, but there are also
striking differences across courts as to how service is effected. Some courts
have required that applicants serve orders on respondents
themselves,
occasionally with the assistance of the police. In some courts, the orders are
collected daily; in others, this happens
twice a week. Certain police stations
have a dedicated officer for this task, but others do not. In other courts, the
applicant must
take the order to the police station themselves (Waldman, 2021).
These differences in service are critical—they not only impact
vulnerability of the complainant but also create delays in securing protection
through an IPO if the process of service takes
a long time or is not properly
The process of obtaining a warrant of arrest to accompany the PO is not
uniform for survivors either. The warrant of arrest is one
tool that may
convince the police to act when subsequent violence is reported. According to
the DVA, where a PO is granted, a warrant
of arrest should be issued, but many
courts do not routinely issue the warrant with the IPO. Instead, survivors are
often required
to return to court to describe the alleged perpetrator’s
conduct and justify why they now need the warrant of arrest. Other
courts will
issue a warrant of arrest with an IPO only “in very, very severe
cases” (Waldman, 2021, p. 56). In some courts,
issuing the warrant of
arrest is a decision made by the court clerk, on a case-by-case basis, with
approval from the magistrate.
This lack of uniformity represents a critical
failure, as the police frequently force survivors to return to court for a copy
the warrant of arrest before they will act in future incidents of violence.
Inconsistent processes for issuing the warrant of arrest
causes additional
burdens and risks for survivors in enforcing the order. This is especially
chilling given the number of intimate
femicide victims who had taken out IPOs or
POs prior to their murders (Mathews et al., 2015).
These practical, process-based differences are not confined to the courts but
also manifest in how the police enforce the law. Officers
are more likely to
respond to physical violence—especially where it causes
injuries—compared to less visible forms of
harm, such as emotional,
psychological, and financial abuse (Moult, 2010; Parenzee et al., 2001).
Research has shown that police
are frequently reluctant to open a criminal
complaint for DV or to exercise their power of arrest upon the breach of a PO
et al., 2001; Spies, 2019). Instead, they will refer survivors to
court to apply for an IPO.
The differences across courts in how a complainant should apply for a PO and
the different rules, requirements, and routines of doing
so can make the
experience bewildering and alienating for complainants. Survivors consequently
feel that the system is stacked against
them. The first implementation studies
on the DVA in the early 2000s documented many of these process-based disparities
et al., 2001), but little has changed. The new DVAA, promulgated in
2021, attempts to address some of the DVA’s shortcomings,
for instance by
providing guidance on outcomes at the return date where parties are not present.
However, the new Act is unlikely
to address the fundamental, but hidden,
discrepancies in procedure that impact outcomes for survivors.
Actor-Based Disparities
When survivors enter a magistrates’ court to apply for a PO, they will
interact with several different actors who operate within
the space. Some of
these (for example, court clerks and magistrates) are formally employed by the
Department of Justice, while others
(like security guards and NGO staff) serve
in more interstitial roles. Survivors are not necessarily familiar with the
roles that these actors play, and the affiliations, processes, and
strategies each draws upon to fulfil particular mandates within
their roles. The
presence of multiple actors co-existing within the same space, sometimes
operating out of the same rooms in the
court, can be confusing for survivors. As
one NGO staff member stated, they’re “part of the system and not
part of the
system”. Survivors are nevertheless often reliant upon these
different actors to gain clarity about the application process,
navigate the
confusing court set-up and administrative procedures, and fill out a PO, before
their application is even seen by a
magistrate. Oftentimes, the positionality of
these actors, and the various forms of persuasive power and accountability that
their roles, determine whether survivors receive assistance within the
While the magistrates make both the interim and final determinations on the
outcome of a PO application, the affidavit may pass through
several different
hands, including both formal and informal legal actors, before a decision is
made. Court clerks are vital in the
preparation and processing of PO
applications. They hold discretionary power in determining the viability and
urgency of a survivor’s
testimony, despite having limited training on the
dynamics of DV (Moult, 2010; Rehse et al., 2022). Clerks enjoying close
relationships
with their magistrates can potentially “twist the
application” (Moult, 2010, p. 145) in ways that might improve a
chances of their application being approved. They might also
draw upon their own “persuasive power” (Moult, 2010, p.
convince a magistrate of the urgency of a particular application, strategically
using their positionality to intervene on
a survivor’s behalf.
Clerks, however, are not always sympathetic to the needs of survivors and can
sometimes work counter to the expressions of harm and
urgency articulated by
complainants. Due in part to insufficient training, clerks can demonstrate
mistrust or dismissal of applicants.
They may tell survivors that their
experiences are not serious enough to constitute DV, ask insensitive questions
chose to remain in an abusive relationship, distil and
flatten survivors’ experiences into the legal language of an affidavit,
dismiss a survivor’s application outright. These examples highlight the
negative consequences of clerks’ discretionary
powers, and the extent to
which they can serve as “gatekeepers” in access to justice (Mathews
et al., 2001; Moult, 2019;
Rehse et al., 2022). Clerks, like magistrates, might
impose their personal biases when determining the “worthiness” and
“validity” of survivor applications. Clerks who express concerns for
the “sanctity” of marriage can recommend
that applicants undergo
mediation or provide referrals to couples counselling or street
through outside
organisations rather than processing a PO application (Moult, 2019). In these
circumstances, clerks redirect survivors
of the legal system,
essentially issuing a statement that DV is an issue that should be determined
and resolved elsewhere.
Court clerks also operate alongside NGOs, organisations that take on
additional administrative and support roles within the courts.
These NGO actors
represent the interstitial, and sometimes confusing, presence of informal
duty-bearers within legal spaces—they
and legal language into accessible and understandable avenues of support for the
public. The presence
of NGOs within magistrates’ courts emerged from the
growing recognition—after the implementation of the DVA—that
survivors required additional emotional assistance when exiting an abusive
partnership and navigating the justice system. Memoranda
of understanding
established between these NGOs and the Department of Justice have expanded over
the years to encompass other informal
duties fulfilled by these organisations.
As a result, NGO have increasingly served as legal
interlocutors—translating legal
genres, processes, and expectations for
court applications, and transforming survivor stories into testimonies that are
legible within
the court context.
While outside NGOs were initially intended to complement the administrative
work carried out by court clerks and render the PO process
more accessible to
survivors, NGO staff have reported to have been pressured by clerks and
magistrates to take on the duties and
labour of court staff. Throughout our
research, NGO staff reported conflicts with court clerks who felt that they were
not working
fast enough or seeing enough clients throughout the day, even though
the primary function of the NGO staff was to provide counselling.
Nevertheless,
NGO staff felt that clerks perceived their role as “just to do their dirty
work. The court is like—do everything!”
(Waldman, 2021, p. 49). To
maintain good relationships with magistrates and clerks—relationships
which they can leverage to
ensure that applications are more
successful—NGOs have conceded and taken on more roles within the court
space. This has included
assisting with affidavit statements and even, in some
cases, providing informal mediation between couples. Accordingly, NGO
relationships
and responsibility for survivors has shifted further into the
ambit of managerial and bureaucratised court procedure. As one NGO
staff member
reported, “how much time I must spend with clients and what I must do with
clients” has changed.
NGO staff and court clerks both play formative roles in generating the
statements used in PO applications, serving as legal interlocutors
translators for survivors. Where survivors struggle with literacy or are not
fluent in a language accepted by the court, their
affidavit may be scribed by a
clerk or NGO staff. Some clerks and NGO staff are more willing or able (due to
time availability) to
take on the role of scribe than others. The willingness of
these actors to step in and write on behalf of the survivor can have a
deterministic impact upon the outcome of their case. Clerks and NGO workers
often know best which words to use to motivate the magistrate
to grant an order.
Nevertheless, clerks and NGO staff can tend towards using generic terms or stock
phrases which are known to have
legal resonance (for example, “I feared
for my life”), but can detract from the authenticity of the
personal narrative. This linguistic and narrative
homogenisation can impact the perceived legitimacy of the statement because it
lacks the personal specificity required to elucidate the complainant’s
case. Magistrates write the provisions of an IPO based
on the contents of the
application form and affidavit, so this lack of specificity about the
survivor’s unique situation can
also lead to orders which omit key
information required to effectively protect the complainant (Artz & Smythe,
2005; Carter,
2002; Moult, 2010; Parenzee et al., 2001).
Clerks and NGO staff can also be caught between addressing the needs of
complainants and meeting the preferences of their magistrates,
resulting in
competing forms of accountability and responsibility to both survivors and court
procedures. Magistrates’ preferences
on what constitutes an effective and
convincing affidavit are not consistent across the documented courts. Turnover
in staffing,
or changes in magistrates, mean that clerks and NGOs have to
continuously adjust and revise the unwritten rules magistrates use to
applications. These adjustments behind the scenes have a cascading effect on
clerks, NGO staff, and survivors as they must
adapt to suit shifting and
inconsistent individual preferences. As one NGO staff member explained:
“we know which magistrate
to give which application. We sometimes take the
cover off [an application that has been denied], change it, and give it to
magistrate,” in the hopes of promoting a more favourable outcome
for the survivor. Complainants, therefore, have very different
experiences
depending on the court that they approach, and court workers argue that this
“all depends on who is sitting on
the bench” (Waldman, 2021, p.51).
These significant differences across magistrate preferences are not provided for
law and have obvious equity implications for the complainants left
vulnerable during the application period.
Although the courts and the police should work closely together under the DVA
to ensure a continuum of support for survivors before,
during, and after their
PO applications, however, the two institutions and coordinating actors, as one
police officer put it, “don’t
talk to one another”. Rather
than opening a case for survivors at the police stations, police officials often
send survivors
to court, “And their attitude when they come here is bad
because of what SAPS told them. [The police] didn’t even listen
problem ... Our clients’ experience with [the police] is very
weak—very, very weak” (Moult, 2010, p. 18).
The communication
failure between these systems of legal and criminal justice not only impacts
survivors’ experiences but also
serves to degrade basic trust within these
institutions and the rule of law. Survivors encouraged to access courts for POs
therefore, manage and negotiate the multiple actors and institutions which
occupy the legal space surrounding DV. While these individuals
and organisations
all ostensibly work on behalf of survivors, in practice, they rarely communicate
or collaborate in a coherent manner.
Thus, the process becomes even more
confusing, and context-specific, for applicants seeking justice.
Only a few years after the DVA was enacted in 1998, it became clear that the
Act was not delivering on its promises to protect and
support survivors (Naidoo,
2006; Parenzee et al., 2001). These slippages are largely attributable to
inconsistent implementation
by criminal justice officials, working under minimal
oversight within an overburdened, and under-resourced (Vetten, 2005), court
system, rather than deficiencies in the Act itself. Throughout the first two
decades of the 21st century, advocates, legal scholars,
and policy makers have
attempted to reform the Act. Additional training was provided for duty bearers
and more NGO staff were introduced
into the court space, in the hopes of
improving service delivery. These attempts, as we have illustrated, tinker
around the edges
of a system which is not delivering justice, yet one in which
the arbitrariness of unsuccessful PO applications is regularly blamed
most in need of protection. The patchy, idiosyncratic, and piecemeal
implementation and uptake of the DVA across the country
has precluded a single,
unitary, and synchronised system of justice. Rather, multiple systems and
assemblages of justice around DV
are contingent upon the network of actors,
procedural mannerisms, and local legal cultures of each magistrates’
court. Nevertheless,
survivors who are left to “bargain within the shadow
of the law” (Basu, 2015, p.4) are expected to abide by these informal,
implicit and variable legal ecologies.
These systems of justice have produced siloed and discordant legal
apparatuses that operate differently for each survivor. A complainant’s
experience is dependent on which court they access, who provides assistance, and
the internal expectations and processes they must
follow. Different PO
application forms provide inconsistent and unpredictable material and legal
affordances for vulnerable survivors.
They elicit variable contingencies around
affidavit statements and permissive structures around what can be said, and what
included in an applicant’s file. The lack of uniformity in PO
paperwork also means that survivors might need to rewrite and
reframe their
statements at a different court only a few kilometres away from where they
initially began their entreaty to justice.
These forms often pass through
multiple hands—a clerk, an NGO staff member, and a magistrate. Each actor
provides new inflections,
additions, and changes to the narrative, thereby
altering the ultimate trajectory and potential success of a survivor’s
application.
Magistrates’ different schedules and preferences around DV
affidavits not only produce relational and individualised adjustments
and NGOs within the court space, but also alter the processes survivors must
follow to obtain a PO. During a highly stressful,
and often vulnerable, point in
a survivor’s experience of abuse, they cannot know what to expect out of
the application process
because the procedures, timeframes, and resolution
mechanisms vary so widely across magistrates’ courts. Survivors must
a system that presents itself as accessible and transparent, despite
internal policies, practices, and procedures that even those
operating within
the court describe as fluctuating and irregular. Within this context, survivors
experience very little predictability
in how their POs will be dealt with,
degrading not only their chances of protection but also their faith in the
justice system overall.
Due to the slow and uneven process of DVA implementation since 1998, each
court—and the street-level bureaucrats (Lipsky, 1980)
that inhabit and
operate within them—has devised their own processes, expectations, and
relational dynamics around POs. In
this way, local legal cultures (Merry, 2006)
are not necessarily
to formalised and official legal rules and
doctrines but are rather remarkably
to change. They incorporate
certain elements of the law while tweaking and manipulating the established
norms and procedures that
are already operating within a given space or
community. Within these varying assemblages of “justice”, we are
that effective implementation is neither top-down nor bottom-up
(Ferguson & Gupta, 2002; Gelsthorpe & Padfield, 2003). Rather,
complex process of negotiation, raising the question of how to effectively
change local legal culture. Within this contested
legal field, however,
survivors stand to lose the most, especially given the vast disparities in
favourable PO outcomes and the attendant
risks of intimate femicide associated
with DV in the country. Rather than the maximum level of protection afforded to
all survivors—regardless
of class and geographic location—these
disparate and contradictory conditions of legal multiplicity often serve to
the harms and perils associated with DV. Complainants are cast as
unruly and unreliable legal subjects when reform needs to be directed
juridical system, or rather systems, as the true culprits of failing to
“follow the process”.
Correspondence:
Emma Louise Backe, PhD Candidate, George Washington
University and University of Cape Town, South Africa.
embacke@gwu.edu
Adelman, M.
Battering states: The politics of domestic violence in
. Vanderbilt University Press.
Artz, L., & Smythe, D. (2005). Bridges and barriers: A five-year
retrospective on the Domestic Violence Act.
Acta Juridica
(1), 200–226.
https://hdl.handle.net/10520/EJC52659
Basu, S. (2015).
The trouble with marriage: Feminists confront law and
violence in India
. University of California Press.
Baxi, P. (2014).
Public secrets of law: Rape trials in India.
University Press.
Bottomley, A. K. (1973).
Decisions in the penal process
Carter, R. (2002).
The Domestic Violence Act (116 of 1998): Increased
safety for women experiencing domestic violence in South
[Master's thesis, University of Cape Town]. OpenUCT.
http://hdl.handle.net/11427/3597
Constitutional Court of South Africa. (1999). “The State vs. Godfrey
Baloyi: Judgement.” https://www.saflii.org/za/cases/ZACC/1999/19.pdf
Currul-Dykeman, K. (2014). Domestic violence case processing: A matter of
local legal culture.
Contemporary Justice Review
https://doi.org/10.1080/10282580.2014.915144
Das, V., & Poole, D. (2004). State and its Margins. In V. Das & D.
Poole (Eds.),
Anthropology in the margins of the state.
Oxford University
Domestic Violence Act 116 of 1998. (1998).
https://www.gov.za/documents/domestic-violence-act
Domestic Violence Amendment Act 14. (2021).
https://www.gov.za/documents/acts/domestic-violence-amendment-act-14-2021-english-afrikaans-28-jan-2022
Ferguson, J., & Gupta, A. (2002). Spatializing states: Toward an
ethnography of neoliberal governmentality.
Ethnologist
(4), 981-1002,
https://doi.org/10.1525/ae.2002.29.4.981
Gelsthorpe, L., & Padfield, N. (Eds.) (2003).
discretion: Decision-making in the criminal justice system and beyond
Greenhouse, C. J. (1989). Just in time: Temporality and the cultural
legitimation of law.
Yale Law Journal 98
, 1631-1652.
http://hdl.handle.net/20.500.13051/16634
Hlavka, H. R., & Mulla, S. A. (2020). Thinking forensically: Law,
medicine and the nomos of sexual violence.
Social and Cultural Sciences
Faculty Research and Publications
, 279, 1-37.
https://epublications.marquette.edu/socs_fac/279
Hawkins, K. (Ed.). (2001).
The uses of discretion
. Oxford University
Jaleel, R.M. (2021).
The work of rape
. Duke University Press.
Lazarus-Black, M. (2007).
Everyday harm: Domestic violence, court rights,
and cultures of reconciliation.
University of Illinois Press.
Lipsky, M. (1980).
Street-level bureaucracy: The dilemmas of individuals
in public service.
Russel Sage Foundation.
Mathews, S., & Abrahams, N. (2001).
Combining stories and numbers: An
analysis of the impact of the Domestic Violence Act (No. 116 of 1998) on
, Gender Advocacy Programme, MRC.
Mathews, S., Jewkes, R., & Abrahams, N. (2015). “So now I'm the
man”: Intimate partner femicide and its interconnections
with expressions
of masculinities in South Africa.
British Journal of Criminology, 55
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azu076
Maynard-Moody, S. W., & Musheno, M. C. (2003).
Cops, teachers,
counsellors: Stories from the front lines of public service
. University of
Michigan Press.
Merry, S. E. (2009).
Human rights and gender violence: Translating
international law into local justice
. University of Chicago Press.
Moore, S. F. (2001). Certainties undone: Fifty turbulent years of legal
anthropology, 1949‐1999.
Journal of the Royal Anthropological
(1), 95-116.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9655.00052
Moult, K. (2010).
Gatekeepers or rights keepers? Domestic violence
court clerks and the administration of justice in South Africa
. [Doctoral
dissertation, American University]. Aura Archive.
https://aura.american.edu/articles/thesis/Gatekeepers_or_rights_keepers_Domestic_violence_court_clerks_and_the_administration_of_justice_in_South_Africa/23880762?file=41877435
Moult, K. (2019). Letting the outside in? Court clerks, discretion and the
shifting boundary between community and court: Domestic
violence cases in South
Africa. In S
Sterett & L. Walker. (Eds.).
Research handbook
on law and courts
. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Mulla, S. (2014).
The violence of care: Rape victims, forensic nurses, and
sexual assault intervention.
Naidoo, K. (2006). “Justice at a snail's pace”: The
implementation of the Domestic Violence Act (Act 116 of 1998) at the
Johannesburg Family Court.
Acta Criminologica: African Journal of Criminology
& Victimology,
https://hdl.handle.net/10520/EJC2889
Ohlin, L. E., & Remington, F. J. (Eds.). (1993).
Discretion in
criminal justice: The tension between individualization and uniformity
Parenzee, P., Artz, L., & Moult, K. (2001).
Monitoring the
implementation of the Domestic Violence Act: First research report,
. Institute of Criminology, University of Cape Town.
Parenzee, P. (2018, October 31).
A law isn't enough to stop domestic
. Institute for Security Studies
https://issafrica.org/iss-today/a-law-isnt-enough-to-stop-domestic-violence
Rehse, K., Thobane, M., Gihwala, H., Artz, L. Waldman, J., Solomons, N.,
Maksudi, K., Karimakwenda, N., & Ngubane, M. (2022).
Protection orders
must protect: exploring the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act (116 of
1998) at local magistrates’
courts and police stations in Cape Town and
the Cape Winelands
. MOSAIC Training, Service and Healing Centre.
Republic of South Africa. (2020). National strategic plan on gender-based
violence and femicide.
https://www.gov.za/documents/national-strategic-plan-gender-based-violence-and-femicide-11-mar-2020-0000
Scott, J. C. (1990).
Domination and the arts of resistance
University Press.
Sharma, A., & Gupta, A. (2009). Introduction. In A. Sharma & A.
Gupta. (Eds.)
The anthropology of the state: A reader.
Publishing.
Smythe, D. (2004). Missed opportunities: Confiscation of weapons in domestic
violence cases.
South African Crime Quarterly
https://doi.org/10.17159/2413-3108/2004/i10a1027
Spies, A. (2019). Continued state liability for police inaction in assisting
victims of domestic violence: A reflection on the implementation
Africa's domestic violence legislation.
Journal of African
(1), 53-77.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021855319000081
Thomas, D. Q., & Beasley, M. E. (1993). Domestic violence as a human
rights issue.
Albany Law Review
, 1119-1148.
https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/albany58&i=1129
Trinch, S. (2010). Disappearing discourse: Performative texts and identity in
legal contexts.
Critical Inquiry in Language
(2-3), 207-229.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15427581003757517
United Nations Human Rights Council. (2015).
Report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, Rashida
Agenda Item 3, 10 June 2015).
Vetten, L. (2005). “Show me the money:” A review of budgets
allocated towards the implementation of South Africa’s
Domestic Violence
Politikon 32
https://doi.org/10.1080/02589340500353649
Vetten, L., Le, T., Leisegang, A., & Haken, S. (2010). The right and the
real: A shadow report analysing selected government departments’
implementation of the 1998 Domestic Violence Act and 2007 Sexual Offences Act.
Tswaranang Legal Advocacy Centre
https://shukumisa.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/The-Right-and-The-Real.pdf
Vetten, L. (2017). Aluta continua: Police accountability and the domestic
violence act 1998.
South African Crime Quarterly,
https://doi.org/10.17159/2413-3108/2017/i59a2231
Waldman, J. (2021).
Wheels of justice & cycles of abuse: What
barriers do victims of domestic violence in South Africa face when seeking the
of the courts?
[Master's thesis, University of Cape Town].
Walker, S. (1993).
Taming the system: The control of discretion in
criminal justice, 1950-1990
. Oxford University Press.
The application for a PO is a
civil process, and South Africa has no specific criminal offence of domestic
violence. Where charges
are laid, cases are dealt with under the common law (for
example, as attempted murder, assault, or assault with the intent to do
bodily harm). The complainant (survivor) is also not required to lay a criminal
charge against the abuser to be able to
request a PO from the court.
While our fieldwork was
confined to one province, the findings have found support from practitioners
across South Africa, who have
used it for policy and advocacy activities.
Therefore, while somewhat limited in generalisability in that it emanates from a
province, experience suggests that the data broadly describes the
situation in courts around the country. Throughout the draft, we
do not name the
NGOs that we have worked with to ensure the anonymity of the organisations, in
alignment with the ethical research
protocols approved by our respective
institutions. We have also chosen not to name the specific courts in question
throughout the
draft, to preserve the anonymity of the NGOs, which tend to work
and have MOUs at specific courts and would therefore be identifiable
assignations.
The first United Nations
Convention document to mention domestic violence is the 1992 General
Recommendation No.19, Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women, U.N. Doc A/47/38 of 1992.
Service of an order means
delivering the sealed order to the complainant and alleged perpetrator, as well
as others who must receive
a copy, such as the local police station.
“Complainant” is
the term used in the DVA to describe individuals seeking protection from the
police and courts. In this
article, we use it interchangeably with our preferred
term, “survivor”. “Respondent” means the alleged
perpetrator
against whom the order is sought.
An affidavit is a witness
Emergency monitory relief (DVA,
s. 7(4)) allows the complainant to claim for losses they have suffered because
of domestic violence,
including loss of earnings, and medical, relocation, and
accommodation expenses. It is rarely granted by magistrates (Artz &
Street committees are informal
justice structures that provide community ordering and anti-crime functions,
including hearing and
mediating complaints between neighbours and family members
(including domestic violence complaints) and settling disputes.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (628 KB)
PDF format (415 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter