URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gerber, P; Ong, B --- "Dispute Boards Is there a role for lawyers" [2010] UMonashLRS 7
Dispute Boards: Is there a role for lawyers?
Brennan Ong & Paula Gerber
This article was first published in Construction Law
International, Vol 5 No 4, December 2010, and is reproduced by kind permission
of the International Bar Association, London, UK.
© International Bar Association 2010.
Introduction
At university, law students are required to study Civil Procedure, where they
learn how to conduct litigation. There is also a multitude
of resources
available to educate lawyers about the role they can play in
alternative/appropriate dispute resolution (ADR), and numerous
articles have been written about the role and responsibilities of lawyers
involved in mediation. It is clear that ADR is
now widely accepted and embraced
by construction lawyers as a normal and natural part of dispute resolution. In
contrast, although
Dispute Boards (DBs) (e.g. Dispute Review Boards and Dispute
Adjudication Boards) have received some scholarly analysis in relation
role they play in preventing and managing construction disputes, there are no
guidelines or courses on the role that lawyers
can play in relation to DBs, and
only very limited publications about whether the legal profession should be
involved in DBs, and
if so in what capacity. This article seeks to fill this
Kurt Dettman, of Constructive Dispute Resolutions in Massachusetts, USA,
asserts that there are two roles that lawyers can play when
it came to DBs,
namely as a member of a DB or in presenting arguments at any hearings that
might be conducted by a DB. However,
the authors of this article suggest that
there is scope for even greater involvement of the legal profession in DBs, to
the benefit
of both construction lawyers and the construction industry. In
particular, the authors explore four roles that construction lawyers
when it comes to DBs, namely:
(1) advising clients regarding the suitability of a project for a DB;
(2) drafting contractual arrangements relating to DBs;
(3) assisting clients with drafting their written submissions and preparing
presentations to a DB; and
(4) being a member of a DB.
What is a Dispute Board?
A DB is a panel of, generally, three independent and experienced persons who
are jointly chosen and appointed by the contracting parties
at the commencement
of a project. The DB members become familiar with the construction project, and
remain up-to-date with developments
through regular site visits and meetings
with the parties. The DB’s expertise and competence in the type of
construction being
performed enables them to understand potential complexities
in the project, and their involvement with the parties and project enables
to help the parties prevent any conflicts that might arise, from escalating into
disputes. Thus the DB plays a proactive role
in the early identification and
resolution of potential problems. As illustrated below, DBs fall within the
arena of dispute avoidance
processes (DAPs) that are designed to help parties
proactively manage conflict and complete their project on-time, within budget
and with no outstanding disputes. In contrast, ADR is reactive, being
implemented only
parties are entrenched in a dispute, and generally
not until after the project is complete.
Processes for interrupting the Conflict-Dispute-Litigation Continuum
In the event a conflict is not resolved, a DB can conduct a hearing which
concludes with the DB providing either a recommendation
or binding decision on
how best to resolve the dispute. Whether a DB issues a recommendation or
decision depends on the type of DB.
Several models are in use around the world,
Review Boards (DRBs)
which were developed in the USA and issue non-binding
recommendations;
Adjudication Boards (DABs)
which were developed by FIDIC, and issue binding
decisions; and
Dispute Boards
which were developed by the ICC and are a
hybrid model which typically issue recommendations, but can also issue binding
if both parties agree. Where controversy exists about whether the CDB
should issue a recommendation or decision, the choice rests
Thus, while the primary function of a DB is to assist parties
to avoid disputes, it also acts as an efficient and effective contemporaneous
dispute resolution system in the event that a dispute cannot be avoided.
The Dispute Resolution Board Foundation (DRBF) (www.drb.org) is a non-profit
organisation based in Washington that aims to promote
and assist owners and
contractors with the DB process. The DRBF maintain a database cataloguing over
1,000 global DB projects, which
includes comprehensive information for each
project, such as the number of disputes heard, the number of disputes referred
formal DB hearing, and the number of disputes that proceeded to further
binding dispute resolution procedures. Notably, this database
reveals that these
projects have achieved a 98% success rate in achieving completion with no
outstanding disputes. This is compelling
evidence that DBs have a significant
role to play in changing the litigious nature of the construction industry, and
there is a strong
argument for greater use of DBs, especially in countries like
Australia, which has been slow to embrace the concept. On this note,
the authors
contend that greater support for and involvement with DBs by construction
lawyers could lead to greater awareness and
acceptance of DBs as an effective
system for dispute avoidance and resolution. The following sections analyse four
ways in which
construction lawyers can become more actively involved with
1. Advising on the suitability of a DB
DBs have been around for more than three decades, and are enjoying increased
usage on a variety of projects around the world. However,
they are nevertheless
a relatively new innovation, especially in jurisdictions outside of Asia and
Africa (where a modified FIDIC
contract (containing a DAB) is used on World Bank
funded projects), and the United States. The idea of forming a DB at the
commencement
of a project to
proactively
manage conflicts and disputes
is, unfortunately, an unknown concept to many principals and contractors. The
aim of those promoting
DBs should be to make the construction industry as
familiar and comfortable with DAPs as they are with ADR.
Construction lawyers are often involved in the early stages of project
planning, and regularly advise clients about appropriate project
methods. This presents them with an opportunity to provide early advice to their
clients about the appropriateness of a
DB. Thus, the first role that
construction lawyers can play in relation to DBs is to advise clients whether
there is a DAP model
that is appropriate for their proposed project. This leads
to the question, what type of projects are suitable for a DB?
Given the relative ‘newness’ of DBs, uncertainty still surrounds
this question, but debate about when a DB should be used
tends to centre around
the question of costs. For example, the Australian experience suggests that DBs
are only suitable for large-scale
projects, with 17 of the 21 Australian
projects that have used a DB being valued over $50 million. This indicates that
within Australia,
there may be a perception that the cost of a DB is
disproportionate to the overall project costs, on projects worth less than $50
million. However, global experience suggests otherwise, and there is evidence of
DBs being increasingly used on small/medium-scale
projects, valued at less than
$50 million. This is possible because DB procedures are designed to be flexible,
and construction lawyers
can assist parties to reduce the cost of a DB on
small/medium scale projects, by adjusting the way the DB operates.
For example, although site visits are recommended by model provisions to be
conducted quarterly, it is not uncommon for site visits
to be reduced on
smaller-scale projects. The costs of site visits can become significant
especially if board members are sourced
internationally, which not only requires
paid travel time and accommodation expenses, but also often involve a
week’s worth
of daily fees for each board member. Another cost saving
could be achieved by reducing the number of board members on a DB. This
consistent with the practice of many U.S state highway departments, such as the
California Department of Transport and the Florida
Department of Transport, who
actively promote and implement varying types of DBs, ranging from a 1-person DB
to a 5-person DB, to
suit a wider variety of projects.
Construction lawyers who possess a thorough understanding of DBs have a
valuable role to play in assessing the suitability of a particular
project for a
DB, taking into account not only the value of the project, but also other
relevant considerations, such as the complexity
and nature of the works, the
parties track record regarding disputes, and the value the parties place on
maintaining positive working
relationships. Widespread use of DBs will only
become a reality when parties to construction contracts are aware of the role
can play on a project, and are convinced of the commercial benefits of
using a DAP. Lawyers are well placed to play a role in educating
and informing
their clients of the documented success of DBs on a wide variety of projects,
and educating them about the benefits
that can be derived from adopting a DB.
2. Drafting contract provisions for a DB
To establish a DB on a construction project, two documents are required,
specifications
which consist of clauses in the construction contract
outlining the DB procedures for the project, including matters such as the
frequency of site visits, the conduct of hearings and the sharing of the costs;
which is executed by each DB member, the principal and contractor,
and which sets out, among other things, the responsibilities of
the board, the
procedure for selecting and removing board members, immunity for DB members and
the board members’ remuneration.
There is no need for lawyers
to ‘re-invent the wheel’ when it comes to drafting these two
contracts, as there are a number
of model DB provisions available. For example,
the DRBF publishes a
Practices and Procedures Manual
that includes draft
specifications and tripartite agreements. Similarly, there are standard form
contracts in the international arena
that include DB clauses, including FIDIC
which incorporates DABs, and ConsensusDocs in the United States which
incorporates DRBs.
In addition, the ICC, through its
Dispute Board Rules
provides standard specifications for using DRBs, DABs and CDBs.
However, despite the increasing number of ‘off-the-shelf’ DB
provisions that are now available, each project is unique
and requires the
tailoring of standard DB provisions to suit the particular parties and projects.
Construction lawyers can assist
clients to adapt the standard DB specifications
and tripartite agreement to suit their particular project. Below are a couple of
examples of changes to the standard provisions that parties might like to
consider for their project:
DB selection criteria:
None of the standard DB provisions
require that any member of the DB has legal expertise. However, many
construction disputes revolve
around questions of contractual interpretation and
application. In light of this, lawyers might want to consider discussing with
their clients whether their project might benefit from a requirement in the DB
specifications that one member of the DB must be a
lawyer. For example, the
Sydney Desalination Plant Project used a DRB and the contract required that the
DRB chairman be a Senior
Counsel from the NSW or Victorian Bar who had
construction law and dispute resolution experience.
Powers of the DB:
None of the standard form DB provisions
include any limitations on the powers of a DB. However, there may be
circumstances where
it is appropriate that a DB
become involved in a
dispute. Construction lawyers with in-depth knowledge and understanding of DBs
can advise clients about whether
any limitations or changes should be made to
the DB’s jurisdiction, and draft provisions to give effect to this. For
it may be appropriate to have some constraints on the monetary value of
disputes that can be referred to the DB, e.g. only disputes
involving more than
$5,000 can be referred to a DB. Such a limitation can be a useful way of
containing DB costs, by ensuring that
the time of DB members is not wasted on
trivial matters, which the parties are encouraged to resolve themselves. It
would also be
inappropriate for the DB to hear disputes involving allegations of
fraud, and the DB specifications could also be amended to incorporate
limitation on the DB’s powers.
Thus, a construction lawyer
with expertise in DBs can assist in tailoring DB contract provisions to suit the
parties and their project.
Further, the fact that some jurisdictions, like
Australia, do not offer embedded DAPs provisions in any standard form contracts,
make it particularly important for lawyers to understand precisely how such
standard forms should be modified so as to incorporate
a DB, and which clauses
will need to be deleted or amended as a result.
3. Assisting clients with preparing submissions and making presentations
The involvement of lawyers in DB hearings has been the subject of much
debate, with some commentators arguing that lawyers are more
of a hindrance than
a help. This view stems from a fear that the construction lawyers will
‘hijack’ the DB process in
much the same way that construction
arbitration has been hijacked by lawyers, with the result that arbitration all
too often fails
to provide a genuine alternative to litigation. Nobody wants the
same fate for DBs, and it is vital that any involvement of lawyers
hearings does not lead to the process becoming as adversarial as the litigation
system it was designed to keep parties out
A DB hearing is not a judicial process, nor even a quasi-judicial process.
Because of this, the rules of evidence are not observed,
and cross-examination
is expressly prohibited by the DRBF’s standard specifications. Similarly,
FIDIC refers to the DAB as
adopting an inquisitorial procedure, and that the
examination and cross-examination of witnesses should be strictly controlled.
like litigation and arbitration, the purpose of a DB hearing is to
persuade a panel about how a dispute should be resolved. Carefully
written submissions and well-presented arguments will assist parties in
convincing the DB of the merit of their position.
Although there are published
guides aimed at helping parties to prepare for a DB hearing, e.g. the
Practices and Procedures Manual
, construction lawyers well
versed in DB processes will be able to maximise a party’s chances of
achieving a favourable outcome
from the DB. The authors’ are not
advocating that lawyers ‘take over’ DB hearings, but rather, that
they assist
their clients, behind the scenes, with the necessary preparatory
work, particularly if the dispute involves legal issues. Indeed,
it is the view
of the authors that it is inappropriate for lawyers to appear for parties at DB
hearings, as this is likely to lead
to greater formality and over legalisation
of the process. An informal, practical approach to conflicts and disputes is at
of DBs and a key element of their success. Thus, lawyers should not be
advocates at a DB hearing, but do have a role to play in assisting
prepare and present their arguments in a clear and logical manner.
4. Appointment as a Member of a DB
In his 1984
The State of Justice
address to the American Bar
Association, former Chief Justice Warren Burger observed:
The entire legal profession – lawyers, judges, law teachers – has
become so mesmerized with the stimulation of courtroom
contest that we tend to
forget that we ought to be healers of conflict. Doctors, in spite of
astronomical medical costs, still retain
a high degree of public confidence
because they are perceived as healers. Should lawyers not be healers? Healers
not warriors?
Healers, not procurers? Healers, not hired guns?
It is this perceived addiction to adversarial battles that has motivated some
commentators to discourage the appointment of lawyers
as members of a DB. These
concerns are based on fears that lawyers may
the procedures to
the detriment of the DB philosophy and process, which revolves around the
contemporaneous resolution of construction
disputes in a harmonious way that
preserves a positive working relationship between the parties. As noted above,
legalisation of
the DB process is inconsistent with the goal of DBs, and risks
increasing hostilities between disputing parties. However, the success
is highly dependent on obtaining the right mix of DB members, who not only have
knowledge and experience with the type
of construction being undertaken, but
also with the interpretation and application of construction contracts. With
this in mind,
appointing the
lawyer as a DB member – one who
displays an avid interest in the resolution of disputes without recourse to the
customary judicial
processes, and who is supportive of the DB concept –
could strengthen and enhance the capabilities of the DB, to the benefit
the parties and the project.
Having a DB that includes a lawyer who is well equipped to resolve issues of
contractual interpretation, and armoured with skills
in negotiation and
non-adversarial dispute resolution, will enable the board to assist the parties
to avoid the escalation of conflict
into disputes. Indeed, teaming a lawyer with
other specialists capable of resolving the engineering and technical issues can
that the DB has a combined skill set that enables it to address the
widest array of disputes. It is for this very reason that George
Govlan QC, the
chairman of the Sydney Desalination Plant project, observed in his 2010 article
Australian Construction Law Newsletter
The experience required of DRB members was experience in similar construction
projects, interpretation of large scale project documentation
and involvement in
resolution of large construction disputes. The parties recognised the
importance of DRB members having dispute
resolution expertise in addition to
technical and legal skills.
An additional benefit of having a lawyer as a DB member stems from the fact
that the end product of a DB hearing is a written decision
that contains either
a non-binding recommendation (in the case of a DRB), or an interim binding
decision (in the case of a DAB).
In either scenario, it is preferable that the
report be carefully drafted in a way that convinces the parties to accept the
findings, and so avoid the dispute progressing to arbitration or
litigation. A lawyer can also ensure that the recommendation or
decision is
soundly based on the contract and the law so that parties can be assured that
the DB’s conclusions are a foretaste
of the likely outcome of an
arbitration or litigation, thereby increasing the likelihood that the DB’s
report will be accepted.
Thus, in many ways, a DB report is a tool for settlement, and a
lawyer’s perspective on how to achieve this could be invaluable.
are renowned for their persuasive abilities, and can play a useful role in
ensuring that the DB expresses its opinions in
ways that not only increase the
likelihood of both parties accepting the DB’s findings, but also
facilitates ongoing harmonious
relations between the parties.
Although the reported success rates of DBs are encouraging, the process is
not a panacea, and the benefits that can be derived from
DBs are highly
contingent on careful planning and implementation. Construction lawyers are
well equipped to ensure that the necessary
processes are in place, draft
appropriate contractual arrangements for a DB, and assist with any presentations
or submissions that
may be made to a DB. While there are still some lawyers who
are wedded to the courtroom battle, and who should not be allowed anywhere
a DB, they are, fortunately, a dying breed. Construction lawyers who
wholeheartedly support the philosophy of DAPs are well
placed to assist their
proactively
avoid and manage conflicts, rather than
resolve disputes through the expensive and timely processes of
litigation, arbitration or even ADR. Lawyers who embrace DBs have
the chance to
become genuine healers of conflict rather than instruments of war; a role that
is all too often performed by litigators.
Paula Gerber is a Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Law, Monash University,
Australia where she teaches Construction Law.
Brennan Ong is a Research Assistant at the Monash University Law School,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.36 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter