URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Grenfell, Laura; Olijnyk, Anna --- "A Breath of Fresh Air? Rights Oversight by the Ombudsman During the Pandemic" [2024] MelbULawRw 13; (2024) 47(3) Melbourne University Law Review 583
A BREATH OF FRESH AIR? RIGHTS OVERSIGHT BY THE OMBUDSMAN DURING THE PANDEMIC
II The Ombudsman and Human Rights
III Pandemic Lawmaking
A Reduced Pre-Enactment (Parliamentary) Scrutiny of Lawmaking
C Hasty Administrative Actions and Frameworks
IV The Ombudsman’s Reactive Role in Resolving Complaints regarding Access to Fresh Air
A Scope for a Rights-Based Approach
B The Ombudsman’s Dialogue with Government
C A Fragmented System of Complaints Handling
V The Ombudsman’s Proactive Role in Monitoring Places of Detention under OPCAT
A The Ombudsman’s OPCAT Monitoring Role
B Australia’s Missed Opportunity for Robust Oversight and Monitoring of Places of Detention during the Pandemic
C The NZ Ombudsman’s OPCAT Monitoring during the Pandemic
D The Australian Ad Hoc and Reactive Approach to Monitoring and Oversight
VI Conclusion
A BREATH OF FRESH AIR? RIGHTS OVERSIGHT BY THE
OMBUDSMAN DURING THE PANDEMIC
Laura Grenfell* and Anna Olijnyk†
This article examines the distinct role played by Australia’s Ombudsman
offices in monitoring and protecting rights during the
pandemic. We argue that
the Ombudsman was uniquely able to respond both reactively and proactively to
rights concerns at general
and systemic levels. Nonetheless, despite the
strengths of the Ombudsman’s responses, the pandemic highlighted the
and often ad hoc nature of rights protection and complaints handling
during an emergency. This article offers two case studies. The
first focuses on
how various Ombudsman offices performed their main role of complaints handling,
in particular their handling of
complaints regarding access to fresh air in
hotel quarantine. The second case study focuses on the new detention monitoring
that various Australian Ombudsman offices are developing, which represents
a significant shift for these offices, transforming them
more squarely into
human rights institutions.
I Introduction
Responding to emergencies is no easy task for lawmakers. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, Australian governments and their agencies acted rapidly
and strongly through laws and administrative action to
protect public health.
But in doing so, Australian governments regularly sidelined human rights by
imposing measures such as lockdowns,
mandatory hotel quarantine, and state and
international border restrictions. These rights-restricting pandemic measures
had an ‘unprecedented,
broad and deep impact across the
community’;
they were on a scale that most Australians had not previously experienced.
Rights intrusions were imposed at both a general level
(such as the imposition
of quarantine requirements through delegated legislation) and in relation to
individuals (such as decisions
restrictions).
For some, this level of rights intrusion was particularly high — for
example, those returning to Australia, communities living on or near state
borders and those living in public housing. It is widely
recognised that during
times of emergency there is a heightened risk of ill-treatment of vulnerable
sections of society, especially
when people are being deprived of their
While much of the scholarship on responses to the pandemic has examined the
work of lawmakers
article offers a different perspective. We focus on the work of an institution
that has received less scholarly attention: the
While the sidelining of human rights can be anticipated during a state
of emergency, it can also be anticipated that the public will need some
assurance by independent oversight bodies, like Ombudsman
offices, that
lawmakers are imposing rights restrictions after having considered whether the
restrictions are reasonable, necessary,
proportionate and lawful, and how the
restrictions might impact particular communities. The Melbourne public housing
lockdown in
July 2020 was one example where — as the Victorian
Ombudsman’s investigation later revealed — lawmakers did not
consider all less restrictive options before imposing these extraordinary
residents were inadequately informed regarding their initial and continuing
phases of detention.
This article analyses how one independent oversight institution — the
Ombudsman — operated during the emergency in providing
rights scrutiny of
pandemic measures. For this purpose, we adopt a methodology of using publicly
available sources produced by Ombudsman
offices to gain insight into the work
those offices performed during the pandemic.
We analyse reports relating to specific
relating more generally to
the Ombudsman’s caseload during the
annual reports
We use these sources to identify the kinds of work Ombudsman offices were
performing and to draw out common themes: strengths, challenges
and distinctive
features that set the role of the Ombudsman apart from that of other
institutions providing rights scrutiny and holding
governments to account. This
article analyses these general themes, using examples to illustrate our points.
The examples do not,
of course, purport to represent every case; in some cases,
as we explain, an example is chosen
it is atypical. Nor do we
claim to have compiled a comprehensive account of Ombudsman activity during the
pandemic. That is not the
purpose of this article. Instead, we aim to show what
the Ombudsman
do and to reflect on how the institution of the
Ombudsman fits into a broader system of rights protection during an emergency.
doing so, we draw on Ellen Rock’s insight that the efficacy of any
single accountability mechanism should be evaluated not
in isolation, but as
‘part of a patchwork of interacting and overlapping
mechanisms’.
This article begins in Part II by identifying key institutional
characteristics of Australian Ombudsman offices, with a focus on the
capacity of
the Ombudsman to monitor government interference with human rights. Part III
considers how the Ombudsman operated within
the context of some distinct aspects
of pandemic lawmaking — reduced parliamentary scrutiny of lawmaking, the
use of soft law,
and the hasty setting up of legal frameworks and taking of
administrative actions — many of which involved significant inroads
rights and liberties.
Parts IV and V offer two case studies illustrating the integral role played
by the Ombudsman in oversight of human rights during the
Part IV focuses on how various Ombudsman offices managed their
role in dealing with pandemic related complaints about a lack of
access to fresh air, made by those deprived of their liberty. It
compares the
responses of
Ombudsman offices with how courts address similar complaints. Part V offers a
second case study focusing on how the pandemic affected
the ability of some
Ombudsman offices in undertaking one of their
roles: that of
monitoring places of detention to prevent the risk of inhuman treatment. This
article compares how this monitoring
was undertaken in New Zealand
(‘NZ’), where a detention monitoring scheme involving the Ombudsman
was already well-established.
Overall, this article argues that when persons are deprived of their liberty
during an emergency, Australian jurisdictions need to
strengthen their systems
of complaints handling and detention monitoring so that avenues of making
complaints are made more visible
and accessible, and to give the public greater
‘assurance of independent
oversight’.
In the context of
detention monitoring, it further argues that Ombudsman offices have proven their
independence and capacity for
rights protection in relation to a wide range of
persons detained, but this monitoring requires adequate resourcing.
II The Ombudsman and Human
Among Australia’s horizontal accountability mechanisms, the Ombudsman
is considered a leading independent oversight institution
accountability.
This can be attested by the Ombudsman’s longevity (many
Ombudsman offices in Australia are now nearing half a century of
perceived capacity (successive governments have bestowed on the Ombudsman
responsibility for an ever-growing number of
functions).
To describe these varying
functions of the Ombudsman, Carol Harlow and Richard Rawlings have deployed the
typology of ‘fire-fighting’
(complaints handling) and
‘fire-watching’ (systemic
investigations).
Rick Snell has suggested
the addition of ‘fire prevention’ to this typology, referring to
Ombudsman activities that are
‘not based solely or primarily on
intelligence gained from previous
complaints’.
This would encompass
preventive work such as detention monitoring, which has been recently added to
Ombudsman’s role in many
The Ombudsman is generally understood to be part of the integrity branch of
governments.
such, the Ombudsman is one of several institutions that exists to ensure that
governments exercise their powers ‘in the
manner in which [they are]
expected and/or required to do so and for the purposes for which those powers
were conferred, and for
While formally part of the
executive, the Ombudsman is given robust statutory independence from other parts
of government and generally
enjoys high levels of public trust. The Ombudsman
has extensive powers of
investigation
but its outcomes are generally limited to non-binding
recommendations.
One aspect that
distinguishes the Ombudsman from many of the other administrative law mechanisms
is that its investigations are usually
conducted informally and in
The jurisdiction of the Ombudsman is conferred — and, it follows,
limited — by statute. The Ombudsman generally has power
to commence an
investigation either on their own motion or in response to a
The matters to which these
investigations relate are restricted. In most jurisdictions, the Ombudsman has
limited or no power
to investigate the
actions of Members of Parliament,
Where the Ombudsman of one
the government of another jurisdiction, there will be jurisdictional
complexities.
As we will see, these
issues during the pandemic,
especially in relation to complex schemes spanning
multiple agencies and jurisdictions.
While the role of the Ombudsman is constantly evolving, it is useful to
distinguish between
(‘fire-fighting’) and
(‘fire-watching’ and ‘fire prevention’)
functions. The main function of the Ombudsman institution in Australia
to be reactive, namely, handling complaints from members of the public about
government action. The right to make a complaint
to an independent body
continues to be one of the key rights that all Australians can
But the Ombudsman also has a
range of proactive functions that do not rely on a complaint being made. The
most obvious is the ability
to commence an own motion investigation which may
then lead to recommendations for law reform to ‘prevent recurring
unfairness’.
In Part V of this article, we examine another proactive function: monitoring of
At the international level, Ombudsman institutions are considered
important mechanisms ‘for the promotion and protection of human rights
and the promotion of good governance and respect for
the rule of
and they are encouraged to actively draw on international human rights
Dame Beverley Wakem and Peter
Kostelka write that ‘[t]here is no doubt that the institution of Ombudsman
contributes to good
governance and the enhancement of trust in
government’.
The Ombudsman’s
work promotes the rule of law through reminding governments that laws must be
made clear and knowable, and
actions must be subject to appropriate
While the rule of law, good
governance and human rights are clearly interwoven, this article focuses on the
Ombudsman as a mechanism
for monitoring and protecting human rights.
Anita Stuhmcke notes that ‘human rights have always implicitly formed
part of the mandate of federal, state and territory ombudsmen’
Australia, and she argues that ‘Australian ombudsmen do and should
continue to address human rights
violations.’
Admittedly, human rights are not an explicit part of the
legislative
mandate of Australian Ombudsman offices apart from the Victorian
Stuhmcke explains that a lack of
an explicit human rights mandate ‘does not predetermine the significance
of the role [that
the Ombudsman] played in human rights promotion and
protection’.
A survey of Ombudsman
reports across Australia indicates that, to differing degrees, most Ombudsman
offices use human rights standards
when performing various
the Victorian Ombudsman having a greater scope to do so when exercising her
explicit human rights
some Australian Ombudsman offices, human rights may be considered when deciding
whether it is in the public interest to investigate
administrative conduct and
when making determinations under general legislative criteria such as whether
administrative conduct is
‘unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly
discriminatory’.
century, Australian Ombudsman offices have adopted an
approach which embraces international human rights treaties and standards as
interpretive rules when determining whether a government
‘unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory’.
Linda C Reif explains that this use of international
human rights by Australian
Ombudsman offices extends to unimplemented treaty obligations (such as parts of
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
’)) and also to non-binding soft international
which offers detailed standards, such
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
(the Nelson Mandela Rules)
In large part, these are ‘standards quite distinct from those used by
in Australia, which distinguishes the Ombudsman from these bodies.
In Stuhmcke’s view, the Ombudsman is well-suited to human rights
protection because it is an institution which ‘straddles both legal and
moral concepts, and takes into account wider values,
rights and questions of law
and administrative practice which render the institution much more than simply a
complaints office’.
Nevertheless,
Stuhmcke articulates some need for caution: she repeatedly argues that should
the Ombudsman’s role in promoting
human rights be extended, resourcing
will be critical, otherwise the efficacy of the Ombudsman’s
‘fire-fighting’
role of handling complaints and addressing
maladministration would risk being
undermined.
Her work also highlights the
findings of a demographic study that Ombudsman ‘clients’ tend to be
both middle class and
advantaged,
which challenges the notion that the Ombudsman assists the most disadvantaged.
In the context of the pandemic, this article
takes up Stuhmcke’s urging
that this institution ‘deserves much closer scrutiny with respect to the
role it does and
may play in the protection and promotion of human
rights’, and it considers Stuhmcke’s call for
III Pandemic
During the first 12 months of the pandemic, Australian governments believed
urgent responses were required
in order to
prevent the spread of infections in the community and ‘to protect the
public health system from being completely
overwhelmed’.
While this urgency may often have been necessary, there was the risk that
ordinary processes for monitoring the effect of new laws
and administrative
frameworks on individual rights would be
This Part identifies
characteristics of lawmaking during the pandemic that heightened this risk and
explains how the Ombudsman responded
in these conditions.
Reduced Pre-Enactment
(Parliamentary) Scrutiny of Lawmaking
A distinctive feature of pandemic lawmaking was the use of delegated
legislation to implement major policy decisions with significant
consequences.
Delegated legislation, whether in the form of regulations, declarations or
public health orders, was used to: prohibit people from
or their local
exclude unvaccinated people from
workplaces;
isolate people with COVID-19
and close contacts;
and mandate
quarantine.
There are, of course, good
reasons for Australian parliaments’ heavy reliance on delegated
legislation. In the circumstances
of the first 12 months of the pandemic, the
New South Wales (‘NSW’) Ombudsman believed there were times when
a need for governments to take rapid and decisive action, and to
change the law frequently.
While the executive made laws with a deep impact on rights through
these delegated legislative instruments, many of these instruments were made
exempt from disallowance by Parliament.
example, under the
Biosecurity Act 2015
(Cth), after a declaration of a human biosecurity
emergency has been made by the
Governor-General,
the federal Health Minister can make determinations or directions dealing with
biosecurity
for a period of up to three
biosecurity directions and
determinations can override laws,
are not subject to disallowance by
Parliament,
and non-compliance with the
directions is punishable by up to five years’
imprisonment.
In normal circumstances, Parliament is the institution primarily responsible
for scrutinising legislation before it has
By deeming some delegated
legislation not subject to disallowance, this meant that some Australian
governments imposed extraordinary
restrictions on liberty with no pre-enactment
parliamentary scrutiny. One such extraordinary restriction was the ban on
travellers from India, which was introduced in
late April 2021.
Noncompliance carried a
fine of up to $63,000 or five
years’ imprisonment.
At the state level, reduced scrutiny of lawmaking also marked pandemic law.
For example in NSW, pandemic lawmaking took place predominantly
health orders made by the Health Minister under
Public Health Act 2010
These orders are a special set of subordinate legislation that are not
disallowable and need not be laid before
Parliament.
No declaration of emergency
needs to precede their
means they are not subject to time limits. Such ministerial orders also do not
fall within the jurisdiction of the NSW
although they can be reviewed by
the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal
and are subject
to judicial review.
Some of these orders
gave broad discretion to the
executive — for example, persons in mandatory hotel quarantine were
required to comply with any ‘direction’ of the
Commissioner.
Breaching an order made under
Public Health Act 2010
(NSW) can lead to fines of up to
$11,000 with a further fine of $5,500 for each day the offence continues, or
imprisonment of up
to six months.
In Victoria, under the
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
Public Health Act
’), directions made by the Chief
Health Officer (‘CHO’) or their delegates could similarly avoid
parliamentary scrutiny,
specifically by the Scrutiny of Acts and Regulations
Committee, if the government failed to gazette or table
Critically, however, the Victorian
Ombudsman could investigate the actions of the Victorian CHO and their
directives between 2020
and 2021 as these directives were not issued by a
Since amendments were made to the
Public Health Act
in December
these orders may only be made by the
However, the legislation ensures:
that the Ombudsman continues to have jurisdiction over detention even when the
detention is pursuant
to a pandemic order made by the Minister; and that those
detained must be informed of the right to
Ombudsman review.
In this situation of reduced scrutiny of lawmaking, where the Ombudsman has
(sometimes in
private) the operation of laws and directives post-enactment is important.
Investigations such as the Victorian Ombudsman’s
report into the hard and
immediate lockdown of Melbourne’s public housing towers in July 2020 can
provide public, high profile
accounts of the impact of these directions and policies on
individuals.
This report was the result of
an own motion investigation:
an example of
the Ombudsman’s proactive role. The report revealed that the Deputy CHO
had 15 minutes to consider the human rights implications of a hard and
immediate lockdown that in its initial phase would effectively
deprive around
3,000 residents of their liberty.
or so residents, this period of being deprived of their liberty continued for
two weeks and it was a week before these residents
were given access to fresh
By the final day of the initial
lockdown phase, in this group, almost half of the households had not been
telephoned by the relevant
government department and some households alleged
they did not receive a copy of the detention
directions.
In addition, the Ombudsman
noted that the ‘overwhelming police presence’ employed in the
lockdown was ‘particularly
traumatic’ for residents who ‘had
endured civil wars and dictatorships before settling in Australia, some even
torture at the hands of their former
The report concluded that,
despite the
Charter of Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
inadequate consideration was given to human rights in the making of this
decision and, in particular, in the immediacy of
implementation.
The Victorian Ombudsman
found that the residents were in part treated inhumanely and
unlawfully.
The report was critical of the
police-heavy approach deployed in the public housing
In this equation, the soft, non-binding nature of the Ombudsman’s
recommendations is a strength. It means that an Ombudsman can make strong
public findings and recommendations for change without any
jeopardising the efficacy of the government’s pandemic response or
delaying necessary government action. This can
be understood as the power of
persuasion. Greg Weeks argues that ‘ombudsmen’s success derives from
their effective exercise
rather than merely from wielding
Several Ombudsman offices reported the executive accepted recommendations made
during the pandemic at high rates of
The Ombudsman’s independence means they can make findings without fear
of party discipline or electoral backlash. In this sense,
the Victorian
Ombudsman’s report was proactive — not simply reacting to a past
event but making sure those making and
enforcing decisions understood that human
rights cannot be unreasonably sidelined. Despite the government’s refusal
to apologise
to the public housing residents, the findings of the Victorian
Ombudsman were likely to have been cathartic and a form of validation
for those impacted. Furthermore, when the same tower was locked down
12 months later, it was managed as a public health operation without a heavy
police and security
Proactive reports such as this can shed light on the ways in which government
action has affected the rights of individuals. The Victorian
Ombudsman’s
report identified specific shortcomings that should not be repeated: hasty
decision-making, over-policing and insufficient
communication.
Somewhat similarly, the NSW
Ombudsman’s 2022 special report on the government response to the pandemic
drew attention to systemic
problems including the disproportionate enforcement
of public health orders against marginalised
and the difficulty of ascertaining
what the law was at any given time.
scrutiny mechanisms are compromised.
Ombudsman offices were not the only institutions scrutinising the
operation of pandemic laws. Parliaments in several jurisdictions established
committees to monitor the operation of these new laws
These committees have done
important work in this area, for example, in calling
for a clearer delineation of federal and state responsibility, and
articulating
the need for national principles for managing
quarantine.
Sarah Moulds described these
new committees as ‘struggl[ing] to [their]
a description which
recognises that these accountability mechanisms had to find their feet in the
midst of the pandemic when many
parliaments paused
The efficacy of parliamentary
committees has varied across jurisdictions: based on political calculation, at
times, they have hesitated
to use the full scope of their powers to compel the
production of information or have diverted their energy to
partisanship.
After two years of the
in March 2022, the NSW parliamentary inquiry into the government’s
management of the pandemic tabled its report without making
recommendations to government.
contrast, Ombudsman offices were already well-established institutions that
could hit the ground running.
We can see how the Ombudsman’s institutional features — long
established independence, existing capacity and machinery
for own motion
investigations conducted in private, and the ability to make findings public
when appropriate — meant that the
Ombudsman was well-positioned to perform
valuable scrutiny during the pandemic. The Ombudsman’s scrutiny of
pandemic measures
was not unfettered though: jurisdictional limits and —
as we will explain later — limited resources and conditions of
uncertainty
restricted the impact of the Ombudsman’s scrutiny. Furthermore, during
the pandemic, governments may have felt more emboldened to push back
on the Ombudsman’s non-binding recommendations, in the belief that an
emergency like the pandemic required them to take bold action.
A second distinct feature of pandemic lawmaking was the heavy reliance of
Australian governments on soft
‘Soft law’ describes ‘a rule which has no legally binding
force but which is intended to influence
Examples from the pandemic include information disseminated through: government
websites, press conferences, published guidelines,
media content and advice given in written or verbal communications by
government officials to
individuals.
There are obvious benefits in communicating information about
COVID-19 related restrictions to the public in an easily accessible and
understandable form. Soft law serves a ‘communicative
This was especially
important during the pandemic, as the law regulating people’s
daily activity changed almost daily. At the height of the pandemic, most
Australians did not engage with the ‘complex, voluminous,
obscure and
everchanging’ legal instruments that controlled their
Instead, they relied on
‘government interpretations of the law distributed in “soft
law” instruments such as guidelines,
websites, advices and press
Soft law largely escapes scrutiny through established accountability
mechanisms.
It is not subject to the
parliamentary process and is generally not reviewable in judicial review or
merits review proceedings (although
decisions applying the underlying hard law
will be reviewable).
However, soft law can go awry, such as when there is a discrepancy
between the hard law and the soft law that is being communicated to the
public. There have been many instances of soft law failing
to reflect the hard
Soft law might be inaccurate: for
example, by specifying some, but not all, exceptions to a
In one instance, the pronouncement
of soft law simplified the hard law by stating a limit on the number of people
who could attend
a private gathering, but omitting reference to some exceptions
to that rule.
Soft law might fail to
distinguish between legally binding rules and mere
guidelines,
such as when the soft law
indicated that mask wearing
was compulsory, while the relevant hard law merely recommended wearing
Confusion caused by soft law has obvious ramifications for the rule of law
and human rights. People might refrain from lawful activities
because they are
under the false impression that those activities are
might risk a penalty by engaging in unlawful behaviour because the soft law did
not clearly communicate the unlawfulness
of this course of action.
Ombudsman offices are well-positioned to identify these discrepancies
associated with soft law and to make recommendations for
improvement.
The NSW Ombudsman’s
second special report into the COVID-19 pandemic explained how the use of soft
law contributed to widespread
confusion about what the law was on any given
The Northern Territory
Ombudsman has highlighted the potential confusion arising from rapidly
changing laws that are not always communicated consistently,
stating that,
‘[f]or the future, it would be enormously helpful to have a single and
settled official source of authority that
is accurate and updated as often as
necessary and as quickly as
In some cases, the Ombudsman may be able to work constructively with
government to correct discrepancies between soft law and the
actual law. For
example, the South Australian Ombudsman’s
Annual Report
At various times throughout the year, my office has contacted the Department for
Health and Wellbeing to request changes to their
website information about the
exemption process when it has been incorrect or required updating due to changes
in directions or circumstances.
The department has generally acted promptly to
comply with such
communications by the NT Department of Health
imposing quarantine fees suggested
the fees were non-discretionary and did not clearly advise of review or waiver
The Ombudsman raised
this with the Department, recommending a more flexible, individualised
approach and a stronger system of internal
The Department’s response
did not embrace these recommendations, citing the need for
a consistent approach and the responsibility of individuals to inform
themselves of current quarantine
requirements.
Hasty Administrative
Actions and Frameworks
A third feature of pandemic lawmaking was the speed at which governments took
administrative actions and set up legal frameworks.
In NSW, for example, in a
single year of the pandemic, the Health Minister made 155 principal and amending
public health orders.
One such hastily established framework was for mandatory hotel quarantine,
which was implemented at the state and territory level
following a decision of
the National Cabinet on 27 March 2020.
The framework was developed at short notice in a context in which ‘[t]here
was no best practice quarantine handbook and arrangements
were developed on a
state-by-state basis’.
The process
for applying for an exemption varied ‘significantly’ from state to
Haste inevitably creates the possibility that things will go wrong,
especially when the hasty measures impose significant restrictions
on liberty.
It is therefore more important than ever that individuals affected have access
to effective mechanisms for reviewing
restrictions on their liberty. This has
not always been the case in relation to Australia’s systems of hotel
quarantine.
In South Australia (‘SA’) for example, the system of hotel
quarantine was initially established without any appeal process
for exemption
applications.
A national review of the
framework found that ‘[i]nformation about criteria, the application
process including evidentiary
requirements, timeframes and appeal mechanisms
were often unclear and/or hard to
In NSW, two agencies were tasked with administering the hotel quarantine system:
NSW Health and NSW Police.
NSW Ombudsman, this posed a significant challenge given his jurisdiction covered
only one of the two agencies, namely NSW
The responsibilities of each of
these two agencies for various aspects of the hotel quarantine system was not
made clear by the NSW
government, thus hampering the efforts of the NSW
Ombudsman to assist those making hotel quarantine
complaints.
People in hotel quarantine or subject to other government actions affecting
liberty were able to challenge government action in judicial
proceedings.
However, during the pandemic, the shortcomings of judicial review and the
comparative advantages of taking a complaint to an
Ombudsman office were magnified. Perusal of the COVID-19 related contacts
received by Ombudsman offices (especially regarding hotel
quarantine)
shows that many of these
• highly time sensitive: relating, for example, to a short but ongoing
period of quarantine or an urgent need to travel interstate,
and unlikely to be
resolved by a court in time to put matters
• not necessarily complaints about the legality of government action,
and therefore not susceptible to correction in judicial
proceedings;
• possibly made by people for whom the costs of judicial review
proceedings would be prohibitive;
• complaints that required further
investigation:
not something an
Australian court can do;
• complaints that revealed systemic
• best remedied by nonlegal means such as apologies or policy changes,
or by amendments to the law.
To take one example, the NT Ombudsman received a complaint from a person in a
government-run quarantine facility. The person complained
that the occupants of
a neighbouring room were noisy and
disruptive.
The Ombudsman liaised with the facility’s operators, arranging for the
complainant to be moved to another room and for increased monitoring of the
disruptive neighbours.
The complaint was
resolved to the complainant’s satisfaction on the day after the
complainant’s first contact with the
Since this situation did not
appear to involve any breach of a legal duty, judicial review could never have
addressed the problem
and certainly not in a timely way.
The speed with which the Ombudsman addressed issues relating to
lockdown and quarantine is noteworthy. For example, the Victorian
Ombudsman’s complex and careful investigation report into the lockdown
of the Melbourne housing estates took no more than five
months, and this
relatively short timeframe factors in the scale of the investigation and the
requirement to provide the relevant
departments with an opportunity to respond,
as part of procedural fairness.
timeframe is important to mention because the pandemic was far from over at the
time the report was published. Those making
and enforcing decisions were
effectively put on notice that independent oversight mechanisms were intent on
monitoring whether rights
were being unreasonably sidelined during the
In terms of gauging speed, we can consider by way of comparison the Supreme
Court of the Australian Capital Territory’s (‘ACT’)
judgment of
Davidson v Director-General
Justice and Community Safety
Directorate
’), relating to a complaint made by
a prisoner in early
prisoner’s complaint was that while in solitary confinement in
2018–19, he was not given proper access to a daily
hour of fresh air and
exercise contrary to
s 40B(1)(a)
Human Rights Act
The matter was heard in mid 2021 and the 90-page judgment was handed down in mid
In his Honour’s reasons,
Loukas-Karlsson J declared cl 4.3 of the
Corrections Management (Separate
Confinement) Operating Procedure 2019
(ACT) — which provided an open
cell door constitutes access to fresh air and exercise —
Seven months later, in December
2022, the ACT government announced a policy change to confirm prisoners’
right to fresh
means that the resolution of this complaint took close to four years.
We are not arguing here that judicial review should become faster. There are
good reasons why court proceedings take time. The adversarial
designed to provide ‘Rolls Royce’ levels of legal argument and
procedural fairness. Inevitably, this method
takes time and costs
In some circumstances, judicial
review will be the most appropriate option for a person affected by executive
action. Our point is
not to denigrate the value of judicial review but, instead,
to highlight the strengths of the Ombudsman’s faster, more flexible
In making any comparisons, it should be noted that during the pandemic, a
number of judicial review actions were heard relatively
swiftly by Australian
state courts. These actions mainly related to the legality of the pandemic
orders themselves and not the conditions
(such as a lack of ventilation) imposed
by the pandemic frameworks established under these
At the same time, the likely
cost and complexity of taking such matters to the courts need to be factored
into this assessment of
dispute resolution
mechanisms, as well as the fact that not every Australian jurisdiction has a
bill of rights. In those jurisdictions, rights issues
must be argued within
(often ill-fitting) legal issues, such as jurisdictional error or breach of a
constitutional limit.
To sum up, the Ombudsman was in many ways well-adapted to
monitoring and remedying rights violations during the pandemic. In most
cases, the Ombudsman provided a responsive and accessible
complaints mechanism.
Through its complaints handling and proactive reports, the Ombudsman was able to
engage in constructive dialogue
with government about individual and systemic
issues, even if the government’s ultimate position did not always align
that of the Ombudsman.
But there were limits on the Ombudsman’s efficacy. Like many
organisations, Ombudsman offices battled limited information in
a constantly
changing environment. As we have seen, the Ombudsman’s jurisdiction is
limited and responses from government were
variable. Resourcing was also an
issue for some Ombudsman offices. The NSW Ombudsman, for example, reflected in
2021 that the shift
to remote work and service delivery during the pandemic
‘exposed the extent to which this office has in some respects
been left behind, with chronic under-funding leading to a long-term
under-investment in legacy technologies, service-delivery modes, and
processes’.
While the NSW
government increased the Ombudsman’s funding in
the fact remains that
limited resources affected the Ombudsman’s operations throughout much of
the pandemic. Inevitably, the
pandemic affected the staff of some Ombudsman
The ACT Ombudsman adopted a
‘limited-service complaint handling model’ to manage employee
availability and welfare, noting
that while this model enabled complaints
handling to continue, it did reduce the Ombudsman office’s ‘ability
to investigate
and manage complaints as efficiently as [it] otherwise
In the next two Parts, we examine more closely the work of the Ombudsman in
two case studies involving human rights and the deprivation
of liberty under
pandemic measures.
IV The Ombudsman’s
Reactive Role in Resolving Complaints regarding Access to Fresh Air
This case study examines how the Ombudsman, in
complaints handling role, responded to concerns about a lack
of fresh air in hotel quarantine and lockdown. We start by setting out
international standard of daily access to fresh air and explaining that
quarantine is a form of detention to which such standards
apply. We analyse how
Australian Ombudsman offices applied these standards and how governments
responded. We conclude with a reflection on the difficulty that those in
hotel quarantine experienced in complaining about this problem,
multiple agencies often involved in this quarantine scheme, and the
fragmented nature of complaints handling and oversight across Australia.
Lack of fresh air was a common issue raised in complaints about hotel
quarantine across jurisdictions, and about the hard and immediate
lockdown of
the Melbourne public housing towers.
Concerns regarding access to fresh air in hotel quarantine were articulated in
the media within the
first month of the scheme, with a story by journalist Jack Gramenz on
23 April 2020 titled ‘Coronavirus: Hotel Quarantine Has No Access to
Fresh Air, Unlike
The headline implied that while hotel quarantine and prison share some
commonalities, those detained in prison were better off. This
comparison was
also articulated in a complaint made to the NSW Ombudsman by a person detained
in hotel quarantine: ‘even criminals
are given outside time in
In June 2020, a
submission to a Queensland parliamentary inquiry explained the problem to
lawmakers: ‘Many people quarantining
in hotels report being confined to
rooms with no opening windows or balconies, and that time allowed out of the
room is at the discretion
of the supervising police
While there is no standalone or direct right to daily access to fresh air in
international human rights law, it is connected to the
right to be treated
humanely when deprived of liberty as articulated by art 10(1) of the
which was ratified by
Australia in
According to the advice of the United Nations Subcommittee on the Prevention of
Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
(‘SPT’) — a body of international experts which monitors all
forms of detention under the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
’) — quarantine (such as hotel quarantine) is a
The SPT released further advice that ‘[s]ince quarantine facilities are a
de facto form of deprivation of liberty,
all those so held should be able to
benefit from the fundamental safeguards against
ill-treatment
Both pieces of advice, published in March and April 2020 respectively, meant
that states parties to
such as Australia were aware that many of
the principles providing fundamental safeguards for those in detention would be
applicable.
These safeguards include the right to daily access to fresh air,
which is articulated by r 23(1) of the
Mandela Rules
were first devised in
1955 in the context of the
treatment of those persons held in prisons and were subsequently revised in
are regularly referred to as relevant standards in reports published by
Australian Ombudsman offices.
Australian Ombudsman offices and other independent oversight bodies have applied
these non-binding standards more broadly
to all detention
In NZ, the Chief Ombudsman, in his
role, published a set of
principles in April 2020 which are aligned with the
Mandela Rules
These principles are designed to guide detention facilities and their staff in
treating those deprived of their liberty in a humane
sixth principle in this statement spells out rights: ‘The fundamental
rights of detained people during the pandemic ...
includ[e] ... the right of
daily access to the open air (of at least one
These rights-based
principles are to be applied to
places of detention in
Scope for a
Rights-Based Approach
In Australia, it appears that complaints about a lack of fresh air in hotel
quarantine were made in most jurisdictions and to a range
of oversight
For example, of the more than
500 hotel quarantine complaints received by the NSW Ombudsman between March 2020
and January 2021,
73 complaints mentioned a lack of access to fresh air and
The Ombudsman was not always able to respond effectively (or at all) to these
complaints. This was the case in NSW where the selection
of hotels for hotel
quarantine was made by NSW Police, a body not subject to the
Ombudsman’s jurisdiction.
Ombudsman’s first pandemic report explains that without a state-based
rights framework,
NSW Police prioritised
safety and efficiency, rather than rights: ‘[NSW Police] determined that
high-rise buildings would be
easier and less resource intensive to keep
and they considered the
option of escorting guests to access fresh air but decided against it on the
bases that it was ‘logistically
too difficult and resource-intensive to
manage, and ... represented a transmission
The NSW Ombudsman’s
regarding the splitting
of responsibility between NSW Health and NSW Police,
thwarted the Ombudsman’s ability to respond
to complaints.
In some jurisdictions, complaints made to the Ombudsman regarding access to
fresh air in hotel quarantine were addressed in a rights
framework, regardless
of whether the jurisdiction in which the complaint was made had a legislative
rights framework or whether the
Ombudsman had an explicit rights mandate. For
example, the
Annual Report 2020–21
of the South Australian
Ombudsman stated that multiple complaints were made about a lack of fresh air in
quarantine.
The Ombudsman subsequently gave advice to the Department for Health and
Wellbeing (SA) that ‘access to fresh air is a basic
human right and that
all people in hotel quarantine should
have access to fresh air’.
report indicates the Department’s response in February 2021, namely that
it had adopted the South Australian Ombudsman’s
position that access to
fresh air was a human right and that it had adopted a policy of only using 80%
of the capacity of a hotel
for quarantine so as to ensure those in hotel
quarantine had provision of a balcony or an opening
rights-based approach to the problem and its acceptance by the Department are
noteworthy given that SA has no
legislative rights framework.
The South Australian response was no doubt bolstered by the work
of other rights-monitoring institutions at a similar time. The Victorian
Ombudsman investigated the issue in the context of the Melbourne
public housing
In mid October 2020, the
Queensland Human Rights Commission ruled that humane treatment in hotel
quarantine requires rooms to have
either balconies or opening windows and that
reasonable that the government be called on to source hotels with such
In both Victoria and Queensland,
government departments and agencies pushed
While the approach taken by both
the Victorian and Queensland oversight bodies occurred under legislative bills
of rights, this approach
clearly had a positive flow-on effect for those
an explicit human rights mandate. This experience demonstrates the
potential value of the Ombudsman as a rights protective institution.
The Ombudsman’s
Dialogue with Government
In jurisdictions with a legislative rights framework, one of the touted
strengths of using the courts as a forum for rights issues
is their potential to
engage the Parliament and the executive in a ‘rights
In the ACT’s
human rights framework, a court can do this by making a declaration of
incompatibility under s 32 of the
, which is what the Supreme
Court of the ACT did in
thus triggering a process whereby the Attorney-General must present the
declaration to Parliament and present a formal government
response within six
Even in a jurisdiction without a
human rights framework, however, the Ombudsman can perform a similar function in
an informal manner.
As the previously mentioned South Australian example illustrates,
informal interaction between the Ombudsman, and government departments and
agencies, is key to much of the reactive, complaints handling
work of Ombudsman
offices. This takes place behind closed doors. However, a form of formal
interaction, similar to that between the
courts and Parliament, is required when
an Ombudsman makes findings. To satisfy the requirements of procedural fairness,
offices give government departments and agencies an opportunity to
formally respond to their preliminary
The Victorian
Ombudsman’s report on the public housing lockdown offers a strong
illustration of such rights dialogue thanks
to the lengthy 44-page government
response which can be found in appendix A of the
The Victorian government response to the Ombudsman made the point that the
right to access fresh air ‘is not mandated ... by
rights instrument’
legislation and that ‘the primary human rights
guidance ... has been developed in the context of imprisonment for criminal
This indicates that
the Victorian government chose to take a highly adversarial and legalistic
approach in responding to the Victorian
Ombudsman, a response which did not
recognise that the Ombudsman’s recommendations are soft, non-binding and
focused on good
The Victorian
government’s approach was narrow, not taking into account
that since 2019, the Commonwealth Ombudsman has been using the
in the monitoring of immigration
and that the media was
publishing articles decrying that prison had higher standards than those
required in hotel quarantine.
worth recalling that, as Weeks explains, the Ombudsman ‘stands apart from
other administrative law bodies’
in that it is ‘not concerned
primarily with law but with
Furthermore, the Victorian government did not implement the
Ombudsman’s later recommendation that the
Public Health Act
be amended to include a right to regular and meaningful access to fresh
shows that while the Ombudsman can engage in public dialogue with government,
the success of this intervention is never guaranteed.
A Fragmented System
of Complaints Handling
While the complaints regarding access to fresh air during the pandemic
indicate a level of engagement and cross fertilisation between
Ombudsman offices and other oversight bodies, they also highlight
Australia’s fragmented system of oversight and complaints handling, a
point made by the NSW Ombudsman in March
This fragmentation at the
quarantine, which was intended
to be a national scheme, albeit legislated and
implemented by each jurisdiction.
fragmented approach is not surprising in a federal system, especially where
state and territory frameworks are hastily established;
but it is concerning
where there is little scrutiny and transparency as to how decisions are made,
and little clarity as to how they
can be appealed or reviewed.
A 2020 review of the national hotel quarantine system, commissioned by
National Cabinet, indicates that the bulk of complaints were
made to state,
territory and Commonwealth Ombudsman offices, while some complaints were made to
the Australian Human Rights Commission
The 2020 review
explains that it did not canvass all the complaints made directly to state
agencies such as the police.
Ombudsman observes,
it was difficult for those affected by pandemic laws to know who to
complain to.
The NSW Ombudsman concludes his first special report on complaints handling
during the pandemic by observing that Australia’s
current oversight and
complaints handling system is not necessarily ‘suited to a crisis of this
nature and magnitude’.
Ombudsman argues that where there is a national scheme or system, arrangements
need to be made ‘to ensure that (whether
on a state-by-state or national
basis) there is at least one oversight body that has full visibility of [that
scheme] and an ability
complaints about all aspects of
For example, given that hotel
quarantine was a national scheme, the Commonwealth Ombudsman could have been
authorised to handle all
hotel quarantine complaints at first
This first special report of
the NSW Ombudsman was published soon after the Victorian government announced
that it would take to
National Cabinet
the recommendation made by its independent Board of Inquiry into the COVID-19
Hotel Quarantine Program in late 2020 that daily fresh
air breaks be made part
of hotel quarantine.
Despite the
consensus among complaints handlers and independent reviews that a national
position on such quarantine and detention
conditions (such as daily access to
fresh air) would be helpful, National Cabinet has not taken a position on this
issue, and it
has not addressed the compelling argument for an integrated and
visible system of complaints — a ‘front door’ —
national scheme is in operation.
This case study on complaints regarding access to fresh air during the
pandemic illustrates three things. First, that Australian Ombudsman
offices are
robustly considering human rights in undertaking their reactive role of handling
complaints, regardless of whether their
legislation. Second, it illustrates that not all governments and their agencies
are receptive
of these rights-based Ombudsman recommendations, even where there
is a legislative bill of rights. Third, it highlights the observation
Ombudsman that Australia’s ‘fragmented’ system of complaints
handling, largely undertaken by various
Ombudsman offices, needs some serious
V The Ombudsman’s
Proactive Role in Monitoring Places of Detention under
Since Australia ratified
gradually implemented the detention monitoring scheme required by this human
rights treaty. This has meant that at least five
Australian Ombudsman offices
have been given a central role in the
monitoring scheme of their
role in preventing
ill-treatment of persons deprived of their liberty through the systematic and
independent monitoring of all places
of detention. This proactive, preventive
role complements the Ombudsman’s more traditional, reactive role of
complaints handling.
In common, both roles seek to hold government to account
for actions affecting individual human rights.
Ombudsman offices are a good fit for this novel role given that issues
relating to the deprivation of liberty have long taken up a
significant portion
of complaints handling and investigation work for Australian Ombudsman
and as demonstrated in the
first case study, these offices have much experience in applying human rights
standards to the detention
time, this proactive role is likely to become more prominent for various
Australian Ombudsman offices as they commence and develop
their roles under
, with the implementation deadline of 20 January 2023 having now
This case study explains this new role for various Australian Ombudsman
offices and how the slow implementation of this scheme affected
the ability of
these offices (in particular the Commonwealth Ombudsman) to conduct effective
monitoring of places of detention during
the pandemic. It offers a comparison
with NZ, where the Chief Ombudsman has been undertaking this proactive role as
one of five integrity
institutions under the
Crimes of Torture Act 1989
following NZ’s ratification of
It concludes by reflecting on how
this new role might transform various
Ombudsman offices.
The Ombudsman’s
Monitoring Role
According to Reif, in half of the states parties to
, Ombudsman
offices have been designated a role as a National Preventive Mechanism
at the domestic level, NPMs perform independent monitoring of all places of
detention in order to proactively prevent the risk of
torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment,
otherwise referred to as ill-treatment. Under art 4 of
‘places of detention’ is to be broadly construed to refer to
‘any place under [states parties’] jurisdiction
and control where
persons are or may be deprived of their liberty’. This would include not
just prisons, youth detention and
locked psychiatric units, but also
non-traditional places of detention such as locked units of residential aged
care. In a federal
system, these places of detention are often under the control
of different jurisdictions.
NPMs conduct monitoring by undertaking regular inspection visits —
announced or unannounced — to places of detention where
unrestricted access to all databases and facilities, and interview staff and
detainees in private.
NPMs undertake
these visits with a diverse team including medical, health, legal and cultural
undertaking this inspection and monitoring role, NPM teams have regard to human
rights principles and best practice.
They are guided by the SPT, which issues advice and visits places of detention
within states parties’
Subsequently, NPMs make
system-level recommendations to Parliament for law reform and institutional
change, which are aimed at preventing
the risk of torture and
ill-treatment.
Ombudsman offices are well-equipped for this role due to the non-binding
nature of NPMs’ recommendations, the Ombudsman’s
existing proactive
own motion investigation power, and the high level of independence and public
regard required of the NPMs to successfully
exert persuasive power. However,
NPMs must take a strictly
role which means that they cannot mix
this with their reactive, complaints handling role. On this front, the SPT has
explained that
where a body has functions in addition to its NPM role, the roles
must be separated and ring-fenced both functionally and financially:
they cannot
be an ‘add on’.
In 2018, the Commonwealth government designated the Commonwealth Ombudsman
the NPM for monitoring places of detention under Commonwealth
control such as
immigration
Additionally, the Commonwealth Ombudsman has been designated as the national
coordinator of the network of NPMs.
2022, Tasmania designated its Ombudsman as its NPM for all forms of
while in Western Australia
(‘WA’), the Ombudsman is the NPM in relation to monitoring mental
health facilities where
persons are deprived of their
ACT has given the Commonwealth Ombudsman a shared role as
while the NT has given its
Ombudsman NPM status on an interim
In late 2022, the Queensland
Ombudsman was given the role of Inspector of Detention
Presently, SA is the only jurisdiction where the Ombudsman has not been given
any role in
detention monitoring, despite the South Australian
Ombudsman’s strong record in inspecting state
the time of writing, NSW, Queensland and Victoria have yet to officially
designate their NPMs.
These states
have demanded that the Commonwealth provide ongoing funding for these new
detention monitoring
schemes required in each jurisdiction under
The protracted nature of this funding dispute leads to questions as to how
genuine the Commonwealth and Australia’s subnational
governments are in
meeting Australia’s
obligations.
Australia’s
Missed Opportunity for Robust Oversight and Monitoring of Places of Detention
during the Pandemic
As noted earlier, Australia was given until January 2023 to implement
. This unusually lengthy deadline meant Australia missed the
opportunity to benefit from
’s rights protection through the
height of the pandemic.
The relevance of
was noted by the Victorian Ombudsman in her
public housing lockdown report
the NSW Ombudsman in his two pandemic
Both noted that
had not yet been implemented and established in
The NSW Ombudsman
insightfully raised how Australia could have benefited from an established
monitoring system during the pandemic, pointing to the experience
in NZ and the United Kingdom (‘UK’). The NZ Chief Ombudsman
performed an NPM role under the
Crimes of Torture Act 1989
while the UK NPM was established
The NSW Ombudsman noted that the well-established
schemes in NZ and the UK meant that formalised channels of
communication between oversight and detention monitoring bodies were already
Consequently, inter-agency cooperation and deliberation could more easily
consider the best ways forward in relation to detention
the Australian context, we can speculate that in circumstances where a decision
needs to be made quickly, such as in the case
Melbourne public housing lockdown, the relevant experts could have been more
easily engaged and drawn into the decision-making process
scheme had already been established. These experts could have proactively
identified the possible risks of inhuman treatment and
made recommendations as
to how human rights-compliant systems could be put in place. For example, the
fact that those deprived of
their liberty would need daily access to fresh air
could have been pre-empted, particularly in relation to those quarantine hotels
and Melbourne public housing towers built without balconies.
On this point it is worth recalling that the NZ Ombudsman’s statement
of principles was published in mid April
— two and a half months
before the Melbourne public housing lockdown. The lack of an established
detention monitoring scheme in Australia meant that there was no
equivalent set of guiding
principles.
The lack of an established
detention monitoring scheme in
Australia also meant that there was no assurance of ongoing onsite monitoring
visits by an
independent
body where people were being deprived of their
liberty. There is a higher risk of ill-treatment when people are ‘out of
which means that preventive monitoring visits are critical. On the
independent inspection visits continuing during the pandemic, the SPT stated
in March 2020 that it ‘
considers that
continue to undertake visits of a preventive nature
, respecting necessary
limitations on the manner in which their visits are
undertaken’.
According to the SPT,
cannot be completely denied access to official places of
detention, including places of quarantine
, even if temporary restrictions
are permissible in accordance with article 14(2) of the Optional
The well-established scheme in NZ meant that the NPMs suspended their onsite
inspection visits for only a month; they were able to
continue visiting places
of detention, albeit through shorter visits. For example, in citing the advice
of the SPT, the NZ Chief
Ombudsman recommenced onsite visits in late April 2020
(after a month of suspension, when the NZ alert level was
and published two inspection
reports in June
In some Australian jurisdictions, onsite visits to places of detention were
suspended for a longer period of up to four months. In
many cases,
inspection visits were suspended by the
inspection teams themselves.
cases, state and territory legislative frameworks gave government agencies the
power to suspend visits by independent prison
inspectors and the
Meanwhile, throughout much of 2020 and in mid 2021, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman suspended his inspection teams’ onsite visits
to immigration
facilities,
in part due to state lockdowns and movement
restrictions.
The Office of the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s 2022 report sets out that it used a remote
monitoring approach. It explains that
it ‘elected not to pursue site
visits where [its] attendance would be inconsistent with or contrary to risk
mitigation strategies
in place at detention
facilities’,
especially given that
these were state-based strategies. This decision arguably sits in tension with
the March 2020 advice of the
SPT that ‘[t]he overriding criterion’
for whether to proceed with an onsite visit during the pandemic ‘must be
that of effectiveness in securing the prevention of ill-treatment of those
subject to detaining measures’.
contrast, this advice was more closely adhered to by the NZ Chief Ombudsman in
his proactive, detention monitoring role.
Ombudsman’s
Monitoring during the Pandemic
We can gain an understanding of how the Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman
could have performed its NPM role by looking at NZ, where
the Chief Ombudsman
made ongoing ‘short and targeted’ inspection
These were made possible through
the NZ Chief Ombudsman arranging to be designated ‘essential
services’ during alert
This gave the NZ Chief Ombudsman a ‘foot in the door’. This pandemic
arrangement showed that NZ authorities recognised
the importance and legitimacy
of NPMs and their monitoring work.
The NZ Chief Ombudsman’s June 2020 inspection report on prisons
indicates some initial pushback to his inspection visits from
Executive of the Department of Corrections
The introductory paragraphs of the
NZ Chief Ombudsman reports pithily explain his rationale on insisting on onsite
visits despite
transmission risks:
I was acutely aware of the specific risks peoples in places of detention
faced, both from the virus itself but also from the measures
taken to prevent
the spread of COIVD-19 in places of detention and the impact these may have on
people’s human rights.
I decided that
physical on-site
inspections must continue
in order for me to provide effective independent
I firmly believe that independent monitoring is essential during these
unprecedented times. Extraordinary measures imposed by the
Government must not
have an unnecessary or disproportionate impact on people’s
One factor that distinguishes the Australian experience from that in NZ is
that the various Australian Ombudsman offices and other
inspectors did not have
the same level of NPM mandate to carry out inspections because the
implementation period was still in train in Australia. Australia initially
extended its
implementation deadline until January 2022 and further
extended it until January 2023,
it a lengthy implementation period. While the Commonwealth Ombudsman was
designated as an NPM in 2018, the subnational jurisdictions
have lagged further
behind, with WA being the first of this group to comprehensively arrange its
in 2019 and Tasmania being the second in late 2021. Furthermore,
Australian Ombudsman offices’ NPM mandates are not set out in primary
legislation,
unlike in NZ where NPM
powers and functions are clearly set out in
legislation.
The onsite visits of the NZ Chief Ombudsman as NPM allowed him to reiterate
to those managing places of detention the requirement
to ensure access to at
least one hour of fresh air on a daily basis for those persons deprived of their
In one of the two inspection
reports published in June 2020, the NZ Chief Ombudsman explained more broadly
that ‘future emergency
response planning’ needed to include
maintaining the right ‘to have adequate access to fresh
Admittedly, it is likely that not all NZ places of detention followed the
principles set out by the Chief Ombudsman as NPM. However,
the ability of
the Chief Ombudsman to make short, targeted inspection visits for most of
2020 meant that the public could be reassured that, while
they were not able to
visit loved ones themselves, a team of independent experts were monitoring and
also engaging with facilities
that needed some reminding of their human rights
obligations.
The Australian Ad Hoc
and Reactive Approach to Monitoring and Oversight
The establishment of National Cabinet early in
the pandemic demonstrated that Australia’s federal government was able to
efficiently and swiftly with the subnational governments of the states and
territories.
National Cabinet created
the broad policy of the mandatory hotel quarantine
but this level of cooperation
did not extend to setting up a nationally coordinated system for detention
monitoring with a set of
exemption provisions to ensure the Commonwealth
Ombudsman could continue onsite monitoring of Commonwealth administered
facilities; nor did it extend to a nationally consistent approach to
daily access to fresh air in hotel quarantine.
The designation of the Commonwealth Ombudsman as the NPM coordinator before
the pandemic unfortunately did not lead to a national
approach or a national set
of principles for detention monitoring. Some of the blame here can be attributed
to the Commonwealth government
which arguably showed minimal genuine interest in
meeting its obligations under
as evidenced by its lacklustre
approach to resourcing the new
monitoring scheme across
This problem of resourcing
Ombudsman offices including the Commonwealth Ombudsman to perform this new human
rights protection role
continues to slow down the implementation of
, even after the official implementation deadline. In May 2023, the
Commonwealth Ombudsman explained in a Senate estimates hearing
that his office
had been given ‘funding for approximately 3.8 people’ but that he
had ‘more than 10 people working
on the NPM functions ... The challenge is
that it does involve taking resources away from other
functions.’
Thus we see that the
role expansion of the Commonwealth Ombudsman is not reflected in sufficient
funding since his office’s
designation in 2018 as the federal NPM, ACT NPM
and NPM coordinator for Australia.
Given the continuing operation of National
Cabinet, there is an opportunity for this national body to give serious
consideration to
the NSW Ombudsman’s finding that Australia lacks a
national system of complaints handling and oversight where schemes (eg hotel
quarantine and detention monitoring) are nationally agreed
There is scope for National Cabinet,
as well as governments in each jurisdiction, to streamline and strengthen
complaints mechanisms
in anticipation of another complex emergency. For example,
the existing network of Australian Ombudsman offices could be given the
resources and capacity to work more closely together and with other oversight
bodies, regardless of their various jurisdictional
discrepancies, drawing on the
principles of cooperative federalism that are instrumental in our nationally
agreed schemes.
Drawing the two case studies together, we observe that had
implemented
the pandemic and all NPMs been made operational, the
Commonwealth Ombudsman as the NPM coordinator could have followed the lead of
to work together with other Australian NPMs to publish a set of national
principles which could have set out rights and standards
such as that of access
to fresh air. This would have largely averted the need for those in hotel
quarantine or lockdown to make complaints
and it is possible that the
inconsistencies relating to hotel quarantine across Australia may have been
better addressed. Giving
the Ombudsman a proactive, preventive role (and
resourcing it) can likely reduce the number of complaints being made and in
particular,
it can assure the public during a time of emergency when access to
various sites including closed institutions is limited.
Overall, in comparison with NZ, the Australian approach to safeguarding the
human rights of those deprived of their liberty during
the pandemic was largely
reactive and ad hoc. Pandemic arrangements often sidelined the human rights of
those deprived of their liberty
because there was no adequate system at play to
identify the relevant principles and likely tension points before directives and
orders were announced. This meant that complaints to Ombudsman offices were
often necessary before action took place. Given that
Australia has robust
Ombudsman offices, governments need to equip these institutions with greater
resources so as to play a more
central role in safeguarding human rights.
VI Conclusion
The pandemic has done much to underline two things. First, it underlined the
fact that Australian governments face few obstacles in
introducing laws that
sideline human rights.
Second, and more
critically for this article, it underlined the importance of the work of the
Ombudsman as a human rights oversight
institution and the strengths of its modus
operandi. In undertaking human rights protection, the Ombudsman takes a
non-litigious
approach based on persuasive power. The pandemic has highlighted
the relative speed at which the Ombudsman can respond, the economy
investigations, and the capacity of the Ombudsman to engage public authorities
and legislatures in dialogue and change. As
a soft mechanism which largely
engages informally with government, the Ombudsman is uniquely positioned to
swiftly scrutinise government
actions and the operation of soft law, and to make
recommendations based on human rights standards that departments generally (but
not always) comply with. Thus, Ombudsman offices have contributed to developing
a human rights-based understanding of justice which
is not always limited to
strict legal obligations.
The first case study on access to fresh air highlights that the vulnerability
of individuals to human rights violations during the
pandemic was in some
situations compounded by the lack of a visible, coordinated and easily
accessible mechanism for complaining
illustrates that while jurisdictional issues impeded the complaints handling
work of Ombudsman offices
around Australia, these institutions are adept at
applying human rights standards and undertaking dialogue with governments both
formally and informally to safeguard human rights. This is evident in both their
main reactive role of complaints handling, and their
main proactive role of
undertaking own motion investigations and issuing special reports. In this case
study, we saw the Ombudsman
seeking (with considerable success) to temper the
rights-abrogating impact of laws and orders that were hastily introduced. While
Ombudsman offices did not have success across the board, they did have some
success in persuading governments to remedy both procedural
and substantive
aspects of hotel quarantine and lockdown.
The second case study focused on the detention monitoring role that various
Australian Ombudsman offices are commencing and developing
This new proactive role opens opportunities for this institution to consolidate
itself as a leading integrity body that safeguards
human rights, regardless of
whether the jurisdiction has a legislative rights framework. In Reif’s
view, where an Ombudsman
is given an NPM mandate, it transforms from a classic
Ombudsman institution into a human rights
institution.
Given at least five
Ombudsman offices have this new mandate, Australian Ombudsman offices are
undergoing a big shift. At the same
time, the fact that the
was given to these Ombudsman offices, rather than for example a human rights
commission at the state or national level, indicates
the success of these
offices in overseeing detention issues.
But this expanded role in human rights protection presents challenges for
Ombudsman offices in terms of the resources and ring-fencing
required for them
to perform this role effectively.
To conclude, we can return to the two concerns identified by Stuhmcke in
relation to the Ombudsman’s role in promoting human
rights in Australia.
One concern is that Ombudsman offices will not be properly resourced when their
functions are expanded into
human rights protection and that this may undermine
the efficacy of the Ombudsman’s ‘fire-fighting’ role. As Part
V(D) explained, on this front, there is good reason for concern.
In terms of the demographic of Ombudsman clients, Stuhmcke’s concern on
this front may be that only the middle class and the
advantaged are positioned
to benefit from the Ombudsman’s work. In light of the Ombudsman’s
role which covers persons in places of detention, it is likely
that the demographic of the Ombudsman’s ‘client’
will shift.
As we know, Australia’s prison population is drawn from a small number of
locations with high levels of economic
disadvantage.
The Victorian
Ombudsman’s investigation of the lockdown of the nine public housing
towers, which impacted 3,000 residents,
squarely addressed the experience of
some of Victoria’s most disadvantaged communities, many of whom have
resettled in Australia
as refugees from war-torn countries. This demonstrates
that, in part due to the new
role, there is scope for the
Ombudsman’s non-litigious approach to human rights protection to benefit a
wider demographic than
was previously the case.
Queensland Ombudsman,
(Report, 2021) 4 (‘
Queensland Ombudsman
2020–21 Annual Report
See, eg, NSW Ombudsman,
Hindsight: The First 12 Months of the COVID-19 Pandemic
(Report, 22 March
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
’); Jamie Paterson,
Mostafa Mahmud Naser and Haydn Rigby, ‘COVID-19 Emergency Measures and
Their Implications for Disadvantaged
and Vulnerable Groups in Australia: A Human
Rights Perspective’
[2023] UWALawRw 11
(2022) 50(1)
University of Western Australia Law
, 434–45; ‘What Human Rights Are at Particular Risk of
Being Restricted during a Pandemic?’,
Australian Human Rights
(Web Page) <
https://humanrights.gov.au/about/covid19-and-human-rights/what-hum‌an-rights-are-particular-risk-being-restricted-during-pandemic
archived at <
https://perm‌a.cc/3KAH-UJD8
‘Embedding Human Rights during COVID-19’,
Victorian Equal
Opportunity & Human Rights Commission
(Web Page) <
https://www.humanrights.vic.gov.au/leg‌al-and-policy/covid-19-and-human-rights/embedding-human-rights-during-covid-19/>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/87M6-ZE3N
See, eg, Kay Wilson and Christopher
Rudge, ‘COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates: A Coercive but Justified Public Health
[2023] UNSWLawJl 15
(2023) 46(2)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
, 387–402; Bruce Chen, ‘The COVID-19 Border Closure to India:
Would an Australian
Human Rights Act
Have Made a Difference?’
(2021) 46(4)
Alternative Law Journal
See, eg, Michael Legg, ‘The
COVID-19 Pandemic, the Courts and Online Hearings: Maintaining Open Justice,
Procedural Fairness
and Impartiality’
(2021) 49(2)
Federal Law
, 166–83; Tania Sourdin, Bin Li and Donna Marie McNamara,
‘Court Innovations and Access to Justice in Times of Crisis’
Health Policy and Technology
447, 448–52; Bruce Chen,
‘COVID-19 Stay at Home Restrictions and the Interpretation of
Emergency Powers: A Comparative Analysis’
(2022) 44(1)
Statute Law
, 3–22 (‘Stay at Home Restrictions’).
Victorian Ombudsman,
Investigation
into the Detention and Treatment of Public Housing Residents Arising from a
COVID-19 ‘Hard Lockdown’ in
(Report, December 2020) 14
[26]–[28] (‘
Victorian Ombudsman Public Housing
Investigation
Ibid 171 [868]–[876].
We note that a somewhat similar
methodology — combing through publicly available reports to shed light on
the Ombudsman’s
role — was employed in Axel Pohn-Weidinger and Julia
Dahlvik, ‘Enacting the Ombud’s Roles: A Study Based on Text
Mining’ (2023) 43(1)
Zeitschrift für Rechtssoziologie
Victorian Ombudsman Public Housing
Investigation
); Victorian Ombudsman,
Ombudsman’s Recommendations: Fourth Report
(Report, September 2022)
Ombudsman Fourth Report
’); Penny McKay, Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Immigration Detention: The Ombudsman’s Oversight of Immigration
No 01/2022, 2022) (‘
Commonwealth Ombudsman Monitoring Immigration
Detention 2022
’); Michael Manthorpe, Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Monitoring Immigration Detention: Review of the Ombudsman’s Activities
in Overseeing Immigration Detention
No 06/2020, 2020) (‘
Commonwealth Ombudsman Monitoring Immigration
Detention 2020
’); Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Monitoring Commonwealth
Places of Detention: Annual Report of the Commonwealth National Preventive
Mechanism under the Optional Protocol
to the Convention Against Torture
(Report, 2023) (‘
Commonwealth Ombudsman Monitoring
Commonwealth Places of Detention
’); Commonwealth National Preventive
Mechanism and ACT Ombudsman,
Post Visit Summaries: ACT Policing Watch House
and ACT Police Stations
(Report, 25 June 2024); Peter Boshier, Office of the
Ombudsman (NZ),
OPCAT Report: Report on an Unannounced Follow up Inspection
of Te Toki Maurere Unit, Whakatāne Hospital, under the
Crimes of Torture
(Report, April 2022) (‘
NZ Ombudsman Whakatāne
’); Peter Boshier, Office of the Ombudsman (NZ),
COVID-19 Report: Report on Inspections of Prisons under the
Crimes of Torture
(Report, June 2020) (‘
NZ Ombudsman Report on Inspections
’); Peter Boshier, Office of the Ombudsman (NZ),
COVID-19 Report: Report on Inspections of Mental Health Facilities under the
Crimes of Torture Act 1989
(Report, 15 June 2020) (‘
NZ Ombudsman
Report on Inspections of Mental Health Facilities
’); Peter Boshier,
Office of the Ombudsman (NZ),
OPCAT COVID-19 Report: Report on Inspections of
Aged Care Facilities under the
Crimes of Torture Act 1989
(Report, August
NZ Ombudsman Report on Inspections of Aged Care
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
); NSW Ombudsman,
The COVID-19
Pandemic: Second Report
(Report, 7 September 2022) (‘
NSW Ombudsman
Second Pandemic Report
’); Victorian Ombudsman,
The Ombudsman for
Human Rights: A Casebook
(Report, August 2021) (‘
Ombudsman Human Rights Casebook
Commonwealth
Annual Report
(Report, October 2021)
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
ACT Ombudsman
Annual Report 2020–21
(Report); NSW Ombudsman,
Annual Report
26 October 2021) (‘
NSW Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual
’); Ombudsman NT,
Annual Report 2020/21
NT Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
); Ombudsman SA,
Annual Report
(Report) (‘
SA Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual
’); Ombudsman Tasmania,
Annual Report 2020–2021
(Report) (‘
Tasmanian Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
Victorian Ombudsman,
Annual Report 2021
(Report) (‘
Ombudsman 2021 Annual Report
’); Ombudsman Western Australia,
Report 2020–21
(Report) (‘
WA Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual
Commonwealth
Annual Report 2021–22
(Report, October 2022)
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
2021–22 ACT Ombudsman Annual Report
ACT Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
Annual Report 2021–2022
(Report, 25 October 2022)
NSW Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
’); Ombudsman NT,
Annual Report 2021/22
(Report) (‘
NT Ombudsman 2021–22
Annual Report
’); Queensland Ombudsman,
Annual Report
(Report, 2022) (‘
Queensland Ombudsman 2021–22
Annual Report
’); Ombudsman SA,
Annual Report
(Report) (‘
SA Ombudsman
2021–22 Annual Report
’); Ombudsman Tasmania,
Annual Report
(Report); Victorian Ombudsman,
2022 Annual Report
(Report) (‘
Victorian Ombudsman 2022 Annual Report
Ombudsman Western Australia,
Annual Report 2021–22
WA Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
Ellen Rock,
Accountability in Public Governance Regimes
(Cambridge University Press,
Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
See Rick Snell, ‘Australian
Ombudsman: A Continual Work in Progress’ in Matthew Groves and HP Lee
Australian Administrative Law: Fundamentals, Principles and Doctrines
(Cambridge University Press, 2007) 100, 100. According to Stuhmcke, by the
end of the 1980s, the Commonwealth Ombudsman was ‘established
as a primary
means of dispute resolution in terms of the new administrative law’: Anita
Stuhmcke, ‘Privatisation and
Corporatisation: What Now for the Commonwealth Ombudsman?’
(2004) 11(2)
Australian Journal of Administrative Law
The first Australian Ombudsman was the
Western Australian Ombudsman (also known as the Parliamentary Commissioner for
Administrative
Investigations), which was established in 1971:
Parliamentary
Commissioner Act 1971
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
’). The second and third were the South Australian Ombudsman and
Ombudsman, established in 1972 and 1973 respectively:
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
’). The New South Wales
(‘NSW’) Ombudsman and Queensland Ombudsman (also known as the
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administrative Investigations) were
established in 1974:
Ombudsman Act 1974
Parliamentary Commissioner Act 1974
(Qld) s 5, as
repealed by
Ombudsman Act 2001
Ombudsman Act
’). The Commonwealth Ombudsman began operation in 1977:
Ombudsman Act 1976
Ombudsman Act
Australian Government,
Making a Difference: 40 Years of the Commonwealth
(Report, 2017) 7. The Tasmanian Ombudsman and Northern Territory
Ombudsman were established in 1978:
Ombudsman Act 1978
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman (Northern Territory)
Ordinance 1978
(NT) s 4, as repealed by
Ombudsman Act 2009
Ombudsman Act
’). The Australian Capital Territory
(‘ACT’) Ombudsman was established in 1989:
Ombudsman Act 1989
Ombudsman Act
The Tasmanian Ombudsman has over 130
separate statutory functions under 17 different Acts of Parliament, representing
a ‘somewhat
extreme example’: see Chris Wheeler, ‘Bringing the
Ombudsman Role and Powers into the Twenty-First Century’ in
Matthew Groves
and Anita Stuhmcke (eds),
The Ombudsman in the Modern State
Publishing, 2022) 113, 116 n 7.
Carol Harlow and Richard Rawlings,
Law and Administration
(Butterworths, 2
) 104, citing ibid 399, 427, 431.
See below nn
–23 and accompanying text.
See generally JJ Spigelman, ‘The
Integrity Branch of Government’
(2004) 78(11)
Australian Law Journal
Alternatively, within Mark Tushnet’s taxonomy, the Ombudsman may
be understood as a fourth branch institution — an institution
democracy: Mark Tushnet,
The New Fourth Branch: Institutions for Protecting
Constitutional Democracy
(Cambridge University Press, 2021) 21–2. Cf
Stephen Gageler, ‘Three Is Plenty’ in Greg Weeks and Matthew Groves
Administrative Redress in and out of the Courts: Essays in Honour of
Robin Creyke and John McMillan
(Federation Press, 2019) 12, 15.
Spigelman, ‘The Integrity Branch
of Government’ (n
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) ss 11, 16–17;
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) ss 17K(3)(b), 18(3)(b);
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) ss 50(2)(a)(ii), (3)(a)(ii);
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
ss 13D(2)(b),
(2), (2A)(b);
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
) ss 19S(3), 19ZD(3)(b), 19ZE(b),
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) ss 5(1), 17K(1);
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Parliamentary
Commissioner Act
In some jurisdictions, this is subject
to an important exception: the power of Parliament to refer matters to the
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) ss 15B, 16A(1);
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
Ombudsman Act
) sch 1 item 1(g);
Parliamentary
Commissioner Act
s 13(2)(a). See also
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
(definition of ‘public
authority’);
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
(definition of
‘authority’).
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) s 5(2)(b)(i);
Ombudsman Act
) sch 1 item 2;
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) sch 2 items 7–8;
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
) ss 13(2)(d)–(ka). See also
Ombudsman Act
(definitions of ‘administrative act’ and ‘agency to which this
Act applies’), 5(3).
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) s 5(2)(a);
Ombudsman Act
) sch 1 item 1(b);
Ombudsman Act
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
) s 14(3). See also
Ombudsman Act
(definitions of
‘administrative act’ and ‘agency to which this Act
applies’). In
A-G (Vic) v Glass
[2016] VSCA 306
(2016) 51 VR 381
, the Victorian
Court of Appeal held that the Parliament of Victoria’s power under
Ombudsman Act
refer ‘any matter’ to the Ombudsman extended to referring acts of a
Minister for investigation: at 405 [56]–[57] (Warren CJ, Beach and
Ferguson JJA).
Ombudsman Act
) sch 1 item 13;
Ombudsman Act
16(2)(c)–(d);
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
sch 2 item 1;
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
) s 4A(1)(b). But see
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
For example, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman may make an arrangement for a state Ombudsman to investigate activity
by certain Commonwealth
Ombudsman Act
) s 8A(1). See also
Ombudsman Act
) s 10A(1);
Ombudsman Act
) s 148(1);
John McMillan, ‘The Ombudsman
and the Rule of Law’ (2005) 44 (January)
Australian Institute of
Administrative Law Forum
Anita Stuhmcke, ‘The Role of
Australian Ombudsmen in the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights’
(2010) 16(1)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
, 49 (‘The Role
of Australian Ombudsmen’). See also Anita Stuhmcke, ‘Australian
Ombudsmen and Human Rights’
(2011) 66 (July)
Australian Institute of
Administrative Law Forum
43, 44, 47.
The Role of Ombudsman and Mediator
Institutions in the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, Good Governance
and the Rule of Law
, GA Res 75/186, UN GAOR, 75
plen mtg, Agenda Item 72(b), UN Doc A/RES/75/186 (28 December
2020, adopted
16 December 2020) para 2(b). At Preamble para 5, this resolution endorses
European Commission for Democracy through Law,
Principles on the Protection
and Promotion of the Ombudsman Institution
Opinion 896/2017 (3 May 2019) (‘
Venice Principles
Venice Principles
) are a set
of standards for the Ombudsman institution adopted in 2019 by the Venice
Commission — the Council of Europe’s
Commission for Democracy
through Law. See also Navanethem Pillay, ‘Statement by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human
Rights, HE Ms Navanethem Pillay to the Ninth
International Ombudsman Institute World Conference’,
Office of the High
Commissioner of Human Rights
(Statement, 16 June 2009) <
https://www.ohchr.org/en/statements/2009/10/statement-united-nations-high-commissioner-human-rights-he-ms-navanethem-pillay
Many human rights abuses are indeed connected with maladministration,
administrative malfeasance, or a lack of government accountability.
essential notion of procedural fairness, which underpins the administrative law
that ombudsman institutions are mandated to uphold,
is thus key to protecting
the rights of individuals in their interactions with public authorities.
I also encourage all ombudsman institutions, even those without an explicit
human rights mandate, to actively draw on the standards
enumerated in
international
instruments and consolidate their mandates in order to accommodate human
responsibilities.
Dame Beverley Wakem, International
Ombudsman Institute and Peter Kostelka,
International Ombudsman Institute, ‘Preface from the Editor’ in
Michael Frahm,
Australasia and Pacific Ombudsman Institutions: Mandates,
Competences and Good Practice
, ed International Ombudsman Institute
(Springer, 2013) v, v.
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
Stuhmcke, ‘The Role of
Australian Ombudsmen’ (n
This aligns with the view expressed in Linda C Reif,
Ombuds Institutions,
Good Governance, and the International Human Rights System
(Brill Nijhoff,
rev ed, 2020) 224.
Ombudsman Act
Stuhmcke, ‘The Role of
Australian Ombudsmen’ (n
) 225–6, 257–8, 272–4,
282–4. See also ibid 45–6. In the ACT,
Human Rights
’) provides that laws must be
interpreted in a way that is compatible with human rights, and s 40B(1)(a)
provides that it is
unlawful for a public authority to act in a way that is
incompatible with a human right. Similar provisions exist under the
Rights Act 2019
Ombudsman Act
), when the Ombudsman
receives a complaint about an administrative action, they can investigate
whether it is compatible with, and
gives proper consideration to, human rights
set out in the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
Victorian Charter
Victorian Ombudsman Human
10–11. See also Stuhmcke, ‘The Role of Australian Ombudsmen’
Ombudsman Act
s 15(1)(a)(ii)
Ombudsman Act
) s 18(1)(a)(ii);
Ombudsman Act
Ombudsman Act
) s 59(1)(a)(ii);
Ombudsman Act
) s 49(2)(b);
Ombudsman Act
Parliamentary Commissioner Act
) s 25(1)(b). Ombudsman scholars such as
Reif categorise those Ombudsman offices with an explicit mandate as (national)
human rights
institutions, while those without are ‘classic-based ombud
institutions’: Reif
) 221. According to Reif,
‘classic-based ombuds institutions ... play a supporting role in domestic
human rights protection’:
) 248–50, 262–74,
282–4. Reif explains that this is increasingly the case in dualist states
where, unlike in monist
states, ratified human rights treaties do not
automatically become part of domestic law: at 257–8.
United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
the Nelson Mandela Rules)
Res 70/175, UN GAOR, 70
plen mtg, Agenda Item
106, UN Doc A/RES/70/175 (8 January 2016, adopted 17 December 2015) annex
Mandela Rules
See below nn
–6 and accompanying text for an
explanation of the origins and application of these rules.
Matthew Groves and Anita Stuhmcke,
‘The Evolution and Future of the Ombuds’ in Matthew Groves and Anita
Stuhmcke (eds),
The Ombudsman in the Modern State
(Hart Publishing, 2022)
Stuhmcke, ‘The Role of
Australian Ombudsmen’ (n
Ibid 54–5; Stuhmcke,
‘Australian Ombudsmen and Human Rights’ (n
Stuhmcke, ‘Australian Ombudsmen
and Human Rights’ (n
citing Steven Van Roosbroek and Steven Van de Walle, ‘The Relationship
between Ombudsman, Government, and Citizens: A
Survey Analysis’
Negotiation Journal
This view is not strongly supported in the
documents reviewed for the purposes of this article. The NSW Ombudsman, for
example, reported
dealing with a large number of COVID-19 related complaints
from people in custody:
NSW Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
Stuhmcke, ‘The Role of
Australian Ombudsmen’ (n
Senate Select Committee on COVID-19,
Parliament of Australia,
First Interim Report
(Report, December 2020)
xvii, xix. The perception of the urgency of executive action at the state level
is observed by the NSW Ombudsman:
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
Senate Select Committee on COVID-19,
Parliament of Australia,
Final Report
April 2022) 1 [1.2] (‘
Senate Select Committee Final
Ibid 87–8 [5.4]–[5.5].
See Tamara Tulich and Sarah Murray,
‘Executive Accountability and Oversight in Australia during the COVID-19
(2022) 30(2)
Michigan State International Law Review
126–7; Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated
Legislation, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the Exemption of Delegated
Legislation from Parliamentary Oversight
(Interim Report, 2 December 2020)
Biosecurity (Human Biosecurity
Emergency) (Human Coronavirus with Pandemic Potential) (Overseas Travel Ban
Emergency Requirements)
Determination 2020
Public Health (COVID-19
Greater Sydney) Order (No 2) 2021
(NSW) cl 6.
Pandemic COVID-19
Mandatory Vaccination (General Workers) Order 2021 (No 1)
(Vic) cl 7.
Management of Diagnosed
Cases of COVID-19 and Close Contacts Direction (No 2)
(Qld) paras 5,
Public Health (COVID-19
Air Transportation Quarantine) Order (No 1) 2021
(NSW) cl 5.
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
Senate Standing Committee for the
Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation (n
) 12–13 [2.7],
14–15 [2.11], 16 [2.15], 17–8 [2.19]–[2.20], 20 [2.27].
Biosecurity Act 2015
Biosecurity Act
; Senate Standing
Committee for the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation (n
Biosecurity Act
Senate Standing Committee for the
Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation (n
) 1 [1.1]–[1.2].
Biosecurity (Human Biosecurity
Emergency) (Human Coronavirus with Pandemic Potential) (Emergency Requirements
— High Risk Country
Travel Pause) Determination 2021
Biosecurity Act
Crimes Act 1914
, as at 31 August 2021.
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
See ‘Scrutiny of COVID-19 Public
Health Orders’,
Parliament of New South Wales
(Web Page) <
https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/news/Pages/COVID-public-health-orde‌rs.aspx
archived at <
https://perma.cc/6KKA-XQFZ
Public Health Act 2010
Public Health Act
Ombudsman Act
) sch 1 item 1(b).
Davis v Minister for Health
[2022] NSWCATAP 115
, [110] (Armstrong J and
Deputy President Britton).
Supreme Court Act 1970
Public Health (COVID-19
Air Transportation Quarantine) Order 2020
Public Health Act
Crimes (Sentencing Procedure)
Subordinate Legislation Act
Victorian Ombudsman 2022 Annual
See especially
Public Health and
Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Act 2021
, inserting
Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008
Public Health and Wellbeing Act
ss 165BF(2A)(a)
Victorian Ombudsman Public
Housing Investigation
[602], [604].
Ibid 12 [8].
Ibid 12 [8], 178 [957].
Ibid 22 [91]–[92], 100–3
[490]–[524].
Ibid 22 [92], 89 [441], [447].
Ibid 179 [1], discussing
Victorian Ombudsman Public Housing
Investigation
See ibid 173–4
[899]–[909].
Greg Weeks, ‘Maladministration:
The Particular Jurisdiction of the Ombudsman’ in Matthew Groves and Anita
Stuhmcke (eds),
The Ombudsman in the Modern State
(Hart Publishing, 2022)
21, 22 (emphasis in original) (‘Maladministration’).
Between 2020–21, the
Commonwealth Ombudsman reported an acceptance rate of 89% of recommendations in
public reports, the Victorian
Ombudsman reported a 92% acceptance rate and the
Western Australian Ombudsman reported a 100% acceptance rate:
Commonwealth
Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
Victorian Ombudsman 2021 Annual
WA Ombudsman
2020–21 Annual Report
12. Between 2021–22, the Commonwealth Ombudsman reported an acceptance
rate of 83% of recommendations in public reports, the
NSW Ombudsman reported a
90% acceptance rate, the Queensland Ombudsman reported a 99% acceptance rate and
the Western Australian
Ombudsman reported a 100% acceptance rate:
Commonwealth Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
NSW Ombudsman
2021–22 Annual Report
Queensland Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
WA Ombudsman 2021–22
Annual Report
) 12. On the
recommendatory powers of Ombudsman offices, see Janina Boughey, Ellen Rock and
Greg Weeks,
Government Liability: Principles and Remedies
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 2019) 256–7 [8.4.1].
Victorian Ombudsman
) 53. In May 2023, the
Victorian government agreed to settle a class action brought on behalf of the
3,000 public housing residents
$5 million: David Estcourt, ‘Tower Tenants Win $5m in Pandemic Lockdown
Settlement, but No Apology’,
(online, 9 May 2023) <
https://www.theage.com.au/national/‌victoria/tower-tenants-win-5m-in-pandemic-lockdown-settlement-but-no-apology-202305‌05-p5d64v.html#>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/W777-9KE8
Victorian Ombudsman Public Housing
Investigation
[845]–[861], 171
[868]–[876], 173–4 [899]–[909].
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
Sarah Moulds, ‘Keeping Watch on
COVID-19 Laws: Are Parliamentary Committees up to the Job?’,
(Blog Post, 1 May 2020) <
https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/‌2020/05/keeping-watch-on-covid-19-laws-are-parliamentary-committees-up-to-the-job
archived at <
https://perma.cc/D8V5-EAC7
Senate Select Committee
Final Report
) ix [1.31], x
Sarah Moulds, ‘Scrutinising
COVID-19 Laws: An Early Glimpse into the Scrutiny Work of Federal Parliamentary
Committees’
(2020) 45(3)
Alternative Law Journal
See generally Harry
Hobbs and George Williams, ‘Australian Parliaments and the Pandemic’
[2023] UNSWLawJl 43
(2023) 46(4)
University of New South Wales Law Journal
For example, the Senate arguably
did not use its full powers to compel the attendance of seven government
Ministers who claimed public
interest immunity and refused to attend hearings:
Senate Select Committee
Final Report
) 5 [1.25], 90–4
[5.20]–[5.36].
Legislative Council Public
Accountability Committee, Parliament of New South Wales,
Government’s Management of the COVID-19 Pandemic
(Report No 12, March
Matthew McLeod, ‘Distancing
from Accountability? Governments’ Use of Soft Law in the COVID-19
(2022) 50(1)
Federal Law Review
Robin Creyke, ‘“Soft
Law” and Administrative Law: A New Challenge’ (2010) 61 (January)
Australian Institute of Administrative Law Forum
15, 15. For an
exploration of definitions of ‘soft law’, see generally Greg Weeks,
Soft Law and Public Authorities: Remedies and Reform
(Hart Publishing,
2016) ch 2 (‘
Soft Law and Public Authorities
Lisa Burton Crawford,
‘Between a Rock and a Hard Place: Executive Guidance in the Administrative
State’ in Janina Boughey
and Lisa Burton Crawford (eds),
Interpreting
Executive Power
(Federation Press, 2020) 7, 14.
Ibid 12–13; Weeks,
Law and Public Authorities
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
) 8, discussing ‘Coronavirus
(COVID-19) Daily Update’,
Department of Health (Vic)
(Web Page, 3
March 2021) <
https://web.archive.org/web/20210303185829/ht‌tps://www.dhhs.vic.gov.au/coronavirus-covid-19-daily-update
Stay Safe Directions (Victoria) (No 16) 2020
(Vic) cl 7(2)(h), as at
15 March 2021.
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
Ibid 14–15.
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
NT Ombudsman 2021–22
Annual Report
SA Ombudsman 2020–21
Annual Report
NT Ombudsman 2020–21
Annual Report
Ibid 10–11.
These orders were made between 1
February 2021 and 31 January 2022:
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic Report
Senate Select Committee
Final Report
Jane Halton,
National Review of
(Report, 15 November 2021) 5. See also Jennifer Coate, Board of
Inquiry into the COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Program, Parliament
of Victoria,
COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Inquiry Final Report and
Recommendations
(Parliamentary Paper No 191, December 2020) vol 1, 15.
Department of Health and Aged Care
National Review of Hotel Quarantine
(Report) 16.
Emergency Management
(Cross-Border Travel No 15) (COVID-19) Direction 2020
National Review of Hotel
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic
Ombudsman Act
(definition of ‘public
authority’), 12–13, sch 1 item 13.
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
Note that, according to the NSW
Ombudsman, as at 7 September 2022, none of the judicial review challenges to NSW
public health orders
were successful:
NSW Ombudsman Second Pandemic Report
For example, the NSW
Ombudsman’s first report refers to complaints about bed bugs in hotel
quarantine and failures to grant
exemptions from quarantine:
NSW Ombudsman
2020 Hindsight
As our discussion of
Director-General, Justice and Community Safety Directorate
[2022] ACTSC 83
(2022) 18 ACTLR 1
’) demonstrates (albeit in relation to a human
rights complaint rather than judicial review), court proceedings can take years
to resolve: see below
–7 and accompanying
SA Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
Ombudsman Second Pandemic Report
NSW Ombudsman 2020
Victorian Ombudsman
Public Housing Investigation
NT Ombudsman 2021–22
Annual Report
Ombudsman Act
25A(2). See also
Ombudsman Act
Chairperson, Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Commission v Commonwealth Ombudsman
(1995) 63 FCR
, 170 (Einfeld J).
) 16 [49] (Loukas-Karlsson J).
Ibid 15 [44].
Ibid 5–6 [2].
Ibid 87 [439], discussing
Corrections Management (Separate Confinement) Operating Procedure 2019
(ACT) cl 4.3.
See ‘Commissioner Welcomes
Secure Access to Fresh Air and Exercise for Prisoners’,
Rights Commission
(Web Page, 2 December 2022) <
https://web.archive.org/web/‌20230322103716/https://hrc.act.gov.au/commissioner-welcomes-secure-access-to-fresh-air-and-exercise-for-prisoners/
See JJ Spigelman, ‘Economic
Rationalism and the Law’
[2001] UNSWLawJl 19
(2001) 24(1)
University of New South Wales Law
, 203; Anna Olijnyk,
Justice and Efficiency in
Mega-Litigation
(Hart Publishing, 2019) 15–16.
Loielo v Giles
[2020] VSC 722
(2020) 63 VR 1
, 6 [5] (Ginnane J). See above n
. On judicial review during the
pandemic, see generally Chen, ‘Stay at Home Restrictions’ (n
Kassam v Hazzard
[2021] NSWSC 1320
(2021) 393 ALR 664
, 669 [4] (Beech-Jones CJ at CL).
NSW Ombudsman
2020–21 Annual Report
NSW Ombudsman
2021–22 Annual Report
The extent of the impact on staff
varied across jurisdictions. The Tasmanian Ombudsman reported that, while there
were changes to
working practice, ‘[t]he activities of the Office were not
greatly affected’:
Tasmanian Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
ACT Ombudsman 2021–22
Annual Report
Poor ventilation in residential
aged care facilities has also been raised as a concern: see Geoff Hanmer and
Bruce Milthorpe, ‘Poor
Ventilation May Be Adding to Nursing Homes’
COVID-19 Risks’,
The Conversation
(online, 20 August 2020) <
https://theconversation.com/‌poor-ventilation-may-be-adding-to-nursing-homes-covid-19-risks-144725
>, archived at <
https://perma.cc/8D54-GBRBhttps
Residents with limited mobility and those persons living in locked units with
secured windows are less likely to be able to access
fresh air. Aged care
legislation such as the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth) does not regulate indoor
air quality in these settings.
Jack Gramenz, ‘Coronavirus:
Hotel Quarantine Has No Access to Fresh Air, Unlike “Prison”’,
News.com.au
(online, 23 April 2020) <
https://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/health/‌health-problems/coronavirus-hotel-quarantine-has-no-access-to-fresh-air-unlike-prison/ne‌ws-story/555a364cc72cc52e25370f498346660e
archived at <
https://perma.cc/M2QX-M4‌VX
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
Human Rights Commission, Submission No 44 to Health, Communities, Disability
Services and Domestic and Family Violence
Prevention Committee, Parliament
of Queensland,
Inquiry into the Queensland Government’s Health
Response to COVID-19
(6 July 2020) 11–12 [37].
Laura Grenfell, Anita Mackay and
Meribah Rose, ‘A Human Right to Daily Access to Fresh Air beyond Prisons
in Australia?’
(2023) 29(2)
Australian Journal of Human Rights 259
‘Chapter IV: Human Rights:
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights’,
United Nations
Treaty Collection
(Web Page, 19 June 2024) <
https://treaties.un.org/pages/viewdet‌ails.aspx?chapter=4&clang=_en&mtdsg_no=iv-4&src=ind
archived at <
https://perma.cc/‌XK34-DHFF
Article 10(1) has not been implemented into federal legislation, but the right
to be treated humanely when deprived of liberty
has been articulated in
legislative bills of rights in the ACT, Queensland and Victoria:
Victorian Charter
Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Provided by the Subcommittee to the National Preventive Mechanism of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Compulsory Quarantine for Coronavirus (COVID-19 Virus
sess, UN Doc CAT/OP/9 (31 March 2020) 1 [2]–[3]. The
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
, opened for signature
2003, 2375 UNTS 237
(entered into force 22 June 2006)
’) applies to all ‘places of detention’
and all persons ‘deprived of their liberty’: at art 4(1). It
designed to ‘
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment’ in such settings: at art 1 (emphasis added).
Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
of the Subcommittee to States Parties and National Preventive Mechanisms
Relating to the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic
, UN Doc CAT/OP/10 (7
April 2020) 4 [10] (emphasis added) (‘
SPT Pandemic
Mandela Rules
) rr 14, 42.
Katrin Tiroch, ‘Modernizing
the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners: A Human Rights
Perspective’
(2016) 19(1)
Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law
, 280, 285.
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Monitoring Commonwealth Places of Detention
Victorian Ombudsman Public
Housing Investigation
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
) 16 n 9; Wayne Lines, Ombudsman SA,
Full Investigation: Ombudsman Act 1972
(Redacted Final Report 2017/01854,
20 September 2017) 2, 13 [55]–[57], 29 [173].
On 20 March 2020, the regional
counterpart of the SPT, the well-resourced European Committee for the Prevention
of Torture and Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (‘CPT’),
took the useful approach of explaining to states parties that the right
access to open air of at least one hour extends to ‘newly established
facilities/zones where persons are placed in
quarantine’: European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment,
Statement of Principles Relating to the Treatment of Persons
Deprived of Their Liberty in the Context of the Coronavirus Disease (Covid-19)
(CPT/Inf(2020)13, 20 March 2020) (‘
Statement of
’). In Australia, the broader application of the
) is evidenced by
Victorian Ombudsman Public Housing Investigation
) 102; Queensland Human Rights
Commission,
Hotel Quarantine: Unresolved Complaint Report under Section 88
Human Rights Act 2019
(Report, 15 October 2020) 8 [35] n 16 (‘
Hotel Quarantine Report
’). Similarly, the NSW Ombudsman explains that
daily access to fresh air has long been seen as a
minimum standard of treatment for people in facilities where liberty has been
restricted:
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
) 16. See also at 16 nn 9–11,
Mandela Rules
) rr 14(a), 23(1), 42,
Pandemic Advice
) 3 [9], and
CPT Statement of Principles
‘OPCAT Inspections during
COVID-19 Pandemic’,
Ombudsman (NZ)
(Update and Statement of
Principles, 15 April 2020) <
https://www.ombudsman.parliament.nz/sites/defau‌lt/files/2021-11/OPCAT%20inspections%20during%20COVID-19%20pandemic%20–%20u‌pdate%20and%20Statement%20of%20Principles%20–%20poster.pdf
archived at <
https://‌perma.cc/Z7XL-YC7N
Ibid. This is closely aligned with
the seventh principle of the
Statement of Principles
See ‘Monitoring Places of
Detention’,
Ombudsman (NZ)
(Web Page) <
https://www.omb‌udsman.parliament.nz/what-ombudsman-can-help/monitoring-places-detention
archived at <
https://perma.cc/53Y2-DVJM
National Review of Hotel
Department of Health and Aged Care (Cth) noted that ‘[a]ccess to fresh air
and exercise varies across jurisdictions
reviewed’: at 12.
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
) 16. The NSW Ombudsman received an
of 40 contacts in relation to hotel quarantine per month in 2020, and 29 per
month between 1 February 2021 and 30 April 2022:
NSW Ombudsman Second
Pandemic Report
Ombudsman Act NSW
) sch 1 item 13.
NSW Ombudsman 2020
SA Ombudsman 2020–21
Annual Report
Ibid 30–1. The issue
re-emerged in October 2021, with the South Australian Ombudsman receiving
several complaints of a lack
of fresh air in hotel quarantine. After
conversations with the Department for Health and Wellbeing (SA), the Ombudsman
was satisfied
that this was a short-term problem resulting from an influx of
travellers, and that appropriate
arrangements were made for people with a particular need for fresh air:
Ombudsman 2021–22 Annual Report
Victorian Ombudsman Public
Housing Investigation
100–14 [491]–[573].
QHRC Hotel Quarantine Report
) 11 [44]. See also Queensland
Human Rights Commission,
Prisoner Isolation: Unresolved Complaint under
Human Rights Act 2019
(Report, 2 February 2021) 25–6
QHRC Hotel Quarantine Report
) 10 [43]; Lily Nothling,
‘Advocates Slam Queensland Government’s “Unacceptable”
Ban on Fresh Air Breaks in
Hotel Quarantine for Returning Travellers’,
(online, 8 December 2020) <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-12-08/coronavirus-queensland-fresh-air-breaks-banned-hotel-quarantine/12960484
archived at <
https://perma.cc/67RF-FMHT
Victorian Ombudsman Public Housing Investigation
222–3 [125]–[129].
On rights dialogue, see Julie
Debeljak, ‘Rights Dialogue where There Is Disagreement under the Victorian
Charter’ in
Julie Debeljak and Laura Grenfell (eds),
Law Making and
Human Rights: Executive and Parliamentary Scrutiny across Australian
(Lawbook, 2020) 267.
) 88 [439] (Loukas-Karlsson J).
Ombudsman Act
) ss 8(5)–(6);
Ombudsman Act
) ss 9(6), 18(5);
Ombudsman Act NSW
Ombudsman Act NT
) ss 61(2), 100(2);
Ombudsman Act
) ss 26(3), 55(2);
Ombudsman Act SA
Ombudsman Act Tas
23A(5)–(6);
Ombudsman Act Vic
Parliamentary Commissioner
) ss 19(4), 26(7).
Victorian Ombudsman Public
Housing Investigation
Although not explicitly stated, the primary human
rights guidance is likely
Mandela Rules
According to Ombudsman scholars,
‘relations between ombuds and an agency can become quite
adversarial’: Groves and Stuhmcke
Commonwealth
Ombudsman Monitoring Immigration Detention 2020
25 [6.45]; McKay,
Commonwealth Ombudsman Monitoring Immigration Detention
) 46 [2.254] n 21.
See, eg, Gramenz (n
); Nick Bond, ‘Five-Star Hotel
Quarantine “Worse than Jail”, Say Travellers’,
News.com.au
(online, 5 April 2020) <
https://www.news.com.au/entertainment/‌tv/current-affairs/fivestar-hotel-quarantine-worse-than-jail-say-travellers/news-story/f00fc9‌90823c09f8194fe70bda4dbe45
archived at <
https://perma.cc/KT5A-UQEB
Zagon, ‘Melbourne Couple inside Hotel Quarantine Leave Scathing
(online, 14 April 2020) <
https://www.9news.com.au/national/melbourne-couple-inside-coro‌navirus-hotel-quarantine-travelodge-leave-scathing-review/84f1928c-b1aa-4bff-b41a-215e5‌3c6fa6d
archived at <
https://perma.cc/2UBU-QXEX
‘Maladministration’ (n
28. See also
Deborah Glass, ‘Common Sense and
Clean Hands: An Ombudsman’s View of Justice’
[2019] MelbULawRw 18
(2019) 43(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Victorian Ombudsman Fourth
) 56. It is worth noting
that in November 2020, an independent review of Victoria’s hotel
quarantine scheme undertook a ‘human-rights-based
analysis’ based on
Victorian Charter
what facilities were appropriate for
quarantine use:
Jennifer Coate, Board of Inquiry into the COVID-19
Hotel Quarantine Program, Parliament of Victoria,
COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine
Inquiry: Interim Report
and Recommendations
(Parliamentary Paper No 169, November 2020) 49
Hotel Quarantine Interim Report
’). The report
directly referred to the
Mandela Rules
) in recommending that daily access to
fresh air be factored into Victoria’s hotel quarantine program: Coate,
Hotel Quarantine Interim Report
) 59 [45]. The Victorian government did
not implement this particular recommendation but instead publicly announced that
take it to National Cabinet so as to achieve a nationally consistent
approach: ‘COVID-19 Hotel Quarantine Inquiry: Government
Response to the
Final Report’,
Victorian Government
(Web Document, 27 October 2023)
https://content.vic.gov.au/sites/default/‌files/2021-03/Victor‌ian-Government-Response-to-the-Hotel-Quarantine-Inquiry_0.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8YT8-U8Y6
(‘Government Response to Hotel Quarantine Final Report’). Such a
national approach never materialised, despite the
view of the Department of
Health and Aged Care (Cth) that ‘[h]otel infrastructure [for quarantine]
should enable access to
open spaces and fresh air independently (that is,
without escort)’:
National Review of Hotel Quarantine
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
Senate Select Committee
Final Report
National Review of Hotel
The NSW Ombudsman’s first
pandemic report articulates that at times it was difficult even for his office
to know which state
or federal entity was in charge of administering these
webs of emergency laws and directives:
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
August 2022, the NSW Parliament sought to address the NSW specific problems
by empowering the NSW Ombudsman to proactively review
and report on the
complaints handling systems of all state public authorities, regardless of
whether the Ombudsman has jurisdiction
to receive and investigate complaints
Ombudsman Legislation Amendment Act 2022
1 items 5, 11, inserting
Ombudsman Act NSW
) ss 15A, 25A. Unfortunately, this is
only a partial fix as the NSW Ombudsman will be able to refer complaints for
investigation only
to those public authorities under his jurisdiction —
and only those public authorities will then be required to report to the
Ombudsman as to the outcome of their investigation:
Ombudsman Act NSW
) ss 12A(1)–(2). This also does
address similar problems in other Australian jurisdictions.
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
) 2. See also
NSW Ombudsman
Second Pandemic Report
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
‘Government Response to Hotel
Quarantine Final Report’ (n
4. See also Coate,
Hotel Quarantine Interim Report
‘Chapter IV: Human Rights:
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment
or Punishment’,
United Nations Treaty Series
(Web Page, 20 June 2024)
<https://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=IND‌&mtdsg_no=IV-9-b&chapter=4&clang=_en>,
archived at <
https://perma.cc/QX5J-6A25
(‘OPCAT Ratification’).
Victorian Ombudsman
2022 Annual Report
SA Ombudsman 2020–21 Annual Report
) 7, 40–1. At the international
level, Glušac explains that ‘[p]rotecting the rights of persons
deprived of liberty
is among the traditional tasks of the Ombudsman’: Luka
Glušac, ‘A Critical Appraisal of the Venice Principles on
Protection and Promotion of the Ombudsman: An Equivalent to the Paris
Principles?’
(2021) 21(1)
Human Rights Law Review
Former Victorian Ombudsman Deborah
Glass OBE explains that while the monitoring of the treatment of detainees has
long been a role
of her office,
) ‘introduces more rigorous
standards for local inspections of places of detention ... [and] demands much
closer attention to
international standards’: Glass (n
Australian National Preventive
Monitoring Places of Detention under the Optional Protocol to the
Convention against Torture: Annual Report of the Australian
National Preventive Mechanism
(Report, 10 July 2024) 2.
Crimes of Torture Act 1989
(NZ) s 16 (definition of ‘National Preventive Mechanism’)
Crimes of Torture Act
‘OPCAT Ratification’ (n
Ibid arts 19–20.
See, eg, Australian National
Preventive Mechanism (n
NZ Ombudsman Whakatāne Hospital
) 8 n 7; ACT Inspector of Correctional
Isolation of Children and Young People at Bimberi Youth Justice
(Report, November 2023) 45.
See also United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Torture: The Role of National Preventive Mechanisms
Professional Training Series No 21, 2018) 17.
See, eg, Commonwealth National
Preventive Mechanism and ACT Ombudsman (n
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Monitoring Commonwealth Places of Detention
) 11; Scottish Human Rights Commission
and National Preventive Mechanism,
Recommend... Repeat...: An Assessment of where Human Rights Have Stalled
in Places of Detention
(Report, July 2024) 17–37.
) arts 11–12.
Ibid arts 19(b), 22.
See Subcommittee on Prevention of
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Guidelines on National Preventive Mechanisms
sess, UN Doc
CAT/OP/12/5 (9 December 2010) 5 [32]. This means that co-assigning staff is
contrary to SPT advice.
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Monitoring Commonwealth Places of Detention
) 40. Other places of detention include
Australian Defence Force military detention facilities and
Australian Federal Police custodial detention facilities: at 9.
Ibid; ‘About the Tasmanian
Tasmanian Government
(Web Page, 25 January 2023) <
https://npm.tas.gov.au/about
archived at <
https://perma.cc/A2D9-7YWR
‘Monitoring Places of
Detention: OPCAT’,
Commonwealth Ombudsman
(Web Page) <
https://www.ombudsman.gov.au/industry-and-agency-oversight/monitoring-places-of-det‌ention-opcat
archived at <
https://perma.cc/26EM-DYJE
The ACT has a multi-body NPM. This
role is shared by the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the ACT Human Rights Commission
and the ACT Inspector
of Correctional Services: ‘ACT National Preventive
Mechanism (NPM)’,
(Web Page, 2023) <
https://www.npm. ‌act.gov.au/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/D2AP-HT3K
‘Monitoring Places of
Detention: OPCAT’ (n
Inspector of Detention Services
This legislation does not designate any NPM body or
bodies or reference
). Debate in the Parliament of
Queensland indicates that the legislation was drafted with
) in mind: see Queensland,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 30 August 2022, 2254
(Shannon M Fentiman, Attorney-General).
Anita Mackay,
Towards Human
Rights Compliance in Australian Prisons
(Australian National University
Press, 2020) 120. Mackay observes that ‘[t]he South Australian
Ombudsman is probably the most active prison inspector in Australia’.
specifically to his numerous prison inspection reports between 2010 and 2019:
at 121 n 231 (citations omitted).
Australian National Preventive
Mechanism (n
See Australian Human Rights
Commission,
Road Map to OPCAT Compliance
17 October 2022) 12, 25–9. One difficulty is that there is a
(mis)perception among
Australian subnational governments that they are not directly bound by
international treaties such as
). This was demonstrated during the
SPT’s 2022 visit to Australia when the body was obstructed from visiting
various places
of detention in subnational jurisdictions: see ‘UN Torture
Prevention Body Suspends Visit to Australia Citing Lack of Co-Operation’,
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Release, 23 October 2022) <
https://www.ohchr.org/en/press-releases/2022/10/un-torture-prevention-body-suspends-visit-australia-citing-lack-co-operation
Victorian Ombudsman Public
Housing Investigation
28–9 [128]–[136].
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
NSW Ombudsman Second
Pandemic Report
Australia arranged an
implementation deadline of 20 January 2022 which was subsequently extended by 12
months: ‘Monitoring
Places of Detention: OPCAT’ (n
Crimes of Torture Act
) s 16 (definition of
‘National Preventive Mechanism’); Te Kāhui Tika Tangata Human
Rights Commission,
2021/22 Monitoring Places of Detention: Annual Report of
Activities under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
(Report, November 2023) 2.
Preventive Mechanism (UK)
(Web Page) <
https://nationalpreventivemech‌anism.org.uk/about/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/X644-QEHR
NSW Ombudsman 2020 Hindsight
‘OPCAT Inspections during
COVID-19 Pandemic’ (n
Note that in October 2022, the AHRC
and the Commonwealth Ombudsman (both responsible for inspecting immigration
detention facilities)
issued a joint statement calling on the federal government
to ensure that those held in hotels as alternative places of
detention have access to at least one hour of open air exercise per day: Iain
Anderson, Commonwealth Ombudsman and Lorraine Finlay,
Australian Human Rights
Commission, ‘Joint Statement on the Use of Hotels as Alternative Places of
Detention’ (Joint
7 October 2022) 1 <
https://www.ombudsman.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/115280/Joi‌nt-Statement-on-hotel-APODs.pdf
archived at <
https://perma.cc/H3MK-FAKL
>. See also
Commonwealth Ombudsman Monitoring Commonwealth Places of Detention
SPT Pandemic Advice
) 2 [7] (emphasis added).
Ibid 4 [11] (emphasis added).
NZ Ombudsman Report on Inspections of Aged Care Facilities
) 2–3. NZ moved to its highest
alert level, alert level 4, on 25 March 2020: ‘History of the COVID-19
Alert System’,
Unite against COVID-19 (NZ)
(Web Page, 29 June 2022)
https://covid19.govt.nz/a‌bout-our-covid-19-response/history-of-the-covid-19-alert-system
archived at <
https://per‌ma.cc/SBR8-CYJX
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Prisons
NZ Ombudsman Report on Inspections of Mental Health Facilities
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Aged Care Facilities
Thalia Anthony et al,
‘Australia’ in Frieder Dünkel, Stefan Harrendorf and Dirk van
Zyl Smit (eds),
The Impact of COVID-19 on Prison Conditions and Penal
(Routledge, 2022) 7, 17–19. Tasmania’s Custodial
Inspector (also known as the Tasmanian Ombudsman) and the NSW Inspector
Custodial Services (not the NSW Ombudsman) postponed all scheduled inspection
visits from March to June 2020. This was also the
case for the Western
Australian Inspector of Custodial Services (not the Western Australian
Ombudsman), who used a remote, virtual
monitoring approach until October 2020.
In contrast, in SA, the Training Centre Visitor’s staff continued to
undertake regular
face-to-face meetings with youth detainees.
For example, in Victoria, emergency
measures legislation initially granted the Secretary to the Department of
Justice and Community
Safety (Vic) or the Governor of a prison the ability to
prevent any ‘visitor’, including an independent prison visitor
Ombudsman visitor, from entering a prison:
Corrections Act 1986
(definitions of ‘Governor’ and ‘Secretary’), 33
(definition of ‘visitor’), 112G(1)–(2),
as at 25 April 2022.
Section 112G of the Act was subsequently repealed in 2022:
COVID-19 Omnibus
(Emergency Measures) Act 2020
(Vic) s 112V, as amended by
Omnibus (Emergency Measures) and Other Acts Amendment Act 2020
In NSW, legislation made the NSW Ombudsman (and the NSW Inspector of Custodial
Services) exempt from any visitor restrictions: see
Crimes (Administration of
Sentences) Act
(NSW) s 275(3), as at 3 March 2022; ibid 17. In
Queensland, the Ombudsman conducted his annual prison visit program ‘in a
way’ in 2020 and 2021, but conducted physical inspections of three
youth detention centres in late 2020 and early 2021:
Queensland Ombudsman
2020–21 Annual Report
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Monitoring Immigration Detention 2022
). This report shows that no onsite
visits took place from early 2020 until November 2020 and that an onsite visit
in November 2020
did not include engagement with detainees in person: at 25
[2.87], [2.91]. Remote visits were again used from mid 2021 to late 2021
restrictions imposed by the governments of NSW and Victoria: at 25 [2.89];
Commonwealth Ombudsman Monitoring Commonwealth Places of Detention
See also Rebecca Vonthethoff, Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman, ‘Developments in OPCAT Implementation in Australia, and
the Importance of the Preventive Mandate’ (Speech, Future Justice and Corrections Summit, 29 March 2022) 7.
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Monitoring Immigration Detention 2022
) 15 [2.25], 16 [2.29], 25 [2.89].
Ibid 16 [2.32].
SPT Pandemic Advice
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Mental Health Facilities
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Prisons
Ibid (emphasis added). This
position was reiterated in the NZ Chief Ombudsman’s report on the
inspection of mental health facilities:
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Mental Health Facilities
See Australian National Preventive
Mechanism (n
The Commonwealth Ombudsman’s
NPM mandates are set out in secondary legislation:
Ombudsman Regulations
States and territories have not yet implemented primary or
secondary legislation setting out their NPMs’ mandates: ibid
Crimes of Torture Act
) ss 16 (definition of
‘National Preventive Mechanism’),
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Prisons
7–8, 10–11; Boshier,
NZ Ombudsman Report on Inspections of Mental
Health Facilities
NZ Ombudsman Report on
Inspections of Mental Health Facilities
For positive assessments of
National Cabinet’s work early in the pandemic, see Australian Associated
Press, ‘PM Weighs
Permanent National Cabinet’,
The Canberra
(online, 14 April 2020) <
https://www.canberratimes.com.au/story/6721545/pm-weighs-permanent-national-cabinet/?cs=14231
Mike Baird and Jay Weatherill, ‘As Former Premiers, We Have Seen the
Benefits of States Cooperating. Let’s Extend
National Cabinet’,
The Guardian
(online, 27 May 2020) <
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/may/27/as-form‌er-premiers-we-have-seen-the-benefits-of-states-cooperating-lets-extend-national-cabinet
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3LZQ-NHWG
Senate Select Committee
Final Report
To resource the Commonwealth
Ombudsman for his new NPM role, including his NPM coordinator role, in
2018–19, the federal government
allocated ongoing funding of approximately
$300,000 per year:
Road Map to OPCAT Compliance
) 16. This new role
includes monitoring seven immigration detention facilities, 15 alternative
immigration detention, 11 Australian Defence Force detention facilities, four
ACT Police policing holding cells, three Australian
Federal Police stations in
external territories and one ACT Police watch house:
Commonwealth Ombudsman
Monitoring Commonwealth Places of Detention
) 12. In 2021, the Commonwealth Ombudsman
described this funding as a ‘modest amount’: Michael Manthorpe,
Commonwealth
Ombudsman, ‘The Implementation of OPCAT in Australia and
Challenges for Detention Inspections in a COVID-19 World’ (Speech,
Annual Prisons Conference, 15 June 2021) 5. By contrast, in
Victorian Ombudsman estimated that
) monitoring would cost Victoria
approximately $2.5 million annually: Victorian Ombudsman,
OPCAT in Victoria:
A Thematic Investigation of Practices Related to Solitary Confinement of
Children and Young
(Parliamentary Paper No 63, September 2019) 60 [304]. In 2021,
expressed concern that the Commonwealth Ombudsman continues to be
underfunded: Anita Stuhmcke, ‘The Commonwealth Ombudsman:
Still Fit for
(Blog Post, 17 September 2021) <
https://www.auspublaw.org/blog/2021/09/the-commonwe‌alth-ombudsman-still-fit-for-purpose
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3HVZ-G2V6
>. In March
2022, the federal government made further cuts to this funding: Christopher
Knaus, ‘Federal Budget Cuts to Integrity
Bodies Spark Calls for
Independent Funding’,
(online, 31 March 2022) <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/202‌2/mar/31/federal-budget-cuts-to-integrity-bodies-spark-calls-for-independent-funding
archived at <
https://perma.cc/T6EC-NKH6
Evidence to Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee, Parliament of Australia, Canberra,
25 May 2023, 96 (Iain
Anderson, Commonwealth Ombudsman). On
10 May 2023, a network of NPMs including the Commonwealth Ombudsman released
a joint statement expressing their disappointment that
the 2023–24 federal
budget ‘did not contain any additional funding to support the work of
Australia’s NPM’:
Commonwealth Ombudsman et al, ‘No Additional
Funding to Implement Australia’s Obligations under OPCAT’ (Joint
May 2023) <
https://www.ombudsman.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_‌file/0038/298748/Joint-Statement-Federal-Budget-10-May-2023-Final-Clean.pdf>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/S2UG-U7KY
>. On the long-term funding of
the Commonwealth Ombudsman, see Michael Kirby, ‘Australia’s
Commonwealth Ombudsman 40
Years on: Achievements and Ten Challenges’
(2017) 45(3)
Federal Law Review
, 499–500, 505.
See ‘Monitoring Places of
Detention: OPCAT’ (n
See above nn
–3 and accompanying text.
In March 2023, the AHRC launched a
position paper recommending that the federal government enact a human rights
act. The paper argues
that Australia’s pandemic
experience has highlighted the inadequacies and lack of cohesion in
Australia’s protection of human rights: Australian Human
Commission,
Free & Equal: A Human Rights Act for Australia
Paper, December 2022) 7, 34, 36–9.
See John McMillan, ‘The
Ombudsman in Australia: Flourishing, Expanding, Diversifying, Innovating’
in Marc Hertogh and
Richard Kirkham (eds),
Research Handbook on the
(Edward Elgar, 2018) 436, 442–3. In McMillan’s
view, the mandate is ‘another indicator of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman’s
successful work on detention issues’: at 442; and he
observes that this was despite a strong campaign by the AHRC to be the
coordinating body.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (336 KB)
PDF format (408 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter