URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawSocCConsc/2024/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:47:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hall, Courtney --- "The Green Wall Street: Neo-Liberal Environmental Governance and the Nature Repair Market" [2024] UNSWLawSocCConsc 9; (2024) 18 UNSW Law Society Court of Conscience 53
THE GREEN WALL STREET:
NEO-LIBERAL ENVIRONMENTAL GOVERNANCE AND THE NATURE REPAIR
Courtney Hall
I Introduction
Dubbed the ‘Green Wall Street’ by Minister for the Environment
and Water, Tanya Plibersek, the Nature Repair Market (
is the federal government’s latest experiment in market-based
environmental governance.
aims to generate private investment in ecological conservation through the
allocation of tradable certificates to landholders
who undertake projects that
enhance or protect biodiversity.
While the involvement of private actors in biodiversity governance is not a new
phenomenon, market-based environmental policies routinely
fail to strike the
intended balance between ecological protection and socio-economic
development.
This is particularly
so where governments’ rush to the market is not attended by an adequate
superstructure of environmental
policy. Although last minute amendments to the
Nature Repair Market Bill have ruled out the use of biodiversity certificates as
environmental offsetting tool, the intention for the NRM to operate alongside
Australia’s legislative offsetting hierarchy
remains a cause for
This article will review the commitments of the NRM to argue that the federal
government’s latest experiment in environmental
policy falls short of
effectively balancing environmental protection and socio-economic
development.
The first part will
situate the NRM within the body of environmental reform provided for by the
federal government’s ‘Nature
Viewed in the context
of concurrent reforms to the
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act
part will address the observable strengths of the NRM as a means of inviting
private investment in ecological conservation.
The second part will review the
passage of the
Nature Repair Act
, to consider how subsequent amendments
to the NRM Bill equally strengthened and confused the objectives of the NRM.
This section
will also consider the risks posed by the NRM if used as a
biodiversity offsetting scheme. Finally, the article will compare the
similar reforms introducing biodiversity offsetting in Finland’s
Conservation Act.
comparison draws attention to international models of neo-liberal environmental
governance, to demonstrate ways of soliciting
private investment in biodiversity
conservation without selling nature to save it.
Although not directly comparable to the NRM, these reforms provide an
instructive model for the effective implementation of experimental
market-based
conservation policies.
II THE NATURE REPAIR MARKET
Creating the Market
Nature Repair Act 2023
(Cth) came into effect in December 2023,
establishing a framework for a national and voluntary biodiversity market. The
core instrument of the slate of environmental reforms introduced
through the
Nature Positive Plan
(‘NPP’). The stated
objectives of the NPP are to deliver environmental protection laws that are
‘nature positive’,
make it easier for private companies to ‘do
the right thing’, and restore integrity and trust to the systems of
environmental
The NRM intends
to further these objectives by issuing tradable certificates to private
companies who undertake projects which enhance
biodiversity.
The NRM capitalises
on the corporate social responsibility movement by monetising conservation
through its biodiversity certification
and trading
Whether stacked,
swapped, or sold, it remains unclear how these certificates will be used by
private investors to secure commercial
The Clean Energy Regulator (‘CER’) has been given responsibility
for administering the scheme and establishing processes
for the operation of the
market. The CER currently administers the Carbon Farming Initiative, the
centrepiece of Australia’s
Carbon Credit Unit
Unlike the NRM, the
Carbon Credit Unit Scheme is controversially an offsetting scheme, inviting
participants to trade carbon credits
in order to compensate for emissions or
meet compliance requirements.
such, the CER will have to implement a distinct methodology of assessment so as
not to confuse the regulation of the NRM with
the Carbon Farming Initiative.
Soliciting Private Investment
The greatest strength of the NRM lies in its ability to provide a means for
private actors to invest in conservation without ownership
over the proposed
From this perspective, the
NRM is an instrument to realise aspirations which see the private sector as the
trustee of Australia’s
ecological conservation where the government cannot
foot the bill to do so. Indeed, the PwC report which buttressed the
announcement of the NRM, speaks of ‘unlocking’ an
estimated $137 billion injection into the protection of Australia’s
environment by 2050.
the private sector’s ability to deliver the stated outcomes of the NPP
significantly depends on the integrity of the
NRM scheme as well as the scale
and motivation of private sector demand.
Beginning with the latter consideration, the design of the NRM contemplates
certificate demand from three sources: companies wanting
to make philanthropic
investments in biodiversity, companies intending to use certificates for a
future offset, and governments.
Leaving aside integrity concerns surrounding the government’s role as
purchaser of NRM certificates for the moment, government
demand for NRM
certificates is effectively illusory since they could already conserve
biodiversity through considered regulation
acquisition.
As Megan Evans
observes, the assumption that private actors are willing and otherwise unable to
invest in biodiversity remains
Consequently, demand
for participation under the NRM relies on the possibility that certificates can
be used to obtain a material
III How The Market Could Crash
Creating Confusion through Amendment
To ensure passage of the Nature Repair Market Bill through the Senate, the
government was forced to strike a deal with the Greens
and crossbenchers,
resulting in two key amendments to the
First, the Act no longer refers to the NRM as a
change in title is not reflective of any alteration to the market mechanisms
which animate the NRM. In fact, current resources
published by the Department of
Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water still describe the NRM as a
market and refer to
it as such.
Although presumably intending to drive home the restorative purpose of the
market, the NRM’s last minute name-change embodies
forms of technical
confusion experienced by the market so far. This confusion is further reflected
in the interchangeable use of
the term’s ‘credit’ and
‘certificate’ in the federal government’s press releases
immediately
preceding the NRM
Where credits represent
some measurable biodiversity gain which can be traded to offset a biodiversity
loss, NRM certificates are
an assurance of gain arising from inputs which bring
specific kinds of biodiversity
As such, biodiversity
certificates are not fungible like other credit-based certifications and
therefore cannot be used to offset
a biodiversity loss elsewhere.
Second, s 76C was inserted into the Act, prohibiting the use of NRM
certificates for virtually any ‘environmental offsetting
This amendment
directly responds to sustained criticism that the Bill tacitly allowed
proponents to purchase certificates for the
purpose of satisfying other
legislatives requirements to offset environmental impacts caused by
development.
Although lauded as
a win by environmentalists, the ruling out of offsets also significantly
decreases the anticipated pool of demand
for biodiversity certificates.
Nonetheless, the Senate Committee’s view that a place for biodiversity
offsetting should be
considered with the legislative ‘offsets
hierarchy’ of the NPP Plan hints at an intention for the NRM to work
the federal government’s evolving offsetting
Biodiversity Offsetting and the NRM
Like offsets generally, biodiversity offsetting aims to compensate for losses
of biodiversity components at an impacted site by generating
ecologically
equivalent gains elsewhere.
this perspective, biodiversity gains are not a standalone objective, but form
part of a larger regulatory bargain which rationalises
environmental destruction
as permissible in achieving ‘no net losses’ of biodiversity
The traces of this
bargain can be seen in relation to the definitional standard adopted by the
Nature Repair Act
, namely, that eligible projects need only
protect’ (emphasis added)
biodiversity.
This approach
effectively locks in current rates of baseline decline contrary to the
environmental outcomes pursued by the scheme.
current offsets policy requires that all
reasonable efforts be made to avoid and mitigate impacts on protected matters,
the proposed offset meet strict like-for-like
requirements.
Nonetheless, the
offset policy was a centrepiece of critique in the Independent Review of the
for its contribution to baseline environmental decline and
piecemeal approach to
governance.
In response to this
review, the NPP also provides for the creation of a National Environmental
Standard for offsets, which aims to
provide certainty and confidence in the
application for environmental
Although such reforms
are urgently needed to mitigate further baseline decline, these amendments do
not identify themselves with
or make provision for co-operation with the
Nature Repair Act
prohibition on the use of certificates
as offsets might not spell the end of uncertainty in the market. With the
federal government
set to introduce final reforms offsetting and restoration
contribution under the
, some commentators anticipate the
reintroduction of NRM biodiversity offsets before the end of the
This predication aligns
with an understanding of NRM as an experimental form of environmental governance
which requires sustained
testing and attention to make it workable for investors
and the environment. With the federal government continuing to finalise the
methods and criterion against which eligible projects will be assessed, the NRM
is not expected to launch until January 2025. In
this period, the scale of
demand for biodiversity certificates in an offset-less NRM may prove
determinative in understanding the
future of the offsetting under the
Dangers and Detriments of NRM Offsets
In light of the possibility that biodiversity offsets will reappear in
forthcoming environmental law reform, it remains relevant to
consider the
appropriateness of offsets within the NRM’s scheme of market-based
governance.
Since, biodiversity certificates record activities as opposed to specific
outcomes for particular ecosystems, NRM projects cannot
meet the like-for-like
requirements required for an
As a result, if
certificates are made eligible to meet offsetting compliance obligations, they
will inevitably be in short supply,
thus limiting the number of possible trades
in the market.
The outcome might
replicate the NSW Biodiversity Offset market, where demand for offsets vastly
exceeds supply, resulting in an excess
of conservation payments despite the
absence of a suitable offset.
Further and in the alternative, allowing NRM certificates to circumvent the
like-for-like requirements would undermine the premise
of reform to the offset
framework as well as misalign the NRM from its stated conservation
Additionally, offsetting schemes have frequently made headlines for the
failure of their oversight bodies to ensure integrity and
accountability. None
more so than the CER whose maladministration of the Australian Carbon Market has
seen it been described as ‘a
case study in poor
governance’.
Review found direct links between the lack of administrative transparency and
the CER’s inability to deliver real
reductions to greenhouse emissions in
accordance with the scheme’s stated
objectives.
While the proposal
for the CER to administer the NRM is presumably based on attested similarities
between the scheme and Australian
Carbon Credit Units, the recommendations from
the Chubb Review have not yet been implemented by the CER. Until the structural
of the CER is complete, it is contrary to the objectives of the NRM
that the CER be given additional administrative responsibilities
in a field that
does not align with their regulatory
Finally, it still remains to be seen whether the federal government intends
to use the NRM as a convoluted way of saying ‘biodiversity
As mentioned above, the fumbling of technical terminology when announcing and
implementing the NRM brings into question
the real meaning of ‘Nature
Positive’ with the NPP.
If this criticism was to be defeated in the context of the NRM, organisations
generating or purchasing certificates must contribute
to active ecological
restoration.
But since offsets
are already a legal requirement under
, the potential to use NRM
certificates as offsets denies progress towards meaningful investment in
environmental restoration and
protection. Ultimately, the big picture is that
the federal government cannot greenwash the flaws of the NRM to look like a
IV Lesson From Finnish Market-Based Conservation
Despite the NRM’s claims to originality, the market-based conservation
model proposed by the NRM falls within a broader international
trend towards
experimental environmental
governance.
The transition from
government to governance embodies a neoliberal mode of resource management which
believes in ‘selling nature
Furthermore,
experimental environmental policy also displays a resounding tendency to ignore
basic policy knowledge developed through
interdisciplinary consolation with
scientific and economic experts.
Nonetheless, Finland’s gradual incorporation of biodiversity offsetting
Nature Conservation Act
’) provides a
model for overcoming conflict between stated policy objectives in the
institution of market-based environmental
Preceding the reform,
stakeholder consultation over the institution of a biodiversity offsetting
scheme reproduced a similar conflict
of objectives as seen in the NRM. Through
these consultations, the objectives of biodiversity offsetting were
characterised as two-fold;
first, as a market mechanism for manifesting
corporate social responsibility and second as a framework for biodiversity
conservation.
When balancing
these objectives, the NCA gives primacy to the latter, requiring that applicants
bear all costs in biodiversity
assessments.
In addition,
proponents may only meet the assessable standard of reimbursement where the
project is ‘very important to the
public interest’ and there is
‘no economically feasible
alternative’.
the Finnish reforms provide an instructive example of how to
effectively implement experimental environmental governance regimes
values conflict.
Incrementalism, Public Consultation and Embracing
Experimentation
As a relative later-comer to forms of market based environmental governance,
Finland had the opportunity to learn from failed implementations
of biodiversity
offsetting in other countries. With this in mind, the Finnish government pursued
an incremental approach to implementing
biodiversity offsetting based on the
accumulated experiences of other
This approach
frames the success of biodiversity offsetting as a matter of interdisciplinary
consolation, rather than political agenda
statement-based public hearing process, draft implementation frameworks were
refined from initially instituting a mandatory
market to later creating a
voluntary offsetting framework.
The voluntary framework developed through a shared appreciation of the risk that
mandatory offsets could transform the ‘polluter
pays’ principle into
a ‘license to
Consensus on this
point could only be achieved through the application of a flexible policy
construction process that accommodated
for multiple understandings of the
problem, and focused on shared ambitions rather than conflict over the details
of implementation.
Taking a lesson from Finland’s incremental approach to biodiversity
offsetting, when implementing the objectives of the NRM,
the government should
implement consultation practices that recognise the experimental nature of the
scheme. Many submissions to
the Senate Standing Committee Inquiry into the NRM
Bill noted the government’s failure to outline the cooperation of NRM with
offset reforms.
Having left the
public virtually in the dark on this matter, at the time of consultation, many
submissions were forced to make recommendations
on the contingency that NRM
certificates are intended to be used as offsets. While this omission may be
intended to afford some flexibility
in the operation of the NRM, it nonetheless
impedes proper public consultation that would otherwise produce stronger public
Robust Environmental Policy Architecture
In addition to strong consultation, the existing body of environmental
governance in Finland supports stakeholder confidence in the
integrity of
experimental market-based reforms. Under the direction of European Union
environmental legislation and directives, Finland
has maintained sustained
investment in protecting biodiversity, leading to its recognition as a global
leader in environmental policy.
In this regard, public confidence in the integrity of Finland’s approach
offset scheme.
Additionally, regulation of the offset market is directed towards the
development of regional dialogues between specialist
offset surveyors and
administrative units applying for a
Thus, by introducing the
biodiversity offset scheme alongside other successful environmental policies and
taking an integrated approach
to its regulation, Finland has been able to secure
public support for the reforms.
In the Australian context, the success of NRM both in its proposed form and
as a tool for offsetting is contingent on the proper implementation
reforms under the NPP. Considering the Samuel Review’s
findings that the current
is not fit for purpose, public trust
in the NRM cannot be established until systemic reform is made to our existing
environmental
This would demand the
prioritisation of reforms directed towards the institution of an independent
Environmental Protection Agency,
and the creation of legally enforceable
National Environmental Standards for offsetting. These reforms go to the heart
of the NPP's
commitment to better environmental outcomes, faster decision-making
and heighted accountability and naturally premise the effectiveness
In sum, if the Australian
government wishes to make meaningful progress towards the advancement of
biodiversity outcomes, they must
first tidy the house.
V Conclusion
Once broken down into its constitutive commitments, it is clear that the NRM
is not fit for purpose. Although its focus on incentivising
and sourcing private
finance in environmental conservation is laudable, if the NRM is to work
alongside offsetting reforms, it will
do so at the expense of achieving the
stated objectives of the NPP. The federal government would be wise to take
instruction from
Finnish reforms implementing similar forms of environmental
policy. As such, until systemic reforms to the
are properly
implemented, the government must curb its ambition and rethink the
implementation of the NRM.
Courtney Hall is a Bachelor of Arts/Laws student at the
University of New South Wales. The author would like to thank Chlarisse Bala
Kate Townsend for their support and encouragement, as well as the editorial team
for their thoughtful feedback.
Tanya Plibersek, ‘Speech to Udayana University on
Environmental Markets’ (Speech, Udayana University, 1 September 2022)
<https://minister.dcceew.gov.au/plibersek/speeches/speech-udayana-university-environmental-markets>;
Nature Repair Act 2023
Nature Repair
Department of Clean Climate
Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (Cth),
Nature Positive Plan
Better for the Environment, Better for Business (
Report, December 2022)
Nature Positive Plan
Megan C Evans,
‘Backloading to Extinction: Coping with Values Conflict in the
Administration of Australia’s Federal Biodiversity
Offset Policy’
(2023) 82(2)
Australian Journal of Public Administration
(‘Backloading to Extinction’). See also Graeme Samuel,
Independent Review of the
EPBC Act – (Final Report, October
Samuel Review
Nature Repair Market Bill 2023
(Cth) (‘NRM Bill’).
For an excellent paper on
political responses to ecological crises in Australia, see Matt McDonald et al,
‘Ecological Crises
and Ecopolitics Research in Australia’ (2024)
Australian Journal of Politics and History.
Nature Positive Plan
Nature Conservation Act
(1096/1996) (‘
Nature Conservation Act
Nature Positive Plan
‘Nature Repair
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and
<https://www.dcceew.gov.au/environment/environmental-markets/nature-repair-market>
NRM Factsheet
Edward Fosu et al,
‘Do Environmental CSR Practices Promote Corporate Social Performance? The
Mediating Role of Green Innovation
and Corporate Image’ (2024) 12
Cleaner and Responsible Consumption 1.
Carbon Credits (Carbon
Farming Initiative) Act
For an illustrative example
of carbon offsetting controversy, see criticisms of Taylor Swift’s private
jet use and carbon footprint:
Lola Mendez, ‘Taylor Swift Claims She
Offsets Her Travel Carbon Footprint – How Does That Work?’,
(online, 14 February 2024)
<https://www.bbc.com/travel/article/20240213-taylor-swift-private-jet-flight-travel-carbon-footprint>.
See also ‘Australian Carbon Credit Unit Scheme’,
Clean Energy
(Web Page, 5 September 2024)
<https://cer.gov.au/schemes/australian-carbon-credit-unit-scheme>.
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
, House of Representatives, 29 March 2023,
2583 (Tanya Plibersek).
A Nature-Positive
Australia: The Value of an Australian Biodiversity Market
(Report, 2022)
Polly Hemming, Rod Campbell
and Richard Dennis,
Shorting the Environment: Submission to the Proposed
Voluntary National Biodiversity Market
(Report, September 2022) 7.
Polly Hemming and Roderick
Beyond Repair? Comment on the Draft
Nature Repair Market Bill
, (Report, March 2023) 21–5.
Megan Evans, Submission to
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (Cth),
National Biodiversity Market
(16 September 2022) 4.
Lisa Cox, ‘Labor and
Greens Strike Deal to Establish Nature Repair Scheme’,
The Guardian
(online, 5 December 2023)
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/dec/05/labor-and-greens-strike-deal-to-establish-nature-repair-market>
For a schedule of the
amendments to the made by the Senate to The
Nature Repair Market Bill 2023
(Cth): see <
https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22legislation%2Fsched%2Fr7014_sched_992a04d1-49d0-4c34-a20a-bb1d8f903de0%22
NRM Factsheet
Evans (n 17) 2; Compare
references to ‘credits’ and ‘certificates’ in Prime
Minister Anthony Albanese’s
twitter remarks against the federal
government’s same day announcement of the NRM in @AlboMP (Anthony
Albanese) (X, 23 August
2022 1:34pm AEST) <
https://x.com/AlboMP/status/1563006827528601601
Anthony Albanese and Tanya Plibersek, ‘Biodiversity Certificates to
Increase Native Habitat and Support Australian Landholders’
Release, 26 August 2022).
Environmental Defenders
Office, Submission No 39 to Senate Standing Committees on Environment and
Communications, Parliament of Australia,
Nature Repair Market Bill 2023
Nature Repair Market (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2023
[Provisions]
June 2023) 9 (‘
EDO Submission
Nature Repair Act
1) ss 76C, 7 (definition of ‘
environmental offsetting
environmental offsetting
Australian Land Conservation
Alliance, Submission No 38 to Senate Standing Committees on Environment and
Communications, Parliament
of Australia,
Nature Repair Market Bill 2023
Nature Repair Market (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2023
[Provisions]
June 2023) 5–6 (‘
ALCA Submission
Senate Standing Committee on
Environment and Communications, Parliament of Australia,
Nature Repair Market
Nature Repair Market (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2023
[Provisions]
(Report, December 2023) 13 [2.33].
Martine Maron et al,
‘Faustian Bargains? Restoration Realities in the Context of Biodiversity
Offset Policies’ (2012)
Biological Conservation
Nature Repair Act
(definition of ‘biodiversity project’).
Department of
Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities (Cth),
Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 Environmental
Offsets Policy,
(Policy, October 2012) 7.
Samuel Review
Nature Positive Plan
(n 2) 1, 21–2.
Patrick O’Connor,
‘Can The Government’s New Market Mechanism Help Save Nature? Yes
– If We Get The Devil
Out The Detail’,
The Conversation
(online, 6 December 2023) <
https://theconversation.com/can-the-governments-new-market-mechanism-help-save-nature-yes-if-we-get-the-devil-out-of-the-detail-218713
Martine Maron and Megan
Evans, ‘The Government Hopes Private Investors Will Help Save Nature.
Here’s How Its Scheme Could
The Conversation
26 October 2022)
http://theconversation.com/the-government-hopes-private-investors-will-help-save-nature-heres-how-its-scheme-could-fail-193010
Audit Office of New South
Effectiveness of the Biodiversity Offsets Scheme
(Performance
Audit Report, 30 August 2022) 2.
EDO Submission
Adam Morton,
‘Australia’s Carbon Credit Scheme “Largely a Sham”, Says
Whistleblower Who Tried to Rein It
The Guardian
(online, 23
March 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/mar/23/australias-carbon-credit-scheme-largely-a-sham-says-whistleblower-who-tried-to-rein-it-in>.
Ian Chubb et al,
Independent Review of Australian Carbon Credit Units
(Final Report
December 2022) 2 (‘
Chubb Review
EDO Submission
Eleanor J Milner-Gulland,
‘Don’t Dilute the Term Nature Positive’ (2022) 6(9)
Ecology & Evolution
1243, 1244.
Martine Maron, Megan Evans
and Sophus zu Ermgassen, ‘“Nature Positive” Isn’t Just
Planting a Few Trees –
It’s Actually Stopping the Damage We
The Conversation
(online, 21 September 2023)
http://theconversation.com/nature-positive-isnt-just-planting-a-few-trees-its-actually-stopping-the-damage-we-do-213075
Regarding the market’s
originality, see Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates,
Representatives, 29 March 2023, 10:45 (Tanya Plibersek
Minister for the
Environment and Water of Australia).
Kathleen McAfee,
‘Selling Nature to Save It? Biodiversity and Green Developmentalism’
(1999) 17(2)
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space
Steven Dovers and Karen
Environment and Sustainability: A Policy Handbook
(Federation
Press, 2nd ed, 2013) 22.
Nature Conservation
(9/2023) ch 11 (amendments introducing voluntary ecological
compensation).
Heidi Lehtiniemi et al,
‘Pulling Biodiversity Offsetting in Different Directions –
Stakeholder Frames in the Preparation
of the Finnish Nature Conservation
Act’ (2023) 283
Biological Conservation
Nature Conservation
(n 7) s 107.
Ibid ss 106, 104.
Thomas Molnár
Karlsson and Kamilla Karhunmaa, ‘“Better than Doing Nothing”
– Constructing Support
for Biodiversity Offsetting in Finland’
(2023) 18(2)
Critical Policy Studies
Florence LP Damiens, Libby
Porter and Ascelin Gordon, ‘The Politics of Biodiversity Offsetting across
Time and Institutional
Scales’ (2021) 4(2)
Nature Sustainability
Lehtiniemi et al (n 46)
Karlsson and Karhunmaa (n
ALCA Submission
24) 5–6; Biodiversity Council, Submission No 53 to Senate Standing
Committees on Environment and Communications, Parliament
of Australia,
Repair Market Bill 2023
Nature Repair Market (Consequential Amendments) Bill
[Provisions]
(1 June 2023) 2–4.
Organisation for Economic
Development and Co-operation,
OECD Environmental Performance Reviews: Finland
(Report, December 2021) 1.
Hanna Kalliolevo et al,
‘Considerable Qualitative Variability in Local-Level Biodiversity Surveys
in Finland: A Challenge for
Biodiversity Offsetting’ (2022) 68
for Nature Conservation
Samuel Review
Frances Medlock and Rachael
Walmsley, ‘Urgency and Ambition More Important than Ever for National
Nature Law Reform’,
Environmental Defenders Office
(Web Page, 27
<https://www.edo.org.au/2023/07/27/urgency-and-ambition-more-important-than-ever-for-national-nature-law-reform/>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (82.9 KB)
PDF format (239 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter