URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bell, Felicity; Legg, Michael; Vickovich, Ilija --- "Editor's Note" [2019] MqLawJl 1; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 1
EDITORS’ NOTE
EDITORS’ NOTE
Technology has been infiltrating the civil justice system for some time,
providing efficiencies or conveniences that were not previously
possible. There
are now many instances of digital uplift: video-conferencing for witness
testimony or argument by counsel; email
and online portals for the filing and
(in some cases) service of documents; real-time court transcripts; instant
messaging for case
management hearings; and webpages and social media by which
courts communicate with the public. While important, these types of
technological
change are generally not characterised as transformative or
disruptive.
More recently, though, with the advent of artificial intelligence (AI),
blockchain and the Internet of Things, civil justice has started
to see more
significant changes. These offer the prospect of a great leap forward in
advancing access to justice, yet simultaneously
raise concerns about the nature
of the justice provided. Such changes implicate the future of the legal
profession itself, with forecasts
both optimistic and pessimistic. The Chief
Justice of the High Court of Australia, the Hon Susan Kiefel, in speaking on
social change
made reference to the impact of technology as follows:
Technology is no longer seen merely as a tool to facilitate the delivery of
legal services. It is also portrayed as a possible threat,
particularly in the
continuing development of artificial intelligence. This might be something of a
distraction. Very few commentators
with an understanding of legal advice,
advocacy, adjudication and dispute resolution would suggest that they could be
overtaken by AI.
The Chief Justice’s observations raise the question of where the
dividing line between human and machine can, or should, be
drawn in the various
steps that comprise dispute resolution.
The articles collected in this volume both elucidate and critique the
operation and effects of technological innovation on the civil
justice system.
This necessarily calls into question future roles for lawyers and the education
and training required for lawyers
and law students.
A common theme of many articles collected here addresses concerns about how
technology may be harnessed to improve access to justice
while maintaining the
rule of law, or core values such as equality and fairness. Further, new
technologies may assist courts but
they have also facilitated dispute resolution
competitors. Courts have always operated with alternative dispute resolution
as a possibility, but the range of ADR has broadened. Capabilities
continue to expand as technology enables online dispute resolution
connect legal advice, problem identification and problem resolution.
Tania Sourdin, Bin Li and Tony Burke examine how technology may impact on the
now accepted civil justice system objective, or overriding
purpose, of the just,
quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings. However, they
first question what is ‘justice’
and indicate that it may be located
outside the formal justice system in alternative dispute resolution. Technology
may therefore
facilitate access to justice in this broad sense through the
provision of information and the resolution of disputes without resort
courts. The authors also question the ‘innovation readiness’ of
lawyers, judges and consumers.
Peter Cashman and Eliza Ginnivan examine technology’s impact on civil
justice at the two ends of the civil justice spectrum:
low value disputes unique
to an individual and high value claims created through the aggregation of
related individual claims. Their
article details the development in numerous
and raises concerns about open justice and procedural fairness. The
focus then turns to class actions and the use of technology to
manage claims and
evidence through to settlement distribution.
James Metzger also explores ODR but from a novel perspective – the rise
of platforms that promise to use blockchain technology
to decentralise dispute
resolution by crowdsourcing the adjudication of disputes to a worldwide pool of
willing juror-arbitrators.
The particular conceptions of justice that they
promote are explored by examining a number of platforms and how they
Concern about fairness for parties in the family law sphere is examined in
greater detail by Felicity Bell. Her article highlights
the dangers for
vulnerable parties and children when data that perpetuates historical biases is
used to fashion a variety of resolutions.
The article argues for differentiated
case management that can harness efficiencies for parties, but also highlights
the role that
lawyers can play as a central protection for those at
disadvantage.
Lisa Toohey, Monique Moore, Katelane Dart and Dan Toohey add to the debate by
raising the issue of ‘legal design’ –
the application of
human-centred design to law – in order to assess and foster the creation
of usable, useful, and engaging
legal services. The authors also point to the
need to consider algorithmic fairness and questions of accessibility and digital
While technology can facilitate dispute resolution, it also changes how the
rest of the world operates. These changes then permeate
the justice system,
through discovery and then evidence, when disputes arise. David Caruso, Michael
Legg and Jordan Phoustanis examine
the Internet of Things – objects,
devices, machines and buildings that incorporate data gathering, handling and
transmission
technology – which is already widespread, and likely to be
ubiquitous in both business and domestic settings of the future.
This article
examines the electronically stored information gathered by these everyday
objects from the perspective of the discovery
process, and the admissibility and
authentication of this data for use in court.
Kathy Douglas, Tina Popa, Christina Platz and Meg Colasante address the use
of technology in legal education as a way to prepare law
students for practice.
Their article focuses on the use of video to demonstrate dispute resolution
skills such as negotiation/mediation
and advocacy, supported by online
discussion technology to reflect on the skills demonstrated in the video.
Technology offers an
opportunity to articulate required legal skills through
realistic exemplars.
This volume of the Macquarie Law Journal develops the current debates in
civil justice and technology, while also putting forward
possible solutions. It
therefore adds to a growing literature that identifies technology as both
opportunity and threat, and evidences
the importance of scrutiny, informed
debate, and research at the intersection of law, dispute resolution, and
technology. The Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, the Hon T
F Bathurst, in speaking about artificial intelligence, observed:
Many of the concepts involved in these technologies are unfamiliar and
difficult to get your mind around without the proper education
and training. A
slow and deliberate response to these technologies therefore makes a great deal
of sense, since our legal system
forms the bedrock of our society, and these
technologies have the potential to introduce significant changes in how it
It is therefore incumbent upon us to understand how these technologies
work and how they will affect our legal system.
Whatever changes we might wish to make, we must always ensure that they do
not compromise the fundamental values and principles which
underpin our legal
In the context of the justice system the opportunities and threats of
technology are arguably magnified, because justice itself –
equality before the law, and its central role in a democratic society – is
We would like to express our gratitude to the authors who contributed to this
special edition, as well as to the academics and experts
who provided peer
review of submissions. The breadth and quality of the published papers underpin
the strength of this edition’s
contribution to the growing body of much
needed research in the field of law and technology.
Our appreciation and thanks are also owed to Justice Stephen Gageler of the
High Court of Australia, who kindly agreed to the publication
in this edition of
a revised version of the lecture he delivered at the Macquarie Law
School’s annual Tony Blackshield Lecture
in November 2018.
Finally, we wish to express our thanks to, and commend the excellent efforts
of, the Student Editors. They have laboured diligently
to make this publication
possible while working towards their degrees at Macquarie Law School.
Felicity Bell
Michael Legg
Ilija Vickovich
The Hon Susan Kiefel, Chief
Justice of the High Court of Australia, ‘Aspects of the relationship
between the law, economic
development and social change and the importance of
stability’,
2019 Queensland Bar Association Conference
, Brisbane, 2
March 2019.
Hon T F Bathurst, Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of NSW, ‘Opening Remarks’,
Society of NSW Future of Law and Innovation in the Profession (flip) Stream
, Banco Court, Supreme Court of NSW, Sydney, 10 May 2019.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (154 KB)
PDF format (879 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter