URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 6 - Guardianship" [2011] SydUPLawBk 8; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
6. 1. Introduction
6. 2. The jurisdiction to appoint guardians generally
6. 3. New South Wales
6. 3. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 3. 2. The reach of the Guardianship Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make guardianship orders
6. 3. 3. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 3. 4. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
6. 3. 5. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 3. 6. Appointing a guardian
6. 3. 7. Joint, several and alternative guardians
6. 3. 8. Types of guardianship orders
6. 3. 9. Removal orders
6. 3. 10. The powers and functions of a guardian appointed in New South Wales
6. 3. 11. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 4. Victoria
6. 4. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 4. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 4. 3. Who may take part in a hearing as a party?
6. 4. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 4. 5. Appointing a guardian
6. 4. 6. Joint, several and alternative guardians
6. 4. 7. Types of guardianship orders
6. 4. 8. Temporary orders
6. 4. 9. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 4. 10. Requested rehearings
6. 4. 11. Reassessments of guardianship orders
6. 5. Tasmania
6. 5. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 5. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 5. 3. Who may take part in a hearing as a party?
6. 5. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 5. 5. Appointing a guardian
6. 5. 6. Joint, several and alternative guardians
6. 5. 7. Types of guardianship orders
6. 5. 8. Other related orders
6. 5. 9. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 5. 10. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 6. South Australia
6. 6. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 6. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 6. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
6. 6. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 6. 5. Appointing a guardian
6. 6. 6. Joint, several and alternative guardians
6. 6. 7. Types of guardianship orders
6. 6. 8. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 6. 9. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 7. Queensland
6. 7. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 7. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 7. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
6. 7. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 7. 5. Appointing a guardian
6. 7. 6. Joint, several, alternative and successive guardians
6. 7. 7. Types of guardianship orders
6. 7. 8. Interim orders
6. 7. 9. Entry and removal warrants
6. 7. 10. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 7. 11. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 7. 12. Parties to reviews of guardianship orders
6. 7. 13. Powers of QCAT on review
6. 8. Western Australia
6. 8. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 8. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 8. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
6. 8. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 8. 5. Appointing a guardian
6. 8. 6. Joint, several and alternative guardians
6. 8. 7. Types of guardianship orders
6. 8. 8. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 8. 9. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 8. 10. Parties to reviews of guardianship orders
6. 8. 11. Powers of WASAT after reviewing a guardianship order
6. 9. Australian Capital Territory
6. 9. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 9. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 9. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a party?
6. 9. 4. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 9. 5. Appointing a guardian
6. 9. 6. Joint, several and replacement guardians
6. 9. 7. Types of guardianship orders
6. 9. 8. Emergency orders
6. 9. 9. Removal orders
6. 9. 10. Directions, advice or opinion to guardians by Tribunal
6. 9. 11. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 9. 12. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 9. 13. Parties to and procedures for, reviews of guardianship orders
6. 10. Northern Territory
6. 10. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint guardians?
6. 10. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship order?
6. 10. 3. Dealing with an application for a guardianship order
6. 10. 4. Who may take part in the hearing?
6. 10. 5. What has to be proved before an order can be made?
6. 10. 6. Appointing a guardian
6. 10. 7. Joint, several and alternate guardians
6. 10. 8. Types of guardianship orders
6. 10. 9. The powers and functions of a guardian
6. 10. 10. Reviews of guardianship orders
6. 10. 11. Powers of Local Court on review
6. 11. Case law relevant to all jurisdictions
6. 11. 1. Withdrawal of an application
6. 11. 2. Incapacity issues
6. 11. 3. Need for a guardian
6. 11. 4. The views of the person the application or review is about
6. 11. 5. Who should be guardian – a private person or a government official (Public/Adult Guardian/Advocate)?
6. 11. 6. Reviews and reassessments of guardianship
6. 11. 7. Requested reviews or reassessments
6. 12. The role of the health care professional
6. 12. 1. Ingredients of assessment
6. 12. 2. What should a report contain?
Chapter 6 – Guardianship
6. 1. Introduction
The development of modern system of guardianship for adults with
decision-making disabilities in Australia is discussed in Chapter
development has resulted in the guardianship systems in the different States and
Territories of Australia being essentially
the same. However, there are
sufficient differences between them for it to be necessary to deal with each
State and Territory system
separately.
This chapter sets out which bodies have jurisdiction to make guardianship
orders in each State and Territory. It also sets out how
guardianship
applications are made, by whom, who may be involved in the hearing process and
what the criteria are for making guardianship
orders. The chapter deals with the
processes for reviewing such orders and the criteria that have to be met before
they may be renewed.
Because of their essential similarity, there are a number of issues common to
each of the eight guardianship systems in the country.
Where possible, these
issues are drawn out and discussed later in the chapter.
Finally, the chapter discusses the role of the health care professional in
the making of such orders.
6. 2. The jurisdiction to appoint guardians
One of the key aims of the modern guardianship systems in Australia has been
to make the seeking and obtaining of guardianship orders
much cheaper and more
accessible than it used to be for those who need to get the orders. As a result,
in the States and the Australian
Capital Territory applications for guardianship
orders are made to tribunals. In the Northern Territory, as will be seen below,
guardianship system is in the effective control of the magistrates.
Nevertheless, the Supreme Courts of the States and Territories
retain their
parens patriae jurisdiction. However, in relation to the guardianship of adults,
this jurisdiction can be the subject
to statutory limitation and may be the
subject of implied legislative removal in Victoria, South Australia and
Tasmania. This is
possible but less likely in the case of the Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory. In Victoria and Tasmania the guardianship of
expressed by Morris J of the Supreme Court of Victoria
as follows:
Although the
parens patriae
historical interest, I doubt if it should play any current role in the day to
day administration
of guardianship matters. Victoria has comprehensive laws in
relation to guardianship and administration matters. These laws have
established
the statutory office of Public Advocate, with roles and responsibilities
somewhat akin to those which might once have
been adopted by the Court. A wide
to resolve disputes
concerning guardianship matters and to consider applications
where there is some perceived threat to the integrity of the guardianship
6. 3. New South Wales
6. 3. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
One of its main functions of the Guardianship Tribunal of New South Wales is
to hear and determine applications for guardianship
Nevertheless the
guardianship of persons” is
not limited by the jurisdiction given to the
Guardianship Tribunal.
Supreme Court remains able to make guardianship orders, which it almost never
does, if it makes such an order and the Tribunal
makes a subsequent guardianship
order, the Court’s order ceases to have
However, if the Tribunal
makes a guardianship order and the Supreme Court makes a guardianship order
subsequently, the Tribunal’s
order ceases to have
In reality the Tribunal makes the guardianship orders in New South Wales. In
2007 Gzell J said that the Guardianship Tribunal had
been set up as an expert
tribunal to deal with matters of this
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make guardianship orders applies to
those who are 16 years and above.
An application cannot be made in relation to anyone who is under the age of 16
The application must specify
the grounds upon which it is claimed that the person the subject of the
application is in need of a
Sometimes the person the subject of an application will have a mental
illness. Even if they have become a “patient” within
the meaning of
Mental Health Act
, the Tribunal can still make a
guardianship order in relation to them. Also, the fact that a person under
guardianship becomes such
a “patient” does not operate to suspend or
revoke the guardianship order. However, any guardianship order made by the
Tribunal in relation to a person who is, or becomes, a patient under the
Mental Health Act
is effective only to the extent that
the terms of the order are consistent with any determination or order made under
Mental Health Act
in relation to that
6. 3. 2. The reach of the Guardianship
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make guardianship orders
The Tribunal makes guardianship orders in relation to adults who are present
in New South Wales when the order is made, even if they
are they are visitors
from interstate or overseas. On rare occasions it had made guardianship orders
in relation to residents of
New South Wales who have been taken out of the State
without their informed consent. Young J has suggested that the Tribunal’s
no power to order service of its applications outside
Young J did not decide
the matter, nor did he consider the
Service and Execution of Process Act
(Cth) which provides a mechanism by which the Tribunal’s processes,
in relation to at least some aspects of financial management,
but probably not
guardianship, may be served outside New South
The Appeals Panel of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal of New South Wales has noted that a State
statute is presumed not to have
extra-territorial operation but that if the
person the hearing is about is served with the application while they are
present in and a resident of New South Wales, the Tribunal does not
offend the principle against extra-territorial operation by hearing
application.
In a 2007 decision, the Guardianship Tribunal held that it had no
in relation to
a person who was living in South Australia and the subject of a guardianship
order there. The Tribunal had made a
guardianship order in relation to the man
while he was living in New South Wales, but his guardians moved him to South
The Guardianship Tribunal’s decision was appealed to the
Appeals Panel of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal which set aside
and sent the application back for rehearing by the Guardianship Tribunal. That
application was allowed to be withdrawn
after the South Australian guardianship
order was made, but another person made an application in relation to the man.
The New South
Wales Guardianship Tribunal took the view that it was precluded
from dealing with the new application because of the presumption
against the
operation of legislation outside of the State for which it was
While that decision may be correct given the facts of the case, the Western
Australian Guardianship and Administration Board held
in 2004 that where it had
made the initial orders when the person was in Western Australia, it could make
new guardianship orders
in relation to a person outside Western Australia if
they were still domiciled in Western Australia. The Western Australian Board,
led by its President, Barker J, noted that while the
Guardianship and
Administration Act
[D]oes not define the basis of jurisdiction or power in terms of the
Court to exercise
a prerogative or inherent jurisdiction in respect of vulnerable people, we think
it is reasonable to accept the
proposition that the common law rules governing
the power of a superior court to exercise jurisdiction in like matters help to
the proper extent of the jurisdiction or powers of a Board such as ours
, subject of course to the terms of the
, and any other relevant legislation, State or
Commonwealth.
The Western Australian Board also noted that while courts in
common law jurisdictions were unlikely to assert jurisdiction if the
not present or did not have property in the jurisdiction, it did not necessarily
follow that a court (or tribunal) “would
lack jurisdiction to deal with
guardianship of a person not in the jurisdiction if a sufficient nexus to the
local forum (the tribunal
or court empowered to deal with the matter), such as
domicile, is established”.
Making a guardianship order for an incapable person who has been
“grannynapped” can be useful in assisting their safe
resettlement in, New South Wales.
6. 3. 3. Who may apply for a guardianship
A person may make an application in relation to
themselves.
The Public Guardian
may make an application but has a practice of making applications only as a last
resort when no one else will
or can make an application that should be made in
relation to a particular person.
Any other person who, in the opinion of the Tribunal, has a genuine concern for
the welfare of a person may make an application in
relation to that
In reality most
applications are made by family members or by those who have a professional
relationship with the person such as
their general practitioner, the manager of
the aged care facility in which the person lives or a member of an Aged Care
Team which has been asked to assess the person.
The Tribunal does not use the requirement that it must be satisfied that the
applicant has a genuine concern for the welfare of the
person they are making an
application about to strike out applications, unless the application is made by
a “mere busybody”
who has no prior involvement with the person and
is causing trouble by making such an
application.
The Tribunal has also refused to determine the application concerning his
mother of an estranged son after it found that he did not
have a genuine concern
for her welfare. The Tribunal held that a genuine concern for welfare required
that the applicant was:
1. bringing to attention a fact situation in relation to the person the
application was about which may call for intervention by the
Tribunal to protect
or promote the welfare or interests of that person,
2. sincere in seeing the situation as one that may call for the intervention
of the Tribunal in the interests of the person, and also
3. the application was motivated by a desire to advance the welfare of the
6. 3. 4. Who may take part in the hearing as a
Those who may take part in the hearing of an application for a guardianship
order as a party are:
1. the applicant,
2. the person the application is about (the person),
3. the spouse, if any, of the person, if the relationship between the person
and the spouse is close and continuing,
4. another person, if any, who has care of the
5. the Public Guardian,
6. any person whom the Tribunal joins as a
Parties are entitled to receive a copy of the application which also gives
notice of the time, date and place of the
They may attend the
hearing and give relevant evidence; however it is not necessary to be a party in
order to attend the hearing
and to give evidence. Parties will receive a copy of
the Tribunal’s order and reasons for decision and have a right of appeal
against the Tribunal’s
6. 3. 5. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before the Tribunal may make a guardianship order, it must be satisfied that
the person the application is about is “a person
in need of a
Tribunal may find that a person is a person in need of a guardian, the Tribunal
must be satisfied, by the evidence available
to it at the hearing, that the
person is a person who has a disability, namely a person who is:
1. intellectually, physically, psychologically or sensorily disabled, or
2. of advanced age, or
3. a mentally ill person within the meaning of Chapter 3 of the
Health Act 2007
4. otherwise disabled, and
who, by virtue of that fact, is restricted in one or more major life
activities to such an extent that they require supervision or
habilitation.
Furthermore, the
person must, as a result of their disability, be either totally or partially
incapable of managing their
The way incapacity is assessed is set out at 6.12 below.
If the evidence satisfies the Tribunal that the person the application is
the Tribunal must
have regard to:
1. the views if any of the person, their
, and the person, if any,
who has care of the person
2. the importance of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships;
3. the importance of preserving the person’s particular cultural and
linguistic environment, and
4. the practicability of services being provided to the person without the
need for the making of such an
Consequently, particularly because of the policy of the
the general principles, but also because of the drafting of the relevant
provisions, it is possible for the Tribunal to
find that a person is “a
person in need of a guardian” and yet not make a guardianship order in
relation to them.
It is the view of the Appeal Panel of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
that the Guardianship Tribunal must consider all four
of these criteria on all
occasions, whether on an initial application or on review, when it is satisfied
that the person the hearing
is about is “a person in need of a
guardian”, before it exercises its discretion whether or not to make or
renew a guardianship
order in relation to that person. In 2004 in relation to a
review of a guardianship order and in 2006 in relation to an initial
application,
the Appeal Panel of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal said:
The Guardianship Tribunal must consider all of the matters set out in
before exercising its discretion. The use of the words "shall have regard to" in
is a clear indication of the legislative intent that the Guardianship
Tribunal is obliged to consider all of the matters set out
in that sub-section
before exercising its discretionary power. Those matters have no hierarchy or
weighting. Each is a mandatory
consideration. The Guardianship Tribunal must
determine in every case whether one or more of those considerations will be
given greater
weight than others. Whilst each is a mandatory consideration, in
some cases there may be no evidence of one or more of them. In such
circumstances it may be prudent for the Guardianship Tribunal to record that
of the section as requiring matters that are manifestly not relevant in a
particular case having to be referred to is out
of step with the views of courts
when reviewing the decisions of tribunals or courts they have jurisdiction to
hear and determine
appeals from. The view that
section 14(2)
Guardianship Act
is mandatory in nature was arrived at
without argument on the question and without considering some of the other
relevant provisions
and without an apparent appreciation of
the policy of least restrictive alternative that underlies the
manifest in the general principles set out in
A major reason why
section 14(2)
is not mandatory is that on many occasions
the matters the Guardianship Tribunal is to have regard to under it do not
exist. First,
in many cases the person the hearing is about is unable to express
views, a matter the section anticipates. Second, there are also
many cases in
which the person has no spouse or carer qualified in the terms of the Act and no
family relationships. Also there are
many cases in which the question of
cultural and linguistic environment is irrelevant. In a significant number of
cases, the only
live issue under
section 14(2)
is the practicability of services
being provided to the person the hearing is about without the need to make a
guardianship order.
Parliament would not have intended the Guardianship Tribunal
to waste time on irrelevancies and the wording of the
require such activity.
The Guardianship Tribunal is often confronted with cases in which none of the
section 14(2)
are relevant. Some examples are where a person who is
incapable of expressing views, who has no spouse, carer, or family needs a
guardianship order to protect them from the depredations of others or where a
person in such a situation needs a guardian as a substitute
decision-maker for
on-going medical treatment. Sometimes, on review, it is apparent that the
original need for the guardianship order
has gone away and no other need for an
order has arisen. Occasionally at the hearing of such a review a spouse or carer
or the person
the hearing is about will ask for the no longer needed order to be
continued. The Guardianship Tribunal’s time is better spent
this at the hearing when those involved are present and referring to it only
briefly in the written reasons for decision.
Another important reason why
section 14(2)
is not mandatory is that if it
were, it would then be in conflict with
provides that it is the duty of everyone exercising functions under this
with respect to those who have disabilities to observe certain
principles. The first principle is that the welfare and interests
of those with
disabilities should be given paramount consideration. The second is that their
freedom of decision and freedom of action
should be restricted as little as
possible. Another principle is that those with disabilities should be
encouraged, as far as possible,
to be self-reliant in matters relating to their
personal, domestic and financial affairs. As just noted, the Guardianship
is under a duty to observe those principles. Those principles can be in
conflict with the need to give more than cursory consideration
to the provisions
section 14(2)
Another matter that the Appeal Panel of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
does not appear to appreciate but something that is
a recurring issue for the
Tribunal is how to reconcile its duty it has under
to recognise the importance of preserving family relationships, and therefore to
take appropriate action to do so, and recording
how it had regard to the
importance of preserving family relationships under
section 14(2).
conflict cases, and particularly when one or more family members are abusing,
exploiting or neglecting or otherwise mistreating
the person the hearing is
possibility of relations between
the person the hearing is about and their
family being repaired or renewed, it is regularly necessary for the Tribunal to
be circumspect
for decision. Stating the Tribunal’s views in clear terms
in the written
reasons for decision, when it is having regard to the matters it must consider
section 14(2)
, can put seriously at risk the possibility of the person the
hearing is about having a worthwhile relationship with their family.
question of what are the person’s long term needs in this regard must be
contrasted with the need to show sufficient
information in the Tribunal’s
reasons for decision to indicate that regard has been to the relevant provisions
section 14(2).
This question must be resolved by ensuring that the
Tribunal’s reasons for decision are written so as not to sabotage the
possibility
of reconciliation.
It is beyond argument that the Guardianship Tribunal must conduct its
hearings in a manner that is procedurally fair and that it makes
an error of law
if it fails to take into account matters that are relevant. In
Ms A v Public
, the Appeal Panel of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal
considered that three of the criteria in
section 14(2)
were relevant
considerations in that case and that the Guardianship Tribunal had failed to
take proper account of two of them amounted
to an error of
The Appeal Panel of the
Administrative Decisions Tribunal could have come to that conclusion without
taking the view that having
regard to all the matters in
section 14(2)
case, whether live issues or not, was mandatory.
While the Guardianship Tribunal must put its mind to at least those of the
section 14(2)
criteria that are relevant to the particular initial application
for guardianship when deciding whether or not to make a guardianship
is wise for it to apply the same approach when conducting a review of a
guardianship order and deciding whether or not
to renew it by making a new order
even though, despite the views of the Appeal Panel of the Administrative
Decisions Tribunal, there
is no obligation to be found in the
Guardianship
for it to do so. As already noted, other factors may require
it when carrying out its duty to apply the principles in
not to renew a guardianship order in relation to a person who
qualifies as “a person in need of a guardian” regardless
views that the Appeal Panel of the Administrative Decisions Tribunal says the
Guardianship Tribunal must have regard to under
section 14(2).
In determining whether or not to make or review a guardianship order, it will
often be very important to consider the views the service-providers
involved in the person’s life. They will often provide information and
insights that will be essential for the Guardianship
understanding of the case to have regard to. In some cases it may be possible to
argue that failure to take into
account such relevant considerations could
amount to an error of law. It is important however that decision-making on
appeal does
not require the Guardianship Tribunal to have to write
over-elaborate reasons for decision in order to appeal-proof its decisions.
When the Guardianship Tribunal is deciding to make a guardianship order, it
also has in mind who should be guardian and what functions
it should give to the
guardian. These matters are dealt with below.
6. 3. 6. Appointing a guardian
While the Tribunal can appoint either a private person or the Public Guardian
as a person’s guardian, the
Guardianship Act 1987
states that
a guardianship order appointing the Public Guardian as guardian shall not be
made in circumstances in which a guardianship
order can be made appointing a
person other than the Public Guardian as
The Tribunal regularly
appoints family members and others with appropriate claims, who meet the
statutory criteria for appointment,
Nevertheless, the Public Guardian is the guardian for the majority of those
under guardianship in New South
This is because a major
factor in whether a person is a “person in need of a guardian” is
whether or not they have family
members or significant others to support them.
Many people under guardianship have no one else in their lives other than their
providers and their guardian. Another reason is that one of the most
significant causes of applications for guardianship orders is
conflict within
the family of the person the application is about relating to them. This
conflict usually, but not always, creates
circumstances that render it necessary
to appoint the Public Guardian as an independent substitute decision-maker who
consult the different family members who are in conflict before
making significant decisions about the person under
guardianship.
In cases in which
the family conflict relates to the person the hearing is about, the factual
circumstances shown by the evidence
are usually, but not always, such that the
welfare and interests of that person will not be able to be promoted if a
private person
with some familial or other properly based claim for
consideration is appointed as guardian. However under the general principles
, the welfare and interests of that person are to be given
paramount consideration and everyone exercising functions under the
including the Tribunal, is obliged to observe that
requirement.
Faced with this
situation, the Tribunal will have to appoint the Public Guardian, at least until
an appropriate, suitable and willing
private guardian becomes available. Also,
the facts sometimes show circumstances in which such an appointment will
preclude the person
from living, as far as possible, a normal a life in the
community or will run contrary to restricting their freedom of decision and
action as little as possible. Occasionally to make such an appointment will
leave the person the application is about in a position
of abuse, exploitation
or neglect rather than protecting them against such things. In addition some
potential private guardians will
not be able to meet the criteria for
appointment as a guardian.
In order to be appointed as a private
guardian, the person must be 18 years or
Also, the Tribunal is
satisfied that:
1. the personality of the proposed guardian is generally compatible with that
of the person under guardianship,
2. there is no undue conflict between the interests (particularly, the
financial interests) of the proposed guardian and those of
the person under
guardianship, and
3. the proposed guardian is both willing and able to exercise the functions
conferred or imposed by the proposed guardianship
Where it is a live issue at the hearing of an initial application or a review
the Tribunal members must put their minds to who should
be appointed guardian.
The choice is between a private person, where the circumstances of the case do
not preclude this, or the Public
Guardian. The Tribunal members should observe
the interaction between the personality of the person the hearing is about and
personality of any proposed private guardian who is present. Where it is
possible to do so and relevant and necessary for their determination
matter, the Tribunal should interview the person the hearing is about and obtain
their views. If Tribunal members have concerns
person as guardian, they should put those concerns, and any other relevant
concerns, to the prospective
guardian and give them the opportunity to comment.
There will be occasions, either at the initial hearing or on review, where
those attending the hearing, including prospective or existing
guardians, agree
that instead of a private person the Public Guardian should be appointed as
There will always be some possibility of a conflict of interests between a
prospective guardian and the person the hearing is about,
but rarely will this
conflict be sufficient to disqualify the prospective guardian.
Sometimes a prospective guardian will be willing but, not able to be
guardian, and at other times they will be able to be guardian
but not willing to
be. The Public Guardian is not subject to this assessment. While the
Tribunal’s reasons should show that
it was satisfied as to theses matters,
its reasons for decision do not have to go into great detail about this matter.
a family member seeking appointment as guardian is not appointed the
Tribunal has to take care to explain sufficiently as to why
that is the case and
that the Tribunal’s reasons for decision are written so as not to sabotage
the possibility of reconciliation.
6. 3. 7. Joint, several and alternative
The Tribunal can appoint joint guardians. They have the same functions as
each other and must make the decisions about the person
under guardianship
jointly. If a joint guardian dies, the surviving guardian continues as guardian
until the guardianship order is
The Public Guardian
prefers not to be appointed as a joint guardian.
The Tribunal can appoint more than one guardian and give each guardian
appointed separate functions which they exercise separately,
but would be wise
to consult with each other before doing so. These are called
“several” guardians. Occasionally the
Public Guardian is appointed
guardian with one or more functions and a private guardian with one or more
other functions.
Sometimes the Tribunal will appoint a single guardian and an alternative
guardian. On rare occasions it will appoint “several”
guardians and
alternate guardians for each of them. The alternate guardians take on the
functions of the guardian they are appointed
alternate for if that guardian is
absent or incapacitated or
Where the guardian dies and there is no surviving guardian or alternate
guardian, the Public Guardian becomes the guardian until the
guardianship order
is reviewed.
6. 3. 8. Types of guardianship
The kinds of guardianship orders the Guardianship Tribunal may make are as
1. Continuing orders.
2. Non-reviewable orders.
3. Temporary orders.
6. 3. 8. 1. Continuing orders
Continuing orders, which continue in operation until the time for their
review, are the most common form of order by far that the
Tribunal makes. They
may be limited or plenary.
Plenary orders are very rare. The Tribunal cannot make such an order “in
circumstances in which a limited guardianship order
Almost all the
continuing guardianship orders the Tribunal makes are limited, and limited to a
relatively few functions. Such orders
must specify the extent to which the
guardian has custody of the person under guardianship and as well as the
guardianship functions
they have in relation to
They may also contain
conditions.
The Tribunal may make an initial continuing order for up to one year. While
many initial orders are for that period, many are for
shorter periods. However,
if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person the subject of the order has
permanent disabilities and is
unlikely to become capable of managing their
person, and there is a need for an order longer than one year, the Tribunal can
an order for up to three
If the Tribunal makes a plenary order, then the guardian has custody of the
person under guardianship to the exclusion of any other
person and all the
functions that a guardian has in law and
A plenary order may
contain conditions.
6. 3. 8. 2. Non-reviewable orders
Non-renewable orders may be either limited or plenary. They differ from
continuing orders only in that they state that they will not
be reviewed. The
Tribunal may not make such a statement in a guardianship order unless the order
relates solely to the taking of
one or more specific decisions or actions on
behalf of the person the under guardianship, and the Tribunal is satisfied that
is no need for the order to continue after the decisions or actions
concerned have been taken.
Even though non-renewable orders state that they will not be reviewed, they
are always checked by the staff of the Tribunal to see
if, because of changed
circumstances or some other reason, they do need to be reviewed. As a result of
this check, some “non-reviewable”
orders are reviewed, but most are
6. 3. 8. 3. Temporary orders
Temporary orders are also rare. They may be made for up to a maximum of 30
days. Such orders may be renewed on review, but only once,
and again for up to
Only the Public
Guardian may be appointed guardian under a temporary order.
6. 3. 9. Removal orders
Another rarely used provision in the
is the one which empowers the
Tribunal to make removal orders.
First an application for a guardianship order has to have been made to the
Tribunal. The Tribunal then may, if it considers it to
be appropriate in the
circumstances of the case to do so, make an order for the removal of the person
from any premises. Such an
order provides the authority to an “authorised
officer” or a member of the police force, using all reasonable force,
enter and search the premises for the person the subject of the order and to
remove them from the
If the authorised officer or member of the
police force removes the person from any premises under the authority of an
by the Guardianship Tribunal, they are required, forthwith, to place
the person in the care of the Director-General at a place approved
One of the earliest applications heard by the then Guardianship Board was an
application to remove a woman with an intellectual disability
from a house in
which she lived with her mother and brother in a country town. The evidence
showed that she was seriously neglected
and under fed. She was locked in her
room over night despite her incontinence and had insufficient bedding. Her
mother refused offers
of help despite her own declining health. The
woman’s brother was unable to look after her if their mother was away. The
applied the general principles of the
and made the removal
order pending the hearing of the guardianship application in relation to the
There is an even less often used provision which empowers “an
officer” or a member of the police force to apply for a
remove a person who may be in need of a guardian from premises and be placed in
the care of the Director-General
at a place approved by the
The Guardianship
Tribunal is not involved in this form of removal process.
6. 3. 10. The powers and functions of a guardian
appointed in New South Wales
These matters are dealt with in Chapter 7.
6. 3. 11. Reviews of guardianship
All continuing guardianship orders are reviewed by the Tribunal towards the
end of the period they are made for. As long as the review
process has been
commenced before the expiration of the period the order was made for, by sending
a notice advising of the time date
and place of the hearing of the review, the
review process can proceed, and the guardianship order remains in effect until
is completed, even if the period the order was made for has
In addition to this “automatic” review of guardianship orders,
any person may request a review. However, it must be appreciated
that reviews
cannot be requested in circumstances in which the proper course is for a party
to a hearing in which a guardianship
order was made by the Tribunal to appeal
against that decision.
The Tribunal can refuse a request to review a guardianship order if it is of
the opinion that the request does not disclose grounds
that warrant a
Consequently, a person with a proper reason for doing so, rather than a
“busybody” can request a review if:
1. the order is not working for the person under guardianship,
2. circumstances have changed that affect the order,
3. there is new information that was not available at the time of the hearing
at which the order was made,
4. there is no further need for a guardian, or
5. a review is needed because the guardian is unable to continue, or has
become incapacitated or has died and there is no joint or
alternative guardian.
The Tribunal may conduct a review of a guardianship order “of its own
motion”, that is without having to wait until the
“automatic”
review of the order to become due or for someone to request a review. The
Tribunal rarely does this because
to do so can give rise to an argument that the
Tribunal is biased; however if a review appears to be required, the Tribunal
conduct it in the exercise of its duty to give paramount consideration to
the welfare and interests of those with disabilities to
Guardianship Act
6. 3. 11. 1. Parties to reviews of guardianship orders
The following are parties to reviews of guardianship orders:
1. (for a requested review) the person who requested the review,
2. the person the subject of the order being reviewed,
3. the spouse, if any, of that person, if the relationship between that
person and their spouse is close and continuing,
4. the person who has care of the person the subject of the
5. the guardian appointed under the order,
6. any person whom the Tribunal has joined as a
6. 3. 11. 2. Powers of the Tribunal on review
After conducting an “automatic”
review of the guardianship order, the Tribunal may:
1. a renew, or renew and vary the order, or
2. determine that the order is to lapse and revoke the unexpired part of the
After conducting a requested or “own motion” review of the
guardianship order, the Tribunal may:
1. vary the order, or
2. suspend or revoke the order, or
3. confirm the order.
When conducting an “automatic” review, the Tribunal considers
whether or not the person the order is about still needs
to be under
guardianship. As the general principles of the
require the Tribunal
to take a “least restrictive alternative” approach and not continue
a person under guardianship
when there is no current need to do so or no
foreseeable need to do so in the short-term future, then the Tribunal should not
a new guardianship order in relation to the person. If there is a need for
on-going guardianship, then the Tribunal should make a
new order, replacing the
order under review.
When conducting such a review, the Tribunal does not have to go back and
determine whether or not the person still qualifies as a
person for whom a
guardianship order can be made. That can be assumed unless there is new or newly
available evidence indicating
otherwise making the question of disability a live
one for the review. Usually those with dementia become less capable over time
while those with whole of life intellectual disabilities sometimes acquire new
and relevant skills and capacities but usually remain
the same. However, those
with an episodic psychiatric condition or an acquired brain injury that is
reducing in effect may no longer
have a disability that makes them “a
person in need of a guardian”.
Usually the “automatic” review of a guardianship order is
confined to whether or not there is an on-going need for guardianship
person the order is about and if so what functions the guardian needs to have in
the interests the person under guardianship.
Sometimes on review it is apparent
that the original need for the guardianship order has gone away and no other
need for an order
has arisen. In that situation it is the duty of the Tribunal,
under the general principles in the
, not to renew the order even
though the person’s spouse or carer or others at the hearing ask for it to
be renewed.
While a substantial proportion of orders are not renewed after a review the
majority are renewed.
not apparent that there is no current need for a guardianship order in relation
to the person, it is wise for the Guardianship
Tribunal puts its mind to at
least those of the
section 14(2)
criteria that are relevant when conducting a
review of a guardianship order, even though there is no obligation set out in
for it to do so, and to decide whether or not to continue
guardianship by making a new
Usually the issue of who should be guardian is resolved when the original
guardianship order is made. However, in some cases it remains
an issue of
contention between the parties and sometimes, because of that, or for other
reasons it is necessary to change the guardian
at the review. If a new private
guardian is to be appointed, the Tribunal must be satisfied that they meet the
criteria set out in
section 17(1)
6. 4. Victoria
6. 4. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
As already noted, Morris J has stated that because Victoria has comprehensive
laws in relation to guardianship and administration
matters, he doubted that the
parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Victoria “should play
any current role in
the day to day administration of guardianship
Supreme Court of New South Wales, the Supreme Court of Victoria may not retain
its jurisdiction in relation to guardianship
matters. The
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
does not preserve its jurisdiction, but while
Morris J has given an indication, the matter has not yet been authoritatively
determined.
Nevertheless, Morris
J’s view is strengthened by the fact that if the Supreme Court of
Victoria, the County Court or the Magistrates’
Court considers that any
party in any proceedings before it may need to have a guardian or an
administrator or both appointed for
them, the court may refer the issue to the
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (VCAT) for its determination. Such a
has effect as an application to VCAT; however it is for VCAT to decide
whether or no to make the
VCAT through its Guardianship List receives, hears and determines
applications for guardianship
Applications should be
made to it.
6. 4. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
Any person may apply to VCAT for an order appointing either a plenary or
limited guardian for a person with a disability who is 18
years old or older or
for such an order to take effect when the person reaches 18
6. 4. 3. Who may take part in a hearing as a
The following are automatic parties to an application:
1. the applicant who can be any person,
2. the person the application is about (the person), and
3. the proposed guardian.
The following are entitled to notice of the application, the hearing and any
order made as a result of the application. They become
a party by taking part in
the hearing:
1. the nearest relative available of the person who is not the applicant, the
proposed guardian or the administrator of the person’s
2. the primary carer of the
3. the Public Advocate,
4. any person whom VCAT joins as a
5. the administrator (if any) of the estate of the
The parties entitled to notice of the making of an application for a
guardianship order, notice of the hearing of the application
and notice of any
order made by VCAT in relation to the
application.
VCAT must commence
to hear the application within 30 days after receiving
6. 4. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before VCAT may make a guardianship order, it must be satisfied by the
evidence that that the person is:
1. a person with a
disability,
2. unable, by reason of the disability, to make reasonable judgments about
all or any of the matters relating to their person or circumstances,
3. in need of a guardian.
When deciding whether or not the person is in need of a guardian, VCAT must
1. whether the needs of the person could be met by other means less
restrictive of the person's freedom of decision and action than
guardianship order in relation to them,
2. the wishes of the person the hearing is about,
3. the wishes of any nearest relatives or other family members of the
proposed represented person (the person the hearing is about),
4. the desirability of preserving the person’s existing family
relationships.
VCAT cannot make a guardianship order unless it is satisfied that the order
would be in the best interests of the person the hearing
6. 4. 5. Appointing a guardian
Where VCAT is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the person the
hearing is about to make a guardianship order in relation
to them, it may
appoint either a private person or the Public Advocate as the person’s
guardian. However, VCAT may appoint
the Public Advocate only if no private
person meets the tests set out
Before VCAT may appoint someone as the person’s private guardian it
must be satisfied that the guardian is 18 years or older
and consents to be the
guardian and that the prospective guardian:
1. will act in the best interests of the person the hearing is about,
2. is not in a position where their interests conflict or may conflict with
the interests of the person the hearing is about, and
3. is a suitable person to act as the guardian of the person the hearing is
When deciding whether a person is suitable to be the guardian, VCAT must
take into account:
1. the wishes of the person the hearing is about,
2. the desirability of preserving existing family relationships,
3. the compatibility of the prospective guardian with the person the hearing
is about and with the administrator (if any) of their
4. whether the prospective guardian will be available and accessible to the
person the hearing is about so as to fulfil the requirements
of guardianship of
that person.
If no other person fulfils these requirements for appointment as the
person’s guardian VCAT may appoint the Public Advocate
person’s guardian.
does this, the Public Advocate has to use his or her best endeavours to find an
appropriate person to be appointed (by VCAT)
as the person’s
6. 4. 6. Joint, several and alternative
VCAT can appoint joint guardians, provided each of them meets the criteria
for appointment as a guardian.
They have the same functions as each other and must make the decisions about the
person under guardianship jointly and be in agreement
While there is no statutory authority to do so in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
, there does not seem any reason why VCAT
should not be able to appoint one or more guardians for one or more functions
more other guardians for one or more other functions, namely
“several” guardians.
VCAT may appoint alternative guardians. They become the person’s
guardian in the event of the death, absence, or incapacity
of the original
guardian. However, they must advise VCAT of the death, absence, or incapacity of
the original guardian and provide
evidence it to
6. 4. 7. Types of guardianship
VCAT may make orders appointing plenary guardians or limited
6. 4. 7. 1. Plenary orders
VCAT cannot make an order appointing a plenary guardian unless it is
satisfied that a limited guardianship order would be insufficient
to meet the
needs of the person under
guardianship.
A plenary guardian has all the powers and duties that a plenary guardian
would have if they were a parent and the represented person
(the person under
their guardianship) was their
The functions, powers and
duties of guardians are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
6. 4. 7. 2. Limited orders
Where VCAT makes an order appointing a limited guardian the order made must
be that which is the least restrictive of that person's
freedom of decision and
action as is possible in the
circumstances.
A limited guardian has only those powers and duties of a plenary guardian
that are specifically given to them by VCAT in the guardianship
order appointing
The functions, powers
and duties of guardians are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
6. 4. 8. Temporary orders
While the provisions relating to applying for and the tests for the making of
temporary orders are the same as for guardianship orders,
they are seen as
different from guardianship
While VCAT can
appoint both limited and plenary guardians under temporary orders, those orders
may remain in effect for a maximum
of 21 days and be renewed only once, again
for a maximum of 21 days.
However, VCAT must hold a hearing within 42 days of making a temporary order to
decide whether or not to make a guardianship order
in relation to the person the
subject of the temporary
A significant number of temporary orders are made by VCAT each year. The
Office of the Public Advocate website indicates that these
orders are for
emergency situations and can be made at very short notice. They allow VCAT to
act swiftly to protect individuals who
are at risk. VCAT can only make a
temporary order when the person in question is at immediate risk and there are
no less restrictive
options for addressing the
6. 4. 9. The powers and functions of a
These matters are dealt with in Chapter 7.
6. 4. 10. Requested rehearings
In Victoria the parties to a hearing of an application for a guardianship
order made to VCAT may apply for a rehearing of the application
if VCAT either
makes an guardianship order or dismisses the application. They cannot apply for
a rehearing if VCAT makes a temporary
order or if the President of VCAT hears
the application alone or with
6. 4. 10. 1. Who may apply?
The Public Advocate, an automatic party or a person entitled to notice of the
application who became a party by taking part in the
hearing may apply to for a
rehearing of the application.
A person entitled to notice of the application who did not become a party may
apply for a rehearing, but only if VCAT gives them
leave to do
The application for a
rehearing, or for leave to apply for a rehearing, must be made within 28 days
after the day of the
6. 4. 10. 2. Parties to rehearings of applications for guardianship
Anyone who was a party to the hearing of an application for a guardianship
order is a party to a rehearing of the application, in
addition to any other
parties such as the appointed guardian or administrator if they were not already
a party to the original hearing.
Anyone who was entitled to notice of the making
of the application is entitled to notice of an application for a rehearing of
application.
6. 4. 10. 3. Powers of VCAT at the rehearing
VCAT must rehear the matter but in doing so has all the functions and powers
it had at the first hearing. After rehearing the application,
1. affirm the order made at the first hearing,
2. vary that order,
3. set aside that order and make another order
6. 4. 11. Reassessments of guardianship
In Victoria guardianship orders are not reviewed, they are reassessed. This
must be done by VCAT within 12 months of the making of
the order unless VCAT
provides for a longer period within which the reassessment may take place. The
maximum period within which
the reassessment may take place is three years,
unless VCAT orders otherwise.
However, VCAT may conduct a reassessment of a guardianship order at any time
either on its own initiative or on the application of
any person, including the
represented person (the person under
guardianship).
Guardians are
encouraged to ask VCAT for an early reassessment if they think guardianship is
no longer necessary.
6. 4. 11. 1. Parties to reassessments of guardianship orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
appears to make a
distinction between those who are parties to a reassessment and those who are
entitled to notice of it. Both the
person under guardianship and the guardian
are automatic parties, as would be the applicant if that person was not either
As VCAT may join other people as parties, they too would become
As well as the parties, the following are entitled to notice of the making of
an application for a reassessment, at least seven days
notice of the hearing of
the reassessment and notice of any order made by VCAT relating to the
reassessment:
1. the nearest relative available of the person under
guardianship,
2. the primary carer (if any) of that
3. the Public Advocate, and
4. any administrator of the estate of the person under
guardianship.
It is the practice of VCAT to conduct most reassessments on its own
initiative, and while it can do so “on the papers”
conducting a hearing, its practice is to conduct hearings at which people may
attend. This is particularly the case where
VCAT does not propose to amend, vary
or replace the order. There are particular notice and other provisions relating
to these reassessments.
In practical terms, the reassessment provisions of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
are given effect to by VCAT providing a
hearing within 12 months, but allowing the order to lapse unless the need to
continue the
order is advises to it. Reassessments are occasionally applied for
in order to change the guardian or to have an order that is no
longer needed
When a reassessment is taking place, guardians are required to prepare a
written report and send it to VCAT. The Public Advocate has
advised that this
report should report should include:
1. any significant decisions the guardian has made;
2. any change in the represented person's capacity to make reasonable
3. the represented person’s current needs and arrangements;
4. future plans relevant to the represented person;
5. the guardian’s relationship with other significant people in the
life of the represented person, including their family and
professional service
providers involved with them;
6. any difficulties or conflict the guardian has faced in carrying out their
guardianship responsibilities;
7. facts relevant to whether guardianship should continue, end or be changed;
8. the guardian’s availability and willingness to continue as guardian;
9. any other matters which the guardian considers VCAT should be aware of
before it makes a decision on the
reassessment.
6. 4. 11. 2. Powers of VCAT on reassessment
Upon completing a reassessment VCAT may revoke the order or amend, vary,
continue or replace it subject to any conditions or requirements
it considers
6. 5. Tasmania
6. 5. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
establishes the
Guardianship and Administration Board of Tasmania to deal with applications for
orders appointing full and limited
does not specifically deal with the parens patriae jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court of Tasmania, it does provide that if any court
in Tasmania,
including the Supreme Court, considers that any party in any proceedings before
it may need to have a guardian or an
administrator or both appointed for them,
the court may refer the issue to the Board for its determination. Such a
referral has effect
as an application to the
Also, the Supreme
Court is the body to deal with appeals against determinations of the
These provisions
together with the opinion expressed by Morris J of the Supreme Court of Victoria
namely, that because Victoria has
comprehensive laws in relation to guardianship
and administration matters, which are similar to those of Tasmania, he doubted
the parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Victoria
“should play any current role in the day to day administration
guardianship matters” indicate that the jurisdiction originally given to
the separate Supreme Court of Van Diemen’s
Land by the
Third Charter of
of 1823, and renewed by Tasmania’s own
of 1831, in relation to the guardianship of adults may have been
removed by necessary implications being drawn from those provisions
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Consequently, while the Supreme Court of Tasmania still operates under the
Charter of Justice, the wise course is to make applications
appointing full and limited guardians to the Guardianship and Administration
Board of Tasmania rather than to the Supreme
6. 5. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
Any person may apply to Guardianship and Administration Board for an order
appointing either a plenary or limited guardian for a person
with a disability
who is 18 years old or older.
The application must be lodged with the registrar and contain the prescribed
information and specify the grounds on which it is alleged
that the proposed
represented person (the person the application is about) needs a
Although the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
does not set
any statutory qualifications for those who may apply for an order appointing a
guardian the Guardianship and Administration
Board’s website states that;
“anyone who has a genuine concern for the welfare of a person with a
decision-making disability
can make an application to the
website also notes that specific application forms are available on request to
the Board's office. They are not available via
the internet as many matters
including guardianship and medical treatment issues can often be resolved
without a formal application
practice always to contact the Board before making an application for an order
as many situations involving a person
with a decision-making disability can be
resolved without the need to appoint a guardian for them.
6. 5. 3. Who may take part in a hearing as a
Unlike the New South Wales and Victorian legislation, the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
does not set out specifically who are the
parties to an application for an order appointing a guardian for a person.
However, the
states specifically that the Board is bound by the rules
of natural justice. Consequently, anyone with a genuine interest in the
the person the application is about in particular, should be told of the
application and advised of the time date and place
of the hearing and what the
basic issues raised by the application are. In this regard it should be noted
that the practice of the
Board is to have its staff investigate the
decision-making capacity of the person the application is about and why there
a need for a guardian. How this is done is set out on the Board’s
website and in particular involves the Board’s staff
liaising with
the applicant, the proposed represented person and all other interested parties
including family members and any professional
service-providers.
6. 5. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before the Board may make a guardianship order, it must be satisfied by the
evidence of the same matters and tests that VCAT has to
be satisfied about it
can make a similar order.
Like VCAT, the Board must consider whether the needs of the person could be met
by other means less restrictive of the person's freedom
of decision and action
than making a guardianship order in relation to them.
The Board cannot make a guardianship order unless it is satisfied that the
order would be in the best interests of the person the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
specifically state that the Board must seek the views of the person the
application is about, it would be a breach of the
rules of natural justice for
the Board not to give any person the subject of an application a reasonable
opportunity to give their
views to the Board if they were capable of expressing
views. Also, the
requires the Board to carry the wishes of the person
with the disability into effect if
In order to deal
with these matters, the Board has adopted a practice of requiring the person the
hearing is about to be at the hearing
so that the Board may see them and hear
their views. If it is not possible for the person to be at the hearing, an
officer of the
Board visits the person to seek and obtain their views wherever
it is possible to do so.
Also, if the Board did not give relatives genuinely involved in the life of
the person the application is about a reasonable opportunity
to be heard, this
could be a breach of the rules of natural justice. However, whether it was or
not would depend on the facts of
the particular case. Again, this matter is
dealt with in practice by the investigating officer of the Board contacting such
and, if they are not able to attend the hearing, offer the possibility
of their views being included in that officer’s report
to the Board.
6. 5. 5. Appointing a guardian
Where Board is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the person the
hearing is about to make a guardianship order in relation
to them, it may
appoint either a private person or the Public Guardian as the person’s
Unlike the New
South Wales and Victorian legislation, the
Guardianship and Administration
does not specifically impose any limitations on the
Board’s discretion to appoint either a private guardian or the Public
as the person’s guardian. However, as will be discussed below,
the established policy of the common law in this field of law
is to appoint a
family member as guardian “if that were
Nevertheless, the Board is required by the principles of the
into effect the wishes of the person under guardianship if possible, but promote
that person’s best interests –
matters which can be in
When appointing a
guardian, the Board must also take into account the desirability of preserving
existing family
relationships.
The experience
of the guardianship jurisdiction though is that sometimes it is the actions or
omissions of family members that create
the need for the guardianship order. In
that situation, the preservation of family relationships can be in conflict with
the best interests of the person under guardianship.
Before the Board may appoint someone as the person under guardianship’s
private guardian it must be satisfied that the guardian
is 18 years or older and
consents to be the guardian, and that the prospective guardian will meet the
same criteria that VCAT has
to consider. The Board must also take into account
the same matters VCAT must take into account when it is determining whether or
not a person is suitable for appointment as a
6. 5. 6. Joint, several and alternative
Although there is no specific statutory authority to do so in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
, applying the usual rule
of statutory interpretation, the Board may appoint joint guardians, provided
each of them meets the criteria
for appointment as a
Joint guardians
would have the same functions as each other and would have to make the decisions
jointly. However, it is not the practice of
the Board to appoint joint guardians.
There is statutory authority for the Board to appoint two or more guardians
each with different functions for the person under guardianship.
appointments of “several” guardians can be made in one or more
limited guardianship
The Board may appoint alternative private guardians. The Public Guardian
cannot be appointed as an alternative guardian in Tasmania.
During the absence
or incapacity of the original guardian, the alternative guardian becomes the
person’s guardian with the
same functions as the original
Since there is no provision for dealing with the death of the guardian, the
guardianship order would cease to operate if the guardian
6. 5. 7. Types of guardianship
The Board may make orders appointing full (plenary) guardians or limited
These orders will
lapse after three years unless they are continued after a
However, they may be
reviewed at any time.
6. 5. 7. 1. Full orders
The provisions in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
are the same as in the Victorian
legislation.
The Board cannot
make an order appointing a plenary guardian unless it is satisfied that a
limited guardianship order would be insufficient
to meet the needs of the person
under guardianship.
plenary guardian has all the powers and duties that a plenary guardian would
have if they were a parent and the represented
person (the person under their
guardianship) was their
The functions, powers
and duties of guardians are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.
6. 5. 7. 2. Limited orders
Again, the provisions in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
are the same as in the Victorian
legislation.
Where the Board
makes an order appointing a limited guardian the order made must be that which
is the least restrictive of that person's
freedom of decision and action as is
possible in the
circumstances.
A limited guardian has only those powers and duties of a plenary guardian
that are specifically given to them by the Board in the
guardianship order
appointing them.
functions, powers and duties of guardians are discussed in detail in Chapter
6. 5. 7. 3. Emergency guardianship orders
The Board has the power to make an emergency order appointing the Public
Guardian as the guardian of a person not already under guardianship.
Board may make such an order it must consider that there are grounds for making
a guardianship order in relation to the
person and consider that it is proper
for reasons of urgency to make the order. The Board may make the order
“considered appropriate
in the circumstances” and give any similarly
appropriate direction.
The Board may make such an order on its own initiative or at the request of
any person the Board considers has a proper interest in
the matter. The request
can be made and information gathered by phone or other means. No notice need be
given to any person. While
the Board is not required to hold a hearing, it must
make such inquiries or investigations as it thinks appropriate. Such orders
be made for up to 28 days and may be renewed once for up to the same
There must be an evidential basis for the Board’s view that the person
may need a guardianship order and there must be obviously
urgent reasons for
making the order or giving the direction. However, the state of the evidence for
making an emergency guardianship
order need not be such as to meet the
requirements for making non-urgent
6. 5. 8. Other related orders
6. 5. 8. 1. Emergency orders and directions
In addition to making emergency guardianship orders, the Board may make other
orders and give other directions that are considered
appropriate in the
circumstances and that the Board considers proper to make or give by reason of
The Board may make such an order on its own initiative or at the request of
any person the Board considers has a proper interest in
the matter. The request
can be made and information gathered by phone or other means. No notice need be
given to any person. While
the Board is not required to hold a hearing, it must
make such inquiries or investigations as it thinks
appropriate.
There must be an
evidential basis for any order the Board makes or any direction that it gives
under this provision.
Any such orders can be made for up to 28 days and may be renewed once for up
to the same period.
6. 5. 8. 2. Removal orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
provides for two
situations in which the Board can make a “removal order” in
relation to a person with a disability
who is not the subject of a guardianship
order. The first is where the Board has received information that a person with
a disability
1. being unlawfully detained against their
2. likely to suffer damage to their physical,
emotional or mental health or well-being unless immediate action is taken.
In this situation, if the Board considers it necessary to do so in order to
secure access to that person, it may empower the Public
Guardian or some other
person specified in the order to visit the person with a disability for the
purpose of preparing a report
for the Board. This must be done in the company of
a police officer who may, with such assistance as is necessary, use such force
as is reasonably necessary to enter the premises where the person with a
disability is
If, after receiving and considering the report, the
Board is satisfied that the person with a disability is being unlawfully
against their will or is likely to suffer damage to their physical,
emotional or mental health or well-being unless immediate action
is taken, the
Board may make an order enabling the person to be taken to, and cared for at, a
place specified in the order until
an application for an order appointing a
guardian for them is heard.
Unlike in New South Wales, no application for a guardianship order has to be
made in advance of the Board taking action if it has
received information upon
which it considers it necessary to act.
The second is where it appears to a police officer that there is reasonable
cause to suspect that a person with a disability who appears
to be in need of a
1. has been, or is being, ill-treated,
neglected or unlawfully detained against their will, or
2. is likely to suffer serious damage to their
physical, emotional or mental health or well-being unless immediate action is
In this situation, the police officer may enter the premises where the person
with the disability is believed to be, by force if necessary,
and remove that
person from the premises if that was thought fit. In this kind of situation,
where the police officer decides to
remove the person from the premises, they
must be accompanied by a person nominated by the Public Guardian. That person
as soon as practicable:
1. take the person
with a disability to a place of safety,
2. ensure that an application for guardianship
or other appropriate arrangements are made in relation to the person with the
disability,
3. provide the Board with a written report
giving details of the action that they had taken when exercising their
responsibilities
under these
provisions.
In either situation the police and the Public Guardian must work together to
check whether the person with the disability is safe
or not, and if not safe to
remove them to a place of safety. After that is achieved, the question of
whether or not the person needs
a guardian is then addressed.
6. 5. 9. The powers and functions of a
These matters are dealt with in Chapter 7.
6. 5. 10. Reviews of guardianship
The Board may make guardianship orders for a maximum of three years. After
that they will expire unless they are continued after a
However, the Board is
also empowered to hold a hearing to review a guardianship order at any time. It
1. on its own initiative,
2. on application by, or on behalf of, a the person
under guardianship, or
3. on the application of any other
6. 5. 10. 1. Parties to reviews of guardianship orders
In Tasmania the parties to reviews of guardianship orders are those persons
that procedural fairness requires to be treated as parties.
These are at least
the following:
1. the person the order is about,
2. their guardian,
3. the applicant for the review if that is neither the guardian nor the
person under guardianship.
Others, such as the spouse of the person under guardianship, may be entitled
to be parties, but that will depend on the circumstances
of the case. However,
it not necessary to be a party to be able to attend a review and to give
evidence at it
6. 5. 10. 2. Powers of the Board on review
After conducting the review hearing, the Board may vary or continue the
guardianship order, subject to any conditions or requirements
it considers
necessary, or it may revoke the order. Also, the Board may make such further
orders as it considers necessary in order
to give effect to the guardianship
6. 6. South Australia
6. 6. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
establishes the
Guardianship Board of South Australia and empowers it to make guardianship
not specifically deal with the parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
of South Australia, but it makes the Administrative
and Disciplinary Division of
the District Court the appeal body for decisions and orders of the Board, with a
further appeal from
that Court to the Supreme Court. The
provides that the Board may refer any question of law to the Supreme Court for
its opinion.
These provisions
together with the opinion expressed by Morris J of the Supreme Court of Victoria
that because Victoria has comprehensive
laws in relation to guardianship and
administration matters, as does South Australia, he doubted that the parens
patriae jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court of Victoria “should play any
current role in the day to day administration of guardianship matters”
indicate that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of South Australia in
relation to the guardianship of adults may have been removed
by necessary
implications being drawn from the relevant provisions of the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Nevertheless, that
part of the Supreme Court’s parens patriae jurisdiction may still
Furthermore, its
parens patriae jurisdiction in relation to guardians may be exercisable by the
District Court.
Nevertheless, the wise course is to make applications for guardianship orders
to the Guardianship Board of South Australia rather
than to the Supreme Court or
District Court.
As will be seen in Chapter 10. 5. 1, the Supreme Court and the District Court
of South Australia both have jurisdiction under the
Aged and Infirm
Persons’ Property Act 1940
to make protection (administration)
orders. The District Court may also have parens patriae jurisdiction to appoint
administrators
for the estates of incapable
6. 6. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
The following may make an application to the Guardianship Board for a
guardianship order or for the variation or revocation of such
1. the person the application is about;
2. the Public Advocate, on his own initiative, or at the request and on
behalf of the person to whom the proceedings relate;
3. a relative of the person the application is about is,
(i) their spouse to whom they are legally
(ii) domestic partner,
(iii) a parent,
(iv) someone who, if the person is under 18 years, acts in loco parentis in
relation to them, or in any other case, the person charged
with overseeing the
ongoing supervision, care and well-being of the person,
(v) a brother or sister of or over 18 years,
(vi) a son or daughter over 18 years;
4. a medical agent of the
5. an administrator of the person's estate; or
6. any other person who satisfies the Board that they have a proper interest
in the welfare of the person.
Guardianship applications must be made in the manner and form determined by
6. 6. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
does not set out who
are parties to a hearing of an application for a guardianship order, but clearly
the person the application
is about and the person making the application are
parties. The Office of the Public Advocate notes that the following people are
likely to attend the hearing:
1. the person the application is about that is, the person said to have a
mental incapacity;
2. the person who made the application;
3. other people involved in the care or welfare of the person;
4. any other person with a genuine interest in the person the application is
The Office of the Public Advocate also notes that in a small number of cases
the person the application is about may be too ill or
frail to attend the
hearing. It is the practice in such situations for a Board member to visit the
person the application is about
prior to the
6. 6. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before the Board may make a guardianship order it must be satisfied by the
evidence before it that the person the subject of the application:
1. has a mental incapacity;
2. does not already have an enduring guardian; and
3. should have a guardianship order made in relation to them.
The term “mental incapacity” is defined to mean the inability of
a person to look after their own health, safety or welfare
or to manage his or
her own affairs, as a result of:
1. any damage to, or any illness, disorder, imperfect or delayed development,
impairment or deterioration, of the brain or mind; or
2. any physical illness or condition that renders the person unable to
communicate his or her intentions or wishes in any manner
whatsoever.
When deciding whether or not to make a guardianship order the Board must, as
the paramount consideration, give consideration to what,
in its opinion, would
be the wishes in the matter of the person the application was about if they
were not mentally incapacitated.
However, the Board is required to do this only
to the extent that there is reasonably ascertainable evidence on which it can
such an opinion.
In addition, the Board must seek and consider the present wishes of the
person, unless it is not possible or reasonably practicable
Furthermore, the Board must give consideration to the adequacy of existing
informal arrangements for the care of the person and to
the desirability (or
otherwise) of not disturbing those
arrangements.
Finally, the order made by the Board must be the one that is the least
restrictive of the person's rights and personal autonomy as
is consistent with
their proper care and
protection.
After giving appropriate consideration to and being satisfied as to all these
matters, the Board may make an order placing the person
under limited
guardianship, or if a limited guardianship order would not be appropriate, a
“full” guardianship
The Board may make guardianship orders subject to such conditions or
limitations (including a limitation as to the duration of the
order) as it
thinks fit and specifies in the
6. 6. 5. Appointing a guardian
The Board is empowered to appoint as the guardian or the guardians such
person or persons as it considers, in all the circumstances
of the case, to be
the most suitable for the
Private guardians must be natural persons, not
Also, a person who
cares for the person under guardianship on a professional basis cannot be
appointed as their guardian.
However, the Public Advocate may be appointed as the guardian, or one of the
guardians, of the person, but only if the Board considers
that no other order
would be appropriate.
The Board cannot appoint anyone as a guardian unless they consent to the
appointment. However the Public Guardian’s consent
is not required before
the Board appoints him.
suggested that the Public Advocate cannot refuse to accept an appointment as
guardian by the Board.
When determining the suitability of a person for appointment as a private
guardian, the Board must have regard to:
1. whether the potential appointee and the person with the mental incapacity
would be incompatible,
2. whether there is some existing family arrangement or relationship that
should be preserved or should not be disturbed,
3. whether the potential appointee would be competent to discharge the
functions of guardian and would do so in accordance with the
principles set out
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
4. whether the potential appointee would be readily available for discharging
those functions,
5. whether any conflict of interest would arise from the appointment. (The
fact that a proposed appointee is related to the person
with the mental
incapacity by blood or marriage is not, of itself, to be taken as giving rise to
a conflict of interest), and
6. such other matters as the Board considers
6. 6. 6. Joint, several and
alternative guardians
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
specifically
provides for the appointment of more than one guardian in a guardianship order
and also allows for the Public Advocate
to be one of those
Consequently,
there does not seem to be any reason why the Board cannot appoint joint
guardians or “several” guardians,
provided each of them was suitable
for appointment as a guardian. Joint guardians would have the same functions as
each other and
would have to make the decisions about the person under
guardianship jointly. “Several” guardians are those appointed
separate functions which they exercise separately, but would be wise to consult
with each other before doing so. While the Board
does not appoint
“several” guardians, there seems no reason why the Board cannot
appoint either single or joint “several”
guardians; however, the
more guardians, the more complex the process of making the most appropriate
decisions in the best interests
of the person under guardianship.
There are no provisions for dealing with the resignation, death or incapacity
of the guardian or one of the joint (or “several”
guardians). If
this occurs, the guardianship order will cease to exist and the person will no
longer be under guardianship. The Board
is not empowered to appoint alternative
guardians. The practice of the Board, when it is advised of such a situation is
a review of the order and take the appropriate action in the light of
the review.
6. 6. 7. Types of guardianship
6. 6. 7. 1. Full and limited guardianship orders
The Board is empowered to make both “full” and
“limited” guardianship
order gives the guardian, subject to the
and the terms of the Board's
order, all the powers a guardian has at law or in
a limited guardianship order is an order by which the Board specifies the
particular aspects of the person under guardianship's
care or welfare that are
to be the responsibility of the guardian or
“limited” guardian has, again subject to the
order, those powers a guardian has at law or in equity that are given to the
guardian in the order appointing them.
6. 6. 7. 2. Self-revoking orders
Because of the Board’s power to include limitations in any guardianship
order it makes, including a limitation as to the duration
of the order, it may
make guardianship orders that are to last only for a set period (probably of not
more than three years).
self-revoking orders do not have to be reviewed in the manner set out below in
6. 6. 9 below. Self-revoking orders can be either
full or limited guardianship
6. 6. 7. 3. Urgent orders
If it is satisfied that urgent action is required, the Board may make an
urgent guardianship order for up to 21 days in other circumstances
where such an
order is necessary.
However, the Board does not appear to have the power to make removal orders
for the protection of a mentally incapacitated person
pending the making of or
the hearing of an application for a guardianship order.
6. 6. 8. The powers and functions of a
As already noted, the Board may appoint full (plenary) or limited guardians.
The powers and functions of guardians, including the
special powers that, on
application, the Board may give to guardians to place and detain the person
under guardianship, are dealt
with in Chapter
6. 6. 9. Reviews of guardianship
There are two types of reviews of guardianship orders in South Australia
– periodic reviews which the Board is required to carry
applications made to it to vary or revoke an
6. 6. 9. 1. Periodic reviews
The Guardianship Board is required to review the “circumstances”
of those under guardianship within six months if they
are being detained in any
place under
an order made by the Board, and thereafter at intervals of no more than a
the guardianship order does not contain a detention provision, then a review
must be conducted at intervals of not more than three
years. On completion of
the review, the Board must revoke the order unless it is satisfied that there
are proper grounds for keeping
the order in force. If the Board decides to keep
the order in force, it may vary the terms of the order. The Board has a wide
as to how it may conduct its reviews.
Parties to periodic reviews of guardianship orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
does not set out who
are the parties to a review; however procedural fairness would require that at
least the person under guardianship,
their guardian and the administrator of
their estate (if any) be notified of the review and be given the opportunity to
The practice of the Board when conducting a periodic review of a
guardianship order
The Office of the Public Advocate’s manual for private guardians
advises that when a guardianship order should be reviewed is
written into the
order itself. Prior to that date the Board writes to the guardian, and any other
significant person
in the life of the person under guardianship, and ask if they think that the
order is still required, and if so, why.
The Board sends guardians a form containing a list of questions to complete.
The purpose of these questions is to assist the Board
to decide whether the
person under guardianship still has a mental incapacity, is still unable to make
decisions because of that
incapacity and still has a need for guardianship
because there are decisions that still need to be made. These questions also
the Board decide whether a further guardianship order should be made, and
if so, for how long and whether there should be changes
in the new order when
compared with the previous order.
If there is medical evidence that the person still has a mental incapacity
and all those involved agree that a guardianship order
is still required, then
the Registrar of the Board may make a new order without a formal hearing.
However, if there are differences
of opinion about the order, or the Board is
unclear about the person’s current level of mental capacity, it may
conduct a formal
review hearing which the guardian will be expected to attend
and answer questions such as:
1. what has happened since the last order was made;
2. has there been any change in the situation of the person under
guardianship;
3. what significant decisions has the guardian had to make; and
4. what are the future plans for the protected
6. 6. 9. 2. Requested reviews
The Board is empowered, “on application” to vary or revoke a
guardianship order if that is the proper course to
The Office of the
Public Advocate’s manual for private guardians encourages guardians to
apply for revocation or variation,
whichever is the more appropriate, if they
think that:
1. the person under their guardianship no longer needs to have a guardianship
2. the duties and roles that have been given to the guardian are not working
3. additional areas of decision making authority are required due to a change
in the circumstances of the person under their guardianship,
4. they are unable or unwilling to continue in their role as
Who may request a review of a guardianship order?
While guardians would be able to request reviews of the orders appointing
them as guardians, so would those placed under guardianship
by those orders.
Others who, in the opinion of the Board, had an appropriate and sufficient
interest in the person the order was
would also be able to request
a review of the order if they had concerns about the way it was working.
Parties to a requested review
Again, while the
does not set out who are the parties to requested
reviews, at least the person the guardianship order was about, their guardian
the administrator of their estate (if any) would have to be notified of the
review and be given the opportunity to take part in it.
Powers of the Board when dealing with requested reviews
Requested reviews appear to be limited to applications to vary or revoke the
order. The drafting of the relevant section opens up
the argument that these
applications are different in nature from the periodic reviews of its orders
that the Board is required to
carry out. The argument is that they limit the
Board to either dismissing the application or varying or revoking the
guardianship
order and they are not reviews of “the circumstances”
of the person the order is about which require the Board to revoke
unless it is satisfied that there are proper grounds for the order remaining in
6. 7. Queensland
6. 7. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
In Queensland the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (QCAT) has
exclusive jurisdiction to appoint guardians for “adults
with impaired
capacity for (personal)
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
specifically states that
its provisions do not affect the Supreme Court of Queensland’s inherent
parens patriae jurisdiction, that general provision
does not prevail over the specific provision in the same
exclusive jurisdiction to appoint guardians to
Note also that the
allows the Court, if it considers it appropriate, to transfer
proceedings before it that are within the QCAT’s jurisdiction
to QCAT and
QCAT to transfer proceedings that are within the Court’s jurisdiction to
power to transfer a proceeding before it to the Supreme Court is limited to
proceedings that are within the Court’s
, such a transfer would not revive the Court’s jurisdiction to
appoint guardians.
In a 2005 case, the mother of a man with an intellectual disability unhappy
with a decision of the Tribunal to renew the guardianship
order in relation to
that man, reappointing his father as his guardian for a further five years,
sought an order from the Supreme
Court, in the exercise of its parens patriae
Wilson J noted that
the parens patriae jurisdiction was to be exercised always with great caution
and with the paramount consideration
being what was in the best interests of the
person the application was
She dismissed the
application pointing out that:
[QCAT] is a specialist tribunal set up to determine issues relating to
intellectually disabled adults. In determining an application
it is constituted
by an experienced lawyer, someone with professional knowledge or experience of
persons with impaired capacity,
and someone with personal experience of such a
person. Proceedings before the Tribunal must be conducted as simply and
the requirements of the
and an appropriate consideration
of the matters before it allow, and it is not bound by the rules of evidence. It
can mould its procedures
to the demands of a particular
6. 7. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
Applications may be made to QCAT for guardianship orders in relation to
adults, persons 18 years of age or older. In certain circumstances
application and an order may make for a person who is at least 17½ years of
age. The order may commence only when the person
The following may make
an application to QCAT for a guardianship order:
1. person the application is about,
2. the Adult Guardian,
3. the Tribunal on its own initiative, and
4. any other “interested
An “interested person” is someone who has a sufficient and
continuing interest in the person to justify the interested
person in making an
application to QCAT for a guardianship order in relation to the person the
subject of the application.
Whether a person is an “interested person” is a matter the Tribunal
may decide, if necessary.
In Queensland the requirements for an application are set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
, subject to QCAT directing
otherwise. The application must be in writing, signed by the applicant and filed
with the Tribunal. The
application must also include the reasons for the
application and information about the person the subject of the application,
of their family, their primary carers and relevant others. This
information is required so that QCAT can meet its obligation to give
the hearing to the relevant
The application must
also include the proposed guardian’s written agreement to being
6. 7. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
(Qld) provides for a
range of people who QCAT must give at least seven day’s notice of the
hearing, wherever practical, but
makes a distinction between active parties and
others who must be given notice. Those who must be given notice are:
1. the person the application is about, if they are not the applicant,
2. the members of that person’s family;
3. any primary carer of that person;
4. all current guardians, administrators and attorneys for that person,
5. the Adult Guardian,
6. the Public Trustee, and
7. anyone else QCAT considers should be given
also requires that notice of the hearing and what it is about
must be given, to the person the hearing is about in the way that
considers most appropriate having regard to that person’s needs. However,
that person’s failure to understand the
notice does not affect its
Also, the giving of
notice may be dispensed with, or the period of notice shortened in relation to
the person the application is
The following are “active” parties:
1. the person the hearing is about,
2. any other person who is the applicant,
3. the person proposed for appointment as guardian,
4. any current guardian,
5. the Adult Guardian,
6. the Public Trustee,
7. any person joined as a party to the proceeding by
Active parties may appear in person at QCAT and, with the leave of QCAT, be
represented by a lawyer or
6. 7. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before QCAT may, by making a guardianship order, appoint a guardian for the
person the hearing is about, it must be satisfied that:
1. the person the application is about has impaired capacity for the
(personal) matter,
2. there is a need for a decision in relation to that matter or the person is
likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely to
involve, unreasonable risk to their health, welfare or property, and
3. without the appointment of a guardian;
(a) the person’s needs will not be adequately met, or
(b) the person’s interests will not be adequately
If it is satisfied as to these matters QCAT may make a guardianship order for
an adult, a person who is 18 years or
While QCAT will usually only make orders on the application of an interested
person, the Adult Guardian or (very rarely) the person
the application is about,
it may make guardianship orders on its own
initiative.
However, whenever
it uses its own initiative to make an order, QCAT must ensure that it acts in a
way that is procedurally fair in
the circumstances. Nevertheless, it is the
practice of QCAT, relying on its power to make orders on its own initiative, to
make guardianship
orders when dealing with applications for administration
orders (and vice versa) when the need to make such an order becomes apparent
the hearing and the evidence satisfies the criteria for making such an order and
the requirements of procedural fairness do not
preclude the making of the order
given the circumstances of the particular case.
The term “impaired capacity for the matter” reflects the idea
that capacity is decision (or “matter”) specific.
Accordingly,
impaired capacity can affect adults over a range from impaired capacity in all
decisions and actions to capacity that
is impaired in relation to just one
matter. However, for most adults who are the subject of applications to QCAT,
their capacity
is usually substantially impaired, meaning in relation to all
matters or at least those matters needing to be addressed at the hearing.
Because of that impairment, they are often incapable of either making decisions
at all or are at unreasonable risk in relation to
their health welfare or
property or are unable to adequately protect their own
A person has impaired capacity for a (personal) matter if they are incapable
1. understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter,
2. freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter and
3. communicating the decisions in some
A personal matter for an adult is defined in the
as, a matter
relating to the adult’s care, including the adult’s health care, or
welfare. The definition offers a wide
range of examples. These are:
1. where they live,
2. with whom they live,
3. whether they work and, if so, the kind and place of work and the
4. what education or training they undertake,
5. whether they apply for a licence or permit,
6. day-to-day issues, including their diet and dress,
7. their health care,
8. whether to consent to a forensic examination, or
9. a legal matter not relating to their financial or property
When dealing with an application for a guardianship order and deciding
whether or not the criteria for making an order have been met,
QCAT must apply
the general principles of the
1. the presumption of capacity,
2. the right of all adults to the same basic human rights regardless of a
particular adult’s capacity must be recognised and
taken into account.
3. the importance of empowering an adult to exercise the adult’s basic
human rights must also be recognised and taken into account,
4. an adult’s right to respect for their human worth and dignity as an
individual must be recognised and taken into account,
5. an adult’s right to be a valued member of society must be recognised
and taken into account,
6. the importance of encouraging and supporting an adult to perform social
roles valued in society must be taken into account,
7. the importance of encouraging and supporting an adult to live a life in
the general community, and to take part in activities enjoyed
by the general
community, must be taken into account,
8. the importance of encouraging and supporting an adult to achieve their
maximum physical, social, emotional and intellectual potential,
and to become as
self-reliant as practicable, must be taken into account,
9. an adult’s right to participate, to the greatest extent practicable,
in decisions affecting their life, including the development
of policies,
programs and services for people with impaired capacity for a matter, must be
recognised and taken into account,
10. the importance of preserving, to the greatest extent practicable, an
adult’s right to make their own decisions must be taken
into account,
11. an adult must be given any necessary support, and access to information,
to enable them adult to participate in decisions affecting
their lives,
12. the adult’s views and wishes are to be sought and taken into
account to the greatest extent practicable when exercising
power for a matter
for the adult,
13. when performing a function or exercising a power under the
someone with impaired capacity, the person must do so in the way that is least
restrictive of the adult’s rights,
14. the principle of substituted judgment must be used so that if, from the
adult’s previous actions, it is reasonably practicable
to work out what
the adult’s views and wishes would be, the person in performing a function
or exercising a power under the
must take into account what they
consider would be the adult’s views and wishes; however, the person
performing a function
or exercising a power under the
must do so in a
way consistent with the adult’s proper care and protection,
15. the importance of maintaining the person’s existing supportive
relationships must be taken into account,
16. the importance of maintaining the person’s cultural and linguistic
environment, and set of values (including any religious
beliefs), must be taken
into account. For an adult who is a member of an Aboriginal community or a
Torres Strait Islander, this means
the importance of maintaining their
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander cultural and linguistic environment, and
set of values (including
Aboriginal tradition or Island custom), must be taken
into account,
17. power for a matter should be exercised by a guardian or administrator for
an adult in a way that is appropriate to the adult’s
characteristics and
18. an adult’s right to confidentiality of information about the adult
must be recognised and taken into account.
6. 7. 5. Appointing a guardian
A guardian must be at least 18 years and not a paid carer, or a health
provider for the person under
guardianship.
When deciding
whether or not a person was appropriate to appoint as a guardian, QCAT must
consider the following matters:
1. the general principles of the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
and whether the person is likely to apply them;
2. if the guardian is to be appointed to make decisions about health matters,
the health care principle and whether the person is
likely to apply it
3. the extent to which interests the person the hearing is about and those of
the proposed guardian are likely to conflict;
4. whether the person the hearing is about and the proposed guardian are
compatible including, for example, whether the proposed guardian
has appropriate
communication skills or appropriate cultural or social knowledge or experience,
to be compatible with the person
the hearing is about,
5. if more than one person is to be appointed as guardian, whether the
proposed guardians are compatible with one another,
6. whether the proposed guardian would be available and accessible to the
person the hearing is about,
7. the proposed guardian’s appropriateness and competence to perform
functions and exercise powers under an appointment
The fact the proposed guardian is a relation or a beneficiary of the estate
of the person the hearing is about does not, of itself,
mean their interests are
likely to conflict.
When considering the proposed guardian’s appropriateness and
competence, QCAT must have regard to:
1. the nature and circumstances of any criminal history they may have,
whether in Queensland or elsewhere, including the likelihood
commissioning of any such offence may adversely affect the person the hearing is
2. whether in Queensland or elsewhere they had been refused appointment or
removed from an appointment, as a guardian, administrator,
attorney or other
person making a decision for someone else and the nature and circumstances of
that refusal or removal.
Guardians have a continuing duty to keep QCAT advised about matters going to
their appropriateness and competence to be
QCAT may make its
own inquiries into these
The Adult Guardian may also be appointed
6. 7. 6. Joint, several, alternative and
successive guardians
QCAT may appoint those who meet the criteria for appointment as guardians as
joint guardians, as several guardians (with different
functions), as alternate
guardians and as successive guardians (those whose appointment begins when the
appointment of another ends).
If it appoints two or more guardians for a person, they will be joint guardians
unless QCAT must make clear in its order that they
are to be several or
alternative guardians.
there are joint guardians and the appointment of one or more of them comes to an
end, the other joint guardians continue to be
guardians should make their decisions together, consult each other and deal with
disagreements are set out on the
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
6. 7. 6. 1. How appointments as guardians end
A person’s appointment as a guardian ends automatically if they die or
1. the person they are the guardian of dies,
2. they become a paid carer or health provider for the person under their
guardianship,
3. they becomes the service-provider for a residential service where the
adult is a resident; or
4. if they were married to the person they are guardian of when they were
appointed guardian and the marriage is subsequently
A person’s appointment as a guardian ends if their appointment is
revoked by QCAT as a result of a review of the
appointment.
A person may withdraw as guardian with the leave of
6. 7. 7. Types of guardianship
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
does not create
separate categories of plenary or full guardianship orders under which the
guardian has all the functions of a guardian
and limited orders under which the
guardian may carry out only the functions of a guardian set out in the
guardianship order. Instead,
it empowers the guardian to exercise power in
relation to personal matters except those that the
guardians from exercising power in relation to. When guardians are given powers
in relation to personal matters, they may
do anything in relation to those
personal matters that the person under guardianship would have been able to if
they had had capacity,
unless the terms if the order prevent
While it is possible
for QCAT to appoint a guardian to exercise power in relation to all personal
matters, except those excluded
by operation of the
, in most cases
most guardianship orders are limited to those personal matters that appear to be
required and are set out in the order.
In addition to these “normal”
orders appointing guardians after full hearings, QCAT may appoint guardians
under interim
6. 7. 8. Interim orders
If QCAT is satisfied that urgent action is required, particularly to protect
an adult with impaired capacity from abuse, exploitation
or neglect, it may make
an interim order appointing a guardian, for a maximum period of six months,
without having to conduct a full
hearing, provide notice of the hearing, or
otherwise comply with the requirements of the
Guardianship and Administration
procedure for dealing with applications for interim orders is set out in a
Presidential Direction.
6. 7. 9. Entry and removal warrants
The Adult Guardian in Queensland has significant investigative powers,
including a power to investigate any complaint or allegation
that an adult with
impaired capacity “is being or has been neglected, exploited or abused or
has inappropriate or inadequate
decision-making
arrangements”.
Associated with that power is the right in the Adult Guardian to apply to QCAT
for a warrant to enter a place and to remove an adult
with impaired capacity
from it if the Adult Guardian considers there are reasonable grounds for
suspecting there is an immediate
risk of harm, because of neglect (including
self neglect), or exploitation or abuse, to the
The procedure for
making such an application is set out in the
6. 7. 10. The powers and
functions of a guardian
Some of the powers and functions of guardians are set out in the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Those powers and
functions and the common law powers and functions of guardians are dealt with in
6. 7. 11. Reviews of guardianship
QCAT must review its appointment of a guardian at least every five
These are called
periodic reviews. However, QCAT may also review its appointment of a guardian on
its own initiative (own initiative
reviews) or on the application of any of the
following (requested reviews):
1. the person under guardianship,
2. a person who has sufficient and continuing interest in the person under
guardianship, usually a family member or
3. the Public Trustee,
4. a trustee company.
QCAT advises that if anyone entitled to request a review may do if they
believe that:
1. an existing order is unsatisfactory,
2. there is new information that could affect the order,
3. circumstances have changed,
4. there is no longer a need for a the person under guardianship to have a
guardian, or
5. the existing guardian is not acting in the interests of the person under
guardianship.
6. 7. 12. Parties to reviews of
guardianship orders
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
specifically
authorises QCAT to conduct each review of a guardianship order as it considers
appropriate.
This allows QCAT
to conduct its reviews in a number of different ways, provided they are
procedurally fair in the circumstances of
the particular case. Usually it
conducts a hearing to which the person under guardianship, the guardian, any
administrator, family
members, carers and others are invited, by notice being
given to them. They are given the opportunity to put new information or evidence
of changed circumstances before QCAT for it to
6. 7. 13. Powers of QCAT on review
QCAT may require the guardian to advise it of anything that the guardian has
not previously advised, but which a proposed guardian
was required to tell QCAT
when it was initially considering whether to appoint that person as
Having conducted its review, QCAT must revoke the guardianship order unless
it is satisfied it would have made an appointment if it
had been dealing with a
new application for an appointment of a
If is so satisfied,
QCAT may either continue or change the order. It may change the order by,
changing the terms of the appointment,
removing a guardian, appointing a new
guardian or by changing the order in some other way.
However, QCAT may remove a guardian only if it considers that the guardian is
no longer competent because, for example, they have
not adequately protected the
interests of the person under guardianship, or have neglected their duties or
abused their powers either
generally or
specifically.
QCAT may also give the guardian advice or directions about how they should
carry out their duties.
6. 8. Western Australia
6. 8. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
Supreme Court Act 1935
the Supreme Court of Western
Australia has the same parens patriae jurisdiction as introduced to the eastern
States of Australia
by the relevant charters of justice. It is a court of
equity, with power and authority within Western Australia and its dependencies
to administer justice and “to appoint guardians and committees of the
persons and estates of infants, lunatics, and persons
of unsound mind according
to the order and course observed in
Court’s inherent jurisdiction, of which the parens patriae jurisdiction is
part, is not affected by the
Guardianship and Administration Act
which gives the State Administrative Tribunal (WASAT) its guardianship
Supreme Court retains its jurisdiction, most applications for guardianship
orders are made to WASAT and WASAT will deal
with applications in relation to
anyone physically present in Western Australia, even if they are a resident of
another part of Australia
WASAT may make guardianship orders for those in need of a guardian who are 18
years and above.
6. 8. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
Anyone may apply to WASAT for a guardianship
The person who the
application is about must be 18 years or
6. 8. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
The executive officer of WASAT must give notice of the hearing at least 14
days in advance to the following so that they can attend
if they wish:
1. the applicant,
2. the person the hearing is about,
3. their nearest relative,
4. the Public Advocate,
5. any proposed guardian or alternate guardian,
6. the administrator of the estate of the person if an administrator has been
appointed, and
7. any other person who in the opinion of the executive officer has a proper
interest in the proceedings.
6. 8. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before WASAT may appoint a guardian for a person, it must be satisfied that
the person is:
1. incapable of looking after their own health and safety,
2. unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to
their person, or
3. in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of their own health
and safety or for the protection of others, and
4. in need of a
WASAT must then declare that the person the hearing is about is in need of a
guardian and also declare which matter or matters listed
above of which it is
WASAT may make the
order subject to such conditions and restrictions that it thinks
When dealing with a guardianship application, the primary concern of WASAT is
the best interests of the person the application is
It must also presume
that the person the hearing is about is capable of looking after their own
health and safety and can make reasonable
judgments concerning their person
until the contrary is proved to the satisfaction of WASAT.
In addition, WASAT must, as far as possible to do so, get the views and
wishes of the person the hearing is about however it can when
the application is
being dealt with or by gathering those views and wishes from the person’s
previous actions.
case, Jenkins J of the Supreme Court of Western Australia noted that WASAT, in
exercising its statutory powers, was required
to take into account, as far as
possible, the views and wishes of T, the young adult the subject of the
application. She said that
this was an important aspect of the exercise of those
powers because:
No person should be deprived of his or her right and freedom to make decisions
to be heard. The right to be
heard is a fundamental rule of natural justice, which the Tribunal was bound to
also noted:
I do not accept that just because a represented person may not be capable of
intellectual reasoning, that reasonable steps should
not be taken to ascertain
his or her views and wishes. In this case, it was important that, as far as
possible, T had a voice in
the hearing to determine who should be his guardian.
I also accept that as T functions on an emotional level, it was relevant for
Tribunal to take into account, if possible, his emotional response to issues
related to guardianship, such as where and with
whom he would like to
Jenkins J sent the matter back to WASAT for redetermination, she concluded by
In order to assist the Tribunal in that re-determination, nothing I say in these
reasons compels the Tribunal to order or obtain
an independent assessment of the
circumstances of each applicant if, after further enquiry, it is of the opinion
that the cost of
such an enquiry would outweigh its benefits or if there is good
reason why the cost of such an enquiry could not be met from T's
Further, although I am of the view that the Tribunal ought
to take further steps to ascertain T's views and wishes, that does not
necessarily mean that those views and wishes will be able to be
ascertained.
must not make a guardianship order if the needs of the person the application is
of the person’s freedom
of decision and action.
any guardianship order it makes must be in terms that WASAT considers impose the
least restrictions possible in the circumstances
of the case on the
person’s freedom of decision and
6. 8. 5. Appointing a guardian
WASAT may appoint as guardians only adults 18 years and above who have
consented to being appointed guardian. Before appointing them,
WASAT must be of
the opinion that they:
1. will act in the best interests of the person they are appointed guardian
2. are not in a position where their interests conflict or may conflict with
the interests of that person, and
3. are otherwise suitable to act as the guardian of that
When deciding whether the person under consideration for appointment as
guardian is “otherwise suitable”, WASAT shall
take into account as
far as is possible:
1. the desirability of preserving existing relationships within the family of
the person the application is about,
2. the compatibility of the proposed guardian with that person and with the
administrator, if there is one, of that person’s
3. the wishes of the person the hearing is about, and
4. whether the proposed guardian will be able to perform the functions to be
given to them.
The fact that the proposed guardian is a relative of the person the hearing
does not, by virtue only of that fact, mean that their interests may or do
conflict. Nor does the fact that the proposed guardian
is the administrator of
the estate of the person disqualify them from being appointed as guardian of
that person.
The Public Advocate of Western Australia is statutory guardian in that State
and may be appointed as a joint guardian with a private
guardian at any time.
However, WASAT cannot appoint the Public Advocate as the sole guardian unless
there is no other person who
is suitable and willing to
6. 8. 6. Joint, several and
alternative guardians
Private guardians may be appointed jointly and the Public Advocate may be
appointed as a joint guardian with one or more private guardians.
guardians may not perform any of their functions without the concurrence of
their co-guardians.
there is no statutory authority to do so in the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
, there does not seem any reason why WASAT
should not be able to appoint one or more guardians for one or more functions
more other guardians for one or more other functions, namely
“several” guardians.
Alternative guardians may be appointed to take over the functions of the
guardian they are appointed as the alternative for upon the
death of that
guardian. However, the alternate guardian must advise the Public Advocate of the
death of the original guardian and
the Public Advocate must ensure that an
application to review the guardianship order is made as soon as practicable
after the death
of the original
6. 8. 7. Types of guardianship
When WASAT makes a guardianship order, it will appoint the guardian or
guardians as either plenary or limited guardians.
6. 8. 7. 1. Plenary guardians
Plenary guardians have wide-ranging functions including the functions given,
Family Court Act 1997
to a person in a parenting order
which allocates parental responsibility for a child or a parenting order which
provides that a person
is to share parental responsibility for a child, as if
the person under guardianship was a child lacking in mature
understanding.
Such parental
responsibility means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority
which, by law, parents have in relation
Plenary guardians (and limited guardians) in Western Australia, as different
from elsewhere in Australia, may be made responsible
for the maintenance of
those under their
guardianship.
neither they nor limited guardians have the right to chastise or punish those
under their guardianship.
6. 8. 7. 2. Limited guardians
Limited guardians have only those powers of a plenary guardian that are given
to them by WASAT in the guardianship order appointing
6. 8. 7. 3. Temporary orders
WASAT does not have the power to make temporary orders. It makes short orders
instead; for example where a guardian may be needed
only to make specific
decisions and carry out specific actions.
6. 8. 8. The powers and
functions of a guardian
The powers and functions of guardians in Western Australia are dealt with in
6. 8. 9. Reviews of guardianship
When WASAT makes a guardianship order, it must specify a period, not
exceeding five years, within which the order must be reviewed
and it must ensure
that the order is reviewed
accordingly.
However, WASAT
must also review a guardianship order if the guardian or a joint guardian:
2. wishes to be discharged,
3. has been guilty of such neglect or misconduct or of such default as, in
the opinion of WASAT, renders them unfit to continue as
4. appears to WASAT to be incapable of carrying out their duties, because of
mental or physical incapacity, or
5. is bankrupt or a person whose property is subject to an order or
arrangement under the laws relating to
bankruptcy.
Any person may make an application for such a
They do not have to
obtain leave from WASAT to do so.
In addition to these mandatory reviews, WASAT may, at any time, review a
guardianship order on the application of:
1. the Public Advocate,
2. the person the order is about,
3. their guardian,
4. the administrator of their estate, or
5. a person to whom leave has been granted, with or without conditions, to
conduct the review.
6. 8. 10. Parties to reviews of guardianship
As the executive officer of WASAT is required to give those listed below at
least 14 days notice of the hearing of any of the three
kinds of reviews of
guardianship orders set out above, it is reasonable to assume that they are
parties to any reviews to which they
are given notice:
1. the applicant where there is one,
2. the person the order under review is about,
3. the nearest relative of that person,
4. the guardian,
5. if there is one, the administrator of the estate of the person the hearing
6. the Public Advocate, and
7. any other person who in the opinion of the executive officer has a
sufficient interest in the
6. 8. 11. Powers of WASAT
after reviewing a guardianship order
After reviewing a guardianship order, WASAT may, as it considers
in the best interests of the person the order is about:
1. confirm the order,
2. amend the order so as to make any provision that may be included in a
guardianship order,
3. revoke the order,
4. revoke the order and substitute another order for it, or
5. without revoking the order, revoke the appointment of any guardian and
appoint a new or additional guardian or appoint an alternate
6. 9. Australian Capital Territory
6. 9. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
Miles CJ has taken the view that the powers given to the Supreme Court of New
South Wales to appoint guardians of persons incapable
of looking after
themselves or their estates were passed on to the Supreme Court of the
Australian Capital Territory upon its creation
He noted that all
Imperial Acts
in force in the Territory, except those specifically
continued, were repealed by the
Imperial Acts Application Act (ACT) 1986
However, as section 24 of the
Australian Courts Act 1828 (UK)
IV c 83) was specifically continued, and provides essentially that all laws and
statutes in force in England at the time of
the passing of the Act should be
applied in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, this continued the jurisdiction
given by the
Third Charter of
Although it is far from clear, I think that the effect of the above is that the
inherent power is still available to be exercised
pursuant to the provisions in
s. 11 of the
Guardianship [and Management of Property] Act
[1991 (ACT)]
Supreme Court Act
[(ACT)] which states that
the Court has "all original and appellate jurisdiction that is necessary to
administer justice in the
Territory".
Miles CJ had fewer doubts about the exercise of this part of the
inherent, parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of the
Capital Territory in an earlier
While the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory continues to have
all original and appellate jurisdiction that is necessary
to administer justice
in the Territory, it is not bound to exercise its powers if its jurisdiction is
concurrent with another court
Since February
2009, the appropriate place to apply for a guardianship order is the ACT Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (ACAT).
ACAT can appoint guardians for adults,
namely persons 18 years of age or older. ACAT may also appoint guardians for
persons less
than 18 years of age, but such appointments do not take effect
until the person turns 18.
6. 9. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
set out who may apply for a guardianship order and the
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (ACT)
appears to allow that any person may
apply to ACAT for a guardianship order in relation to themselves or another
requires ACAT to “observe natural justice and procedural
allows ACAT to decide its own procedure in a particular matter if the
does not set down the procedure to be followed, it also requires the
procedures of ACAT to be simple, quick, inexpensive and informal
consistent with achieving
It is suggested that for ACAT to be procedurally fair and still meet its
obligations about efficiency, that it allow applications
for guardianship orders
to be made to it only by those genuinely concerned about the welfare of a person
with impaired decision-making
ability. These will usually be family members or
friends of the person, but applications also sometimes need to be made by mental
health and disability workers or by members of Aged Care Assessment Teams,
treating doctors or others. At other times it will be
appropriate for the Public
Advocate to be approached to make the application. In emergency situations, the
Public Advocate will usually
apply as only the Public Advocate can be appointed
as a person’s guardian in emergency
circumstances.
Whoever makes the application must make it on the approved
6. 9. 3. Who may take part in the hearing as a
ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (ACT)
states that
parties to applications are the applicant and respondent, unless the authorising
law provides otherwise.
authorising law, the
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
, used to provide who were, whenever it was practicable, to be given
written notice of the hearing. These were:
1. the person the hearing is about,
2. their domestic partner, parents, brothers and
3. each child of the person the hearing is about,
4. if there is a manager of the property of the person the hearing is about
—the manager; and
5. the Public Advocate.
It is suggested that all the above should be given notice of the hearing
unless it is impractical to do so. In particular cases procedural
fairness may
require that others be given notice of the hearing because their interests may
be affected. All attending a hearing
are entitled to be represented by a lawyer
or an agent.
The Public Advocate is an automatic party and has a function of representing
those with disabilities at hearings before ACAT. The
Public Advocate is entitled
to engage a lawyer to appear before ACAT for this
However, while the
Public Advocate or her staff usually attend hearings of ACAT, they are usually
there carrying out the role of
the Public Advocate, they are rarely there for
the purpose of representing the person with the impaired decision-making ability
even more rarely, do they engage a lawyer to represent the person the
hearing is about.
6. 9. 4. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before ACAT may make a guardianship order, it must hold a hearing and be
satisfied by the evidence that:
1. the person the hearing is about has “impaired decision-making
ability in relation to a matter relating to” their health
or welfare;
2. while the person has the impaired decision-making ability there is, or is
likely to be, a need for a decision in relation to the
matter that they have
impaired decision-making ability in relation to; or the person is likely to do
something in relation to that
matter that involves, or is likely to involve,
unreasonable risk to the person’s health, welfare or property; and
3. if a guardian is not appointed the person’s needs will not be met;
or the person’s interests will be significantly
adversely affected
A person has
impaired decision-making ability
their decision-making ability is impaired because of a physical, mental,
psychological or intellectual condition or state, whether
or not that condition
or state is a diagnosable
However, a person
must not be taken to have a physical, mental, psychological or intellectual
condition only because they:
1. are eccentric;
2. do or do not express a particular political or religious opinion;
3. are of a particular sexual orientation or expresses a particular sexual
preference;
4. engage or have engaged in illegal or immoral conduct; or
5. take or have taken drugs, including alcohol. (Nevertheless, any effects
of a drug may be taken into
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
person’s “interests” to include the following:
1. protection of the person from physical or mental harm,
2. prevention of the physical or mental deterioration of the person,
3. the ability of the person to—
(a) look after themselves, and
(b) live in the general community, and
(c) take part in community activities, and
(d) maintain their preferred lifestyle (other than any part of the
person’s preferred lifestyle that is harmful to the person),
4. promotion of the person’s financial security,
5. preventing the wasting of the person’s financial resources, and
6. preventing the person becoming
If these and the other relevant interests of the person the hearing is about
are likely to be significantly adversely affected, ACAT
may make a guardianship
order in relation to them if the other criteria for making an order are met.
If satisfied as to the three matters set out at the beginning of 6. 9. 4
namely that:
1. the person the hearing is about has impaired decision-making ability in
relation to a matter relating to their health or welfare,
2. there is a need to make a decision about that matter, and
3. if a guardian is not appointed, the person’s needs will not be met
or there interests will be significantly adversely affected
ACAT may, appoint a guardian for the person, with the powers that ACAT is
satisfied are necessary or desirable to make decisions for
the person in
accordance with the decision-making
principles.
In addition, the
powers that ACAT gives to a person’s guardian are to be no more
restrictive of the person’s freedom
of decision and action than is
necessary to achieve the purpose of the guardianship
6. 9. 5. Appointing a guardian
ACAT can appoint either private persons who are 18 year and above or the
Public Advocate as
A private person may be appointed as a guardian only if ACAT is satisfied
that they person will follow the decision-making principles
and are otherwise
suitable for appointment.
When deciding whether a potential guardian will do this, ACAT must take into
account at least the following:
1. the views and wishes of the person for whom a guardian is to be appointed,
2. the desirability of preserving existing family relationships,
3. whether the potential guardian and the person the hearing is about are
compatible,
4. whether the proposed guardian lives in the ACT,
5. whether the proposed guardian will be available and accessible to the
person the hearing is about; and
6. the nature of the functions to be exercised under the order and whether
the proposed guardian is competent to exercise them; and
7. whether the interests and duties of the proposed guardian are likely to
conflict with the interests of the person the hearing is
of those interests. With regard to this matter, the interests and duties of the
domestic partner or a relative
of a person must not be taken to be likely to
conflict with the interests of the person the hearing is about only because of
fact of being the domestic partner or
The Public Advocate does not have to satisfy ACAT as to these matters before
she can be appointed as a
ACAT must not appoint a private person as a person’s guardian unless
the private person consents in writing to the appointment
and has informed ACAT,
on oath, whether they:
1. have been convicted or found guilty of an offence involving violence,
fraud or dishonesty,
2. have been, either in the ACT or elsewhere, refused appointment as a
guardian or manager, or removed from office as a guardian or
manager; or
3. is bankrupt or has executed a personal insolvency agreement (and, if so,
has given particulars to
While the Public Advocate may be appointed as a guardian by ACAT, ACAT must
not appoint her if an individual who is otherwise suitable
has consented to be
The idea that the
Public Advocate is the guardian of last resort is further emphasised in the
Australian Capital Territory by the
obligation imposed on the Public Advocate,
when appointed as a guardian, to endeavour to find a suitable person to be
appointed as
the guardian and if a suitable person is found, to apply to ACAT
for the appointment of that person as
6. 9. 6. Joint, several and replacement
Private persons may be appointed as joint
If one of the
joint guardians dies, becomes incapable, resigns or otherwise ceases to be a
guardian, the remaining guardians continue
and the guardianship order continues
to operate.
There is nothing
to preclude ACAT appointing one or more guardians as
“several” guardians with separate powers and duties.
There is no specific statutory provision for the appointment of replacement
guardians, ACAT has power to do so as it is required to
conduct a review of a
guardianship order where “under the order of appointment” someone
else becomes the replacement
6. 9. 7. Types of guardianship
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
not make a distinction between plenary (full) and limited orders. It sets out
some of the functions of guardians and some of
the matters that are outside the
powers or functions of guardians to make decisions
In addition, as
already noted, ACAT is limited to giving to guardians only those functions that
are no more restrictive of the freedom
of decision and action of the person
under guardianship than is necessary to achieve the purpose of the guardianship
Nevertheless, many of
the orders made by ACAT are plenary in effect on the grounds that it may not be
possible to predict with accuracy
the decision-making functions the guardian may
6. 9. 8. Emergency orders
ACAT can make emergency guardianship orders, lasting no longer than 10 days,
appointing the Public Advocate as a person’s
guardian without holding a
normal hearing if ACAT is satisfied that there are special circumstances of
urgency that make it proper
Examples of situations in
which such orders are made include where substitute consent is required for
medical treatment or where
there is a need for a litigation guardian to be
The question of the degree of proof required in relation to whether the
person the hearing is about first has impaired decision-making
relation to a matter concerning their health or welfare, second whether there is
a need to make a decision about that
matter, and third, if a guardian is not
appointed, the person’s needs will not be met or there interests will be
significantly
adversely affected, has not been resolved in relation to emergency
guardianship orders. There is no indication in the legislation
that it should be
any less than proof on the civil standard of the balance of probabilities. In
any event, as the application is
usually made by the Public Advocate, it is
accompanied by one or more doctor’s reports about the person’s
decision-making
ability and information, albeit often hearsay, about the other
matters that ACAT has to be satisfied about, the information before
ACAT usually
meets the standard of proof required.
6. 9. 9. Removal orders
ACAT may in carefully circumscribed circumstances issue a warrant authorising
the Public Advocate, with the police officers that may
be required, and using
only the force that is necessary and reasonable, to enter that place and remove
First, this part of ACAT’s jurisdiction may be exercised by
ACAT’s Presidential or Deputy President or a Supreme Court
magistrate. Second, they may act only on the written application of the Public
Advocate. This application must be accompanied
by a statement setting out the
information in support of the application. If it is impracticable for the Public
Advocate to apply
in writing, the application may be made by telephone or other
appropriate means. Thirdly, before ACAT, Judge or magistrate may issue
warrant, they must be satisfied that grounds exist for the appointment of a
guardian, and that the person is:
1. because of a physical, mental, psychological or intellectual condition,
likely to suffer serious damage to their physical, mental
or emotional health if
not removed from a particular place, or
2. being unlawfully detained in a particular place.
All information given to ACAT, whether oral or in writing, in support of the
application must be given on oath. A warrant lasting
no more than 14 days may be
issued as a result of the hearing. It must specify:
1. the purpose for which it is issued,
2. the person whose removal it authorises,
3. the place from which that removal is authorised,
4. particular hours during which the removal is authorised or that removal is
authorised at any time of the day or night and
5. the date when it ceases to have
6. 9. 10. Directions, advice or opinion to
guardians by Tribunal
ACAT may give a guardian directions, advice or an opinion about the exercise
of their functions or powers under a guardianship order
if they apply to ACAT
for such directions, advice or
6. 9. 11. The powers and functions of a
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
that the powers (in other jurisdictions called functions) that may be given to a
guardian include the following:
1. to decide where, and with whom, the person under guardianship is to
2. to decide what education or training they are is to receive,
3. to decide whether they are to be allowed to work,
4. if the person under guardianship is to be allowed to work - to decide the
nature of the work, the place of employment and the employer;
5. to give or refuse consent on their behalf for a medical procedure or other
treatment (other than a prescribed medical procedure);
6. to bring or continue legal proceedings for or in the name of the person
under guardianship.
Whether guardians elsewhere in Australia have this last function may be open
to debate because it involves taking actions and making
decisions that have
financial implications for the person under guardianship and consequently could
be seen as matters for an administrator.
The other functions mentioned are
common ones for guardians. However, these matters are dealt with in more detail
in Chapter 7.
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
provides that a guardian may not discipline the person under guardianship nor
may they do any of the following things for the
person under guardianship:
1. vote in an election,
2. make a will or other testamentary instrument,
3. consent to the adoption of a child,
4. give a consent to a marriage, or
5. give a consent required for a prescribed medical procedure for the person
under guardianship.
To carry out any of these functions, other than the last one, may be seen as
too personal a matter for a guardian to do elsewhere
in Australia. Again, these
matters are dealt with in more detail in Chapter 7.
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991
for a set of decision-making principles that require a guardian to exercise
“substituted judgment”, that is
to make decisions for the person
under guardianship according to their wishes wherever those wishes can be worked
out, unless making
the decision in accordance with those wishes is likely to
significantly adversely affect the of the person under guardianship.
Nevertheless,
even if giving effect to those wishes is likely to significantly
adversely affect the interests of the person under guardianship,
the guardian
must give effect to those wishes as far as possible without significantly
adversely affecting the interests of the person
guardianship.
It is the obligation of a guardian, if the wishes of the person under
guardianship cannot be given effect to at all, to promote the
interests of the
person under guardianship when making decisions for them while, at the same
1. interfering with the life and lifestyle of the person under guardianship
to the smallest extent necessary,
2. encouraging them to look after themselves as far as possible, and
3. encouraging them to live in the general community, and take part in
community activities, as far as
Furthermore, before making a decision, the guardian is required to consult
with the each carer of the person under guardianship, unless
to do so would, in
the guardian’s opinion, adversely affect the interests of the person under
guardianship.
6. 9. 12. Reviews of guardianship
When ACAT appoints a guardian, the appointment continues until:
1. the death of the person under
guardianship,
2. ACAT removes the guardian if ACAT is satisfied that the guardian is no
longer suitable, competent, has neglected to perform the
duties and functions of
guardian, or has contravened a particular provision of the
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
3. the guardian resigns in writing addressed to the
Nevertheless, ACAT must hold a review of each guardianship order at least
once every three years to see whether the order should be:
2. revoked on the ground that it is no longer needed, or
3. whether the guardian should be
In there is an on-going need for the guardianship order, and no apparent
dispute about that fact, the review will usually be conducted
papers” without a full hearing.
Reviews may also be held as a result of an application or on ACAT’s own
initiative.
Reviews must also
be held if the guardian dies or a replacement guardian, provided for in the
guardianship order, becomes the
In the past
guardians have been encouraged to ask for a review the guardianship order if
they believe that there is no longer a need
for guardianship. The person under
guardianship or other interested persons can also request a review if they
believe that guardianship
is no longer necessary. For these kinds of reviews,
ACAT will hold a hearing and will revoke the order if satisfied, after applying
the policy of least restrictive alternative underlying the
is no longer needed.
6. 9. 13. Parties to and
procedures for, reviews of guardianship orders
ACAT will conduct either hearing “on the papers” or a full
hearing to review a guardianship order. It is suggested that
those entitled to
receive notice of and attend such hearings are the same as those entitled to
notice of and attendance at the hearing
of an application for a guardianship
6. 10. Northern Territory
6. 10. 1. Who has jurisdiction to appoint
Adult Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
empowers the Local Court of the
Northern Territory to make guardianship
not specifically deal with the parens patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
of the Northern Territory, which the Court inherited
from the Supreme Court of
South Australia when the Northern Territory became a territory of the
Commonwealth of Australia in
the Supreme Court the appeal body for decisions or determinations made by the
Local Court under the
In practice, as
shall be seen below, guardianship orders are made by the Local Court after
receiving a report and recommendations
from a Guardianship Panel. Whether the
Supreme Court has lost its jurisdiction in relation to the guardianship of
incapable adults
is an open question. That court could decide that it retained
that jurisdiction or it could follow the opinion expressed by Morris
Supreme Court of Victoria that because Victoria has comprehensive laws in
relation to guardianship and administration matters
he doubted that the parens
patriae jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Victoria “should play any
current role in the day to
day administration of guardianship
6. 10. 2. Who may apply for a guardianship
Adult Guardianship Act
does not state in
terms that it applies to persons “under a disability” who are aged
18 years and above, the name of
implies this and the term
“adult” is defined in the
to mean a person who is 18
years or above.
limits those who may make an application for a guardianship order to
the following:
1. a near relative of the person the application is about,
2. a person who is providing substantial care and attention to that person,
3. the Public Guardian.
The term “near relative” is defined to mean:
1. a parent of the person;
2. a spouse of the person, including a person who is not legally married to
the first-mentioned person but who lives with that person
on a bona fide
domestic basis;
3. a de facto partner of the person; or
4. another relative of the
In a Territory in which more than a quarter of the population are aboriginal
people, there is an obvious need to have regard to different
kinds of kinship
groups and to the responsibilities recognised in custom that may fall on those
who have certain relationships with
adults with a disability. Consequently, the
term "another relative" is further defined to mean a reference to a person
by blood relationship, marriage, de facto relationship, adoption
or custom to the person with a disability. For this purpose persons
1. by blood relationship if within the fourth degree of relationship;
2. by marriage if one is married to the other or to a person who is connected
by blood relationship to the other;
3. by de facto relationship if one is in a de facto relationship with the
other or with a person who is connected by blood relationship
to the other;
4. by adoption if one has been adopted as the child of the other or as a
child of a person who is within the third degree of relationship
to the other;
5. by custom if the relationship is generally regarded in a community as
being akin to one of blood, marriage or
In addition to these possible applicants, the Local Court may direct any
person to make an application for a guardianship order in
relation to a person
with a disability.
one else may make an application for a “normal” guardianship order,
as shall be seen later, anyone may make
an application for a temporary
guardianship order.
Adult Guardianship Act
provides that
applications are to be made to the Local Court, in practice most applications
are made to the Adult Guardianship Executive
Officer, an office established
and separate from the
The making of an application sets in motion a process by which the Minister,
upon being advised by the Executive Officer that an application
guardianship order has been made, sets up a Guardianship Panel to advise, give
reports and make recommendations to the Local
Court relating to that
application.
The Panel is
required to complete its functions in relation to the application within six
weeks of the application being referred
It should be noted that under the
, the Minister is also the Public
However, as
provided for in the
, the Minister’s functions have been
The function of
appointing the Panel has been delegated to the Executive Officer and the role of
Public Guardian has been delegated
to the holder of the position of Assistant
Secretary, Community Services Division, Department of Health and Community
6. 10. 3. Dealing with an application for a
guardianship order
Although family members and carers are required to make most of the
applications for guardianship orders in the Northern Territory,
they are usually
unfamiliar with what guardianship is about, the processes that have to be
followed in order to obtain an order and
why an order should be sought.
Consequently, the Executive Officer and staff do most of the gathering of
information about each application.
While this is being done, the Executive Officer, as delegate of the Minister,
establishes a new Guardianship Panel to handle the first
part of the process. A
new Panel has to be established for each application. A Panel comprises:
1. the Executive Officer as chair of the Panel;
2. a person who has expertise in the assessment of persons with an
intellectual disability;
3. a member of the community in or near to which the person the application
is about lives.
The role of the Panel is, acting through the Executive Officer, to obtain
either from persons having the appropriate qualifications
or expertise, or from
the members’ own knowledge, such information as will enable the panel to
provide advice or recommendations
to the Local Court, which carries out the
second stage of the process, on the following matters:
1. the extent of the person’s intellectual disability;
2. the nature and extent of any support system which is available to maintain
the person in the community in which they live;
3. the nature and extent of any support system which was used by or provided
to the person;
4. any matters of cultural significance to the person or the community in
which they live;
5. whether or not a guardian should be appointed for the person.
If the Panel recommends the appointment of a guardian, the Panel is required
also to advise on:
1. the suitability of the proposed guardian as guardian of the person the
application is about:
2. any limitations which should be incorporated into the guardianship order;
3. the implications, effects or results that a guardianship order may have on
the person, their family and relatives and the community
in which the person
Each Panel is also required to make or obtain an estimate of the value of the
person’s estate.
Because the role of the Panel is so critical in the process of dealing with
an application for a guardianship order each Panel must
operate in a way that is
procedurally fair, even though the
Adult Guardianship Act
does not specifically provide for it.
This means that the person the hearing is about is entitled to attend the
meetings of the Panel relevant to their application, to
hear what is being said
documents or notes, or access to
information about them, that is provided to the
Panel. They would also be entitled to an interpreter.
As with anyone else carrying out functions under the
, the Panel
must perform its functions so that the least restrictive approach to the
person’s freedom or decision-making and
action-taking as possible in the
circumstances is adopted in its recommendations. The Panel is required to
promote the best interests
of the person and to give effect to his or her wishes
wherever possible.
When it has completed its functions, the Panel must give its report to the
Local Court and the application is set down for hearing.
This is the second part
of the process of making a guardianship order in the Northern Territory. The
Executive Officer is required
Adult Guardianship Act 1988 (NT)
attend all guardianship proceedings in the Court. In particular, the Executive
Officer is required to present to the Court the
advice, reports and
recommendations of the Panel in relation to each application for a guardianship
The application is dealt with by a Magistrate in open court. The Magistrate
conducting the hearing has broad powers, under the
Adult Guardianship Act
, to regulate their own hearings generally or in a particular
case. However this power is subject to the relevant requirements of
the Act and
any direction of the Chief
Magistrate.
The Magistrate hearing the application is not bound by the rules or practice
as to evidence and may inform themselves in such manner
as they think fit,
including admitting evidence that would not be admissible in a court bound by
the strict rules of evidence.
In addition to accepting the advice, report or recommendation of the Panel, the
Magistrate, through the Executive Officer, may require
any officer of a Northern
Territory or Commonwealth Department or Statutory Authority, or a service
provider, the Public Guardian,
a guardian or manager of an estate, including the
Public Trustee, to provide a report on any matter relating to the
proceedings.
Magistrate may interview the person, a near relative, the applicant or any other
person the Magistrate thinks
It is the statutory obligation of the Executive Officer to ensure that the
person the application is about is represented by a lawyer
6. 10. 4. Who may take part in the
A range of people are entitled to make representations to the Court at the
hearing of an application for a guardianship order. They
1. the person the hearing is about or the lawyer representing them;
2. the Executive Officer on behalf of the Guardianship Panel;
3. the applicant;
4. a near relative of the person;
5. any relative or person who has relevant information relating to the care
of the person;
6. the Public Guardian; and
7. any other person the Court considers
Because these people are entitled to make representations, there is an
argument that they are entitled to notice of the hearing. However,
there could
be difficulties in many cases in determining who exactly were the relevant
“near relative” and who is a “person
who has relevant
information that relates to the care of” the person the application is
the person the application is about and
the applicant should be treated as parties, others, including service providers
who may have
very relevant information relating to the care of the person the
application is about, do not need to have that status, except in
exceptional
circumstances.
It appears from the
Adult Guardianship Act
person the application is about is entitled to notice of the hearing in the
Local Court and that that notice must be served
personally on
The person serving the
notice must “to the maximum extent possible” explain the content of
the notice to the person the
application is about “in the language, mode
of communication and terms which the person is most likely to
understand”.
possible such notice must be given both orally and in
This means that the
person serving the notice must be someone who understands what adult
guardianship in the Northern Territory is
person the application is about according to the requirements of the section.
People other than the person the application is about can be served by post
at their usual or last known
6. 10. 5. What has to be proved before an order
can be made?
Before the Local Court may appoint a guardian for a person 18 years of older,
called an “adult guardian” in the Northern
Territory, it must hold a
hearing and be satisfied that the person the application is about is:
1. a person under an intellectual disability; and
2. in need of an adult
The term “intellectual disability” is defined in the
Guardianship Act
to mean “a disability in an adult
resulting from an illness, injury, congenital disorder or organic deterioration
or of unknown
origin and by reason of which the person appears to be unable to
make reasonable judgments or informed decisions relevant to daily
There has been a difference of view between the magistrates of the Local
Court as to whether a mental illness is an intellectual disability
as that term
is defined in the
. In 2004 a magistrate took the view that the
inability to make reasonable judgments or informed decisions relevant to daily
arising from mental illness was not an intellectual disability within the
scope of the definition.
view was consistent with the view of the Chief Magistrate in a 2003
However, in a 2005 case, Magistrate Blokland held that schizophrenia was an
intellectual disability as defined in the
Adult Guardianship Act 1988
. She rejected the restrictive approach taken by her colleagues based on
the distinction between “physical” illness or
injury on the one hand
and “mental” or “psychiatric” illness or injury on the
other because, as the medical
literature shows, there is not always a clear line
between the two and that many so called “mental” conditions have
noted her intention, “unless satisfied to the contrary view in the future,
or there is a successful review of this
decision” to continue to take the
more expansive approach to the term “illness” in the
When exercising its jurisdiction to make a guardianship order, the Court
1. adopt the least restrictive approach to the person’s freedom or
decision-making and action-taking as is possible in the circumstances;
2. promote the best interests of the person; and
3. give effect their wishes wherever
6. 10. 6. Appointing a guardian
The Court may appoint as a guardian a person who is 18 years or above and who
consents to act as guardian. However, before appointing
such a person, the Court
has to be satisfied that that person:
1. will act in the best interests of the person under their guardianship,
2. does not have interests that do or may conflict with the interests of the
person under guardianship, and
3. is a suitable person to be guardian of the person under
guardianship.
When deciding whether the person is suitable to act as guardian of the person
under guardianship, the Court must take into account:
1. the wishes of the person under guardianship,
2. the desirability of preserving their family relationships,
3. the compatibility of the proposed guardian with the manager of the
person’s estate if an order is made placing their estate
under management
under the provisions of the
Aged and Infirm Persons’ Property Act
Adult Guardianship Act
provides that being a near
relative does not, on its own, create a conflict of
This is consistent
with the idea of preserving family relationships. It also ensures that the
perceived rather than real conflicts
which arise from people being close
relatives do not preclude close relatives being appointed as guardians.
The structure of the
Adult Guardianship Act
a legislative preference for a relative to be appointed as the guardian of the
person under guardianship. However, the
does provide for the Public
Guardian to be appointed where a person needs a guardian and no other person
meets the criteria for appointment
as a guardian set out
It should also be noted that in the Northern Territory, the Local Court may,
if it is satisfied at the hearing of an application for
a guardianship order,
that the adult guardian is competent to manage the estate of the person the
application is about, appoint the
adult guardian to be the manager of the estate
subject to such terms and conditions as the Court thinks
6. 10. 7. Joint, several and alternate
provides for the appointment of joint guardians. Private
persons can be appointed as joint guardians provided each of them meets
criteria for being appointed a guardian and the Court considers it appropriate
to appoint them as joint
Those appointed as
joint guardians carry out the powers and duties of a guardian jointly. The
Public Guardian can be appointed as
one of the joint guardians and is regularly
appointed in that capacity.
There is nothing in the
to preclude the Court appointing one or
more guardians as “several” guardians with separate powers and
duties. However,
does not provide for the appointment of
alternate guardians. As there have to be statutory arrangements for when an
alternative guardian
can act as guardian, the better view is that the Court
cannot appoint alternative guardians in the Northern Territory.
6. 10. 8. Types of guardianship
6. 10. 8. 1. Full orders
When the Court makes a full (plenary) order, it confers on the guardian all
the powers and duties of a guardian as the guardian were
a parent and the person
under guardianship their infant
explicitly that these powers include in relation to the person under
guardianship:
1. deciding where they are to live;
2. deciding with whom they are to live;
3. deciding whether they should or should not be permitted to work and if so,
the nature or type of the work, for whom they are to
work and related matters;
4. consenting to health care that is in their best
Full orders may be subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Court
thinks fit.
6. 10. 8. 2. Conditional orders
The Court may also make conditional (limited) orders. These confer on the
guardian one or more of the powers and duties of a
Like full orders,
conditional orders may be subject to such conditions and restrictions as the
Court thinks fit.
6. 10. 8. 3. Temporary orders
The Court can make temporary guardianship orders on the application of any
person, even when a guardianship application has already
been made under the
procedure described above.
the Court considers that the circumstances of the person the application is
unreasonable delay, the
Court may hold a hearing applying the procedures mandated in the
“with such modifications as are necessary in respect of the
If at the hearing the Court is satisfied that the person the application is
is in need of a guardian,
it may appoint the Public Guardian or any other suitable person as guardian for
up to 90 days.
The court may
make either a full or conditional order and make the order subject to such
conditions it considers fit.
If the Court makes a temporary order, it must then conduct another hearing
before the expiry of the temporary order, to determine
whether or not to make a
“normal” guardianship order and, if so, whether it should be a full
or conditional order.
second hearing is conducted after the Executive Officer, as the Minister’s
delegate, has appointed and convened a Panel,
has gathered the necessary
evidence and developed its recommendation to the Court.
Temporary orders are intended to deal with urgent situations and could be
used to deal with situations for which removal orders and
similar orders are
used in the States and the Australian Capital Territory.
6. 10. 9. The powers and functions of a
Some of the more common functions of a guardian are set out above in relation
to full guardianship orders. The powers and functions
of a guardian are dealt
with in detail in Chapter 7.
6. 10. 10. Reviews of guardianship
Adult Guardianship Act
requires the Local Court
to review a guardianship order within two years of making it or at its expiry if
the Court makes it for
a shorter period (a “statutory
The Court is
also empowered to review a guardianship order of its own volition or on the
application of the person under guardianship
or another person on their behalf,
the Public Guardian or any other person (a “requested
The Executive Officer has a number of roles to play in preparing statutory
and requested reviews for hearing. The first of these is
to ensure that notice
of the review is provided at least 14 days before the review is to be held to
the following people:
1. the person under guardianship and the lawyer representing them,
2. the guardian,
3. the Public Guardian, and
4. any administrator or manager of the estate of the person under
guardianship, including the Public
These people could be seen as parties to a guardianship review. The person
under guardianship must be served personally with the notice
of the review and
the contents of it explained to
The second role of the Executive Officer is to ensure that the person under
guardianship is represented by a lawyer at the review.
Such representation is
implied by the Executive Officer’s obligation to ensure that notice of the
review is provided to the
lawyer representing that person at the
A third role for the Executive Officer in relation reviews is to prepare and
provide the Court with such information and reports as
the Court considers
necessary in order to:
1. determine the effectiveness of the guardianship order in providing for the
care and protection of the person under guardianship;
2. consider the need for the order to continue;
3. consider any changes in the circumstances of the person under guardianship
or their guardian; and
4. determine any changes to the existing order which might be
A fourth role arises because, as already noted, in the Northern Territory, a
guardian can be appointed, as guardian, to manage of
the estate of the person
under their guardianship. If they are so appointed, they must, at least once a
year, give an account to
the Executive Officer of their management of the estate
“showing assets and liabilities and receipts and payment” in
relation to the estate.
Executive Officer must report on the management of the estate to the Court at
the review of the guardianship
The final role for the Executive Officer is to attend the Court in all
guardianship proceedings under the
Adult Guardianship Act
, including review
proceedings.
6. 10. 11. Powers of Local Court on
At the completion of the review the Court may, by order, revoke, amend, vary
or continue the guardianship order and may place any
conditions or restrictions
the Court considers necessary on the continued, varied or amended
In addition, in
relation to the management of the estate of the person under guardianship, the
Court may vary or terminate the appointment
of the guardian as manager of the
person’s estate. In fact the Court can do this at any time, subject to
meeting the requirements
of procedural fairness. It need not wait until a review
of the relevant guardianship
6. 11. Case law relevant to all
While the legislative provisions in the different States and Territories of
Australia relating to the criteria that make a person
“in need of a
guardian” and deal with the choice of guardian are differently worded,
they are all similar in effect.
Also the fact situations that give rise to the
need for guardianship orders to be made are replicated throughout the country.
Consequently,
the decisions made in one jurisdiction can be relevant to all the
other Australian jurisdictions and common law jurisdictions elsewhere.
6. 11. 1. Withdrawal of an
application
Because the ethos of the tribunals and other governmental bodies carrying out
functions within the Australian guardianship system
is to interfere as little as
possible in the lives of adults with decision-making disabilities, consistent
with acting in their best
interests, many applications for guardianship orders
are withdrawn administratively without the need to proceed to a hearing. This
because the matters which gave rise to the application have either disappeared
or been resolved. This is often achieved by those
involved realising that there
is an alternative way of dealing with the matter that is less restrictive of the
person with the disability’s
freedom of decision-making or action or by
conciliating out or mediating an outcome that meets the person with the
disability’s
best interests without the need to seek a guardianship order
in relation to them.
In New South Wales the Guardianship Tribunal cannot, unless it considers that
it is not possible, or appropriate, to attempt to do
so, make a decision in
relation to a guardianship application until it has brought, or used its best
endeavours to bring, the parties
to the application to a
settlement.
This process starts with the staff of the Tribunal dealing with the matter and
continues into the hearing where appropriate. Consequently,
a number of
applications are withdrawn at the hearing
Nevertheless there are circumstances in which the applicant may wish to
withdraw the application but the Tribunal does not consider
that it is in the
best interests of the person the subject of the application for this to happen.
The Tribunal has administrative
processes in place to ensure proper
consideration of requests for withdrawal, but sometimes the Tribunal, relying on
its obligation
under the principles of the
Guardianship Act
to give paramount consideration to the welfare and interests of
persons with disabilities, will insist that a matter goes to
In Victoria, VCAT has a discretion under the
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
to give leave to an applicant to
withdraw their application.
In Queensland an application may be withdrawn only with the leave of the
In a 2006 case, VCAT
discussed this discretion when the applicant sought to withdraw the application
on the basis that the concerns
raised in the application when it was made had
been resolved to an extent, in that the person with the disability was currently
ongoing specialist medical treatment, including appropriate and
effective medication, with good
VCAT noted that the
Guardianship and Administration Act
imposed an obligation on it to ensure that the best interests of a
person with a disability were promoted. Accordingly, VCAT would
not grant leave
to withdraw an application if there were outstanding concerns as to whether the
best interests of a person with the
disability would be promoted, or adequately
protected if the leave to withdraw was granted. VCAT decided that in the absence
other evidence of ongoing concerns as to whether the person with the
disability’s best interests were being promoted, or adequately
there appeared to be no reason not to grant leave to withdraw the application.
Consequently, it granted the leave
Guardianship and Administration Act
different approach from that outlined above. It neither establishes nor applies
a best interests test. Instead, it leaves
the matter of withdrawal in the hands
of the applicant by stating in terms:
Nothing in this
will be taken to prohibit a person from withdrawing
an application made by him or her under this Part at any time prior to a final
determination being made on it by the
6. 11. 2. Incapacity issues
6. 11. 2. 1. Does the person have a disability?
In the overwhelming majority of guardianship cases whether initial
applications, reviews or reassessments, the disability of the person
the hearing
is about is not in dispute. A typical example is the Tasmanian case of
who had had a stroke and had hearing and balance difficulties as a
result of Menniere’s Disease and who had moderate to severe
Alzheimer’s Disease.
However, in a few cases the question of whether or not the person the hearing is
of whether the disability
leads on to incapacity.
There is a broad range of disabilities that can lead on to incapacity in
adults, but dementia is the biggest cause by far. Other significant
contributors
are mental illness, intellectual disability and acquired brain injury whether
through accident or drug or alcohol
Anorexia nervosa,
particularly when there is evidence of testing showing that it is the likely
cause of demonstrable cognitive impairment
can lead on to a finding of
incapacity.
In rare cases a person may need a guardian because of their physical or
sensory incapacity rather than their cognitive impairment.
In a 1993 case the
New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal (then called the Guardianship Board)
appointed the Public Guardian as guardian
of a woman who was almost completely
blind and who had spasticity to three of her four limbs and was dependant in
most aspects of
self care. Although she had no major cognitive problems
affecting her comprehension and communication, her physical and sensory
disabilities
restricted her in many life activities to the extent that she
required supervision. The Tribunal gave the Public Guardian the functions
making decisions as to the services the woman needed and of assisting her in
effecting day to day financial transactions and facilitating
her access to her
Nevertheless, there are limits on what is a disability. The overuse or abuse
of alcohol or drugs is not, of itself a disability; however,
an abuser of
alcohol or drugs may at some point develop a disability and incapacity as a
result of the damage they have done to their
brain and their body. The overuse
of drugs and alcohol in a person in their late teens may show their
rebelliousness and be a manifestation
of their immaturity, arrogance and
irresponsibility and may drive their parents to wanting a guardianship order to
control and help
their troubled child, but that is neither the purpose of
guardianship nor is it within the powers of the Australian guardianship
tribunals and courts to make guardianship orders in those
circumstances.
Occasionally an application will be made for an inappropriate purpose, for
example to gain an advantage in Family Court proceedings
for divorce, custody of
children or property settlement. Early in its history a small number of such
applications were made to the
New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal (then
Board). A 1993 case is an example. In that case a husband applied for a guardian
appointed for his wife. The medical evidence before the Tribunal was that
his wife had no cognitive incapacity. The Tribunal held
that the application was
frivolous and vexatious and awarded costs against the
6. 11. 2. 2. Does the disability lead on to incapacity or an inability to
make reasonable judgments?
The legislation in the different States and Territories provides for
different tests for this step in the process of deciding whether
the person the
hearing is about is one for whom a guardianship order could be made or could be
continued. Again, the case of
provides an example of a case in which
the evidence demonstrated declining capacity or increasing cognitive impairment
on the part
of the person the hearing was about. The declining cognitive
capacity of that person resulted in a doctor assessing them as being
make any significant decisions about their future. Other witnesses corroborated
this by reporting that HDH was “disoriented
in time and location,
reflecting increasingly upon his earlier life overseas in preference to any
discussions about recent events”.
This led the Tasmanian Guardianship and
Administration Board to be satisfied that HDH was “unable,
by reason of his disability, to make reasonable judgments in respect of
relating to his person or
circumstances”.
The presumption of capacity always applies which is why the tribunals dealing
with guardianship applications need to have evidence
before them satisfying them
that the person the hearing is about has lost, or never had, capacity before
they may proceed to make
a guardianship order even though “everybody
knows” that the person does not have capacity. The presumption of
has to be rebutted on the civil standard of “balance of
probabilities” by
evidence presented to the tribunal dealing with
the matter.
6. 11. 3. Need for a guardian
6. 11. 3. 1. The common law
It has been long established by the common law that guardians are appointed
for the benefit of those with decision-making disabilities
and not for the
benefit of others.
noted in 1984 that the Supreme Court of New South Wales would not normally
exercise its (guardianship) jurisdiction, “unless
it is at least
desirable, if not necessary, in the interests of the [person the application is
Under the modern guardianship systems set out in legislation where informal
arrangements are working and the incapable person’s
needs are being
appropriately met and their interests adequately protected, there will be no
need to make a guardianship
6. 11. 3. 2. Need for a guardian involves best interests and least
restrictive alternative
As part of the modern guardianship system, the legislation in the different
States and Territories uses different language to describe
what all the relevant
tribunals have to be satisfied about in order to find that the person the
hearing is about is in need of a
guardian. Nevertheless, the tribunals must be
satisfied that making the guardianship order is:
1. the least restrictive alternative for the person, and
2. in their best interests.
A Victorian case decided in 1988 shows this. The case concerned an elderly
woman, Mrs M, who was totally dependent on others for her
every need. She was in
a nursing home. She was incontinent. She was unable to feed herself. She was
incapable of understanding what
was said to her and appeared not to understand
what her eyes could see. She was visited every day by her daughter. Her daughter
her daughter’s husband attended to her every need. They applied for a
guardianship order for Mrs M because although no issues
had arisen in relation
to Mrs M’s care, they were concerned that their lack of legal authority
could cause difficulties in
relation to medical treatment or if Mrs M had to be
moved to another nursing home. The then Guardianship and Administration Board
Victoria held that there was no need for a guardianship order for Mrs M and then
Administrative Appeals Tribunal of Victoria upheld
The President of
that tribunal, Jones, J noted that the applicants were effectively fulfilling
the role of guardians without a guardianship
order and will continue to do so,
In my view, it is the evident intent of the legislature that guardianship
(particularly in its plenary form) should be the last resort
to be utilised
where no other viable, and less restrictive, protective means is available to
meet the needs of the person. This involves
considering whether the person to be
represented is likely to benefit from guardianship as distinct from the person
seeking to be
appointed. Even where guardianship is considered necessary in the
best interests of the person, it is the intention of the legislature
least restrictive form available be
coming to this view Jones J considered some New South Wales cases and noted that
what had to be considered in making an order was
the benefit to the person who
would be the subject of the order, not the benefit to those seeking appointment
as guardians.
Underwood J of the Supreme Court of Tasmania having noted that the relevant
provisions of the Victorian and Tasmanian legislation
were virtually identical
went on to apply Jones J’s
The Guardianship
and Administration Board of Tasmania has also followed this
In applying Jones J’s approach, Underwood J noted that:
The expression "best interests" as enacted in [the Tasmanian Act], does no more
than reinforce the general concept that the paramount
concern is the overall
interest of the patient, just as in Family Law, the best interests of the
children are the paramount concern
in disputes involving their custody, care and
management. The statute makes it clear that insofar as is possible, the
preservation
of the proposed represented person's freedom of action and decision
is in their best interests and, as his Honour Judge Jones said
in M's case, an
order is the last
In the 2001 case,
, the then Guardianship and Administration
Board of Western Australia also followed this approach adopting the views of
to the effect that if the tribunal dealing with the matter reaches the view
that all the needs of the person the hearing was about
could be satisfied by
means less restrictive of their freedom of action and decision than would be the
case if (a guardianship or)
an administration order was made, then such an order
should not be made. Accepting that this construction of the relevant legislation
reflects the philosophy apparent in it namely that control over and restriction
on a person under a disability is to be kept to a
minimum. The Western
Australian Board then went on to note that the need for a guardianship order can
arise from the need to fill
a legal vacuum and appoint someone with legal
authority to make personal decisions on behalf of the person under guardianship
order to resolve issues relating to [their] personal
It is respectfully suggested that de Jersey CJ’s decision in
Williams v Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
is inconsistent with
both the policy and provisions of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
(Qld) and the approach taken to similar provisions elsewhere in
In that case Mr
Williams applied to the then Guardianship and Administration Tribunal of
Queensland to appoint his wife, his son
and himself as joint guardians of his
daughter, K, who was born in 1967 with micro-cephalic spastic quadriplegia. The
Tribunal declined
to make a guardianship order taking the view that there was no
"pressing need for someone to be given specific legal authority to
decision" for K. The Tribunal said that because of her “obvious
vulnerability due to her total dependence on others”,
what she needed was
not a surrogate decision-maker, but “strong and effective advocacy”
which was being provided by her
family and which they could continue to provide.
The Tribunal also stated that her parents were her statutory health attorneys
that it expected that her service-providers would respect her parents’
authority as attorneys and to comply with their decisions
made under that
de Jersey CJ noted that K unable to care for or make most decisions for
herself. She could communicate her wishes only through gestures
and limited
vocalisation. She required 24 hour assistance and supervision so that all of her
daily personal needs could be met. He
also noted the Tribunal’s acceptance
of the parents’ frustrations in dealing with K’s service-providers
“great concern” and “quite considerable
disquiet” they felt over the service-providers’ neglect in
to particular matters and the father's contention that the service-providers
regularly challenged the parents’ views.
He considered it compelling to
accept, as reasonable, the family’s wish to be appointed guardians in
order to ensure that K's
needs and interests were adequately met and protected.
He was doubtful about the Tribunal's expectation that the service-providers
would respect health decisions of the parents because they had a PEG tube
inserted in K contrary to the parent’s known wishes.
He appointed the
family members as K’s joint
This was a situation in which the service-providers should have been expected
to negotiate out a set of arrangements about K with
her family, and for the
family to play a constructive role in those negotiations. Even a person with
capacities as limited as K’s
is entitled to have the advantages of
influences other than those of her family. In reality most decisions to be made
on her behalf
would have to be made by her service-providers as their provision
of 24 hour care continued into the future. When significant decisions
made, K’s family representatives would have to be involved as a matter of
proper practice and they would have to
be informed about her on-going health and
well-being through a process that, in the normal course where good will was
present, would
be easy to settle upon. Her medical and dental treatment would
have to be consented to by her parents as her statutory health attorneys.
fact that they were made her guardians would not, of itself, overcome the
unacceptable failure of her service-providers to seek
their consent before the
procedure to insert the PEG tube was undertaken. The process of seeking
substitute consent from the parents
would have to be worked out in discussion
and the obligations of the service-providers in that situation appreciated.
The need for guardianship would arise in circumstances like these only in the
event of a breakdown of the family, service-provider
relationship where it could
be shown that a guardian was needed in demonstrable interests of the person with
the disability and not
in the interests of
It is also respectfully suggested that it was inappropriate for the
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal of Queensland, in a 2006
appoint the Adult Guardian as guardian for a woman with an intellectual
disability in order to provide someone with formal
legal authority to give
“consent” for her to participate in the community by taking part in
such things as sailing and
horse-riding
activities.
matter to be taken up by the Adult Guardian and others as an issue to ensure
that appropriate arrangements are worked
out for people with decision-making
disabilities to live as normal a life as possible in the community without
having to suffer the
stigma of being placed under guardianship in order to
overcome the anxieties of others.
Each year there are applications to tribunals in Australia in which it is
necessary to make guardianship orders in relation to people
with decision-making
disabilities because the evidence shows they need such orders because they lack
insight into the problems confronting
them and demonstrate this by expressing
views which, if given effect to, would be seriously detrimental to their own
In a 1989 case, Hart J sitting in the Victorian Administrative Appeals
Tribunal noted that there must be cases in which a person’s
capacity to
express their wishes was so impaired as to render those wishes meaningless or
valueless. He also noted that there must
be cases in which the wishes of the
person the hearing was about were impractical or unreal or physically impossible
of performance
or where the person’s wishes were in conflict with their
best wishes “as objectively
ascertained”.
case, involving a young man with Prader-Willi syndrome, Hart J considered that
the young man’s wishes were governed
by his psychosis and noted evidence
that the young man had an extremely poor capacity to comprehend his situation
and comply with
treatment because of his low intelligence, that he could not
comprehend more than the immediate consequences of his wishes, especially
relation to his health, and that he could not make judgments for the long term.
When he added those matters to his psychosis,
Hart J formed the view that it was
not possible to give any real weight to the young man’s
6. 11. 3. 3. The need for a guardian must be either present or proximate
and neither premature nor “just in case”
Sometimes the making of a guardianship order can be seen to be premature;
although it is not unusual for the making of an application
for such an order to
focus the minds of all those involved, including the person the subject of the
application, on the facts that
there are decision-making problems about personal
matters that have to be addressed. An example of this is the South Australian
in which a person’s case manager made an application for a
guardianship order in relation to
Mrs B was 71 years of
age who lived at home with her husband. She had a “likely” diagnosis
of multi-infarct dementia
and also had diabetes mellitus, chronic airflow
limitation and depression. For some years, domiciliary services have been
to her but these were not always accepted. Personal and home hygiene had
been ongoing problems for Mrs B who had had two recent hospital
admissions.
The applicant’s view was that a trial of increased services should
occur before decisions about the placement of Mrs B in an
aged care facility
could be made. If the community services are able to maintain Mrs B at home then
residential care may be able
to be avoided. The Board made a guardianship order
in relation to Mrs B.
At the appeal to the District Court of South Australia, the evidence showed
that since the order was made, Mrs B had accepted an increase
in services
provided in her own home which her case manager saw as a good outcome. The Court
quashed the limited guardianship order
[S]ince the hearing before the Board, domiciliary services have been increased
significantly without the involvement of the guardian.
It seems to us, albeit
with the benefit of hindsight, that the order was premature, and that the
application should have been adjourned
pending the outcome of the trial of
increased services envisaged by (the case manager). If there is any significant
change in circumstances,
such as in the availability of services or (Mrs
B’s) acceptance of them, necessitating an admission to a nursing home or
making of other decisions in her interests but against her wishes, a further
application to the Board can be
are other cases in which the person may, on an objective view, meet all the
criteria for needing to have a guardian appointed
for them, but be so opposed to
the appointment of a guardian and determined to maintain their own independent
lifestyle that the
making of the order would be, at best futile, but more likely
adverse to their best interests because of the effect on them of the
that they are the subject of a guardianship
It has been the practice of the Guardianship Tribunal in New South Wales to
require that the evidence before it at a hearing be sufficient
to satisfy it
that the person the hearing is about needs a guardian either now or in the
immediate future before it will make a guardianship
order. This is consistent
with the approach taken by the Supreme Court of New South Wales and
In a 1994 case in
Western Australia, the Public Guardian, as the Public Advocate was then known,
“conjectured” whether
a guardianship order could be made for a
situation “if and when the need arises” and for it to “lie on
until it was needed”. However, the then Guardianship and
Administration Board found that there was no evidence of a present
guardian and dismissed the
application
It is suggested
that the view that the Australian tribunals have no jurisdiction to make
“just in case” orders is based
on both the statutory requirement
that orders are not to be made unless the need for them is demonstrated to the
level of satisfaction
required by the tribunal hearing the application and the
established common law relating to guardianship and administration that
are not to be made unless there is a real necessity to do
6. 11. 3. 4. On review, the need for a guardian must be continuing
Just because a person has had a guardian appointed for them at one time, and
even if guardianship has continued for some time, it
does not follow that that
person should have a guardian for the rest of their lives, even if they are born
with a whole of life intellectual
disability. The circumstances of their lives
will vary over time. Sometimes an order may be needed. At other times there will
no need for an order.
Guardianship orders may only be made where the person with a disability needs
them. They are not to be made for the benefit of those
seeking to be appointed
or re-appointed guardians.
6. 11. 3. 5. Guardianship sometimes needed to help a person to become more
self reliant and to live, as far as possible, a normal
life in the community
One of the paradoxes with guardianship is that while it is intended to be a
last resort when no less restrictive alternative is available,
it is sometimes
becomes a necessary element in a process designed to give effect to the wishes
of the person with the disability
and to help them to become, as far as
possible, self reliant in matters relating to their personal, domestic and
financial affairs
and to live as normal a life as possible in the
An example of this
is the case of MW who, at the time of the guardianship application in relation
to her was 20 years old. She had
a borderline or mild intellectual disability
and another disability that compromised her physical health and her
The Guardianship and
Administration Board of Tasmania was satisfied that she did have relevant
disabilities and that while the level
of intellectual disability would not
normally be sufficient for the purposes of a guardianship application, the
complexity of MW’s
other health conditions had a cumulative effect on her
capacity to make certain lifestyle and health care decisions and made her
incapable of undertaking certain complex decisions required for the adequate
long-term management of her health
conditions.
The Tasmanian
Board accepted the view that MW’s parents were overly protective and
restrictive in their care of her and that
in their efforts to preserve the
support available to her from the family, they had failed to fully recognize her
developmental needs
for independence and broader social
interaction.
The Board considered it too restrictive to appoint MW’s parents as her
guardian. It appointed the Public Guardian as MW’s
limited guardian for a
period of 13 months to ensure that policies, practices and competent staff were
available to support her independent
living and health care and further that an
appropriate schedule of medical treatment and review was established to monitor
her well-being.
6. 11. 3. 6. Need for a guardian because of disputes involving family,
service providers and others
Guardianship orders are sometimes needed where there is a family dispute
should live, what
medical treatment they should receive or some other significant, personal
decision which cannot be resolved by
discussion and conciliation. These disputes
can arise from disagreements between adult siblings, between different
generations in
the same family or when there are differences of view within a
blended family or within an extended family and local
Sometimes family
disputes about guardianship are
irresolveable.
A study of 50 cases of family and systems conflict in cases of dementia
presented to the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal, found
that conflict most
frequently occurred between adult children of the person with dementia. In ten
of the twelve cases of multiple
siblings, several siblings were in alliance
against one “black sheep” carer sibling. In seven cases of sibling
the “black sheep” carer was significantly troubled with
mental illness or burden including: schizophrenia or severe paranoid
personality
disorder (n= 2); substance abuse disorder (n=2); major depression (n=1) or
“overburdened” or “unable
to cope with caring” (n=2. One
carer reluctantly conceded that he needed help “before I do
something”. In all
seven cases the carer was male, unemployed, and, save
for one case, single and living with the person with dementia.
In 26% of cases there was some involvement of service providers in the
conflict and in 12% of cases the conflict was solely between
service providers
and the family. In the latter cases the conflict was based on lack of
communication and judgemental stances adopted
by service providers (e.g.
regarding family’s misuse of finances or the family’s neglect of
their ageing relative).
Clearly, there are situations where differences between family members and
service-providers cannot be resolved by discussion and
conciliation,
necessitating the making of a guardianship order in those circumstances. Often
enough, but not always, in these cases
it is also necessary for the tribunal
dealing with the matter to appoint the Public Advocate or Public Guardian as
guardian and not
An example of an inter-generational disagreement involving a daughter and a
husband from a recent marriage is the case of an 88-year-old
woman whose lack of
capacity was not in doubt. She had been born in South Australia and had
lived there all her life. She had married
her husband in 2000 and had a daughter
who lived in Western Australia. Her daughter brought her to
Western Australia in late 2004
because she felt that her mother, whose
husband did not live with her, was living in a state of neglect and needed care.
In March 2005, WASAT appointed the Public Advocate as the elderly
woman's guardian to decide where and with whom she should live.
Advocate decided that the woman needed care in an aged care facility in
South Australia which was her home and was where
her husband lived.
The daughter disagreed with the decision and sought review of the order
appointing the Public Advocate as guardian. The daughter maintained
husband was not willing or able to provide informal care and advocacy for his
wife and that, although she required care
in an aged care facility, she would be
better cared for in Western Australia. The husband disagreed with the
daughter and wanted
his wife to return to South Australia so that he could
visit her. His wife's consistently expressed the wish to live in
South Australia
and be near to her
The disagreement between the husband and the daughter about where the elderly
woman should live, and the evidence that this difference
of opinion was not open
to resolution by informal meant that she had a continuing need for a
The Tribunal decided to reappoint the Public Advocate as the elderly woman's
guardian, as the suitable person to make the accommodation
decision. The
Tribunal felt that the daughter could not objectively consider her mother's
needs as they related to her relationship
Nevertheless, not all cases in which opposing guardianship applications are
made by family members in apparent conflict result in
the making of guardianship
orders. Some families will agree to disagree on some issues and still have
factions but yet be able to
agree on issues involving the family member the
application was about in such a way that it becomes clear to all that a
guardianship
order was not
Sometimes a spouse or other life partner has difficulty coming to terms with
the fact that their spouse has dementia and to ensure
their safety. In the 2009
case, 86 year old demented Mrs WBN’s had been admitted to an aged care
Her husband, who
had not been able to look after her, wanted to remove her from the facility. One
of their adult children, supported
by the others, applied to the NSW
Guardianship Tribunal for a guardianship order. The Tribunal made the order, and
after consideration,
appointed the applicant as guardian with function of
deciding accommodation issues for her mother and with authority to prevent
from the aged care facility by Mrs WBN unless there were appropriate
safety mechanisms in place.
6. 11. 3. 7. Need for a guardian where there is no person
responsible/statutory health attorney or other substitute decision-maker
medical treatment or they are incapable or not acting appropriately
Sometimes the need to appoint a guardian arises because there is no family
member or anyone else in the life of the person with a
decision-making
disability who may act as their automatic substitute decision-maker for medical
and dental treatment. In the Western
Australian case of
mother, while interested and concerned in the care of her daughter, was unable
to understanding the nature of the treatment
provided to her daughter and so
she, by reason of her own disability, was unable to give a valid consent to her
treatment. Furthermore, there were no other known relatives who
qualified as automatic substitute decision-maker for medical and
treatment. WASAT appointed the Public Advocate as limited guardian to decide
whether or not to consent to the medical treatment
and health care proposed for
A Queensland example of the need to appoint a guardian in these circumstances
arose because the statutory health attorney (“person
responsible” in
New South Wales , Victoria and Tasmania) was not always making the most
appropriate decisions for his mother.
The then Queensland Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal was concerned that the statutory health attorney’s
health care
decisions were not always reasonable and appropriate in the
circumstances and that the statutory health attorney did not take or
even listen
to advice and had rigid and inflexible views. He did not consult or keep the
family informed of health care issues in
relation to his mother. His actions
were clearly in breach of the General Principles and the Health Care Principle
contained in
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
In the 2009 case
, Mr QAX was unable to make decisions in relation
to medical intervention and treatment due to his long term mental
He had recurrent
stricturing of his oesophagus. Consent to needed treatment was regularly given
by the Mental Health Review Tribunal
under the NSW mental health legislation
which did not provide for advance care planning. The evidence before the NSW
Guardianship
Tribunal was that Mr QAX needed a guardianship order so that a
guardian could deal with advanced care planning covering issues including
resuscitation, intubation, and life support, issues which had already arisen.
The Tribunal was satisfied that there was a need to
appoint a guardian for Mr
QAX on this basis. In the absence of an alternative, the Tribunal appointed the
Public Guardian as guardian
for one year.
6. 11. 3. 8. Need for a guardian and duty of care and the principle of
Many people with decision-making disabilities arising from intellectual
disability, acquired brain injury or dementia, but less so
from psychiatric
condition or other sources of disability need permanent care and support,
including assistance with activities of
daily living and supervision and
assistance to avoid injury from falls or through the inability to protect
themselves from even apparent
Because of their incapacities, some of these people need to be closely
supervised and directed to avoid dangers that are obvious to
others. Others of
them need to be restrained when activities of daily living, that they are
incapable of carrying out themselves,
need to be carried out on them in order to
promote their health and well-being. Yet others need to be protected from
falling out
of bed or from falling of chairs when they are out of bed. Some need
to be dressed. All these people need assistance every day so
that they can take
part in the activities or the life of the institution in which they are living
whether it be an aged care facility,
group home or large residential
institution.
Beginning in the late 20
century genuine attempts have been made
to give people with decision-making disabilities greater access to and contact
with the wider
community. The implementation of this policy has raised a number
of problems for those providing that access or those residential
services. One of the issues that arises for these carers and service-providers
is how far can they go in the exercise of
their duty of care and how far does
the principle of necessity extend? These concepts clash with well-established
aspect of the common
law, namely trespass to the person in the form of battery
and false imprisonment.
This clash raises the question of whether certain ways of dealing with people
whose disabilities render them unable to look after
themselves are illegal
unless approved by an appointed guardian authorised to consent to such
activities or whether at least some
of the more personally intrusive ways of
providing protection, support and services to them can be carried out under a
duty of care
or by application of the principle of necessity without the need
for a guardian to be appointed.
Determining whether a guardian is necessary in certain situations has been a
matter that guardianship tribunals in Australia have
had to wrestle with. While
it has been difficult to identify with clarity the components of those
situations that require a guardian
to agree to and those that don’t, some
examples can help by showing some of the decisions that have been made and
As pointed out by Lord Goff of Chieveley in the House of Lords case
, a long established and fundamental principle is that that every person's
body is inviolate, meaning that everybody is protected
not only against physical
injury but against any form of physical
molestation.
However, not all
touching is unlawful. Some is acceptable as part of the ordinary conduct of
daily life. Other touching is not unlawful
if there is a lawful excuse for it
Also, Lord Goff
has drawn out and developed the common law a principle of necessity which, he
said “may justify action which
would otherwise be
discussing this principle he went on to say:
Furthermore, in the case of a mentally disordered person, as in the case of a
stroke victim, the permanent state of affairs calls
for a wider range of care
than may be requisite in an emergency which arises from accidental injury. When
the state of affairs is
permanent, or semi-permanent, action properly taken to
preserve the life, health or well-being of the assisted person may well
such measures as surgical operation or substantial medical treatment
and may extend to include such humdrum matters as routine medical
treatment, even simple care such as dressing and undressing and putting to
case, the then Guardianship and Administration Board of Western Australia noted
that the High Court did not accept the “extended
necessity” as appropriate to apply in relation to the issue of consent to
the sterilisation of a child and considered
it unsafe to rely on
as stating the common law in relation to the application of
restraints.
There is little
doubt that the extended doctrine of necessity is inappropriate to apply in
relation to sterilisation treatment and
in cases where significant physical or
chemical restraints are being considered for use over periods of indeterminate
length. However,
this does not mean that the principle of necessity is not
applicable to other situations involving the day to day provision of services
and support to people with decision-making disability who need supervision and
protection well beyond that required by others in
order to lead their lives
safely and healthily.
In a 1998 case in the House of Lords in England Lord Goff noted
century cases which provide authority for
the proposition that the common law permitted the detention of those who were a
or potential danger, to themselves or others, in so far as that was
shown to be necessary.
In a 2004 case Munby J of the Family Division of the High Court of Justice in
England stated that the doctrine of necessity was capable
of operating not
merely in relation to questions concerning a patient's surgical, medical or
nursing treatment but also in relation
to questions of where they should live,
who they should see, and the circumstances of such
In Australia a guardianship order is required if a substitute decision-maker
needs to make decisions about who an incapable person
has contact with and under
what conditions. However, the doctrine could apply when carers have to act
quickly to protect the incapable
person they are caring for from inappropriate
appropriate orders
from a guardianship tribunal. An incapable person’s
accommodation can be changed without the need for a guardian to be appointed
make the decision, provided the incapable person does not object and the change
of accommodation is made in their interests or
not adverse to their interests.
Where there is a guardian authorised to make accommodation decisions, then they
make that decision
having received the advice of others.
In a 1996 case, the New South Wales Guardianship Tribunal dealt with a
question of whether a guardian needed to be given a function
of approving (or
refusing to approve) the use restraint for an elderly woman with
Alzheimer’s Disease and myoclonic jerking
whose cognitive functioning was
so poor that she could not use a walking frame or follow basic instructions when
being assisted to
form of restraint proposed was to put her in a comfortable armchair with a table
in front of it for limited time only during
The Tribunal considered that it was appropriate to extend the principle of
necessity to situations like this. The Tribunal said:
Necessity, and common sense, require that appropriate measures be taken to
protect (the elderly woman), measures which may not be
appropriate for other
people with cognitive impairment and which would be singularly inappropriate,
and, indeed, illegal if applied
to people who do not endure her level of
impairment.
6. 11. 4. The views of the person the
application or review is about
The legislation of all the States and Territories requires the relevant
tribunals, where possible, to obtain and consider the views
of the person the
hearing is about prior to appointing a guardian (or renewing a guardianship
order). However, the legislation divides
into two groups on the issue of the
impact of the views of the person the hearing is about on capacity of the
relevant tribunal to
appoint a guardian (or renew a guardianship order). The
first group contains the legislation that requires the relevant tribunal
regard to, but not be bound by the views of the person the hearing is about. In
New South Wales, the Guardianship Tribunal
has to have regard to, but is not
bound by, the views of the person the hearing is about, if they have or are
capable of communicating
any, before it makes (or renews) a guardianship
The South Australian
Guardianship Board must consider not only the discoverable wishes of the person
the hearing is about when the
person was not mentally incapacitated but also
their current wishes unless it is not possible or reasonably practicable to do
In Western Australia
WACAT is required, as far as possible, to gather the current views of the person
the hearing is about or ascertain
them from the person’s previous
The second group contains the legislation that requires the relevant tribunal
to consider making a substituted judgment based on the
wishes of the person the
hearing is about. The effect of the Victorian
is that it is the
intention of Parliament that VCAT gives effect to the wishes of the person the
hearing is about wherever possible
when making (or reviewing or reassessing) a
guardianship order.
places the same obligation on the Guardianship and
Administration Board as does the Northern Territory
in relation to
both the Guardianship Panels and the Local
In Queensland,
although the term “substituted” judgment is used, QCAT applies the
general principles of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
which provide for substituted judgment in the sense that QCAT takes
into account the discoverable views and wishes of the person
the hearing is
In the Australian Capital Territory, the decision-making principles in the
legislation appear to place the wishes of the person the
hearing is about above
the promotion of their interests. Their wishes must be given effect to unless to
do so would be likely to
significantly adversely affect their
The legislative provisions that impose these obligations on tribunals impose
the same obligations on guardians appointed by
The problem
facing both tribunals and guardians of having to give effect to both the views
and wishes and the best interests of
those who may need a guardian appointed for
them or are already under guardianship are discussed further in Chapter 7. 3.
6. 11. 5. Who should be guardian – a
private person or a government official (Public/Adult
Guardian/Advocate)?
The State and Territory legislation continues the common law policy of
favouring the appointment of a family member, or at least a
private person, as
the guardian where this is appropriate. However, in each State and Territory
there is a public official whether
called a Public Advocate, Public Guardian or
Adult Guardian, available for appointment as guardian if there is no private
available or no private person suitable for appointment. Sometimes there
are good reasons why family members should not be appointed.
In other cases it
is clear that family members lack the capacity to act as guardians, or do not
wished to be appointed as guardians.
One of the difficulties facing the tribunal or court which is satisfied by
the evidence that either a particular family member, or
any family member,
should not be appointed guardian in a particular case, is to explain why
sufficiently for its decision to be credible,
but not in such detail or with
such vigour as to make it either inappropriately difficult or impossible for the
family relationships
of the person under guardianship to be repaired or restored
where it is in that person’s interests that their family relationships
capable of repair or
restoration.
In this context it is important to recall the advice of the High Court of
Australia gave to the Family Court in
A tribunal or court
deciding who to appoint as guardian should not divert itself from its statutory
role in order to come to a definite
conclusion about the allegation made in
relation to the person seeking to be appointed guardian. In some cases it will
that the allegation is well founded. In others it will be apparent
that the allegation is groundless. However, in the nature of things,
be very many cases in which the tribunal or court will not be able confidently
to make a finding either way. In these
circumstances it is the role of the
tribunal or court to assess the risks involved in appointing the family member
as guardian, whether
or not the appointment is in the best interests of the
person to be placed under guardianship, and to apply the other statutory
required to be considered before a guardian is
Having considered
these matters, the tribunal or court may then decide who to appoint as guardian.
In a 2003 case in New South Wales, Windeyer J discussed the relevant
legislative provisions and the common law as follows:
There would be a considerable number of cases where no person would be available
to be appointed. An example might be a disabled,
destitute person with no friend
or relative. Such a case might lead inevitably to the appointment of the Public
Guardian. Nevertheless
appointment of the Public Guardian should not, I think,
be restricted to such cases. I consider that the proper meaning to be given
the section is to read it as saying that the Public Guardian should not be
appointed in circumstances in which an order can properly
be made in favour of
another person. That requires not only that the person be willing, reliable and
responsible, but that the appointment
will result in the policy considerations
and principles set forth in the
being given effect.
While s 15(3) [of the
Guardianship Act
must be interpreted within the context of the
and in accordance with
its principles, it must be given effect within those bounds. In Lunacy and
Mental Health proceedings it has
always been the policy to appoint a member of
the family as committee or guardian of the person if that were possible. The
is continued under the
which created the office of Public
Guardian. Just because a decision is required about accommodation and there is
some dispute about
this does not mean that a close family member holding one
view ought not to be appointed. On the other hand if the Tribunal considered
evidence established that such a decision was likely not to be in the interests
of the person under guardianship then the person
who would make such a decision
would not be a person who could properly be appointed under s 15(3). In other
words what is described
as a “contest” is not sufficient reason not
to appoint a person otherwise appropriate as guardian. This may mean that
Tribunal has to consider the evidence in some little
In some cases the question of whether a private, usually family member,
guardian should be appointed or the government official, who
has the role of
acting as guardian when appointed, can sometimes be a marginal one, while at
other times it can be quite clear that
even though a particular, close family
member may wish to be appointed guardian, it is not in the best interests of the
person under
guardianship for them to be appointed.
Some examples of these situations are set out below. However, more generally,
when dealing with an initial application for a guardianship
order but also when
reviewing such an order, dissension in the family, provided that the conflict
goes beyond “typical family
differences”, can be a reason why the
tribunal or court dealing with the matter may appoint a public official as
guardian over
a relative in the best interests of the person the hearing is
remains the abiding rule and it is not necessary for the tribunal or court
dealing with the matter to expressly find the relative
proposed as guardian
deficient in their ability to act as guardian before moving to appoint a public
First, the difficult choice
: RL was born with an intellectual
disability in 1950 in Victoria. While she lived in institutions for people with
an intellectual
disability, her family was in constant contact with her and the
two institutions in which she lived. When her father was becoming
frail in the
early 1990s, he asked the applicant, who was RL’s sister, to take over
RL's care. Nevertheless, in 1995 the Public
Advocate was appointed RL’s
limited guardian (health care) with the obligation to consult with the father
and the applicant
on matters of importance.
However, in the same year, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal appointed the
applicant as RL’s limited guardian for health
care and accommodation. A
similar order was made by the VCAT’s predecessor tribunal in 1996 and in
1998 VCAT appointed the
applicant as plenary guardian. She had already been
appointed administrator. In 2000 the Office of the Public Advocate and the
Hospital requested a review of the 1998 guardianship order. It was
revoked on review, but VCAT continued the administration order.
In 2001 the
applicant sought to be re-appointed as RL’s plenary guardian.
The Department of Human Services took the view that a plenary guardian was
not required but if one was to be appointed, it should
not be the applicant. The
Department expressed reservations about the suitability of the applicant to act
as her sister’s guardian.
On the other hand the applicant pointed out that a range of guardianship type
decisions were now being made on an ad hoc basis by
a range of people, including
those who have only limited contact with RL. In the applicant’s view it
was highly likely that
significant health care and other decisions would arise
in the future. She also argued that as RL's elder sister, the one who had
significantly involved in her care right throughout her life, the one who had
training and experience as a health care professional
herself and the person who
was the administrator of RL's affairs, she was the logical person to be
appointed as RL’s guardian.
She also pointed to the close bond between RL
and herself.
The Vice President of VCAT who heard the matter, Duggan J, noted that there
was a significant body of material within the file to
confirm the
applicant’s claims. This included a letter from the sisters’ late
father noting his own failing health and
expressing a wish that the applicant be
appointed the guardian of his daughter, RL. Their brother E supported the
application.
Duggan J also noted that many major decisions had had to be made in the
recent past about RL’s health and other circumstances
and that it was
highly likely that similar issues requiring major decisions would arise in the
near future. He also noted that RL
would never be able to make those decisions
herself and that someone would have to make them on her behalf. Because
effectively she
had none, the appointment of a plenary guardian would not
restrict RL's freedom of decision and
Duggan J was willing to appoint a plenary guardian. The question was who
should that be? The applicant’s case for being appointed
guardian was
opposed by the Department of Human Services which pointed out that its efforts
to work in a collaborative fashion with
the applicant had been unsuccessful in
the past. They believed that the applicant refused to acknowledge the legitimate
role of the
Department in the care of RL. For example, the applicant has refused
to allow Departmental staff to be present when RL attended medical
appointments.
Duggan J noted that the applicant was a person who had strong views about the
proprietary or appropriateness of the actions of others.
VCAT’s file
contains many examples of the strongly held views that the applicant had
expressed. Duggan J also expressed serious
doubts about the wisdom of
proceedings the applicant, as RL’s administrator, proposed to take against
one of RL’s former
medical practitioners. He considered this to be
motivated more by a desire to punish the practitioner than an attempt to
Nevertheless,
he had no doubt that the applicant had nothing but the best interests of RL at
heart and went on to appoint her as
her sister’s plenary guardian,
The fact remains however that the applicant emerges as a woman who over a long
period of time has been devoted to her sister's wellbeing.
There is mild
criticism of a unilateral decision to reduce the medication that RL was taking
on one occasion. Apart from that incident
I am not aware of any suggestion that
any act carried out by the applicant was other in the best interests of her
sister. In respect
of that incident the applicant provides a convincing
explanation as to why she took the decision that she did. It is relevant to
point out that over the considerable period now that the applicant has been the
administrator of RL's affairs, her administration
has been described as
"exemplary"
the case of the family member who wanted to be appointed guardian “no
matter what”
: AS was a 79 year old woman with dementia who lived in an
aged care facility in Victoria. The evidence was clear that, because of
dementia, she was unable to make judgments concerning her person and
circumstances, particularly her accommodation, and that
she needed a guardian.
Her son JS wanted to bring her home and sought habeas corpus in the Supreme
Court of Victoria, rather than
an order appointing a guardian for his mother in
VCAT. Another person made a guardianship application to
On the question of who should be guardian VCAT held that JS could not be
appointed because VCAT could not be satisfied that he would
mother’s best interests. His application to the Supreme Court was
unnecessary and potentially disruptive and distressing
He had had limited
current capacity and her care needs.
Also, he essentially discounted expert
medical and other opinion about his mother’s capacity and her need for
high level care.
VCAT was concerned that he would contemplate his mother’s
return home despite the weight of evidence indicating that this would
contrary to her best
VCAT was also concerned that there was a conflict between his interests and
those of his mother. He resided in her home and that he
was in dispute with the
administrator and was “clearly incompatible” with the
administrator.
reasons VCAT could not appoint JS and appointed the Public Advocate AS’s
At times there will be conflict between family members as to who should be
guardian and there will be competing applications for guardianship
Sometimes those
competing applications will be for different private guardians to be appointed.
Sometimes one part of the family
will want a private guardian while another side
of the family, or service-provider applicants, will want the Public Advocate or
Guardian appointed. Often these applications will result in the public
official being appointed, but not
The tribunal hearing
the application must still take evidence on the issue and consider whether
despite the opposition to the appointment,
a particular private guardian should
be appointed in the best interests of the person the applications are about.
Sometimes a person appointed as guardian will be seen by service providers as
overzealous and that a public official should be appointed
as guardian. The
Supreme Court of Queensland dealt with such a case in 2003 and in it Chesterman
J noted on the issue of the then
Queensland Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal appointing a private guardian in place of the Adult Guardian:
The Tribunal may have overstated the point a little by saying that the
appointment of the Adult Guardian is a matter of `last resort
when there is no
other appropriate person for appointment', but the notion underlying that
expression is, in my opinion, correct.
The Adult Guardian is a functionary of
the State which, very properly, endeavours to protect the helpless and
defenceless. But where
such a person has friends or family who are able and
willing to provide the requisite support and assistance it is, in my view,
that they be allowed to do so rather than be supplanted by a
bureaucrat, no matter how well intentioned. To take any other view is
the expression of what is good in human nature. This is all the Tribunal was
saying and I agree with it. The Tribunal made
the point well. It said that Mr
Hunt had demonstrated a degree of affection and devotion for Ms Frame which made
him a passionate
advocate for her well being. The alternative was to appoint the
appellant [the Adult Guardian] who would do no more than perform
his statutory
function for one more
there is no family member or anyone else involved in the life the incapable
person available for appointment as a private guardian,
it is appropriate to
appoint the person who has the role of statutory guardian, for example the
Public Guardian in New South Wales,
the Public Advocate in Victoria and the
Adult Guardian in Queensland. It is not appropriate to consider appointing a
paid carer as
they will have a conflict of interest that precludes them from
appointment.
While private guardians must be, in the opinion of the tribunal appointing
them, both willing and able to act as guardian, they also
have to meet other
suitability criteria. Nevertheless, as Chesterman J pointed out, the only
criticism of Mr Hunt was that his zeal
has been difficult for the managers of
the nursing home to accommodate. His zeal had prolonged the life of the person
under guardianship
and made her more comfortable. Chesterman J considered it
“unreasonable to criticise Mr Hunt because of his unceasing endeavours
alleviate the suffering of the woman he has loved for many years” and went
on to state that it would be:
[A] repression of unselfishness and [to] impose a penalty on loyalty if it were
considered inappropriate to appoint Mr Hunt as Ms
Frame's guardian because he
has tried too hard to protect her.
It should not be overlooked that his complaints about the Ms Frame’s care
were vindicated and that the nursing home sought
to have the [Adult Guardian]
made guardian shortly after the arbitrator's
determination.
6. 11. 6. Reviews and reassessments of
guardianship
The all the States, except South Australia, and in the Northern Territory,
but not the Australian Capital Territory, the guardianship
tribunals are
empowered to carry out periodic reviews of the guardianship orders they make.
However, as noted by VCAT, but relevant
to the other tribunals around Australia,
the role of the tribunal when reviewing or reassessing guardianship orders is
not to review
the decisions of the guardians or to decide what decisions a
guardian should make in the best interests of the person under guardianship.
Nevertheless, when re-appointing a guardian, the tribunal must be satisfied that
the guardian will act in the best interests of the
person. Consequently, the
guardian’s previous decisions may sometimes be relevant to the question of
whether the tribunal can
be satisfied that that guardian will, in the future
act, in the best interests of the person.
VCAT suggested that relevant questions about previous decisions would
1. whether the guardian complied with the guardianship legislation;
2. whether the guardian obtained sufficient relevant information to make a
3. whether the guardian was reasonable in seeking out or relying on
particular kinds of expertise;
4. whether the guardian gave appropriate weight to the information available;
5. whether the guardian’s decisions were of benefit to the person under
guardianship; and
6. above all whether the guardian kept an eye on the ball by putting the best
interests of the represented person ahead of other considerations.
However, VCAT also noted that in many (reviews or) reassessments these
matters would not be in doubt or
contention.
6. 11. 7. Requested reviews or
reassessments
Whether specifically empowered to do so or not, the guardianship tribunals in
all the States and Territories may review the guardianship
orders they have made
if requested to do so by an appropriate person. The grounds for requesting a
review include at least the following:
1. the order is not working for the person under guardianship,
2. circumstances have changed that affect the order,
3. there is new information that was not available at the time of the hearing
at which the order was made,
4. there is no further need for a guardian, or
5. a review is needed because the guardian is unable to continue, or has
become incapacitated or has died and there is no joint or
alternative guardian
(or, in Queensland, successive guardian).
A party who is unhappy about a decision of a guardianship tribunal to make,
renew or continue a guardianship order cannot request
a review on that basis.
Their proper course is to lodge an appeal against the decision of the tribunal.
However, they will be able
to raise their concerns when the periodic review of
that order is being conducted, provided those concerns are relevant to the
circumstances
of the person under guardianship prevailing at the time of the
6. 12. The role of the health care professional
When tribunals and the courts are considering whether or not to make a
guardianship order, they rely upon the opinions of health care
professionals as
information central to the decision they have to
Although what must be
proven in order to appoint a guardian varies across the States and Territories,
most tribunals and courts rely
upon evidence of disability and incapacity to
make an order. Additionally, in New South Wales and Tasmania at least, the
legislation
requires evidence of the impact of the disorder on activities of
everyday life. Also, in each State or Territory the tribunal determining
matter must also, either as required by the legislation or the common law,
consider whether there is a need to make an order.
Depending on their role and involvement with the patient, health care
professionals are often in a position to provide evidence not
only about the
basic elements of disability and incapacity but also about the risks to the
person the hearing is about and their
need for a guardian. Clearly however, when
providing opinions for determinations about guardianship matters, health care
professionals
must be guided by the relevant legislation defining the criteria
for appointment of guardians in their respective States or Territories.
It is not a breach of their professional responsibility to keep client
information confidential, or of privacy legislation, for health
professionals to provide information to guardianship tribunals about the person
who is the subject of the application.
6. 12. 1. Ingredients of assessment
6. 12. 1. 1. Disability
In making assessments for the purpose of guardianship applications, health
care professionals should address the nature of the disability
the person the
subject of the application has. This might include a physical, mental,
psychological or intellectual condition and,
in New South Wales, advanced
In the Northern
Territory, the relevant disorders are put under an umbrella term of
“intellectual disability”, which
in turn is defined as a
“disability in an adult resulting from an illness, injury, congenital
disorder or organic deterioration
or of unknown
As stated in
terms in the relevant Australian Capital Territory legislation, disability is
not eccentricity, political or religious
opinion, sexual orientation or sexual
preference, engaging in illegal or immoral conduct or taking drugs, including
It is extremely helpful for a health care professional who is suitably
qualified and experienced to provide in their evidence some
evaluation of the
severity of the intellectual or cognitive impairment of the person the hearing
is about to the tribunal dealing
with the matter. This information will assist
in the tribunal’s understanding of the person’s ability to
participate
in the process as well as in its consideration of whether an order
should be made and its type and
In the case of
dementia, scores on cognitive screening tests such as the Folstein Mini Mental
State Examination might be helpful.
Some assessment of the person’s
cognitive functioning specific to decision-making (e.g. executive functions such
as planning,
judgment and reasoning) is useful. Sometimes more detailed
neuropsychological assessments may be available, for example where a person
brain damage after a motor vehicle accident or where a person has been
extensively “worked up” (or assessed) for
6. 12. 1. 2. Incapacity
As we have emphasised throughout this text, incapacity is task specific and
decision specific. Also, it is erroneous to assume that
the presence of a
disorder per se implies incapacity. It is therefore inadequate to report;
“Mrs X has dementia and therefore
lacks capacity to make decisions”.
Rather, tribunals and courts require a description of the way in which the
disorder or disability
has affected the person’s decision-making.
Criteria for assessing decision making are specified only in the Queensland
legislation which provides that a person has impaired
capacity for a personal
matter if they are unable, to understanding the nature and effect of their
decisions about the matter, to
freely and voluntarily make decisions about the
matter and to communicate those decision in some
The Victorian,
Tasmanian, Western Australian and Northern Territory legislation make reference
to “reasonable
judgments”.
South Wales the person must be incapable of “managing his or her
Regardless of
the State or Territory the person is in, their decision-making capacity might be
assessed by asking whether they:
1. know the context of the decision at hand,
2. know the choices available, and
3. have the ability to appreciate the potential consequences (risks and
benefits) of making particular choices
In keeping with the general principles of guardianship legislation throughout
Australia, which are to preserve, to the greatest extent
practicable, an
adult’s right to make their own decisions and to interfere as little as
possible in their right to make their
own decisions, it is important to specify
in relation to which matters (e.g. where they may live, what medical, dental and
services they may receive) the person is unable to make decisions.
This is acknowledged in the legislation in Queensland and the
Australian Capital
Territory which provides that the person must have impaired decision-making
in relation to all or any matters
relating to their health or
The complexity of
decision making varies with the task and accordingly, it may be easier, for
example, for someone with impaired
cognition to consent to simple medication or
meals on wheels than to weigh the pros and cons of staying at home.
The following is a guide to the kind of questions the clinician might use to
assess decision-making in the domains of accommodation,
services and health
1. Accommodation: Is the person aware of their disabilities and ability to
manage at home? Do they understand choices or alternatives
such as residential
care and the consequences of their choice? Can they weigh the options of
placement versus community support at
2. Services: Does the person acknowledge/understand that they have functional
impairment in activities of daily living? Do they understand
their choices for
dealing with their disability or need for support? Are they willing to accept
of the consequences of their choices?
3. Health care and medical and dental consents: Does the person know and
understand their health condition(s) and treatments? Do they
medications they are on, and for what purpose? Do they use health care
professionals when necessary and if not why not?
6. 12. 1. 3. Activities of daily living
In New South Wales, for example, the Tribunal must be satisfied that the
person is restricted in one or more major life activities
to such an extent that
they require supervision or social
habilitation.
It is therefore
basic (e.g. hygiene, dressing, feeding)
and instrumental (e.g. shopping,
cooking, cleaning) activities of daily living when making assessments. Although
not all jurisdictions
require this information, it has been suggested that its
inclusion will be of assistance to all Australian guardianship tribunals
is evidence of the effect of the person’s disability.
6. 12. 1. 4. Need and best interests
In most States and Territories it is necessary to provide evidence that there
is a need to make an order or that an order is in the
person’s best
It is important to
understand that lack of capacity, of itself, is usually insufficient
justification to make an order. Informal
mechanisms may obviate the need for an
order. For example, the person may be unable to make decisions about personal
care but decisions
are still being made in their best interests with the
assistance of others. As a result of these informal mechanisms the incapable
person may still accept community support services, nursing home placement or
the support of their general practitioner and medication
as appropriate and
therefore not need an order. It is usually when the person is objecting to
support that an application becomes
The Queensland and Australian Capital Territory legislation provides that one
of the reasons why an order may be needed is that the
person the subject of the
application is likely to do something that involves or is likely to involve,
unreasonable risk to their
health, welfare or
Sometimes health
care professionals will be aware of such risks. These risks can include the
person neglecting basic safety measures
in the home such as leaving the gas on
or otherwise creating fire risks by, for example, smoking in inappropriate
places. They might
also be at risk of recurrent falls or getting lost. If such
risks have been observed by a health care professional, they should be
to in any report that health care professional makes to any of the Australian
guardianship tribunals.
6. 12. 2. What should a report
A suggested outline for report writing is included in the following box:
A suggested outline of a medico-legal report relating to an application for a
guardianship order
1. Expertise
: An outline of the health care professional’s
qualifications, experience or expertise that they bring to their assessment
2. Involvement:
What has been the health care professional’s
involvement with the person?
3. Is there a diagnosis or disability?
What is the nature of the
disability (i.e. is it intellectual disability, mental illness such as
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder,
or acquired brain injury or dementia?)
Provide the basis for that diagnosis (i.e. results of examination, including
cognitive examination).
It is helpful to make specific reference to the
cognitive functions relevant to decision-making such as judgment, reasoning and
4. Severity:
An estimate of the severity of the diagnosis
5. Is there incapacity with regards to matters relating to health and
In what way does the diagnosis/disability impact on the
person’s decision making about:
a. Where the person should live;
b. What services they should receive;
c. What medical treatment they should be given;
d. To whom they should have access.
6. Extent of restriction in life activities
- description indicating
performance in basic (e.g. hygiene, dressing, feeding) or instrumental (e.g.
shopping, cleaning) activities
of daily living.
7. Is there a need for an order?
i.e. What is the current situation
regarding practicability of services being provided without the need for an
order? Is there any
risk? Why might an order be needed or what are the
consequences of making or not making order,
8. Do you have any input into who should be guardian?
Do you have
knowledge of personal history and family relationships, keeping in mind the aim
of preserving family relationships and
cultural and linguistic environments?
Gardner; re BWV
, [99], 7 VR 487.
Guardianship Act
For an example of
the Supreme Court making a guardianship order see,
[2009] NSWSC
Boviard v Boviard
[16]. See also
Johnson v NSW Guardianship Tribunal
[12].For a similar view of the Guardianship and Administration
Tribunal of Queensland (now QCAT) see,
[2005] QSC 68
an earlier, different view see,
[2000] NSWSC 886
Guardianship Act
s 15(1)(a).
EMG v Guardianship and
Administration Board of Victoria
[1999] NSWSC 501.
Service and Execution of
Process Act 1992
Ms A v Public
[2006] NSWADTAP 55
Matter No 2007/1899
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 31 October 2007).
[2004] WAGAB 6
Ibid. [53].
Guardianship Act 1987
[2004] NSWGT
[2007] NSWGT 12.
[2007] NSWGT 15
in which an application for a financial
management order by a niece of an elderly lady with dementia was refused on the
grounds that
the Tribunal was not satisfied that the niece’s application
was motivated by the desire to advance her aunt’s welfare
in circumstances
in which there was litigation between members of the family. Also
[2009] NSWGT 1
in which the Tribunal refused to join a person as a party to an
application as he did not have sufficient interest in the welfare
of the person
the subject of the application. See also
United States Tobacco v Minister for
Consumer Affairs
(1988) 20 FCR 520, 526-530.
For a description of
“having the care of the person” see,
Guardianship Act 1987
It provides that a person has the care of another person if
they, on a regular basis and otherwise than for remuneration (widely
provide or arrange for the provision of domestic services and support for that
other person. In
[2000] NSWSC 1052
[22], Young J of the NSW Supreme
Court said:
In my view, apart from paid professionals and other people who are outside the
section on its clear words, the Tribunal should admit
as a party every private
person who provides domestic services and support for the person concerned, even
if that person gets some
remuneration from some source for doing so, if they are
not in the class of a professional carer unemotionally involved with the
The Public Guardian rarely takes an active part in the hearing of an application
for a guardianship order, unless he is the applicant.
However, the Public
Guardian will take an active part in the review of a guardianship order if
appointed guardian.
The Tribunal may join, as a party any person
who, in its opinion, should be a party whether because of their concern for the
of the person the subject of the application or for any other reason.
See Ibid. s 57A. For an example of a case in which an application
to be joined
as a party was refused see,
[2009] NSWGT 1.
Ibid. ss 67, 67A and 68.
The spouse must have a close
and continuing relationship with the person in order to be entitled to have
their views sought
Guardianship Act
This provision is intended to overcome problems arising from spouses who have
been separated, lost contact but not divorced.
The term “has the care
of the person” is defined in
but are not limited to, those who, otherwise than for remuneration, but on a
regular basis provide domestic services and
support to the person with the
disability or arranges for the person with the disability to be provided with
such services and support.
also makes it clear that where the person
with the disability resides in an institution (such as a hospital, nursing home,
people do not become the person’s carers for the purposes
any other section of the
Guardianship Act 1987
. Furthermore, those
who were the carers of the person with the disability immediately before they
began residing in the institution
remain the cares of the person for the
purposes of
or any other section of the
. The carers pension
is not regarded as remuneration for the purposed of these provisions, see s
Ibid s 14(2).
Ms A v Public Guardian
[2006] NSWADTAP 55
In more recent times while
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal continues to adhere to its view that section
14(2) is mandatory, a
less censorious attitude to the Guardianship
Tribunal’s reasons for decision on this issue appears to have been adopted
DG v Public Guardian
[2008] NSWADTAP 58.
[2006] NSWADTAP 55.
Guardianship Act
On 30 June 2010, 1943 people
were under the guardianship of the Public Guardian. In the year ending 30 June
2010, the Guardianship
Tribunal appointed Public Guardian in 58% of cases in
which it appointed a guardian.
For an example see,
Matter No. 2006/7212
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 29 January
Guardianship Act 1987
s 16(1)(a).
For an example see
Guardianship Tribunal Matter No 2004/5028
(15 September 2004).
Guardianship Act 1987
description of the functions of a guardian see, Chapter 7.
s 18(2)and(3).
“authorised officer” is an officer declared to be an authorised
officer, or a member of a class of officers declared
to be authorised officers,
by the Minister in an order published in the Gazette.
Guardianship Act 1987
At the time of writing the Director-General was the
Director-General of the Department of Aging, Disability and Home Care and the
Minister was the Minister for Disability Services. However both of them have
delegated their powers to officers of the Department
of Aging, Disability and
File No C/0020
(unreported, Guardianship Board, 24 August 1989). See also,
(unreported, Guardianship Board, 23 October 1989)
Guardianship Act 1987
s 21(2)(a).
for the meaning
of “has the care of the person”.
Ibid. s 57A.
For an example see,
Matter No. 2001/4708
(unreported, Guardianship Tribunal, 13 May
For example, in 2007-2008,
33% of guardianship orders were not renewed, but 64% were. See Guardianship
Tribunal Annual Report 2007/2008,
p 41 (www.gt.nsw.gov.au).
For a contrary view see,
[2004] NSWADTAP 3.
Gardner; re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
, [99], 7 VR 487.
See also Jones J’s
consideration of the scheme of the Victorian
Re M and R and the
Guardianship and Administration Board
(1988) 2 VAR 213
, [16]-[21] where at
[21] he suggests that the
replaces the previous system.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
PL (Guardianship)
SB (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 333.
Ibid. s 19.
Ibid. s 19(1).
Ibid. s 19(2). However, note
that it is not necessary to nominate a proposed administrator. VCAT will decide
who is to be the administrator
if it determines that an administrator should be
Ibid. s 20(a). The
“nearest relative: of the person is their spouse or domestic partner or,
where they do not have a spouse
or domestic partner, the first listed relative
in list below who is 18 years or older. If there are of two or more
relatives at the
same level then the elder or eldest: (a) son or daughter; (b)
father or mother; (c) brother or sister; (d) grandfather or grandmother;
grandson or granddaughter; (f) uncle or aunt; (g) nephew or niece, see ibid. s
3.The nearest relative available of the person
is the nearest available who is
not the applicant, the proposed guardian or the administrator of the
person’s estate
Ibid. s 20(b). The primary
carer of the person is the person who is primarily responsible for providing
support or care to the person,
see ibid. s 3.
Ibid. In Victoria, at the
request of VCAT, the Office of the Public Advocate investigates a substantial
number of the matters coming
before VCAT and presents reports at the hearing of
a number of applications for guardianship orders.
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Ibid. and for any parties
not specifically covered by s 20, the common law relating to procedural
Ibid. s 21.
“Disability”
means intellectual impairment, mental disorder, brain injury, physical
disability or dementia. See, ibid.
Ibid. s 22(1).
Ibid. s 22(2).
Ibid. s 22(3).
Ibid. s 23(4).
Ibid. s 23(1).
Ibid. s 23(2).
Ibid. s 23(4).
Ibid. s 16(2)(b).
Ibid. s 23(5).
Ibid. ss 34 and 35.
Ibid. ss 19 and 22.
Ibid. s 22(4).
Ibid. s 24(1).
Ibid. s 22(5).
Ibid. s 25(1).
Ibid. ss 32 and 33.
Ibid. s 33(2).
Ibid. s 33(3).
www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
s 60A(1) and (6).
Ibid s 60A(1) and(3).
Ibid. s 60A(2).
Ibid. s 60A(4).
Ibid. s 60A.
Ibid. s 60(2).
Ibid. s 61(1).
Ibid. s 61(2) and (3).
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 1998
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Ibid. s 62(1)(a). The
“nearest relative” of the person is their spouse or domestic partner
or, where they do not have
a spouse or domestic partner, the first listed
relative in list below who is 18 years or older. If there are of two or
more relatives
at the same level then the elder or eldest: (a) son or daughter;
(b) father or mother; (c) brother or sister; (d) grandfather or
grandmother; (e)
grandson or granddaughter; (f) uncle or aunt; (g) nephew or niece. See,
Guardianship and Administration Act 1986
Ibid. s 62(1)(b). The
primary carer of the person is the person who is primarily responsible for
providing support or care to the
person. See,
Guardianship and Administration
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Ibid. s 62(2A) and
Good Guardianship: A
Guide for Guardians appointed under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, 2005, Office of the Public Advocate, www.publicadvocate.vic.gov.au.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
example of a case in which this was done, in Victoria, see
(Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 333.
Gardner; re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
, [99], 7 VR 487.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
“prescribed information” is set out in regulation 4 of the
Guardianship and Administration Regulation 1997 (Tas)
www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/process.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
For the matters and tests VCAT must
be satisfied about, see 6. 4. 4. above.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
s 21(2)(b).
Acts Interpretation
Act 1931(Tas)
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
For an example of an
emergency guardianship order case see,
BO (Emergency Guardianship
Application)
8-2-03, www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Gardner; re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
, [99], 7 VR 487.
(1974) 9 SASR 378.
District Court Act
That section provides that the District Court has the same
civil jurisdiction as the Supreme Court subject to “qualifications”
that do not exclude the parens patriae jurisdiction.
District Court Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 37(1)(a).
Ibid. A person is a
“domestic partner” of another person if they have been living in a
close personal relationship with
that other person continuously for three years,
or during a period of four years for an aggregate of three years, or they and
other person are the parents of a child who has been born, and, in any of
these three cases, are, at the time they made the application
in relation to the
other person, living with that other person. A “close domestic
relationship” is a relationship between
two adults, whether or not related
by family and irrespective of their gender, who live together as a couple on a
genuine domestic
basis. Two persons may live together on a genuine domestic
basis whether or not a sexual relationship exists, or has ever existed,
Family Relationships Act 1975
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
A “medical agent” is a person appointed under a medical power of
attorney made under the
Consent to Medical Treatment and Palliative Care Act
to be a medical agent of another.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
application form is available from the website of the Public Advocate
www.opa.sa.gov.au.
www.opa.sa.gov.au.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
-(c). For a case in which a
guardianship order made by the Board was quashed because the evidence of mental
incapacity was insufficient
to ground the order see,
[2002] SADC
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Ibid. s 14(7).
Now you are a
guardian – A manual for private guardians in South Australia
of the Public Advocate, (2004), 31, www.opa.sa.gov.au.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
Now you are a
guardian – A manual for private guardians in South Australia
of the Public Advocate, (2004), 32, www.opa.sa.gov.au.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
. Contrast the terms of
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
s 84(1). Note s 84(1) is subject to
which allows either the Supreme Court or the District Court when sanctioning
settlements or damages awards in relation to adults
with impaired capacity to
exercise QCAT’s powers under Chapter 3 of the
, including the
power to appoint a guardian or an administrator.
Ibid. s 240.
Ibid. s 241.
Ibid. [28].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
For an example see,
[2005] QGAAT 3.
Ibid. Schedule 4.
Ibid. s 116. See also
Guardianship and Administration Regulation
the Tribunal’s website, www.justice.qld.gov.au/guardian/gaat.htm
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
See for example,
[2006] QGAAT 92
[2006] QGAAT 91
[2006] QGAAT 73
[2006] QGAAT 88.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Schedule 4.
Ibid. Schedule 2, item
The general
principles are set out in Schedule 1 items 1 to 11.
s 14(1)(a)(i).
they don’t meet any of these requirements for appointment, they must
advise the Tribunal before it makes the appointment.
They must advise the
Tribunal of other matters as well. See, the
Guardianship and Administration
and (b) and (2).
(b). If they don’t meet any of these requirements for appointment, they
must advise the Tribunal before it makes the appointment.
They must advise the
Tribunal of other matters as well. See, the
Guardianship and Administration
and (d) and (2).
s 14(1)(a)(2).
relation to successive guardians see also
requires the guardian to tell the Tribunal if their appointment as a
guardian ends because any of the events in 1 – 4 occur.
Presidential Direction
No 2 of 2005.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Ibid. s 197.
and Sch 4. If
there is doubt or argument about whether an applicant for a review has
sufficient and continuing interest in the person
under guardianship to bring
their application, this matter may be dealt with by the Tribunal. See,
While it is
unlikely that the Public Trustee or a trustee company will seek a review of a
guardianship order, they are empowered
to do so and appropriate circumstances
Guardianship and
Administration Tribunal general information document “Reviewing
Guardianship and Administration Orders”
www.justice.qld.gov.au/guardian/gaat.htm.
Guardianship and
Administration
Guardianship and Administration Orders” (footnote 223).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
example see,
[2004] QGAAT 11.
Supreme Court Act
s 16(1)(d)(ii).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
[2001] WAGAB 1
(2001) 28 SR (WA) 333
(1993) 13 SR
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
s 43(1)(a).
s 43(1)(b).
Ibid 43(2).
[2007] WASC
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
[2007] WASC
Ibid [157]-[158].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
example of a private guardian and the Public Advocate as guardians see,
[2006] WASAT 64.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Family Court Act 1997
s 84(2)(f).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
See 7. 2. 4 and Chapter 7
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
For an example of a guardianship order
made for five years and why see,
[2006] WASAT 279.
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
A v Guardianship and
Management of Property Tribunal
[1999] ACTSC 77.
Ibid. [70].
Public Trustee v
[2000] ACTSC 4.
Supreme Court Act
See also the power of the Supreme Court to direct ACAT to
appoint a guardian under
Crimes Act 1900
as it applies
in the ACT and
Guardianship and Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (ACT)
Ibid. S 7(b).
Ibid. S 7(a).
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (ACT)
s 117. The approved form is available
at www.acat.act.gov.au.
Ibid. S 29(1).
The “domestic
partner” of the person the hearing is about is their spouse or the person
with whom the person the hearing
is about is living with as a couple on a
genuine domestic basis, whether of a different or the same sex. There are 9
indicators to
Legislation Act
ACT Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2008 (ACT)
Public Advocate Act
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
Ibid s 7(2).
Ibid ss 9(1) and
Ibid s 10(3). The
decision-making principles are found in s 4, but are set out below at
Ibid s 10(4) and
Ibid s 10(3).
Ibid s 10(2).
Ibid s 10(4).
Public Advocate Act 2005
McGregor and Pearce v The Hon John Gallop and the
Attorney-General of the ACT
[2002] ACTSC 45
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act 1991(ACT)
Ibid s 32(1).
Ibid s 19(3).
Ibid ss 7(3) and 7B.
Ibid s 11. See 6. 9.
Ibid. If it is not
practicable for the application to be made in writing, an alternative procedure,
still requiring a hearing and
authorisation, is provided in s 68(6).
Ibid ss 16 and 18.
Ibid s 7(3).
Ibid s 4(2)(a) and (b).
Ibid s 4(2)(c) to (f).
Ibid s 4(3) and (4). The
term “carer” is defined in the
Guardianship and Management of
Property Act
See, ibid.ss 5 and
Adult Guardianship
Act 1988 (NT)
ss 8 to 15.
Supreme Court Act
Supreme Court Act
Gardner; re BWV
[2003] VSC 173
, [99], 7 VR 487.
Adult Guardianship
Ibid. s 8(1).
Ibid s 3(2)(b).
Ibid s 3(1).
Ibid s 3(2)(a).
Ibid. s 8 (2).
Ibid. s 19.
Ibid s 9(5).
“intellectual disability means a disability in an adult resulting from an
illness, injury, congenital disorder or
organic deterioration or of unknown
origin and by reason of which the person appears to be unable to make reasonable
judgments or
informed decisions relevant to daily living”. See, ibid. s
Ibid. s 9(2).
Ibid. s 9(3).
Ibid. S 9(4).
Ibid. s 7(3).
Ibid. s 12(1).
Ibid. s 12(2).
Ibid. s 12(3).
Ibid. s 12(4).
Ibid. s 13(2).
Ibid. s 13(1).
Ibid. s 27(1).
Ibid. s 27(2).
Ibid. s 27(3).
Ibid. s 27(4).
Ibid. s 15(1).
Carol Pettola v
Daranee Buckley
(Unreported NTMC case no 20405525, 8 September 2004, Mr
Lowndes SM).
Rex Wild QC v Andrew
(Unreported NTMC case no 20321492, 14 October 2003, Mr Bradley
Vincenzina Zangari v
[2005] NMTC 022 [8].
Adult Guardianship
Ibid. s 14(1).
Ibid. s 14(2).
Ibid. s 14(3).
Ibid. s 14(4).
Ibid. s 16(1)(a).
Ibid. s 14(5).
Ibid. s 17(1).
Ibid. s 17(2).
Ibid. s 17(3).
Ibid. s 18(1).
Ibid. s 18(2).
Ibid. ss 8 and 19(1) and
Ibid. ss 12, 13, 19(3)
Ibid. s 19(4) and
Ibid. s 19(5).
Ibid. s 19(7).
Ibid. s 23(1).
Ibid. s 23(2).
Ibid. s 23(3).
Ibid. s 27.
Ibid. s 23(3)(d).
Ibid. s 23(4).
Ibid. s 16(3).
Ibid. s 16(4).
Ibid. s 7(3).
Ibid. s 23(5).
Ibid. s 16(2A).
Guardianship Act
For example in 2005-2006,
11% of guardianship applications were withdrawn during the hearing process.
Guardianship Tribunal Annual
Report 2005/2005, 21.
Guardianship Act
Note that under s 67C of the
Tribunal’s Registrar may, at the discretion of the President of the
Tribunal, exercise the function of deciding whether
or not to consent to the
withdrawal of an application (including a guardianship application) to the
Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Department of Human
Services v G (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 160
Ibid. [22] and [23].
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
HDH Guardianship
(9-6-05), 12-13. See, www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
See for example,
[2006] QGAAT 80.
For cases showing the
advance of dementia see,
[2006] QGAAT 87
[2006] QGAAT 88
; Alzheimer’s Disease see,
[2001] QGAAT 3
[2006] QGAAT 90
; for gradual
decline because of stroke and possible dementia see,
[2006} QGAAT
; mental illness (chronic schizophrenia) see,
[2006] WASAT 265
[2005] QGAAT 51
; acquired brain injury through motor vehicle
accident see, Re MLA
[2006] QGAAT 91stroke
[2006] QGAAT 3
[2006] QGAAT 92
; permanent vegetative state see,
[2006] QGAAT 89
For an example see,
[2007] NSWGT 21.
, (unreported, Guardianship Board, 8 March 1993).
For a US example see,
696 N.Y.S. 348
, (unreported, Guardianship Board, 3 September 1993).
HDH Guardianship
(9-6-05), 13-14. See, www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
(Unreported, Queensland Supreme Court, Ambrose J, (S 2000 of 2000)) and
[2003] QGAAT 16
[53]. See also,
(1994) 12 SR (WA) 380.
Ex parte Lyttleton
[1801] EngR 189
(1801) 31 ER 911
In re B (an alleged lunatic)
[1891] UKLawRpCh 137
[1891] 3 Ch 274
[1981] 2 NSWLR 334
[1984] 1 NSWLR 694
For examples see,
[2006] QGAAT 21
[2005] QGAAT 76.
Re M and R and the
Guardianship and Administration Board
(1988) 2 VAR 213
[1981] 2 NSWLR 334.
Public Trustee v
[1998] TASSC 130
8 Tas R 256
HDH Guardianship
(9-6-05), 30-31. See, www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
Public Trustee v
[1998] TASSC 130
8 Tas R 256
SR (WA) 320
, 329-330. See also
[2005] WASAT 131
[2009] WASAT 79.
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal
[2002] QSC 237.
Ibid. [1]-[2].
Ibid. [5], [8] and
For an example of where
the matters in the last two paragraphs were discussed, but a family member was
still needed as a guardian
to advocate for a man with whole of life disabilities
living in a group home see,
Matters Nos 1999/208 and 1999/3154
(unreported, NSW Guardianship Tribunal, 6 July 1999 and 7 September 2000,
respectively).
Ibid. 92-93.
Batchelor v
Guardianship Board
[1999] SADC 13.
Ibid. [9]. For another
example of a case in which the order was seen to be premature and left the
Public Advocate unable to take
decisions on the person’s behalf see,
Williams v Guardianship Board
[1999] SADC 25.
See for example,
(1993) 12 SR (WA) 393
(1994) 12 SR (WA) 380.
[1983] 1 NSWLR 138
Public Advocate v
[2004] VCAT 1880
[10]. See also the two reviews related to the same
Matters Nos 1999/208 and 1999/3154
(unreported, NSW
Guardianship Tribunal, 6 July 1999 and 7 September 2000, respectively).
SR (NSW) 31.
(1993) 12 SR (WA) 372.
In re B (an alleged
[1891] UKLawRpCh 137
[1891] 3 Ch 274.
See for example
[2006]QGAAT 6 in which there had been interim guardianship orders
because of accommodation problems which had been resolved and there
outstanding issues.
(unreported
NSW Guardianship Tribunal, 13 May 2004, Matter No 2001/4708).
The best statement of
these principles is found in the
Guardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
MW Guardianship and
Administration Application
(unreported, Tasmanian Guardianship and
Administration Board, 10 October 2003). See,
www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
Ibid. [28].
Ibid. [34].
See for example,
[2006] QGAAT 74
[2006] QGAAT 90
(2000) 24 SR
See, for example,
[2009] NSWGT 4.
For a case in which the Public Guardian was appointed
guardian because of the conflict between family members see,
Peisah C. Brodaty H,
Quadrio C. (2006) Family conflict in dementia: prodigal sons & black sheep
Int J Ger Psychiatry (2006) 21(5):485-492
For examples see,
Matter No. 1999/4756
(Unreported Guardianship Tribunal (NSW), 9 November
[2001] QGAAT 3
[2006] QGAAT 75
[2010] WASAT 110.
[2010] NSWGT 9.
, 41 SR (WA) 176.
Ibid. [103].
Ibid. [112].
For an example see,
[2006] QGAAT 25.
[2009] NSWGT
[2005] WASAT
[2005] WASAT 303
JJB and EWB
[2006] WASAT 110
[2006] WASAT 94.
[2005] QGAAT 64.
[2009] NSWGT
[1991] UKHL 1
[1990] 2 AC 1.
reported as,
F v West Berkshire Health Authority
[1989] 2 All ER 545.
Ibid. 72-73,
Re application for a
guardianship order (BCB
(2002) 28 SR (WA) 338
, 345 and 348.
R v Bournemouth
Community and Mental Health NHS Trust Ex Parte L
[1999] AC 459
[1998] UKHL 24.
In re F (Adult: Court’s
[2000] EWCA Civ 3029
[2001] Fam 38
[2000] EWCA Civ 192.
Sheffield City
Council v E
[2004] EWHC 2808 (Fam)
[99]. See also,
A v A Health
Authority, In re J (A Child), R (S) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2002] EWHC 18 (Fam/Admin)
[2002] Fam 213
, [39]-[40],
Re S (Adult
Patient) (Inherent Jurisdiction: Family Life)
[2002] EWHC 2278 (Fam)
Re S (Adult's Lack of Capacity: Carer and Residence
[2003] EWHC 1909 (Fam)
, [2003] 2 FLR 1235.
(unreported, NSW Guardianship Board, 12 June 1996, Matter No. 96/1970).
Guardianship Act
s 14(2)(a)(i).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1993
s 5(a)and(b).
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1986
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1995
Adult Guardianship Act
[2003] QGAAT
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
For an example see,
HDH Guardianship 9-6-05
, www.guardianship.tas.gov.au/decisions.
For US cases which
discuss the issue of appointing a public official or other non-relative as
guardian and the need to explain why
Estate of Romberg
942 S.S. 2d
417 (1997),
Oliva v Oliva
113 S.W. 3d 269
875 A. 2d 697
Prost v Schuffman
202 S.W. 3d 41
[1988] HCA 68
, [21]-[24],
166 CLR 69.
Ibid. [23]-[24].
[2003] NSWSC
[25] and [26].
See as examples,
Matter of Hancock
828 S. W. 2d 707
Matter of Benson
S. W. 3d 79
(2004). For an example of disputes within the leading to the
appointment of the Public Guardian as guardian see,
[2008] NWSGT
RL (Guardianship)
[2002] VCAT 12.
Ibid. [21].
Ibid. [24].
Ibid. [26] and [27].
Ibid. [26].
AS (Guardianship)
[2006] VCAT 2143.
Ibid. [35].
Ibid. [35].
Ibid. [37] – [39].
For another case involving a son wanting to be appointed guardian, but the best
interests of the person
under guardianship requiring the Public Advocate as an
independent guardian see,
BK (Guardianship)
[2007] VCAT 332.
See for example,
(1993) 13 SR (WA) 10.
For examples of cases in
which the public official was appointed and why see,
(1993) 12 SR
(1994) 12 SR (WA) 384
Matter No 1999/4756
(Unreported, NSW Guardianship Tribunal, 9 November 1999) and
[2006] WASAT 11
, 41 SR (WA) 176.
Adult Guardian v
[2003] QSC 297
[2006] WASAT
See for example
Guardianship and Administration Act
Guardianship Act
s 17(1)(b).
Ibid. [31]-[32].
CB (Guardianship)
[2006] VCAT 1812
[10] and [11].
Bennett HP, Hallen P.
“Guardianship and financial management legislation: what doctors in aged
care need to know” Intern
(2005) 35(8):482-7.
Guardianship Act 1987
Adult Guardianship
Guardianship and
Administration of Property Act
Bennett HP, Hallen P, op
cit (footnote 405).
Guardianship and
Administration Act
, Schedule 2
and Schedule
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 22(!)(b);
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
s 43(!0(b)(ii)
Adult Guardianship
Guardianship Act
Bennett HP, Hallen P, op
cit (footnote 405).
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D. (Ed)
Who can decide? The six step capacity assessment process
Memory Australia Press, Adelaide, 2000, 34-57.
Guardianship and
Management of Property Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act 2000
Guardianship Act
Darzins, P, Molloy DW,
Strang D op cit (footnote 414)..
uardianship Act
Guardianship and Administration Act
Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Guardianship and Administration Act 2000
Adult Guardianship Act
Guardianship and
Administration Act
Guardianship and Management
of Property Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.69 MB)
PDF format (587 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter