URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2010/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Brown, Robert L --- "Criteria for the Optimal Design of a Social Security Retirement System" [2010] IntJlSSWC 7; (2010) 2(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 79
CRITERIA FOR THE OPTIMAL DESIGN OF A SOCIAL SECURITY RETIREMENT SYSTEM
I INTRODUCTION
II FINANCING: FUNDED VERSUS PAYGO
III MINIMUM BENEFITS: DEMOGRANT or Welfare
IV PROGRESSIVE VERSUS REGRESSIVE
V VOLUNTARY VERSUS MANDATORY
VI INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNTS VERSUS COMMINGLING OF RISK
VII PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE
VIII AUTOMATIC BALANCING MECHANISMS
IX SYSTEM RISK DIVERSIFICATION
X CONCLUSION
CRITERIA FOR THE OPTIMAL DESIGN OF A SOCIAL SECURITY
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
This contribution discusses a series of selection points in the design and
financing of social security retirement systems. For each
criterion, the paper
lists and discusses advantages and disadvantages of the options available.
For example, in any Social Security Retirement system, one must decide if the
system should be fully funded or pay as you go. The
contribution addresses a
range of issues, which are relevant in this regard. Should there be minimum
guaranteed benefits and, if
so, should they be granted as welfare benefits or as
demogrant benefits? How progressive should we make the contribution/benefit
balance? If we use full actuarial equity, then the system could easily be
regressive since low-income workers have shorter life expectancies.
system be voluntary or mandatory? Can we mitigate risk through risk sharing or
do we wish to use an individual accounts
design? How much of a worker’s
retirement income security should come from public sources versus the private
market.? Do we
plan to include an automatic balancing mechanism? If so, what are
advantageous design features?
It is the sincere hope of the author that this discussion will create even
more debate of the issues surrounding these important selection
criteria which,
in turn, will result in better social security retirement systems for all.
I INTRODUCTION
This paper reviews a series of criteria that are decision points in the
design of social security retirement systems (SSRS). For each
criterion, the
advantages and disadvantages of the options available are outlined and discussed
briefly. In this manner, the paper
attempts to lead public policymakers to a set
of design criteria that would result in optimal design for any SSRS. The author
to stimulate wide discussion of these important debating points.
It can be shown that the Notional Defined Contribution (NDC) systems in
Sweden, Italy and Poland are equivalent to Career Average
Defined Benefit (DB)
plans with annual adjustments based on economic growth. Thus, any analysis about
DC SSRS will reference Individual
Account systems, not Nominal DC systems.
The paper is targeted to SSRS public policymakers. Thus, some very
traditional points of debate, while referred to, are not discussed
II FINANCING: FUNDED VERSUS PAYGO
First, one should differentiate between funding and financing. SSRS need not
be funded, certainly not fully funded. They only need
to be financed in a
sustainable manner, which is quite a different matter. Having said that, it is
very difficult to achieve continuous
sustainability in a pure pay-as-you-go
(PAYGO) system without unacceptable contribution volatility. Thus, it is the
position of this
paper that an optimal SSRS design would include enough
(partial) funding to overcome the peaks and valleys caused by the volatility
demographic and economic variables.
More heavily funded SSRS are preferable when rates of return on investments
exceed the rate of growth of the contributions base of
the SSRS (which is the
reality in many advanced economies with aging populations today). Less funding
(and hence more PAYGO financing)
would be preferred when the growth of the SSRS
contributions base exceeds the rate of return on
investments.
The rate of growth of the contributions base of a SSRS is itself a function
of several variables. A primary factor is the growth rate
of the work force.
This, in turn, is the result of a growing population (through rising fertility
or higher immigration) or higher
labor force participation rates. Also, the
contributions base will normally rise when there is real wage growth, which
usually relies
on productivity gains.
It is worthy of note, however, that a funded SSRS is inherently no more
secure and no more predictable (ie, less volatile) than a
PAYGO scheme. It is no
easier to predict future investment rates than future fertility rates. Thus,
using a ‘stability’
argument in favor of fuller funding may find
merit in some advanced economies with aging populations today, but may not be
in many other economies or other times. One need only review the
history of many European (fully funded) SSRS in the period 1930
understand the validity of this observation (when these fully funded SSRS were
wiped out by hyper inflation). Further,
states that historical
evidence suggests that sensitivity to economic changes is likely to be a more
serious source of unpredictability
than sensitivity to changes in population
demographics.
SSRS are effectively means to allocate goods and services between workers and
retirees. That is, each society decides how much of
the Gross National Product
SSRS beneficiaries can consume. The absolute dollar value of the promised
benefit has little meaning in
and of itself.
If a PAYGO social security system has a 10 per cent contribution rate, then
workers have effectively agreed to pass all of their production
morning over to the country’s retirees for consumption.
If the plan is fully funded, then the transfer is more complex, but
equivalent. The worker takes 10 per cent of pay (reflecting the
value of 10 per
cent of product) and seeks to buy assets. Such assets will be available from
retirees (who amassed them during their
working lifetime). Upon sale, the
retiree gets money for his/her assets and then uses this money to buy goods and
services. The end
result is equivalent to a PAYGO scheme. In particular, both
PAYGO SSRS and fully funded SSRS are absolutely dependent on a next generation
of workers to produce goods and services. Neither is demographically immune. If
there is no production, there is no consumption.
Both systems suffer from political risk. In a PAYGO SSRS, the government can
change the benefit or contribution formula and deny workers
their assumed
promise. In a fully funded SSRS, the government can allow inflation to deplete
the value of the individual accounts,
once again nullifying the implied contract
with workers.
These axioms bear further reflection. Many important reforms of SSRS around
the world were based on criteria other then ‘who
gets to share in total
Gross National Product?’ Other less important (side-bar) issues became the
focus of the reforms. Does
fuller funding increase national savings? Does the
financing method create a more rapid rate of economic growth? Does the level of
funding assist in creating a good banking system or a good stock market
infrastructure? What impact does the design of the SSRS
have on labor force participation rates or on the age of retirement? Does the
design of the SSRS incent a cash economy? A careful
reading of the literature
says that there are no clear answers to most of these
While these may be very
important questions, they should not be the driving focus for a well-designed
SSRS. The number one criterion
should be the ability of the elderly to share in
total Gross National Product at least to the extent that poverty is
alleviated.
On another point, one must ask if there is any economic difference between a
PAYGO SSRS and one that is funded but where the assets
are all government bonds
(especially if the positive or negative cash flow of the SSRS is included in a
unified government budget).
Those who pay SSRS contributions are the same people
as those who pay off the debt represented by government bonds. Does it make
difference (except in the name) which method us used: SSRS contributions are
paid or bonds are redeemed? They are surely the
same in both size and
Funded SSRS also introduce political risk. As Sass states these risks are
that a trust fund would:
• become a captive source of credit that would fund the government at
below-market rates;
• invest in ‘socially desirable’ projects and/or avoid
‘socially undesirable’ projects;
• use its power as a major shareholder to promote ‘socially
desirable’ and/or avoid ‘socially undesirable’
decisions, such as those regarding plant closing or mergers and acquisitions;
• prop up financial markets in a
At the very least, an independent, ‘at-arm’s-length’
investment agency should be mandated. One such workable model
would be the
Canada Pension Plan Investment Board created in 1996 that works completely
independently of the Canadian government.
Finally, a dishonest leader of a country with a funded SSRS, can abscond with
the plan assets in the middle of the night. If the plan
is PAYGO, then the
leader can only abscond with its liabilities.
III MINIMUM BENEFITS: DEMOGRANT
In a demogrant system, benefits are paid to those who satisfy a residency
criterion. There are no other requirements.
An optimal SSRS should include in its total benefit package a minimum benefit
that is enough to provide economic security to the elderly
at least equal to an
accepted measure of poverty. That is, an acceptable SSRS will create at least
subsistence level benefits.
It is the position of this paper that this first pillar of benefits
(sometimes called Pillar 0) should be financed out of general
tax revenues and
not from earmarked contributions. This will make the Pillar 1 SSRS (mandatory
earnings-related schemes) much easier
to design since it does not have to
include in its formulation the provision of a minimum benefit. As one example,
the design of
the U.S. Old-Age Survivors and Disability Insurance (OASDI) system
is unnecessarily complex because it is expected both to provide
benefit but also have a strong sense of individual equity (whereby benefits are
a function of contributions). OASDI could
be designed more easily and more
logically if there existed a separate Pillar 0 benefit. While the U.S. does have
a Supplementary
Security Income (SSI) program, it is too small to satisfy the
full needs of poverty
alleviation.
The question now arises as to whether Pillar 0 should be paid as a demogrant
or welfare benefit. The difference is whether or not
there is an income and/or
asset test for the Pillar 0 benefit that will result in the benefits being
clawed back for many recipients
(ie, recipients lose their SSRS benefit
according to the amount of personal income they have). These claw back rates can
high (eg, 50 per
Such claw backs can cause perverse actions by the SSRS participants. For
example, this can create incentives that work against private
saving on the part
of workers. Or workers may cash out their SSRS benefits at retirement (ie, take
a lump sum where possible), spend
this cash quickly, so as to qualify for the
Pillar 0 benefit. Clearly, this is not desirable.
This is a very difficult problem. One must balance the rate of the claw back
very carefully. If the claw back is low, then Pillar
0 will be very costly and
benefits may go to recipients who are not in need. The extreme of this is a
demogrant benefit with no claw
backs (although benefits might be taxable). If
the claw back is high, then the perverse incentives outlined above will be the
Regardless of whether the Pillar 0 benefits are demogrant or welfare, there
should be a lengthy period of qualification (eg, residency)
for the minimum
benefit. Short qualifying periods will lead to other perverse results such as
early retirement or low labor-force
participation. A 40-year qualifying period
is not unreasonable.
IV PROGRESSIVE VERSUS REGRESSIVE
Most SSRS anticipate some redistribution of wealth from the rich to the poor.
However, if the particular SSRS is truly a pure DC system set up using
individual accounts, then that system will be regressive. Why
is this so? The
reason is that wealthy people live longer than poor people (and this is not
reflected fully in the private annuity
markets). Evidence of this is
overwhelming.
SSRS that have minimum guaranteed benefits as Pillar 0 may not need any
explicit progressivity in Pillar 1 benefits. This would describe
the Swedish NDC
system that has such minimum Pillar 0 benefits and a pure DC Pillar 1. In
Canada, the Canada/Quebec Pension Plans
(C/QPP) do not have to be progressive in
themselves since there are already Pillar 0 benefits (Old Age Security and
Guaranteed Income
Supplement) that are funded by general tax revenues and are
highly progressive. Despite this, the C/QPP have an explicit feature
contribution formulae (in that no contributions are made on the first $3500 of
earnings) that make them progressive regardless
of Pillar 0.
OASDI is clearly progressive (and its progressivity overcomes the longer life
expectancy differential in favour of the wealthy) through
its benefit formula
with two bend points (ie, lower wages achieve a higher benefit ratio than higher
If a SSRS raises its Normal Retirement Age (the earliest age at which full
benefits are payable) then the probability that the system
is regressive may
rise. This is because raising the Normal Retirement Age represents a larger
percentage cut in benefits for those
with short life expectancies than for those
with longer life expectancies. The particular impact depends on the mortality
in the country by income
Finally, there is a limit to how progressive the SSRS can be. One important
attribute of a well-designed SSRS is social solidarity.
That is, all
participants should want the system to continue in place. That means that even
after accounting for progressiveness,
the system must provide meaningful
benefits to all participants, across the full earnings
V VOLUNTARY VERSUS MANDATORY
In a true voluntary SSRS, workers could choose to join, or not, on a
completely voluntary basis. Few national SSRS have gone this
route. Most
national social security systems appear, at least at first glance, to be
mandatory. However, there can be a number of
ways that this feature is
depreciated.
For example, some systems do not require contributions from workers until
their earnings achieve a defined level (e.g., the Canada
Pension Plan as
explained above). This may encourage workers (and their employers) to shift into
the cash economy. This will be reinforced
if the system provides some guaranteed
minimum benefit or provides significant benefits for very short periods of
attachment or very
small total contributions.
Other systems allow ‘drop-out’ periods because of military
service, disability, unemployment, child rearing and so on
without any
commensurate decrease in ultimate benefits (eg, the Canada/Quebec Pension
Plans). Again, such features create incentives
for inappropriate action amongst
the workers (moral hazard). However, given the choice of some well-defined
periods versus a SSRS that allows maximum benefits to be
achieved with a very short participation history, one should prefer the
‘drop-out’ option. In fact, the ability to achieve maximum benefits
without at least 40 years of contributions seems
ill advised.
In summary, a mandatory SSRS will mitigate anti-selection and moral hazard.
James et al point out the advantages of not having to be concerned about
anti-selection. According to their calculations, a mandatory,
public SSRS
offering the same benefits as the C/QPP would cost between 8 and 9.5 per cent of
pensionable earnings (as defined by
the C/QPP). The variance between 8 and 9.5
per cent is dependent on the asset-liability matching strategy. Similar benefits
a voluntary, private annuity system would require contributions of 11 to
12.5 percent.
Private cost rates
exceed the mandatory/ public rate because of high private administrative costs
and adverse selection costs (and
these have about equal impact, ie,
There also has to be a
profit margin in a private system.
Adverse selection occurs because potential annuitants know more about their
health than the insurance company. If the SSRS is voluntary,
individuals with higher-than-average life expectancy will participate, biasing
the average longevity upward thus requiring
higher contribution rates. Mitchell
et al show that the expected present value of annuity payouts per dollar of
annuity premium averages
between 80 and 85 cents for an individual chosen at
random from the population, and between 90 and 94 cents for an individual chosen
at random from the pool of individuals who purchase
This could be
alleviated if there were more risk classification within the annuity product.
Thus, a totally voluntary SSRS could result in a pricing spiral as those with
lower life expectancy opt out. Ultimately, this pricing
spiral means that SSRS
contribution rates will only allow the most select lives to achieve a full
market value through their participation.
At the other extreme, a mandatory SSRS, based on the principles of individual
equity (ie, non-progressive) will result in poorer workers
subsidizing more
wealthy workers since the latter live significantly longer on average. This is
the likely result in Defined Contribution
SSRS, including Individual Accounts
SSRS. In this case, there should be other design features to counter this
regressive redistribution
(as previously discussed).
If one prefers a voluntary system, but wants to maximize coverage, then an
opt-out system is preferable to an opt-in system. Studies
have consistently
shown that automatic enrollment results in much higher participation rates than
being forced to act to opt in.
This is indicated in Table 1, below.
TABLE 1. 401(k) Participation by Tenure Before and After
Automatic Enrollment (AE)
After - Before
After - Before
After - Before
The sample for Companies C and D is all 401(k)-eligible employees. For
Companies B and D, the first two columns of numbers give the
fraction of
employees who have ever participated in the 401(k) plan. For Company C, the
first two columns give the fraction of employees
contemporaneously participating
in the 401(k) plan.
VI INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNTS VERSUS COMMINGLING OF RISK
The primary purpose of a SSRS is to allocate rights to retirees to consume
Gross National Product in a manner that minimizes the probability
of living in
poverty. In that regard, the design of the SSRS should also be one that
mitigates risk (variance) as much as possible
in the goal of achieving income
For retirement income security, risks include: investment and investment
expense risk, interest rate risk, timing risk, inflation
risk and longevity
The investment risk is well illustrated in the following graph from
Source: Gary Burtless, ‘Lessons of the Financial Crisis for the Design
of National Pension Systems’ (CESIFO Working Paper
No 2735, July 2009)
Clearly, the worker can decrease the investment risk by choosing less
volatile investments such as government bonds. While it is true
volatility decreases markedly, so too do the Replacement Rates as seen in Figure
Source: Gary Burtless, ‘Lessons of the Financial Crisis for the Design
of National Pension Systems’ (CESIFO Working Paper
No 2735, July 2009)
The replacement ratios in the above graphs also display the impact of the
timing risk. This is the risk of being forced to annuitize
when interest rates
are low and annuity prices are, therefore, high. This is true in 2010.
For each of the five risks listed, large commingled systems achieve superior
expected outcomes than Individual Accounts; some through
the effective
application of the Law of Large Numbers, others through the efficiencies of
A summary of the failure of Individual Account SSRS in South and Latin
America is widely reported.
In a commingled SSRS, all participants (and this may be the entire work
force) share these risks. In fact, some risks may be shared
across generations
of workers. In an Individual Accounts system, the individual worker carries all
of these risks unilaterally. This
is a responsibility for which the worker has
little capacity. Most individual workers do not have investment expertise, and
can find investment expertise it comes at a high cost.
On the other hand, large commingled funds can hire extremely good investment
management at low per unit cost. Such large funds can
also participate in
private placements not available to most investment funds. Further, they can
achieve much lower per-unit administrative
cost ratios.
Size matters. Ambachtsheer
provides the following illustration.
Your salary moves from $35 000 to $65 000 over a 40-year career. You want to
replace 60 per cent
of your final salary (= $39 000) upon retirement. You will
get $25 000 from social security (comparable to Canada and the U.S.),
need $14 000 per annum
Assuming you can earn i= 4 per cent real for 20 years and 3 per cent real
thereafter,
you need to
contribute 6 per cent of salary over your lifetime to achieve this goal. If you
have a well-managed plan (as can be expected
on a net basis from a large
commingled plan) that can earn an extra 1 per cent per annum, then the 6 per
cent contribution rate falls
to 4.5 per cent. On the other hand, if you face
management expense fees equivalent to 2 per cent (ie, your rates of return are 2
per cent and 1 per cent real) then the contribution rate required rises to 10
per cent. Further, if inflation is running at 2 per
cent per annum, you have
made no net gain in purchasing power at all. You are merely standing still.
The literature indicates that if individuals are responsible for managing
their own capital accumulation accounts, they do so conservatively
and receive
lower rates of return. They also face management expense ratios that could
decrease their net rate of return by as much
as 3 per cent (300 bps).
Ambachtsheer
says that these commingled asset pools should be no
smaller than $10B. Such commingling would have to be facilitated by government
regulation, but could be done entirely by private sector managers so long as the
total expenses were low (eg, less than 50 basis
Finally, at retirement, the individual worker must either manage his or her
own retirement or buy an individual annuity. Brown states
that the opportunity
to participate in an actuarially fair annuity market is equivalent to a 50 per
cent increase in non-annuitized
However, the higher cost involved in
having to purchase a retirement annuity from the private sector because of
higher administrative
costs and the anti-selection factor faced by the private
insurer has already been noted. That is, the insurer will price all annuities
the assumption that a voluntary purchaser has five-star life expectancy. Clearly
this results in the poor subsidizing the rich.
Thus unless the retiree has
five-star life expectancy, it is not clear which is better: buying an annuity
from the private sector
or managing one’s own assets and one’s own
longevity risk. Brown states that the vast majority are still better off to
Without having a separate discussion, it is for the reasons just outlined
that an optimal SSRS will provide income for life rather
than a lump sum at the
defined point of retirement. Individuals cannot manage these lump sums and
fair-value annuities are only available
to those in five-star
In conclusion, a
lump-sum SSRS should not be adopted.
Again, without a separate discussion, it is the position of this paper that
benefits should retain their purchasing power. Thus, benefits
should be indexed
to at least the cost of living. Whether benefits should be indexed to wages
(thus guaranteeing a consistent standard
of living for retirees) will not be
discussed in this paper. However, most Individual Account proposals for Social
Security reform
do not include indexation of benefits.
Many portray Individual Accounts SSRS as being advantageous because such
systems do not provide incentives for early retirement. Countering
however, is the indication that DC SSRS can cause significant variation in the
dependency ratio over time. That is, countries
dominated by DC schemes may, over
time, be exposed to significant risk in the size of its labor
This is true because the
financial market’s condition strongly affects the retirement pattern of
its citizens, making the dependency
ratio unpredictable which may be contrary to
the interests of society at large.
To illustrate, the economic meltdown of 2008 would decrease DC account
balances causing those wishing to retire to stay in the labor
force at a time of
high unemployment; rapid economic expansion and healthy asset returns would have
the opposite, but still perverse,
impact (ie, workers would retire at a time of
labor shortages).
Finally, while this paper discusses only the retirement income portion of
Social Security, most Social Security systems also have
benefits for disability
and death that are somewhat difficult to replicate under the Individual Account
In short, there seems to be nothing to recommend Individual Accounts as the
plan design preference for a national
VII PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE
How much of the provision of retirement income security should be the
responsibility of society through the government and how much
should be left to
private/individual initiative?
The answer to this will certainly vary based on local culture. It is doubtful
that the Scandinavian countries would ever have the
low SSRS replacement ratios
common in the United States, for example (or vice versa).
Further, the discussion of what is public and what is private is often murky.
If private retirement savings have measurable tax incentives
(as in most
countries) then is this not the same as public participation? And, many of these
tax incentives have a regressive impact
since they benefit those in higher tax
brackets more. This aspect is often missing in the normal debate on these
Clearly, there is no magically ‘correct’ answer.
VIII AUTOMATIC BALANCING MECHANISMS
SSRS that are based on Individual Accounts do not need Automatic Balancing
Mechanisms (ABM) since the retirement benefit available
to the worker is only
what his or her account balance can purchase. Thus, by definition, the system is
always in ‘balance’.
Many DB SSRS around the world (eg, Canada, Brazil, Sweden, Germany, and
Japan) have introduced ABMs into their systems. These are
meant to return a plan
to sustainable financing when external forces (eg, economic or demographic)
create a non-sustainable balance
of contributions and benefits. This can be done
either by increasing the contributions or decreasing the benefits or by a
combination
of the two approaches.
It seems advisable that an ABM should react towards these imbalances by
sharing the pain as equitably as possible between workers
and retirees. If the
system is based on defined contributions the only variable in the system on
which the ABM can work must be the
benefits. In this case, the Automatic
Balancing Mechanism will be one-sided in that all of the impact will be on
retiree benefits
(as is the case in Sweden today).
Only one of the above SSRS shares the ‘pain’ between workers and
retirees at this time (Canada) and it can be shown that
‘normal’ circumstances even the Canadian ABM hits retiree benefits
harder than worker contributions.
This does not seem appropriate as retirees normally have no way to respond to
reduced benefits and reduced standards of living.
IX SYSTEM RISK DIVERSIFICATION
A basic economic/actuarial tenet is that one way to mitigate risk (variance)
is through diversification. That is, do not put all of
your eggs in one
This tenet should extend into the design of the total retirement income
security system of any
Most countries will have a variety of sources for retirement income for their
citizens. The author is of the opinion that system diversification
(eg, multiple
sources of income) is advantageous. These will normally include:
• a basic welfare-based income financed by tax revenues;
• a government-sponsored universal SSRS with contributions/benefits
that reflect both individual equity and social adequacy;
• employer-sponsored workplace pensions (DB or DC);
• individual savings.
The first layer will normally provide Defined Benefits and be financed on a
PAYGO basis. The second tier in most Western countries
is still a Defined
Benefit scheme although there has been a measurable shift to Defined
Contribution SSRS over the past thirty years.
If DB, these plans are normally
only partially funded (but not pure PAYGO). Similarly, employer-sponsored
pension plans, thirty years
ago, would have been primarily Defined Benefit plans
but are now mostly Defined Contribution. In either case, they are meant to be
fully funded at any time. Finally, individual savings are purely defined
contribution schemes and are fully funded by definition.
It can be shown that there are times when PAYGO is favourable and times when
full funding is to be preferred. Similarly there are
economic conditions that
favour DB systems and other environments that favour DC.
However, overall it is the position of this paper that the total national
system should represent a diversified approach to providing
retirement income
security. Some parts of the system should be PAYGO, some fully funded. Some
benefits should be DB, and some DC.
But never should an entire national
retirement income security system put all of its eggs in one basket.
This is a very serious concern today as many nations are on the road to only
one basket; namely, DC fully funded systems. One can
find nothing in basic
actuarial science axioms to support this positioning.
X CONCLUSION
SSRS around the world seem to be in a continuous state of flux. Old designs
are abandoned in favour of new science. In many developing
countries, SSRS are
being implemented for the first time.
The purpose of this paper is to provide a schematic for public policymakers
who promote certain SSRS design features. Should the plan
be PAYGO or fully
funded? Should minimum benefits be in a separate Pillar (0) tier or be a part of
government sponsored Social Security
in a tier (1) plan? The list of questions
This paper has presented a series of decision points in the design of an
optimal SSRS. Through a background of a strong knowledge
of the existing
literature, the paper has attempted to steer public policy decisions in a
direction that history has demonstrated
is to be preferred.
It is the author’s sincere hope that the discussion above will be used
to improve the design features of future SSRS around
Department of Statistics and
Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo, Canada. A previous Working Paper
version of this paper can
be found at
http://www.watrisq.uwaterloo.ca/Research/2010 Reports/2010-03.pdf
Henry J Aaron, ‘The Social
Insurance Paradox’ (1966) 32
Canadian Journal of Economics
Political Science
371, 374; Lawrence Thompson,
Older and Wiser: The
Economics of Public Pensions
(Urban Institute Press, 1998) ch 7.
Thompson, above n 1, ch 7.
As already shown in Robert L Brown,
‘In Defense of Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) Financing of Social Security’
(1997) 1(4)
North American Actuarial Journal
Steven A Sass, ‘Reforming the
Canadian Retirement System: Investing Social Security Assets in
(Global Issue in Brief Number 5, Center for Retirement
Research, Boston College, April 2006) 4.
Robert L Brown and Steven G Prus,
‘Social Transfers and Income Inequality in Old-Age: A Multi-National
Perspective’
(2004) 8(4)
North American Actuarial Journal
Michael Wiseman and Martynas Ycas, ‘The Canadian Safety Net for the
Elderly’ (2008) 68(2)
Social Security Bulletin
See, eg, Diana Chisholm and Rob Brown,
‘Negative Effects of the Canadian GIS Clawback and Possible Mitigation
Alternatives’
(2008) 12(4)
The North American Actuarial Journal
Robert L Brown and Joanne McDaid,
‘Factors Affecting Retirement Mortality’ (2003) 7(2)
American Actuarial Journal
Edgar R Whitehouse and Ashgar Zaidi,
‘Socio-Economic Differences in Mortality’ (OECD Social, Employment
and Migration
Working Papers No 71, 2008) 5.
See also, Robert L Brown and Jeffrey
Ip, ‘Social Security – Adequacy, Equity and Progressiveness: A
Review of Criteria
Based on Experience in Canada and the United States’
(2000) 4(1)
North American Actuarial Journal
Steven James, James
Pesando, Jennifer Arnold, John Iliw
The Fair Value of the Canada Pension
Plan: The Role of Risk and Cost Structure
(Canada Pension Plan Investment
Board, Working Paper, Third Draft, 2008) 5.
Olivia S Mitchell et al, ‘New
Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities’ (1999) 89(5)
American Economic Review
1299, 1312.
See, eg, Keith Ambachtsheer,
‘The Canada Supplementary Pension Plan (CSPP)’ (C. D. Howe Institute
Commentary No 265,
Toronto, May 2008).
Alberto Arenas de Mesa,
from the Privatization of the Social Security Pension System in Chile:
Macroeconomic Effects, Lessons and Challenges
(PhD thesis, University of
Pittsburgh, 1997); Indermit S Gill, Truman G Packard and Juan Yermo,
the Promise of Social Security in Latin America
(Stanford University Press
for the World Bank, 2004); Tapen Sinha and Maria de los Angeles Yanez, ‘A
Decade of Government-Mandated
Privately Run Pensions in Mexico: What Have We
Learned?’ in Stephen J Kay and Tapen Sinha (eds),
Lessons from Pension
Reform in the Americas
(Oxford University Press, 2008).
Ambachtsheer, above n 13,
With the ‘i’ standing for
a rate of interest or rate of investment return.
Jeffrey R Brown,
‘Differential Mortality and the Value of Individual Account Retirement
Annuities’ (Working Paper 7560,
National Bureau of Economic Research,
2000) 19, 7
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7560
Peter Diamond, ‘Social
(Presidential address delivered at the one hundred
fifteenth meeting of the American Economic Association, San Diego, CA, 2004)
www.atyponlink.com/AEAP/doi/pdf/10.1257/000282804322970670?cookieSet=1
Bonnie-Jeanne MacDonald, Andrew J G
Cairns, ‘The Impact of DC Pension Systems on Population Dynamics’
(2007) 11(1)
North American Actuarial Journal
Peter Diamond and Peter Orszag,
‘A summary of Saving Social Security: A Balanced Approach’
(Adapted extract from Peter Diamond and Peter Orszag,
Saving Social
Security: A Balanced Approach
(Brookings Institution Press, 2004) 2004)
http://econ-www.mit.edu/files/684
Gary Burtless, Lessons of the Financial Crisis for the Design of National
Pension Systems
(CESIFO Working Paper No 2735, July 2009) 11.
Diamond, above n 20.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.63 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter