URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlStuS/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Xing, Dong --- "Judicial Activism Within Human Rights-Based Climate Change Litigation: A Comparative Functional Analysis of the US and Australia" [2025] UNSWLawJlStuS 17; (2025) UNSWLJ Student Series No 25-17
JUDICIAL ACTIVISM WITHIN HUMAN RIGHTS-BASED CLIMATE CHANGE
LITIGATION: A COMPARATIVE FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF THE US AND AUSTRALIA
I INTRODUCTION
Since 2017, there has been a notable increase in Climate Change Litigation
(‘CCL’) cases globally, with a growing number
of cases being filed
around the world.
CCL covers situations in which climate change is one of multiple concerns or
where dealing with climate change is a distinct reason
or result of the case,
although it may not be the main legal argument presented to the
The current pattern involves a variety of legal approaches, an emphasis on
holding governments and corporations accountable, and adherence
to international
treaties with a broad range of topics, including regulation of fossil fuels,
corporate accountability, and disclosure
of environmental impact.
As CCL rapidly evolves as a legal realm, applicants will continue to
introduce novel arguments and claims. Throughout this process,
the impact of
judicial activism cannot be overlooked.
With the theoretical support of the
Paris Agreement
that parties
‘should, when taking action to address climate change, respect, promote
and consider their respective obligations
human rights grounds
have become emerging in CCL
Jacqueline Peel and Hari Osofsky observed that in CCL, loss and damage are
reframed as a human rights issue. This strategy highlights
the critical
importance of protecting climate-vulnerable communities and addressing the
violations of their rights.
prevailing trend, the human rights argument has become the mainstream approach
in CCL and has garnered attention from both the
This strategy also requires the courts to apply judicial activism to
interpret legislation to protect fundamental rights based on
The Sabin Centre database indicates that CCL volume increased significantly
in Australia, ranking second only to the United Sstates
Lawsuits are filed in both state and federal courts, encompassing a wide range
of case categories.
Historically, CCL in the US and Australia has primarily centred on
challenging administrative decisions associated with projects contributing
greenhouse gas (‘GHG’) emissions through judicial review or
However, human rights are used as legal grounds in some influential cases in
these two countries to establish significant precedents.
For instance, in some landmark cases, addressing climate change was
considered part of safeguarding human rights, like in the US seminal
Juliana v United States
Waratah Coal v Youth Verdict Ltd
Therefore, assessing how courts make rulings in response to human rights
demands has become an opportunity to observe judicial activism
ratification in different jurisdictions.
This article aims to answer the following questions:
1. How is judicial activism reflected in the United States and Australia
through the lens of human rights grounds in CCL?
2. What are the ramifications of judicial activism in those two countries
when the courts face human rights claims in CLL?
The argument and the structure of this article are as follows:
Part II lays the theoretical foundation of judicial activism. A flagship
international CCL case of
Urgenda Foundation v State of Netherladnds
is selected to reflect briefly on the strategy of how human rights are
argued and interpreted in CCL.
Part III explains this article methodology of comparative law studies, which
guides the comparative case studies in Part IV.
In Part IV,
Waratah Coal
are selected for detailed
analysis. Both cases are centred on human rights grounds, and both
state of Queensland have legislation to
address human rights expressly. The selection criteria make the comparison have
fewer variable
factors but more focus on how the courts interpret human rights
protection within the legislative framework.
Finally, in Part V, the research reveals the similarities and differences
between the US and Australia regarding implementing and
rectifying judicial
activism in CCL and sheds light on the future development of human rights
grounds in CCL.
II JUDICIAL ACTIVISM IN HUMAN RIGHTS-BASED CLIMATE
Based on Blackstone’s perspective on the judiciary, it is often
asserted that judges do not and cannot make law; they only discover
and declare
This view of the judiciary’s function is rigid and formalist,
particularly in the context of CCL, where the physical world is
significant changes due to climate change. The world has experienced rising
temperatures, increasing sea levels, more
frequent natural disasters,
climate-related displacement, etc. At the same time, public awareness of climate
change has rapidly intensified
around the globe.
Against this backdrop, in CCL, judicial activism facilitated the opportunity
to explore the practical application and legal interpretation
in the court to
deal with challenges placed by climate change.
Judicial activism is accurately defined as ‘a heavy use of
discretionary powers, often with the suggestion that the judges have
a political
agenda’, that is ‘often driven by recognition of evolving social
values or the implications of new scientific
knowledge and technological
By practising judicial activism, the court actually becomes an
‘activist’ and will not only focus on dispute resolution.
it decides on policy questions and broader social
In CCL, the court, which is fond of judicial activism, will respond to the
societal perspectives and desire to tackle climate change
and the harms and
infringement caused by it.
In a democratic society, a popularly elected government can create climate
change policies that go against international agreements;
those policies are
still considered democratic. In this circumstance, judges addressing climate
change issues that are not covered
by domestic policy may be viewed as
contradicting the principles on which democracy is built.
In order to solve this dilemma and avoid judicial restraint, judges should
intervene when disputes involve significant threats to
fundamental democratic
rights, such as the right to
It is common in CCL currently that existing legal rules may not always apply
to climate change issues, requiring the formulation of
new rules to balance
economic development and nature conservation and, ultimately, to protect human
The human rights trend in climate litigation, as outlined in the
report, focuses on leveraging human rights frameworks to address
climate change
impacts. Cases increasingly argue that inadequate climate mitigation and
adaptation violate fundamental rights, including
the rights to life, health,
water, food, and a healthy environment.
A growing trend in climate litigation centred around human rights has been
captured by the United Nations, which uses human rights
legal frameworks to
tackle the effects of climate change.
Human rights can be infringed by insufficient measures for climate mitigation
and adaptation, including the rights to life, health,
water, food, and a safe
environment.
Human rights arguments occurred in CCL in various jurisdictions. Domestic
cases have contended that climate rights stem from established
constitutional
and fundamental rights within domestic laws, frequently aligning with
international obligations under the
, the Urgenda Foundation, a Dutch
environmental group, and 900 Dutch citizens took legal action against the
government of the Netherlands
in 2015, demanding more significant measures to
combat global climate change. The District Court of The Hague found that the
of the Netherlands is responsible for excessive GHG emissions and
violated the obligations under articles 2 and 8 of the
European Convention on
Human Rights
Article 2 regulates the right to life by stating ‘everyone’s
right to life shall be protected by law’, while article
8 is regarding the
right to respect for ‘his private and family life, his home and his
correspondence’.
After appeals by the government, the country’s Court of Appeal and the
Supreme Court of the Netherlands upheld the District
Court’s judgment and
ruled in favour of the Urgenda Foundation on human rights grounds. The case
expands the opportunities
for strategic climate justice lawsuits based on human
rights in the Netherlands, including the possibility of claiming damages for
harm caused by excessive
The Supreme Court of the Netherlands also considered the argument raised by
the government that the court cannot impose an ‘order
legislation’ on it.
government’s argument is based on
trias politica
, which is the
Dutch system of separation of
In the Supreme Court of the Netherlands’ reasoning, it is evident that
the court first established that the government’s
actions regarding
climate change constituted a violation of human rights which constitute a tort
Dutch Civil Code
. On this basis, the Court determined that the
government had a duty to take action. However, the specific actions to be taken
considered within the government's discretionary
demonstrates the recently popular strategy of climate change
mitigation, in which activists utilise human rights grounds to support
claims to hold the government accountable for tackling climate
Furthermore, the Supreme Court of the Netherlands’ judgment established
a logical framework from Urgenda for CCL, asserting
that requiring the
government to take human rights-based actions to mitigate climate change does
not lead the judiciary to exceed
its judicial power, encroach upon the
legislative domain, or undermine the executive powers of the government. As a
civil law jurisdiction,
the Netherlands' approach provides a valuable reference
for common law countries in developing their own legal responses to
The ruling also unprecedently ordered a national government to comply with
the provisions agreed upon within an international climate
This aspect is a special
feature of the Dutch legal system. In common law countries, international legal
obligations are generally
subordinate to domestic law. However, in the
Netherlands, international legal obligations, including human rights treaties,
precedence over conflicting national laws. This legal framework
empowers Dutch courts to directly enforce such obligations against
thereby enabling judicial activism in
Paolo Farah and Imad Ibrahim stress the importance of judicial activism in
by arguing that it proved swift and decisive. The Dutch Courts
recognised the importance of human rights in their discussions by
interpreting
government inaction as a violation of human rights, a principle that ultimately
contributed to a favourable resolution
plaintiffs.
Although no jurisdictions explicitly confer a human right to a healthy
a similar strategy of
utilising human rights grounds in CCL has spread to other countries, including
the US and Australia, which
will be demonstrated in Part IV.
III RESEARCH METHODOLOGY: COMPARATIVE LAW THROUGH THE
FUNCTIONAL METHOD
Comparative law studies in CCL between the US and Australia provide various
intellectual and educational advantages, particularly
in enhancing comprehension
of human rights grounds and judicial activism.
John Reitz uses an analogy to describe comparative law, likening it to
comparing ‘apples’ and ‘oranges’ to
form a more general
category such as
legal systems in the US and Australia may not be as distinct as apples and
oranges, they can be seen as different types
of apples, like ‘red
delicious’ and ‘granny smith’. These legal systems have
inherited distinct legal philosophies
from their respective historical and
social backgrounds.
Comparing these two nations can help identify the distinct characteristics of
their legal systems as well as their
similarities.
This approach
promotes the consideration of climate litigation as a worldwide issue, not just
within local boundaries but within
a global or interdisciplinary framework. It
offers insights into how the law interacts with political, economic, and social
and facilitates international transactions and communication between
legal systems, particularly in a globalised
The examination will utilise the functional approach, focusing on the
tangible outcomes or impacts of legal establishments. Legal
frameworks are
evaluated according to their problem-solving abilities in real-life
situations.
This approach proves especially advantageous in environmental-related fields
where countries like Australia and the US can be compared
based on their
approaches to regulating pollution and protecting natural resources and human
rights despite having different regulatory
frameworks.
The functional method in comparative law research can provide criticisms and
propose improvements to enhance the performance of a
legal system by emphasising
real-world effectiveness and drawing on successful functional aspects from other
It emphasises the practical functioning of the legal system, consistent with
the perspective that legal systems should be interpreted
in the context of their
wider social and economic
objectives.
This research will
use functional equivalence to reflect different solutions arising from similar
IV COMPARATIVE LAW STUDIES ON JUDICIAL ACTIVISM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS GROUNDS IN CCL
Human rights arguments are commonly raised in CCL but are rarely seen as the
main legal grounds. The research targets jurisdictions
in the US and Australia
that have legislation to protect human rights explicitly, and two cases were
selected for comparison:
, a federal-level case in the US, and
Waratah Coal
, which has been filed in
Queensland, Australia.
The Bill of Rights in the
United States
Constitution
protects a wide
range of human rights, covering political, religious, and economic domains.
However, it does not recognise environmental
rights, meaning that the right to
enjoy a stable environment is not protected as a constitutional human
So far, all legal
attempts to add environmental rights to the
Constitution
Additionally, the US
courts have a strong tradition of applying the ‘political question
doctrine’. When CCL is deemed
a political issue, courts tend to defer the
matter to the executive branch for
resolution.
Due to the lack of similar legislation in the Bill of Rights in the federal
constitution, Australia as a jurisdiction is excluded
from this research.
Queensland was selected because it passed the
Human Rights Act
broadly defines human rights but does not explicitly
recognise climate or environmental rights. A climate-related claim must be
to another cause of action, such as the right to life or Indigenous
rights, to be considered legally
Moreover, regarding the
relationship between international and domestic law, Urgenda is a landmark
example of global CCL.
was directly grounded in the
because the Dutch
legal system is partially monist. According to articles 93 and 94 of the
Constitution
, if an international legal rule is considered binding
on all individuals, it can be directly applied in domestic cases. Consequently,
has become a particularly important legal source for CCL in the
Netherlands.
It demonstrates how domestic law can connect with international law in the
Netherlands, offering a fresh perspective on how international
law interactions
can influence CCL. However, tempering this optimism is important, as the
relationship between international and
domestic law varies across different
In the US and Australia, the relationship between international law and
domestic law is quite different from that in the Netherlands.
Generally, both
countries follow a principle known as dualism, which emphasises the separation
between international law and domestic
law. According to dualism, international
law and domestic law operate in distinct spheres and international treaties
cannot be automatically
enforced as domestic laws. Therefore, for international
law to take effect within a specific jurisdiction, it must be integrated
the domestic laws, a process often referred to as
transformation.
Constitution
has a Supremacy Clause. Found in article
VI, clause 2 which states that:
Constitution
, and the Laws of the United States which shall be
made in Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under
the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and
the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any
thing in the
Constitution
or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding.
Despite this provision in the
Constitution
, not all international
treaties can be directly enforced in the country. Usually, the US Supreme Court
determines whether a treaty
is self-executing or non-self-executing. Treaties
that are self-executing have the force of domestic law, while non-self-executing
treaties require legislation from Congress to become judicially
enforceable.
For instance, in
Foster v Neilson
, the Court saw a treaty as a
contract between two nations, not a legislative act. It stated that:
Constitution
declares a treaty to be the law of the land. It is
consequently to be regarded in courts of justice as equivalent to an act of the
Legislature whenever it operates of itself, without the aid of any legislative
provision. But when the terms of the stipulation import
a contract, when either
of the parties engages to perform a particular act, the treaty addresses itself
to the political, not the
Judicial, Department, and the Legislature must execute
the contract before it can become a rule for the Court.
When international treaties conflict with domestic law, the American legal
system has a complex response. Self-executing treaties
are regarded as having
the same authority as federal law and take precedence over state law. Further,
self-executing executive agreements
also override conflicting state laws.
Congressional-executive agreements and administrative agreements made under
treaties have the
same weight as federal law. However, the courts have
determined that sole executive agreements signed by the president are less
authoritative
than conflicting federal laws when they relate to matters
explicitly authorised by Congress.
Regarding non-self-executing treaty and administrative agreement provisions,
the US Supreme Court has made clear that the responsibility
for translating
international obligations arising from non-self-executing treaties into domestic
law rests with Congress. Therefore,
without legislative action in the bicameral
process, it is unlikely that non-self-executing agreements will be transformed
into enforceable
domestic law in the
Even when Congress and the President ratify treaties, they are sometimes
subject to conditions that prevent them from serving as a
legal basis for
domestic law. In international human rights law, the US imposes conditional
restrictions on modern human rights treaties
such as the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
The traditional bicameral legislative process, rather than signing the
treaty, is the proper scenario to enact domestic civil rights
laws. Thus, human
rights treaties that do not address reciprocal obligations and regulate only
domestic relations between states
and their citizens go beyond the scope of
treaty rights.
Australia has a less complex situation than the US when facing international
Since Australia does not address international law status in its
Constitution
, the High Court of Australia has articulated its stance on
the relationship between international and domestic law through various
The High Court has determined that international treaties signed by Australia
only have external effects and serve as commitments
to the international
community; they do not legally impact the country’s powers and
responsibilities regarding internal
For an international treaty to take effect within Australia, it must be
enacted through domestic law. Given the significance of the
separation of powers
and federalism in the Australian legal framework, international treaties remain
exclusively within the scope
of the executive, whose decisions do not create or
modify domestic law.
Apart from international law, which is not binding on domestic law, if there
is a conflict between international law and Australian
domestic law, the latter
shall prevail. The High Court has held that neither the executive nor the
judicial power of the Commonwealth
need be constitutionally limited in order to
satisfy international law.
Although the enforcement of international law in Australia is constrained,
this does not mean that international law is insignificant
to domestic law.
According to
section 15AB(2)(d)
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
when domestic law refers to the enforcement of an international
treaty or agreement, relevant instruments or texts of international
serve as aids for interpretation.
For instance, even though the
was drafted with reference to
international human rights
section 48(3) of the
restricts international law and international case precedents to
being merely ‘considered’ rather than directly applied.
In addition, for CCL, Australia’s judicial system noticeably recognises
the important role of international law in the development
of domestic law,
particularly in the area of human rights.
Brennan J stated:
The common law does not necessarily conform with international law, but
international law is a legitimate and important influence
on the development of
the common law, especially when international law declares the existence of
universal human rights.
Kirby J reaffirmed that:
[T]he basic principle[s] of the international law of human rights ... can
properly inform the expression of the common law of Australia,
and add a new
dimension, not considered in past cases, for the elaboration of the common
The following case analysis reflects the responses of the judicial systems in
the US and Australia to international human rights law
in CCL. Specifically,
did not rely on international human rights law but instead argued
for protecting human rights under the
Constitution
. In contrast, the
Waratah Coal
made limited reference to the application of
international CCL regarding human rights.
A Judicial Activism and the Amendments of the
Constitution
, a group of 21 young Americans initiated their
constitutional climate lawsuit against the US government in 2015 at the United
District Court for the District of Oregon. The US government responded
with a motion to dismiss the case.
The plaintiffs’ argument claims that the
government’s active measures contributing to climate change have infringed
the constitutional rights to life, liberty, and property of the younger
generation and have also neglected to safeguard crucial public
They request a declaratory judgment and an injunction requiring the
government to establish a strategy to ‘gradually eliminate
fossil fuel
emissions and reduce excess atmospheric [carbon
In 2016, the District Court denied the government’s motion and affirmed
that the plaintiffs had a constitutional right to a
‘climate system
capable of sustaining human
After the US
government appealed to both the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (‘the Ninth
Circuit’) and the US Supreme
Court, with the US Supreme Court refusing to
intervene directly, in 2020, the Ninth Circuit dismissed the case. It ruled that
the political branches could address the plaintiffs’ requested
The plaintiffs’ human rights arguments are rooted in the US Bill of
Rights as the Fifth and Ninth Amendments constitute important
theoretical
The plaintiffs claimed violations of:
• the plaintiffs’ substantive rights under the Due Process Clause
of the Fifth Amendment;
• the plaintiffs’ rights under the Fifth Amendment to equal
protection of the law;
• the plaintiffs’ rights under the Ninth Amendment; and,
• the public trust doctrine.
Life, Liberty, and Property Rights and the Fifth
The plaintiffs’ core argument is that the government had been aware for
more than fifty years that carbon dioxide emissions
from fossil fuel combustion
contribute to global warming and recognised that this posed a risk to
‘human life, liberty, and
They asserted an implicit fundamental right to a ‘climate system
capable of sustaining human life’ under the Due Process
Clause of the
Fifth Amendment.
The plaintiff also raised the ‘danger-creation due process
claim’ argument under the Fifth Amendment, which argues that
government’s fossil fuel-favoured policies are not merely negligent but
actively worsened the risks of climate change;
it has infringed on their life,
liberty, and property by contributing to climate change. Therefore, they claimed
harm of health issues,
displacement, and damage to
To support their arguments, the plaintiffs presented expert evidence to prove
that government policies contribute to global warming.
Therefore, they were
calling for immediate action to prevent irreparable harm to their
constitutional rights because there is a limited
time remaining to act before
climate change hits
irreversible.
In its judgment, the District Court accepted plaintiffs’ arguments
regarding the Due Process Clause in the Fifth Amendment.
The District Court held that plaintiffs have adequately alleged infringement
of a fundamental right protected by the Due Process Clause
of the Fifth
Implied Right to a Sustainable Environment, the Ninth Amendment and
Public Trust Doctrines
In addition to the Fifth Amendment, the plaintiffs also strengthened the
protection of human rights in addressing climate change through
Amendment, which implies that in addition to listing specific rights in the
Constitution
, people can have other rights that have not
been addressed.
Therefore, the plaintiffs argued on this basis that the Ninth Amendment
protects unenumerated rights essential to human well-being,
environmental stability necessary to sustain life.
This claim expands the constitutional basis for environmental protection,
even if the relevant power is not explicitly mentioned in
Constitution
but emphasises that the right of people to a liveable climate
is consistent with the rights reserved by
The plaintiffs made claims under the Public Trust Doctrines
(‘PTDs’). PTDs hold that common natural resources such as
atmosphere, water systems and forests are the shared property of all citizens,
and therefore the state should perpetually steward
They argue that the federal government has violated PTDs by allowing conduct
that destroys the environment and natural resources,
exacerbates climate change,
undermines public welfare, and threatens public
The District Court recognised the PTD claim by ruling that the PTD is deeply
rooted in US history and is a ‘fundamental principle’
In the judgment, Judge Aiken made a significant ruling:
I have no doubt that the right to a climate system capable of sustaining
human life is fundamental to a free and ordered society.
Just as marriage is the
‘foundation of the family,’ a stable climate system is quite
literally the foundation ‘of
society, without which there would be neither
civilization nor progress.
It is the most important point in the District Court’s decision, which
was that the court found a right to a stable
The Case Overturned and Calling for Judiciary Intervention in the
The Ninth Circuit overturned the District Court’s decision and
dismissed the case for lack of Article III
It also ruled that the
plaintiffs’ injuries exceeded the court’s power to order, design,
supervise, or implement.
In order to satisfy the article III standing, the plaintiffs need to
establish that, firstly, they have suffered or will imminently
suffer a concrete
and particularised injury; secondly, the injury is traceable to the
defendant’s actions; and thirdly, the
injury is redressable by the
In the judgment, the court acknowledges that ‘[t]he plaintiffs
have presented compelling evidence that climate change is causing
continue to cause a variety of severe injuries to their health, personal safety,
and property’,
,and agrees
that ‘[t]he plaintiffs have also presented evidence that these injuries
are caused by carbon emissions’, and
‘federal subsidies and leases
have increased those
emissions’.
It means that the Ninth Circuit agrees the first and second elements of
article III standing have been satisfied, and the missing
puzzle is the third
element. Because the court concluded that the plaintiffs’ injuries were
not redressable and the court had
no power over the remedial plan the plaintiff
sought. Consequently, it found that ‘the plaintiffs’ case must be
to the political branches or to the electorate at large’.
In her dissent, Judge Staton presented a striking opinion. She agreed with
the plaintiffs’ claim that the US government is not
only failing to curb
climate change but is, in fact, enabling it through its policies. Additionally,
she challenged the common arguments
asserting that the injuries cannot be
redressed, emphasising that even partial compensation is both necessary and
significant.
Another notable point, which can demonstrate judicial activism vividly, is
that Judge Staton held that the courts have the authority
and responsibility to
intervene in CCL and called for action against judicial
Such relief, much like the desegregation orders and statewide prison
injunctions the Supreme Court has sanctioned, would vindicate
plaintiffs’
constitutional rights without exceeding the Judiciary’s
B The Function of Human Rights Legislation in Queensland,
Waratah Coal
In 2020, Youth Verdict and the Bimblebox Alliance (‘YVTBA’)
submitted objections at the Queensland Land Court (‘QLC’)
Waratah Coal Pty Ltd’s (‘Waratah Coal’) Galilee mining
The project consists of two open-cut mines and four profitable underground
mining operations that extract massive amounts of coal
annually for over two
decades. The project is expected to release approximately 1.58 billion tons of
carbon emissions, including
the indirect emissions caused by the exported coal
being burned internationally.
The Australian Commonwealth approved the Galilee project in 2013, but it
still needs to obtain a Queensland State government mining
environmental authority before operating.
After Waratah Coal’s applications went to the public, YVTBA lodged
objections to the project under the
Mineral Resources Act
Environmental Protection Act
, the QLC was responsible for
hearing these objections and ruling a recommendation to first approve or deny a
mining lease under the
and second approve or deny an environmental
authority under the
In 2022, after evaluating the objections, the QLC made a recommendation from
President Kingham to reject the applications based on
environmental, climate,
and human rights issues.
The scope of the right to life and its relationship with climate change had
not been considered by any court in Queensland or Australia
before this
Therefore, it was
remarkable that YVTBA presented crucial arguments highlighting significant
implications for human rights and climate
change under the
YVTBA’s arguments are based on sections of
• The right to life of people in Queensland
(section 16)
• The rights of First Nations People
(section 28)
• The rights to privacy and home
(section 25(a))
• The rights of children
(section 26(2))
• The right to property of people in Queensland
(section 24)
• The right of certain groups to enjoy human rights without
discrimination
(section 15(3))
The Right to Life is Limited
The right to life imposes a negative obligation to refrain from conduct
causing arbitrary deprivation of
The term ‘arbitrary’ refers to actions or decisions that are
‘unpredictable, unjust, or
unreasonable’.
what is reasonably necessary for the project involves making a thoughtful value
judgment that balances costs and
The QLC recognised the interconnectedness of humans with the environment, and
environmental degradation, climate change, and unsustainable
development pose
significant threats to the right to life. The QLC also ruled that the
interpretation of the right to life cannot
be restrictive, even without the loss
of life occurring, it can be violated by a life-threatening
The QLC finds the project’s emissions will worsen environmental issues
in Queensland, increasing fatalities from bushfires,
heatwaves, and
While the economic
benefits are significant, they don’t outweigh the expected environmental
damage and public health costs.
The coal supply to Southeast Asia does not
justify its significant climate change
Approving the project
risks contributing to preventable harm and limiting fundamental
The Rights of First Nations People is Widely Considered
The human rights of First Nations People have been widely examined and
intertwined with other arguments in the case. The Court found
that climate
change will affect First Nations peoples in a disproportionate manner.
Climate change impacts on the First Nation’s cultural rights will be
significant, as some people will be displaced from their
country, and their
culture will struggle to
The risk of displacement is very clear in Queensland as First Nations peoples
in the north of Australia are already ‘experiencing
the effects of climate
change impacts on their ability to enjoy, maintain, control, and develop
For instance,
the Torres Strait Island peoples face an existential risk from sea level rise,
while cultural destruction is ‘something
that cannot be measured in
monetary terms’.
The derivates of the rights of First Nations People, such as the human rights
of First Nations children and disadvantaged people,
are mentioned repeatedly in
the arguments.
The Rights to Privacy and Home and the Right to Property
The risk of displacement due to climate change in the Torres Strait Islands
does not only pose threats to First Nations People’s
culture but also a
serious risk to the homes of local
Due to its unique location, the Torres Strait Islands can be among the first
areas to become unliveable, with future sea level rise
threatening homes on the
islands. In addition to the islands, parts of Queensland will become unliveable
due to extreme heat. Therefore,
the limit on the right would be
The infringement on human rights in regard to property caused by climate
change has been discussed from homes to broader properties.
Property loss,
displacement and unhabitable environment caused by weather events are recognised
in this case.
Other impacts associated with the risk to property include economic
consequences, displacement of people from their property and related
health concerns.
A remarkable court finding is that the de facto deprivation of property for
at least thousands of Queenslanders has been directly
linked with the
The Rights of Children and the Rights of Certain Groups
The QLC found that children have vulnerability and a disproportionate
intergenerational burden when facing climate change, and they
lack control over
making decisions.
Additionally,
the intersection of rights for First Nations children is important as their
displacement threatens their connection
to their country and
Apart from children, the QLC also found climate change impacts
disproportionately on older individuals and disadvantaged groups, including
First Nations communities which are at higher risk for illnesses related to
extreme heat.
C Comparative Human Rights Grounds in CCL: Judicial
Activism in the US and Australia
The above two cases reveal the similarities and differences regarding the
strategy of human rights grounds in CCL and judicial activism
between the US and
Waratah Coal
, it can be observed that
judicial activism exists in both jurisdictions. The courts are embracing the
interactive relationship between
human rights and climate change.
Meanwhile, they also illustrate the boundaries of judicial activism in
different legal frameworks.
Different Effects of Legal Frameworks on CCL
The legal framework directly determines the approach of human rights grounds
in CCL in the US and Australia.
The Bill of Rights in the US directly supports linking climate change to
human rights. In
, plaintiffs argued, based on constitutional
amendments, that the government’s failure to address climate change
violated citizens’ rights to life, liberty, property and a
sustainable environment.
The plaintiffs aimed to establish a connection between climate change and
constitutional rights by emphasising the threat that climate
change poses to
future generations’ environment. Although the case ultimately did not
succeed, its advancement in Federal Court
set a new legal precedent that could
serve as a reference for similar lawsuits in the future.
In contrast, Australia does not have a Bill of Rights at the Commonwealth
level, resulting in a lack of legal grounds for human rights
Constitution
and creating a void for CCL regarding human rights protections. This gap in the
legal framework prevents climate change lawsuits
at the federal level from
holding the federal government accountable for human rights violations.
This limitation highlights that, without constitutional safeguards, even if
judicial activism is widely accepted, Australia may lack
a solid ground for
pursuing human rights in CCL against the Federal Government.
Different Manifestations of Judicial Activism within Similar Legal
Although human rights grounds are entrenched at the federal level in
Waratah Coal
demonstrates ground-breaking potential due to the
in Queensland.
The plaintiffs successfully argued under the
to frame climate
change as a threat to fundamental human rights, establishing a link between
human rights and climate change in the
Waratah Coal
share a similar strategy: after
identifying the link between climate change and human rights, both plaintiffs
try to convince the
courts to adopt a broader and more active interpretation of
human rights protection under the related legislation.
Another similarity is that both cases depend heavily on scientific evidence.
Plaintiffs have successfully demonstrated, through extensive
expert evidence,
the risks climate change poses to fundamental human rights. This integration of
science and law not only strengthens
the arguments in these cases but also lays
a technical foundation for judicial activism in the courts in determining
damages and
measuring remedies.
The Boundaries of Judicial Activism
Waratah Coal
, it becomes clear how the
boundaries of judicial activism in the US and Australia regarding human rights
grounds in CCL.
The claims made by the plaintiffs in
appear to be somewhat
empty and lack specificity.
contrast, the plaintiffs in
Waratah Coal
were clear in their arguments
and targeted the directly responsible party, allowing them to present
substantial evidence, measurable
impacts, and practical remedies during the
proceedings.
Even if the courts acknowledge the role of judicial activism in CCL, they
could only establish specific conditions for interpreting
or recognising the
relevant legislation, which is necessary to ensure that they do not overstep
their duty to uphold the rule of
Background of Judicial Activism in CCL
Waratah Coal
recognise the international
consensus on the relationship between climate change and human rights. In 2009,
the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights affirmed
that climate change jeopardises the right to life, the right to adequate food,
the right to water, the right to health, the right to adequate housing and the
right to self-determination.
Aligning with the United Nations, the Australian government recognises
climate change’s effects on similar human
There are no observed
obstacles to climate change impacts on human rights in Australian courts.
The political environment in the United States is complex. For instance, the
Trump administration withdrew from the
Paris Agreement
in 2019, while the
Biden administration later rejoined it in 2021. Despite changes in government
and policy, the courts did not alter
their rulings based on the domestic
political climate. This is evident because no US court dismissed any claims
solely due to the
government’s withdrawal from the climate agreement. This
situation highlights a notable example of the independence of the
judiciary and
judicial activism in the US courts.
The Difference in the Effect of the Judgment
As a federal-level case, the Ninth Circuit decision in
have significant implications for future legal interpretations across the US. It
revolves around the interpretation of the
Constitution
, and it is
essential to recognise that if the outcome leads to further appeals to the US
Supreme Court, the interpretation of constitutional
rights could vary greatly.
Furthermore, the potential consequences of a loss for climate change activists
must be carefully considered.
In contrast, in the
Waratah Coal
, the QLC has more flexibility to
express its opinions in a judicial activist manner. This is not only because it
is a state-level
case, but also because the QLC’s judgments are
recommendations rather than binding decisions. Ultimately, the final decision
rests with the Queensland government.
V CONCLUSION
Based on the analysis above, the following responses to the research
questions can be formulated: Judicial activism plays a significant
role in the
discussion of human rights grounds within CCL in both the United States and
Australia. Courts in both countries tend
to adopt a favourable view of judicial
activism in this area, although existing legal frameworks still limit them.
When plaintiffs assert human rights claims, the court can fill gaps in
existing law by establishing new precedents. Thus, the significance
judicial activism approach is that the court can change the existing rules
instead of rigidly providing interpretations.
The encouraging outcome is that in
Waratah Coal
the courts in two jurisdictions, spurred on by judicial activism, have
unanimously recognised the absolute link between climate
change and human
rights, that governments are responsible for addressing climate change, and that
climate change, broadly defined,
can cause substantial harm to specific
individuals and groups.
While it is important to remain optimistic about such judicial practices, an
undeniable fact is that CCL utilising human rights strategies
faces significant
challenges, and its actual impact on mitigating climate change remains
Research indicates that the
had a relatively limited impact on
Dutch climate policy. One study suggests that most of the emissions reduction
measures implemented
by the Dutch government in response to the ruling did not
achieve any meaningful mitigation
Similarly, none of
the three cases discussed in this article,
Waratah Coal
, have led to substantial and direct improvements in climate
change. This is because, regardless of how idealistic judicial activism
courts cannot create specific environmental outcomes where the law does not
explicitly allow them to.
Thus, while progress in those three CCL cases should be acknowledged, it is
crucial to recognise that the human rights-based argument
is, at best, a
judicial fallback strategy in the absence of comprehensive legislation. Suing
specific emitters is inherently an inefficient
and temporary solution to climate
Ultimately, effective
climate governance necessitates legislation at both the national and local
That said, small steps add up to create significant progress. Particularly
given the frequent failures of intergovernmental negotiations
international law, it is meaningful for developed economies to take the lead in
exploring the boundaries of CCL through individual
cases. Through judicial
activism to expand the legal scope of climate change, such CCL cases not only
promote legal principles but
also raise public awareness and encourage wider
discussions on climate
When the court, legislators, executives and ordinary citizens in a society
prioritise human rights over economic development and business
judicial activism will have more room to pursue climate justice and advocate for
clear and enforceable legislation.
United Nations Environment
Global Climate Litigation Report 2023 Status Review
27 July 2023) 14 (‘
Global Climate Litigation Report
Jacqueline Peel and Hari
Osofsky, ‘Climate Change Litigation’
Annual Review of Law
and Social Science
Paris Agreement
for signature 22 April 2016,
[2016] ATS 24
(entered into force 4 November 2016)
Margaretha Wewerinke-Singh,
‘The Rising Tide of Rights: Addressing Climate Loss and Damage through
Rights-Based Litigation’
(2023) 12(3)
Transnational Environmental
Jacqueline Peel and Hari
Climate Change Litigation: Regulatory Pathways to Cleaner Energy
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 340.
Rachel Pepper, ‘Turning
a Ripple into a Torrent: Riding the Waves of Climate Change Litigation’
(Speech, Clayton Utz
Seminar, Climate Change Litigation, Sydney, 16 March 2021)
Ceri Warnock and Brian
Preston, ‘Climate Change, Fundamental Rights, and Statutory
Interpretation’
(2023) 35(1)
Journal of Environmental Law
Nicola Pain, ‘Climate
Change Litigation in the Asia-Pacific’ (Speech, Asian Australian Lawyers
Association National
Cultural Diversity Summit, 1 October 2022) 11.
Juliana v United States
(9th Cir, No. 18-36082, January 17 2020).
Waratah Coal Pty Ltd v Youth Verdict Ltd [No 6]
[2022] QLC 21.
refers to a
series of litigations between Urgenda Foundation and the State of the
Netherlands, including:
Urgenda Foundation v State of the Netherlands
(ECLI:NL:RBDHA:2015:7196 ) (The Hague District Court),
State of the
Netherlands v Urgenda Foundation
(ECLI:NL:GHDHA:2018:2610 ) (The Hague Court
of Appeal) and
State of the Netherlands v Urgenda Foundation
(ECLI:NL:HR:2019:2007)
(Supreme Court of the Netherlands).
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England Book
(Legal Classics Library, 1983)
Australian Law
) (online at 30 July 2024)
‘judicial activism’.
Margit Cohn and Mordechai
Kremnitzer, ‘Judicial Activism: A Multidimensional Model’
Canadian Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
Laura Burgers,
‘Should Judges Make Climate Change Law?’ (2020) 9(1)
Transnational Environmental Law
Global Climate
Litigation Report 2023
Naomi Spoelman,
‘Urgenda: A How-To Guide for Enforcing Greenhouse Gas Emission Targets by
Protecting Human Rights’
(2021) 47(2)
Ecology Law Quarterly
Rebecca Mooney, ‘The
Urgenda Case: Human Rights Obligations to Reduce Carbon Emissions’
Oxford Human Rights Hub
(Web Page, 29 January 2020)
<https://ohrh.law.ox.ac.uk/the-urgenda-case-human-rights-obligations-to-reduce-carbon-emissions/>.
The State of the
Netherlands v Urgenda Foundation
(Supreme Court of The Netherlands, 20
December 2019, unofficial translation through Climate Change Litigation
Urgenda Supreme Court Decision
Ibid; Jan ten Kate and
Peter van Koppen, ‘Judicialization of Politics in the Netherlands: Towards
a Form of Judicial Review’
(1994) 15(2)
International Political
Science Review
Urgenda Supreme Court
(n 20) [5.13].
Jacqueline Peel and Hari
Osofsky, ‘A Rights Turn in Climate Change Litigation?’ (2018) 7
Transnational Environmental Law
37, 37–67; Jaap Spier, ‘There
is No Future Without Addressing Climate Change’
Energy and Natural Resources Law
State of the
Netherlands v Urgenda Foundation
(2019) 132(7)
Harvard Law
Joana Setzer and Dennis van
Urgenda v State of the Netherlands
: Lessons for
International Law and Climate Change Litigants’
Grantham Research
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment
(Web Page, 10 December 2019)
<https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/urgenda-v-state-of-the-netherlands-lessons-for-international-law-and-climate-change-litigants/>.
Evert Stamhuis, ‘A
Case of Judicial Intervention in Climate Policy: The Dutch Urgenda Ruling’
Canadian Legal Journal of Public and Comparative Law
Paolo Davide Farah and Imad
Antoine Ibrahim, ‘Urgenda vs Juliana: Lessons for Future Climate Change
Litigation Cases’
(2023) 84(3)
University of Pittsburgh Law Review
James Robert May,
‘The Human Right to a Healthy Climate’
American Bar
Association
(Web Page, 30 October 2024)
<https://www.americanbar.org/groups/crsj/resources/human-rights/2024-october/human-right-healthy-climate/>.
John Reitz, ‘How to
Do Comparative Law’
(1998) 46(4)
American Journal of Comparative Law
Oliver Brand,
‘Conceptual Comparisons Towards a Coherent Methodology of Comparative
Legal Studies’
Brooklyn Journal of International Law
Reitz (n 29) 618.
Kenneth Murchison,
‘Environmental Law in Australia and the United States: A Comparative
(1994) 11(3)
Environmental and Planning Law Journal
Ralf Michaels, ‘The
Functional Method of Comparative Law’ in Mathias Reimann, and
Reinhard Zimmermann (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Comparative
(Oxford Academic, 2006) 373.
Mark Van Hoecke,
‘Methodology of Comparative Legal Research’ [2015]
Michaels (n 34) 358.
Mina Juhn, ‘Taking a
Stand: Climate Change Litigants and the Viability of Constitutional
(2021) 89(6)
Fordham Law Review
Brian Preston,
‘Trends in Human Rights-Based Climate Litigation’
Address, 2021 Castan Centre for Human Rights Law and King & Wood Mallesons
Annual Lecture, 9 December 2021) 1, 21.
Channa Samkalden, Charlotte
Liem Prakken d’Oliveira and Marloes Wantenaar,
Civil Liabilities for
Human Rights Violations in the Netherlands
(Report, October 2022) 1, 7.
George Williams et
Blackshield and Williams Australian Constitutional Law and Theory:
Commentary and Materials
(Federation Press, 7
Stephen P Mulligan,
Congressional Research Service,
International Law and Agreements: Their
Effect upon US Law
(Report No RL32528, 13 July 2023) 17.
Foster v Neilson
(1829) 27 US
[1829] USSC 16
(2 Pet) 253
, 525–6 (2008).
Jack Goldsmith,
‘Should International Human Rights Law Trump US Domestic Law?’
(2000) 1(2)
Chicago Journal of International Law
Margaret Allars, ‘One
Small Step for Legal Doctrine, One Giant Leap Towards Integrity in Government:
Teoh’s Case and
the Internationalisation of Administrative Law’
[1995] SydLawRw 16
(1995) 17(2)
Sydney Law Review
Simsek v Macphee
(1982) 148 CLR 636
, 641 [15]–[16].
Plaintiff S195/2016 v
Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] HCA 31
(2017) 261 CLR 622
Queensland Government,
Human Rights
’ (Web Page)
<https://www.qld.gov.au/law/your-rights/human-rights#:~:text=In%20Queensland%2C%20the%20Act%20protects%20the%20following,protection%20of%20families%20and%20children%20(section%2026)>.
Mabo v Queensland
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Tofilau v The Queen
[2007] HCA 39
(2007) 231 CLR 396
, 443 [148].
Juliana v United
947 F 3d 1159
Cir, 2020) 12 (‘
Juliana v United
217 F Supp 3d 1224 (D
Or, 2016), 1224 (‘
Juliana District
Chloe N Kempf, ‘Why
Did So Many Do So Little? Movement Building and Climate Change Litigation in the
Juliana v United States
(2021) 99(5)
(n 55) 1261.
(n 54), 12.
Joseph Orangias,
‘Towards Global Public Trust Doctrines: An Analysis of the
Transnationalisation of State Stewardship Duties’
(2021) 12(4)
Transnational Legal Theory
Juliana District
(n 55), 1233–4
Global Climate
Litigation Report 2023
‘Article III, Section
2, Clause 1: Cases and Controversies Doctrine’,
Constitution
<https://constitution.congress.gov/browse/essay/artIII-S2-C1-6-1/ALDE_00012992/>.
Colin Kalmbacher,
‘Judge’s Polarizing Dissent in Climate Change Case Could Land Her on
a SCOTUS Shortlist’
Law and Crime
(Web Page, 17 January 2020)
<https://lawandcrime.com/climate-change/judges-polarizing-dissent-in-climate-change-case-could-land-her-on-a-scotus-shortlist/>.
Tim Henmore et al,
‘Land Court Refuses Thermal Coal Mine on Climate Change and Human Rights
MinterEllison
(Web Page, 7 December 2022)
<https://www.minterellison.com/articles/land-court-refuses-thermal-coal-mine-on-climate-change-and-human-rights-grounds>.
Waratah Coal
248; Bruce Adkins, ‘Is this the Beginning of the End for Thermal Coal
Mine Approvals in Australia?’
Johnson Winter Slattery
(Web Page, 9
October 2023) <
https://jws.com.au/what-we-think/is-this-the-beginning-of-the-end-for-thermal-coal-mine-approvals-in-australia/>.
Waratah Coal
Waratah Coal Pty
Ltd v Youth Verdict Ltd & Ors (No 6)
[2022] QLC 21
of Queensland
(Web Page, 25 Novermber 2022)
<https://law.uq.edu.au/research/vulnerable-persons-project/human-rights-case-law/waratah-coal-pty-ltd-v-youth-verdict-ltd-ors-no-6-2022-qlc-21>.
Waratah Coal
Ibid 311–12.
Ibid 315–16.
Farah and Ibrahim (n 27)
United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights,
Annual Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights
(Report, A/HRC/37/3, 26 January 2018)
‘Climate Change and
Human Rights’,
Australian Human Rights Commission
(Web Page, 1
December 2007)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/rights-and-freedoms/projects/climate-change-and-human-rights>.
Kim Bouwer,
‘Lessons from a Distorted Metaphor: The Holy Grail of Climate
Litigation’ (2020) 9(2)
Transnational Environmental Law
Laura Schuijers,
‘Compelled by the Court to Act on Climate Change:
Bushfire Survivors
for Climate Action Incorporated v Environment Protection Authority
’ (2022) 34(1)
Journal of Environmental Law
Bret Walker, ‘Why
Not Litigate Climate Change Responses’ (Speech, Mahla Pearlman Oration, 27
July 2022) 1, 9–10.
Kim Bouwer, ‘The
Unsexy Future of Climate Change Litigation’
(2018) 30(3)
Environmental Law
Smith v Fonterra
[2021] NZCA 552
[2022] 2 NZLR
, 292 [28].
Pepper (n 6) 9.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (145 KB)
PDF format (404 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter