URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nguyen, Sophie --- "Editorial" [2025] UNSWLawJl 24; (2025) 48(3) UNSW Law Journal 747
The concept of ‘governance’ is a highly general one. It is so
general, in fact, that scholars have laboured over firstly
proving it ‘is
a coherent concept that does useful
before even touching on
what good governance may look like.
At its core, governance simply describes how decision-makers within a group
or organisation elect to manage their common
This is a rather difficult
task in practice. Inherent is the need to serve a collective good, but
reasonable minds may differ on
which metrics, principles and norms to
Further still, governance
may be undertaken at all levels of formality by a wide range of social groups,
organisations and institutions.
There is thus no singular answer to the central
dilemma of how those governing may properly meet the needs of the governed.
Fortunately, generality is not something foreign to, or feared by, the
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Across its 50 years of publication, the
has welcomed articles
which grapple with the question of proper governance across all areas of
Australian law. Issue 48(3) proudly
follows this tradition.
The articles in this Issue suggest that a useful starting point is to place
Australia and its institutions in their wider context.
First, Australia is a
member of the international community and has agreed to fulfil key global policy
objectives. A helpful reminder
of this was provided very recently. In July, the
International Court of Justice largely rejected submissions by Australia and
high greenhouse gas-emitting
affirming that States have
a legally binding obligation to limit climate change-based
Australia is also an
international community itself – out of its population of 27.2 million
people, 8.6 million, or 31.5%,
Embracing these broader
dimensions of Australia’s identity and ensuring they are genuinely
accounted for in governance frameworks
is essential.
In positioning ourselves as global citizens, the 10 articles in this Issue
provide the foundation for its launch theme: ‘International
Good Governance’. Adopting the experiences of overseas jurisdictions,
commitments to international law and multicultural
perspectives more generally,
they critically rebut the restrictive ‘fortress
that currently
reigns supreme in some of Australia’s foreign counterparts. The authors of
this Issue remind us that Australia’s
institutions, from our government,
to our schools, to our banks, owe their progress in part to the lessons they
have learnt from
these international stories of success (or lack thereof).
This Issue begins with lessons that we can draw from international human
rights law and the shared goals it seeks to embody. In their
article, Katherine
Keane, Hope Johnson and Bridget Lewis investigate whether Australia’s food
governance frameworks properly
reflect its commitment to the right to
In doing so, they critique
the current lack of a comprehensive and enforceable response that targets the
root cause of food insecurity
in Australia: economic disadvantage and inability
to access proper nutrition.
However, international lessons extend beyond those formally provided for in
the law. Stephen Young and Harry Hobbs use case studies
from various countries
such as Canada, New Zealand and the United States, adopting a pluralist lens to
acknowledge the various norms
that provide stable legal relations outside of
state law. The authors differentiate such non-state legal orders in Indigenous
communities
from spurious sovereign citizen ideologies, warning that a
conflation of these two concepts sets back recognition of Indigenous sovereignty
and rights.
The connection between plural thinking and good governance also presents
itself in Australia’s education system. For law schools
in an increasingly
multicultural Australia, embracing inclusivity challenges the ideal of the
‘privileged male,
lawyer and improves
students’ sense of belonging. Maria Bhatti and Sandy Noakes expound this
view in their qualitative study,
exploring the experiences of Muslim law
students and the unaddressed barriers they face in transitioning to the legal
profession.
Anna Bunn then evaluates governance of educational technology at the primary
and high school level, guided by a blend of United Nations
commentary and
overseas government initiatives. She demonstrates the troubling distance
children’s data can travel beyond the
walls of the classroom, calling for
both schools and service providers to play a more active role in protecting
The following trio of articles use the experiences of other nations to
support stakeholder-centric approaches to improving commercial
governance. In
the corporate sustainability and accountability sphere, Anita Foerster, Ingrid
Landau and Mayleah House present a
compelling overview of Europe’s
mandatory human rights and environmental due diligence framework, demonstrating
the weaknesses
of Australia’s reliance on market-based methods of
accountability.
The broader need to integrate social impacts into governance frameworks is
also reflected in Ross Buckley and Lucien van Romburg’s
argument that
justifications by central banks for issuing a retail central bank digital
currency (‘CBDC’) have an overly
narrow focus on their mandates and
monetary policy objectives. The authors call for engagement with the general
public when determining
the design of a CBDC
whether there is a need
for one in the first place.
Failures of governing bodies to meet the needs of those most impacted by
their policies also exist in the superannuation space. Drawing
from analogous
overseas contexts as well as overarching principles of trust and loyalty, Rami
Hanegbi and Mirko Bagaric advocate
for Australia’s superannuation
legislation to disqualify domestic abusers from receiving their victims’
death benefits.
The last three articles of this Issue discuss how institutions elect to
govern in spite of Australia’s unique position as the
only liberal
democracy without a national human rights charter or
Henry Palmerlee’s
article contends that despite its fundamental importance, procedural fairness
has been afforded little attention
in the legislative process. Ultimately, he
argues that structured proportionality – a methodology of German origin
should be used by the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of
Bills as the most suitable means of protecting procedural fairness.
This consideration of structured proportionality provides a convenient segue
to Patrick Graham’s article on the implied freedom
of political
communication – Australia’s response to the positive freedom of
speech found overseas. Graham analyses the
first stage in assessing an
impermissible contravention of the implied freedom, which is determining whether
the relevant burden
exists at all. He posits that courts to date have taken an
overly narrow approach that limits the intended effectiveness of this
constitutional limitation on legislative power.
As an apt conclusion for a law journal issue, Ben Yates explores the
governance of free speech in an academic context. He argues that
norm-breaching
academic speech is a natural manifestation of the scholar’s democratic
function and suggests a framework to
balance potential harms with academic
freedom’s systematic importance.
It would be remiss of me to simply summarise the content of these 10 articles
without acknowledging the immense contributions by this
authors. In seeing these articles through to publication, I have had the
privilege of being an early student of
the significant lessons they offer. I am
deeply thankful for the authors’ trust, as well as their meaningful and
all-too-kind
words during the editorial process. I extend my gratitude to the
many anonymous peer reviewers involved in this Issue, whose time
constructive feedback has helped to polish the analysis within its pages.
The launch of Issue 48(3) would not be a success without the
’s premier sponsors, Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer, Corrs
Chambers Westgarth, Allens and King & Wood Mallesons, whose generous
is greatly appreciated. My thanks go to Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer
especially for hosting the launch of Issue 48(3).
Further, each launch is made special by the keynote speaker. In light of the
academic bent this Issue takes, I sincerely thank Professor
Jacqueline Mowbray
for providing a fascinating keynote address and illuminating the role scholarly
debate has to play in the legal
reform landscape.
Behind the scenes, the
is also a product of consistent effort
by some very dedicated individuals. I am very grateful to Kerry Cooke, our
Peta Lee, our cover designer, for their PDF-ing and designing
wizardry. I also thank our Faculty Advisors, Professors Rosalind Dixon
Edmond, who have provided valuable guidance and clarity on every query. Further,
I would like to express my appreciation
for Professor Andrew Lynch, Dean of the
Faculty of Law & Justice – it would be difficult to find more enduring
and its student editors elsewhere.
On that note, our Editorial Board (or with deserved affection,
‘Boardies’) are a continuous source of pride for the
The editorial process for this Issue has taken them on a winding expedition
through the
Australian Guide to Legal Citation
from chapter 1 all the way to chapter
26. I shudder to think of what this Issue would look like without their keen
attention to detail,
curiosity and good humour in the face of the
’s exacting demands. Few students, faced with a luxurious
amount of choice about what to do during their university life, would
toil over hundreds of footnotes.
Even fewer students lack enough self-preservation to commit themselves to
being an Executive Committee member. Sharing in the organised
chaos that is
keeping the
burning brightly for another year has been a uniquely
fulfilling experience that I will look back on fondly. I am indebted to the
Executive Committee for welcoming me so warmly last year and for providing their
seasoned advice. To the 2025–26 Executive,
I am so lucky to have spent my
time, weekend meetings and all, with such a brilliant group of people. Thank you
for your heartwarming
support despite my incompetencies; 13 months was far too
short of a time to remedy them. I will dearly miss the haphazard event
preparations
in our third-floor office/nook, and the hilariously off-topic chats
that went deep into the night.
My words thus far have hopefully reflected the sincere, but predictable,
enthusiasm I carry as this Issue’s Editor. What has
been more surprising
is seeing that same enthusiasm in my close friends and my partner Francis, none
of whom are personally acquainted
. Their willingness to
listen to my grievances with incorrect capitalisation (and similar pedantry) has
been a great source of comfort
– I thank them for their unending kindness
and encouragement.
My ultimate thanks go to my family. Firstly, to my parents, Hanna and Hai,
for their unconditional love and reminders that stopping
to take a breath is a
necessity of life, not a privilege to be earned. To my younger brother Nathan, I
am so grateful for, if not
a little mystified by, the thoughtfulness that goes
beyond your years. I can only hope I have done you all proud as a small token
my appreciation.
It is difficult to come up with a pithy concluding comment, but I can at
least say this: I would not have traded this long, arduous,
wonderful journey
for anything else. With my time as Editor winding down, I eagerly await the
innovative series of lessons the
will bring in the future under
its next set of editors. To the readers, I hope the articles in Issue 48(3)
imbue you with same spirit
of interconnectedness and continuous learning they
have for me.
∗ Editor, Issue 48(3).
Mark Bevir,
Governance: A
Very Short Introduction
(Oxford University Press, 2012) 2.
Arie M Kacowicz,
‘Regional Governance and Global Governance: Links and Explanations’
(2018) 24(1)
Global Governance
Harj Narulla, ‘The
ICJ’s Ruling Means Australia and Other Major Polluters Face a New Era of
Climate Reparations’,
The Guardian
(online, 24 July 2025)
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/jul/24/the-icjs-ruling-means-australia-and-other-major-polluters-face-a-new-era-of-climate-reparations>.
Obligations of States in
Respect of Climate Change (Advisory Opinion)
(International Court of
Justice, General List No 187, 23 July 2025). See especially at [427].
As of June 2024:
‘Australia’s Population by Country of Birth’,
Bureau of Statistics
(Web Page, 30 April 2025)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/population/australias-population-country-birth/jun-2024>.
Michael Kirby,
‘Constitutional Law and International Law: National Exceptionalism and the
Democratic Deficit?’
(2010) 98(2)
Georgetown Law Journal
International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
, opened for signature 16 December
(entered into force 3 January 1976) art 11.
Sylvia van der Raad,
‘Othering and Inclusion of Ethnic Minority Professionals: A Study on
Ethnic Diversity Discourses, Practices
and Narratives in the Dutch Legal
Workplace’ (PhD Thesis, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 2015) 247.
Australian Human Rights
Commission, ‘Commission Launches Model for an Australian Human Rights
Act’ (Media Release, 9
March 2023)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/about/news/media-releases/commission-launches-model-australian-human-rights-act>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (24.3 KB)
PDF format (123 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter