URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Association for Maritime Affairs --- "Submission to the National Infrastructure Priority List" [2008] MarStudies 24; (2008) 161 Maritime Studies 19
Australian Association for Maritime Affairs
Opening remarks
Some components of maritime infrastructure
Public and private maritime infrastructure
Competition policy and maritime infrastructure
Relationship with competition policy
‘Greenfields’ maritime infrastructure development
Climate change and global warming
Conclusions
Recommendations
Australian Association for Maritime Affairs
This is the AAMA submission to the National Infrastructure Priority List
dated 10 October 2008. Comments from readers are welcome
and should be sent to
acmarst@bigpond.com
The Australian Association for Maritime Affairs (AAMA) seeks to generate
greater public awareness of maritime affairs. It provides
a focal point for
people with an interest in maritime affairs, especially those in business,
tertiary institutions, the marine professions
and the public service who are
concerned with any aspect of Australia's maritime affairs.
Opening remarks
The AAMA is concerned that neither of the two Discussion Papers released as
part of the current process –
Discussion Paper 1: Australia's Future
Infrastructure Requirements
Discussion Paper 2: Public Private
Partnerships
– appears to address, with the exception of the word
‘ports’, the wide range of national infrastructure that needs
available to Australia’s maritime industries and authorities if they are
to make their maximum contribution to Australia’s
wealth. Later, this
submission indicates some of those.
Instead, the discussion papers appear to be directed at nationally
significant edifices, monumental infrastructure suitable for bearing
of not-long-forgotten politicians. The AAMA is pleased that subsequent comments
and guidelines released by the Prime Minister
appear to reject that approach.
We believe that, at least in the maritime sphere, much of the infrastructure
that needs to be addressed lies in the form of small
to medium facilities, each
quite vital in themselves, but merely
of much more significant
national systems. It is the components of maritime infrastructure that need to
be considered when addressing
nation-building and the developing of
Australia’s regional capacities.
Some components of maritime infrastructure
have been mentioned specifically in the
Infrastructure Australia discussion papers, there appears to be no recognition
in the discussion
papers that there are ports and ports. A simple iron ore
loading facility, with all cargo going just one way – outbound –
a port, but so too is the Port of Melbourne, with co-located repair and
maintenance facilities, tugs, dredgers, navigation marks
and lights, dry docks,
cranes, wharfage and warehouses, land transport links, Customs facilities,
marine pilots, search and rescue,
etc. Both types of ‘port’ rely, of
course, on national services, like hydrographic or meteorological services,
are also components of maritime infrastructure.
As we have seen in recent years, one inadequate component of the Port of
Melbourne – the depth of the main channel – was
allowed to become a
primary determinant of the performance of the whole multi-billion dollar
investment in that part of Australia’s
maritime infrastructure.
Mention of tugs, albeit a relatively small aspect of the whole Australian
maritime industry, also raises other national infrastructure
issues: what is the
value to the nation of having its own, possibly subsidised,
maritime infrastructure
, like salvage operations – deep-sea tugs,
heavy lift ships, ocean-going floating docks, salvage diving facilities, etc
which can be relied on to be available locally, or at least under
national control, irrespective of international developments?
The maritime infrastructure needs of Australia’s
, to give another example, are enormous: diving facilities need to
include tank re-charging and testing, recompression chambers, diving
schools and
their associated regulation, etc. Then there is a need for marinas and moorings,
boat chandlers and repairers, waste
disposal, environmental protection
regulation and enforcement, fisheries regulation, etc, without even starting to
consider the on-shore
infrastructure requirements of the tourism resorts
themselves. Whether the current maritime tourism infrastructure facilities are
adequate seems, at present, to be determined only when some tragedy occurs.
Exploitation and management of Australia’s existing and new
maritime resources
, arising from the UN Convention on the Law of the Seas,
will require considerable expenditure on maritime infrastructure: scientific
research capacity to establish what resources are there and how best to extract
them; predict, manage and monitor impacts; diving
facilities; submersibles (and
the associated rescue facilities); off-shore support vessels, on-site drilling
and construction vessels.
All of the offshore effort also requires onshore
support infrastructure.
maritime education
infrastructure requirements range from
training facilities for the personnel needed to support the shipping and
associated traditional
maritime industries, e.g. the Australian Maritime
College, but extends to the encouragement of maritime-focused courses in higher
education curricula and thence to the marine research capacity needed to
identify and quantify Australia’s marine resources
before they can be
exploited. Is it adequate? The shortages suggest otherwise.
Given changing attitudes to ‘careers’, and the tendency for
people to spend only 5-10 years in one area of endeavour,
it may be necessary to
encourage the recognition of qualifications and the development of courses to
facilitate the cross-over, at
the lowest possible cost to both the nation and
the individual, of personnel from land-based to maritime industries, and
. That, too, is ‘maritime infrastructure’.
There is even a case to be made that the
infrastructure needed ashore
to control run-off from Queensland sugar cane farms, and thus protect the Great
Barrier Reef, is actually supporting a largely maritime
and nationally
significant tourism industry in that region. That, too, could be addressed by
Infrastructure Australia.
smallest scale
of separate maritime infrastructure requirements
may be the specialist port services, for example navigation marks and lights
maintenance,
tank cleaning operations and ballast water disposal, boat building
and repair, or the provision of Customs services and the availability
commercial customs agents.
Getting the investment needed to provide those essential maritime
infrastructure facilities requires a combination of Government policy
– for example, you won’t get Customs facilities established in a new
port without political support – and
entrepreneurial drive, i.e. someone
willing to risk their money on, say, building a boat slip or setting up a new
stevedoring company.
Maritime infrastructure does not exist in isolation. For example, ports exist
to service other things – cities, mines, fisheries,
land-based industries,
etc. Any consideration by Infrastructure Australia of the provision and adequacy
of Australia’s maritime
infrastructure needs to consider the associated
‘upstream’ infrastructure, like road, rail and air links, proximity
markets, workforce, and supporting engineering facilities etc, as well as the
‘downstream’ infrastructure required, like
deepwater channels, the
regulation and protection of adjacent fisheries, tourism facilities, etc.
It is the presence or absence of all of those sorts of
around Australia that determines whether or not the totality of
Australia’s maritime infrastructure is adequate for the task.
facilities may be only components of maritime infrastructure, and individually
apparently insignificant, but their presence
or absence is
significant and regionally they can be vital if the particular region depends on
good shipping transport for its development!
This paper therefore goes beyond the limited Infrastructure Australia
Discussion Papers, and assumes that the Terms of Reference of
Infrastructure
Australia itself,
…to advise governments, investors and owners of infrastructure
concerning:
• nationally significant infrastructure priorities;
• policy and regulatory reforms desirable to improve the efficient
utilisation of national infrastructure networks;
• options to address impediments to the development and provision of
efficient national infrastructure;
• the needs of users; and
• possible financing mechanisms.
are, in fact, broad enough
allow this AAMA submission to address the range of infrastructure required by
Australia’s maritime
industries and interests to meet our nation’s
Public and private maritime infrastructure
The provision of adequate maritime infrastructure will depend largely on how
it is to be funded. If it is needed to meet national
goals or policies,
particular maritime infrastructure may need to be funded or at least encouraged
by government; if it can generate
profits, the infrastructure may be funded
commercially.
In assessing how to fund Australia’s maritime infrastructure needs, it
must be recognised that:
(a) There are some forms of maritime infrastructure which are used directly
by a wide community of users, e.g. meteorological, hydrographic
and navigation
services, marine science, etc;
(b) There are other forms of maritime infrastructure which are of direct
value to the particular users at particular times, eg the
provision of wharves
and loading/ unloading facilities, dry docks and slips, marinas, maintenance and
ship repair facilities (which
often go hand-in-hand with ship building), etc.;
(c) Somewhere in between are those maritime services, like pilotage, safety
inspection services, fisheries regulation, environmental
protection, etc., which
are required to meet objectives determined by government, but which are provided
to individual users.
Funding the first probably has to be paid for from taxes or general levies,
although the provision of the particular service may be
contracted out by
government agencies if that is more cost-effective than having the government
provide the service itself.
Funding the second, i.e. maritime infrastructure which is of direct benefit
to the particular user, can be achieved by charging the
users but there is
probably a role for additional government funding if needed to meet
objectives – defence, competition policy, or national/
regional development objectives, to give a few examples – if there
insufficient commercial demand to attract private start-up investment. In
general, however, on-going use of this kind of maritime
infrastructure can
reasonably be charged on the basis of full cost recovery.
Funding the third type of maritime infrastructure, which is provided to
individual users but is primarily a requirement of government,
needs to be
shared, with government paying all of the costs of initial set-up and part of
the on-going costs.
Competition policy and maritime
infrastructure
The AAMA appreciates that one of the major challenges for Infrastructure
Australia in developing a list of national infrastructure
priorities will be to
(a) the need to have sufficient maritime infrastructure to reap the economic
rewards of competition despite a scarcity of resources
available to develop
competitive infrastructure; with
(b) the advantages and disadvantages of private-v-public ownership of
infrastructure.
For example, we have recently seen ‘bottlenecks’ as ships wait to
load coal at coal-loading ports. While such loading
bottlenecks are a source of
frustration for the shippers, the coal producers and the overseas users, and
have adverse effects on
the national economy as a whole, they are a source of
considerable commercial satisfaction for the owners of the coal loaders.
It is in the commercial interests of the owners of such major maritime
infrastructure to keep it running at full capacity, rather
than risk ever
completely satisfying the demands on it! The nation as a whole, however, should
benefit from increased capacity but
only as long as the national and
international economy requires it. In the above coal loader case, we don’t
want to develop
too many coal loaders if world demand for coal is about to fall.
At a much lower level, in terms of investment requirements, is the provision
of, say, towage facilities, i.e. tugs. Tugs are like
taxis: not having enough of
them can be crippling but having too many makes it uneconomic to provide the
service, while striving
to find a balance raises accusations of anti-competitive
‘cosiness’ between the regulators and the service providers.
Relationship with competition policy
Small enterprises they may be individually but without adequate maritime
infrastructure – e.g. adequate tugs – a port
may not be viable for
regular use by shipping. Unfortunately while a new port is developing, such
facilities may be under-utilised
and unprofitable, with absolutely no scope for
competition policy to be adopted.
That raises questions that need to be addressed in government policy
(a) In the above case, exactly when should competition be mandated and how
should it be implemented?
(b) Whether vertical integration of ports and their associated harbour
services should be permitted, for example whether a resource
developer, when
creating a new port to support a particular resource development, should be
permitted to provide all its own maritime
infrastructure? If that is permitted
at the beginning of the development of a new port, how and when should it move
to a fair competitive
structure, both for access by other potential port users
and for the provision of the port infrastructure facilities at some later
As a general observation, it seems that competition can become a driver in
the provision of maritime infrastructure only after the
particular facilities
have become fairly well established.
There appear to be two ways of defining ‘well established’ with
regard to maritime infrastructure like a port. One is
on the basis of
profitability but, particularly if vertical integration of the associated
infrastructure facilities is permitted,
‘profitability’ becomes a
variable term, dependent on the ingenuity and ability of lawyers and accountants
in transfer pricing. That is particularly so if part of the
vertically integrated facilities are foreign-owned. Another definition
‘well established’ is on the basis of total turnover or tonnage,
which is probably slightly less open to manipulation
but does not differentiate
between high value and bulk trade, and what is involved in servicing each.
Shared access to infrastructure that was previously created by monopoly
providers to meet their own needs is now well established
under current
competition law, e.g. rail or telecommunications infrastructure, although it
remains to be seen how effective the policy
is in practice over time and whether
competition is, eventually, crushed in practice.
Experience of shared access to maritime infrastructure under our developing
competition law is likely to determine the commercial
attractiveness of
maritime infrastructure to the potential providers of the capital
that is needed. The requirement to share access may, indeed, determine
sequence of the provision of particular components of new infrastructure, with
the infrastructure developers taking great care
to meet only and precisely their
own needs first.
A final complexity is that much depends on how the particular
‘market’ for maritime infrastructure is defined. Are the
ports of NW Australia part of a single competition law ‘market’,
notwithstanding that they may be individually
owned by different, competing,
iron ore producers, or is each port that can support access by more than one
iron ore producer to
be considered a separate market? The answer to that
question may determine how the various maritime services in each port are
– by the one tank cleaning service in all the competing NW
Australian ports, or by competing tank cleaning services in the
separate markets
of multiple ports.
At the other end of the argument, is the Australian Maritime College a
monopoly provider of some kinds of maritime training, or is
it bravely keeping
the Flag flying in the face of national incomprehension of the importance of an
Australian shipping industry and
its need for a trained workforce?
Naturally, as in the example of the coal-loaders mentioned earlier, the
owners and operators of existing maritime infrastructure will
view competition
quite differently from the users. That will greatly influence their views on
whether they should fund construction
and/or on-going operation of the
particular infrastructure.
‘Greenfields’ maritime infrastructure
development
If Governments, State as well as Commonwealth, do not encourage the provision
of the maritime infrastructure needed to support their
regional development
policies, many of those policies will be still-born and the regional development
will occur elsewhere.
That is particularly so with regards to offshore undersea resource
development. As the Western Australian Government has recently
discovered at
great cost to that State, the vast undersea resources that are now under
Australian sovereignty, and are increasingly
exploitable, do not need to be
brought ashore to the nearest Australian port or potential processing site.
Being out at sea offers
developers of Australia’s undersea resources great
flexibility when choosing where any on-shore processing should take place,
needs to take place on the Australian mainland at all.
Of course, if resources are to be exported directly from an off-shore
facility, even that requires maritime infrastructure in the
form of regulatory
supervision, e.g. the provision of Government-provided services like Customs, to
check exactly what is extracted
and exported, and possibly additional scientific
environmental regulation.
Another form of ‘greenfields’ maritime infrastructure requirement
is the provision of marinas, diving facilities, environmental
protection, etc.,
needed when a new maritime tourism facility is being developed. While the
provision of some of that infrastructure
will be driven by market forces looking
at the potential profits to be made by the service suppliers, other aspects,
like environmental
protection or recreational and commercial fisheries
regulation, needs to be put in place by government, even if ongoing costs are
met by levies on users. If they are not put in place, either the development
will suffer or the responsible government will, eventually,
pay a political
price when things go wrong.
Climate change and global warming
Climate change seems likely to lead to major changes in the regional
development of Australia, which will need to be reflected in
the maritime
infrastructure that is created to support that regional development.
The southern drying trends in projected climate change suggest that
agricultural industries may prove more viable in the north in
the future. Any
substantial movement of Australian agricultural industries to the wetter
northern regions would require significant
investment in new transport
infrastructure.
Irrespective of whether Australia adopts an emissions trading scheme or a
straight carbon tax, shipping transport should become more
competitive with
road, rail or air transport, because of its lower emissions per ton/mile. The
cost of airfreight to transport even
high-value agricultural, pastoral or
fishing exports is likely to become prohibitive and to lead to a need for
improved regional
port and shipping services to supply both Australia’s
own population centres and our export trade.
Recent research by the CSIRO suggests that the fishing industry, both
off-shore fishing and fish-farming, is likely to be severely
affected by climate
change, as seawater temperatures rise and current patterns change. That will
affect not only the size of the
likely catch but also the location of fish farms
and fishing ports, fish processing plants, and all the other associated support
facilities. Given the body of recent development experience, it is to be hoped
that environmental regulatory processes can now be
streamlined so that fishing
industry infrastructure can be re-located expeditiously without adverse
environmental effects.
Nationwide, the increased severity of weather events, coupled with projected
changes in sea levels, is going to demand better designed
infrastructure on land and sea, and improved meteorological and search and
rescue services to support shipping and off-shore
and undersea platforms.
Conclusions
It would be naïve to consider Australia’s infrastructure
priorities as simply a list of monumental projects. What is required,
in the maritime sphere, is a thorough survey of of the vast range of current and
future maritime infrastructure requirements
to identify deficiences.
If economic pump-priming and job creation is the Government’s current
focus in infrastructure development, development of the
multitude of small and
medium maritime infrastructure to meet identified deficiencies seems likely to
produce quicker, cheaper and
longer-lasting benefits than many of the more
monumental infrastructure projects.
In general and as with most other infrastructure, the more profitable that
maritime infrastructure is, the greater the burden it becomes
on all other
aspects of Australia’s maritime interests, and thus on the nation as a
whole. Nevertheless, maritime infrastructure
must be profitable to justify the
initial investment and the ongoing costs of operation.
It is for government to determine, using the range of policy levers available
to it – subsidies, competition policy, environmental
regulation, etc. – just what is a reasonable level of return/profitability
to be expected from particular aspects
of maritime infrastructure. That will
determine the funding mechanisms – commercial or government – that
are available
to overcome Australia’s maritime infrastructure
deficiencies.
It is probable that funding to overcome many of Australia’s maritime
infrastructure deficiencies can be provided commercially,
given the right policy
and regulatory environments.
Climate change and any associated need to move much of Australia’s
rural industries to the north and relocate parts of the fishing
industry, is
going to reinforce the need to develop regional maritime infrastructure, much of
it from scratch. That will probably
require judicious direct Government funding
support, at least initially.
The elephant in the room for this AAMA paper is, of course, the shipping
industry itself. It has been treated in this paper as a major
industry in its
own right, whose own infrastructure needs have been discussed here. If
Infrastructure Australia sees the shipping
industry as merely one part of the
infrastructure supporting the whole Australian nation, then a separate study
will be required
to resolve fundamental issues like whether, for national
defence and trade security reasons, a premium should be paid to increase
proportion of Australian trade carried in Australian ships.
Recommendations
As a first step, a proportion of the total budget for new infrastructure
needs to earmarked for maritime infrastructure, sufficient
to reflect its
national importance.
Infrastructure Australia needs to survey Australia’s current and future
maritime infrastructure needs in great detail, to identify
significant weaknesses and highlight commercial opportunities. Some of that
information is probably available to the Commonwealth,
but much is commercial
and some will require investigation on-site.
Then, in conjunction with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission,
Infrastructure Australia needs to develop policy guidance
to permit the creation
of necessary new commercial maritime infrastructure in such a way that it will
be developed at the lowest
possible economic cost to the nation.
When that has been done, Infrastructure Australia, through the appropriate
policy departments, should recommend to Government those
Australia’s maritime infrastructure where the provision of additional
Government support is appropriate.
If appropriate, a separate study should be conducted into the best structure
for Australia’s shipping industry, and how to achieve
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter