URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AltLawJl/2006/51.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bogdanoski, Tony --- "The Marriage of Family Law and Animal Rights: How Should Australian Family Law Approach the Rise of 'Pet Custody' Disputes?" [2006] AltLawJl 51; (2006) 31(4) Alternative Law Journal 216
THE MARRIAGE OF FAMILY LAW AND ANIMAL
RIGHTS: How should Australian family law
approach the rise of ‘pet custody’ disputes?
Pet custody disputes under Australian family
Family pets: property or persons?
The characterisation of family pets as personal
The characterisation of family pets as children:
paradigm shift on the horizon?
Family pets: neither property nor persons
THE MARRIAGE OF FAMILY LAW AND ANIMAL
How should Australian family law
the rise of ‘pet custody’ disputes?
TONY BOGDANOSKI
Although many pet owners view their beloved Fido as a family
member [there are] few really contentious disagreements over who will
physical custody of the family pet … But divorce, being what it is, there
have been cantankerous exceptions. For those
inclined to fight over who gets the
family cat, dog or parakeet, they need to know the court views pets not as
people, but strictly
as property to be allocated equitably among the parties
along with the furniture.
The development of animal law as a legitimate area of legal practice and
academic discourse over the past
inevitably raises a number
of new challenges for the practice of contemporary family law. One of the most
significant of these challenges
to the family law system is determining the most
appropriate method of resolving ‘pet custody’
These disputes concern
the issue of which party should be entitled to retain physical custody of the
family pet (or pets) following
the breakdown of the marital, de facto or
domestic relationship of the parties.
It can be said that family pets, or companion animals, occupy a curious place
under Australian family law. On the one hand, family
pets are protected from
being abused by their owners by state animal protection legislation. On the
other hand, at the same time,
they are inconsistently viewed as mere chattels by
the legal system when it comes to the disposition of assets following
relationship
The interests of companion animals and those of their human guardians would
be better served by removing this inconsistency, but not
on the basis of a
blanket implementation of a ‘best interests’ model analogous to that
used for the resolution of parenting
disputes. Nevertheless, the family law
system cannot continue to overlook the fact that companion animals are sentient
beings that
have assumed a much greater importance within the lives of
contemporary families and so should not continue to treat them as though
are simply assets to be equitably divided according to property law principles
in contested family disputes.
There should not be exclusive reliance on property law principles in deciding
with which party the pet should remain after a relationship
breakdown. Instead,
this article suggests that the family law courts could further the interests of
both the human and non-human
parties by formulating a set of principles derived
from both parenting and property law in ultimately determining which party the
family pet ought to remain with following divorce or separation, especially
since the legislature has shown no interest in doing
this. It is argued that
this approach ultimately avoids the establishment of any one overriding or
paramount consideration, in contrast
to the definitive test proposed by a
‘best interests of the pet’ model, which is clearly only relevant to
parenting law.
Pet custody disputes under Australian family
Despite the relatively long history of pet custody cases in the American
family courts,
the issue has
largely eluded Australia’s family
and has been left to animal
welfare groups and animal rights activists to investigate. However, this
ignorance among family lawyers
is no longer tenable, if only because companion
animals are increasingly regarded as integral members of the family by their
guardians, no different from the usual human protagonists of spouses,
parents, children and grandparents that make up the family
law reports. After
all, it is only natural for family lawyers to take an active interest in the
‘regulation of domestic or
personal relationships and [especially] the
consequences that flow
from the end of such
relationships’.
To indicate the growing importance of the issue of pet custody, a survey in
February 2005 surprisingly revealed that almost 40 per
cent of British dog
owners would be prepared to launch a custody battle to secure the future
possession of the family pet.
custody disputes are of concern to animal welfare and animal rights groups
because they involve decision-making (whether judicial
or administrative) that
affects the future care and welfare of the family pet after relationship
breakdown. At the same time, pet
custody disputes are also becoming ‘a
niche specialty for divorce
American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers in
early 2006, nearly a quarter of 1500
divorce lawyers surveyed (23 per cent) across the United States noticed an
increase in pet custody
disputes. The survey further revealed that, of these
disputes, more than 90 per cent involved the family dog, 5 per cent the family
cat and the remaining 5 per cent involved more unusual animals including horses,
cows and boa constrictors.
In the United States, family law (and especially the law of marriage) is
almost entirely a state matter, so the interests of family
members and spouses
vis-à-vis each other will differ according to the applicable jurisdiction
in which they are domiciled. This
largely explains the conflicting pet custody
outcomes and decisions in the United States. In Australia, matrimonial pet
custody cases,
at least, would be treated consistently as federal matters if and
when any guidelines are developed by the family courts.
Following the High Court decision in
Re Wakim; Ex parte
the Family Court
has lost the power to adjudicate on the ancillary property matters of unmarried
de facto couples among other state
family laws it could exercise previously.
However, the reference of powers by the States to the Commonwealth in 1988
regarding ex-nuptial
children means that de facto couples with children must
still use the federal system for their parenting disputes, while continuing
use the state system for the resolution of their property disputes. Since family
pets are obviously not human children of the
parties, pet custody disputes
between couples in de facto and other domestic relationships can only be
addressed under the state
system. So, if there is ultimately a dispute between a
de facto couple over their children and their pets, the former would require
resolution in the federal family court system while the latter would presumably
be dealt with in the relevant state court depending
on the value of the
couple’s total assets.
In contrast, regardless of whether family pets are considered by the court to
be property or children, pet custody disputes between
married couples naturally
fall within the definition of ‘matrimonial cause’ in the
Law Act 1975
(Cth), such disputes flowing as they do from the marital
relationship itself and its dissolution, and so would be a matter to be
determined by the federal family courts.
Family pets: property or persons?
State-based North American family law statutes do not specifically provide
courts with legislative assistance in resolving pet custody
disputes (the same
situation prevails in Australia). The outcomes of North American cases have
often hinged on the personal biases
of the presiding judges, including whether
or not the presiding judge subscribes to the philosophy of the animal rights or
welfare movement.
not an ideal situation, since there are no precedents to guide the judges in the
area of pet custody, and significant discretion
is vested in family court judges
adjudicating on the ‘best interests’ of children and the equitable
distribution of matrimonial
and non-matrimonial property. This only increases
the need for a carefully developed framework, whether judicial or legislative,
both in North America and Australia, to ensure that future cases are decided
consistently and, therefore, equitably for all of the
parties involved, both
human and non-human.
An insurmountable divide currently exists between North American
On the one hand, there
are those who view family pets strictly as personal property to be equitably
distributed among the parties
irrespective of any emotional bonds the parties
may have fostered with the pet. On the other hand, some judges are willing to
that companion animals, as sentient living beings, occupy a special
place in the hearts of their human guardians as members of the
family. The
latter are thus more inclined to apply what amounts to a ‘best
interests’ test derived from parenting law
principles to determine the
most suitable party with whom the family pet should remain and the extent, if
any, of any visitation
rights granted to the non-custodial party, as well as any
liability for the maintenance and upkeep of that pet.
Often, unique family possessions and memorabilia pose the greatest obstacles
for divorcing or separating couples attempting to reach
property settlements.
These items may, from an outsider’s perspective, seem trivial, but to the
divorcing or separating parties
they are invaluable. The parties may even be
capable of agreeing about the distribution of the marital home or other
significant
assets, but can ultimately be drawn into protracted legal
proceedings because of a failure on their part to agree on a seemingly
significant proprietary issue. The issue of pet custody falls within this
Section 2 of the
Property (Relationships) Act 1976
(NZ) specifically
excludes ‘heirlooms’ from the statutory definition of ‘family
chattels’ and applies a different
method of distributing these more
contentious property items. Somewhat inconsistently this legislation explicitly
includes ‘household
pets’ within the definition of ‘family
chattels’. This is in contrast to the
Family Law Act 1975
State de facto legislation, which do not distinguish between categories of
chattel and do not refer at all to household
The characterisation of family pets as personal
A classic legal definition of ‘property’ is Blackstone’s
famous statement that ‘property is the sole and despotic
dominion which
one man claims and exercises over the external things of the world, in total
exclusion of the right of any other individual
More recently,
the Australian High Court has defined property as the ‘legally endorsed
concentration of power over things and
resources’.
Applying these
definitions of ‘property’ to companion animals in the context of the
judicial division of assets following
the breakdown of marital and de facto
relationships poses many problems for both the parties and the companion
, despite having the ability to
feel pain and pleasure, family pets must naturally be allocated to only one of
the parties, as is
standard practice with divorce settlements. This means that,
essentially, one of the parties must become the ‘winner’
other the ‘loser’. There is no possibility for shared ownership or
possession of chattels following divorce or
separation since ownership becomes
vested in only one of the parties. Even if the property was a joint acquisition
before the parties
entered into their relationship, after divorce or separation
one of the parties is expected to liquidate their entitlement in the
and in return be compensated by the other party. The proprietor thus assumes all
the power to control access to their
‘property’, even if the family
pet itself may desire access with their other ‘parent’.
It is not difficult to see how many pet custody disputes, at their core, much
like parenting disputes over children, can represent
a power struggle between
the parties. One party may seek to assume control and restrain the other from
interfering with what they
view as their rightful property, not uncommonly for
malicious purposes.
There is no
question that pet custody disputes can become just as unpleasant as those
involving parenting disputes when both parties
claim the companion animal as
An advantage of treating family pets as personal property, at least to an
overworked family law system if not necessarily to the parties
(including the family pet), is that the courts avoid the problem of having to
enforce the ‘custody’ and ‘access’
rights of the
parties. By giving the family pet solely to one of the parties, and leaving the
other party empty-handed, the courts
can rest assured that the parties cannot
resort to further litigation over the same matter, with finality an important
be considered in the equitable distribution of matrimonial
However, it will be particularly distressing for the non-custodial party
should a court ignore the reality that, although not having
legal title in the
family pet, nevertheless he or she maintained it and acted as primary caregiver.
It is submitted that the courts
should not overlook the non-financial
contributions of a party who may not have purchased or otherwise possessed the
pet before or
after the relationship but nevertheless played a large role in
maintaining the pet.
only consistent with the aims and goals of animal welfare, even if it does not
go as far as vesting actionable
in the family pet in the
form of taking their best interests into account. Some theorists, such as David
Favre, have proposed an
‘equitable self-ownership’ model as a means
of enshrining the interests of animals under the law, instead of conferring
legal rights on animals.
both a ‘rights’ approach and an ‘equitable
self-ownership’ approach are ultimately aimed at removing
the strictly
proprietary status of animals under the common law, Favre’s approach lends
itself to incremental change rather
than a revolutionary legal change which may
alienate a conservative legal system. Favre’s model also appears to be
more practical
since it challenges the legal system to treat animals as the
subjects of a guardianship relationship not only within the confines
cruelty situations but in all realms of the law where the interests of animals
are affected.
A party to a relationship breakdown will most likely be advised by their
lawyer that the law has long treated companion animals as
property and that the
family courts would probably not entertain contrary arguments. Despite this,
some parties have remained undeterred,
justifiably unsatisfied by the operation
of the common law, and have attempted to challenge the status quo by mounting
the argument
that the ‘best interests of the pet’ necessitates that
party obtaining ‘custody’ of the pet after their marriage,
or domestic relationship has irretrievably broken down. No doubt this is a
reflection of the fact that companion animals
often represent much more to the
parties than mere property.
The characterisation of family pets as children:
paradigm shift on the horizon?
Pet custody litigants have attempted to convince North American courts to
adopt a ‘best interests’ model by arguing that
a paradigm shift has
occurred within society such that pets are now fully-fledged members of the
family household, and that this
mandates a departure from prevailing common law.
They have argued that while the legislature may have failed to act to change the
common law,
this does not mean
that the courts should also ignore this issue, continuing to treat companion
animals as personal property when
doing justice between the parties requires the
court to review the law in light of changed social circumstances.
In 2001, Switzerland became the first nation in the world to attempt to
enshrine the rights of pets in divorce and other relationship
breakdowns by
giving them the same entitlements as children. Ultimately, the referendum did
not pass despite the best efforts of
animal rights activists. The proposed
change would have required the application of the ‘best interests’
test to the
family pet, where the parties couldn’t agree about who should
keep the pet.
Since most courts view companion animals purely as personal property to be
equitably divided between disputing parties, along with
other personal property,
they have explicitly objected to the use of language such as
‘custody’ and ‘guardianship’
to describe physical
custody of the family pet. To adopt such language would be to extend parenting
law principles to non-human animals,
which has never been the intention of the
legislature, either in North
or Australia.
It is, therefore, unsurprising that some litigants have framed their actions
in the property torts of trespass to goods, particularly
in detinue and
conversion. However, at least on a practical level, family lawyers tend to
factor in (whether impliedly or explicitly)
an amount in the property
settlement, including any spousal maintenance that may be awarded, to cover the
maintenance and upkeep
of the family pet, whether or not the family pet itself
is the subject of pet custody
proceedings.
Appellate cases in the United States have concerned attempts by parties
receiving ‘visitation rights’ to vary court-ordered
‘custody’ arrangements or to overturn trial decisions so that they
ultimately obtain sole custody of the
In the leading case of
Bennett v Bennett
Florida District Court of Appeals for the Second District made it unequivocally
clear that ‘pet custody’ disputes
could not be brought before
Florida courts, even if such cases were permitted to be brought in other
Californian courts). The trial court in
awarded ‘custody’ of the family dog to the husband and gave
visitation rights to the wife, who later filed a notice of
motion claiming the
husband was in contempt of court by refusing her access to the dog. However, the
appellate court overturned the
visiting rights of the wife, relying in part on
standard property principles, and allowing new evidence to show that the dog was
the premarital property of the husband. The appellate court was also guided by
‘floodgates’ policy considerations:
Our courts are overwhelmed with the supervision of custody, visitation, and
support matters related to the protection of our children.
We cannot undertake
the same responsibility as to
court reasoned that the enforcement or proper ‘supervision’ of
contentious parenting orders relating to children
is difficult enough without
further burdening the workload of the courts by extending the same to pet
custody disputes. This approach
can be criticised on the basis that
administrative convenience is used to avoid engagement with the substantive
issue. The courts
should at least be prepared to develop some guidelines to
clarify the way in which pets should be equitably divided at divorce or
separation, taking into account the changing social mores about the place of
pets within families.
Family pets: neither property nor persons
Ultimately, the judicial or legislative recognition and adoption of a
‘best interests of the pet’ test, at least in
would be a logical
starting point in resolving pet custody disputes. Already state-based animal
welfare and protection
legislation
impliedly recognises
through their prohibition of cruelty that companion or domestic animals (among
others) are not inanimate
Animals must be
treated with greater care than mere chattels. Obviously, people can treat their
personalty in whatever manner they
wish, including destroying or damaging it,
but the same liberty does not extend to companion
Furthermore, as with
human children, family pets are often adversely affected by divorce and other
relationship breakdowns.
interests of the companion animals affected should be given some consideration,
whether by the courts or primary dispute resolution
decision-makers.
There is growing evidence in the social science literature that children who
have companion animals tend to cope better with the ramifications
parents’ divorce or relationship breakdown than those who do not have
Similarly, there is a
growing body of research suggesting that divorce and separation can affect
companion animals as much as it
does children, if not more so. Dogs are more
likely than cats to feel a great sense of loss as a result of a marital or
shared household
breaking down and to be more sensitive to the attendant discord
and verbal abuse often accompanying the
Links have been shown
to exist between animal abuse, on the one hand, and domestic and child abuse on
Veterinarians are
even being encouraged by some Australian and North American state and local
governments to help fight child abuse
with some studies
showing that ‘women will often remain in violent and dangerous situations
rather than leave their pet behind
This has led to
some commentators arguing for the extension of injunctive relief to protect
companion animals as well as abused or
threatened humans where there is violence
in the home.
It is proposed that the approach taken by the Texas First District Court of
be adopted as the
starting point by Australian family courts approaching pet custody matters,
treating family pets neither as property
nor children since they obviously do
not fit into either category:
Because of the characteristics of animals in general and of domestic pets in
particular, [the court] consider(s) them to belong to
a unique category of
‘property’ that neither statutory law nor case law has yet
recognised.
this approach requires concerted active legislative and/or judicial action. For
example, it might require the insertion of
new provisions into the
(Cth) and equivalent state de facto legislation specifically
dealing with the custody of pets following divorce or separation, distinct
the provisions already existing relating to parenting and property orders.
What ultimately becomes evident is the need for empirical research to be
carried out to examine the extent to which pet custody issues
affect parties
involved in Australian family law proceedings, an area of fast-growing
importance in family law
internationally.
Australia’s family courts, which pride themselves as ‘helping
courts’ and originally developed ‘to assist
reduction of bitterness
and distress … and the alleviation of post-divorce
along with most
family law academics, have overlooked the issue of pet
While animal lawyers,
academics and activists are pursuing this issue, it should naturally arouse the
interest of family lawyers.
There is a wealth of resources emanating from North
America, where, as has been shown, the issue has a relatively well-established
presence in the family law system.
It is too simplistic for the common law to continue relying solely on
property principles to resolve pet custody disputes. Qualitative
quantitative sociological
from a number of
fledged members of the family unit.
Despite this, legal policy has not been
formulated to give effect to, and adequately protect, the unique role occupied
by companion
animals in the family when the pet’s guardians dissolve their
relationship with one another. This situation has often led to
injustice and
incoherence in the United States because of the conflicting decisions reached by
the courts there, in the absence of
legislative and judicial guidance. Neither
the companion animal nor their disputing human guardians benefit from this
uncertainty.
The first step that should be taken, at the very least, is to recognise that
family pets have a value which transcends their economic
market-value worth, so
that they deserve to be treated as occupying a place somewhere between mere
chattels and children. This would
allow the court determining a pet custody
dispute to look at a broader range of factors than just which party has
prevailing legal
title of the pet. For example, a court could consider the
arguably more important matter of the time and money each party spent looking
after the family pet and developing an emotional bond with it during the period
of the parties’ marriage or cohabitation. Both
property and parenting law
principles could therefore be applied in resolving the dispute. This approach
avoids the inflexibility
that the establishment of any one overriding or
paramount consideration would create and would allow for greater incremental
beyond being confined to specific guidelines such as that proposed by the
‘best interests of the pet’ test.
TONY BOGDANOSKI is a Masters
student at the University of Sydney.
This article was produced as part degree requirement at the Faculty of Law,
UTS, Sydney. The author gratefully acknowledges the assistance
of Associate
Professor Geoffrey Monahan, Steven White and
Sue Bogdanoska.
Cynthia Fox, ‘Courts View
Pets as Property in Divorce Battles,’
St Louis Post-Dispatch
Louis, Missouri), 19 April 2006, A08.
See Nancy Perry, ‘Ten
Years of Animal Law at Lewis and Clark Law School’ (2003) 9
i, ix; Mary Rose Liverani, ‘Animal Law Graduates to Legal
Discipline’
(2004) 42(6)
Law Society Journal
; Steven White,
‘Animals and the Law: A New Legal Frontier?’
[2005] MelbULawRw 10
University Law Review
; Leonie Lamont, ‘For All Creatures, A Law
Course Looks at Problems Great and Small’,
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney), 10 July 2004, 5.
Roza Gossage, ‘Pet
Custody: The New Frontier in Family Law’ (2002) 45(5)
http://www.illinoisbar.org/Sections/FamilyLaw/6-02b.htm
October 2006.
See, eg, Ann Britton,
‘Bones of Contention: Custody of Family Pets’, (Working Paper No 94,
University of California-Berkeley,
2003) 1; see also
Akers v Sellers
(1944), 114 Ind App 660.
There are no reported or
unreported pet custody cases in Australia’s family or other courts.
However, the media has sporadically
documented this phenomenon, largely in the
context of the high-profile divorces of celebrities and others in the public
see, eg, Bronwyn Watson, ‘Who Gets the Dog?’
Morning Herald
(Sydney), 3 May 1990, 7.
Definition of ‘family
law’ in Peter Butt (ed),
Butterworths Concise Australian Legal
(3rd ed, 2004) 169 (brackets and italics mine). See also
definition of ‘matrimonial cause’ in
Family Law Act 1975
Direct Line Pet Insurance,
‘Britain’s Dog Owners to Spend Thousands on Pet Custody’
http://www.directline.com/about_us/news_030205x.htm
at 2 November 2006
(Press Release, February 2005).
Brad Smith, ‘Who Gets
Fido? Former Couples Agree to Share’,
Tampa Tribune
Florida), 27 October 2003, 1.
See American Academy of
Matrimonial Lawyers, ‘More Divorces Becoming Dogfights’ (Press
Release, 26 June 2006).
(1999) 198 CLR 511.
struck out as unconstitutional the cross-vesting system,
specifically the vesting of state power in federal courts.
Joyce Tischler,
‘Lawyers Must Plan for More Cases About Animals’,
Los Angeles
Daily Journal
(Los Angeles, Califoria), 27 May 2004, 1. See also Robert
Garner, ‘Political Ideology and the Legal Status of Animals’
Rebecca Huss,
‘Separation, Custody, and Estate Planning Issues Relating to Companion
University of Colorado Law Review
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England
(first published 1765–69, 12th
ed, 1978) vol 2, 1–2.
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351
, 366 (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron CJ, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Danna Harman, ‘A
Fiercer Battle in Today’s Divorces: Who’ll Get the Pooch?’
Christian Science Monitor
, 26 January 2004
http://www.csmonitor.com/2004/0126/p11s01-lihc.html
at 19 October
Family Law Act
Eithne Mills and Keith
Akers, ‘Who Gets the Cats … You or Me? Analyzing Contact and
Residence Issues Regarding Pets upon
Divorce or Separation’
Family Law Quarterly
See Gary Francione,
Animals, Property and the Law
(1995) for a comprehensive analysis of the
proprietary legal status of animals generally. See also Barbara Newell,
Custody Disputes: A Growing Crack in the ‘Legal
Thinghood’ of Nonhuman Animals’
David Favre, ‘A New
Property Status for Animals’ in Cass Sunstein and Martha Nussbaum (eds),
Animal Rights: Current Debates and New Directions
(2004) 236.
For an interesting
discussion about estate planning issues as they relate to companion animals, see
Huss, above n 12, 326ff.
Bennett v Bennett
655 So2d 109
, 110–111 (1995).
In the Marriage of
356 NW 2d 611
, 612 (1984).
Boschee v Duncan
133 ACWS (3d) 683 (2004), from Alberta, Canada. However, see also
142 ACWS (3d) 87, 88 (2005) which seems to have put an end to
‘pet support’ litigation, at least in Ontario, Canada.
In the Marriage of
, n 22 above;
Arrington v Arrington
613 SW 2d 565
(1981), Tex Civ App 1981.
655 So 2d 109
For example, this may
necessitate taking into account any wishes of the family pet, pursuant to the
recommendations of an animal
behavioural expert’s report: see Linda
Legal Beagle: Diary of a Canine Counselor
(1996) and Warren
Eckstein and Denise Madden,
Memoirs of a Pet Therapist
See, eg, the
of Cruelty to Animals Act
(NSW). All other Australian State and
Territory jurisdictions have comparable animal protection statutes.
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979
(NSW) for offences against
animals generally, and specifically
for the prohibition on
‘cruelty’ against animals.
See, eg, the
Animals Act 1998
, where the principal object of the Act is stated
as being ‘to provide for the effective and responsible care and management
of companion animals’.
Angie Brown, ‘Family
Break-Up Has Pets Licking Wounds’,
The Scotsman
(Edinburgh), 23
February 2005, 12; Maryln Schwartz, ‘Helping Fido Get Through a
Dallas Morning News
(Dallas, Texas), 9 June 1987, 1C.
See, eg, Tanja Hoff and
Reinhold Bergler, ‘The Positive Influence of Dogs on Children in Divorce
Crises from the Mother’s
Perspective’ (Paper presented at the 9th
International Conference on Human-Animal Interactions, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
13–15, 2001).
See, eg, Katheryn Walker,
The Heart That is Loved Never Forgets: Recovering from Loss: When Humans and
Animals Lose Their Companions
Nicola Taylor, ‘Child
Abuse, Domestic Violence and Animal Abuse: Considering the Links’ (2004)
National Child Protection Clearing House Child Abuse Prevention
(Australian Institute of Family Studies) [16].
Australian Veterinary
Association, ‘Child Abuse Summit Should Include Animal Abuse’ (Press
Release, 16 December 2004).
Taylor, above n 34.
Dianna Gentry,
‘Including Companion Animals in Protective Orders: Curtailing the Reach of
Domestic Violence’ (2001) 13
Yale Law and Feminism
97; Eleonora
Gullone, Anne Volant and Judy Johnson, ‘The Co-occurrence of Family
Violence and Animal Abuse: A Comparison of
Violent and Nonviolent
Families’ (Paper presented at the Australian Institute of Family Studies
Conference: Step Forward for
Families — Research, Practice and Policy,
Melbourne, 2003).
886 SW2d 368 (Tex
Ibid (Hedges and Duggan JJ)
(footnotes omitted). See also Laura Ireland, former director, National Center
for Animal Law at Lewis
& Clark Law School (Portland, Oregon), quoted in
Stephen Beaven, ‘Who Gets the Dog?’
The Oregonian
Oregon), 19 April 2003, D1.
Paul Waldau, ‘Will the
Heavens Fall? De-Radicalizing the Precedent-Breaking Decision’
Joint Select Committee on
Family Law Act
Family Law in Australia
(1980) [7.10].
Chris Pippos, ‘Pets
Used as Bargaining Power in Custody Battles’,
Guardian Messenger
(Adelaide), 29 August 2001, 26.
See Aaron Beck and Aaron
Between Pets and People: The Importance of Animal Companionship
(revised ed, 1996). See also Peter and Ingrid Salmon, ‘Who Knows Who?
Psychological Research into the Human-Pet Bond in Australia’
Katcher and Aaron Beck (eds),
New Perspectives on Our Lives with Companion
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (84.1 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter