URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:07:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harris, Bede --- "Cats, Dogs and Bodies Corporate - Adjusting the Balance Between the Right to Animal Ownership and the Powers of Bodies Corporate" [2024] JCULawRw 3; (2024) 30 James Cook University Law Review 25
Cats, Dogs and Bodies Corporate
– Adjusting the Balance Between the Right to Animal Ownership and the
Powers of Bodies Corporate
Bede Harris
Conflicts between animal owners and bodies corporate are a notorious feature
of communal living and have generated a significant body
of case law. The power
that bodies corporate have over animal ownership varies widely between
Australian jurisdictions. In some,
animal ownership is given statutory
protection, whereas in others the rights of unit owners are wholly determined by
bodies corporate.
A new issue that affects what unit owners may do with their
property is the increasing trend towards the enactment by local governments
animal containment measures – a development that puts unit owners in the
position of having to navigate the interaction
between containment legislation
on the one hand and body corporate prohibitions on alterations to the external
appearance of lots
on the other. This paper argues that the wide by-law making
power enjoyed by bodies corporate has undermined the common law principle
owners are free to use and enjoy their property as they see fit, subject to the
equal rights of other property owners, and that
a re-balancing of the law is
necessary. The paper ends by offering model statutory provisions that could be
used to reform this
area of the law.
I Introduction
Disputes between animal owners and bodies corporate are a notorious feature
of property law in Australia. Part II of this paper surveys
the law relating to
strata and community title schemes in Australia’s various jurisdictions
and the legal status of by-laws
made by bodies corporate. Part III examines how
legislation treats the issue of animal ownership and the extent to which bodies
corporate have the power to either prohibit or regulate it. The paper then
discusses recent case law in New South Wales and Queensland
which, it is argued,
provides persuasive authority that could be used in other jurisdictions to
challenge by-laws that are unreasonably
restrictive of animal ownership. Part
IV discusses the increasing trend among local authorities of enacting
legislation requiring
animals to be contained within their owners’
property, and the difficulties that can arise out of the interaction between
legislation on the one hand and restrictive unit scheme by-laws that
prohibit the installation of structures that alter the external
appearance of
units on the other. Part V draws on the theory underlying property law to argue
that the conferral of broad by-law
making powers on bodies corporate is
inconsistent with the
numerus clausus
principle which limits the burdens
that can be placed on the ownership of real property. It goes on to assert that
the breadth of
such powers is also inconsistent with the principle that an
owner’s rights to use and enjoy their property should be restricted
to the extent necessary to protect the similar rights of other property owners.
The paper ends with two model sections addressing
animal ownership and animal
containment respectively which, it is argued, strike the correct balance between
the right to own animals
as a normal incident of ownership of property and the
rights of other residents of strata schemes.
II Strata and Community Title in Australia
The Trend Towards Strata and Community Living
In line with many other countries, residential property prices in Australia
have risen at a rate that is making housing increasingly
unaffordable. The
median value of houses in Australia in 2024 was $ 944
which is more than nine times
the average annual salary of $ 98
This has led many
apartment or other type of lot in
a multi-resident scheme, the median price of
which was $ 650 279 in 2024, accepting that in doing so they become subject to
constraints
associated with communal living. The scale of this trend is
illustrated by the fact that as of 2022 it was estimated that 16% of
Australia lived in strata title developments, including 21% of residents of the
Australian Capital Territory, which had
the highest proportion of strata
The New South Wales
Office of Fair Trading estimates that 50% of the residents of greater Sydney
will live in strata developments
In Australia, the title under which communal development properties are held
is known either as strata title or community
In the case of strata
title, ownership is divided into lots, each of which consists of a cubic space
with horizontal boundaries
(defined by the walls, floors and ceilings that
separate a lot horizontally or vertically from adjacent lots), and common
ownership of which vests in a body corporate of which each lot owner
is a member. The common property typically consists of areas
such as corridors,
lifts, driveways and gardens. Strata title is most commonly used in the case of
apartment blocks. In community
title schemes, each owner’s property is
defined according to allotments of parcels of land, rather than by boundaries
buildings. As in the case of strata title developments, community title
schemes also have common property, ownership of which is
shared between the
owners and is managed by a community corporation of which they are members.
Because it is based on individual
parcels of land, community title is most often
used for residential village developments, but it can also be used for the
of developments consisting of several parts, each on its own piece of
land, with strata schemes forming one of those parts.
An Overview of Strata Scheme Legislation
Legislation governing strata and / or community schemes has been enacted in
every Australian state or territory. In some states,
one Act establishes strata
title as a type of real property while the regulation of schemes is governed by
The discussion in this
article is confined to the latter class of legislation. In some states the
regulation of strata and community
title schemes is governed by separate Acts,
in which case this article references both
In all jurisdictions, the relevant Acts distinguish between the property
comprising individual lots and common property and provide
that the management
of common property is vested in a body, known as the body corporate,
owners’ corporation or strata corporation
of which each unit owner is a
The legislation provides
that a scheme must have internal rules, known variously as rules or by-laws,
which are adopted by the
and which regulate the
use of the common property and / or individual
In some jurisdictions,
the legislation states that owners must obtain the consent of the body corporate
before making alterations
affecting the exterior appearance of their
while in others this is
commonly stated in body corporate rules. In accordance either with express
statutory provisions or general
principles governing delegated legislation,
by-laws will be invalid if inconsistent with statute
and in some jurisdictions
may also be invalidated if they are unreasonable and / or
oppressive.
The day-to-day
exercise of a body corporate’s powers is vested in a body elected by the
members of the body corporate and
known as the executive committee, strata
committee, management committee or
For the sake of convenience, given the difference in terminology not only as
between strata and community title schemes but also between
paper uses the terms ‘strata scheme’, ‘lot’,
‘by-law’ and ‘body corporate’
when discussing the law
generally, while the terms appropriate to specific jurisdictions is used when
discussing case law arising
There has been uncertainty regarding the way in which by-laws adopted by
bodies corporate should be classified. In
Owners of Strata Plan No 3397 v
McColl JA stated that
by-laws could be conceived of either as delegated legislation or as a statutory
contract. However, the dominant
view now is that adopted by the High Court in
Dainford Ltd v Smith
that the power to make by-laws is an administrative one, delegated to bodies
corporate by strata legislation and that by-laws are
accordingly subject to
invalidation under administrative law principles governing
ultra vires
and reasonableness.
stated by Young JA in
Casuarina Rec Club Pty Limited v The Owners –
Strata Plan 77971
with approval the words of Lindley LJ in
London Association of Shipowners and
Brokers v London and India Docks Joint
by-law is not an agreement, but a law binding on all persons to whom it
Unfortunately, strata title legislation confers the by-law making power in
broad terms. In New South Wales, for example,
Strata Schemes
Management Act 2015
(NSW) states that ‘By-laws may be made in relation
to the management, administration, control, use or enjoyment of the lots
common property and lots of a strata scheme.’ This phraseology is so wide
as to make it very difficult to challenge
by-laws on grounds that they are ultra
More promising is the
fact that in some jurisdictions by-laws and / or decisions taken under them are
challengeable if they are
unreasonable.
III The Law Governing the
Keeping of Animals in Strata Schemes
The Position in the Different Jurisdictions
According to the RSPCA, 69% of households in Australia own a
Pet ownership is thus an
integral part of Australian life and so, given the increase in strata and
community living discussed in
, there is an obvious need for the law to
balance the rights of pet owners and of other residents in strata schemes. The
unit owners to keep animals differs between jurisdictions and
sometimes between strata title and community title legislation within
Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
(Qld), an owner must apply to
the body corporate for permission to keep an animal, but such permission may not
be unreasonably denied.
South Wales, the
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW) prohibits
by-laws that unreasonably prohibit the keeping of animals and presumes that the
keeping of pets is reasonable unless
the keeping of the animal unreasonably
interferes with another occupant’s use and enjoyment of that
occupant’s lot or
In Victoria, the legislation is silent on the right of an owner to keep pets.
However, that right was established as a result of the
decision in
Owners Corporation SP24474 v
In that case, a lot
owner challenged the validity of a rule passed by the owners corporation
prohibiting owners of units from keeping
pets and prohibiting pets from the
common property. The Tribunal held that while
Corporations Act 2006
(Vic) conferred a power on the owners’
corporations to make rules relating to ‘the control, management,
administration,
use or enjoyment of the common property or of a lot’, that
power was confined in so far as the use of lots was concerned, to
the matters
contained in
of Schedule 1 of the Act. The Tribunal also noted that
of the Act stated that a rule would be invalid if it was
‘oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to or unfairly discriminate[d]
against, a lot owner’.
The Tribunal held that
of Schedule 1 did not mention the keeping of animals,
nor did the keeping of an animal in a lot have any connection with the use
common property, and that therefore the owners’ corporation did not have
the power to make the rule. The Tribunal also
found that the rule prohibiting
owners from bringing pets onto the common property unfairly discriminated
against them, because they
would need to traverse the common property with the
pet in order to bring the pet into their unit, and so the rule had the practical
effect of prohibiting pet ownership. The Tribunal contrasted this with a
hypothetical rule which regulated the bringing of pets
into certain areas of
common property such as a pool or gymnasium which would be discriminatory but
not unfairly so.
In other jurisdictions the legislation does not protect the right to keep
animals. In the Northern Territory, and in the case of
community title schemes
in the ACT and New South Wales, the legislation is silent on the issue, which
means that the rights of pet
owners are wholly subject to what is stated in body
corporate rules. In South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania and in
in schemes falling under the
Building Units and Group Titles Act
(Qld), the legislation protects only the right to keep assistance
Grounds on Which Restrictive By-laws Can Be
It is arguable that by-laws which impose a prohibition on the keeping of
animals in the jurisdictions discussed in the preceding paragraph
are open to
challenge where legislation provides that by-laws are invalid if they are
unreasonable, unfair, oppressive, discriminatory
Case law from New South
Wales and Queensland provides persuasive authority that demonstrates how this
might be achieved.
New South Wales
The most important case in which a by-law imposing a blanket ban on the
keeping of animals was challenged was
Cooper v The Owners – Strata Plan
case which was decided before New South Wales legislation was amended so as to
confer a right to keep animals.
, the New South Wales Court of Appeal held that a by-law
imposing a blanket ban on the keeping of animals (other than assistance animals)
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
(NSW), which
provides that a by-law must not be ‘harsh, unconscionable or
oppressive.’ Basten JA came to this conclusion
on the basis that the test
for whether a by-law was harsh, unconscionable or oppressive is
it interferes with the property rights of a lot owner by controlling or
prohibiting a particular use in circumstances where that use
does not materially
and adversely affect the enjoyment of any other lot.
Basten JA also held that where
of the Act stated that the owners
corporation ‘shall, for the benefit of the lot owners, manage and control
the use of the
common property,’ the phrase ‘for the benefit of the
lot owners’ was to be interpreted as imposing a purposive
constraint on
the exercise of power, including on the creation of by-laws, and that:
... a by-law which restricts the lawful use of each lot, but on a basis which
lacks a rational connection with the enjoyment of other
lots and the common
property, is beyond the power to make
He further held that:
A by-law which restricts the rights of all owners as to the use and enjoyment
of their lots in circumstances where the prohibited
use would not interfere with
the use and enjoyment of any other lot, is not a by-law which has regard to the
interests of all lot
holders; nor is it “for the benefit of the lot
owners,” within the terms of
Similarly, MacFarlan JA held that:
The by-law at issue in the present case (By-law 14) imposes a blanket
prohibition (save in respect of assistance animals) on keeping
any animal, or
permitting it to be, on any lot or the common property. Its scope is broad
enough to prevent lot owners using their
lots in a way which could not, on any
rational view, adversely affect other lot owners’ enjoyment of their lots
or the common
property. The keeping of goldfish in a secure aquarium was an
obvious example given in the course of submissions in this Court. Other
examples, such as the keeping of a small bird in a cage, could also be
Fagan J held that:
By-law 14.1 is “oppressive” contrary to
prohibits an aspect of the use of lots in the strata plan that is an ordinary
incident of the ownership of real property,
namely, keeping a pet animal, and
the prohibition provides no material benefit to other occupiers of the building
in their use or
enjoyment of their own lots or of the common property. In an
apartment building such as that to which Strata Plan 58068 applies,
could be kept within a lot without creating the least interference with other
lot owners. The by-law is oppressive because
it prohibits the keeping of animals
across the board, without qualification or exception for animals that would
create no hazard,
nuisance or material annoyance to others. By-law 14.1 thus
interferes with lot holders’ use of their real property in a respect
to an extent that is unjustified by any legitimate concern of others in the
is also important because of the broad general principles laid
down by the justices:
MacFarlan JA adopted as his starting point the principle that property owners
are entitled to ‘enjoy and exercise the ordinary
incidents of ownership of
For a by-law to restrict a lot owner in the enjoyment or exercise of his or
her rights incident to ownership would in my view be “harsh,
unconscionable or oppressive” at least where the restriction could not on
any rational view enhance or be needed to preserve
the other lot owners’
enjoyment of their lots and the scheme common
Similarly, Fagan J said that a reason why the by-law under consideration was
oppressive was because it prohibited an ‘ordinary
incident of ownership of
real property.’
argued that these dicta represent a shift in approach, subordinating the
rule-making power of bodies corporate to the
inherent rights of lot owners as
owners. This, it is submitted, is correct – it should be presumed that
owners of a lot in
a scheme have the same rights as owners of non-strata
properties and that, in accordance with common law principles of nuisance,
rights are subject to curtailment by virtue of community living only when
reasonably necessary to protect the equal rights
of other lot holders.
The dicta in
suggest that the courts will interpret body
corporate rules restricting the rights of owners in their use of their property
subject to the requirement that bodies corporate be able to discharge
the onus of proving that rules meet that test. Importantly,
this approach does
not depend on the existence of a legislative provision prohibiting rules or body
corporate conduct which is unreasonable,
unconscionable, unfair or oppressive
(although such provisions provide additional grounds for invalidating rules that
unreasonably
intrude upon owners’ rights). Rather, it rests on an
interpretation that statutory provisions conferring rule-making power
relation to the use of individual lots and common property exist only for the
purpose of protecting the rights of unit owners
to use and enjoy their property,
and that exercises of that power beyond that purpose are
The case is also interesting because of the approach adopted to the
interaction between majoritarian decision-making and
oppression.
Basten JA held that
a liberal democracy is not a majoritarian dictatorship; it operates under legal
constraints designed to protect
minorities from
oppression.’
Fagan J held that
The inherent qualities of the by-law and the way it impacts upon lot owners
make it oppressive if, as in the case of by-law 14.1,
it forbids a common
incident of property ownership without providing benefit to others. Accordingly,
it is immaterial whether the
by-law in question may have been adopted or
maintained by a large majority or even unanimously. If a by-law that contains an
prohibition were adopted unanimously, that would suggest that no lot
holder at the time of the vote wished to undertake the prohibited
would not detract from the quality of oppression, which does not depend upon
whether any current lot holder desires to
act contrary to the by-law. By-laws
bind incoming purchasers. The oppressive character of a by-law, inherent from
the time of its
adoption, unanimous or not, may come to be felt by a person who
acquires a lot at a later
Following the decision in
Strata Schemes Management Act
(NSW) was amended by the insertion of
which prohibits by-laws
that unreasonably prohibit the keeping of animals and creates a presumption that
the keeping of pets is reasonable,
unless the keeping of the animal unreasonably
interferes with another occupant’s use and enjoyment of the
lot or the common property.
Section 137B
has a dramatic effect
on onus. Whereas previously applicants seeking to overturn a by-law or body
corporate decision bore the onus
– and thus the inconvenience and expense
– of proving the by-law or decision was
unreasonable,
that position by presuming that the keeping of an animal is reasonable, thereby
casting upon the body corporate the burden
of demonstrating that unreasonable
interference would occur.
It is also important to note that although the by-law in
imposed a blanket ban, that does not mean that the finding of the court applies
only in such circumstances. The principle that by-laws
will be intra vires only
where they protect the legitimate interests of others means that even by-laws
falling short of an absolute
ban on an activity will be found to be invalid if
they are not necessary to protect the rights of other occupiers.
However, this point was not appreciated in
McGregor v The Owners, Strata
Plan No 74896,
by-law permitted the keeping of cats, fish and birds but permitted only
assistance dogs. In that case, the Tribunal held
that, notwithstanding the
decision in
, the by-law was not invalid as it did not impose a
blanket ban on the keeping of animals. In light of
this was, with
respect, incorrect in that the ban on dogs other than assistance dogs had no
rational connection with the protection
of the interests of other occupants.
In Queensland (where the legislation protects only the right to keep
assistance animals) such an attempt to restrict animal ownership
implementing a blanket ban was at the core of the matter in in
Body Corporate for Kings Row Centre CTS
where the Tribunal
found that a by-law which prohibited the keeping of cats and dogs but permitted
other animals (subject to body
corporate approval) was oppressive and thus
contrary to
Body Corporate and Community Management Act
(Qld), which prohibits by-laws which are ‘oppressive or
unreasonable, having regard to the interests of all owners and occupiers
included in the scheme and the use of the common property for the scheme.’
Similarly, in
the Tribunal
held that a by-law prohibiting the keeping of animals was invalid on two
The first of these was that as
Body Corporate and Community
Management Act 1997
(Qld) states that by-laws could ‘regulate’
the use of lots and the common property, the power to make by-laws did not
extend to imposing an outright prohibition on a particular use of a lot.
The second ground was that the by-law contravened
was followed in
Body Corporate for
City Apartments CTS 31622 v
Portmeirion Village
Similarly, in
the Tribunal applied
in holding that a by-law limiting pet
ownership to either one cat or one dog was oppressive, while in
the Tribunal held
that a by-law that imposed a limit of two animals per unit, required them to be
de-sexed and imposed upper limits
on height and weight were oppressive in that
while number, de-sexing and size were factors that might be considered by a body
in determining whether to grant permission for them to be kept in
individual cases, the imposition of general criteria of that type
was oppressive
and unreasonable. In
applied in invalidating yet another example of a body corporate rule that set a
weight limit on animals and prohibiting them
from touching common
There may however be unusual circumstances in which, as was held in
Corporate for River City Apartments CTS 31622 v
a complete ban may
be justified. An example of this is
Crystal Waters Permaculture Village v
in which the issue
was whether a by-law which permitted the keeping of animals other than dogs and
cats in a scheme that operated
a wildlife sanctuary was invalid for on grounds
of being oppressive. In that case, the unique nature of the scheme as a rural
which encompassed an area on which biodiversity was protected, and where the
lots were unfenced so as to allow native fauna to move
freely meant that the
by-law which prohibited predatory animals (such as dogs and cats) was not
oppressive.
There is therefore a trend in Queensland under which blanket bans on animals
and by-laws imposing invariable conditions on keeping
them will be found to be
oppressive and that bodies corporate must consider each application on its
merits. As was held by the Adjudicator
decisions must be
specific to the circumstances of each case:
I note also that approval is often withheld on the basis of hypothetical
concerns: apartments are not suitable for dogs; the dog may
be noisy; another
occupier may have a fear of dogs; or another occupier may be allergic to them.
It is not reasonable to refuse approval
on the basis of merely hypothetical
concerns. In any event, in my experience these concerns are rarely well-founded.
Keeping a dog
is an ordinary part of living in a strata
Conclusion on By-laws Restricting Animals
The cases from New South Wales and Queensland provide persuasive authority
that could be used to overcome blanket bans or bans which
unreasonably restrict
animal ownership rights in jurisdictions where the by-law making power of bodies
corporate is limited by a
requirement that such by-laws not be discriminatory,
unreasonable and or oppressive.
IV Animal Containment Legislation And Its Significance For
Strata Living
The Trend Towards Animal Containment
An issue which has become an increasingly important issue for pet owners, and
which has the potential to give rise to particular difficulty
for pet owners
living in strata schemes, is the trend in some jurisdictions towards the
enactment of pet containment legislation.
Such legislation requires owners to
contain their animals within their property either completely or within
designated hours. The
motive for this is the protection of wildlife which has
long concerned zoologists.
containment laws are also beneficial for cats themselves in that they avoid
dangers posed by vehicles, attacks by other animals
and the transmission of
Although cat containment legislation was enacted decades ago in some overseas
comparatively new in Australia. Thus far, the ACT is the only state or
territory to have introduced jurisdiction-wide legislation
of this type.
Section 84AN
Domestic Animals Act 2000
(ACT) empowers the relevant
minister to make declarations requiring that cats must be confined within their
carer’s premises.
The power has been used to declare that all cats born
after 1 July 2022 be contained 24 hours per
In other states and
territories, containment laws have been enacted by local
authorities.
In Victoria, 38
out of 79 local government districts have implemented either dusk to dawn or
24-hour curfews, while in Queensland
74 out of 77 local councils have adopted
24-hour containment measures.
It is estimated that nation-wide, one third of local governments have enacted
containment rules of some
Animal Containment
Legislation and Strata By-laws on the External Appearance of Lots
The increasing number of local government areas adopting cat containment
measures means that body corporate rules regulating the keeping
of pets and
those regulating the alteration of the exterior of units are increasingly likely
to come into conflict. This will occur
where, although the keeping of an animal
has been approved under the by-laws, the body corporate has denied an animal
owner permission
to instal a containment structure over their garden or balcony
on the ground that such an installation would conflict with a by-law
prohibiting
the alteration of the exterior of units. The installation of containment
structures can also come into conflict with
by-laws prohibiting alterations to
common property because, depending on whether the balcony walls are part of the
unit or of the
common property, the installation of hooks and screws needed to
secure containment structures may cause damage to common property,
even though
such damage may be minor in nature.
It is true that a body corporate that does not permit pet containment
structures does not thereby prevent animal owners from complying
with animal
containment legislation because they can simply confine their cat indoors. In
addition, some owners may keep their cat
inside because they cannot afford to
instal containment structures. However, while it is certainly possible to keep
an animal wholly
indoors, it is obviously of benefit to the animal if it has
access to open air where that is possible. For example,
Animal Welfare Act 1992
(ACT) states that a person in charge of an animal
is required to allow an animal ‘appropriate opportunities to display
that is normal for the animal’ – ‘appropriate’
being defined as ‘suitable with regard to the species,
environment and
circumstances of the animal.’
One could argue that maximising free movement would be recognised as a good
under this legislation and that therefore animals should
have appropriate
opportunities to control their own access to the outside, at least for some
portion of time during the day. Even
in those jurisdictions where the law does
not contain a provision of the type in effect in the ACT, this factor could be
account when tribunals are called upon to decide whether prohibitions
on external structures satisfy the test of reasonableness where
the conduct of
bodies corporate and / or the content of by-laws must meet that test.
It can also be argued that the decision in
broader ground upon which a by-law prohibiting animal containment structures
could be invalidated, namely that the enjoyment
of an animal’s company in
the entirety of a unit, outdoor areas included, is an ordinary incident of
ownership of real property
which should not be curtailed other than on grounds
that are rationally connected to other unit owners’ use and enjoyment of
their property.
installation of a containment structure could not be said to interfere with
other owners’ use and enjoyment of their
property, one reaches the
conclusion that owners have a presumptive right to make such alterations.
An argument which bodies corporate have raised is that by disrupting the
uniformity of a scheme, the installation of containment structures
affects the value of owners’ property. This issue was raised in
Tranquility Garden City
in which the
applicant had sought permission from the body corporate to instal a net designed
to contain the cat she owned. She
did this in order to enable the cat to obtain
fresh air while still being contained within her lot. The applicant said that
netting was of a low-visibility design which would comply with the strata
rule prohibiting structures that detracted from the building’s
façade. The body corporate granted permission for her to erect an
external structure but subject to the condition that it
have the same appearance
as a retractable sunshade that had been installed by residents of another lot.
The applicant appealed against
the decision, alleging that the decision of the
body corporate was unreasonable and thus contrary to
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
(Qld), which required
the body corporate and its committee to act reasonably, because there were no
retractable nets available that
were suitable for animal containment and that a
sunshade would not contain her cat.
Unfortunately, although the applicant raised in argument the fact that
of the Brisbane
Animals Local Law
requires that owners enclose animals, the Adjudicator did not
address this point in the decision, which was based solely on the question
whether the body corporate had breached its duty to act reasonably by making
consent for an enclosure subject to the condition
that the applicant to instal a
sunshade instead of a net.
The grounds that the body corporate advanced for imposing the condition were
two-fold: that the net would detract from the uniformity
of the external
appearance of the building and that scheme by-law 37.2(b) prohibited the
enclosure of balconies. The Adjudicator
held that the net did not constitute an
‘enclosure’ under scheme by-law 37.2(b). So far as uniformity of
was concerned, the Adjudicator noted that by-law 18 of the scheme
stated that an owner had to seek body corporate approval for improvements
their lot except in cases where an improvement was ‘minor cosmetic work
that does not in any way affect, alter or otherwise
impact the Common Property
or another Lot’ - which is a common way for rules regarding external
improvements to be phrased.
The Adjudicator also noted that by-law 19 prohibited
an owner from doing anything ‘which changes the external appearance of
Lot (including without limitation, an improvement or the placement of an item),
if it will result in a change of the appearance
of the Lot being visible from
another Lot or the Common Property, or from outside the Scheme Land, without the
Body Corporate’s
written approval.’
Since both parties agreed that the cat net was not minor or cosmetic in
nature, the case revolved around whether or not the body corporate
reasonably in taking the view that the net detracted from the uniform appearance
of the scheme. The Adjudicator stated
that by-law 19 did not prohibit
improvements which changed the appearance of the scheme but rather permitted
such changes to be approved
by the body corporate, and that the question was
therefore whether the change of appearance was such as to have an adverse impact
on the scheme or other owners. This was a matter of degree and depended on a
wide range of factors such as ‘
... the nature and extent of the alteration to the external appearance of the
lot, the reason for the change, the visual impact of
the change in the context
of the appearance of the surrounding lots and common property and the appearance
of the scheme generally,
and the impact of the change on others.
On the facts, the Adjudicator found that the net was not sufficiently visible
to impact the uniformity of the scheme to any real degree
and held that the
condition imposed by the body corporate that the applicant instal a blind rather
than a net was unreasonable and
The decision in
Tranquility Garden City Residences
is a positive
development in that it established a precedent that a net, at least
, does not detract from the uniformity of a scheme to an extent that
adversely affects the interests of other
However, the problem
remains that whether a net or other containment measure will be approved
ultimately depends on a determination
of its aesthetic effect in the context of
the particular scheme.
The risk therefore remains that a Tribunal might find that a net unreasonably
disrupted the uniformity of a scheme’s façade,
in which case an
animal owner would be left in the position of having either to dispose of their
animal or keep it wholly inside,
contrary to the normal usage of their property
that a pet-owner would expect. The decision in
Tranquility Garden City
would have been on firmer grounds had the Brisbane City
Animals Local Law 2017
been given primacy and had the
Tribunal interpreted the requirement that bodies corporate act reasonably to
find that the fact that
animal owners are obliged to comply with the Local Law
means that the obligation to contain over-rides questions of uniformity, and
that reasonableness in relation to this issue means that bodies corporate cannot
deny permission to owners to instal such structures
as are necessary to comply
with the Local Law or similar legislative requirements. Under this approach it
would still be open to
a body corporate to make a by-law that prescribed
reasonable specifications for such structures – relating, for example, to
permissible materials, so as to ensure that they are as unobtrusive as possible
– but blanket prohibitions would not be permissible.
Another interpretative avenue would be that when deciding whether
restrictions placed by bodies corporate on external structures are
reasonable,
tribunals should subordinate aesthetic considerations to consideration of what
is an effective method of containment.
A similar argument is made by Sherry,
who opines that the installation of safety netting to protect children should
not be prohibited
on aesthetic
It is submitted that
the correct approach should be to presume that animal owners have a right to
instal such structures and that
what a reasonable structure is would depend on
whether the structure had the least adverse effect on the appearance of a scheme
still achieving the objective of containing animals. This would be in
contrast to the current position, where there is no presumptive
right to instal
a structure, and structures will be permitted only when they do not unreasonably
alter the appearance of a scheme.
In many, perhaps most, instances nets will,
because of their transparent nature, be found to have the least effect on
external appearance.
However, as the
Tranquility Garden City Residences
case shows, there are bodies corporate which adopt the stance that nets are
impermissible, thereby putting owners to the inconvenience
and expense of
mounting a challenge. A new interpretative approach in terms of which
containment has priority over aesthetics in
determining what is reasonable would
establish a precedent that would deter bodies corporate from adopting such a
V Reform of Strata Law
Body Corporate By-laws as a Restriction of Ownership
The issue of animal ownership – and the sheer volume of case law it has
generated - is just one among the many areas of dispute
that can arise between
lot owners and bodies corporate. It also reflects a general problem, which is
that the vesting of wide by-law
making power in bodies corporate has created a
new and limitless type of burden that can be attached to property. In her
theoretical
analysis of body corporate power, Sherry argues that the vesting of
wide rule-making power in bodies corporate runs counter to the
efforts that
courts have made since the 13
century to reduce the number of
interests that can be attached to real property through the development of the
numerus clausus
principle. She states that the regulatory power of
bodies corporate fragments interests in property because lot owners (and their
successors in title) take property whose usage is subject to the changing
interests of third parties.
further argues that the subordination of ownership rights to the will of third
parties runs contrary to Mill’s harm principle
that a person is free to
act so long as they do not harm
and that the subjection
of ownership to restrictive by-laws has the significant economic effect of
reducing the saleability of lots,
deterring potential purchasers who object to
existing by-laws and who also do not want to run the risk of further (and
unpredictable)
by-laws being adopted in future. Referring specifically to
restrictions on the keeping of animals she
Examples of by-laws that regulate self-regarding behaviour are by-laws that
implement blanket restrictions on pets or pet restrictions
based on size or
weight. If readers will excuse the pun, pets are not a petty issue. The freedom
to keep a companion animal is
central to many people’s daily lives and
wellbeing and the inability to keep a pet is a source of significant distress
litigation in strata schemes....If [a] dog barks all day and night,
that...would be an ‘other-regarding act’, a use
of private property
which harms others and thus can legitimately be regulated. However, a goldfish,
a cat that never leaves the house,
or even a labrador who lies comatose on the
sofa all day, is a use of one’s property that has no effect on the
neighbours and
is thus not a subject of legitimate regulation. To illustrate
this point, let us imagine that a local council banned all pets in
residential
areas on the grounds that as some pets are a nuisance, it is easier and more
certain to ban all. This decision would
not be tolerated. People would argue
that regulation of land use is only justifiable to prevent harm to others, and
must not sloppily
scoop up harmless behaviour as well. We do not sanction that
kind of legislative overreach in the public sphere, so why should strata
be any different?
The scope of body-corporate rule-making power thus has significant
implications for the nature of property rights. So far as the
right to keep
animals is concerned, law-makers face a policy choice between two competing
positions. These are, on the one hand
and in the words of McFarlan JA in
that the keeping
of animals is a ‘normal incident of ownership of property’ or, on
the other, that body corporate majorities
can strip owners of this and other
incidents of ownership. The issue, as Kotwal states, is that:
People’s homes are enshrined in the principles of liberal democracy as
a place of refuge from the outside world, where people
should be free to live,
with legal limits, according to their own conscience. Strata title, by its
inherent character, involves the
surrender of these rights to a statutorily
created body....
But the effects of the by-law making powers of bodies corporate extend far
beyond the bounds of property law because they confer upon
bodies corporate the
power to regulate the way in which owners live their lives, with all the
implications for individual autonomy
that such a position entails. Bodies
corporate are, in effect, private governments, with powers akin to those
conferred on public
institutions.
This provides
another, and perhaps more fundamental, ground than interference with property
rights that justifies reform of this
area of the law.
The Need for Reform
In discussing how strata law might be reformed, it is important to pay
attention not only to the rights of the individual strata dweller
animals but also to the wider social factors. The psychological benefits of pet
ownership are well documented,
but animal companionship is also important for physical health in that it
counters the effects of loneliness which are linked to
increased rates of
greater risk of coronary heart disease, high blood pressure, stroke and poor
This is all the more
significant given the fact that the high cost of housing is causing people to
postpone having children and
to rely on animal companionship
Thus adopting policies
which reduce loneliness directly assists in reducing demands on the health
system, and this, no less than
the rights of animal owners, must be weighed
against the rights of majorities as expressed through bodies corporates.
The facts of the cases indicate the need for reform. Some of them reveal a
paranoid attitude towards animals laced with what appears
to be pettiness and
malice. For example, in
where the by-law
prohibited animals from even touching common property, the body corporate
prescribed as a condition of keeping an
animal that:
You would have to have some form of trolly made to carry and secure the dog
in this journey, and possibly 3 or 4 times per day. This
trolly would have to be
of soft exterior as to not damage any of the lifts, yet strong enough to secure
the 33kg dog. This transport
will inconvenience owners but our major concern is
damage to the lifts which would totally be your responsibility. Our extra
is lift use where 2 lifts service 60 plus units, yet up to 8 times a day
a lift will be out of service for your use and further consideration,
some owners are petrified and allergic to the presence of dogs which could
require some form of sanitisation as any soft
surface will retain odour.
Another example is provided by
Kary v B'nai B'rith Retirement Villages
where the rules
of a scheme prohibited the keeping of animals other than fish and where the
scheme operator refused to amend the rules
so as to allow the applicant, who
suffered both from depression and lung cancer, from keeping two budgies in a
Avenues Towards Reform
With this in mind, how could strata law be reformed, noting that that law
reform is difficult, and even more so in areas of law that
are controlled by
multiple jurisdictions?
avenue lies in the hands of tribunals that determine body corporate disputes.
persuasive authority that could be used to overturn by-laws that either prohibit
animals or impose conditions that amount
to a de facto no animal policy.
Similarly, the decision in
Tranquility Garden City
Residences,
coupled with
the interpretative approach to reasonableness advocated in
paper, could be used to overturn body corporate prohibitions on animal
containment structures. The disadvantage of attempting
reform through
litigation is, however, that it is incremental. It also depends on a lot owner
having the resources to initiate a
suit (bearing in mind that
to the New South Wales Court of Appeal) and it may, of course, lead to failure
if a tribunal establishes a precedent contrary
to that which is desired.
Far more effective would be the establishment of animal owner rights through
amendment of the various state and territory Acts. As
Sherry states:
... the legislature must not give private citizens carte blanche to write any
by-laws they please, but for the sake of individuals
within schemes and the
wider community, it must explicitly provide courts with the ability to reject
by-laws that do not embody the
values of a liberal democratic society with a
free land market.... As the law currently stands, strata and community title
create ‘an open-ended bundle of property rights’. They do
this by allowing private citizens to attach negative and positive
obligations to
freehold land in the form of by-laws, with the only general limit being that
by-laws relate to the use or enjoyment
of lots or common property...by-laws
regulating personal autonomy or authorising financially burdensome contracts
will all meet that
description.
A general rule of the common law is that everything which is not forbidden is
When applied in the realm of property law, this means that in the absence of
some prohibitory legal rule, a person has the right
to determine the use of
their property, interference with which by another constitutes a
The balance between the competing interests of unit owners and bodies corporate
should be altered so as to reflect this doctrine,
which means that an
owner’s right to use and enjoy the normal incidents of ownership of their
property – the keeping
of animals included - can be limited only to the
extent that is reasonably necessary to protect the similar rights of other
To give effect to this, the legislation should expressly confirm the
right of scheme residents to keep animals. This would then
leave it up to the
body corporate, in circumstances where an animal is unreasonably disturbing the
right of other residents to enjoy
the use of their property, to seek a remedy
from the relevant tribunal for the abatement of that particular nuisance, in the
way as it would in the case of any other, non-animal related, conduct.
The legislation should also take into account the legitimate interests that
potential purchasers have in applying for permission to
keep animals. None of
the state or territory acts give potential purchasers the right to do this, and
although it may be the case
that bodies corporate will respond to such
applications from people who are considering making an offer to purchase a lot,
law indicates that sometimes purchasers who own animals have been able
to apply only after taking transfer of a property, finding
themselves in an
impossible position if permission to keep the animal is denied.
So far as containment structures are concerned, although it is possible for
animals to be kept wholly indoors, it is submitted that
the normal incidents of
ownership include an owner’s right to enjoy their animals’ company
on balconies and in gardens
forming part of their lot as much as inside a lot,
and that therefore legislative reform should include a presumptive right on the
part of animal owners to instal containment structures in these areas.
There is a precedent for this in existing legislation. In Victoria,
Owners Corporations Act 2006
(Vic) provides that by-laws must not
unreasonably prohibit the installation of sustainability items (defined as
anything that eliminates
or reduces a reliance on non-sustainable energy
sources) on the exterior of a lot, and that a prohibition of the installation of
sustainability items only on aesthetic grounds is taken to be unreasonable.
This provision serves the social good of encouraging
the installation of devices
such as solar panels which reduce reliance on fossil fuels. Given the health
benefits of animal companionship
discussed above, it is submitted that a
permissive regime governing the installation of animal containment devices is
equally justifiable
on social grounds.
The following model statutory provision, which draws on elements of
legislation in New South Wales and Victoria while also incorporating
features, embodies the reforms recommended in this paper:
Keeping of animals
(1) In this section the word ‘animal’ refers either to a single
animal or to more than one animal
(2) Each of the following has no force or effect to the extent that it would
unreasonably prohibit the keeping of an animal on a lot
(a) a by-law,
(b) a decision by a body corporate under a by-law.
(3) It is taken to be reasonable to keep an
animal on a lot unless the keeping of the animal unreasonably interferes with
occupier’s use and enjoyment of their lot or the common
(4) A body corporate may apply to the Tribunal
for a remedy in cases where it is alleged that the keeping of an animal
with another occupier’s use and enjoyment of their lot or the
common property, and the Tribunal may make such orders as are
necessary to terminate such interference.
Animal containment structures
(1) In this section
(a) the word ‘animal’ refers either to a single animal or to more
than one animal,
(b) the word ‘lot’ includes common property attached to a
boundary of a lot.
(2) Each of the following has no force or effect to the extent that it would
unreasonably prohibit the making of alterations to, or
the installation of
structures in or on, a lot for the purpose of containing an animal
(a) a by-law,
(b) a decision by a body corporate under a by-law.
(3) It is taken to be reasonable to make alterations to, or the instal
structures in or on, a lot for the purpose of containing an
animal unless it
unreasonably interferes with another occupant’s use and enjoyment of their
lot or the common property.
(4) If a by-law requires that an occupier obtain permission from a body
corporate for the making of alterations to, or, or the installation
structures in or on, a lot for the purpose of containing an animal, and an
occupant or, if a unit is advertised for sale, a person
who is a potential
purchaser of the unit, seeks such permission from the body corporate, the body
corporate will be taken to have
granted such permission if it makes a decision
contrary to subsection (2)(b) or fails to make a decision within 7 days.
(5) A by-law may authorise the body corporate to attach such conditions to
the making of alterations to, or the installation of structures
in or on, a lot
for the purpose of containing an animal as are reasonably necessary to prevent
interference with other occupiers’
use and enjoyment of their lot or the
common property.
(6) For the purposes of subsection (4) denial of permission only on aesthetic
grounds is taken to be unreasonable.
(7) If a body corporate decides to deny permission under subsection (4) or to
attach conditions under subsection (5), the burden of
proving that such a
decision was reasonable rests on the body corporate.
The conferral of statutory rights both to keep animals and to instal
containment structures would lead to a decrease in litigation.
It would negate
an argument often advanced by bodies corporate that a ‘no pets’
policy serves to maintain the value
of units in a scheme by making them
attractive to buyers who prefer to live in an animal-free environment: if the
law required all
schemes to allow the keeping of animals and the installation of
containment measures, there would be nothing to distinguish one scheme
another, and so the property value argument would become irrelevant. Placing
the burden on bodies corporate to prove the reasonableness
of conditions
attaching the installation of containment structures would reverse the current
balance of power between owners and
bodies corporate and would reduce the number
of cases that burden tribunals.
The rationale for reform of this area of the law can be summarised by this
simple proposition: Since the owner of a free-standing
property has the right,
subject to state and local laws and the common law of nuisance to keep an
animal, why should the law be any
different in strata schemes? The mere fact
that strata owners live in close proximity to each other has led legislatures to
excessively broad powers on bodies corporate which the latter have used
to make increasingly intrusive by-laws governing the lives
of scheme residents.
The falsity of the underlying premise upon which that allocation of power is
based needs to be recognised,
and the law reformed accordingly.
BA (Mod) Dublin, LLB (Rhodes), DPhil (Waikato), Senior Lecturer
in Law, School of Business, Charles Sturt University. This article
is dedicated
to all the animals who have shared their lives with our family.
Kate Ainsworth, ‘Price
gap between houses and apartments widens to new record as land values surge in
capital cities’
(Web Page, 20 February 2024) <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-02-20/house-apartment-price-gap-widens-record-high-property-market/103484076
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Average Weekly Earnings, Australia
(Web Page, 22 February
https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/labour/earnings-and-working-conditions/average-weekly-earnings-australia/nov-2023
City Futures Research Centre,
University of New South Wales,
Australasian Strata Insights 2022
June 2023) 6, 16.
New South Wales Office of Fair
Buying a strata property
(Web page, 12 December 2023) <
https://www.nsw.gov.au/housing-and-construction/strata/buying-a-strata-property
For an overview of types of
title see Cathy Sherry,
Strata Title Property Rights – Private
governance of multi-owned properties
(2017, Routledge) 16-26 and Hossein
Esmaeli and Brendan Grigg (eds),
The Boundaries of Australian Property
(Cambridge University Press, 2016) 163-7.
For example, in New South Wales
Strata Schemes Development Act 2015
(NSW) creates strata title while
Strata Schemes Management Act 2015
Community Land
Management Act 2021
(NSW) regulate strata and community schemes
respectively.
Unit Titles
(Management) Act 2011
Community Titles Act
2001 (ACT), the
Strata Schemes
Management Act 2015
Community Land Management Act 2021
Owners Corporations Act 2006
Building Units
and Group Titles Act 1980
Body Corporate and Community
Management Act 1997
Strata Titles Act
Community Titles Act 1996
Strata Titles Act 1985
Community Titles Act 2018
Unit Title Schemes Act 2009
(NT) and the
Strata Titles Act 1998
(Tas). In subsequent footnotes,
legislation is referred to by jurisdiction only rather than by full title. Where
there are separate
strata and community title Acts in a jurisdiction, the
different Acts are referred to by abbreviations before section numbers.
ACT UTMA s 16(1), CTA s 30(1);
NSW SSMA s 9(1), CLMA s 7(1); Vic s 4; Qld BUGTA s 27, BCCMA s 30; SA STA s 18,
CTA s 71; WA STA s
14(1), CTA s 17(1); NT s 27(1); Tas s 71(1).
ACT UTMA s 108(1), CTA s 48;
NSW SSMA s 141, CLMA s 131; Vic s 138(1); Qld BUGTA s 30(2), BCCMA ss 62 and
66(1)(e); SA STA s 19(2),
CTA s 39(1); WA STA s 44(1), CTA s 43(2); NT s 95; Tas
By-laws can regulate the use
both of the common property and individual units under NSW SSMA s 136(1), CLMA s
128(2)(e)); Qld BUGTA
s 30(2), BCCMA s 169(1)); SA STA Schedule 3, CTA s
34(2)(c)-(d); WA STA s 45(1), CTA 45(2)(a); NT s 95A(2) and Tas s 90(1). The
is true in Victoria under s 138(1) of the
Openers Corporations Act 2006
(Vic), although s 5 of Schedule 1 of the Act lists only a limited number of
matters pertaining to the use of individual units that
can be regulated by
by-laws. In the ACT
s 108(3)(d)
Unit Titles (Management) Act 2011
(ACT) says that the body corporate may not make rules that are not
‘incidental or ancillary to the exercise of its functions
Act’ but does not otherwise specify the scope of the matters that rules
may relate to (other than in the case of
retirement villages). However, the
model rules contained in Schedule 1 of the
Unit Titles (Management)
Regulation 2011
(ACT) specifies certain matters pertaining to the use of
units that by-laws may regulate. Section 48(1)(a) of the
Community Titles Act
2001 (ACT) provides that by-laws can regulate the use of both the common
property and individual units.
Such provisions exist in the
Owners Corporations Regulations 2018
(Vic) Schedule 2, cl 5.3, in
Strata Titles Act
(SA), and in
s 87(5)(b)(i)
Titles Act 1985
ACT UTMA s 108(3)(a); NSW
SSMA s 136(2), CLMA s 128(3); Vic s 140(b); Qld BCCMA s 180(1); SA CTA s
41(1)(a); WA UTA s 46(b), CTA
s 47(b); NT s 95(3)(a). Inconsistency is not
expressly mentioned in the other Acts, but given the prevailing view that
by-laws are
a species of delegated legislation, it is suggested that
inconsistency is prohibited where by-laws are inconsistent with any primary
legislation. The only exception to this is in Western Australia where
Strata Titles Act 1985
Community Titles
(WA) state that by-laws are not subsidiary legislation.
ACT UTMA s 108(3)(c), CTA s
49; NSW SSMA s 139(1), CLMA s 130(1); Vic s 140(a); Qld BCCMA s 180(7); SA STA s
19A(9), CTA s 38(1)(b);
WA UTA s 46(j)(ii), CTA s 47(l); NT s 84(1)(c); Tas s
ACT UTMA s 34, CTA s 43(1);
NSW SSMA s 29(1), CLMA s 30(1); Vic s 100; Qld s 42(1) BUGTA, s 98 BCCMA; SA UTA
s 35(1), CTA s 90; WA
UTA s 135(1), CTA s 112 (1); NT s 94(1); Tas s 79(1).
[2007] NSWCA 207
(2007) 70 NSWLR 344
(McColl JA).
(1985) 155 CLR 342
(Gibbs CJ), 351 (Mason J), 355–8 (Wilson J).
Giridhar Kotwal, ‘The
Use of Administrative Law Principles to Limit the Decision Making Powers of
Owners Corporations’
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Student Series
No, 14-09, 2.
5-6. The only exception to this is in Western Australia where
Strata Titles Act 1985
Community Titles Act
(WA) state that by-laws are not subsidiary
legislation.
[2011] NSWCA 159
(2011) 80 NSWLR 711
(Young JA).
[1892] UKLawRpCh 125
[1892] 3 Ch 242
(Lindley LJ).
Sherry (n 5) 31-2, 124,
RSPCA ‘How many pets
are there in Australia’?
RSPCA Knowledge base
https://kb.rspca.org.au/knowledge-base/how-many-pets-are-there-in-australia/#:~:text=There%20are%20currently%20an%20estimated,Figure%201
ACT UTMA s 32(4), Qld BCCMA
s 169B. However, in the ACT and Queensland the right to keep animals is not
protected in schemes falling
Community Titles Act 2001
Building Units and Group Titles Act 1980
(Qld) respectively.
NSW SSMA s 137B. By
contrast, the rights to keep animals is not protected by the
Community Land
Management Act 2021
[2016] VCAT 1312.
Section 140
was subsequently
amended in 2021 and now prohibits any rule that ‘is oppressive to,
unfairly prejudicial or unfairly discriminates
against, an owner or occupier of
ACT STA s 49; NSW CLMA s
130(1); SA STA s 19(4)(c), CTA s 37(1); WA UTA s 46(h), CTA s 47(k); Tas s 7(2).
In the Northern Territory
Unit Title Schemes Act 2009
(NT) prohibits a body corporate from taking a decision which is unreasonable,
oppressive or unjust, which would include decisions
taken in the enforcement of
[2020] NSWCA 250
(2020) 103 NSWLR 160.
For an analysis of the case
see Cathy Sherry, ‘Judicially Identified Limits on the Body Corporate
By-law Making Power –
Cooper v The Owners – Strata Plan No 58068
Australian Law Journal
(n 28) [56]
(Basten JA).
Ibid [57]-[61] (Basten
Ibid [63] (Basten JA).
Ibid [79]-[80] (MacFarlan
Ibid [88] (Fagan J).
Ibid [76] (MacFarlan
Ibid [78] (MacFarlan JA).
[88] (Fagan JA).
This argument is made by
Sherry (n 29) 131-2.
(n 28) [88]
(Fagan JA).
Ibid [48] (Basten JA).
Ibid [94] (Fagan JA).
Bramley and the Owners of
52 Wickham Street Strata Plan 59237
[2013] WASAT 127
, [31] (Member
Owen-Conway).
[2021] NSWCATCD 1.
[2010] QCATA 57.
[2012] QBCCMCmr 227.
[2012] QCATA 47.
[2016] QBCCMCmr 350.
[2020] QBCCMCmr 161.
[2014] QBCCMCmr 343.
[2020] QBCCMCmr 648.
[2023] QBCCMCmr 266.
There is a previous decision
by the Tribunal in
Mariners Peninsula Subsidiary No. 100
[2022] QBCCMCmr
in which the Adjudicator held that a condition attached to permission to
keep a dog prohibiting the animal from touching common property
was reasonable.
However, it is submitted that
is no longer good authority, given
is a more recent decision and that
the validity of a body corporate rule rather than only a condition attached to a
[2012] QCATA 47.
[2020] QCATA 80.
A similar case to this was
The Owners of Cocos Beach Bungalows Survey Strata Plan
[2021] WASAT 101
where the tribunal considered the decision in
but found that a by-law governing a scheme consisting of holiday
accommodation units was not unreasonable and oppressive in prohibiting
from bringing animals into units unless the unanimous consent of all owners had
been obtained. Tribunal Member McGiven said
that he was unaware of any Western
Australian case law to the effect that animal ownership is an incident of
property ownership,
but that even if it was, the New South Wales decision in
related to residential property, rather than to holiday
accommodation, and that the effect of the by-law was therefore not to prevent
people from owning animals but rather from bringing them on holiday, and was
also qualified in nature because there was scope for
consent to be given.
[2022] QBCCMCmr 123.
Ibid [24] (Adjudicator
Sutherland).
John Woinarski, Sarah Legge
and Chris Dickman,
Cats in Australia: companion and killer
Publishing, 2019).
As an example of this from
the former DDR see the discussion in ‘Naturschutz – Sinnvolle
Katzenhaltung’ (1988)
Neue Berliner Illustrierte
ACT Government City
Services, Cat containment (Web Page)
https://www.cityservices.act.gov.au/pets-and-wildlife/domestic-animals/cats/cat-containment
Tida Nou, Sarah Legge, John
Woinarski, Jaana Dielenberg and Georgia Garrard
The management of cats by
local governments of Australia
(2021, Threatened Species Recovery Hub).
Donna Lu, ‘Keep your
cat indoors’: why conservationists are pushing for pet containment in
The Guardian
(12 September 2023, Web Page) <
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/sep/12/should-you-keep-your-cat-indoors-australia-native-animals
Jaana Dielenberg,
‘Two-thirds of us support banning pet cats from roaming. A ban would save
millions of native animals —
and billions of dollars’
Conversation
(15 May 2024, Web Page) <
https://theconversation.com/two-thirds-of-us-support-banning-pet-cats-from-roaming-a-ban-would-save-millions-of-native-animals-and-billions-of-dollars-229180
Sherry (n 5) 178-90.
[2024] QBCCMCmr 224.
Denial of permission to
instal a cat enclosure was also found to be unreasonable in
[2008] QBCCMCmr 364.
Sherry (n 5) 218-20.
Cathy Sherry, ‘Lessons
in Personal Freedom and Functional Land Markets: What Strata and Community Title
Can Learn from Traditional
Doctrines of Property’
[2013] UNSWLawJl 13
of New South Wales Law Journal
Ibid 293-4.
Ibid 310-11.
(n 28) [76]
(McFarlan JA).
Kotwal (n 17) 2.
Sherry (n 5) 165-9.
Allen McConnell and
Christina Brown, ‘Friends With Benefits: On the Positive Consequences of
Pet Ownership’ 2011 (101)
Journal of Personality and Social
Vivek Murthy,
– Loneliness, Health & What Happens When We Find Connection
(Profile Books, 2020) 14.
Oliver Gordon and Georgia
Roberts ‘More than half of young Australians are putting off having
children. What does that mean
for future growth?’
Page, 4 June 2024) <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-06-04/why-australians-arent-having-children/103930594
[2023] QBCCMCmr 266.
Ibid [13] (Adjudicator
[2023] NSWCATCD 16.
Nicole Johnston, ‘Law
Reform Challenges – An evaluation of Australia’s strata law trends
and implications’
in Randy Lippert and Stefan Treffers (eds),
Condominium Governance and Law in Global Urban Context
(2021, Routledge)
220, 224-5.
Tranquility Garden City
Sherry (n 69) 303.
Brownlie v State
Pollution Control Commission
(1992) 27 NSWLR 78
, [85] (Gleeson CJ), Charles
Sampford, ‘Law, Institutions and the Public/Private Divide’
Federal Law Review
, 201, Aaron Timoshanko, ‘Could Existing
Anti-Cruelty Laws Ban Whip Use in Horse Racing?’
[2022] AdelLawRw 16
Adelaide Law
, 443 and John Laws, ‘The Rule of Law: The Presumption of
Liberty and Justice’ (2017) 22
Judicial Review
Razeen Sappideen, Prue Vines
and John Eldridge,
Torts, Commentary and Materials
(Thompson Reuters,
13th ed, 2021) 781.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (123 KB)
PDF format (474 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter