URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Del Villar, Katrine; Jeanneret, Ruthie; White, Ben P --- "When Safeguards Become Stumbling Blocks: A Call to Remove the State Residence Requirement for Voluntary Assisted Dying in Australia" [2025] UNSWLawJl 20; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 611
WHEN SAFEGUARDS BECOME
STUMBLING BLOCKS: A CALL TO REMOVE THE STATE RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT FOR VOLUNTARY
ASSISTED DYING IN AUSTRALIA
KATRINE DEL VILLAR,* RUTHIE JEANNERET** AND BEN P WHITE***
The requirement that a person has been
ordinarily resident in a state for at least 12 months is the most litigated
criterion of eligibility
for voluntary assisted dying in Australia. The state
residence criterion is problematic for people who live a nomadic lifestyle,
spend long periods of time interstate or overseas, move between states for work,
or have retired to another state. We analyse the
case law on this issue, and the
policy reasons for this eligibility requirement, and conclude that the original
reasons for including
this requirement are no longer persuasive. We consider
options for reform. Although some of the problems this requirement causes
ameliorated by introducing an exemption, or allowing mutual recognition of
eligibility in another state, we recommend repeal
of the state residence
requirement. This has the advantage of legal and practical simplicity, avoids
concerns about unconstitutionality,
and is consonant with assisted dying laws
internationally.
I INTRODUCTION
It is unlikely that Australian state and territory parliaments when (often
heatedly) debating voluntary assisted dying (‘VAD’)
laws would have
foreseen that the most litigated issue in relation to these Acts would be
residency requirements. Yet, this has been
the case. Five cases relating to
residency have been litigated in 2024 in Western Australia (‘WA’)
and a further two cases have earlier been decided in
Six of those seven cases have involved the requirement that a person be
ordinarily resident in the state for at least 12 months before
applying to
access VAD.
This article analyses
the impact of legislative state residence requirements, in light of the case
law, on patient access to VAD.
To be eligible for VAD in the Australian
or the Australian Capital Territory
a person must be an adult, have a terminal illness (an advanced, progressive
condition which is expected to cause death within the
specified timeframe), have
decision-making capacity, and make a free and voluntary request. In addition to
these requirements, a
person must meet two eligibility criteria relating to
residence. The first is that the person must be an Australian citizen or
This criterion
was included to prevent what has been termed ‘death tourism’ or
‘suicide tourism’
– that is, to prevent people from other countries where assisted dying is
unlawful travelling to Australia to access VAD. The
second criterion is that the
person must be ‘ordinarily resident’ in the relevant state for at
least 12 months before
applying for
This criterion was intended to
prevent residents travelling to states where VAD had been legalised to access
This article focuses on the 12 month state residency requirements, which have
proved difficult for persons seeking VAD in
Apart from the cases
that proceeded to tribunal litigation, it is not clear what number of people are
impacted by this requirement
However, we anticipate
that it is not an insignificant number. For example, in Queensland, where it is
possible to seek an exemption
from the residency requirements, in the first 18
months of operations (ie, 1 January 2023 – 1 June 2024), there were 35
granted for state
This suggests there
is a cohort of people seeking access to VAD who are unable to demonstrate state
residency. While the analysis
that follows centres on Victoria and WA –
the only two states where the issue has been litigated to date – this
has implications for all Australian states, and the ACT when its law
commences in 2025.
In Part II, we briefly outline the six tribunal cases (one from Victoria and
five from WA) which have reviewed decisions concerning
the state residence
Part III then details
the burden this imposes on patients, health professionals and the VAD system,
which has implications for the
policy goal of providing timely access to VAD.
Part IV articulates some of the policy reasons for the state residence criterion
eligibility, and queries whether these policy objectives are being achieved,
in the light of the outcomes of some of the decided
cases. Part V then sets out
calls for reform of the state residence criterion, and Part VI concludes with
suggested models that this
reform could take.
II WHO IS ‘ORDINARILY RESIDENT’ IN A
In every state except Tasmania, one of the eligibility criteria to access VAD
is that at the time of making a first request for VAD,
a person must have been
‘ordinarily resident’ in the state for ‘at least 12
The criterion is
formulated slightly differently in Tasmania, where the legislation requires a
person to have been ‘ordinarily
resident in Tasmania for at least 12
months immediately before’ making a first
Assisted Dying Act 2024
ACT VAD Act
not adopt the wording of ‘ordinarily resident’ and simply states
that a person must ‘have lived in the ACT for
at least the previous 12
As will be seen
below, these minor differences in wording will have significant ramifications
for access for some persons seeking
Queensland and New South Wales (‘NSW’) permit a person to apply
for an exemption from the state residence requirement
if a person has a
‘substantial connection’ to the
These laws provide
examples of who might have a substantial connection, including a resident in a
border community who works or receives
medical treatment in a neighbouring
state; a person who has family members in the state and has moved there to be
closer to them
for care and support; and a returning resident with family in the
The recently enacted
will also allow persons who do not meet the 12 month
residency requirement to apply for an exemption if they have a
‘substantial
connection’ to the
Examples of persons
who would fall within this exemption include: a resident in a border community
who works or receives medical
treatment in a neighbouring state; a person who
has family members in the state and has moved there to be closer to them for
and support; or a returning resident with family in the state; Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander persons wishing to die on Country;
and new residents
who received their diagnosis after moving to the
While not an exemption to
the residency requirements, the
End-of-Life Choices (Voluntary Assisted
Dying) Act 2021
Tas EOLC Act
’) enables a medical
practitioner to seek advice from the Voluntary Assisted Dying Commission
(‘VAD Commission’)
requirements.
This approach,
unique to Tasmania, may alleviate some of the burden placed on medical
practitioners to determine this legal criterion.
The phrase ‘ordinarily resident’ used in all state VAD laws is
not defined in any of those
While in many cases
residence is self-evident, issues arise when dealing with those whose working
patterns are irregular, such as
fly-in fly-out workers, flight crews or shipping
crews. It also becomes complex for some persons, particularly in the latter
of their lives, who are no longer working and thus may choose to travel
frequently, live a nomadic lifestyle, or spend extended periods
of time living
in other states or countries. The six cases examined in this article exemplify
the challenges in applying the ‘ordinarily
resident’ criterion to
these circumstances.
A Nomadic Lifestyle:
There has been one case in Victoria concerning a man who had difficulty
demonstrating he was ‘ordinarily resident’ in
’) involved a man referred to as BTR,
who was born in Victoria and for the last 14 years of his life had been living
in a caravan
parked on property owned by friends in
He travelled regularly
interstate on fishing trips, spending long periods of time away, particularly in
Queensland during the colder
He was in Queensland
when he was diagnosed with incurable cancer and immediately returned to
to be close to friends and
Less than three weeks
after returning to Victoria, he made a request for
BTR’s doctor, Dr NTJ,
initially determined BTR had been ‘ordinarily resident in Victoria’
for at least 12 months
and assessed him as eligible for
Over the next three weeks, Safer Care Victoria, the government department
responsible for administering the VAD legislation in Victoria,
requests for further information concerning BTR’s
Despite becoming an
inpatient in hospital during that period, BTR, in support of his application,
provided copies of his driver’s
licence; passport; medical letters and
records; Centrelink income statement; and various vehicle and vessel
registration certificates
as evidence that he had a Victorian residential
He made a statutory
declaration concerning his
the VAD Navigator at
the hospital where BTR was an inpatient made a
and the hospital
responded to a list of questions from Safer Care
but these were
insufficient to satisfy Safer Care Victoria’s requests for further
information.
Eventually Dr NTJ made an application to the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal (‘VCAT’) for determination of
Quigley J concluded that,
despite his frequent absences for extended periods, BTR was ‘ordinarily
resident’ in Victoria
and therefore was eligible for
She opined that not having
a fixed address does not prevent a person being ‘ordinarily
resident’ in a state.
Continuous physical presence is not a requirement for a person to be
‘ordinarily resident’. Temporary absences are permissible
they are not too
‘prolonged’.
concluded that residence was ‘a matter of fact and degree’ which
depends on circumstances, including where a person
regularly or customarily
lives and the person’s subjective
B Family Interstate and Overseas:
Nearly four years after
in February 2024, the Western
Australian State Administrative Tribunal (‘WASAT’) was called on to
decide the first of
what would become a string of five cases concerning the
state residence requirement.
’) involved a 67-year-old man with lung cancer and brain
metastases (‘AB’) who sought access to
Although AB had been born
in NSW, he had been living and working in WA for around 30 years, until
AB did not own property in
WA, but owned a run-down property in NSW which he was renovating and stayed at
when he visited family
AB also had a romantic
partner and son in Cambodia whom he visited periodically, but not for any
substantial length of time.
After being diagnosed with lung cancer in December 2019, AB sought to arrange
his affairs.
He lived in NSW for
his property there.
He also made
two trips of a few months each to Cambodia to visit his Cambodian family, and
visits to friends in WA.
finally returned to WA in September 2023. Soon after he found accommodation at a
palliative care provider,
made a first request for VAD.
His doctor denied his request, considering him ineligible as he had spent little
time in WA in the preceding 12
AB did not apply for review of his doctor’s decision for over three
months, because of his poor health and his lack of information
as to his review
Eventually, his friend
assisted him to apply to the WASAT for
Pritchard J held that AB
was ‘ordinarily resident’ in
There was no doubt that AB
was ordinarily resident in WA from 1991 to
Despite his physical
absence from WA for much of 2022 and 2023, Pritchard J concluded the periods of
time spent in NSW and Cambodia
were temporary ‘and for a specific
purpose’, being to renovate and sell his property to provide funds for his
Pritchard J adopted the test articulated by Quigley J in
and concluded that
‘ordinarily resident’ is ‘a matter of fact and
Physical presence
in the state is not required (although ‘sufficiently prolonged’
absences might rupture the residence
connection).
What is significant
is where a person regularly or customarily lives with some element of
permanence, rather than where a person
temporarily.
In this case, AB
maintained a bank account, driver’s licence and skipper’s ticket in
WA, his personal effects were in
storage in WA, and it was apparent that his
time in NSW and Cambodia was temporary to visit
AB’s subjective
belief that WA was his home, as evidenced by his many close friendships and
supports there, was also a relevant
This case demonstrates
that in determining whether a person is ‘ordinarily resident’ in a
state, the period of 12 months
immediately preceding the first request is not
the only period that must be taken into account – evidence from before
period is also relevant.
C Living in Bali:
, the case of
also involved a
man who was absent from WA for long periods of time but considered WA his home.
GH was an 83-year-old man who was
almost blind from glaucoma and had recently
been diagnosed with laryngeal
Originally from the
Netherlands, he had emigrated to WA aged 18 and lived in Perth with his wife and
family for over 40 years.
his marriage ended in 2007, he had divided his time between Bali and
GH generally spent more
time living in Bali, where it was cheaper to live on his pension than in Perth,
but returned to Perth to
visit his daughters and seek
healthcare.
COVID-19 related
travel restrictions meant he lived continuously in Bali from early 2020 until
January 2023.
In February 2024,
GH returned from Bali, was diagnosed with a malignant tumour of the larynx and a
tracheostomy was performed, after
which GH required assistance to breathe, eat
A couple of weeks after his surgery, GH made a first request for
His coordinating
practitioner, Dr KL, initially assessed him as ineligible, because he had not
been ‘ordinarily resident’
in WA for 12 months prior to requesting
His daughters EF and IJ
assisted him to seek review of this decision by the
Judge Jackson found that, despite spending more time in Bali than Perth over
the previous 17 years, GH was nevertheless ‘ordinarily
resident’ in
He maintained a physical
connection to WA, demonstrated by maintaining possessions in his
daughter’s home in Perth; administrative
ties to the state associated with
banking, Medicare, Centrelink;
and, ‘most critically’, the fact that all his healthcare needs have
been met by the same practitioners in WA over a period
Another critical
consideration was GH’s emotional connection to WA – his entire
‘support network’ of family
(including daughters and grandchildren)
and friends was there,
evidence was that he always considered his ‘home’ to be WA and that
he was a guest in Bali.
combination of factors meant that GH was not ‘a tourist with a home
elsewhere but was, rather, someone who has come home
to die peacefully with his
Therefore, Judge
Jackson concluded that GH was eligible for
D Moving to Tasmania:
In contrast to
recent cases resulted in former residents of WA being denied access to VAD.
HM and the Co-ordinating Practitioner for HM
69-year-old woman who had been a long-term resident of WA from 1980 before
moving to Tasmania with her husband upon retirement
She returned to WA
regularly once or twice a year to visit family and on one of those visits, in
October 2023, was diagnosed with
incurable lung
Since her diagnosis, HM
had remained in WA and commenced chemotherapy, followed by radiation
Ultimately, her illness
progressed and HM requested VAD on 13 March
She was assessed as
ineligible by her coordinating practitioner, on the basis that she was not
ordinarily resident in WA.
HM applied to the WASAT for review of the coordinating practitioner’s
Judge Vernon applied
the same principles first articulated in
and confirmed
to be applicable in WA in
However, she
distinguished those cases, concluding that after 2014, HM was not
‘ordinarily resident’ in
In contrast to the
applicants in
, she considered
HM had severed her physical and administrative connections to
In particular, she had sold
her property in the state and bought property in
she had obtained and
held a Tasmanian driver’s licence; her Tasmanian property was noted as her
place of residence for tax
purposes; and her doctor was in
Although HM returned
regularly to WA, this was only for short visits of two to three
There was evidence that HM remained emotionally attached to WA, considered
herself to be a Western Australian, and in 2022 had begun
preparations to
renovate and sell her Tasmanian property prior to an eventual return to WA in
the future.
Despite this
emotional connection to WA, Judge Vernon concluded that on the totality of the
evidence, HM had been ordinarily resident
in Tasmania since 2014, as that is
where her property and almost all her possessions
It could not be said that
the periods of time spent in Tasmania could be characterised as extended
holidays (as in
), or were of a temporary nature or for
defined purposes (as they were in
E No Fixed Address:
The fourth case was
BMR v Co-ordinating Practitioner for MTH
70-year-old man of no fixed address, travelled regularly between WA and Victoria
(and sometimes Queensland) for
He had a room for his sole
use in his sister’s house in Victoria, as well as a room in his
niece’s house in WA, and appeared
to spend periods of a few months at a
time with both each year.
2019, while living in Victoria with his sister, he was diagnosed with
He engaged in treatment
in Victoria, including chemotherapy and participating in a clinical trial in
On 14 February 2024, after
being excluded from the clinical trial, MTH returned to
MTH made his first request for VAD on 15 April 2024 and was assessed as
ineligible on the ground that he was not ordinarily resident
It was argued that MTH
was ordinarily resident in both Victoria and WA, as he had a room of his own in
his relatives’ homes
and possessions in both
It was argued that he
was prevented from continuing to be resident in both states by COVID-19 travel
restrictions,
and then by the
clinical trial which was not available in WA.
Judge Vernon accepted that MTH had a strong emotional connection to WA. He
spent roughly half his life in WA, he considered himself
to be a Western
Australian, and ‘he thinks of Fremantle as home, because it was the place
where, as a child, he was secure,
Despite this,
she considered he had not been ‘ordinarily resident’ in WA for at
least 12 months.
The concept
of ‘resident’ has two elements: physical presence, and an intention
to treat the place as ‘home’.
It cannot be based solely on
Although he had
been ordinarily resident in the state at certain times in his life, this was not
the case for the period prior to
February 2024. His administrative ties (ie,
bank accounts, Centrelink, Medicare and electoral records) were not in WA prior
significantly, unlike in
, he had received medical
treatment and participated in a clinical trial outside the
F Extended Holiday:
The most recent case was
NP, a man in his early 70s, was born overseas but lived in WA for forty
years, working and raising his family
In mid 2021, NP and
his wife sold their home, stored their possessions and bought a caravan to
embark on the ‘holiday of a
lifetime’ around
interrupted in January 2022, when they travelled to Adelaide to provide urgent
Their initial plan was
to stay in South Australia (‘SA’) for the year before continuing
their travels,
and to return
to WA permanently in 2024.
For financial reasons, NP and his wife sold their caravan and bought a residence
in a lifestyle village in SA.
NP had also obtained a South Australian driver’s
NP lived in SA for over two years, returning home to Perth only a couple of
times for short periods.
April 2024, NP was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in SA and returned
immediately to WA.
first request for VAD to Dr QR on 6 July
but was assessed as
ineligible because he had not been ‘ordinarily resident’ in WA for
at least 12 months prior to making
Glancy J decided that NP was ordinarily resident in WA, setting aside Dr
QR’s decision.
characterised NP’s trip as an ‘extended holiday’, stating that
NP never intended to make anywhere other than
Glancy J distinguished
on the basis that NP, unlike HM
always had an
intention to return home at a ‘relatively specific point in time’,
despite this time point being
She reasoned that
most indicia pointed towards NP being ‘ordinarily resident’ in WA,
where he maintained a physical and
emotional connection, even though NP had a
South Australian driver’s licence and despite the purchase of a residence
The different results in these cases highlight the difficulty of applying the
criterion of ‘ordinarily resident’ in the
state for at least 12
months prior to requesting VAD. In the six cases outlined above, four applicants
were ultimately found eligible
to access VAD and two were not. One clear theme
from these cases is how complex it can be to determine whether or not a person
‘ordinarily resident’ in a state. ‘Resident’ has been
consistently described in the case law as a ‘question
of fact and
degree’: that is, it depends on the totality of the circumstances,
including physical connection, administrative
ties and emotional
connection.
Ultimately, this
is a complex legal test. Yet it is medical practitioners, acting as coordinating
and consulting practitioners, who
must bear the burden of determining whether
applicants meet this eligibility criterion. This may point to the value of the
Tas EOLC Act
which enables a medical practitioner to
seek advice on this point from the VAD
Commission.
The cases also shed light on the factors that will guide decisions about
whether a person will be judged to be ‘ordinarily resident’
state. One factor is physical presence in the state. While this is obviously a
consideration in favour of being ‘ordinarily
resident’ and a fact
that would be relatively easy for medical practitioners to substantiate,
physical presence is not necessarily
determinative and people who live elsewhere
for periods may still be able to meet this criterion. In
the applicant had been living in Bali for the majority of the past 17 years but
was not considered to be ‘resident’
there. Similarly, AB had been in
NSW or Cambodia for most of the two years prior to his request for VAD, but he
was nevertheless
considered to be ‘ordinarily resident’ in WA.
Further, NP had been travelling outside WA for approximately two and a
years, even purchasing property in SA, but was found to be ‘ordinarily
resident’ in WA. In contrast, HM had spent
the previous six months in WA
but was considered to be ‘ordinarily resident’ in Tasmania, where
she had lived for nine
years prior to that. The cases also demonstrate
difficulties assessing the residency status of persons with no fixed address or
lifestyles, as evidenced by the opposing outcomes reached in
compared to
Significant weight seems to have been placed in all the decided cases on
administrative documentation such as a driver’s licence,
registration, and the address provided to Centrelink or
driver’s licence is relatively easy for applicants to produce, other
documentation may be more time-consuming to obtain,
particularly bearing in mind
patients are suffering from a terminal
Another highly significant factor appears to have been the state where the
person ordinarily receives medical treatment. This accords
with one of the
principles underpinning the VAD laws: namely, supporting and maintaining the
therapeutic relationship between a person
and their health practitioner where
In some cases,
where the person chose to receive medical treatment confirmed their residence
status. For example, when GH’s
daughters raised concerns about his health
and urged him to seek treatment in Bali, he instead decided to return home to
WA, whereupon
he was immediately admitted to hospital and operated on.
Similarly, when BTR was diagnosed with cancer in Queensland, he immediately
plans to return to Victoria for treatment where his support network was. In both
cases, this confirmed that the person’s
residence was the state where they had longstanding relationships with family
and friends, and medical
practitioners. By contrast, in
the fact that he underwent chemotherapy and a clinical trial in Victoria for a
couple of years before eventually moving back to
WA suggested to the Tribunal
that MTH was resident in Victoria, not WA.
This factor, however, can be difficult to apply in practice. For example, AB
received chemotherapy and radiation therapy in WA and
also received cancer
treatment in NSW before returning to WA for palliative care and VAD. The
Tribunal did not consider that this
precluded AB from being considered
ordinarily resident in WA. The result in
is most curious
in this regard – she was diagnosed with cancer in WA and all her treatment
occurred in that state, yet one
of the factors described as significant in
determining that she was ultimately resident in Tasmania, not WA, was the fact
had a regular general practitioner in Tasmania. It is difficult to see
why this factor was more significant than the fact she had
therapeutic relationship with her cancer team in WA.
Another factor, which was not mentioned in any tribunal decisions but may
have shaped deliberations, is whether VAD was available
in the other
would have been eligible for VAD in
Victoria, having lived there since 2019
(partially due to COVID-19 restrictions preventing him travelling to Perth,
partially due
to his illness). HM would also likely be considered ordinarily
resident in Tasmania, where VAD is a legal option and would have been
for VAD had she returned to Tasmania promptly after being diagnosed with
This is very
different from the situation, for example, of GH returning from Bali where VAD
is not legal, or BTR returning to Victoria
in 2020 at a time when it was the
only Australian state where VAD laws were
operational.
III CHALLENGES OF THE STATE RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT
The cases above highlight some of the issues which arise in practice with a
requirement for patients to be ‘ordinarily resident
in a state for at
least 12 months’ as part of the eligibility criteria for VAD. This Part
now looks beyond these cases and
identifies the range of practical impacts of
the state residence requirement on people seeking VAD, not only in relation to
the tribunal
review process, but also more broadly in relation to the VAD
request and assessment process.
A Compiling Evidence for the VAD Request and Assessment
Due to the multifactorial nature of the ‘ordinarily resident’
test and the variation in individuals’ circumstances,
there is no single
form of documentation which is universally accepted to prove a person has been
ordinarily resident in a state
for at least 12 months. Therefore, it may require
considerable administrative effort by persons seeking VAD to gather the
paperwork for the assessing practitioner during the VAD request and
assessment process. In
, Safer Care Victoria requested
copies of the applicant’s driver’s licence, car, boat, caravan and
trailer registration,
and Medicare and Centrelink records as evidence that he
had a Victorian residential
They also sought
formal statements from the applicant, the VAD Navigator at the hospital where he
was receiving treatment, and the
All of this evidence
was required at the first assessment stage in order to be satisfied the person
was ordinarily resident in Victoria.
An additional challenge is that some people
with terminal illness throw out their paperwork as they are preparing for death
may be unable to provide the necessary documentary evidence, or it may
cause delays to find and compile such
To illustrate, an
empirical study of doctors’ participation in VAD in Victoria reported this
observation from an assessing
practitioner:
I remember saying to someone ‘Now, I need your rates bills or your
rental bill from 12 months ago to prove you've been a resident
of Victoria for
12 months’. She looked at me as if I'm some blithering idiot and said
‘I'm going to be dead in two months’
time. I've thrown out all my
paperwork. What the f*** do you mean I've got to keep paperwork like that from
12 months ago?’,
and she had a
B Lack of Knowledge of Review Rights
A person assessed as not eligible for VAD on the basis of state residency may
not be aware of relevant review mechanisms. This is
not a hypothetical concern.
, there was a delay of over three months before he
sought a review of the decision that he was not ordinarily resident in WA. This
delay occurred because AB was unaware of his right to seek review, and due to
his ill health, needed assistance from his friend to
prepare the review
This lack of
awareness has implications for access to
particularly as the
decision that a person was ineligible for VAD was overturned in three of the
five Western Australian cases.
C Burden of Completing Application for Review
Litigation is always challenging, but these challenges are magnified for
terminally ill people, who by definition are the cohort who
may need to seek
this review. In the six cases analysed above, all the individuals concerned had
advanced cancer and in some cases,
their ill health was exacerbated by invasive
treatments such as chemotherapy and radiation therapy. The cases record that
some applicants
would have been unable to make the application for tribunal
review without assistance. For example, in
, it was noted
that AB needed assistance to prepare the application because of his
‘precarious
Similarly, in
, the process of obtaining GH’s witness statement
was described as being ‘slow, difficult, and exhausting’ for
and the need for
assistance due to his ill health was
reiterated.
D Compiling Evidence for Tribunal Review
Review before an administrative tribunal is a comprehensive process,
requiring detailed compilation of evidence. This will generally
exhaustive than the evidence already compiled for the request and assessment
process, which was already described as challenging
above. The tribunals have
generally sought to piece together how long a person lived in a particular
place, not just over the last
year or two, but over the course of their entire
, the judge noted that the statements referred
to ‘events [which] occurred a considerable period of time
For people in
their 70s and 80s, this may require marshalling a considerable amount of
information, particularly if they have moved
around a lot. As described in Part
II, the tribunals have generally required evidence of where a person’s car
or other vehicle
registrations are maintained, electoral registration,
Centrelink address, Medicare address, and other administrative requirements.
, the tribunal went through details of the
applicant’s bank accounts and corresponding branch addresses back to the
This is a considerable
amount of detail to be gathered at a time when a person is at the very end of
their life and very unwell.
Further, given the passage of time and the stress of
a terminal illness, inaccuracies can occur, which can affect the outcome of
review process. In
, despite acknowledging that witnesses
were giving evidence concerning events which occurred long ago, the judge stated
that differences
between witness statements ‘undermine the reliability of
that evidence to some
E Cost of Tribunal Review
Yet another challenge for patients is the cost of tribunal review. Although
there are no filing fees in Victoria or WA to apply for
review of a decision on
eligibility, there may be significant costs in terms of legal representation.
Although the applicant doctor
in the Victorian
in person, in all the Western Australian cases, the applicant was legally
represented.
Senior Counsel
were involved in two of these cases, due to the complexity of the
A further, possibly most significant, challenge is the time taken to
establish state residency. The time required to assemble evidence
residence for the initial VAD request and assessment process has already been
noted. Even without tribunal review, this
can take some time, particularly if
there are requests for further information from monitoring agencies. In
, requests for information went back and forth over three
weeks after the patient’s first VAD
assessment.
Additionally, where tribunal review is required, this takes further time.
Time is spent engaging lawyers, preparing witness statements
and attending
hearings – all time which could be spent with the dying person’s
family and friends. Although the tribunal
process is expedited and timeframes
from application to hearing are rapid compared to other legal proceedings, a
delay of 5 to 22
days (as outlined in Table 1) is nevertheless significant for
people with terminal illness, when every day is
significant.
It is also worth
noting that a person would not have completed the VAD request and assessment
process at the date of the tribunal
decision – this is simply determining
the outcome of the first step of the VAD request and assessment process.
Patients would
still need to be approved by at least one other medical
practitioner, make a written request, and decide how the medication would
administered, amongst other steps, before they could actually obtain access to
Table 1: Time Taken for Tribunal Review of State Residence
Requirements
First Request
First Assessment
Application to Tribunal
Date of Tribunal Decision
Time from Tribunal Application to Decision
Time from First Assessment to Tribunal Decision
27 March 2020
27–30 March 2020
17 April 2020
22 April 2020
13 October 2023
19 October 2023
2 February 2024
12 February 2024
22 February 2024
22 February 2024
23 February 2024
1 March 2024
13 March 2024
13 March 2024
19 March 2024
5 April 2024
15 April 2024
15 April 2024
6 July 2024
8 July 2024
18 July 2024
9 August 2024
The tribunal review process also creates administrative burdens and has time
costs for other participants in the VAD system. It takes
time for medical
practitioners to research and understand complex requirements such as
‘ordinarily resident’, which are
not part of usual medical practice
but are nevertheless eligibility criteria they must evaluate and assess. In
cases where the person
has not been physically present in the jurisdiction for
most of the preceding 12 months, medical practitioners will need to familiarise
themselves with the case law discussed above and seek to understand all the
relevant factors in terms of physical presence in the
state, administrative ties
and emotional connection, before making a decision.
G Distress and Hardship
Finally, the cumulative effect of the evidentiary burden, the cost of
engaging and briefing counsel, the stress of being involved
proceedings, and the time review processes take, causes distress and hardship to
the patient, their family and others. As
was noted in
relation to tribunal review, it ‘has clearly added to the distress of an
already very distressing time in [the patient and
their family’s]
impact is significant as family support from a
was crucial in all
cases, as was the support of the person’s coordinating practitioner.
IV POLICY REASONS FOR THE STATE RESIDENCE
REQUIREMENT
This Part identifies, and then critically examines, the intended policy
reasons for the state residence requirement. These are primarily
to prevent VAD
tourism and to ensure VAD occurs in the context of high quality end-of-life care
within a therapeutic relationship
with a local medical practitioner. We critique
the state residence criterion against these goals, noting it can impede the
achievement
of these policy objectives. Further, we contest the ongoing need for
such a requirement now that VAD is lawful in almost all Australian
In both Victoria and WA, it was explicitly noted that the primary reason for
introducing the ‘ordinarily resident’ requirement
was to prevent
people travelling to the state temporarily for the purpose of accessing
a phenomenon described by the Australian Medical Association as ‘voluntary
assisted dying
All the decided cases have expressly referred to this legislative
, Pritchard J also noted that this restriction was necessary because
people may wish to travel interstate to access VAD where VAD
was not available
to them in their home state.
As one of the authors has suggested elsewhere, the desire to prevent VAD tourism
is likely to be underpinned by concerns to protect
the state’s health
system from the burden on healthcare practitioners and resources which may be
caused by an influx of out
The prevention of VAD tourism is less important now that all Australian
states and the ACT have legislated for VAD, with residents
less likely to move
state simply to access VAD. However, retaining the ‘ordinarily
resident’ restriction has the unfortunate
consequence of precluding former
long-term residents of a state returning home to die surrounded by family and
friends. This can
be seen from the outcomes in
MTH’s Case.
In both cases, the person may have been eligible for VAD
in another Australian state (Tasmania and Victoria, respectively). They were
in WA because of the lack of VAD laws in their current state, but because they
wished to die in the place they considered home,
surrounded by family and their
support network.
, Judge Vernon observed:
Mr MTH also points out that he was eligible to access voluntary assisted
dying in Victoria and had chosen to come home to Western
Australia to die with
his family, expecting that he would be eligible because he has spent large parts
of his life in this State.
Both Ms BMR and Ms CJG say that they do not
understand why Mr MTH, who considers himself to be a Western Australian,
has to fight so hard to access something that he had access to in
’. Ms BMR points out that Mr MTH cannot be regarded as a
medico-tourist
Similarly, in
, Judge Vernon also commented that HM had
a longstanding association with the state, considers herself a Western
Australian and was
not the type of person intended to be excluded from accessing
VAD in WA (ie, a VAD
The second relevant policy reason for the state residence requirement is to
provide VAD in the context of high quality end-of-life
care by supporting and
maintaining a therapeutic relationship with a local medical
practitioner.
In some of the
decided cases, the presiding tribunal member noted that the state residence
requirement furthers this legislative
purpose by preventing people who do not
have a therapeutic relationship in the state from accessing
While this may be true,
there will also be circumstances where it will hinder the achievement of this
legislative objective. A case
in point is
. After becoming
unwell and receiving a cancer diagnosis while on a trip to visit family in WA,
HM remained in WA a further six months
and ‘all her medical treatment for
that cancer ... occurred [in
Yet, although she
had existing relationships with a number of medical professionals in WA when she
applied for VAD, her application
was refused on the basis that she was not
‘ordinarily resident in Western
Australia’.
This result
seems at odds with the legislative purpose of HM receiving VAD in the context of
therapeutic relationships.
As such, the emphasis on the policy objective of an ongoing therapeutic
relationship with local medical practitioners may also work
against other policy
principles – in particular, promoting high quality care and treatment as
opposed to genuine choices at
end-of-life.
As the outcome
demonstrates,
if a person
being in a current therapeutic relationship within the state is considered an
important indicator of being ‘ordinarily
resident’, in some
situations this may force the person to choose between receiving top quality
healthcare in another state
and meeting the eligibility criteria for VAD in
their home state. Although in
being ‘absent from
the State to obtain access to medical treatment not available in this
State’ did not affect AB’s
, the choice to stay in Victoria to participate in a clinical trial of
cancer treatment was a significant factor in the conclusion
that MTH was not
‘ordinarily resident’ in
The focus on the
therapeutic relationship rather than high quality care and treatment hampers
genuine choice at the end-of-life.
The state residence requirement will also work against achieving the policy
objective of accessing VAD within an existing therapeutic
relationship for
residents of border towns or
Such issues have already occurred in the United States (‘US’), where
a constitutional challenge was brought by a resident
of Washington state living
close to the Oregon border, who wished to receive assistance to die from his
Oregon-based practitioner,
rather than a practitioner in his home state.
Although the claim in
Gideonse v Brown
was settled when the government in
Oregon agreed not to enforce the residence
requirement,
this situation
illustrates that the state residence requirement will cause issues for a small
number of patients with relationships
with medical professionals across state
V CALLS FOR REFORM
There have been growing calls for change to the state residency criterion
from VAD Boards, advocacy groups and
The Victorian
Voluntary Assisted Dying Review Board has suggested the state residency
requirements and access to VAD across borders
reconsidered,
recognised that the state residency requirement can be difficult to meet,
particularly for people who travel around Australia
for long periods (such as
the applicants in
The Voluntary
Assisted Dying Board Western Australia (‘WA VAD Board’) has also
observed the exclusionary effect this
has on those who want to relocate to WA to
be closer to family or social supports at the end of their life (such as in
It has been argued that the documentation requirements to demonstrate
‘ordinarily resident’ place an unnecessary burden
on people at a
time when they are often extremely
Further, the state residency requirement excludes Australians from accessing VAD
not because they are not suffering a terminal illness,
but purely on the basis
of their living arrangements. In submissions to the five year review of the
operation of Victoria’s
, advocacy organisations Dying With
Dignity Victoria and Go Gentle Australia called for the state residency
criterion to be
as did the Australian and New Zealand community of VAD
practitioners.
This restriction has been described as ‘an unnecessary hurdle and barrier
now that VAD
laws are operational in all Australian states, with the ACT to follow in
November 2025. The declining utility of this
criterion once other Australian
Law Reform Commission,
prior to the enactment of Queensland’s VAD
An alternative option for states like Victoria and WA is to introduce an
exemption for persons who do not meet the 12 month state
residency requirement
but who have a substantial connection to the state. An exemption is currently
available in Queensland, NSW
and the ACT. The WA VAD Board in its
Report 2022–23
recommended exemptions be available in two classes of
cases: those with a substantial connection to WA, and those found eligible
another jurisdiction.
Advocacy organisations also support the availability of exemptions for residents
of border communities and people relocating to be
close to family at the
end-of-life, if removing the state residency requirement altogether were not
considered possible.
Another reason for considering reform is that the 12 month state residence
criterion is arguably unconstitutional on the basis that
it infringes section
Constitution
Section 117
prohibits laws discriminating against residents of different states. The 12
month state residence requirement in all Australian VAD
laws is a textbook
example of direct discrimination on the face of the law – a resident of
another state is excluded from accessing
VAD, while a resident of the state
concerned is not. Section 117 of the
Constitution
prohibit every instance of discrimination against out of state residents –
discriminatory state laws may be constitutional
if they are necessary for and
proportionate to a legitimate
While it may
previously have been arguable that excluding residents of other states was
necessary to ensure a state’s health
system was not unduly overburdened by
out of state residents, healthcare resource considerations can no longer be
considered a legitimate
purpose for such discrimination now that all states have
operational VAD laws. Further, the discriminatory impact of the 12 month
residence criterion on new residents of the state has never been justifiable for
a legitimate purpose and, in that respect,
the state residence requirement has
always contravened
VI SUGGESTED MODELS FOR REFORM
The current state residence requirements are no longer fit for purpose. Now
that VAD is legal in seven of eight Australian jurisdictions,
the policy goal of
preventing VAD tourism assumes considerably less significance. The fiscal and
healthcare resource implications
of providing VAD to a small number of out of
state residents (ie, those with a nomadic lifestyle as in
, or returning former
residents as in
marginal in the context of the scheme overall. Any potential resource
implications would also arguably be offset by no longer
requiring doctors to
spend time assessing state residency (which is a cost to the health system) or
have tribunals adjudicate on
this issue.
Furthermore, the law is ineffective in achieving its second purported policy
goal of ensuring VAD is accessed in the context of an
ongoing therapeutic
relationship. As
demonstrates, in some cases the state
residence requirement has the opposite effect – excluding a person who has
been undergoing
cancer treatments in the state for six months from receiving
assisted dying from their treating practitioners.
Rather than achieving these legislative purposes, the state residence
criterion imposes a significant administrative burden on terminally
by requiring them to provide detailed documentation to demonstrate their
ordinary state of residence. It also requires
medical practitioners to apply a
highly discretionary multi-factorial legal test in determining whether a person
is eligible to access
VAD, which is particularly complex where the person has
been living a nomadic lifestyle, has no fixed address or lives in a border
community. Originally designed to prevent VAD tourists travelling from states
without operative VAD laws, the state residence criterion
now operates
differently and can exclude former residents returning to their home state from
accessing their chosen end-of-life options
Accordingly, we argue that reform of the state residence criterion is needed
in Australian VAD laws. There are three possible models
which could be adopted
to achieve this: an exemption to state residence, mutual recognition of similar
schemes, and repeal of state
residence requirements – our preferred
A Retain State Residence Criterion but Permit
The first model is that states could incorporate an exemption, similar to
that currently contained in the VAD legislation in Queensland,
NSW or the ACT,
which allows persons with a ‘substantial connection’ to the
state/territory to access VAD within the
state/territory. The exemption would
need to be framed broadly to encompass returning residents, new residents of a
state who receive
a terminal diagnosis, those with family or support networks
within the state, and those with a nomadic or fly-in fly-out lifestyle.
This option has the advantage of medical practitioners no longer being
required to determine what is essentially an administrative
criterion of
eligibility in complex cases. Where there is uncertainty about a person’s
eligibility due to frequent moving or
lengthy periods interstate, a decision on
eligibility could be made by seeking a bureaucratic exemption. This option also
the least amount of legislative change, which may be politically
However, a drawback of such an approach is that it retains the state
residency requirement, which, as has been demonstrated, is not
justifiable in
light of the policy goals of the VAD legislation. Even in routine cases,
demonstrating residency still requires patients,
families and doctors to go
through the process of locating and assessing relevant documentation, imposing a
considerable time and
cost burden on them. As noted above, this is not part of
the skill set or training of doctors.
In addition, significant doubts remain as to the constitutionality of this
model. It retains the current state residence requirement
which explicitly
discriminates against out of state residents and is arguably in violation of
section 117 of the
Constitution
. As demonstrated in
there is unlikely to be a legitimate reason for excluding out of state residents
now that most Australian jurisdictions have legalised
VAD. Further, this model
involves additional administrative processes as the exemption documentation is
prepared and approval is
sought. This inevitably involves stress and delays,
which are undesirable when terminally ill people are seeking assistance in
B Mutual Recognition
The second model, which may be adopted independently or with the first
option, is to insert a legislative provision permitting access
to VAD in the
state if they would have been eligible in another state or territory with
similar legislation. There is precedent for
mutual recognition in a number of
areas of state law, including recognition of advance directives made under laws
in other states.
This option may seem an attractive way to address the problems experienced in
cases such as
. However, it
would not be effective to address the situation which arose in
, as GH was living in Bali, which does not have VAD laws. Therefore,
this solution is partial at best, as it would not solve the difficulties
experienced by returning Australian citizens and residents from jurisdictions
without analogous VAD laws.
A further difficulty with this approach is that the differing language used
in the VAD legislation across states may cause unexpected
technical lacunae. The
illustrate one of these gaps. HM had been
resident in Tasmania for nine years before her visit to WA, where she received
her terminal
However, the state residence criterion under Tasmania’s VAD legislation
requires that the person has been ‘ordinarily
resident in Tasmania for at
months immediately before’ making a first
As HM had been
living in WA and receiving cancer treatment there for approximately six months
before making a VAD request, she likely
would not have been eligible for VAD in
Tasmania, were she in a physical condition to return there, as her period of
residence in
WA would break the continuity of her longer period of Tasmanian
residence. A mutual recognition provision would therefore not assist
a person in
HM’s position.
Another reason for caution about mutual recognition as a solution to this
problem is that, while state and territory laws in Australia
currently contain
similar eligibility requirements, there is a possibility that some states may
later amend their laws to apply to
a broader class of persons. For example, the
ACT legislation is explicitly required to be reviewed three years after it
This requires consideration of whether VAD should be permitted for
individuals who do not meet the state residence requirement and
are not eligible
for an exemption, children with decision-making capacity through advance
Similarly, the
mandatory legislative review in Queensland in 2026 is expressly required to
consider the eligibility
The outcomes of
these reviews could create significant differences between Australian
which could lessen the desirability
of mutual recognition of eligibility for VAD from a policy perspective.
Further, while current Australian VAD eligibility criteria are similar, they
are not the same.
recognition to work, this would potentially require assessing doctors to be
aware of eligibility criteria of Australian
state or territory. This would add a range of complexity and challenges for the
VAD system, including
potentially requiring mandatory training for health
practitioners assessing and providing VAD to address the eligibility criteria
across all Australian jurisdictions.
C Repeal the State Residence Criterion
The final option, our preferred option, is to repeal the state residence
criterion now that all states and the ACT have passed VAD
laws. This has the
advantage of both legal and practical simplicity. It removes an eligibility
criterion which no longer serves its
intended purpose, and which patients,
families and doctors find burdensome. However, the Australian citizen or
permanent resident
criterion of eligibility will continue to ensure that
Australia is not subject to an influx of VAD tourists from other countries,
has been the case in
Switzerland.
In addition,
removing the state residence requirement will support a coordinated national
approach to VAD. This option has the advantage
of removing the constitutional
difficulties with section 117 of the
Constitution
described in
This model is also consonant with VAD practice internationally. Although many
countries where VAD is legal require a person to be
a citizen, permanent or
long-term resident of that country to access
no other jurisdiction
has adopted the 12 month minimum residence requirement imposed in each of the
Australian states. This leaves
citizens and permanent residents of those
countries free to return to their home country to access VAD if they are
diagnosed with
a serious and incurable illness while living abroad. As
demonstrate, this is much more difficult in Australia due to the additional 12
month state residence requirement. The US is the only
country where, like
Australia, VAD laws differ between
Unlike Australia,
only 12 jurisdictions out of a possible 50 to date permit VAD, so there is much
more genuine scope for VAD tourism
in the US. Most US states or districts which
permit VAD expressly require a person to be a resident of that state or district
order to be eligible.
However, they do not require a minimum period of residency, so US citizens
regularly move to a state which has legalised VAD in order
to access the
procedure there.
states, such as Vermont and Oregon, have repealed their residency
requirement
constitutional reasons. The move to repeal residency requirements in some US
states sends a particularly strong signal of the
problematic nature of these
requirements, given the increased likelihood of significant numbers of out of
state VAD applicants in
VII CONCLUSION
The current state residence requirement is no longer fit for purpose. It is
not effective to ensure VAD occurs in the context of a
therapeutic relationship
with medical practitioners within a state, and there is no longer any
significant need to prevent VAD tourists
coming from other states. The case law
discussed above demonstrates that what was originally intended as a safeguard
for hospitals
and health systems has become a stumbling block for those
Australians who are living a peripatetic lifestyle, either for work reasons
in their retirement, as well as those who live apart from their family and
support networks. As all states are mandatorily required
to review the operation
of their VAD laws on a regular basis, there is an opportunity to address this.
Indeed, Judge Vernon in
expressly noted that the Western
Australian legislative review provides an opportunity for Parliament to consider
whether the legislation
should be amended to allow Australians moving from
interstate the opportunity to seek VAD in a place where they have the support
their family.
However, this
issue does not need to wait for these mandatory reviews, which in some
given the problems identified, there
is a case for action now. In this regard, we note recent reports that the
Western Australian
and Queensland governments were willing to consider reform on
this issue.
We invite them,
and the other Australian jurisdictions, to reflect on the problems highlighted
by these recent Western Australian
cases and amend their laws accordingly.
* Dr Katrine Del Villar, Australian Centre for Health Law Research, Senior
Lecturer, Faculty of Business and Law, Queensland University
of Technology.
** Dr Ruthie Jeanneret, Lecturer in Ethics, Law & Professionalism,
Academy for Medical Education, Affiliate Lecturer, TC Beirne
School of Law,
University of Queensland.
*** Professor Ben P White, Australian Centre for
Health Law Research, Professor of End-of-Life Law and Regulation, Faculty of
and Law, Queensland University of Technology. All translations are by
the authors, except where otherwise indicated.
(2024) 112 SR (WA) 281
(2024) 113 SR (WA) 324
HM and the Co-ordinating Practitioner for HM
BMR v Co-ordinating
Practitioner for MTH
(2024) 114 SR (WA) 257
(2024) 115 SR (WA) 309
[2020] VCAT
[2020] VCAT 1396
Voluntary Assisted Dying
NSW VAD Act
Voluntary Assisted
Dying Act 2021
Qld VAD Act
Assisted Dying Act 2021
End-of-Life-Choices
Voluntary Assisted Dying) Act 2021
Tas EOLC Act
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
Vic VAD Act
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act
The ACT has recently passed
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2024
’), but this will not come into effect until 3 November 2025.
In some states, the
legislative criterion is more flexible and includes those who have been
residents of Australia for at least
three years but have not formally become
citizens or permanent residents:
NSW VAD Act
(n 4) s 16(1)(b)(iii);
Qld VAD Act
(n 4) s 10(1)(e)(iii);
Tas EOLC Act
11(1)(a)(iii). Additionally, in Queensland, a person can apply for exemption
from this criterion:
Qld VAD Act
(n 4) s 12(1)(a). The
(n 5) does not require Australian citizenship or permanent residence as
a criterion of eligibility.
Sascha Callaghan, ‘Death
, 36–7; Saskia Gauthier et
al, ‘Suicide Tourism: A Pilot Study on the Swiss Phenomenon’ (2015)
Journal of Medical Ethics
611, 611 <https://doi.org/
doi:10.1136/medethics-2014-102091>.
NSW VAD Act
Qld VAD Act
(n 4) s 10(1)(f);
26(1)(b)(iii);
Tas EOLC Act
(n 4) s 11(1)(b);
Vic VAD Act
9(1)(b)(ii)–(iii);
(n 4) s 16(1)(b)(ii).
ACT VAD Act
(n 5) s 11(1)(f)(i) does not use the ‘ordinarily resident’
requirement but requires that the person has ‘lived in
the ACT for at
least the previous 12 months’.
287 [27] (Pritchard J);
https://doi.org/
doi:10.1136/medethics-2014-102091
(n 1) 329 [33]–[34]
(Judge Jackson). See also Ben P White et al, ‘Does the
Assisted Dying Act 2017
(Vic) Reflect Its Stated Policy Goals?’
[2020] UNSWLawJl 15
University of New South Wales Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.53637/QEQJ5610> (‘Does the
Reflect Its Goals?’).
The seventh case
unsuccessfully sought review of the citizenship or permanent residence
(n 2) [5] (Quigley J). The Victorian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to determine
the matter.
Issues concerning the interpretation of this criterion have been
analysed in Katrine Del Villar, Lindy Willmott and Ben P White,
Exclusion of Long-Term Australian Residents from Access to Voluntary Assisted
Dying: A Critique of the “Permanent
Resident” Eligibility
[2023] MonashULawRw 16
(2023) 49(2)
Monash University Law Review
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4576199>.
In WA, two applicants were
declared ineligible on the ground of state residence: Voluntary Assisted Dying
Board Western Australia,
Annual Report 2023
2024) 20. Although statistics are available in Victoria indicating 77 out of
2,769 applicants have been assessed as ineligible
for VAD at the first
assessment, no breakdown is available as to the grounds of ineligibility:
Voluntary Assisted Dying Review Board,
Voluntary Assisted Dying Review Board
Annual Report: July 2023 to June 2024
(Report, September 2024) 8.
Accordingly, in most states, it is not possible to determine how many other
persons have been denied access
to VAD on residency grounds but did not seek
tribunal review.
Email from Sally
Stubbington, Voluntary Assisted Dying Unit, Queensland Health to Katrine Del
Villar, 18 July 2024.
ACT VAD Act
Administrative tribunals in
four Australian states, as well as the Supreme Court of New South Wales and the
Voluntary Assisted Dying
Commission in Tasmania, have jurisdiction to review
decisions on certain eligibility criteria for VAD:
NSW VAD Act
Qld VAD Act
(n 4) ss 99, 102;
(n 4) s 85(1);
Tas EOLC Act
(n 4) s 95(1);
Vic VAD Act
(n 4) s 68(1);
(n 4) s 84(1).
NSW VAD Act
Qld VAD Act
(n 4) s 10(1)(f)(i);
Vic VAD Act
(n 4) ss 9(1)(b)(ii)–(iii);
(n 4) s 16(1)(b)(ii).
Tas EOLC Act
11(1)(b) (emphasis added).
ACT VAD Act
11(1)(f)(i).
NSW VAD Act
17(1)–(2)(a);
Qld VAD Act
(n 4) ss 10(1)(f)(ii), 12(2)(a).
(n 4) s 17(2)(a);
(n 4) s 12(2)(a).
(n 5) ss 11(1)(f)(ii), 154(1).
Ibid s 154(1).
(n 4) s 11(2).
(n 4) s 11(5) includes examples of evidence of ordinary residence including:
a person’s driver’s licence; enrolment to
vote; ownership of or
lease of property in Tasmania or another state or territory.
2) [49] (Quigley J).
Ibid [48], [50], [53],
Ibid [47], [51], [57].
Ibid [54]–[56].
Ibid [58]–[59].
Ibid [87], [91].
Ibid [77], [83].
Ibid [83], [88].
1) 282 [1] (Pritchard J).
Ibid 292 [53].
Ibid 292 [54], 293
Ibid 293 [60].
Ibid 293 [60], [62].
Ibid 293 [62], [64].
Ibid 293 [68].
Ibid 283 [2]–[3].
Ibid 283 [4].
Ibid 295 [75].
Ibid 294 [69].
Ibid 294 [70].
2) [77] (Quigley J).
1) 290–1 [37] (Pritchard J).
Ibid 289–90 [36],
(n 2) [77] (Quigley J).
1) 289–90 [36] (Pritchard J), quoting
(Quigley J).
1) 294 [70]–[71] (Pritchard J).
Ibid 291 [41], 292 [48],
293 [67], 295 [73].
Ibid 295 [74].
Ibid 325 [1]–[2]
(Judge Jackson).
Ibid 325 [1].
Ibid 332–3 [59].
Ibid 325 [2], 333
Ibid 325 [2].
Ibid 326 [3].
Ibid 326 [4], 335 [84].
Ibid 334 [72].
Ibid 334 [75].
Ibid 334 [68].
Ibid 333 [67].
Ibid 335 [81].
Ibid 335 [84].
Ibid [26]–[28]
(Judge Vernon).
Ibid [67]–[71].
(n 2) [77] (Quigley J);
(n 1) 289–90 [36]
(Pritchard J);
(n 1) 335 [78]–[80] (Judge
1) [11] (Judge Vernon).
Ibid [108]–[110].
Ibid [52]–[60], [77],
Ibid [109].
Ibid 265 [49]–[53]
(Judge Vernon).
Ibid 269 [94].
Ibid 270 [98].
Ibid 272 [122].
Ibid 263 [29], quoting
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Addy
[2020] FCAFC 135
(2020) 280 FCR 46
(Derrington J, Steward J agreeing).
(n 1) 269 [88] (Judge Vernon).
[109]–[111].
Ibid 310 [1], 315
[43]–[44] (Glancy J).
Ibid 315–16
Ibid 316 [52].
Ibid 315–16
Ibid 316 [53].
Ibid 315 [44].
Ibid 315 [47], 316
Ibid 316 [55].
Ibid 310 [1].
Ibid 310 [2], 317
Ibid 317 [57], [62].
Ibid 317 [58].
Ibid 317 [61].
(n 2) [83] (Quigley J);
(n 1) 290–1 [37] (Pritchard
(n 1) 262–3 [25] (Judge Vernon);
(n 1) [16] (Judge Vernon).
Tas EOLC Act
4) s 11(2).
(n 2) [47], [85] (Quigley J);
(n 1) 292 [49], 294 [70]
(Pritchard J);
(n 1) 265 [48], 269 [88]–[89]
(Judge Vernon);
(n 1) 334 [72] (Judge Jackson);
(n 1) [38], [89] (Judge Vernon);
(n 1) 315 [44], 316 [53] (Glancy J).
Lindy Willmott et al,
‘Participating Doctors’ Perspectives on the Regulation of Voluntary
Assisted Dying in Victoria:
A Qualitative Study’
(2021) 215(3)
Journal of Australia
, 127 <https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.51123>
(‘Doctors’ Perspectives’).
NSW VAD Act
Qld VAD Act
Vic VAD Act
(n 4) s 4(1).
(n 1) 287 [28] (Pritchard J);
(n 1) 329–30 [35] (Judge Jackson).
Note, however, that by
the time HM made her request for VAD in WA in March 2024, she had not been
‘ordinarily resident in
Tasmania for at least 12
immediately before’ (emphasis added) the request and would probably no
longer have been eligible in Tasmania. The operation
(n 4) is discussed further below.
Eliana Close et al,
‘Voluntary Assisted Dying and Telehealth: Commonwealth Carriage Service
Laws Are Putting Clinicians at
(2021) 215(9)
Medical Journal of
, 407 <https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.51287>.
(n 2) [47], [51], [57] (Quigley J).
[54]–[56], [59].
Willmott et al,
‘Doctors’ Perspectives’ (n 128) 127, app.
(n 1) 283 [4] (Pritchard J).
Enforcing legal rights
at the end of one’s life depends on knowledge of end-of-life law, which is
often lacking: see Cheryl
Tilse et al, ‘Community Knowledge of Law on
End-of-Life Decision-Making: An Australian Telephone Survey’
(2019) 27(2)
Journal of Law and Medicine
; Lindy Willmott et al, ‘Role of Law
in End-of-Life Decision-Making: Perspectives of Patients, Substitute
Decision-Makers and
(2021) 28(3)
Journal of Law and Medicine
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3909636>.
../customXml/item1.xml
(n 1) 283 [4] (Pritchard J). See also
, where he was
described as ‘very gravely ill’:
264–5 [37] (Judge Vernon).
(n 1) 328 [25] (Judge Jackson).
Ibid 327–8 [16],
(n 1) 264–5 [37] (Judge Vernon).
(n 1) [31]–[32] (Judge Vernon).
(n 1) 264–5 [37] (Judge Vernon).
By Ms R Young SC in
(n 1), Ms B Tariq in
(n 1), Mr P Doukas in
Mr T Pontre in
(n 1) 284 [11] (Pritchard J);
(n 1) 326 [8] (Judge
Jackson). Note that in
the Tribunal deliberately sought
pro bono representation for the applicant, because it was the first case in
(n 4) was being considered by the WASAT:
(n 1) 284 [11] (Pritchard J).
27 March 2020 to 17
April 2020:
(n 2) [46]–[59] (Quigley J).
Ben P White et al,
‘Access to Voluntary Assisted Dying in Victoria: A Qualitative Study of
Family Caregivers’ Perceptions
of Barriers and Facilitators’
Medical Journal of Australia
<https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.52004>.
The median timeframe
from first request to death is 24 days in WA: Voluntary Assisted Dying Board
Western Australia,
Annual Report 2022
(Report, 2023) 34
WA Board Report 2022
’). In Victoria, the
median timeframe from first request to dispensing the medication is 34 days:
Voluntary Assisted Dying Review
Annual Report: July 2022 to June 2023
(Report, June 2023) 16 (
‘Vic Board Report
(n 1) 263–4 [31] (Judge Vernon).
GH’s children EF
and IJ were co-applicants in his tribunal review application and acted as his
‘support network’:
(n 1) 327–8 [16]
(Judge Jackson).
MTH’s sister, CJG,
and niece, BMR, were co-applicants in his tribunal review application. They were
both named as substitute
decision-makers in his enduring power of attorney, and
provided him with care, support and advocacy:
[7], 261 [18] (Judge Vernon).
, his best friend Ms S was integral to him being able to bring the
application:
(n 1) 283 [4] (Pritchard J).
Department of Health and
Human Services (Vic),
Ministerial Advisory Panel on Voluntary Assisted
(Final Report, July 2017) 56; Legal and Social Issues Committee,
Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into End of Life Choices
(Final Report, 9
June 2016) 221; Department of Health (WA),
Ministerial Expert Panel on
Voluntary Assisted Dying
(Final Report, 27 June 2019) 20 (‘
WA Panel Report
(n 154) 20, quoting the submission of the Australian Medical Association. For a
more detailed discussion of this legislative purpose,
see Katrine Del Villar and
Amelia Simpson, ‘Voluntary Assisted Dying for (Some) Residents Only: Have
States Infringed
Constitution
[2022] MelbULawRw 15
(2022) 45(3)
Melbourne University Law Review
, 1016–19; White et al,
Reflect Its Goals?’ (n 9) 435–6.
(n 2) [72] (Quigley J);
(n 1) 287 [27] (Pritchard J);
(n 1) 329 [33]–[34] (Judge Jackson), quoting
(n 1) 287 [27] (Pritchard J);
1) [84] (Judge Vernon), quoting
(n 1) 287 [27] (Pritchard
(n 1) 270 [96] (Judge Vernon), quoting
(n 1) 287 [27] (Pritchard J);
[34]–[35] (Glancy J), quoting
(n 1) 287 [27]
(Pritchard J).
(n 1) 287 [28] (Pritchard J).
Del Villar and Simpson
(n 155) 1024.
(n 1) [82] (Judge Vernon).
(n 1) 263–4 [31] (Judge Vernon) (emphasis in original).
(n 1) [86]–[87] (Judge Vernon).
See Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 19 October 2017, 2948 (Jill
Hennessy, Minister for Health), cited in Del Villar and Simpson (n 155)
(n 2) [71]–[72] (Quigley J);
(n 1) 287 [28]
(Pritchard J);
(n 1) 329–30 [35] (Judge
(n 1) [86] (Judge Vernon).
(n 4) s 16(1)(b)(ii).
These principles were
expressly referred to by the tribunal in
(n 1) 287 [28]
(Pritchard J).
(n 1) 271 [111]–[112] (Judge Vernon).
(n 1) 287–8 [29] (Pritchard J).
(n 1) 271 [111]–[112], 271–2 [116]–[117], 272 [121] (Judge
This was recognised by
the Queensland Law Reform Commission (‘QLRC’) in its report:
Queensland Law Reform Commission,
A Legal Framework for Voluntary Assisted
(Report No 79, May 2021) 160–1 [7.456]–[7.459]
QLRC Report
Nicholas Gideonse,
‘Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief’, Pleading in
Gideonse v Brown
(3:21-cv-1568, 28 October 2021); ‘Settlement
Agreement and Release of Claims’, Settlement in
Gideonse v Brown
(3:21-cv1568, 28 March 2022) 2.
See, eg, Aidan
Ricciardo, ‘Voluntary Assisted Dying and State Residence Requirements: A
Western Australian Perspective’
[2024] UWALawRw 9
(2024) 51(2)
University of Western
Australia Law Review
Vic Board Report
(n 148) 32; Voluntary Assisted Dying Review Board,
of Operations July 2021 to June 2022
(Report, June 2022) 31.
Voluntary Assisted Dying
Review Board,
Report of Operations January–June 2020
August 2020) 15.
WA Board Report
(n 148) 4, 54.
Dying with Dignity
Victoria, Submission to Centre for Evaluation and Research Evidence, Department
of Health (Vic),
Review of the Operation of Victoria’s Voluntary
Assisted Dying Act 2017
(February 2024) 7 (‘
Dying with Dignity
Ibid; Go Gentle
Australia, Submission to
Centre for Evaluation and Research Evidence,
Department of Health (Vic),
Review of the Operation of Victoria’s
Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
(February 2024) 4 (‘
’); John Hont, ‘Victoria: From Leader to Laggard in
Voluntary Assisted Dying’,
Dying with Dignity Victoria
<https://www.dwdv.org.au/other-resources/victoria-from-leader-to-laggard-in-voluntary-assisted-dying/>.
Voluntary Assisted Dying
Australia and New Zealand,
Submission to Centre for Evaluation and
Research Evidence, Department of Health (Vic),
Review of the Operation of
Victoria’s Voluntary Assisted Dying Act 2017
(February 2024) 6.
Go Gentle Australia and
Voluntary Assisted Dying Australia and New Zealand,
VADCON 2023
(Conference Report, 27–28 September 2023) 8.
QLRC Report
170) 165 [7.498], 168.
WA Board Report
(n 148) 54.
Dying with Dignity
(n 176) 20;
Go Gentle Submission
Del Villar and Simpson
(n 155). The QLRC also recognised that the state residence requirement might
infringe section 117:
QLRC Report
158–9 [7.442]–[7.448].
Street v Queensland
Bar Association
[1989] HCA 53
(1989) 168 CLR 461
, 511 (Brennan J).
Del Villar and Simpson
(n 155) 1044.
Attorney Act 1988
(Qld) s 40;
Advance Care Directives Act 2013
Guardianship and Administration Act 1995
Treatment Planning and Decisions Act 2016
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(n 1) [86], [95] (Judge Vernon).
(n 4) s 11(1)(b) (emphasis added).
(n 5) s 162.
(n 4) s 154(2).
Katherine Waller et al,
‘Voluntary Assisted Dying in Australia: A Comparative and Critical
Analysis of State Laws’
[2023] UNSWLawJl 46
(2023) 46(4)
University of New South Wales Law
, 1434–5, 1466.
See, eg, Callaghan (n
7); Gauthier et al (n 7). The authors note that in the ACT there is no
‘Australian citizen or permanent
resident’ criterion of eligibility.
If the ACT state residence criterion were to be removed, there is a potential
for influxes
of international VAD tourists. If the ACT wished to prevent this,
it would need to insert an Australian citizenship or residence
End of Life
Choice Act 2019
(NZ) s 5(1)(b);
Reglamento para la Aplicación de
la Eutanasia Activa Voluntaria y Avoluntaria en Ecuador
[Regulations for the
Application of Active Voluntary and Involuntary Euthanasia in Ecuador] (Ecuador)
12 April 2024, No 00059-2024,
art 4(a), (b);
Ley Orgánica 3/2021, de
24 de Marzo, de Regulación de la Eutanasia 2021
[Organic Law 3/2021
of March 24 for the Regulation of Euthanasia] (Spain) art 5(1)(a);
Rechtsvorschrift für Sterbeverfügungsgesetz
[Complete Legislation
for Death Directives Act] (Austria) BGBl I, 242/2021, § 1(2);
Diário da República
[Official Gazette of the Union]
(Portugal) No 101, Series I of 25 May 2023, Law No 22/2023, art 3(2) (16 May
2023). For more detail,
see Katrine Del Villar, Lindy Willmott and Ben P White,
‘Voluntary Assisted Dying: Australia in an International Context’
Medical Law Review
(forthcoming).
Spain, Canada and
Austria are all federations, but their main assisted dying laws have been passed
at the national level. There
is a separate law at the provincial level in
Quebec, Canada:
Act Respecting End-of-Life Care
, RSQ 2014, c
Oregon Death with
Dignity Act
, Or Rev Stat §§ 127.805(1), 127.860 (1997);
Washington Death with Dignity Act
, Wash Rev Code §§
70.245.040(1)(b), 70.245.130 (2008);
End of Life Option Act
, Cal Health
and Safety Code § 443.2(3) (Deering, 2015);
Death with Dignity Act of
, DC Code § 7-661 (2017);
End-of-Life Options Act
Stat § 25-48-103(1) (2016);
Our Care, Our Choice Act
, Haw Rev Stat
§§ 327L-2, 327L-13 (2018);
Medical Aid in Dying for the Terminally
, NJ Stat Ann § 26:16-4(a) (West, 2019);
Maine Death with
Dignity Act
, Me Rev Stat Ann § 2140.4 (2019);
Elizabeth Whitefield
End-of-Life Options Act
, NM Stat § 24-7C-2(A) (2021); An Act to Amend
Title 16 of the Delaware Code Relating to End of Life Options, HR 140,
Delaware General Assembly (2024).
See the high profile
case of Brittany Maynard who moved from California to Oregon to access VAD: Del
Villar and Simpson (n 155)
1035. See also Thaddeus Mason Pope, ‘Medical
Aid in Dying: Key Variations Among US State Laws’
(2020) 14(1)
of Health and Life Sciences Law
<https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3743855>.
Vermont became the first
state to remove its residency requirement on 2 May 2023: An Act Relating to
Removing the Residency Requirement
from Vermont’s Patient Choice at End of
Life Laws, HR 190, General Assembly of the State of Vermont (2023). Oregon
bill repealing its residency requirement in June 2023: An Act Relating
to Death with Dignity, HB 2279, 82
Oregon Legislative Assembly
(n 1) 264 [33].
Keane Bourke,
‘Voluntary Assisted Dying Almost Universally Available in Australia, but
Residency Requirements Block Some from
Accessing It’,
(online, 12 July 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-07-12/residency-requirements-blocking-access-to-vad/104050352>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (229 KB)
PDF format (362 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter