URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbULawRw/2024/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:18:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gageler, Stephen --- "The New Constitutional Scholarship in Australia" [2024] MelbULawRw 5; (2024) 48(1) Melbourne University Law Review 202
THE NEW CONSTITUTIONAL SCHOLARSHIP IN AUSTRALIA
CRITIQUE AND COMMENT
THE NEW CONSTITUTIONAL SCHOLARSHIP IN
THE HON CHIEF JUSTICE STEPHEN GAGELER
The prevailing view of the
Constitution
for much of the
century considered it uninspired, inflexible and ill-adapted to
the advancement of the Australian nation. That view was not shared
constitutional scholars, who regarded it as innovative, dynamic and capable of
empowering popular sovereignty. Recently,
a new generation of scholars is
recapturing that earlier perception. Their emergent body of work is concerned
with exploring the
distinctiveness — the Australianness — of the
Constitution
In 1985, Sir Anthony
Mason took leave from the High Court to visit the University of
There, he gave the inaugural Sir Robert Menzies Lecture entitled ‘The Role
of a Constitutional Court in a Federation: A Comparison
of the Australian and
the United States
Experience’.
He commenced the
lecture as follows:
To an Australian lawyer the surprising feature of the contemporary American
scene is the satisfaction, indeed the pride, that Americans
take in their
Constitution
. To be sure, continuous and contentious debate surrounds the
Supreme Court’s interpretation of particular provisions and the
Court’s methods of reaching those interpretations. But Americans generally
have a strong conviction that the
United States
Constitution
, despite its
age, is just about as good a constitution as one can hope to get. Yet the
Constitution
, which is less than one hundred years old and, in
its federal aspects, has much in common with its American model, is frequently
condemned — principally by our politicians — as a product of the
horse and buggy
‘horse and buggy’ metaphor did not originate with Sir Anthony. For a
decade, if not
it had been a constant motif in political and constitutional discourse in
Australia. In his contribution to a collection of essays
edited by Leslie Zines
and published in tribute to Geoffrey Sawer in 1977, RD Lumb had observed that
the rhetoric used to justify
proposals for revision of the
Constitution
in the 1970s included ‘such words as “a
constitution fit for a horse and buggy age” as though a reference to past
methods of transport is indicative of social blinkers which guided the draftsmen
Constitution
, and therefore betrays its
limitations’.
Sawer himself had written in 1967 that Australia was ‘constitutionally
speaking ... the frozen
continent’.
The product of the horse and buggy age: frozen at a bygone time;
‘prosaic’ even
antiquated and unimaginative in its design; rigid; clunky; blinkered; no longer
fit for purpose. That was the prevailing view of
Constitution
amongst leading constitutional scholars when I went to law
school and when I entered the legal profession.
The view persisted and can fairly be said to have prevailed into this century
despite the
Australia Act 1986
(Cth) and despite the changes in judicial
perspective which became apparent under the Chief Justiceships of Sir Anthony
Sir Gerard Brennan in the decade after its enactment. Michael Coper
and George Williams sought in 1997 to present a picture of the
Constitution
then being in ‘ferment’, meaning that through
‘on-going judicial interpretation and reinterpretation’ it
‘in a state of constant
But if that picture
seemed accurate then, it was not to stay accurate for long. HP Lee and Peter
Gerangelos evidently set out to
be more ironic than provocative in publishing in
2009 their edited collection of essays in honour of George Winterton under the
Constitutional Advancement in a Frozen
That view of the
Constitution
as uninspired, inflexible,
and ill-adapted to the advancement of the Australian nation was a very long way
from the view of constitutional
scholars of the age in which it was brought into
Federation saw the publication of
The Annotated
Constitution
the Australian Commonwealth
co-authored by the older and incongruously named
John Quick and the younger, talented and nimble Robert
whose monograph,
The Coming Commonwealth
, had enthusiastically heralded
Federation in
Garran would in later life endorse a description, attributed to the journalist
Claude McKay, of Quick as having a mind ‘like
the mills of God grinding
slowly and exceeding[ly] small’ and would refer to his own collaboration
with Quick as having placed
him in the role of ‘the junior partner of a
steam-roller’.
also credited Quick with authorship of the Corowa Plan, which had set out the
blueprint for the popular movement that
led to Federation in the second half of
The size and detail of Quick and Garran’s valuable and influential
commentary owed much to Quick. The elegant style owed much
In the preface, Quick and Garran together said this:
The Federation of the Australian colonies has occupied the best energies of
the statesmen and the people of Australia for many years;
Constitution
is the outcome of exhaustive debates, heated controversies,
and careful compromises. It is an adaptation of the principles of British
colonial government to the federal system. Its language and ideas are drawn,
partly from the model of all modern governments,
Constitution
itself; partly from the colonial Constitutions based on the British model;
partly from the
Constitution
of the United States of America
partly from the semi-federal
Constitution
of the Dominion of Canada
such modifications as were suggested by the circumstances and needs of the
Australian people.
Constitution
of the Commonwealth
, therefore, is not an isolated
document. It has been built on traditional foundations. Its roots penetrate deep
into the past. It
embodies the best achievements of political progress, and
realizes the latest attainable ideals of
Looking on from afar, the Anglo-Irish polymath and statesman James Bryce was
of a similar view. In his
Studies in History and Jurisprudence
, published
in 1901, Bryce devoted a chapter to a detailed study of the freshly minted
Constitution
His comparative conclusion was that the
Constitution
‘at least abreast of European and American theory, and ahead of European
or American practice’.
represented, he said, ‘the high-water mark of popular
government’.
said, ‘penetrated by the spirit of
democracy’.
Bryce’s friend and contemporary as a student and teacher at Oxford
University, Albert Venn Dicey, also weighed in. The self-styled
of the obvious’,
done more than any other scholar of his generation to impose legal and
conceptual order on late 19
-century constitutional practice in the
United Kingdom. He had done so utilising his penchant for aphorisms and his
facility for taxonomising
by drawing binary distinctions. The aphorisms were
catchy and all-encompassing. Though the distinctions were not always compelling,
they were always confidently and clearly drawn.
Lectures Introductory to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
, the first edition of which was published in 1885, Dicey had
confidently drawn a clear-cut binary distinction between a ‘rigid
constitution’ and a ‘flexible
constitution’.
He had confidently drawn another clear-cut binary distinction between
‘political’ sovereignty and ‘legal’
sovereignty.
He had drawn yet
another clear-cut distinction between ‘law’ and
‘convention’.
Building on those distinctions, he had managed to distil the entirety of the
legal operation of what he saw as the flexible
Constitution
of the United
Kingdom into the outworking of two stable if not timeless principles which he
labelled parliamentary ‘supremacy’
and ‘the rule of
Looking across the
Atlantic to what he saw as the rigid federal
Constitution
of the United
, he confidently informed his readers that ‘[f]ederalism’
means ‘legalism’: ‘the predominance of the
judiciary in the
constitution’.
In the sixth edition of his
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
, published in 1902, Dicey added what he described as a
‘Note on Australian
Federalism’.
He explained that the note was ‘intended to illustrate the nature of
federal government by setting forth the main features
of the new and very
interesting type of federalism exhibited in the
Constitution
Commonwealth of
note, Dicey identified what he saw as the main characteristics of the federal
system of government established by the
Constitution
identified four characteristics, three of which can be seen from the present to
have had enduring significance. They were, in
Dicey’s words:
, a Federal form of Government’;
, a Parliamentary
(we would now
say, and would even then have said, ‘responsible government’); and
, an effective Method for amending the
Constitution
Maintaining a distinction dear to his heart, Dicey characterised the
Constitution
as ‘rigid’ — because to him a
federal constitution could only ever be ‘rigid’ — but he
that the self-governing colonies of Australia which had become states
had ‘flexible’ constitutions which seemed to have
served them
He continued:
Now the people of Australia have, we may safely assume, no desire to forgo the
advantages of a flexible constitution or to adopt
a federal polity which should
lend itself as little to amendment as does the
Constitution
of the United
, or should, like the
Constitution
of the Canadian Dominion
amendable only by the action of the Imperial Parliament. Hence Australian
Federalists were forced to solve the problem of giving
Constitution
the Commonwealth
as much rigidity as is required by the nature of a federal
government, and at the same time such flexibility as should secure to
of Australia the free exercise of legislative authority, even as regards
articles of the
Constitution
solution to the problem arrived at by the framers of the
Constitution
, as Dicey saw it, was
‘ingenious’.
solution, as he explained it, was to produce a constitution which was
‘rigid’, ‘since it cannot be fundamentally
altered by the
ordinary method of parliamentary
legislation’,
temper its rigidity in three different ways. The first was to endow the
Commonwealth Parliament with ‘very wide legislative
authority’, much
of which was to be concurrent with the legislative authority of the
The second was to
provide for many provisions of the
Constitution
to remain in force only
‘until Parliament otherwise provides’ thereby allowing the
Commonwealth Parliament to change
them ‘like any other law’ whilst
giving them a ‘certain moral weight which may prevent their being hastily
The third was to
provide for a formal mechanism of constitutional alteration, which he noted
‘embodies the principle, though
not the name, of the Swiss institution
known as the
referendum’.
To Dicey, the
Constitution
was therefore
‘rigid’, because according to his dogma any federal constitution had
to be ‘rigid’.
it was also ‘flexible’, because in his view this federal
constitution was, in critical respects, capable of being
moulded in order to
secure ‘the free exercise of legislative authority’ to ‘the
people of Australia’.
Incidentally, but interestingly, the copy of the sixth edition of
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
which is held in the High Court library in Canberra has inscribed on the
cover page the handwritten words ‘Owen Dixon 2
1904’. In the margins appear some characteristically astute handwritten
reflections on Dicey by the 18-year-old Dixon when
himself a student at the
University of Melbourne. Where, for example, in his introduction, Dicey quoted a
passage from Henry Hallam’s
View of the State of Europe during the
Middle Ages
to the effect that the independence of the English nation had
been ‘derived’ from ‘the spirit of its
Dixon wrote in the
margin: ‘Confusion of cause + effect — the laws are the expression
of (not the cause of) the characteristic
independence’. And where Dicey
went on to describe Walter Bagehot and WE Hearn as ‘philosophical
theorists’,
Dixon wrote in
the margin: ‘Both deal with legal facts — not theories’.
Writing in Hobart, in
Studies in Australian Constitutional Law
first edition of which was published in 1901 and the second edition of which was
published in 1905, Andrew Inglis Clark described
Constitution
in terms which were not boxed in by Dicey’s preconceived
and dogmatically maintained distinctions and which were based instead
Clark’s detailed and tolerably accurate understanding of the history and
functioning of the
Constitution
of the United
In a review of the first edition of
Studies in Australian Constitutional
, published in the
Harvard Law Review
in 1902, the great American
constitutional theorist James Bradley Thayer wrote that Clark was a
‘careful and learned writer’
who cited ‘freely the apposite
decisions of ... [the United States] Supreme Court with a remarkable general
Nonetheless,
Thayer continued that ‘[n]ow and then there is a slight error or
inadvertence’ in Clark’s analysis
of certain American constitutional
At the end of his
critique, Thayer himself referred to a ‘radical difference’ between
Constitution
Constitution
of the United
: that ‘we ground ours on the authority of our own people, while
theirs, in a legal sense, rests ultimately on an Act of the
Parliament’.
John Williams has pointed out, however, that Clark had a sophisticated
understanding of the constitutive role of the Australian people
both in creating
and sustaining the
Constitution
Clark set out
that understanding in elegant prose. As to the role of the Australian people in
creating the
Constitution
, he wrote that the reference to
‘the people’ in the preamble ‘acknowledges the historical fact
that it was voluntarily
adopted as an agreement by the people of the several
colonies ... and that the force of law was given to it by the Imperial
in order to give effect to that
agreement’.
As to the role of the Australian people in sustaining the
Constitution
, he wrote that
the language of the
Constitution
must be applied, and hence it must be
read and construed, not as containing a declaration of the will and intentions
of men long
since dead, and who cannot have anticipated the problems that would
arise for solution by future generations, but as declaring the
intentions of the present inheritors and possessors of sovereign power, who
maintain the
Constitution
and have the power to alter it, and who are in
the immediate presence of the problems to be
is they’, he wrote, (the ‘present possessors of sovereignty’)
‘who enforce the provisions of the
Constitution
and make a living
force of that which would otherwise be a silent and lifeless
Writing here in Melbourne, in
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of
, the first edition of which was published in 1902 and the second
edition of which was published in 1910, Dixon’s lecturer in
constitutional
law, Harrison Moore,
more constrained tone. He picked up on Dicey’s earlier aphorism that
federalism means legalism,
in contrast to Dicey’s own views about the flexibility of the
Constitution
, he commented that the
Constitution
‘contains few evidences of that experimentalism for which the politics of
the Colonies have become
But he observed
Constitution
‘bears every mark of confidence in
the capacity of the people to undertake every function of
government’.
explaining the choice of the framers not to include a bill of rights in the
Constitution
, he recognised the ‘great underlying principle’
Constitution
to be that ‘the rights of
individuals are sufficiently secured by ensuring as far as possible to each a
share, and an equal
share, in political
To bring this survey of the perceptions of early constitutional scholars to
completion, reference must be made to Bryce’s last
major work,
Democracies
, published in
Providing a high-level
description of what he labelled the Australian frame of government, Bryce,
there, said this:
There is no such thing as a Typical Democracy, for in every country physical
conditions and inherited institutions so affect the
political development of a
nation as to give its government a distinctive character. But if any country and
its government were to
be selected as showing the course which a self-governing
people pursues free from all external influences and little trammelled by
intellectual influences descending from the past, Australia would be that
country. It is the newest of all the democracies. It is
that which has travelled
farthest and fastest along the road which leads to the unlimited rule of the
multitude. In it, better than
anywhere else, may be studied the tendencies that
rule displays as it works itself out in
prevailing perception of the
Constitution
amongst early
constitutional scholars was accordingly one of innovation, dynamism and
democratic empowerment. They saw a flexible
constitutional casing within which
beat a heart of popular sovereignty, capable of adaptation to fulfil the
aspirations and to meet
the challenges of successive generations of Australians.
A glimmer of that early perception, tinged with nostalgia, can be seen in
Robert Menzies’ lectures delivered at the University of Virginia and
published in 1967 under the title
Central Power in the Australian
Commonwealth
How and why Australian constitutional scholars departed from that early
perception and had come to adopt the perception of rigidity
and redundancy which
was ascendant by the time I came to the study and practice of Australian
constitutional law in the 1980s are
questions that I will touch on but will not
attempt to answer in full.
Constitutional scholarship in and after the 1920s became generally drier,
more formalistic and more focused on the minutiae of legal
doctrine. There were
scholars who were notable exceptions. Sawer was one. Leslie Zines was another.
Tony Blackshield was another.
They were, it must be emphasised, exceptions. The
prevailing approach was illustrated by the content and longevity of William
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in
Wynes’ treatise had been ‘welcomed in 1936 as the first book of
substance in the Australian constitutional field for
It also attracted
the comment that ‘the legalistic tradition that the work ...
represent[ed], untouched by speculative theory
or by conscious sociology, [was]
not adequate to the task of constitutional
That criticism
notwithstanding, the book became the standard text on Australian constitutional
law with its fifth and final edition
published in 1976.
The drivers of the prevailing perception of rigidity and redundancy were
deeper than a mere change in jurisprudential orientation.
The failure of the
High Court to arrive at an enduring and workable approach to the express
guarantee of freedom of interstate trade
Constitution
before the unanimous decision of the High Court led by Mason CJ in
seems to me
to have had a great deal to do with it. Beginning in the 1920s and continuing
until 1988, the seemingly intractable problem
Constitution
cast a pall over the entire constitutional landscape. Sir John Latham
described it in 1957 as ‘the curse of the
Constitution
as a ‘boon to lawyers and to road hauliers and to people who want to sell
skins of protected animals or to trade
in possibly diseased
Twenty years
later, Sawer described its study as involving ‘gothic horrors and
theological
complexities’
The fact that limitations on Commonwealth legislative power had repeatedly been
seen to stifle national economic and social reforms
may also have contributed to
the prevailing perception. Policies frustrated by decisions of the High Court in
the first 50 years
after Federation included the Deakin Government’s
‘New Protection’ tariff
pharmaceutical
subsidies introduced during World War
and the postwar
nationalisation of Australia’s
The failure of multiple
attempts at formal constitutional amendment also certainly
contributed.
From the late 1970s onwards, the constitutional crisis of 1975 became a major
contributor. The ‘standard narrative’ of
that crisis, as Brendan Lim
has summarised it, quickly became that of ‘aberrational politics’
having been enabled by
‘technical design flaws or ambiguities in the
constitutional rules’ the underlying cause of which was a fundamental and
irremediable incompatibility between federalism and responsible
government.
The theme of the
standard narrative was captured in the provocative description of the
Constitution
as the ‘“Washminster”
Federation experiment of blending elements of different constitutional
traditions had been shown by the course of events
to have resulted in a
constitutional version of a Frankenstein’s monster. The revitalisation of
United States
Constitution
under the Warren Court and the
proliferation of newer and swankier constitutions in many other countries
throughout the world in
the period of rapid decolonisation which followed World
War II only added to a sense that what once had seemed new and vibrant was
longer fit for purpose.
My objective in undertaking such an historical excursus has not been to dwell
on the movement of constitutional scholarship away from
the perception of the
Constitution
that prevailed at and soon after Federation but
to draw attention to the recent emergence of a body of constitutional
scholarship
which is going some way towards recapturing that earlier perception.
Traces of some of these emergent ideas can be seen in earlier
writings of Geoff
Lindell, Paul Finn, Leslie Zines, George Winterton, Greg Craven and Fiona
Wheeler; in the more historical writings
of Michael Crommelin, Helen Irving,
John Williams and Nicholas Aroney; and in an important but insufficiently
appreciated interdisciplinary
contribution to constitutional analysis by social
philosopher Percy Partridge.
Overwhelmingly, however, the ideas are being generated by a younger generation
of scholars.
To describe those ideas and explain their emergence, something more general
needs to be said of the trajectory of constitutional scholarship
in Australia.
Since the time I studied constitutional law at the Australian National
University and then at Harvard University in
the 1980s, constitutional
scholarship in Australia has become more integrated with constitutional
scholarship globally. In line with
global trends, it has become generally less
beholden to legal positivism. In expanding its horizons, it has taken on
concerns which
in my youth would have been seen by most academic lawyers to be
outside the province of law and within the province of social sciences.
moving beyond a concern with the content of legal doctrine, it has recaptured
the concern which constitutional scholarship had
in our earlier period of
nation-building for democratic theory and institutional design.
Over the past three decades, two broad trends in constitutional scholarship
seem to me to have emerged. First in time has been the
rise of comparative
constitutionalism, pioneered at Melbourne Law School through the establishment
of the Centre for Comparative
Constitutional Studies under the tireless
leadership of Cheryl Saunders in 1988. Comparative constitutionalism in the
I am using that label has been broadly concerned with emphasising the
similarities and differences in constitutional structures and
constitutional adjudication in comparable national jurisdictions. Australian
examples in that vein include various contributions
The Future of
Australian Federalism
edited by Gabrielle Appleby, Aroney and Thomas John
and published in 2012; Janina Boughey’s
Human Rights and Judicial
Review in Australia and Canada
, published in 2017; various contributions to
Comparative Judicial Review
edited by Erin Delaney and Rosalind Dixon,
published in 2018; and Appleby and Delaney’s ‘Judicial Legitimacy
and Federal
Judicial Design: Managing Integrity and Autochthony’ and
Jeffrey Gordon’s ‘Comparative Judicial Federalism’,
published in 2023.
Overlapping with comparative constitutionalism, and drawing upon some of its
insights, has been another vein of constitutional scholarship
which I think of
as pan-constitutionalism: the emphasis of which has been on expounding deep
principles common to constitutional
structures or modes of constitutional
adjudication in some or most comparable national jurisdictions. Australian
examples of mature
works of scholarship within that vein which have received
international acclaim are Jeffrey Goldsworthy’s
Parliamentary
Sovereignty
, published in 2010, and Rosalind Dixon’s
Judicial Review
, published in early
The emergent body of constitutional scholarship to which I draw attention is
neither comparative constitutionalism nor pan-constitutionalism,
although it
draws inspiration from both. Rather than being concerned with comparing national
constitutional systems or expounding
transcendent principles, it is bent on
exploring the distinctiveness — the Australianness — of the
Constitution
A bridge between this emergent body of constitutional scholarship and
pan-constitutionalism was a review, published in 2021 by Adrienne
Stone and Lael
of Nicholas Barber’s book
The Principles of Constitutionalism
published in 2018.
Barber’s claims in the book was that constitutional scholarship globally
had become focused on constraining state power
at the expense of engaging with
an older constitutional tradition that focused instead on the capacity of the
state to govern in
the interests of its
Barber labelled that
older tradition ‘positive constitutionalism’ and traced it to
Stone and Weis said
in their review that they were ‘not convinced’ that positive
constitutionalism had been overlooked
to the extent that Barber
Instancing the
Australian federal system, they wrote that ‘although the constitutional
law of federalism imposes limitations
on power, its animating purpose is the
enablement of a properly functioning federal
Stone expanded on the enabling or constitutive quality of Australian
constitutionalism in her 2022 High Court lecture, published in
, in which she set out to describe what she referred to as
‘Australian constitutional
The picture
that she presented, in her own language, was one of ‘egalitarianism within
public debate’, an ‘inclusive’
but ‘incomplete’
approach to franchise, a ‘tradition of democratic innovation’ and
altogether, ‘a robust
innovative (if imperfect) democracy and a socially
progressive, active
As supporting that
picture, she pointed to what she described as the ‘exciting emerging
work’ of several early-career
and mid-career constitutional
To illustrate the emergent body of constitutional scholarship, I will take
Stone’s list and expand on it slightly. My own expanded
list should be
taken to be indicative rather than exhaustive and encouraging rather than
confining. Excepting just one slightly earlier
publication, all of the scholarly
output to which I will refer has been published only in the last four years or
is in the course
of being published. No doubt, there is other similar
scholarship which remains work-in-progress.
The slightly earlier publication is Patrick Emerton’s contribution to
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
, which was published
Under the heading
‘Ideas’, Emerton offered what he described as a
‘counterpoint’ to the perception of the
Constitution
as a prosaic, arid legal
He argued that the framers
Constitution
regarded its democratic character as
fundamental and that they conceived of responsible government in ‘active
of ‘the people’ wanting ‘their parliament, and
the government responsible to it, to do
In his article ‘What Do Australians Talk about when They Talk about
“Parliamentary Sovereignty”?’, Ryan Goss
disputes the notion
that Dicey’s doctrine of parliamentary supremacy has meaningful operation
in Australia.
In a similar vein,
in her article, ‘Political Constitutionalism: Individual Responsibility
and Collective Restraint’,
Yee-Fui Ng portrays Australian
constitutionalism as a distinctive blend of ‘political
constitutionalism’ (involving holding
those who exercise governmental
power to account through political processes) and ‘legal
constitutionalism’ (involving
legal mechanisms for delimiting governmental
power, policed through strong form judicial
Having examined
developments subsequent to the constitutional crisis of 1975, she argues that
those forms of constitutionalism are
not in irreconcilable tension but are
rather in constant
William Partlett’s article ‘Remembering Australian Constituent
Power’ recalls the popular movement to federate in
the implementation of
the Corowa Plan.
He portrays it
as a process which resulted in the Australian people having both political
sovereignty and legal
sovereignty.
He considers that
the people act through ‘parliamentary representation to make ordinary
law’ and through ‘special,
extra-parliamentary representation to
alter their constitutional
In his book
Responsible Government and the Australian
Constitution
Benjamin Saunders argues that responsible government in the form incorporated
Constitution
is based on principles of popular
sovereignty and political accountability and ‘ultimately depends for its
good functioning
on an engaged citizenry and a vibrant political
In her recent paper, ‘Active Citizens and an Active State: Uncovering
the “Positive” Underpinnings of the Australian
Constitution
Lynsey Blayden focuses on the conciliation and arbitration power to contend that
the design of the
Constitution
was influenced not solely by a
desire to limit governmental power but also by a concern ‘to safeguard ...
social and individual
wellbeing’ by ‘structuring and enabling
effective government’.
Will Bateman develops that theme. In his important paper ‘Federalising
Socialism without Doctrine’, he reinterprets the
Constitution
as having advanced what he describes as ‘colonial
socialism’ which he explains in terms of ‘empowering governments
own and operate vast public capital, while providing social insurance in a
market economy’.
[t]he Australian model of a constitutional state that emerged from the colonial
phase was one of ‘egalitarian state potency’
which implied a vastly
different balance of public and private authority to the constitutions
administered in Washington or Westminster
to argue that the ‘constitutional model of a potent egalitarian state
accreted during the colonial phase’ which
was then drafted into the
Constitution
and was judicially endorsed in
New South Wales v
Commonwealth
Surplus Revenue Case
What seems to me to be common to the body of scholarship, of which I have
given examples, is an intense concentration on pre- and
post-Federation
constitutional history and a prioritisation of democratic empowerment over legal
constraint. What is driving this
scholarship’s emergence is difficult to
say. Global events over the past two decades have perhaps cast the British and
progenitors of the
Constitution
in a new light in
which they have seemed comparatively less attractive than their progeny.
Outright breakdowns in constitutional
order in scores of other countries with
swankier constitutions have perhaps contributed to an appreciation of the
robustness of our
own constitutional system. Our relative success in dealing
with both the global financial crisis of 2008–09 and the recent
seems to have contributed to an appreciation of our
Constitution
adaptability and workability.
Be that as it may, I see in the emergence of the body of scholarship
fulfilment of the founding era ambition so elegantly expressed
in the words of
Clark which I have earlier
It is the ‘present
inheritors and possessors of sovereign power, who maintain the
Constitution
and have the power to alter it, and who are in the immediate
presence of the problems to be solved’ who ‘make a living
that which would otherwise be a silent and lifeless
Chief Justice of the High
Court of Australia. This article is a revised version of the Sir Anthony Mason
Lecture delivered at Melbourne
Law School on 31 October 2023.
Sir Anthony Mason, ‘The
Role of a Constitutional Court in a Federation: A Comparison of the Australian
and the United States
Experience’
[1986] FedLawRw 1
(1986) 16(1)
Federal Law Review
, 1 (‘The Role of a Constitutional Court’).
Federal Law
version of Sir Anthony’s lecture was reprinted as Sir Anthony
Mason, ‘The Role of a Constitutional Court in a Federation:
A Comparison
of the Australian and the United States Experience’ in Geoffrey Lindell
The Mason Papers: Select Articles and Speeches by Sir Anthony Mason AC,
(Federation Press, 2007) 110.
Mason, ‘The Role of a
Constitutional Court’ (n
See, eg, W Anstey Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and
Judicial Powers in Australia: Being a Treatise on the Distribution of
Legislative Executive and Judicial
Powers of Commonwealth and States under the
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
(Law Book, 3
1962) viii (‘
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers 3
RD Lumb, ‘Reform of the
Constitution
: The 1973 Session of the Australian Constitutional
Convention’ in Leslie Zines (ed),
Commentaries on the Australian
Constitution
: A Tribute to Geoffrey Sawer
(Butterworths, 1977) 233, 233
(‘Reform of the
Constitution
Geoffrey Sawer,
Federalism in the Courts
(Melbourne University Press, 1967) 208.
Sir Anthony Mason, ‘The
Constitution
in Retrospect and Prospect’ in Robert French,
Geoffrey Lindell and Cheryl Saunders (eds),
Reflections on the Australian
Constitution
(Federation Press, 2003) 7, 8 (‘The Australian
Constitution
Michael Coper and George
Williams (eds),
The Cauldron of Constitutional Change
(Centre for
International and Public Law, 1997) v.
HP Lee and Peter Gerangelos
Constitutional Advancement in a Frozen Continent: Essays in Honour of
George Winterton
(Federation Press, 2009).
John Quick and Robert
Randolph Garran,
The Annotated
Constitution
of the Australian
Commonwealth
(Angus & Robertson, 1901).
See generally Robert
Randolph Garran,
The Coming Commonwealth: An Australian Handbook of Federal
(Angus & Robertson, 1897) (‘
Commonwealth
Sir Robert Randolph Garran,
Prosper the Commonwealth
(Angus and Robertson, 1958) 137.
Justice Stephen Gageler,
‘Sir Robert Garran: Medio Tutissimus Ibis’
(2018) 46(1)
Quick and Garran (n
James Bryce,
History and Jurisprudence
(Oxford University Press, 1901) vol 1,
Richard A Cosgrove,
‘Dicey, Albert Venn’ in HCG Matthew and Brian Harrison (eds),
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography
(Oxford University Press, 2004)
vol 16, 43, 44.
Introductory to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
(Macmillan,
ed, 1885) 114–16 (‘
Lectures Introductory
’). Dicey’s treatise was followed by a second
edition in 1886 under the same title and eight further editions under the
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
: see AV Dicey,
Lectures Introductory to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
(Macmillan, 2
ed, 1886); AV Dicey and ECS Wade,
Introduction to
the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
(Macmillan, 10
Introductory 1
Ibid 56, 167–8.
Introduction
to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution
(Macmillan, 6
ed, 1902) ix–x, 477 (‘
Introduction
Ibid 477 (emphasis in
Ibid 481–2.
Ibid 2, quoting Henry
View of the State of Europe during the Middle Ages
(John Murray,
ed, 1868) vol 2, 267.
Introduction
See A Inglis Clark,
Studies in Australian Constitutional Law
(Legal Books, rev ed, 1997) v,
JBT, review of A Inglis
Studies in Australian Constitutional Law
(1902) 15(5)
Harvard Law Review
See generally Clark (n
) iii–xxxix.
See Philip Ayres,
(Meigunyah Press, rev ed, 2007) 11–12.
W Harrison Moore,
Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia
(Charles F Maxwell,
ed, 1910) iii.
James Bryce,
Democracies
(Macmillan, 1921) vol 2.
Sir Robert Menzies,
Central Power in the Australian Commonwealth: An Examination of the Growth of
Commonwealth Power in the Australian Federation
(Cassell, 1967). See, eg, at
7, 9, 24–5.
Wynes’ treatise was
published under four slightly different titles across its five editions: see W
Anstey Wynes,
Legislative and Executive Powers in Australia: Being a Treatise
on the Legislative and Executive Powers of the Commonwealth and States
Australia under the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
ed, 1936); W Anstey Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and Judicial
Powers in Australia: Being a Treatise on the Distribution of Legislative
Executive and Judicial
Powers of Commonwealth and States under the Commonwealth
of Australia
Constitution
(Law Book, 2
ed, 1956); Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers 3
); W Anstey Wynes,
Legislative,
Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia: Being a Treatise on the Distribution
of Legislative Executive and Judicial
Powers of the Commonwealth and the States
under the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
ed, 1970); W Anstey Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and Judicial
Powers in Australia
(Law Book, 5
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers 5
P Brazil, review of W
Anstey Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia
[1977] FedLawRw 27
(1977) 8(3)
Federal Law Review
[1988] HCA 18
(1988) 165 CLR 360.
JG Latham, review of W
Anstey Wynes,
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia
[1957] MelbULawRw 31
(1957) 1(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Geoffrey Sawer, review of
Christopher Enright,
Constitutional Law
[1977] FedLawRw 28
(1977) 8(3)
Federal Law
See generally
[1908] HCA 43
(1908) 6 CLR 41.
See generally
ex rel Dale v Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 30
(1945) 71 CLR 237.
See generally
New South Wales v Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1.
See Lumb, ‘Reform of
the Constitution’ (n
Brendan Lim,
Australia’s Constitution after Whitlam
(Cambridge University Press,
Elaine Thompson, ‘The
“Washminster” Mutation’ in Patrick Weller and Dean Jaensch
Responsible Government in Australia
(Drummond Publishing, 1980)
See, eg, GJ Lindell,
‘Why Is Australia’s Constitution Binding? The Reasons in 1900 and
Now, and the Effect on Independence’
[1986] FedLawRw 2
(1986) 16(1)
Federal Law
; Paul Finn, ‘Public Trust and Public Accountability’
(1993) 65(2)
Australian Quarterly
50; Leslie Zines, ‘Dead Hands or
Living Tree? Stability and Change in Constitutional Law’
[2004] AdelLawRw 2
(2004) 25(1)
Adelaide Law Review
; George Winterton, ‘Popular Sovereignty and
Constitutional Continuity’
[1998] FedLawRw 1
(1998) 26(1)
Federal Law Review
Craven, ‘Heresy as Orthodoxy: Were the Founders Progressivists?’
[2003] FedLawRw 3
(2003) 31(1)
Federal Law Review
; Fiona Wheeler, ‘The Separation
of Judicial Power and Progressive Interpretation’ in HP Lee and Peter
Gerangelos (eds),
Constitutional Advancement in a Frozen Continent: Essays in
Honour of George Winterton
(Federation Press, 2009) 222; Michael Crommelin,
‘The Federal Principle’ in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne Stone (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University
Press, 2018) 853; Helen Irving, ‘To Constitute a Nation: A Cultural
History of Australia’s Constitution’
(Cambridge University Press,
1997); John Williams, ‘The Emergence of the Commonwealth
Constitution
’ in HP Lee and George Winterton (eds),
Constitutional Landmarks
(Cambridge University Press, 2003) 1; Nicholas
Constitution
of a Federal Commonwealth: The Making and Meaning of
the Australian
Constitution
(Cambridge University Press, 2012); PH
Partridge, ‘The Politics for Federalism’ in Geoffrey Sawer (ed),
Federalism: An Australian Jubilee Study
(FW Cheshire, 1952) 174. See also
Stephen Gageler, ‘Foundations of Australian Federalism and the Role of
Judicial Review’
[1987] FedLawRw 11
(1987) 17(3)
Federal Law Review
See generally Gabrielle
Appleby, Nicholas Aroney and Thomas John (eds),
The Future of Australian
Federalism: Comparative and Interdisciplinary Perspectives
University Press, 2012); Janina Boughey,
Human Rights and Judicial Review in
Australia and Canada: The Newest Despotism?
(Hart Publishing, 2017); Erin F
Delaney and Rosalind Dixon (eds),
Comparative Judicial Review
Elgar, 2018); Gabrielle Appleby and Erin F Delaney, ‘Judicial Legitimacy
and Federal Judicial Design: Managing Integrity
and Autochthony’
Yale Law Journal
; Jeffrey Steven Gordon, ‘Comparative
Judicial Federalism’
(2023) 21(4)
International Journal of
Constitutional Law
See generally Jeffrey
Goldsworthy,
Parliamentary Sovereignty: Contemporary Debates
University Press, 2010); Rosalind Dixon,
Responsive Judicial Review:
Democracy and Dysfunction in the Modern Age
(Oxford University Press,
Adrienne Stone and Lael K
Weis, ‘Positive and Negative Constitutionalism and the Limits of
Universalism: A Review Essay’
(2021) 41(4)
Oxford Journal of Legal
Principles of Constitutionalism
(Oxford University Press, 2018).
Stone and Weis (n
Ibid 1255 (emphasis
Adrienne Stone, ‘More
than a Rule Book: Identity and the Australian
Constitution
(2024) 35(2)
Public Law Review
Ibid 132–4, 136.
Ibid 135, citing Lynsey
Blayden, ‘Active Citizens and an Active State: Uncovering the
“Positive” Underpinnings of
the Australian
Constitution
(2024) 52(3)
Federal Law Review
(advance), Patrick Emerton,
‘Ideas’ in Cheryl Saunders and Adrienne Stone (eds),
Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 143,
143, William Partlett, ‘Remembering Australian Constitutional
Democracy’ (2024)
Federal Law Review
Ibid 143–4.
Ibid 152 (emphasis
Ryan Goss, ‘What Do
Australians Talk about when They Talk about “Parliamentary
Sovereignty”?’
Yee-Fui Ng,
‘Political Constitutionalism: Individual Responsibility and Collective
(2020) 48(4)
Federal Law Review
William Partlett,
‘Remembering Australian Constituent Power’
[2023] MelbULawRw 13
(2023) 46(3)
University Law Review
Ibid 838–41.
Ibid 857–8 (emphasis
Benjamin B Saunders,
Responsible Government and the Australian
Constitution
: A Government for a
Sovereign People
(Hart Publishing, 2023) 217. See also at 211.
Will Bateman,
‘Federalising Socialism without Doctrine’ (2024) 52(3)
(advance), 1.
Ibid 24–5, citing
New South Wales v Commonwealth
[1908] HCA 68
(1908) 7 CLR 179
, 189–90 (Griffith
CJ), 195–6 (Barton J), 198–9 (O’Connor J), 200–3 (Isaacs
J), 203 (Higgins J).
See above nn
–7 and accompanying text.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (475 KB)
PDF format (144 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter