URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rios Oyola, Sandra --- "Restoring Sexual Dignity: Sexual Violence, Human Dignity and Transitional Justice in Colombia" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 20; (2025) 14(2) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 129
“What Do We Do With all This
South African Time, Space, and Place in Forensic Evidence
Robyn Gill-Leslie
University of Oslo, Norway
Truth recovery; forensics; transcorporealism;
Marikana; South Africa.
Introduction
investigations after atrocities have historically focused on providing
information for court-focused justice and have not
always been geared towards
the families of the deceased (Hofmeister & Navarro, 2017, p. 36). The ways
in which forensic evidence
can impact truth recovery processes are now viewed
through a wider frame,
forming not
only part of legal procedures (Jones, 2020, p. 680) but also part of the
emotional labour of truth recovery processes
(Hofmeister & Navarro, 2017, p.
39). In this way, forensic investigations can thus contribute to the
of truth-seeking—the making of a public record of
“truth” providing dignity for the dead (Schwartz-Marin &
Cruz-Santiago, 2016, p. 62).
This expanding scope has led to increased focus on forensic socio-cultural
engagement in truth recovery scenarios. In death, the body
transitions from
being somebody to being an object of legal and political value (Jones, 2020, p.
679). The corpse thus has a dual
existence: a new object of interest and the
“remnants of a person”, which combine to represent both a violation
life history (Jones, 2020, p. 681). As a result, there is a developing
understanding of the role the dead played in life and how
critical social
context is to both investigating death and helping affected communities repair
after atrocity. This places the dead
into a social and cultural context,
“speaking” to historical events (Moon, 2018, p. 3).
In turn, this has led to the suggestion that forensic evidence during truth
recovery processes can support and bolster the development
of a set of rights
regarding death and dead bodies. Interest in the right to truth and the right to
know has increased in investigations
after atrocity, conferring forensics with
an extra layer of significance and suggesting that the dead themselves could be
as having human rights (Moon, 2014, p. 49). These developments, focusing
on the social and community contexts of death and the emphasis
and conferment of
important rights, have expanded the space around which forensic evidence
operates during post-atrocity truth recovery
proceedings.
This article critically engages with the “forensic turn”
(Anstett, 2022, p. 97) in truth recovery after atrocity. It does
considering documented approaches to foregrounding socio-legal contexts of the
dead after atrocity crimes. This discussion
continues critiques of these
approaches that question the extent to which universal rights-based
frameworks—such as the right
to truth and the right to know—can
occlude the complexities of local communities who have suffered violence.
Deploying Hugo
ka Canham’s theory-method of
ukwakumkanya
Canham, 2023, p. 6), this article performs a symbolic seeking/blocking exercise
when considering forensic engagement with truth
recovery initiatives, through
examining aspects of medico-legal evidence from South Africa’s Marikana
Commission. The gesture
ukwakumkanya
is considered alongside
transcorporeal thinking, which highlights the multidirectional flow of
information and agency between human
and non-human actors. In so doing, the gaze
reflected by
ukwakumkanya
surfaces embedded local knowledge regarding the
bending and stretching of forensic time. It also foregrounds the importance of
objects and spaces, such as autopsy reports and grave sites, as boundary
objects with latent potentiality. The actors and agency
that are consequently
foregrounded show how forensic evidence can change and shift, tied into a form
of relation with both communities
of the living and spectral grave sites, which
emit “vibrational charge” (ka Canham, 2023, p. 29).
This theoretical framing is extended through expert interviews conducted with
participants in the Marikana Commission, a truth recovery
mechanism established
in the wake of the 2012 Marikana massacre. The author interviewed a variety of
socio-legal practitioners with
standing from the abundant legal teams
representing non-state actors at the Marikana Commission in 2023. These
interviewees were
selected as they were in proximity to the families and
survivors of the massacre—enabling meaningful responses to the
themes—but had no links to the specific traumas of the
event. This was a self-imposed research boundary. The author did not
engage in fieldwork with the capacity for re-traumatisation or the potential for
extractive output while interviewees remain
in cyclical states of violence and
uncertainty (Tilley, 2017, p. 37). As Tilley writes, it is imperative for
researchers to be aware
of the extractive point of knowledge development:
All knowers in the intellectual commons should be equally valued for their
expertise. With this in mind, we need to identify the point
of commodification
of knowledge, as well as the points and modes of the certification and addition
of value. (2017, p. 39)
Interviewees and their designations were anonymised and assigned letters as
identifiers. This was due to the sensitive nature of the
work conducted, their
personal and/or traumatic responses to the work, and/or the ongoing nature of
some of the legal entanglements
from the Marikana
Commission.
A total of 12
interviews were conducted for this project: 10 socio-legal practitioners
involved in the Marikana Commission and two
ritual specialist experts, one of
whom was a practising sangoma. The interviews were semi-structured, lasting
between one and two
hours, and were conducted either in person in Johannesburg
or Durban (South Africa) or via Zoom.
From Humanitarianism to Civism
Capturing the development of how forensic investigations relate to social
contexts and rights-based values is the term, humanitarian
forensic action
(HFA): the application of forensic science to humanitarian action framed by
international humanitarian law (Moon,
2014, p. 50). HFA focuses on dignity and
the acknowledgment that victims of atrocity crimes were embedded in a social
context. As
such, victims’ families have the “right to know”
what happened to their loved ones (Cordner, 2018, pp. 640–641).
was thrown into relief when it became increasingly clear that bodily
identification was not necessary for the prosecution
and conviction of war
crimes. In other words, bodily identification was not necessary for this kind of
legal justice, which left
an unmet need amongst relatives and communities
(Cordner, 2018, p. 642). Some, including the Red Cross, saw that forensic
could be about more than evidence for or against guilt, or apportioning
criminal responsibility for an action. Forensic science could
also identify a
person by name and thereby inform relatives of the manner of death and provide
related support (Cordner & Tidball-Binz,
2017, p. 65). Indeed, in 1996,
INTERPOL’s General Assembly affirmed a universal right to be recognised
after death (Cordner
& Tidball-Binz, 2017, p. 66).
Linked to liberal ideals that prioritise concepts like the right to truth and
the right to know, HFA highlights that bodies are carriers
of cultural, as well
as physical, information. It recognises that part of the job of forensics is to
unite dead bodies with their
“kinship ties”—their cultural and
social worlds (Parra et al., 2020, p. 80). This prioritises the dignity of the
dead through recognising that they present three key areas that forensics must
consider. These include social identity (family and
social worlds), social
connectedness (important rituals and processes, including burial rites or other
important cultural markers),
and acknowledging and addressing bodily
disintegration (allowing appropriate burial sites or other sensitive treatment
of remains)
(Parra et al., 2020, p. 86). The key concern around ignoring the
cultural and social worlds of the dead is that this results in a
stripping of
the right to dignity in death. HFA prioritises the elevation and attainment of
rights; the right to truth, the right
to know, and the right to dignity in death
are fundamentally important. However, it is important to acknowledge that
focusing on
rights and their presence and/or absence can obfuscate unstable
spaces of forensic investigation after atrocity.
Struggles for justice in local contexts are relational acts, requiring
“complex knowledge” in which forensic, social,
and creative
perspectives conjoin to present a diverse and locally situated landscape
(Robledo Silvestre & Ramírez González,
2022, pp. 85–89).
This said, Kieran McEvoy’s concerns about the “triumph of human
rights” (2007, p. 419),
whereby a global liberal world order influencing
truth recovery mechanisms prioritises rights rather than structures of abuse,
weight. In positioning forensic investigations around a rights-based
framework, the complexity of truth recovery on the ground can
fall out of focus.
Authors have raised concerns with the manner in which the journey of global
rights norms—such as the right
to truth—to local contexts has been
“romanticised” in Burundi and Rwanda. A universal rights-based
discourse is
almost certainly administered through a nation-state, providing
opportunities to present historical truth through a specific, often
frame (Jamar & Major, 2022, p. 57).
This complexity has also been acknowledged regarding post-South African Truth
and Reconciliation Commission (SATRC, TRC henceforth)
exhumations, through the
work of the Missing Persons Task Team (MPTT) in South Africa. In some ways, the
work of the MPTT can be
seen as a “critical counter-measure” to the
TRC’s view of closure (Thomas, 2018, p. 430). Established in 2005 in
with TRC recommendations, the MPTT searches for apartheid’s disappeared:
officially 477 cases, according to TRC records
(Rousseau, 2015, p.
Remains of 138 missing
persons had been uncovered as of 20 April 2018 (Ntsebeza, 2024, p. 89).
Returning remains to family members
can be seen as an act of reparation and, in
this way, the MPTT sees itself as part of a collaborative and restorative
process (Rousseau,
2015, p. 178). Indeed, engagement with the work of the MPTT
emphasises how the task force remains focused on the families of those
lost loved ones. The MPTT works in tandem with family members, inviting them to
exhumations and planning and update meetings,
and engaging in spiritual
reparatory activities (Aronson, 2012; Fullard, 2018; Rousseau, 2009). Despite
this, the MPTT is part of
the state, through its location inside the National
Prosecuting Authority (NPA). Moreover, the MPTT has exhumed primarily (though
not exclusively) African National Congress (ANC) cadres who could be identified
as national heroes, people for whom “a political
biography was already in
place” (Rousseau et al., 2018, p. 21). Exhumation and other investigations
into death and disappearance
in the politically-charged and more complex early
1990s South Africa remains less visible (Aronson, 2012, p. 264; Rousseau, 2015,
p. 189). Universalising, rights-based discourses can be used to consolidate a
political agenda, although exhumations and related
forensic work contain
multiple forms of truth that cannot be concealed (Jamar & Major, 2022, p.
56). As Rousseau, who worked
for the TRC and consulted with the MPTT, writes,
“a body is less recovered than produced” (2016, p. 204).
When considering the aftermath of political violence, other critiques of the
universalising impact of rights-based discourse on local
contexts include the
ways in which these frameworks do not always correspond with the way survivors
feel and remember their kin.
Carolina Robledo Silvestre and Paola Ramírez
González detail one such case, observed while working with
(The Searchers),
Drugs (2006–present) (CFR.org Editors, 2025).
Mimi had fragments of her
husband’s jaw and teeth verified and returned, yet she experienced no
peace despite this (Robledo
Silvestre & Ramírez González,
2022, p. 85). “She does not trust the genetic opinion that accompanied the
... remains because she does not find in them the known traits of her husband,
especially in relation to the teeth” (Robledo
Silvestre &
Ramírez González, 2022, p. 85). In this way, experiences of the
“right to know” in truth
recovery can escape the rationale of
forensics (Aragüete-Toribio, 2022, p. 12), seen in this case through a
painful sundering
of fact and feeling that can leave family members dislocated
and liminal.
Are They Even Human?
As Mimi’s case shows, the importance of bodies and their social
context, framed through a right to know and a right to truth
regarding atrocity
crimes, can occlude critical reflections of that key signifier—the body
itself. Injuries to bodies will
always be both physical and social, as an act of
violence forces the victim to live in relation to the person or system that
them. This, then, is the tension that must be confronted after
atrocity, particularly that which is state-sponsored: the violence
is structural
but the injury is personal (Kesselring, 2017, p. 74). Physical bodies remain
relationally bound to people and systems
of violence and oppression.
However, this complex and involuntary relationality risks being thinned out
when foregrounding a rights-based approach. Historically,
there has been a
supposition of legal neutrality, implying that human rights norms are universal,
or interchangeable. Considering
the global discourse of human rights and the
linked “universality” of the human body, this becomes problematic
in fact, the body that is subject to such universal rights is almost
always a privileged one. The white, able, and male body is normative,
the privilege of invisibility (Dietz et al., 2022, p. 7). If knowledge, power,
or law is based on the invisible normative
body, then each body that deviates
from this norm is othered. It is assigned to Berber Bevernage’s
“allochronic”
time, reserved for those out of step or otherwise
de-synced from contemporaneity (2010, p. 123). Rights-based frameworks turn on
the production of evidence of a rights violation or rights unfulfilled or absent
(Keenan, 2018, p. 110). Yet, this evidentiary requirement
suggests that we are
not self-evidently human; if there is a claim for rights, the existence of this
argument itself suggests these
rights are not automatic or guaranteed and must
be argued for. Thomas Keenan (2018) states that, while we might all be human in
common-sense manner, it is true that many of us do not seem to hold value at
all. Whether situated inside rickety boats, cargo lorries,
or in open ground
near a platinum mine at Marikana, the very notion of a human rights discourse
proves that membership of this community
is not a given (Keenan, 2018, p. 111).
Prioritising rights-based frameworks that position the right to know and the
right to truth
as key aspects of forensic work in truth recovery does not
adequately consider the complex relationality of communities to sources
violence. Moreover, it does not take into account how these universalising
frameworks are defining “human” in the
face of rampant
de-humanisation.
Critique of Expertise
Critical responses to universalising rights-based frameworks that
“romanticise” such rights and their transition from
global to local
primarily focus on the conceptualisation of forensic expertise. Forensic
aesthetics argues against the presumption
of a single entry point, audience, or
spatial location of forensic action; in conceiving forensic sites as dynamic and
adaptive to
specific locations, they can be interpreted as attempting a
redistribution of the sensible (Jaussen, 2023, p. 35). In Rancièrian
terms, “the sensible” refers to the boundaries of what has been
allowed to be sensed and has been rendered visible. The
necessity of this
“redistribution” becomes clear when considering Jacques
Rancière’s argument that all experiences
exist in a political
environment where not everyone is visible, present, or can speak, and certain
parts of society are enabled or
disabled from communicating (2004, pp.
10–13). Thus, forensic aesthetics leans towards this recalibration of
social and political
worlds that provides fertile ground for engagement with
non-state actors – exemplified by forensic civism (Jaussen, 2023, pp.
34–35). Examining, for instance, Mexican and Colombian experiences of the
state’s passivity or complicity when investigating
large-scale
disappearances from political and narcotic-related conflicts, forensic civism
employs grassroots techniques to expose
the weaknesses of expert (often
state-sponsored) forensic investigation. Thus, forensic civism illustrates that
a meaningful forensic
presence does not always constitute the presence of
conventional experts (Cordner, 2018, p. 645). Forensic civism often involves
people (families and communities who have experienced loss) educating themselves
on forensic processes, such as list-making,
documenting, mapping, and searching,
and applying these skills to uncover information about missing persons and/or
identify human
remains (Schwartz-Marin & Cruz-Santiago, 2016.
Forensic civism challenges the state and (state-sanctioned) science’s
monopoly on expertise when it comes to our comprehension
of the notions of
evidence, truth, and justice. It builds an alternative kind of knowledge
production about disappearance and human
remains and is founded on love, care,
and vulnerability (Schwartz-Marin & Cruz-Santiago, 2016, p. 62). When
community members
develop skills, techniques, and strategies that form modes of
forensic understanding, such disruptive knowledge production can constitute
challenge to a state-centric approach to truth recovery that foregrounds
difficult-to-realise rights in response to atrocity crime
(Schwartz-Marin &
Cruz-Santiago, 2016, pp. 70–71). In this way, communities are both
recognising and refusing their de-humanisation,
or, as Musila (2025) describes,
“[their] disproportionate exposure to harm, their illegibility to
hegemonic alphabets of the
human. The living dead. Surplus people” (p.
Engaging with those considered “surplus people” deepens critique
around a universalising rights-based framework for understanding
the role of
socio-legal forensics. This article heeds Nicky Rousseau’s call to
“disentangle the journey from missing
to final re-burial” (Rousseau,
2015, p. 193). It offers a theoretical framing that builds on the established
importance of
both social context (HFA) and local knowledge (as seen through
critical responses, such as forensic aesthetics and civism). Considering
Canham’s theory-method of
ukwakumkanya
, read through a
transcorporeal lens, I suggest foregrounding both socio-local perspectives and
local formulations of time and place/space
in forensic investigation. This novel
form of relation surfaces a powerful ecological urgency alongside a
reconsideration of forensic
output’s relationship to place, space, and
Seeking and Blocking
To seek out new relational forms requires a different manner of attending.
Ukwakumkanya
is an isiMpondo word of the amaMpondo people, located in
South Africa’s Eastern Cape province. It describes the movement of
one’s hand to shield the eyes, and forms a cornerstone of Mpondo theory. A
seemingly small gesture performed automatically
or by rote,
ukwakumkanya
is a paradox. Hugo ka Canham (2023) outlines that the movement’s
intentional seeking and blocking motion “creat[es] a
shadow in order to
illuminate” (p. 6).
Ukwakumkanya
is a way of looking differently,
acknowledging the very consciousness and intentionality in the paradoxical
looking/shielding motion
that offers alternative understandings of the world.
Ukwakumkanya
entails a disruption of the “fantasy of
hierarchy” between spiritual, animal, natural, and human worlds (Musila,
p. 11). By symbolically lifting a hand to paradoxically both seek and
block from view, the universality of rights-focused approaches
to forensic
investigations is unsettled and becomes momentarily peripheral. In this moment,
local formulations closer to specific
sensorial registers of time, place, space,
and affinity take on shape and detail. As many responses to ka Canham’s
work evince,
this local register does not prevent applicability; in fact, this
ukwakumkanya
is a reminder of the multitudinous connections
between life, death, and space/place (Fine, 2024; Macharia, 2024; Walcott,
Indeed, this is a key aspect of how the gaze of
ukwakumkanya
linked with transcorporealism’s focus on openness and the multidirectional
flow of information.
Transcorporealism is a perspective that views all humans as embedded in the
material world that passes through them, changes them,
and is itself changed by
them. Stacy Alaimo labels this the “strange agencies” that connect
“substance, flesh and
place” (2018, p. 2). This approach counters
Western-focused human exceptionalism, which presumes the human is subtracted
the world and the environment they survey. Instead, the human and the
environment change each other; this can be acknowledged and
investigated if
researchers diversify their gaze. The reality of socio-ecological
interdependence is the acknowledgement of the porosity
and permeability of
bodily boundaries, even in death (Scott, 2015, p. 264). Transcorporealism
renders physical bodies’ relevance
to place imperative, rather than
elective, dynamic, rather than passive. Transcorporealism’s focus on how
knowledge and experience
are exchanged in multidirectional flows, between bodies
and physical space, suggests that experiential knowledge gains its power
this kind of intersubjectivity (not in spite of it) (Alaimo, 2018, p. 5). The
body, after all, is not a single, closed entity
but a series of open-ended
systems, a “creative and generative space between the social, the
biological and the natural world”
(ka Canham, 2023, p. 75). The importance
of recognising this lies in interrogating the science/experience boundary:
evidence is not
the truth, nor is it an answer. It is a question, asking to be
told its own validity by those who hear it (Keenan, 2018, p. 113).
The transcorporeal gaze of
ukwakumkanya
considers the manner in which
one attends to the ecology of both human and non-human landscapes in defiance of
“death/life
binaries” (ka Canham, 2023, p. 4). These death/life
binaries do not form part of the experience of the amaMpondo, the focus
work of ka Canham, nor that of communities in South Africa. Ka Canham highlights
the continuity between living and dead in
his writing on Mpondoland. This rural
location in South Africa’s Eastern Cape province has been historically
neglected and
overlooked (except for key moments in history when mining
companies or other forms of capitalist development have shown interest
natural resources). Ka Canham expresses intense sadness and rage as his work
documents the waves of death that move through
his community. However, he
highlights that, rather than seeing the dead as lost, one can be attuned to
their graves, connected to
the earth that holds them. We can thus be in a
constant form of relation to them (ka Canham, 2023, p. 151).
In this way, for those who are bereaved to live well, a bond between
themselves and the deceased must be maintained, rather than severed
(Yawa, 2010,
p. 25). Death does not indicate a dissolution of the link between the living and
the deceased. Rather, it indicates
movement towards a different form of relation
between the deceased and those still alive, in the form of communication with
in the spiritual plane. To this end, ceremonies and rituals are
conducted to accompany the deceased’s spirit on their journey
towards the
ancestral realm, creating a pathway that can guide the spirit back towards the
living for consultations and engagement
(Yawa, 2010, p. 24). A South African
sangoma explained further:
Culturally, there is an intimate link between land and place: it is important
for future generations to know where they came from
... . The point of
traditional rituals and processes are to talk with ancestors ... these are the
goals and processes should be framed
around this understanding ... . Death is
not an end, it is a transition. (Interviewee D)
uMbuso Nkosi’s (2018) work on land and identity in South Africa does
not distinguish between the respect offered to the living
and the dead, who both
occupy physical and psychic space. For Nkosi, land not only provides sustenance
but people are “at one
with it” (2018, pp. 178–179), as
babies’ umbilical cords are buried in the earth to root and locate their
identities.
Alongside the cord, writes Nkosi, a tree is planted and, at death, a
branch of this tree is used to fetch the spirit home (Nkosi,
178–179). Thus, a sense of self is a location-specific exercise and the
erasure of self through colonial land conquest
and concomitant violence is an
erasure of person through the razing of place/space. It is no surprise, then,
that Nkosi translates
the isiXhosa word for colonial encounters,
as meaning “the land is dead” (Nkosi, 2018, p. 173). In ka
Canham’s cosmology, the ancestors who are already dead
(and have physical
markers in the soil through their grave sites) can guide the decisions and paths
of the living (ka Canham, 2023,
p. 10). ka Canham emphasises that these
relationships are central to identity and include relationships between place,
space, time,
and bodies. These relationships are neither fixed nor easily
knowable, requiring us to follow voices and memories “scripted
bodies” and—crucially—onto the natural environment (ka Canham,
2023, p. 11).
From this perspective, graves become active sites of potentiality; they are
zones where the living can gain access to the dead through
consultation. In this way, grave sites can be seen as places that hold together
multiple social worlds, giving meaning
to the relational forms amongst them: a
form of boundary object (Star & Griesemer, 1989, p. 393). This becomes clear
when considering
the “boundary” of a boundary object is
conceptualised not as a border, but a zone of shared space where “that
of here and there are confounded” (Star, 2010, p. 603).
Forms of relation between the living and the dead, and the physical space
that holds them both, are critical to understanding responses
to forensic
information in South Africa. The following discussion draws medico-legal
documentation into this form of relation, using
the gaze of
ukwakumkanya
to better understand and interpret the decisions of the Marikana widows
regarding medico-legal evidence at the Marikana Commission.
Death on 16 August 2012: Families’ Trauma
Violence is both world-making and world-shattering (Jaussen, 2023, p. 29). On
16 August 2012, the South African Police Service (SAPS)
fired live ammunition
into a group of striking mineworkers at Lonmin’s Marikana mine in South
Africa’s North West province.
Thirty-four men were killed that day, at two
different scenes. Scene one was inadvertently filmed live by news media covering
protest. As some miners attempted to escape from scene one, they were
pursued by police and a further shoot-out ensued at scene two,
a rocky outcrop
strike occurred before this watershed
moment of violence, and in the ensuing
months and years (Marinovich, 2016, pp. 157–158). In this section, the
article foregrounds
aspects of medico-legal evidence from the Marikana
Commission, instigated by then-President Jacob Zuma to investigate events at the
Marikana mine during the days preceding, and the day of, the massacre (South
African Government, 2012). Despite concerns around the
manner in which these
autopsies were conducted (Naidoo, 2015), they remain compelling documents that
explain what happened to the
34 miners shot that day and provide critical
information for those left behind. However, interviews showed a consensus among
experts involved in the Marikana Commission that these medical reports did
not play as significant a role in proceedings as might
have been expected. As
one interviewee commented: “I wish Farlam had paid more attention to
forensic reports: the injuries
show how angry the police were, to inflict such
harm” (Interviewee C). Some interviewees suggested this was because the
in question was not a legal trial, where something had to be proved or
disproved (Interviewee A). Another suggested that the surfeit
of video and
photographic evidence meant the autopsies were less significant (Interviewee B).
Regardless of the reasons, these medico-legal
reports did not take centre stage
at the legal inquiry.
Alongside the video and photographic evidence available, the autopsy reports
show the scale of injury on record. The SAPS opened fire
on the striking workers
using R5 assault rifles, resulting in brutal and traumatic injuries that were
extremely difficult to understand
and process (Forrest, 2015, p. 12).
Interviewees who worked with the families of the killed mineworkers explained
how these injuries,
combined with South Africa’s migrant labour system,
compounded the devastation for many families. South Africa’s mineworkers
are often recruited from poorer, rural areas of South Africa and experience poor
living and labour conditions at a great distance
from their families, often
being the sole breadwinner for their immediate and extended community. Multiple
visits home within a year
were uncommon among Marikana mineworkers. Interviewees
explained that often only one family member was able to travel the distance
the morgues in the North West province, where the massacre happened, to identify
a body. The bodies were in such a mutilated state
that further viewing by other
family members was not possible. One interviewee who worked with the families at
Marikana explained:
The way people died at Marikana made no sense: the extensive damage caused by
the assault weapons wreaked significant damage to people’s
faces, people
who were shot in the face. In some cases, the head couldn’t be shown, only
the body, and we had to explain that
they were killed by a weapon that leaves
the same kind of damage as being run over by a truck. This was hard to
understand. (Interviewee
In the chaos that surrounded the immediate aftermath of the massacre, it took
days for bodies to be named and identified. As described
above, by the time some
families had been informed, the body was unviewable. Therefore, in some cases,
the bodies of the slain mineworkers
were returned to their homesteads in coffins
unseen, having been apart from their families for upwards of 9 months.
Interviewee E
described this as being “straight from Rustenburg to the
grave”, explaining how many families and children could not
closure as to the catastrophe that had befallen them. The interviewee went on to
describe what they witnessed:
[Redacted]’s mother just couldn’t hold herself. We had to stop.
She was insisting to know but we had to stop. [No matter
what we said] she knew
her son and the way he was killed did not make sense to her. This is very
traumatic, especially if you didn’t
see the body as it went straight to be
buried, and they had been away from home for work for many months. (Interviewee
While already a multifaceted physical and emotional trauma, from a spiritual
perspective, the Marikana massacre left gaping holes
in expected death rituals
and ceremonies. To conduct death rites appropriately and guide spirits towards
their ancestral home, it
is important to know the exact place of death
(Interviewee D). For the miners who died at scene two, rigorous research was
to identify places and locations of death, and this information was not
immediately available. In addition, the extremely violent
nature of the deaths
at Marikana necessitated specialist intervention. An interviewee who was also a
trained sangoma explained:
there are specific processes to follow if a violent death occurs: in this
case, often the body cannot just travel to the homestead,
in case they bring a
contaminating energy — this is particularly important when graves are
present in the yard of the homestead.
(Interviewee D)
Some families also had the paradoxical experience of knowing and witnessing
(through video evidence)
of their family members, without any judgment from the commission, as complex
legal processes played out. An interviewee
who worked with the families
In one video you can hear a policeman saying “I shot that
motherfucker”—and families had to listen to this—and
though there was a clear admission there, and other examples, still no police
[accountability]. Families simply cannot understand
this. (Interviewee E)
Those working with the families were able to take each family member through
their relative’s autopsy pack, explaining the injuries
and medical
evidence in detail, including which wounds would have been potentially
survivable if medical help was forthcoming. It
was important for family members
to know the ways in which their relatives died, as this information would be
broadcast and canvassed
at the Marikana Commission. However, as the commission
continued to its three-year end point, those working with the families of
slain mineworkers heard a specific request from them. Despite the trauma those
reports contained—despite the grim detailing
of mutilation and violence,
laid out in detail—families wanted to keep the reports and return them to
their homes. The following
section considers this decision through the
speculative gaze of
ukwakumkanya
, surfacing conceptions of place, space,
and time. This demonstrates a stretching of forensic evidence’s
applicability, and
reorientate it towards a form of relation between the living
and the dead, a both dynamic and unpredictable act.
“Umuntu kafi apele [When a Person Dies, That is Not the End of
Him]” (Mokoena, 2011, p. 253)
HFA is framed through international law and correctly highlights the
importance of the right to know what happened to victims of atrocity—a
right to truth—while foregrounding the kinship ties and cultural markers
of the dead. This approach can stumble, as the movement
of rights from global to
local norms does not always reflect conditions on the ground and can obscure the
complex relationship between
forensic evidence and local communities. However,
in examining medico-legal evidence through the framing of transcorporeality and
applying a new manner of attending that draws forward the interconnected nature
of bodies, time, and place/space—particularly
in death—a different
form of relation emerges.
Considering the medico-legal evidence from the Marikana Commission,
ukwakumkanya
can be used to intentionally shift the gaze towards
documents that can become active participants in communities’
understanding
of their loss and rage. Through
ukwakumkanya
, connections
can be made between bodies, graves, and forensic documentation. The following
section discusses how the significance
of medico-legal evidence expands to
include forming an important link in a chain running forwards and backwards in
time. This evidence
is grounded in physical grave sites that are better defined
as active boundary objects offering cyclical and chronologically limitless
engagement, rather than resting places. By theoretically lifting one’s
hand in the paradoxical seeking/blocking motion ka Canham
highlights, I suggest
new perspectives are opened on the influence of forensic evidence in how time
and space are perceived in truth
recovery after atrocity. The gesture
foregrounds a spiritual perspective that links medico-legal evidence of death to
future generations
and frames forensic evidence, linked to physical grave sites,
as full of potentiality, not closure.
As previously discussed, legal practitioners at the Marikana Commission have
suggested that the autopsies were under-utilised in favour
of photographic and
video evidence. Despite the horror they contained, family members wanted to keep
their autopsy packs, even after
the evidence had been examined and the
commission had ended. In the words of one lawyer , “They wanted a pack to
kids [when they got older], to be able to say this is what happened
to your father—these are the circumstances of his death”
(Interviewee E). This act of holding and keeping with a view to re-opening,
showing, and using at a later date, demonstrates how
time and space can stretch
and expand when considering forensic material.
Dead and missing bodies are these kinds of time/space disrupters. Thomas
Keenan (2018) writes, “nothing guarantees that the
past is past, nothing
secures it in the present, nothing prevents it from coming back, and going
back” (p. 122). MPTT Head,
Madeleine Fullard, presents an equally
chronologically-conflicted description of the specific tempo-spatialities in her
graves and exhumations. Fullard juxtaposes a perceptually
“motionless” past that must work within the impermanence of
present, as nature, bureaucracy, and memory shift and elide her grasp of vital,
physical clues to possible grave sites (2018,
p. 177). Time, when considering
graves and dead bodies, appears continually out of step. Fullard similarly
contrasts the pace of
time above and below ground. She describes slow,
underground, microbial evolutions that can enable the survival of a skeleton for
decades, while the surface of grave—supposedly a similarly immobile home
of the interred—shifts at a quicker pace that
outstrips the subterranean
decomposition: “A cemetery presents itself as a place of ultimate
immobility. What is a graveyard
but the end of time? Yet it evolves, here
erupting, there decaying, as if it were a living organism” (Fullard, 2018,
Fullard’s metaphorical “living organisms” reflect the
latent potentiality of these medico-legal documents. Their
influence will change
and shift, depending on who views them, who explains them, where, and when; the
content will change, depending
on who looks and who talks about what evidence
contained therein. On this understanding, the medico-legal evidence so
purposively
held by families, and deemed secondary at a quasi-legal inquiry, is
suspended in space, with relevance to historic death, but also
generations. A sangoma confirmed:
In terms of forensic evidence from Marikana, there is comprehensive
information on what happened to somebody: this makes it easier
to know things
that could inform future rituals, and give information regarding any ritual that
might need to be re-performed or
corrected further down the line. If these
violent deaths appear in the next generation, they can understand and act. These
can also be important for naming: if you name a child a family name,
you must be sure to know everything about previous holders of
this name: if the
previous holder died violently, there are rituals you can perform to protect the
child, so these deeds do not follow
the child. (Interviewee D)
These records produced for the Marikana Commission are continuously
transforming, subject to change from the environment they now
inhabit. By
returning forensic medical information to the homestead of the deceased, it
becomes part of the deathly environment it
purports to describe. Interaction
with these medico-legal records does not end after truth recovery procedures.
The potentially limitless
re-engagement with these records and the ancestral
bodies they describe resists the dominant narrative of closure, so often linked
to truth recovery after atrocity, and replaces it with a temporal prescience.
Andile Yawa lost his son, Cebisile, at the Marikana
massacre. In the documentary
Marikana: South Africa’s Dark Heart
(Saba et al., 2022)
he recounts how he gave Cebisile his own place in the mines after he was
diagnosed with silicosis. In tears, he blames himself for
his son’s death,
believing Cebisile would still be here with him if he hadn’t sent him to
the mines. Speaking in the
present and future tense, he says, “I hope he
too will not hold it against me, even as he rests in the garden” (Saba
al., 2022).
Described in autopsy reports that now form part of an intergenerational
inheritance, as well inhabiting the grave sites and the locations
where their
bodies fell at Marikana, the area’s deathscapes have created ancestral
grounds for generations to come. These locations
provide a physical connection
to the spiritual realm.
perspective of
ukwakumkanya
—overlooking the now, gazing into the
future and the past—the potentiality of these deathscapes as touchstones
for resistance
to the brutalising forces of poverty and capitalism are palpable.
Mr Yawa’s concern whether his son holds him responsible for
his death is
, directly relational to the physical grave site and the ancestral
access this site could offer.
Marikana’s deathscapes are not simply demonstrative of a kinship tie
recognised or a dead body re-humanised through a highlighting
of social or
cultural markers or rights. In his review of ka Canham’s work, Rinaldo
Walcott (2024) captures the powerful and
terrifying notion that black life is
always entangled with death. But as both Walcott and Casey Golomski highlight,
ka Canham’s
formulation of death is one that presages dynamism, seeing
dying and decay as “vitalising forces” (Golomski, 2024, p.
Through emphasising cyclicality and refusing linear understandings of
bodies’ movement through space, it opens up conceptions
operating both “then and now” (Fine, 2024, p. 278). These
deathscapes are indicative of how the transcorporeal
ukwakumkanya
collapses conventional boundaries of place, time, and space, as they are seen as
zones of latent potentiality. The graves, alongside
the autopsy reports that
detail what happened to the physical bodies within, demonstrate how
meaning-making has multidirectional
flows between dead bodies, the land that
contains them, and the forensic documentation. Safeguarded by survivors, this
can be operationalised
for future generations through ritual consultation with
those who now inhabit the ancestral realm.
A new manner of attending to forensic medico-legal evidence from the Marikana
massacre draws attention to the connected nature of
things, people, and places,
surfacing ecological linkages that local knowledge has long understood. Through
the theoretical gesture
ukwakumkanya
, conceptions of time, place,
future, past, and present show an interconnected web of multiple generations,
the latest of whom are
not lost, despite their catastrophic end. Rather, their
form of relation to their community has now shifted.
Alongside an important part of identifying kinship ties and social markers,
and demonstrating aspects of ideal rights fulfilment,
forensic evidence is shown
to be an important link in a chain running forwards and backwards in time. This
chain is grounded in deathscapes
created from both documentation and the burial
grounds’ soil, unsettling asymmetries between expertise and experiential
The gesture of
ukwakumkanya
is a reminder of the connections
between life, death, and space/place, linked with transcorporealism’s
focus on openness and
the multidirectional flow of information.
Ukwakumkanya
can be used to intentionally shift the gaze towards
documents that can become active participants in communities’
understanding
of their loss and rage - through the connections between bodies,
graves, and forensic documentation.
Acknowledgments
Deepest thanks are due to all my interviewees, for their candid and
comprehensive responses despite juggling large workloads. Specific
due to the anonymous reviewers, cultural and intellectual interlocutors who
shared insights and advice. As with all work
on Marikana (and beyond), these
stories belong to the land and the people, borrowed here with care.
Research for this article was funded by the Research Council of Norway as
part of the Bodies of Evidence Grant # 300205.
Correspondence:
Dr Robyn Gill-Leslie, post-doctoral fellow, Department
of Criminology and Sociology of Law (IKRS), University of Oslo, Norway,
robyneg@uio.no
S. (2018). Trans-corporeality. In R. Braidotti & M Hlavajova (Eds.),
posthuman glossary
(pp. 435–438). Bloomsbury Publishing.
Anstett, É. (2022). Silent stock.
Social Anthropology/Anthropologie
(1), 96–105.
https://doi.org/10.3167/saas.2022.300307
Aragüete-Toribio, Z. (2022). Introduction.
Anthropology/Anthropologie Sociale
https://doi.org/10.3167/saas.2022.300302
Aronson, J. (2012). The strengths and limitations of South Africa’s
International Journal of
Transitional Justice
(2), 262–281.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijtj/ijr013
Bevernage, B. (2010). Writing the past out of the present: history and the
politics of time in transitional justice.
History Workshop Journal
(1), 111–131.
https://doi.org/10.1093/hwj/dbq008
CFR.org Editors. (2025, February 21).
Mexico’s long war: Drugs,
crime, and the cartels
. Council on Foreign Relations.
https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/mexicos-long-war-drugs-crime-and-cartels
Cordner, S. (2018). Humanitarian forensic science.
Australian Journal of
Forensic Sciences
(6), 639–650.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00450618.2018.1461930
Cordner, S., & Tidball-Binz, M. (2017). Humanitarian forensic action -
its origins and future.
Forensic Science International
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2017.08.011
Cruz-Santiago, A. (2020). Lists, maps, and bones: The untold journeys of
citizen-led forensics in Mexico.
Victims & Offenders
https://doi.org/10.1080/15564886.2020.1718046
Dietz, C., Travis, M., & Thomson, M. (Eds.). (2022).
A jurisprudence
of the body.
Palgrave Macmillan.
Fine, M. (2024). Book review: Hugo Ka Canham, Riotous deathscapes.
African Journal of Psychology
(2), 277–282.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00812463241241
Forrest, K. (2015).
Marikana Commission: Unearthing the truth, or burying
Wits University, Johannesburg: Society, Work and Development
Fullard, M. (2018). Some trace remains (an extract).
(1), 163–180.
https://doi.org/10.17159/2309-9585/2018/v44a10
Golomski, C. (2024). Book review: Hugo ka Canham. Riotous deathscapes.
American Historical Review
(1), 357–358.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/rhad565
Hofmeister, U., & Navarro, S. (2017). A psychosocial approach in
humanitarian forensic action: The Latin American perspective.
Science International
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2017.08.027
Jamar, A., & Major, L. (2022). Managing mass graves in Rwanda and
Social Anthropology/Anthropologie Sociale
https://doi.org/10.3167/saas.2022.300305
Jaussen, P. (2023). Forensic poetics.
Jones, I. (2020). Objects of crime: Bodies, embodiment and forensic
Social & Legal Studies
(5), 679–698. htt
ps://doi.org/10.1177/09646639198979
ka Canham, H. (2023).
Riotous deathscapes
Wits University
Keenan, T. (2018). Getting the dead to tell me what happened: Justice,
prosopopoeia, and forensic afterlives.
https://doi.org/10.17159/2309-9585/2018/v44a7
Kesselring, R. (2017).
Bodies of truth: Law, memory, and emancipation in
post-apartheid South Africa.
Stanford University Press.
Macharia, K. (2024). Dear Hugo: In five parts.
. Advance online
publication.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17533171.2024.2402583
Marinovich, G. (2016).
Murder at Small Koppie: The real story of the
Marikana massacre.
Penguin Random House.
McEvoy, K. (2007). Beyond legalism: Towards a thicker understanding of
transitional justice.
Journal of Law and Society
Mokoena, H. (2011).
Magema Fuze: The making of a Kholwa intellectual
University of KwaZulu-Natal Press.
Moon, C. (2014). Human rights, human remains: Forensic humanitarianism and
the human rights of the dead.
International Social Science Journal
(215–216), 49–63.
https://doi.org/10.1111/issj.12071
Moon, C. (2018). Politics, deathwork, and the rights of the dead.
https://humanityjournal.org/blog/claire-moon
Musila, G. A. (2025). The promise of belatedness for Africa-based
scholarship.
African Studies
(2–3), 152–166.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00020184.2024.2443640
Naidoo, S. (2015).
Marikana: Opportunity for review of National FPS
Disaster Management Practice
. National Department of Health.
Nkosi, U. (2018).
Doing research otherwise: Critical essays on ‘the
land question’, farmworkers and resistance in South Africa.
dissertation, University of the Witwatersrand]. ETD Collection.
https://hdl.handle.net/10539/27239
Ntsebeza, D. (2024).
Opinion for National Prosecuting Authority concerning
the TRC component and TRC prosecutions
. Office of the State Attorney.
Parra, R. C., Anstett, E. L., Perich, P., & Buikstra, J. E. (2020).
Unidentified deceased persons: Social life, social death and
humanitarian
action. In R. C. Parra, S. C. Zapico, & D. H. Ubelaker (Eds.),
science and humanitarian action: Interacting with the dead and the living
(pp. 79–99)
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Rancière, J. (2004).
The politics of aesthetics: The distribution
of the sensible.
Robledo Silvestre, C., & Ramírez González, P. A. (2022).
Situating the investigation on clandestine graves in Mexico.
Anthropology/Anthropologie Sociale
(3), 79–95.
https://doi.org/10.3167/saas.2022.300306
Rousseau, N. (2009). The farm, the river and the picnic spot: Topographies of
African Studies
(3), 351–369.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00020180903381263
Rousseau, N. (2015). Identification, politics, disciplines: Missing persons
and colonial skeletons in South Africa. In E. L. Anstett
& J.-M. Dreyfus
Human remains and identification: Mass violence, genocide, and the
‘forensic turn’
(pp. 175–202)
University Press.
https://doi.org/10.7228/manchester/9780719097560.003.0008
Rousseau, N. (2016). Eastern Cape bloodlines I: Assembling the human.
(2), 203–218.
Rousseau, N., Moosage, R., & Rassool, C. (2018). Missing and missed:
Rehumanisation, the nation and missing-ness.
https://doi.org/10.17159/2309-9585/2018/v44a2
Saba, A., Solker, R., & Robinson, M. (Directors). (2022).
South Africa’s dark heart
Mail and Guardian.
Schwartz-Marin, E., & Cruz-Santiago, A. (2016). Forensic civism:
Articulating science, DNA and kinship in contemporary Mexico
and Colombia.
Human Remains and Violence: An Interdisciplinary Journal
https://doi.org/10.7227/HRV.2.1.5
Scott, D. N. (2015). “We are the monitors now”: Experiential
knowledge, transcorporeality and environmental justice.
Social & Legal
(3), 261–287.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0964663915601166
South African Government. (2012).
Commission of enquiry into tragic
incident at or near area commonly known as Marikana Mine in Rustenburg, North
West Province
on or about 11-16 August 2012
https://www.justice.gov.za/legislation/notices/2012/20120928-gg35730-nor59-marikana.pdf
Star, S. L. (2010). This is not a boundary object: Reflections on the origin
of a concept.
Science, Technology, & Human Values
https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243910377624
Star, S., & Griesemer, J. (1989). Institutional ecology,
“translations” and boundary objects: amateurs and professionals
Berkeley's Museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907-39.
Social Studies of
(3), 387–420.
https://doi.org/10.1177/030631289019003001
Thomas, K. (2018). Exhuming apartheid: Photography, disappearance and return.
Cahiers d’Études africaines
, 230, 429–454.
https://doi.org/10.4000/etudesafricaines.22209
Tilley, L. (2017). Resisting piratic method by doing research otherwise.
(1), 27–42.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038516656992
Walcott, R. (2024). Hugo Ka Canham’s riotous deathscapes and the future
of black studies.
. Advance online publication.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17533171.2024.2412405
Yawa, S. N. (2010).
A Psycho–analysis of bereavement in Xhosa, Zulu
And Tswana Cultures.
[Masters dissertation, University of South Africa].
http://hdl.handle.net/10500/4770
In this article title, the
quotation, “What Do We Do With all This Dying?” is from ka Canham
(2023, p. 141).
Forensic evidence in truth
recovery processes covers a range of potential forensic sites, including: crime
scene forensics, which
can include ballistics, blood spatter analysis, spatial
issues, including how bodies fell or are found, and in what position and
what physical matter nearby; pathology or autopsies, which encompass the
analysis and presentation of dead bodies in the form
of autopsy or other
pathology reports, including x-rays and other medical diagnostic reports; and
testimony of experts, witnesses,
survivors, or any other relevant parties. This
article examines medico-legal evidence inside a truth recovery mechanism,
on autopsy reports.
This is in line with the data
protection requirements from the author’s funder, the Norwegian Research
Council: anonymity is
particularly important in cases when designations and
organisational affiliations are specific enough to reveal participants’
identities, despite anonymous participation.
Aronson (2012) writes that this
was an acknowledged undercount.
While outside the remit of this
article, it is worth noting that searching for missing and disappeared bodies is
a gendered task,
primarily undertaken by women. For more information, see
Cruz-Santiago (2020).
As mentioned, scene one of the
massacres was inadvertently live-streamed; scene two was not filmed but police
camera and other footage
provided videographic evidence throughout the
Commission of Inquiry.
The specific location of this
quote is at timestamp 00:05:28–00:05:35 in the documentary.
A robust discussion of the link
between ka Canham’s work and the significance of the identities of the
Marikana massacre victims
is beyond the scope of this article, despite their
spatial specificity. As a generative mark for future engagement, I note here
men from Mpondoland accounted for 26 of the 34 deaths at the Marikana
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (724 KB)
PDF format (394 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter