URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ricciardo, Aidan; Fimognari, Nicholas --- "Trans-Inclusive Pedagogy in University Reproductive Health Education: Challenging Cisnormativity in Health Law and Biological Science" [2025] WALawTRw 3; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 19
TRANS-INCLUSIVE PEDAGOGY IN
UNIVERSITY REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH EDUCATION: CHALLENGING CISNORMATIVITY IN HEALTH
LAW AND BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE
AIDAN RICCIARDO & NICHOLAS FIMOGNARI
This article examines the pressing need for trans-inclusive reproductive
health education in science faculties and in law schools
(especially in the
context of health and medical law). It traces how traditional curricula in
health law and human biology reinforce
binary and cisnormative understandings of
sex and gender, and argues that educators have duties – ethical,
pedagogical, and
professional – to challenge these norms. Drawing on
critical pedagogy, the article shows how inclusive teaching can enrich
scientific education. Through practical examples and reflections from health law
and human biology courses, it demonstrates
that trans-inclusive pedagogy not
only better reflects scientific and legal realities, but also prepares graduates
to engage respectfully
and competently with the diverse communities they will
serve in their future careers.
I INTRODUCTION
In universities, reproductive health has
historically been taught according to cisnormative understandings of human
bodies and reproduction.
cisnormativity revolves around the notion that there is a strict binary
division: male or female in terms of ‘biological
dimorphism, man or woman in terms of gender, and that a person’s gender
will align with their sex assigned at
The effect of this is that
the teaching of sexual and reproductive health has largely centred on
‘traditional’
that overlook the existence and experiences of trans, gender diverse, and
intersex people.
This is especially
true of the way that reproductive health has been taught by science faculties in
human biology and medical science
but it is also true of the
way it has been taught in law schools (for example, in health and medical law
These traditionally dominant narratives about binary sex and gender are being
increasingly challenged and
There is growing
recognition and understanding that sex, gender and bodies are not strictly
confined to a binary.
visibility of activism by trans and gender diverse people has played a central
role in broadening conceptions of diverse gender
experiences, including that a
person’s gender may not align with the sex they were assigned at
Non-binary, agender,
genderqueer, and other gender identities that exist beyond the traditional
binary are gaining visibility and
acknowledgement.
There has also
been some shift in understandings of intersex people and their innate variations
of sex characteristics,
declining acceptance of the medical model which views intersex variations as
abnormalities in need of medical intervention,
and a greater focus on
conceptualising variations of sex characteristics as part of the spectrum of
natural diversity of human
This article argues that there is now a critical need to dismantle
cisnormative traditions in our science faculties and law schools,
and instead
teach reproductive health in a way that is inclusive and respectful of a
diversity of sex and gender.
It does so by first setting out the traditional approaches to teaching
reproductive health in science and law, noting that cisnormativity
is prevalent
in both disciplines. It then considers how understandings of sex and gender have
changed over time. The article then
draws on critical pedagogy (a framework for
education grounded in social justice and the disruption of systemic
oppression)
to set out why there
is a need to teach reproductive health in a way that is inclusive of trans and
gender diverse people, arguing
that teachers owe duties to their students and
themselves to do so. It then moves on to consider some of the hurdles to
trans-inclusive
tertiary education. Finally, it contributes to the literature
relating to queering the curriculum by providing examples of what
trans-inclusive
reproductive health education can look like in both law and
Much of the discussion about trans-inclusive pedagogy in this article can be
extrapolated beyond the specific context of reproductive
health education. This
article focuses on the teaching of reproductive health in order to discuss an
area which arises in both law
and science, allowing for explicit and implicit
comparison and a broader understanding of the impact of cisnormativity in higher
II BACKGROUND
This part sets out the relevant background information to the matters
discussed in this article. It first canvasses the traditional
approaches to
teaching reproductive health in both science and in law, concluding that both
disciplines are heavily influenced by
cisnormativity. It then provides a brief
overview about how understandings of sex and gender have changed over time.
A Traditional Approaches to Teaching Reproductive Health
In tertiary science education, reproductive health is typically taught in
ways that perpetuate cisnormative assumptions. Traditionally,
approaches to
teaching this topic neither challenge nor critically engage with cisnormative
assumptions, even though there is capacity
We identify three key
drivers of this cisnormative approach (two of which are discussed in more detail
in the sub-parts below). First,
the fundamental teaching of sex hormones is
routinely tied to understandings of sex and gender. Second, concomitant with the
sex hormones play in development throughout a lifetime, these hormones
become all but synonymous with binary forms and anatomy (eg,
testosterone = man
= penis; oestrogen = woman = vagina). And third, where sexual behaviour and
sexuality is explored, teachings are
often centred around conception, pregnancy
and procreation – typically excluding people with diverse sexualities,
characteristics.
These practices
and understandings are entrenched in many scientific disciplines relevant to
reproductive health.
1 Fundamental teaching of sex hormones in reproductive health
The focus on sex hormones around sexual development, fertility and conception
has been pivotal to deepening understandings of the
reproductive system, and
this is indispensable to teach reproductive biology pragmatically. Throughout
secondary and tertiary education,
the sex hormones are classically discussed in
human biology for their integral and differential roles in development and
of the reproductive systems, anatomy, gender, and
Crucially, a region
on the Y chromosome drives testosterone dominance with a 46 XY karyotype
(endosex male), whereas the absence
of this region and ‘Y’
chromosome in those with a 46 XX karyotype (endosex female) drives oestrogen
dominance, with respective
reproductive changes and development directed by the
dominant sex hormones.
Consequently, oestrogen(s) and testosterone(s) have become synonymous with
‘femininity’ and ‘masculinity’,
respectively, and this
has ingrained them in discourse relating not only to sex, but also to
To some extent this is
balanced by the following key points on the crucial interplay between sex
1. Dehydroepiandrosterone is a fundamental precursor hormone in biosynthesis
of all sex hormones;
2. Oestrogens are converted from testosterones and other androgens by the
aromatase enzyme;
3. All individuals have variable concentrations of all sex hormones –
androgens, testosterones and
oestrogens.
In the teaching of human biology, reproduction-centric cisnormative
assumptions are typically made about people and their bodies on
the basis of
their sex characteristics and sex hormones – eg, bodies are described
as either ‘male/man’ or ‘female/woman’
on the basis of
their characteristics and
2 Pathologising forms beyond the binary
Binary perspectives are entrenched in medical sciences. Anatomy and
physiology (form and function) relating to bodies beyond the cisnormative
endosex binary are rarely covered in core scientific or medical education or
When education has
paid attention to reproductive variation in forms, this has been historically
underscored by a binary lens, and
subsequently a pathologising
For example, one of
the most widely used graphical representations of genital variation is the
Quigley scale,
whilst depicting a scale between ‘fully masculinised’ and
‘fully feminised’ genitalia –
is typically used only in the
context of categorising so-called genital ‘anomalies’ and
‘abnormalities’ that
sit between the binary
That is, it implies that
the binary male and female forms on either side of the scale are normal, and
that anything in between is
There is typically only fleeting representation of bodies and identities that
do not conform to binary norms in reproductive biology
and medical science
Where there has been
representation, this has typically been framed as relating to ‘disorders
of sexual development’
– a term used to refer to variations of sex characteristics (despite being
rejected by peak intersex advocacy groups for stigmatising
and pathologising
intersex people).
generally poor understanding of genital anatomy and variation amongst the
creating a need for
specialists in anatomy to further develop knowledge and education which presents
sex characteristics as a spectrum
of features amongst natural
B Traditional Approaches to Teaching Reproductive Health
In law schools, reproductive health is typically taught primarily in medical
law or health law units.
units are often seen as an intersection between medicine and
and thus, the teaching and
curricula in these units has been shaped by traditions in both medical science
In this way, the
traditional approach to teaching reproductive health in science – as
discussed above – has had a profound
impact on the way that reproductive
health has been taught in law schools. That is to say that much of the
discussion set out in
the preceding sub-part applies equally in the context of
legal studies.
Of course, though, legal traditions have also shaped the way that
reproductive health has been taught in law schools. As is the case
with science,
law as a discipline (and indeed, the law
has traditionally been
cisnormative and heteronormative in
This has shaped the
language used in case law and
the law school
curriculum,
and dominant
attitudes within the legal
profession.
For example, a 2022
study relating to LGBTQI+ diversity in legal education found that participating
LGBTQI+ law students thought
the law curriculum was not particularly inclusive
of LGBTQI+ people in general, and that sources (like textbooks) and law teachers
could make a greater effort to use gender-neutral
Indeed, legal education often reinforces the binary and cisnormativity by
framing reproductive health laws predominantly around the
experiences of
cisgender women. For example, discussions surrounding abortion rights and access
to contraception are typically centred
on cisgender women's bodies and
experiences. This framing excludes transgender men, non-binary and gender
diverse people, as well
as some intersex people who may also require
reproductive health care but face distinct legal and medical barriers. This
in legal education is influenced by the law itself, with statutes and
case law typically using gendered and binary language, such
as references to
‘women’ and
to acknowledge the diverse identities of people who can become pregnant or
require reproductive healthcare. This exclusion
perpetuates a legal framework
that marginalises transgender and gender diverse
In conclusion, in Western cultures, both law and medical science have been
profoundly impacted by cisnormativity. The result of two
historically
cisnormative disciplines colliding is that these biases and expectations have
become doubly entrenched in the teaching
C Understandings of Sex and Gender over Time
This sub-part provides a brief and selective overview of how sex and gender
have been understood over time. First, it provides a number
of examples to
demonstrate that trans and gender diverse identities are not new phenomena,
despite common misconceptions. It then
considers how medical and biological
sciences have played a role in entrenching cisnormative understandings of human
bodies (especially
in Western cultures). Following that, it looks at the other
side of that same coin, touching on some developments in science that
those cisnormative understandings. Finally, it briefly notes how in contemporary
times, there has been less pathologisation
and greater acceptance of trans and
gender diverse people.
1 Trans and gender diverse identities are not ‘new’
In Western cultures, trans and gender diverse identities are often thought of
as relatively new phenomena.
However, there are many historical (and in many cases, enduring) examples of
gender diversity in many cultures over the world. This
is especially apparent in
a number of Indigenous cultures where diverse understandings of sex and gender
predated colonisation. These
examples frame the binary understanding of human
bodies as an introduced system of ideas and concepts which does not fully
established sociocultural structures and histories.
One example is discussed in work by Oyèrónkẹ́
Oyěwùmí on Yoruba cultural knowledge and
Oyěwùmí positions generational reproduction at the core of
Yoruba society, upheld by social categories which were
not gendered,
gender-exclusive, or biologically determined, and which preceded
colonisation.
A common framework
in imperialist societies opposes these notions – instead, assuming
that sex determines gender, which in
turn determines the social categories that
coordinate generational
reproduction.
Yoruba culture
offers one example to challenge these imperialist assumptions, but it is not the
only example.
As further examples, non-binary identities are present in many Indigenous
cultures. Amongst some Polynesian peoples, such as in Hawaii,
‘māhū’ is used to refer to individuals who do not embody
the exclusive qualities ascribed to any one
of the binary genders as understood
within the communities, and may identify as a third
This third gender is
often described as encompassing a mixture of conventionally gendered features
and traits, or not embodying gendered
Non-binary identities are
also present in Oaxaca (Mexico), especially in Zapotec cultures, by people who
identify as ‘Muxe’
– individuals who do not conform to
traditional gender roles,
who have integral roles in society alongside ‘women’ and
Indigenous North American nations, gender is understood to be on a continuum,
and these societies embrace gender non-conforming
individuals who are referred
to as ‘Two-spirit’.
There are also social categories with long histories which extend beyond a
‘third’ gender.
The brief overview of gender diversity in cultural histories in this Part is
nowhere close to comprehensive, and further diversity
But what is apparent
from this brief overview is that gender diversity has been accepted in many
cultural traditions for a long time,
transcending Western understandings of
gender and sex that position gender diversity as a new
phenomenon.
What is also
apparent from this overview is the relationship between colonisation and Western
globalisation on the one hand, and
understandings of sex and gender in many
non-Western and Indigenous cultures on the other. When we consider that
institutional teaching
on reproductive health, sex and gender has largely
ignored the reality of diverse
these tertiary
institutions can be understood as perpetuating colonial values and
2 The role of medical and biological science in entrenching
cisnormativity
While developments in medical and biological science have undoubtedly
contributed to advancements in human health, the proliferation
of this knowledge
over the 19th and 20th centuries also perpetuated essentialist views that
oversimplify and restrict the complexity
The roots of
essentialist views can be traced to early medical perspectives that linked
gender directly to anatomical
and designated certain
traits in association.
perspectives reinforced a binary understanding of sex, associating specific
traits and roles with male and female bodies. Biology
has provided a foundation
for a binary outlook on sex and gender. Gendered associations with sex and sex
hormones extend to gametes:
sperm (‘men’) and eggs
base biological requirement for sexual reproduction in humans is the fusion of
gametes, science has been used to ground binary
and cisnormative understandings
of human bodies, and this is so despite sex – in terms of reproduction
– not being clearly
linked to the concept of
Early advances in genetics led to the identification of sex chromosomes and
associated them with dominant sex hormone profiles, reinforcing
the idea that
sex is a strictly binary, biologically-determined characteristic, with
associated binary forms.
Historical (and, in some cases, enduring) medical practices reflect both a
pattern of diagnosing pathology and chromosomal aberrations,
and a tendency to
model binary understandings of human bodies and identities. For example,
non-consensual sex assignment surgeries
performed on intersex infants and
children exemplify an emphasis on assigning a fixed binary gender based on
anatomical features.
example is provided by the inclusion of gender identity disorders in psychiatric
diagnostic classifications, which until
recently pathologised transgender and
gender diverse people.
examples have arguably arisen from essentialist cisnormative and
endosexnormative views,
self-perpetuate these views within a gender-binary
preventing meaningful
mainstream discourse about diverse gender identities within the scientific
community, and society at
3 Developments in science that challenge cisnormative
understandings
Although (as set out above) science has played a role in entrenching
cisnormative views of sex and gender, there have also been a
developments and discoveries in science that have challenged those cisnormative
understandings.
For example, research in biology has revealed examples of many organisms that
require more than two individuals to
are not constrained
or even correctly represented by binary
and that do not have a
fixed ‘biological’
Further examples and
concepts have been extensively discussed in a recent essay by Goymann, Brumm
& Kappeler,
although many of
these discoveries have been well established for decades. Thus, despite
traditional cisnormative expectations of
bodies, the binary is not
unanimous amongst all life forms.
Looking to our common living ancestors, gender and sexuality in many primate
species are not determined exclusively by ‘biological
non-reproductive interactions and sexual behaviours in primates are driven by
socialisation,
occur outside of
our heteronormative understandings of gender, sexuality and sexual
and do not show
significant association with
As put by Burton in
relation to non-human primates, ‘If the hormones determine the roles, one
would expect to find the same
sex occupying the same role in all
societies’.
A substantial
body of literature now supports the view that in humans, identity is determined
by a combination of genetic, hormonal
and environmental
and that it is also
profoundly influenced by social structures, and in accordance with how gender
and sex are modelled in our homes
Cisnormative views of sex are also challenged by the relationship between
gametes and sexual behaviours. As discussed by de Loof,
the number of gamete
sexual behaviours and identities
(which are considerably more
That is, gametic sex
and sex hormones do not unilaterally determine sexual behaviours (eg,
sexuality). While some genetic and heritable
attributions to non-binary
expression of sex are known, evidence suggests that epigenetic switching
(turning off and on of certain
genes) is significantly deterministic in sexual
differentiation.
This is not
purely dependent on genetic or hormonal factors known to regulate sexual
development and identity,
can be shaped by life experiences inconsequential to ‘biological
which are highly
variable throughout a person’s
let alone throughout
different brain regions.
suggests that binary extrapolations cannot reliably be drawn from sex hormones
and gametes, thus providing analogical support
for understanding concepts of sex
and gender as not inherently linked.
Key evidence for challenging classical and reductive associations between
gender, genitals, and identity is provided by ‘Guevedoces’
Dominican Republic. This population has a genetic mutation which impairs the
conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone
(DHT), a hormone previously
thought to be singularly deterministic in male genital differentiation in
All individuals with this
mutation have vulvas, are assigned female at birth (AFAB) and raised as
‘girls’, but undergo
significant genital changes during puberty in
the absence of DHT, with their genitals transitioning from vulvas to penises.
being raised with traditional AFAB conventions, many identify
differently in adulthood,
challenging rigid notions of gender identity. This example recapitulates that
gender is not fixed at birth but is a construct; shaped
by various biological,
social, societal and cultural
Genital and gender diversity are often viewed through a binary, essentialist
and procreative lens, and this skews perceptions of some
naturally occurring
variations that do not necessarily indicate pathology. For example, around 17.5%
of people are considered infertile
according to the World Health
Organisation,
yet this statistic
predominantly reflects the impaired fertility of cisgender and heterosexual
couples trying to reproduce, whilst
queer, gender and genital diverse
individuals are largely excluded, and classed as ‘socially
infertile’.
However, the
most recent preclinical advances demonstrate how modern technologies can produce
offspring from two of the same
supporting the potential
for same-sex and gender diverse people to access assistive reproductive
technologies in the future. Most
importantly, this shows that procreation is
possible outside of traditional binary conventions. These examples challenge the
essentialist and procreative framework. Directly challenging this
framework can lead to a broader understanding of what constitutes
variation of sex and gender, beyond the essentialist procreative lens,
emphasising that gender and sex characteristics do
not fit neatly into fixed,
predetermined structures.
4 Greater acceptance of transgender and gender diverse people:
contemporary challenges to medicalised models
Following on from the entrenching of cisnormative essentialism covered above,
in more contemporary times there has been growing (though
certainly not
unanimous) recognition within societies that gender diversity is a reality, and
that it is part of the natural diversity
This shift has also
occurred within medical and scientific communities specifically, with efforts to
de-pathologise trans and gender
diverse identities and provide affirming
healthcare.
Feminism(s), queer studies, and LGBTIQA+ activism have paved the way for
broader acceptance of transgender and gender diverse
identities,
with a number of
studies from the past decade indicating general acceptance of transgender
though with variation
between nations.
Indeed, there
is no doubt that despite increased acceptance, considerable stigma, persecution,
and transphobia continue to exist
and affect transgender and gender diverse
III WHY WE SHOULD TEACH REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
INCLUSIVELY
This Part argues that as teachers who cover reproductive health, we have a
duty to teach it in a way that is inclusive of trans and
gender diverse people.
We propose that this duty arises from a number of sources. First, we apply
critical pedagogy to this topic
and consider the duties arising from that
theoretical approach. Second, we consider the duties we owe to others –
namely, our
students and the communities they will serve in their future
professions. Third, we consider the duty we owe to ourselves as teachers
– a duty to teach authentically and accurately.
A Critical Pedagogy and the Imperative for Inclusive
This article adopts the theoretical paradigm of critical pedagogy to argue
that as teachers covering reproductive health, we have
a duty to do so
inclusively. Critical pedagogy is an educational approach rooted in critical
theory, particularly associated with
the work of Paulo
It focuses on
challenging oppressive power structures, fostering critical thinking, and
promoting social justice within educational
At its core,
critical pedagogy seeks to engage learners in a process of conscientisation,
which involves critically analysing societal
norms, inequalities, and power
dynamics to develop a deeper understanding of the
Critical pedagogy is deeply concerned with social justice and equity, aiming
to dismantle oppressive structures and inequalities,
advocating for inclusion,
fairness, and respect for diverse
identities.
Importantly,
critical pedagogy encourages teachers to strive towards these goals by teaching
with a social justice agenda.
Educators are encouraged to inspire learners to become agents of change in their
communities: the goal is to motivate individuals
to engage in transformative
action, challenging injustice and promoting
In summary, critical
pedagogy asserts that values like equity and justice should be inherent in
education, and that it is not improper
for educators to teach with an agenda of
Applying this theoretical approach to the present topic, critical pedagogy
gives licence to fostering a more trans-inclusive and respectful
environment in the teaching of reproductive health.
Critical pedagogy encourages questioning and deconstructing societal norms,
including traditional assumptions about sex and
In this way, in the
context of reproductive health, critical pedagogy encourages ways of learning
and teaching that acknowledge and
respect the diversity of sex and gender beyond
conventional binaries and expectations.
Following critical pedagogy, learners are encouraged to critically examine
the implications of power structures and advocate for inclusivity,
particular attention to injustices and how they can be
Accordingly,
students can be encouraged to recognise power dynamics that have historically
marginalised trans and gender diverse
people in reproductive health contexts,
and in traditional understandings of reproductive biology. Students can be
encouraged to
identify gaps in policy and practice and advocate for reforms that
recognise and protect the reproductive rights of transgender and
Overall, an approach based on critical pedagogy encourages students and
teachers to critically examine existing knowledge, challenge
biases, and
advocate for more equitable and inclusive
approaches.
This can be
applied readily to the context of reproductive health, and is consistent with
teaching reproductive health in a way that
is inclusive of trans and gender
diverse people. Indeed, as Miller states, ‘because gender, sexual, and
other forms of social
hierarchy are reproduced and regulated through discourse
and social institutions, those institutions can and must be changed for
Opponents of critical pedagogy might assert that educators should be neutral
in their teaching: that it is not a teacher’s role
to transmit values or
influence beliefs.
worth interrogating what is meant by, and the factors that underpin,
‘neutrality’. As a simple example, critics
may regard a
teacher’s use of trans-inclusive language (eg, ‘pregnant
people’ instead of ‘pregnant women’)
as a value-laden and
non-neutral choice. However, this critique would fail to recognise that using
non-inclusive language is every
bit as much of a choice – neither
option is inherently neutral. As put by Shaull, ‘there is no such thing as
educational
Perceptions
of neutrality are subjective and shaped by cisnormative societal
In reality, no one
choice is truly neutral, and if both options are non-neutral choices, there is
much to be said for making the
choice that promotes inclusion and
B Duty to Others
We contend that we should teach reproductive health in a trans-inclusive way
because we owe duties to others to do so – namely,
our students and
those who our students will interact with in their professional lives. Though
not disconnected from critical pedagogy,
this duty justifies explicit
discussion.
As set out by Ricciardo et al in a study of LGBTQI+ diversity in legal
education, there is a pressing need to teach our students about
diverse people
and their experiences, including in relation to transgender and gender diverse
The academic literature on legal education emphasises the need to teach law
students about diversity, including issues relating to
gender identity and
sexual orientation. That literature suggests that this prepares the wider
student cohort for the diversity of
their future clients and their legal
problems, and that it makes students better problem-solvers. Including these
issues also situates
the law curriculum within the wider, societal normative
concerns of civil and criminal
Indeed, as previously put by the now Sex Discrimination Commissioner, Anna
Cody, the ‘lived experiences of clients [affect]
how they interact with
the law. To be good lawyers we must be able to listen to and understand our
diverse clients.’
sentiments can be applied equally to graduates from health and science degrees,
as well as the clients they will encounter
In short, in order to equip our students to deal with the diversity of
clients and communities they will encounter in their careers,
we need to teach
them about that diversity (and how to navigate it inclusively and respectfully)
in their tertiary studies.
This can even be conceptualised as part of an educator's duty to ensure that
course content is relevant and up to date.
Relatedly, educators should also strive to make course content relevant to
their students and their
Of course, it is also
a reality that our students themselves may be just as diverse as the clients and
communities they will come
It is an undeniable
fact that trans and gender diverse students are in our
universities.
reasons quite apart from their future careers, we owe it to our students to
teach with that diversity in mind, making choices
that include (rather than
alienate) them. In the context of teaching about reproductive health, it is also
worth considering that
some of our students will have a personal stake in
learning information relating to trans and gender diverse people, and having
to content that is relevant to their own bodies and experiences is
important to them. Failing to teach that content, or failing to
teach it in an
inclusive way, only contributes to any existing invisibility and inaccessibility
of that information.
To recognise the diversity – including gender diversity – of
student cohorts is also to recognise the diverse experience
and expertise that
our students bring to their classes. It is to recognise that students themselves
– including trans and gender
diverse students – can contribute
to class discussions and course content on the basis of their experiences,
knowledge and
identities (eg, by speaking on the basis of lived experience or
identifying gaps in course content). In doing so, we are able to
diverse students not only as passive learners, but also as stakeholders who
co-construct the learning journeys that take
place in our classes. This is
consistent with the dialogical problem-posing process central to critical
pedagogy, whereby all classroom
participants – including students –
are involved in
‘teaching’.
C Duty to Ourselves as Teachers
As set out above, there is no ‘neutral’ option when it comes to
teaching reproductive health in a trans-inclusive way.
On a simplified view,
there are two options: either take steps to teach it inclusively, or
don’t. Each of these options is
a choice and neither is neutral. We argue
that when presented with these options, we owe a duty to ourselves as teachers
of reproductive
health to be guided by critical pedagogy and choose the option
that best promotes justice and
Choosing to teach reproductive health in a trans-inclusive way is not only
consistent with justice and equality – it is also
consistent with the
values held by many teachers who (like the authors of this article) strive to
create inclusive classroom environments
and support trans and gender diverse
rights. By making choices that align with our values, we are able to be more
authentic teachers.
Relevantly, there is a body of scholarship which supports
teaching with authenticity.
Whilst authenticity in teaching has been described as a ‘multifaceted
it includes
(amongst other things) genuineness and acting in a way that is consistent with
one’s values, beliefs, and
The relevant literature establishes that authentic teaching has benefits for
both teachers and for student
As put by Melissa J
It is difficult to do our best as teachers if we are not coming from a place
of integrity and transparency... [As] teachers, we have
“real” and genuine in our dealing with students. They deserve to
know us, and we deserve to experience passionate,
related, and authentic
Indeed, we are doing ourselves (and in turn, our students) a disservice if,
in pursuit of some false sense of neutrality, we ignore
our own values and
choose not to take steps to teach reproductive health inclusively.
IV HURDLES TO TEACHING REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
INCLUSIVELY
This article has thus far argued that teachers in law and science
take steps to teach reproductive health in ways that are inclusive
of trans and gender diverse people. But what challenges might
teachers encounter
in trying to take those steps? After setting out the hurdles that might be
encountered in any discipline, this
Part considers the particular hurdles that
might arise in teaching about reproductive health in law and science.
A Hurdles in All Disciplines
There are a number of hurdles that a university teacher in any discipline
might encounter when seeking to teach reproductive health
in a trans-inclusive
way. For example, there may be resistance to trans-inclusive pedagogy from a
number of sources. Institutional
resistance is a
possibility,
especially in
courses with interrelated knowledge where the content (and the way content is
taught) is scaffolded across individual
units. Resistance might also come from
individual students and colleagues, especially from those who hold rigid binary
views on sex
and gender.
resistance could manifest as anything from subtle discomfort to active
and may result in
retaliation in formal student satisfaction surveys.
Adapting course content to be more trans-inclusive can also pose other
challenges – for example, it might be difficult for
teachers to find
appropriate and resources that address reproductive health in an inclusive way.
Textbooks and materials might not
include trans-inclusive content, and might
even undermine the teacher’s trans-inclusive framing and
terminology.
Adapting course
content might also be particularly difficult considering the time, workload and
curriculum constraints already faced
There is also
unlikely to be any workload recognition or reward for making these changes.
Another hurdle for many teachers will be their own lack of confidence and
knowledge in delivering trans-inclusive reproductive health
Many educators may
have limited personal understanding or formal training in gender diversity and
inclusive teaching practices, leaving
them uncertain about how to effectively
teach in a trans-inclusive way. Without adequate training, teachers might
struggle with the
correct terminology or understanding of the specific health
needs of trans and gender diverse people. This knowledge gap can create
hesitation in addressing these topics and
perspectives.
Relatedly, a fear of making mistakes — such as using incorrect language
or unintentionally offending students — can deter
educators from fully
engaging with trans-inclusive
This fear may be
exacerbated by concerns about being publicly criticised or facing backlash from
students or colleagues,
can discourage teachers from taking proactive steps to practice trans-inclusive
A final challenge present in education generally is that the responsibility
to drive change in this space often falls on LGBTQ+ academics
placing an undue
burden on those directly affected by exclusionary
There is a pressing
need for cisgender and heterosexual educators to actively participate as allies
in fostering inclusive education.
Overcoming these challenges requires institutional support, access to
professional development opportunities, and fostering a learning
environment
where educators feel safe to expand their understanding and adjust their
teaching practices.
B Particular Hurdles in Law
In legal education specifically, a particular hurdle to teaching in a
trans-inclusive manner is that the law itself – especially
law – is often written in rigid cisnormative terms. For example,
reproductive rights legislation often explicitly refers
without acknowledging that trans men and non-binary people can also experience
pregnancy and associated reproductive
Properly teaching
students the law itself while highlighting its inherent limitations requires a
careful balance that can be challenging.
Beyond the law itself, legal education as a discipline often prioritises
doctrinal analysis, which can constrain discussions around
the social and human
rights dimensions of trans-inclusive reproductive health. Law teachers may feel
pressure to focus on black-letter
law and may feel that it is difficult to
justify the inclusion of broader socio-legal perspectives that critically
examine how the
law impacts transgender people. However, as noted by Gerber and
O’Hara, inclusive law teaching ‘involves resisting the
notion that
the law school curriculum is “neutral” and teaching students to
unpack the ideologies and assumptions behind
C Particular Hurdles in Science
Teaching reproductive health in a trans-inclusive manner within science
disciplines presents distinct challenges rooted in both the
structure of
scientific knowledge and the culture of scientific education. Related to the
point discussed in Part II(A), a key hurdle
is the deeply ingrained use of
gendered language when describing biological systems. This can be further
complicated by not clearly
explaining the distinction between different meanings
of terms in differing societal and scientific
Reproductive biology often relies on binary frameworks – categorising
bodies strictly as male or female – which can make
it difficult to discuss
complex terms, reproductive anatomy and processes without reinforcing
cisnormativity. Using terms like ‘those
who ovulate’ or
‘sperm-producing individuals’ are viable alternatives, but shifting
to more inclusive language
can be difficult when this is considered
highlighting the
little uptake in the discipline more broadly. Indeed, much of the foundational
scientific literature and existing
educational resources remain heavily
Additionally, scientific research relating to transgender, non-binary, and
queer health issues is still
The relative
scarcity of empirical studies addressing the unique reproductive health needs of
trans and gender diverse people creates
a gap in evidence-based content for
educators to draw upon. This lack of research not only limits what can feasibly
be taught but
also perpetuates the invisibility of trans and gender diverse
people in scientific discourse.
Institutional priorities and funding patterns further exacerbate these
challenges. Research funding and curriculum development in
reproductive health
often focus on heteronormative and cisnormative experiences. Without dedicated
funding and institutional support,
efforts to diversify teaching materials,
expand knowledge and fields of research, and develop specialised medical
treatment may remain
isolated and
underdeveloped.
institutional priorities tend to be concerned with increasing representation
without meaningful inclusionary
Collectively, these
issues compound and further deprive a consensus on issues relating to natural
variation and trans and gender
diverse (including non-binary) bodies in
scientific educational frameworks.
V TEACHING REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH INCLUSIVELY: OUR
EXPERIENCES
In this final Part, we provide examples setting out some ways in which
reproductive health might be taught more inclusively in both
law and science. We
draw substantially from our own practice, teaching experiences, and reflections.
Of course, these subjective
experiences and perspectives may not always align
with objective realities. However, the discussion in this Part is presented in
the context of the relevant literature, and research has established that
‘properly contextualised reflective practice can
produce knowledge of the
mechanisms at work in the contemporary
This Part can be understood as an example of what Freire calls
– the dynamic integration of reflection and action in the pursuit of
transformation.
By critically
engaging with our own teaching experiences and using them to inform efforts
toward more inclusive reproductive health
education, we aim not only to analyse
existing practices but to actively challenge and reshape them.
First, the first author – a law academic – sets out how
reproductive health can be taught in a more trans-inclusive way
in a health and
medical law unit. Second, the second author – a science academic
– sets this out with respect to human
biology education. We then come
together to provide some combined interdisciplinary reflections on inclusive
reproductive health
teaching across law and science.
Our teaching practice, experiences and reflections are shaped by our
positionalities as cisgender gay men – while we are part
of the LGBTIQA+
community generally, we are not part of the trans or gender diverse community
specifically. In this regard, we identify
as ‘internal allies’
– as put by Ricciardo and Elphick:
Although we typically think of ‘allies’ of LGBTQIA+ people as
those from outside the community who are supportive of us,
those of us within
the LGBTQIA+ community can, and should, also think of ourselves as allies. In
thinking of ourselves as allies,
we are reminded that we must comply with the
principles and guidance relating to effective and appropriate allyship –
eg, obligations
to self-educate, engage in appropriate consultation and
co-design, and platform marginalised voices... conceptualisation of oneself
an ally is especially important when an LGBTQIA+ [academic’s] work
concerns specific LGBTQIA+ identities to which they do
Although this passage relates to ‘internal allyship’ (ie, those
within the LGBTIQA+ community acting as allies to one
another) in the context of
LGBTIQA+ researchers who research about LGBTIQA+ issues, it can apply equally to
LGBTIQA+ educators who,
like us, teach content that relates to LGBTIQA+ people.
Accordingly, our teaching (and our scholarship of teaching and learning)
underpinned by a commitment to educating ourselves about trans and gender
diverse matters so that we can represent them adequately
seeking feedback
from our students and trans and gender diverse people generally to ensure that
our work is designed and delivered
appropriately;
platforming trans and gender diverse voices in our teaching and pedagogical
scholarship (eg, through selecting course materials
and citing works by trans
and gender diverse people with relevant lived
experience).
A Trans-inclusive Reproductive Health Teaching in Health
& Medical Law
I (the first author) teach an undergraduate law unit at The University of
Western Australia called ‘Birth, Life and Death: Health
and Medical
Law’. The first parts of the unit (‘birth’ and
‘life’) are most relevant to reproductive
health, covering topics
relating to pregnancy, the legal status of the unborn, abortion, assisted
reproductive technologies, as well
as gender affirmation. In my teaching of all
aspects of the unit I endeavour to conscientise students as to how law is often
as an objective set of rules, whereas in reality it reflects the social,
political, and historical contexts in which it is made.
I encourage students to
consider how the relevant legal frameworks are shaped by prevailing norms about
bodies, gender, ability,
and morality, meaning they are not neutral but deeply
value-laden.
When I first took on coordination of the unit in 2020, I taught the topics in
the same way and with the same terminology that had
been used in previous years.
For example, when speaking of pregnancy, I almost invariably used the term
‘pregnant woman’
without acknowledging that people who do not
identify as women can also be
Reflecting on my teaching throughout that semester in 2020, I realised that
although I personally valued the inclusion of trans and
gender diverse people
and understood some of the ways in which the topics applied to trans and gender
diverse people, this was not
adequately reflected in my teaching. I felt as
though I was oversimplifying the concepts I was teaching, and used terms of
convenience
(eg, ‘pregnant woman’) to avoid grappling with the
complexity of gender diversity in the classroom. I felt that my teaching
adequately preparing my students for the diversity they might actually encounter
‘in the real world’. I also
worried that any trans and gender
diverse students in my class might perceive my teaching as deliberately
non-inclusive and feel
unsafe in my
In 2021, I made an effort to rethink the way that I spoke of sex and gender
throughout the course. Importantly, I chose to move away
from the term
‘pregnant woman’ and instead use the term ‘pregnant
person’. However, I worried that I might
be dismissed by students as
somewhat of a ‘radical’ – that they might interpret this use
of language as me overtly
trying to ‘indoctrinate’ them with my
personal views about gender.
To abate this risk, I chose to introduce the choice of terminology in the
context of external sources which might be perceived as
more neutral and
objective than my own
The following text
appeared on the first slide when moving to consider pregnancy in the course:
A NOTE ABOUT TERMINOLOGY
This unit aims to reflect developments in science, society, and in healthcare
practice. Part of this is using the terminology used
in those settings.
The Australian Government’s Pregnancy Care Guidelines:
‘The Guidelines recognise that individuals have diverse gender
identities. Terms such as pregnant person, childbearing people
and parent can be
used to avoid gendering birth, and those who give birth, as feminine. [Whilst
terms like woman and mother are often
used], it is not meant to exclude those
who give birth and do not identify as female.’
Kinnon R MacKinnon et al, 'Recognizing and Renaming in Obstetrics' (2021)
Obstetric Medicine
‘... the term ‘pregnant
person’ does not discredit cisgender women; rather it opens the umbrella
to cover everyone
seeking obstetrical care. Language evolves, and words matter.
Providing comprehensive and accessible healthcare to all includes broadening
gender-neutral and affirming language in obstetrics.’
As can be seen from the text of the slide, I anchored the choice to
government guidelines and research from the health sciences, expecting
these authorities might provide a solid grounding for the choice (quite apart
from my own views). Doing so also has the added
benefit of teaching students
professional skills about the importance of keeping up with contemporary
standards relating to diversity
and inclusion in applied
As the topic went on, my subjective impression was that students generally
accepted this choice of language (indeed, I noticed that
they used that same
terminology when participating in class). I also found that explicitly engaging
with the reality that people
who are not women might become pregnant had further
benefits: it actually enabled further, more nuanced analysis of the law
For example, when
walking through legislation relating to abortion, students questioned the
cisnormative language used in legislation.
They asked questions like ‘If a
person who isn’t a woman is pregnant, can they still seek an abortion even
law refers only to “a woman” who is pregnant?’.
This provided a fantastic opportunity to ask students to critically
whether the law is adequate when it does not reflect reality, and to think about
how that might create practical problems
for those people seeking access to, and
those people providing, reproductive healthcare (including
abortions).
In 2022, based on
that experience, I explicitly embedded discussion of this issue into the class
plan, noting that abortion legislation
which uses the term ‘woman’
in place of ‘pregnant person’ fails to recognise the medical,
social, and psychological
realities that there is a diversity of sex and
and that people who
might legally be classed as any gender can become pregnant and might choose or
require an abortion. This may
occur for many reasons – for example, many
trans people obtain social and/or legal recognition of their affirmed gender
retaining their reproductive
characteristics.
People with
non-binary gender identities may also become pregnant. Some intersex people who
were assigned male at birth might also
become pregnant (depending on the
variations of sex characteristics they
Beyond the topics relating to pregnancy, I did my best to consider trans and
gender diverse perspectives throughout the course. For
example, when discussing
the law relating to public
I chose to teach
transgender and gender diverse people.
I encouraged students to discuss the role
the law has played in establishing those barriers, then asked them to consider
policy or other regulatory solutions.
As another (perhaps obvious) example, a terminology issue also arose when
covering the law relating to gender
affirmation.
Although it is
soon set to change,
current legislation in Western Australia uses the term ‘gender
reassignment’ – indeed, it is called the
Gender Reassignment Act
(WA). That terminology is considered inaccurate and outdated by many
trans people,
so I made sure
to explicitly grapple with this in classes, noting that trans people – and
healthcare practitioners –
now typically use the term
‘transition’ or ‘affirmation’ rather than
‘reassignment’.
In choosing sources for this topic (including academic and media sources), I
made an effort to focus on transgender and gender diverse
voices, enabling
students to engage with authentic perspectives informed by lived experience.
This focus also helps to counter the
pathologising perspectives that can be
present in the law and other
In a broad sense, there is capacity to apply these approaches to other law
courses beyond health and medical law. The guiding question
I ask myself when
planning my lessons is
‘Quite apart from the words and approaches used
by the law, does the way I am teaching each topic consider and include trans
gender diverse people and their experiences?’.
This requires me to
think about the language I use and my choices about what content and sources to
include in the course. If the
law itself isn’t inclusive of trans and
gender diverse people, there is scope to invite students to engage in analysis
regard. This is an approach which has been instructive in my own
teaching of health and medical law, but which is likely to be helpful
teaching in any area of
B Trans-inclusive Reproductive Health Teaching in
I (the second author) teach into a second-year undergraduate anatomy and
human biology unit at The University of Western Australia
called ‘Human
Reproductive Biology’. This unit encompasses study of the human
reproductive system(s) from conception,
gestation and throughout a
person’s life. The key focus is reproductive anatomy, cell biology and
physiology, but the unit
includes linkage with other major systems,
developmental changes, and genetics. Often considered peripheral to the
of reproductive biology; sexual health, development,
behaviour and identity are important themes deeply entangled in this field that
manifest and change throughout an individual’s
As an educator in this
space, I feel that reproductive biology is well positioned to bring awareness to
some inequalities and contemporary
issues that impact identity,
sexual/reproductive health and biology. Accordingly, I consider that I have a
duty to explore these
nuances within the framework of the unit, especially at a
time when many students – as new adults – are just beginning
explore these matters themselves in personal and interpersonal aspects of their
When I started to teach into this unit in 2021, I observed amongst others in
the teaching team a clear intention to enhance knowledge
of gender diversity and
queer issues in reproductive biology, and a desire to enable students to tackle
some major incumbent and
contemporary societal issues. This was the first time
in my educational career – as a student, professional, and teacher in
human biology – that I had experienced such a dedication to
increasing queer visibility in tertiary education. It also expanded
my knowledge
of societal understandings of gender as a construct (including views which were
not unanimously supported by the scientific
community). Additionally, as a
cisgender gay man, I felt that the team of academics in the unit upheld a shared
vision with authentic
intentions, and I admired that these efforts came from a
largely cisgender, non-queer team. This demonstrated bona fide allyship,
supported by the unit coordinators’ genuineness and openness in asking for
opportunity to drive further changes in
the unit. While there was a clear commitment to adopting de-gendered language
and incorporating
some inclusive content, I felt that more could be done to
embed inclusive content relating to LGBTIQA+ people and their bodies throughout
the unit’s curriculum. Additionally, I believed the best opportunity for
encouraging meaningful engagement with this content
was by requiring students to
address it in the unit’s major assessment. Indeed, research indicates that
students often focus
their engagement on content that is directly assessed,
highlighting the impact of assessment on learning
priorities.
Since 2021, I have led some significant changes to the unit’s content
through altering the scope and framework of a major group
assignment to increase
visibility of queer, gender diverse and other diverse groups in reproductive
biology. This infographic-based
group assignment previously related to blocking
or preventing fertility as a novel contraceptive and potential future medical
application
– in other words, it required students to focus on
a reproductive barrier. Instead, we shifted the lens to require
students to consider how assisted reproductive technologies could
improve fertility status and reproductive outcomes. The new assignment requires
students to focus on overcoming the anatomical
and biological limitations they
learn throughout the unit – so it requires students to instead focus on
a reproductive barrier. This new assignment aimed to deepen
understanding of gender diversity, increase visibility of various forms
diversity, enhance inclusive content, and allow students to connect scientific
publications in the field to potential solutions
for reproductive issues faced
by marginalised groups.
In preparing to make these changes, I – and the broader teaching
team – considered the potential effect of these reforms
with reference to
the existing pedagogical scholarship in this
We wondered
‘Would these changes actually have the intended impact on the student
We also knew from our own expertise and consultation that
gender diverse representation was so lacking in this field that any changes
would be impactful –
‘is this enough without any formal impact assessment?’.
Additionally, changing the scope of the assignment to capture more diverse
reproductive challenges required removal of key content
around contraception
‘Are these changes at the detriment of other issues and
populations (eg, cisgender women and societal inadequacies around
contraception)?’.
To ensure that our approach to teaching reproductive health in an inclusive
way was impactful and effective, we were guided by a principled
approach as part
of a holistic framework whereby we tried to:
1. Increase visibility and understanding of issues affecting queer, trans and
other marginalised groups in reproductive biology, especially
through a major
assignment, and integration of new inclusive content;
2. Ensuring balance by promoting these inclusive efforts whilst maintaining
scientific rigour and key educational outcomes;
3. Enhance coverage of under-represented issues whilst ensuring other
important issues receive warranted attention (eg, by running
a laboratory which
focussed specifically on contraception);
4. Highlight challenges in society and reproductive biology that entrench
cisnormative and heteronormative understandings and views;
5. Measure the social impact of changes through empirical and collaborative
means, including dedicated student evaluation surveys
before and after semester,
mapping the discussion of diversity-related content in student assignments, and
engaging with students
for feedback which could be used to further develop the
The cumulative changes made to enhance inclusionary content in reproductive
biology by our team of academics, and an impact assessment
for the changes to
the major assignment have been detailed in a recent
publication.
student feedback and indicators of social impact were overwhelmingly positive
eg, student
survey respondents were ‘unanimous in their agreement that the unit was
inclusive of LGBTIQA+ issues and that the
unit made them think about societal
issues related to reproductive health
differently’.
some student feedback requested more information around genital diversity,
including non-binary forms and genitals with
mutilation. Reflecting on our
approach, and taking account of the impact and feedback we received around
wanting more teaching on
genital diversity, I am reminded of the need to enhance
coverage of under-represented issues in our teaching generally (as set out
our holistic framework). There is a need to increase the visibility of many
diversity and inclusion issues in this space, including
in relation to other
marginalised groups (which may or may not intersect with LGBTIQA+ communities).
Having used my teaching to increase
visibility of issues within queer
communities, I am also committed to using this platform to bring greater
awareness and competence
in relation to the nuances experienced by other
minority and marginalised groups in reproductive biology. I also feel that we
a duty – consistent with critical pedagogy – to treat our
students as stakeholders and co-creators of course
and that we must
listen to and act on their feedback where possible and appropriate.
This being said, as a science academic I can acknowledge that in some cases,
significantly restructuring a unit to incorporate trans-inclusive
content may
not be feasible, practical, or pedagogically appropriate. For example, in
certain science disciplines like chemistry,
the subject matter and learning
objectives may not directly intersect with concepts of gender, identity, or
human experience. Of
course, is only appropriate to cover academic content
relating to trans and gender diverse people where it is relevant to the course.
However, this should never serve as a justification for avoiding inclusive
practices or neglecting the needs of gender diverse students
– trans-inclusive practice in the science classroom can extend beyond
content and curriculum.
C Interdisciplinary Reflections on Inclusive Reproductive
Health Teaching Across Law and Science
Our experiences teaching reproductive health inclusively in law and science
settings reveal both important parallels and meaningful
points of divergence
between the two disciplines. In reflecting on our practice, it is apparent that
while the disciplinary traditions
and expectations of law and science differ in
many respects, there are significant commonalities in the challenges faced, the
employed, and the benefits observed when reproductive health is
taught in a way that is inclusive of trans and gender diverse people.
reflections suggest that there are lessons to be learned across disciplines, as
well as from within them.
Both our experiences suggest that, in law and science alike, teaching
reproductive health inclusively is not simply a matter of adding
content relating to trans and gender diverse people. Instead, it requires a more
fundamental engagement with the assumptions
and frameworks that underpin the
discipline itself. In law, these assumptions often relate to the ways in which
legal sources and
legal analysis are framed as objective and neutral, despite
being shaped by social and political contexts that have historically
marginalised trans and gender diverse people. In science, they relate to the
ways in which binary models of sex and gender have been
treated as natural and
biologically determined, despite significant scientific evidence to the
contrary. In both cases, teaching
inclusively requires a willingness to
critically interrogate the foundational assumptions of the discipline, and to be
transparent
with students about the ways in which disciplinary knowledge has
been, and continues to be, socially situated.
Our reflections also suggest that similar pedagogical strategies can be
effective across disciplines, even where the subject matter
and epistemological
traditions differ. In both law and science, we found that framing inclusive
teaching practices as aligned with
disciplinary values — such as legal
coherence or scientific accuracy — helped to situate these practices as an
of, rather than a departure from, disciplinary norms. For example, in
health law, drawing attention to the way legislation may fail
to capture the
realities of all people capable of pregnancy not only made trans and gender
diverse people visible, but also encouraged
students to think critically about
the adequacy of the law. In reproductive biology, refocussing on assistive
reproductive technology
rather than contraception not only challenged
cisnormative assumptions but also better reflected the complexity and diversity
human biology. In both cases, inclusive teaching practices were framed not as
ideological interventions, but as necessary to achieve
the core goals of the
discipline.
Despite these commonalities, our experiences also highlight some differences
that arise from the distinct nature of law and science
as fields of study. In
law, language itself is central: it is the primary medium through which legal
meaning is constructed and
communicated.
As a result,
changes in language — such as using ‘pregnant person’ rather
than ‘pregnant woman’ —
can feel particularly significant, and
can prompt critical reflection on how the law constructs and regulates bodies
and identities.
In science, by contrast, language is often perceived as
secondary to empirical observation and
description.
Consequently,
challenges to traditional language in science education may be less immediately
visible, but are no less important,
given the ways in which language shapes what
is observed, described, and understood.
Our reflections also highlight the importance of considering student
experience and engagement across both disciplines. In both health
reproductive biology, we observed that students were generally receptive to
inclusive teaching practices, especially when
these practices were introduced
thoughtfully and situated within the broader aims of the course. Students
demonstrated a willingness
— and, in many cases, an enthusiasm — to
grapple with the complexities that arise when traditional assumptions are
questioned.
This demonstrates the ongoing need for careful framing, scaffolded
engagement, and explicit discussion of why inclusive teaching
is not a departure
from disciplinary rigour, but an enhancement of it.
Finally, our interdisciplinary reflections reinforce the importance of
ongoing self-education and consultation in developing and delivering
pedagogy. As cisgender academics working as
we recognise that our
perspectives are necessarily limited. In both law and science, we have found it
essential to seek feedback
and guidance from students, to consult external
sources (including scholarship and voices from trans and gender diverse
communities),
and to approach our teaching as a continual process of
reflection, and
adaptation.
teaching in any discipline is not a static achievement but a dynamic and
iterative practice.
Taken together, these interdisciplinary reflections suggest that while
disciplinary differences matter, the broader imperatives for
reproductive health education transcend individual fields. Teaching inclusively
enhances the accuracy, relevance, and integrity
of our disciplines, and better
prepares our students to engage with the diversity of the communities they exist
VI CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Reproductive health education in tertiary settings must move beyond its
historically cisnormative frameworks. As this article has
demonstrated, both
science and law have traditionally relied on binary and cisnormative assumptions
exclusions that distort biological and social
realities. We have duties to our students, our communities and ourselves to
teach reproductive
health in a way that includes and accurately depicts trans
and gender diverse people. A trans-inclusive approach is not just a progressive
ideal – it is about ensuring that future professionals in science and law
are equipped to work competently and ethically with
diverse populations. Trans
and gender diverse people exist within every field, every patient population,
and in every jurisdiction.
Their realities cannot be ignored or treated as
peripheral. A reproductive health curriculum that fails to account for this is
only incomplete but actively harmful.
A fundamental step in this shift is uncoupling sex assigned at birth from
gender, sexuality, and identity. While biological differences
exist between
people, they do not map neatly onto rigid categories of ‘male’ and
‘female,’ nor do they determine
identity or lived
experience.
This reality must
be reflected in course content, dismantling outdated narratives that falsely
equate anatomy with identity.
Educators must critically consider how they can develop assessments, syllabi,
and learning materials to ensure that inclusion is not
an afterthought but an
integral part of the
curriculum.
Our courses
should challenge binary assumptions rather than reinforce them, and students
should be encouraged to engage with the
complexity of reproductive health beyond
traditional frameworks. Authentically engaging students as stakeholders in these
developments
(eg, by being responsive to their feedback and seeking their input
throughout) ensures that inclusion is not imposed top-down but
developed in
conversation with those it seeks to benefit.
Institutional support is also necessary. Universities must actively support
educators in this shift, providing resources, training,
and recognition for
those working on inclusive pedagogy. Consulting representatives from
marginalised groups is crucial to ensure
that content is not just inclusive but
also accurate and affirming.
At the same time, educators must be prepared to challenge resistance –
whether from students, colleagues, or institutional structures.
difficult conversations only entrenches the status quo. Inclusive education
demands active engagement with pushback, addressing
misunderstandings with
evidence and fostering an environment where critical inquiry is encouraged
rather than dismissed.
Reforming the way we teach reproductive health is a collective
responsibility, and the path forward is clear. By embedding inclusion
teaching, we foster learning that encompasses the diversity of human experience.
Aidan Ricciardo is a Senior Lecturer at the UWA Law School, and
a member of the Centre for Health Law and Policy at The University
Australia. Nicholas Fimognari is a Sessional Academic at the School of Human
Sciences, The University of Western Australia,
and a Research Project
Coordinator in Microbial Ecology at Edith Cowan University.
Gabrielle Maria Finn et al,
'It’s Not Alphabet Soup – Supporting the Inclusion of Inclusive
Queer Curricula in Medical
Education' (2021) 5(2)
The British Student Doctor
der Toorn, Ruthie Pliskin and Thekla Morgenroth,
'Not Quite Over the Rainbow: The Unrelenting & Insidious Nature of
Heteronormative
Ideology' (2020) 34
Current Opinion in Behavioural
160, 160–2.
‘traditional’ is used here to refer to ways of thinking that are
established norms in Western cultures, noting
that traditions in many Indigenous
and other cultures differ from these norms.
Pamela L Geller, 'Bodyscapes,
Biology, and Heteronormativity' (2009) 111(4)
American Anthropologist
504, 504; Nicholas Fimognari et al, 'Inclusion of Genital, Sexual, and Gender
Diversity in Human Reproductive Teaching: Impact on
Student Experience and
Recommendations for Tertiary Educators' (2024) 48(4)
Advances in Physiology
Samuel N Dubin et al,
'Transgender Health Care: Improving Medical Students' and Residents' Training
and Awareness' (2018) 9
Advances in Medical Education and Practice
380; Joshua D Safer, 'Research Gaps in Medical Treatment of
Transgender/Nonbinary People' (2021) 131(4)
Journal of Clinical
Investigation
This is established in
of this article.
Finn et al (n 1) 28.
See, eg, C E Roselli,
'Neurobiology of Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation' (2018) 30(7)
of Neuroendocrinology
Article No 12562, 2-5; Dubin et al (n 5).
Elijah Adiv Edelman, 'Gender
Identity and Transgender Rights in Global Perspective' in Michael J Bosia,
Sandra M McEvoy and Momin
Rahman (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of Global LGBT
and Sexual Diversity Politics
(Oxford University Press, 2020) 62.
Ibid. For definitions of
these identities, and other LGBTIQA+ identities, see Human Rights Campaign,
Glossary of Terms
(31 May 2023)
<https://www.hrc.org/resources/glossary-of-terms>.
See, eg, Morgan Carpenter,
'Fixing Bodies and Shaping Narratives: Epistemic Injustice and the Responses of
Medicine and Bioethics
to Intersex Human Rights Demands' (2024) 19(1)
Clinical Ethics
3. Note though that intersex people and their priorities
and experiences are not to be conflated with trans and gender diverse identities
and experiences. Intersex inclusion is not the focus of this article.
Jan McArthur, 'Achieving
Social Justice Within and Through Higher Education: The Challenge for Critical
Pedagogy' (2010) 15(5)
Critical Perspectives
493, 494–5,
See generally Sam L Sharpe
et al, 'Sex and Biology: Broader Impacts Beyond the Binary' (2023) 63(4)
Integrative and Comparative Biology
See generally Tuomas Aivelo,
Eva Neffling and Maija Karala, 'Representation for Whom? Transformation of
Sex/Gender Discussion from
Stereotypes to Silence in Finnish Biology Textbooks
from 20th to 21st Century' (2024) 58(2)
Journal of Biological Education
See, eg, Aivelo, Neffling
and Karala (n 15); Katherine Maslowski et al, 'Sex and Fertility Education in
England: An Analysis of Biology
Curricula and Students’ Experiences'
(2024) 58(3)
Journal of Biological Education
702; Katherine Maslowski et
al, 'Reproductive Health Education in the Schools of the Four UK Nations: Is it
Falling Through the Gap?'
(2023) 26(3)
Human Fertility
527; Fimognari et
Roselli (n 8) 2.
Sari M van Anders, 'Beyond
Masculinity: Testosterone, Gender/Sex, and Human Social Behavior in a
Comparative Context' (2013) 34(3)
Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology
Stephanie J Webb et al, 'The
Biological Actions of Dehydroepiandrosterone Involves Multiple Receptors' (2006)
38(1-2) Drug Metabolism
Reviews 89, 89.
Melody V Wu, 'Estrogen
Masculinizes Neural Pathways and Sex-Specific Behaviors' (2009) 139(1)
Johanna Olson et al,
'Baseline Physiologic and Psychosocial Characteristics of Transgender Youth
Seeking Care for Gender Dysphoria'
(2015) 57(4)
Journal of Adolescent Health
See generally Mel Ferrara
and Monica J Casper, 'Genital Alteration and Intersex: a Critical Analysis'
Current Sexual Health Reports
Jennifer A Hayes and
Meredith J Temple-Smith, 'New Context, New Content – Rethinking Genital
Anatomy in Textbooks' (2022) 15(5)
Anatomical Sciences Education
943–4; Aivelo, Neffling and Karala (n 15).
Fimognari et al (n 4)
Charmian A Quigley et al,
'Androgen Receptor Defects: Historical, Clinical, and Molecular Perspectives'
(1995) 16(3)
Endocrine Reviews
See, eg, Luke Uden, Vanessa
Vaughan and Helen Wilcox, 'Building Gender and Sexual Diversity into Case-based
Learning' (2024) 25(4)
Focus on Health Professional Education
Tove Lundberg, Peter Hegarty
and Katrina Roen, 'Making Sense of ‘Intersex’ and ‘DSD’:
How Laypeople Understand
and use Terminology' (2018) 9(2)
Psychology &
InterAction for Health and
Human Rights,
Media and Style Guide
(2 March 2021)
<https://interaction.org.au/style/>.
Rebecca Beni, Lauren Fisher
and Georga J Longhurst, 'The Importance of Diverse and Accurate Descriptions of
Genital Anatomy in Textbooks'
(2022) 15(5)
Anatomical Sciences Education
985, 985–6.
Goran Štrkalj and
Nalini Pather, 'Beyond the Sex Binary: Toward the Inclusive Anatomical Sciences
Education' (2020) 14(4)
Anatomical Sciences
513, 514–15.
See, eg, Susan B Apel,
'Teaching Health Law: Teaching Law and Medicine on the Interdisciplinary Cutting
Edge: Assisted Reproductive
Technologies' (2010) 38(2)
Journal of Law,
Medicine & Ethics
420. Note though that aspects of reproductive health
may be taught in other units like Criminal Law and Family Law.
See generally Scott Burris
et al, 'Moving from Intersection to Integration: Public Health Law Research and
Public Health Systems
and Services Research' (2012) 90(2)
The Milbank
Paula Gerber and Ronli
Sifris, 'Erasing Trans People: How to Ensure Australia Does Not Go Down the Same
Path as the United States'
(2024) 49(4)
Alternative Law Journal
See, eg, Stevie Leahy,
'Fostering Equity and Inclusion Across the Gender Spectrum in the Law School
Classroom' (2020) 65(5)
Villanova Law Review
1105; Paula Gerber and
Claerwen O'Hara, 'Teaching Law Students about Sexual Orientation, Gender
Identity and Intersex Status within
Human Rights Law: Seven Principles for
Curriculum Design and Pedagogy'
(2019) 68(2)
Journal of Legal Education
Florence Ashley, 'The
Constitutive In/Visibility of the Trans Legal Subject: A Case Study' (2021)
UCLA Women's Law Journal
423, 424, 435.
Mark Israel et al,
'Fostering “Quiet Inclusion”: Interaction and Diversity in the
Australian Law Classroom'
(2017) 66(2)
Journal of Legal Education
Aidan Ricciardo et al,
‘Perceptions of LGBTQI+ Diversity in the Legal Profession: “It's
Happening Slow, but it’s
Certainly Happening”’
(2021) 46(2)
Alternative Law Journal
Aidan Ricciardo et al,
Understanding, Promoting and Supporting LGBTQI+ Diversity in Legal Education
(2022) 56(3)
The Law Teacher
Eg, in Western Australia the
statutory provisions relating to abortion referred only to a
‘woman’s’ ability to
access an abortion until 2023.
Anniken Sørlie,
'Trans Reproduction: Continuity, Cis-normativity, and Trans Inequality in Law'
(2023) 21(2)
International Journal of Constitutional Law
That is, the
heteronormativity and cisnormativity in science provides validation for the
heteronormativity and cisnormativity in
law, and vice versa.
Phillip L Hammack and
Adriana M Manago, 'The Psychology of Sexual and Gender Diversity in the 21st
Century: Social Technologies and
Stories of Authenticity' (2024)
Psychologist
(online ahead of print).
Oyèrónkẹ́ Oyěwùmí, 'Conceptualizing
Gender: The Eurocentric Foundations of Feminist Concepts
and the Challenge of
African Epistemologies' (2002) 2(3)
Jenda: A Journal of Culture and African
Women Studies
Maria Lugones, ‘The
Coloniality of Gender’ in Wendy Harcourt (ed),
The Palgrave Handbook of
Gender and Development: Critical Engagements in Feminist Theory and Practice
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2016) 13, 14–15.
Rachel Beth Chapman,
and Native Hawaiian Culture: Experiences of Non-Heteronormativity
(Dissertation, 2023) <https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/etd/10084> 3.
Makiko Kuwahara, 'Living as
and Living with Māhū and Raerae: Geopolitics, Sex and Gender in the
Society Islands' in Niko
Besnier and Kalissa Alexeyeff (eds),
Gender on the
Edge: Transgender, Gay, and Other Pacific Islanders
(University of Hawai'i
Press, 2014) 93, 94.
Jacobo Ramirez and Ana
María Munar, 'Hybrid Gender Colonization: The Case of Muxes' (2022) 29(6)
Gender, Work & Organization
1868, 1868; Alejandra Gall Peña,
Reflections and Conceptions of Muxe Gender Identity in Contemporary Mexican
(Dissertation, 2022)
<https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1675237/FULLTEXT01.pdf>
Alfredo Mirande,
the Mask: Gender Hybridity in a Zapotec Community
(Tucson: The University of
Arizona Press, 2017) 10.
John R Sylliboy, 'Coming Out
is Part of the Life Cycle: A Qualitative Study Using Two-Eyed Seeing to
Understand a Two-Spirits Coming
Out Process' (2022) 17(10)
Global Public
2428, 2428–30.
Sharyn Davies,
Challenging Gender Norms: Five Genders Among Bugis in Indonesia
Cengage, 2007) x, 9.
See generally Emmie Matsuno
and Stephanie L Budge, 'Non-binary/Genderqueer Identities: a Critical Review of
the Literature' (2017)
Current Sexual Health Reports
Volkmar Sigusch, 'On
Cultural Transformations of Sexuality and Gender in Recent Decades' (2004) 2
German Medical Science
See generally Lugones (n 48)
See generally Juliana
McLaughlin and Susan Whatman, ‘The Potential of Critical Race Theory in
Decolonising University Curricula’
(2011) 31(4)
Asia Pacific Journal of
See generally Ash T Zemenick
et al, 'Six Principles for Embracing Gender and Sexual Diversity in
Postsecondary Biology Classrooms'
(2022) 72(5)
See generally, Hayes and
Temple-Smith (n 24); Štrkalj and Pather (n 32).
Hayes and Temple-Smith (n
24); Štrkalj and Pather (n 32); A M Aramati Casper et al, '"It's completely
erasure": A Qualitative
Exploration of Experiences of Transgender, Nonbinary,
Gender Nonconforming, and Questioning Students in Biology Courses' (2022) 21(4)
CBE Life Sciences Education
Article No 69, 1–2.
Katrina Karkazis, 'The
Misuses of "Biological Sex"' (2019) 394(10212)
See generally Arnold de
Loof, 'Only Two Sex Forms but Multiple Gender Variants: How to Explain?' (2018)
Communicative and Integrative Biology
e142739. This point is
explored further later in this article.
Institute of Medicine (US)
Committee on Understanding the Biology of Sex and Gender Differences,
‘Every Cell has a Sex’
in Theresa M Wizemann and Mary-Lou Pardue
Exploring the Biological Contributions to Human Health: Does Sex
(National Academies Press, 2001).
See generally, Peter Hegarty
and Annette Smith, 'Public Understanding of Intersex: An Update on Recent
Findings' (2023) 35
International Journal of Impotence Research
Ricciardo, ‘Harm Caused by Medical Interventions which Alter Intersex
Variations: Can Negligence Provide a Remedy’
(2021) 40(2)
University of
Tasmania Law Journal
91, 94–113.
Rebeca Robles, Tania Real
and Geoffrey M Reed, 'Depathologizing Sexual Orientation and Transgender
Identities in Psychiatric Classifications'
(2021) 2(2)
Psychiatricum
Ricciardo (n 65)
94–113; Amets Suess Schwend, 'Trans Health Care from a Depathologization
and Human Rights Perspective' (2020)
Public Health Reviews
3, 12; Keely Duggan and Donna McNamara, 'The Blurred Distinction Between
Therapeutic and Non-therapeutic Medical Interventions
for Intersex Children in
Australia' (2021) 27(2)
Australian Journal of Human Rights
Tamar Saguy, Michal
Reifen-Tagar and Daphna Joel, 'The Gender-Binary Cycle: The Perpetual Relations
Between a Biological-Essentialist
View of Gender, Gender Ideology, and
Gender-Labeling and Sorting' (2021) 376(1882)
Philosophical Transactions of
The Royal Society B Biological Sciences
Article No 20200141, 5.
See generally Baqar Husain,
Stigma, Cisgenderism, And the Pathologization Of Transness
(Dissertation,
2022) <https://elischolar.library.yale.edu/ysphtdl/2159/>; Suess Schwend
John Whitfield, 'Everything
You Always Wanted to Know about Sexes' (2004) 2(6)
PLoS Biology
718–19, 721.
J F McLaughlin et al,
'Multivariate Models of Animal Sex: Breaking Binaries Leads to a Better
Understanding of Ecology and Evolution'
(2023) 63(4)
Integrative and
Comparative Biology
891, 896–7.
Joan Roughgarden,
Evolution's Rainbow Diversity, Gender, and Sexuality in Nature and People
(University of California Press, 2013) 169–71.
See generally, Wolfgang
Goymann, Henrik Brumm and Peter M Kappeler, 'Biological Sex is Binary, Even
Though There is a Rainbow of
Sex Roles: Denying Biological Sex is
Anthropocentric and Promotes Species Chauvinism' (2023) 45(2)
Alan Dixson, 'Primate
Sexuality' in
The International Encyclopedia of Human Sexuality
2015) 861, 867–9.
Andrew B Barron and Brian
Hare, 'Prosociality and a Sociosexual Hypothesis for the Evolution of Same-Sex
Attraction in Humans' (2020)
Frontiers in Psychology
Article No 2955,
Michelle Rodrigues and Emily
Boeving, 'Comparative Social Grooming Networks in Captive Chimpanzees and
Bonobos' (2018) 60(3)
191, 191–2.
Frances D Burton, 'Ethology
and the Development of Sex and Gender Identity in Non-human Primates' (1977)
Acta Biotheoretica
See generally Roselli (n
Elizabeth Barr et al,
'Gender as a Social and Structural Variable: Research Perspectives from the
National Institutes of Health (NIH)'
(2024) 14(1) (2023/04/19)
Translational
Behavioral Medicine
De Loof (n 63) 1.
Nancy G Forger, 'Epigenetic
Mechanisms in Sexual Differentiation of the Brain and Behaviour' (2016)
Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society B Biological
Article No 20150114, 1.
Ceri Weber and Blanche
Capel, 'Sex Determination Without Sex Chromosomes' (2021) 376(1832)
Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society B Biological Sciences
Article No 20200109, 1–2.
Laura R Cortes, Carla D
Cisternas and Nancy G Forger, 'Does Gender Leave an Epigenetic Imprint on the
Brain?' (2019) 13
Frontiers in Neuroscience
Article No 173, 5.
Marija Kundakovic and Maria
Tickerhoof, 'Epigenetic Mechanisms Underlying Sex Differences in the Brain and
Behavior' (2024) 47(1)
Trends in Neurosciences
Weber and Capel 82) 1.
See generally, Julianne
Imperato-McGinley et al, 'Androgens and the Evolution of Male-Gender Identity
among Male Pseudohermaphrodites
with 5α-Reductase Deficiency' (1979)
New England Journal of Medicine
Barr et al (n 79).
World Health
Organization,
Infertility Prevalence Estimates: 1990–2021
Erika Maxwell, Maria Mathews
and Shree Mulay, 'More Than a Biological Condition: The Heteronormative Framing
of Infertility' (2019)
Canadian Journal of Bioethics
Zhi-Kun Li et al, 'Adult
Bi-paternal Offspring Generated Through Direct Modification of Imprinted Genes
in Mammals' (2025)
Cell Stem Cell
(online ahead of print).
L Zachary DuBois and Heather
Shattuck-Heidorn, 'Challenging the Binary: Gender/Sex and the Bio-logistics of
Normalcy' (2021) 33(5)
American Journal of Human Biology
Jhon Alexander Moreno et al,
'A Brief Historic Overview of Sexual and Gender Diversity in Neuroscience: Past,
Present, and Future'
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience
1414396, 3–6.
Suess Schwend (n 67). Note
though that this has not been a universal experience – see, eg,
Gerber and Sifris (n 36).
See generally Wendy
Cumming-Potvin, 'LGBTQA+ Allies and Activism: Past, Present and Future
Perspectives' (2024) 38(3)
338. There have been many legal
dimensions to this LGBTIQA+ activism, including strategic litigation, advocacy
for legislative reform,
and broader campaigns for systemic change.
Hannah Morgan et al,
Attitudes to Transgender People
(Equality and Human Rights Commission
Research Report, 2020) 3–4
<https://www.equalityhumanrights.com/sites/default/files/attitudes_to_transgender_people.pdf>.
Ipsos Public Affairs,
Global Attitudes Toward Transgender People
(Report, 2018)
<https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2018-01/ipsos_report-transgender_global_data-2018.pdf>.
Jaclyn M White Hughto, Sari L
Reisner and John E Pachankis, 'Transgender Stigma and Health: A Critical Review
of Stigma Determinants,
Mechanisms, and Interventions' (2015) 147
Sciences and Medicine
222, 228–9.
Paulo Freire,
Pedagogy of
the Oppressed
, tr Myra Bergman Ramos (Continuum, 30th Anniversary ed, 2005);
Henry A Giroux,
On Critical Pedagogy
(Bloomsbury, 2nd ed, 2020).
Peter McLaren, 'Critical
Pedagogy: A Look at the Major Concepts' in Antonia Darder et al (eds),
Critical Pedagogy Reader
(Routledge Falmer, 2002) 69, 78, 89; Michelle L
Page, 'LGBTQ Inclusion as an Outcome of Critical Pedagogy' (2016) 7(1)
International Journal of Critical Pedagogy
115, 116–17; Lauren B
Clark, 'Critical Pedagogy in the University: Can a Lecture be Critical
Pedagogy?' (2018) 16(8)
Policy Futures in Education
985, 996–7.
Freire (n 99)
104–10; 159–60.
Page (n 100) 116;
McArthur (n 13) 494–6.
David W Stinson, Carla R
Bidwell and Ginny C Powell, 'Critical Pedagogy and Teaching Mathematics for
Social Justice' (2012) 4(1)
The International Journal of Critical Pedagogy
76, 77–9; McArthur (n 13) 494–5; Clark (n 100) 996–8.
Page (n 100)
116–17, 135–6; McLaren (n 100) 78–89.
Indeed, this is
encouraged. See generally Douglas Bourn, 'Teachers as Agents of Social Change'
(2016) 7(3)
International Journal of Development Education
Wayne Martino and Kenan
Omercajic, 'A Trans Pedagogy of Refusal: Interrogating Cisgenderism, the Limits
of Antinormativity and Trans
Necropolitics' (2021) 29(5)
Pedagogy, Culture
679, 681–90; Eli Kean, 'Advancing a Critical Trans
Framework for Education' (2021) 51(2)
Curriculum Inquiry
Freire (n 99) 80–1;
Clark (n 100) 997–8.
Freire (n 99) 80–1;
Clark (n 100) 997–8; Page (n 100) 116; McArthur (n 13) 494–6.
Jennifer Miller, 'Thirty
Years of Queer Theory' in Deborah P Amory et al (eds) Introduction to LGBTQ+
Studies: A Cross-Disciplinary
Approach (State University of New York Press,
2022) chapter 1. See also, Eli Kean, 'Advancing a Critical Trans Framework for
(2021) 51(2) Curriculum Inquiry 261.
See generally Peter
Gardner, 'Neutrality in Education' in Robert Goodin and Andrew Reeve (eds)
Liberal Neutrality
(Routledge, 1989).
Richard Shaull, preface
to Freire (n 99) 34.
Gerber and O’Hara
(n 37) 421, 452.
See generally Julie
Taylor, 'Education Can Never be Neutral — Teaching for Subversion' (1993)
Nurse Education Today
Ricciardo et al (n 41)
Anna Cody, ‘The
Importance of Diversity in our Profession’
See, eg, Uden, Vaughan
and Wilcox (n 28) 18–19.
Cody (n 115) 2.
Clark (n 100) 986, 997;
Page (n 100) 122.
Samantha Marangell et al,
'Students’ Attitudes Toward Diversity in Higher Education: Findings from a
Scoping Review' (2024)
Issues in Educational Research
See generally Australian
Bureau of Statistics,
Estimates and Characteristics of LGBTI+ Populations in
Australia: Data on gender, trans and gender diverse, sexual orientation, and
people born with variations of sex characteristics
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/people-and-communities/estimates-and-characteristics-lgbti-populations-australia/latest-release>;
Jennifer L Marino et al, 'Sexuality and Gender Diversity Among Adolescents in
Australia, 2019-2021' (2024) 7(10)
JAMA Network Open
Freire (n 99) 72, 80.
Page (n 100) 116;
McArthur (n 13) 494–6.
See, eg, Carolin Kreber,
‘Academics’ Teacher Identities, Authenticity and Pedagogy’
(2010) 35(2)
Studies in Higher Education
171; Angus Brook, 'The
Potentiality of Authenticity in Becoming a Teacher' (2009) 41(1)
Educational
Philosophy and Theory
46; Arthur W Chickering, Jon C Dalton, and Liesa
Encouraging Authenticity and Spirituality in Higher Education
(Jossey-Bass, 2006); Patricia Cranton,
Becoming an Authentic Teacher in
Higher Education
(Krieger, 2001); Christina Do and Aidan Ricciardo,
‘Meaningful Connectedness: A Foundation for Effective Legal
Curtin Law and Taxation Review
Melissa J Marlow, 'Does
Kingsfield Live? Teaching with Authenticity in Today's Law Schools'
(2015) 65(1)
Journal of Legal Education 229
, 230–1; Patricia Cranton and Ellen
Carusetta, 'Perspectives on Authenticity in Teaching' (2004) 55(1)
Education Quarterly
5, 7–8; Lauren Bialystok, ‘Should Teachers
be Authentic?’ (2016) 10(3)
Ethics and Education
Marlow (n 124) 231;
Cranton and Carusetta (n 124) 7.
See, eg, Kreber (n 123).
See also Carolin Kreber and Monika Klampfleitner, ‘Lecturers’ and
Students’ Conceptions
of Authenticity in Teaching and Actual Teacher
Actions and Attributes Students Perceive as Helpful’ (2013) 66(4)
Higher Education
Marlow (n 124) 241.
Catherine Bovill et al,
'Addressing Potential Challenges In Co-Creating Learning And Teaching:
Overcoming Resistance, Navigating
Institutional Norms And Ensuring Inclusivity
In Student-Staff Partnerships' (2016) 71
Higher Education
Ibid 199– 201.
See, by analogy, Jill M
Hermann-Wilmarth and Caitlin Law Ryan, 'Navigating Parental Resistance: Learning
from Responses of LGBTQ-Inclusive
Elementary School Teachers' (2019) 58(1)
Theory Into Practice
See Hayes and
Temple-Smith (n 24); Beni, Fisher and Longhurst (n 31); Aivelo, Neffling and
Karala (n 15).
J Watts and N Robertson,
'Burnout in University Teaching Staﬀ: A Systematic Literature Review
(2011) 53(1)
Educational Research
Gerber and O’Hara
(n 37) 416.
Ibid; Carolina Snaider
and Trystan Reese, ‘You Don’t Want to Say Anything Wrong: Teachers
Fearing Uncertainties and Trans
Parents (In)Visibility in Early Childhood
Education' (2025)
Gender and Education
11 (online ahead of print).
See generally Elizabethe
Payne and Melissa Smith, 'The Big Freak Out: Educator Fear in Response to the
Presence of Transgender Elementary
School Students' (2014) 61(3)
Homosexuality
399, 412–15.
Raquel Wright-Mair,
‘The Costs of Staying: Experiences of Racially Minoritized LGBTQ+ Faculty
in Higher Education’ (2023)
Innovative Higher Education
336–9; Finn et al (n 1) 32.
Finn et al (n 1) 32. This
is consistent with the experiences of other marginalised groups, and those at
the intersections of multiple
marginalised identities – see
Wright-Mair (n 137) 336–9.
See, eg, Marco Reggiani,
Jessica Dawn Gagnon and Rebecca Jane Lunn, 'LGBT + Academics’
and PhD Students’
Experiences of Visibility in STEM: More than Raising the
Rainbow Flag' (2024) 87
Higher Education
Indeed, in relation to
abortion this was the case in Western Australia until 2024 – see
(WA) s 334 as it existed prior to 27 March 2024. The new Western
Australian legislative provisions relating to abortion instead use
the term 'a
person' – see, eg,
Public Health Act 2016
noted that public consultation materials relating to this abortion law reform
stated that pregnancy may be experienced
by a person of any gender, but then
referred to 'a woman' rather than 'a person' throughout – a matter that
the first author
of this article raised in their consultation submission –
see Aidan Ricciardo,
Submission to the Abortion Legislation Reform
(Public Health Regulation Directorate, 17 December 2022)
Gerber and O’Hara
Fimognari et al (n 4)
Lisa Campo-Engelstein and
Nadia Johnson, 'Revisiting “The Fertilization Fairytale”: An
Analysis of Gendered Language
used to Describe Fertilization in Science
Textbooks from Middle School to Medical School' (2014) 9
Cultural Studies of
Science Education
Hayes and Temple-Smith (n 24) 943–4;
Beni, Fisher and Longhurst (n 31) 985–6; Aivelo, Neffling and Karala (n
See, eg, Safer (n 5).
Emily Yarrow and Karen
Johnston, 'Athena SWAN: “Institutional Peacocking” in the Neoliberal
University' (2023) 30(3)
Gender, Work & Organization
Sue Clegg, ‘Knowing
Through Reflective Practice in Higher Education’ (2000) 8(3)
Educational Action Research
451, 451, 466. See also Aidan Ricciardo,
Julie Falck and Joe Louis Robinson, ‘Academic Experiences of Gradeless
Learning' (2022)
Western Australian Law Teachers' Review
Freire (n 99) 128.
Aidan Ricciardo and Liam
Elphick, ‘Under My Umbrella: LGBTQIA+ Rights, LGBTQIA+ Researchers and
‘Internal Allyship’
(2024) 49(2)
Alternative Law Journal
Ibid 131–2.
Contrary to best practice
– see Sørlie (n 43) 637–8, 641–2.
See generally Ricciardo
et al (n 41) 317–19, 330.
See generally Lydia Fagan
and Victoria Rawlings, 'Gender Fluidity And “Other Left-Wing
Superstitions”: Problem Representations
In The Inquiry Report On The Nsw
Parental Rights Bill' (2024)
Educational Review
3–4 (online ahead
of print); Human Rights Watch,
“I Became Scared, This Was Their
Goal”: Efforts to Ban Gender and Sexuality Education in Brazil
(Report, 2022); Payne and Smith (n 136) 412–15.
A similar approach
– anchoring choices to sources of perceived objectivity – is
recommended by Gerber and O’Hara
(n 37) 432.
Australian Government,
Clinical Practice Guidelines: Pregnancy Care
(Guidelines, 2020). A
slightly different passage appears in the updated 2025 version of these
Guidelines – see Australian Living
Evidence Collaboration,
Practice Guidelines: Pregnancy Care
(Guidelines, 2025) 9.
Kinnon R MacKinnon et al,
'Recognizing and Renaming in Obstetrics: How do we Take Better Care with
Language?' (2021) 14(4)
Obstetric Medicine
Cody (n 115) 2.
See generally Gerber and
O’Hara (n 37) 452–5.
Abortion can be
conceptualised as reproductive health – see, eg, Enze Xing et al,
'Abortion Rights are Health Care Rights'
(2023) 8(11)
JCI Insight
See generally,
Štrkalj and Pather (n 32); Janet Hyde et al, 'The Future of Sex and Gender
in Psychology: Five Challenges to
the Gender Binary' (2019) 74(2)
Psychologist
171; Sarah Hunt, 'Embodying Self-Determination: Beyond the
Gender Binary' in
Determinants of Indigenous Peoples' Health: Beyond the
(Canadian Scholars, 2nd ed, 2018); Matsuno and Budge (n 55); Ada S
Chung et al, 'Non-Binary and Binary Gender Identity in Australian
Gender Diverse Individuals' (2020) 49(1)
Archives of Sexual Behaviour
AB v Western
[2011] HCA 42.
It should also be noted
that an intersex person – like any person – may have any gender
Public health can include
reproductive health – see eg, Farzana Kapadia, 'Reproductive Justice
Matters: A Public Health of
Consequence' (2022) 112(8)
American Journal of
Public Health
Though not itself
technically reproductive health, gender affirming treatments intersect with
reproductive health – see, eg,
Kenny Rodriguez-Wallberg et al,
'Reproductive Health in Transgender and Gender Diverse Individuals: A Narrative
Review to Guide Clinical
Care and International Guidelines' (2022) 24(1)
International Journal of Transgender Health
John Quigley, 'Government
Delivers Important Reforms for LGBTQIA+ Community' (Media Release, September
<https://www.wa.gov.au/government/media-statements/Cook-Labor-Government/Government-delivers-important-reforms-for-LGBTQIA%2B-community--20240917>.
Aidan Ricciardo et al,
'Supporting LGBTQI+ Diversity and Inclusion in Legal Education: A "How To" Guide
for Law Schools and Law Teachers'
Western Australian Law Teachers'
Marin McCoy et al,
'Understanding Sex and Gender: Concepts and Terminology for Gender Affirming
Care' (2024) 54
Pediatric Radiology
1345, 1349–50.
Sheherezade Kara,
Gender is Not an Illness: How Pathologizing Trans People Violates
International Human Rights Law
(GATE Publications, 2017) 5; Maria Elisa
Castro-Peraza et al, 'Gender Identity: The Human Right of Depathologization'
(2019) 16(6)
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Article No 978, 5–8; Husain (n 69); Suess Schwend (n 67).
Indeed, inclusive
pedagogy scholarship specific to human rights education has been helpful in
informing my own teaching in other
areas of law – see generally
Gerber and O’Hara (n 37).
See generally Fimognari
et al (n 4).
Kjærgaard, Elisabeth N Mikkelsen and Julie Buhl-Wiggers, ‘The
Gradeless Paradox: Emancipatory Promises but
Ambivalent Effects of Gradeless
Learning in Business and Management Education’ [2022]
1, 2; Aidan Ricciardo and Julie Falck, 'Letting them Learn How to
be Law Students: Student Perceptions of "Ungraded Pass/Fail" Assessment
Foundational Subject of a Qualifying Law Degree' (2022) 15
Journal of the
Australaisan Law Academics Association
Fimognari et al (n 4)
See, eg, Hayes and
Temple-Smith (n 24); Beni, Fisher and Longhurst (n 31).
Fimognari et al (n 4)
See, eg, John Cleland,
Sarah Harbison, and Iqbal H Shah, 'Unmet Need for Contraception: Issues and
Challenges' (2014) 45(2)
Studies in Family Planning
105. See also Amanda
Francis, Sona Jasani and Gloria Bachmann, 'Contraceptive Challenges and the
Transgender Individual' (2018) 4
Women's Midlife Health
Fimognari et al (n 4).
This data collection has
approval from the University of Western Australia Human Research Ethics Office
– reference 2022/ET000415.
Fimognari et al (n 4)
Bovill et al (n 128);
Alison Cook-Sather and Kelly E Matthews, 'Pedagogical Partnership: Engaging with
Students as Co-creators of
Curriculum, Assessment and Knowledge' in Lynne Hunt
and Denise Chalmers (eds),
University Teaching in Focus
(Routledge, 2nd
ed, 2021) ch 11.
Fimognari et al (n 4)
Timothy Endicott, 'Law
and Language' in Edward N Zalta et al (eds),
The Stanford Encyclopedia of
(Stanford University, Spring 2022)
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2022/entries/law-language/>.
Matthew Normand, 'The
Language of Science' (2017) 42(3)
Perspectives on Behaviour Science
Ricciardo and Elphick (n
150) 126–7.
This is consistent with
the role of teachers in critical pedagogy. As put by Freire (n 99) 80,
‘[t]he teacher is no longer
merely the-one-who-teaches, but one who is
himself taught in dialogue with the students, who in turn while being taught
also teach.’
See generally McCoy et al
For specific
recommendations and strategies in this regard see Finn et al (n 1).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (227 KB)
PDF format (728 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter