URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adams, Michael --- "Australian corporate law reform or evolution?" [2012] ALRS 1
CORPORATE REFORM – EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
PROFESSOR MICHAEL
School of Law, University of Western Sydney
In Greek mythology, Theseus used a ball of string to get out of a labyrinth;
so this paper will do the same in the field of Australian
corporate reform. This
paper examines the difficult issue of predicting future developments in
corporate law reform, based on historical
developments to date. The many topics
to be discussed are grouped according to three predominant themes, first,
officers/directors;
second, shareholders/institutions & AGMs; and third,
global corporate governance. The key assessment of the paper will concern
question of whether the corporate reform agenda has evolved over the last twenty
years, or whether there has been a revolution,
or even, whether the future holds
the possibility of revolutionary reform?
I INTRODUCTION
It is interesting to note that Australian corporate reform has been
continuing consistently since 1989. It can be argued that at times
we have had a
revolution of corporate reform, but it is far easier to argue that it has been
an evolution. This paper explores the
bigger picture, beyond the usual
developments in case law and legislation/regulation. Although it is important
for governance professionals,
directors, lawyers and company secretaries to keep
up-to-date with changes, it is also important to look beyond the usual
boundaries.
In effect this paper provides ‘clues’ to the anticipated
corporate reforms, by way of commentary on the current state-of-play.
It is said in Greek mythology that Theseus had a ball of string (called a
‘clews’) which he unwound as he travelled through
a labyrinth, so he
would not get lost. This paper will in turn string together contemporary clues
to the labyrinth of corporate regulations.
I also note that Saint Ives (the
person, rather than the three English towns, and the Sydney suburb) was the
Patron Saint of Lawyers
and on his tomb its states “Saint Ives was Breton;
A lawyer and not a thief; A marvellous thing to the people”.
Big Ideas Outside This Paper:
When we ponder on the bigger picture it is possible to overlook that the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
in May 2012,
projected that Australia would be the fourth fastest growing developed economy,
at the rate of 3.1%, only behind South
Korea, Mexico and Chile. One need not
mention that New Zealand’s predicted growth is 1.9%, USA’s 2.4%,
and poor Greece is at negative
Alternatively, we could focus on the remarkable rate of insolvencies that are
occurring in Australia. We are all aware of the two-speed
economy, but the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) are reporting the
highest levels of insolvencies since statistical
records were introduced in
1999. In February 2012 over 1,123 businesses were placed in administration
compared to 518 in January
2012. 40% of the businesses placed into
administration were court ordered. Of greater concern is the fact that the 97%
of corporate
administrations only return 11 cents in every dollar of debt.
The full impact of the financial crisis, around the world, post-2008 Global
Financial Crisis (GFC) is still having repercussions on
the local economies and
securities markets. A few weeks ago A$56billion was wiped from the Australian
Securities Exchange (ASX) market
and SuperRatings warned of superannuation being
down by 3.2% on balanced funds, as there is a global flight to safety at this
of uncertainty. By the end of May 2012, it was calculated that a total of
A$105billion was wiped off the
Finally, the world is watching to see if Greece defaults and is forced (or
elects) to leave the Euro-zone as well as what that might
mean for the banking
and finance sector. It is hard to see if this is a cause of corporate reform or
time for a revolution.
Big Ideas Within This Paper:
Now that we know what I am not going to discuss, we need to focus on the
three big topic areas I do intend to cover:
and directors;
Shareholders,
Institutions and AGMs; and
corporate governance.
II OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS
There are some really important developments occurring in the area of
officers’ duties, or more commonly called ‘directors’
duties’. It is worth remembering that there are approximately 1.9 million
registered companies, and each must have at least
one director. Each year, ASIC,
through the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions, has successfully
prosecuted over 25 directors!
However, the corporate reform agenda has focused primarily on the definitions
of officers and directors, the various roles management
play (company secretary
and general counsel are examples – what should a CFO know etc). It has
been effected through key case
law (and pending cases), as well as a constant
flow of legislative reform.
Finally, there are increasingly important issues relating to diversity within
the boardroom, which hold the potential to add value
to the corporation. This
diversity might be linked to gender, culture (race/ethnicity) or even
technology.
Some Definitional Issues:
It is worth noting that the legal term ‘officer’ is defined in
Corporations Act 2001
(a) a director or secretary of the corporation; or
(b) a person:
(i) who makes, or participates in making, decisions that affect the
whole, or a substantial part, of the business of the corporation;
(ii) who has the capacity to affect significantly the corporation's
financial standing.
In most cases, the majority of officers of a corporation are the directors,
but this does include the chief executive officer (CEO),
possibly the chief
financial officer (CFO) and other senior executives, depending upon the size and
structure of the corporation.
In a small corporation, there is likely to be only
one director, who is also the CEO. The 2003 Royal Commission into the collapse
of HIH Insurance recommended the change of terminology from ‘executives to
the more functional approach of
Corporations Act
also provides a definition of
‘director’, which is also found in
(a) a person who:
(i) is appointed to the position of a director; or (ii) is
appointed to the position of an alternate director and is acting in that
capacity; regardless of the name that is given to their position; and
(b) unless the contrary intention appears, a person who is not validly
appointed as a director if:
(i) they act in the position of a director; or
(ii) the directors of the company or body are accustomed to act in
accordance with the person's instructions or wishes.
In 99% of cases, it is
very clear who is an officer of a company, insofar as it includes all the
directors and the company secretary
(if appointed). In small corporations, the
CEO or managing director is nearly always a registered director. Even if he or
not, they would be deemed to be an officer of the company and thus bound
by the same laws.
Officers of a company have very well defined legal obligations and there is a
clear link to the role of corporate governance in all
Over the last decade,
corporate governance, and in particular the role of officers’ duties, has
come under the microscope of
the Australian courts, in all
No director, company
secretary, general counsel or CFO could argue they did not know what is expected
of them in terms of the basic
legal duties owed to the company. The HIH
Insurance Royal Commissioner, the Hon Justice Neville Owen, in May 2008,
re-stated the
need for a commitment to education on the fiduciary principle and
for greater professionalism in governance.
This paper builds on some earlier published work on directors’ and
officers’ duties.
The Federal
Minister responsible for developments in this area of law has noted that a
review into the Safe Harbour Rule (known as
the Business Judgment
Review of Sanctions
in Corporate Law
paper, did not
expect any quick changes at the moment. This is a very true statement, as there
has been no change to this officers’
defence and few directors have ever
been able to successfully rely upon it as a defence. The details of the business
judgment rule
are discussed below.
It is fair to say that any lay person might feel confused over the state of
Australian corporate law. This is sharply brought into
focus for directors and
company officers that have an increasingly high expectations imposed upon them
by a number of stakeholders.
But the courts do not remain static, in large part due to the wonders of the
common law system of precedent. A broader meaning of
the term officer was given
in the recent Victorian Supreme Court case of
where a senior
manager was deemed to be an officer for the purposes of the
Corporations
. Similarly, the more complex issue of
occurs and in another recent case,
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL (no
stresses the need
to look beyond the formal appointment procedures to determine whether a person
owes a fiduciary duty.
Basic Review of Australian Officers’
In April 2010 the Australian Government’s reform body for corporate
law, the Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee (CAMAC)
published a more
detailed guide for directors.
This report outlined in detail the challenges facing directors and the various
guidance to be drawn from legislation, the case law,
the regulators and the ASX
Corporate Governance Council. It also provides an international comparison with
the United Kingdom and
North America. However the report is a more useful
resource for public companies and those listed on the ASX, rather than smaller
Before examining the recent developments in Australian case law on officers
and, in particular, director’s duties, it is valuable
to review the
existing legal framework. There is a natural overlap between the legislation
imposed by Parliament and the case law
developed over the last couple of
centuries. Companies have existed since the
but the modern,
incorporated (registered) company can be traced back to
Australia has , for the
most part, followed the corporate laws of the United Kingdom but has only moved
to registered corporations
as part of the change, in 1991, to a national system,
under what is now the
Corporations Act 2001
In Australia, the
laws relating to officers and directors can be divided into three parts:
• Statutory duties;
• Common law duties (such as the duties of care, skill and diligence);
• Equitable fiduciary duties.
The fundamental duties, that are imposed on all officers of all registered
companies, can be illustrated in a simple Venn diagram.
The overlapping areas
represent how the
Corporations Act
reflects aspects of both the common
law and equitable principles.
: Overview of officers’
(Adams, 1992 –
updated 2011)
Some duties are specifically laid out in statute, such as the prohibition on
insider trading in
Other duties, such as when directors have
interests in company contracts, are both statutory
and fiduciary
Directors must not trade while insolvent, by virtue of
and have a common law duty to consider creditors in times of financial trouble,
as in the High Court case of
The three circles intersect at s
which provides
that the duties imposed by legislation are additional to, and not exclusive
from, the duties imposed at common law
and in equity. Thus a director could be
sued for all three bases of action, rather than just the
Corporations Act
or the common law/equity principles. An example of a director being held liable
for all three types of actions occurred in
South Australia State Bank v
A breach of
may result in a civil penalty order, under
, but this is not applied under the common law or equity. However, further
criminal liability may also arise under
, in relation to the types of
breaches found in
. This is important due to the different kinds
of remedies that apply to civil, civil penalty and criminal cases.
Beyond Recent Case Law
However, it is worth noting that at common law, officers are expected to be
honest and to take reasonable care in exercising their
duties. At the same time,
provides that officers are required to discharge their duties in good
faith and for a proper purpose, whilst
provides that they must do so
with reasonable care and diligence. This is comparable to the tort of
negligence, which was recognised
in the corporate directors’ context in
ASIC v Adler
equitable principles of avoiding conflicts of interest and not taking advantage
of confidential information are reflected
respectively.
Working, professional directors and officers (as well as the many
non-executive and part-time directors) have difficulty keeping up-to-date
the many cases surrounding the same factual circumstances, but which often deal
with different aspects of the law. For example
the One.Tel litigation, which is
often cited as the decision of
involves many
different sub-cases. Obviously, the HIH litigation and the GIO litigation all
produced many cases surrounding the directors’
duties. In the future, the
2007-2008 collapses of Opes Prime brokers’ litigation and Centro shopping
centres will produce multiple
cases to confuse, or possibly enlighten, directors
and company secretaries.
One of the most significant decisions was the
(known as the
Greaves One.Tel case
’) which occurred in 2003, as it
examined the precise role of a chairman of the collapsed telecommunications
company. Austin
J held that Mr Greaves had been a paid, non-executive director
with finance experience and thus owed a higher duty of care under
the common law
and statute than other directors. This original case was a procedural action,
which was to be struck out, but went
on to an out-of-court settlement for $20
million, which was paid to the liquidator. This settlement, plus an agreed
banning order,
had to be formally certified by White J and thus gives legal
status to the earlier decision of Austin J in the NSW Supreme Court.
did not work out positively for ASIC in 2009. Before
detailing the failed litigation of ASIC, it is important to note the limited
success in the
James Hardie
litigation and other major cases.
The High Court of Australia does not often examine corporate law cases, but
one of the many One.Tel cases which it did consider,
examined the
importance of procedures in the area of civil penalties. The HIH Insurance
cases around
ASIC v Adler
scrutinised in depth the civil penalty standards of directors’ duties. In
particular whether Mr Rodney Adler acted dishonestly
(a breach of
failure to take reasonable care and diligence (a breach of
Williams and Mr Adler. Unusually, a separate criminal prosecution was launched
against Mr Williams
resulting in a conviction
and jail sentence. This was followed by the high profile case of Steve Vizard,
which involved the misuse
of confidential information, from the boardroom of
Telstra, for personal gain.
case could have been brought under the insider trading laws, but was in fact
brought under the directors’ duties provision
for misusing confidential
information.
Hot on the heels of the HIH Insurance cases were the GIO cases (the hostile
takeover by AMP of GIO) which resulted in
In this case the
three CFOs of the various GIO companies were held liable for a breach of their
duties as officers of the target
company. A higher duty of care had been
expected of a chair of a company, or even a board audit committee, following
Hall v Poolman
Thus, after a number of successes against directors in the civil and criminal
courts, ASIC potentially hit a wall. The initial highs
of the successful 2009
James Hardie
resulted in an appellate court over-ruling Gzell J in a number of ways and
exonerating most of the directors held liable. The
Hardie Industries NV v
was a huge step
backwards for the regulator. The outcome of the appeal was that the company
(JHL) was found to have made misleading
statements to the ASX in June 2002 and
failed to comply with continuous disclosure obligations. The CFO at the time, Mr
Morley, was
in breach of his duty in advising the board and thereby limited the
nature of the predicted analysis of compensation. Similarly,
the company
secretary and general counsel, Mr Shafron, had part of his appeal upheld, but
was still found to be in breach of his
duty to advise the board. The other
non-executive directors, including the chair, Ms Hellicar, were successful in
their appeals such
that the finding of breaches of the officers’ duty in
were removed (in respect of the approved minutes of the board meeting, which
became the ASX announcement on asbestos compensation).
ASIC was criticised for
not calling a particular witness (an external lawyer) who was present at the
relevant board meeting of JHL.
In May 2012, the High Court finally ruled on the
James Hardie
with a clear statement, holding the non-executive directors
The matter was
also remitted to the NSW Court of Appeal for the determination of the
appropriate penalty for the non-executive. But
the executive director that
appealed, the company secretary and general counsel, was dismissed and the
person was held to have failed
to advice the CEO and board of information from
the professional advisors and the famous media release of 16
February 2001, in
One of the most important contemporary decisions involved the entrepreneur
and miner, Mr Andrew ‘Twiggy’ Forrest and his
ASX listed company,
Fortescue Metals Group Ltd (FMG). Mr Forrest, on behalf of FMG, announced
through both media releases and ASX
announcements that ‘binding
agreements’ with various Chinese, state-owned, corporations had been made
to develop the
Pilbara region of Western Australia for iron ore exploration.
From August 2004 until November 2004 the share price rose of FMG from
to $1.93. By March 2005 the share price had reached a high of $5.05 per share.
Australian Financial Review
investigated the claims of the so-called
binding agreement and as a result the price started to drop (once the agreements
were formally
disclosed to the ASX).
ASIC started proceedings against the FMG for making misleading statements and
failing to comply with continuous disclosure laws. In
addition, Mr Forrest, as
an officer of the company, was alleged to have breached his officers’ duty
of reasonable care under
Corporations Act
The Federal Court
found that there was no breach of the Act in
ASIC v Fortescue Metal Group [No
ASIC decided to appeal the decision of the trial judge, Gilmour J, and were
successful on all counts in
ASIC v Fortescue Metals Group
The actual penalty
imposed on FMG for the misleading conduct, contravening
, failure to
comply with continuous disclosure, contravening
, or personally against
Mr Forrest for the officers’ duty of reasonable care, contrary to
and his involvement in the breach of continuous disclosure, pursuant to
, has not yet been
determined.
Significantly an
application for leave to appeal to the High Court has been made such that we
await the decision sometime in 2012.
Centro litigation
has raised many concerns about the ability of
directors and officers to personally equip themselves with the financial
literacy and
the converse ability to rely upon others, such as an external
expert or even the audit committee. The decision in
showed that the board
did not take the necessary care with the financial accounts, but accepted their
individual forthrightness and
thus did not impose penalties. A separate class
action has just been settled, in May 2012, against the auditors and companies
$200million, with the legal costs at $15m and IMF funders receiving $60m and
leaving the shareholders to split the remaining $125m
A further example is
the case of
Kirby v Centro Properties Ltd (No
which dealt with the
difficult issue of legal privilege in advice provided to the board.
Finally, all directors and officers tend to place a high level of reliance
upon directors and officers insurance policies (known as
policies) for protection. However, D&O policies were recently brought under
the microscope of the New Zealand
High Court in
Steigrad & Ors v BFSL
2007 Ltd & Ors
court ruled that the creditors are entitled to any money paid by the insurer to
the company in satisfaction of specific debts.
This principle could be applied
to Australian policies in the future.
All of the above comments only touch on a tiny proportion of the corporate
reform case law that occurs every year. It is important
to note that many of the
principles of law discussed above can be derived from the basic legal duties
which were borrowed, by way
of an analogy to the duties owed by the trustees to
the beneficiaries, from
Re German Mining Co; ex parte
Chippendale
Although the
Corporations Act
in many ways codifies the common law and equitable
duties, there is still an overlap even though they have different outcomes in
terms of remedies or sanctions.
ASIC must take risks with litigation, as it is the only way to really test
the complex statutory provisions of the
Corporations Act
. However, there
is a publicity risk when the regulators lose a major case, which makes proper
case preparation absolutely crucial.
Beyond Corporate Reform in Legislation
Over the last twenty years, we have lived with the constant reform in
corporate law, from the Simplification Task Force to the Corporate
Law Economic
Reform Program (CLERP), and towards a more
approach of naming
legislation. As well as the primary legislation, there are literally thousands
of regulations and other minor
changes which constantly flow through the
corporate environment, depending upon the particular industry or service or
policy – carbon tax would be an example.
For the purposes of this paper, the focus is on the seven noteworthy areas
but these will be deakt with at bird’s eye view,
as all will require
detailed examination if they directly relate to your business entity.
Personal Liability for Corporate Fault Reform Bill 2012
been debated for a while and was intended to provide better clarity for officers
of corporations in certain circumstances.
As discussed above, the business
judgement rule could have been applied broadly to the
Corporations Act
but rather it has been applied narrowly to
reasonable care and diligence
actions. There is some good news for company secretaries, by way of the
suggested amendments, in reducing
liability under
, but an increase to the
general penalties in Schedule 3 of the
Corporations
Future of Financial Advice (FOFA)
reforms – will build on the
amendments of the
Financial Services Reform Act 2001
, which greatly
altered the licensing regime under the
Corporations Act
. The focus is on
protecting consumers and clients who receive financial advice, but such reforms
come at the cost of
compliance.
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
– became operational from 30 January 2012 and completely changed the
way personal security arrangements are facilitated. It
also introduces a new
regime with new terminology, in respect of regulation and compliance, such as
the reference to a ‘security
interest’ and requirement that it be
‘perfect’. A two-year transitional period applies to the
legislation, but
all corporations should be working with their professional
advisers so as to be prepared for the new PPSA priority rules and enforcement
provisions which will be
Business Names Registration Act 2011
it has been flagged for
some time that ASIC will take regulatory control of all national business names
and apply similar tests and
procedures that already occur with corporate names
and the Australian Trade Marks Register. The new law became effective on 28 May
2012, but there are still some states and territories that have yet to pass
enabling legislation to make the Business Names Register
fully national and
functional.
Work Health and Safety national legislation
has long been a push to create a simplified version of occupational health and
safety (OHS) laws which is harmonised between
the states and territories. The
Commonwealth, NSW, Queensland and ACT have passed the necessary laws and others
are following suit.
It has had the effect of creating new terminology, such as
the movement from ‘employers’ to ‘PCBU’ (persons
conducting a business or undertaking). Also employees, visitors and even
volunteers have clearer duties owed to them (even when working
from home). A lot
has already been written on WHS and in the next few years, even more will be
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
– carbon tax – the conversion of the
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) into the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) helped split the anti-competitive (monopolies, price-fixing etc)
provisions from the consumer protection provisions. The creation
of Schedule 2
, which is known as the
Australian Consumer Law
’), brought together the wide-ranging provisions of
the federal, state and territories consumer laws under one structure. A
simplification of the enforcement of remedies and sanctions, the consistency for
national businesses, as well as giving equal consumer
rights to all Australians,
were positive steps. However, as with all change there are direct costs, for
instance overtime will become
just part of the ‘licence to do
business’. One particular area of focus of consumer protection has always
been ‘misleading
or deceptive conduct’, which was known as a section
52 action, which is now officially dealt with by
There is currently a particular focus on misleading environment claims (known as
‘greenwash’).
regulator, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), has set up
a specific surveillance unit relating to misleading
claims arising from the
introduction of the ‘carbon tax’ in July 2012.
Corruption legislation
– the introduction of which has become a
prominent global issue. The Corruption Perceptions Index that is published by
Transparency
International, which covers 182 countries, indicates corruption
risks. There are already some provisions, in the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), which cover Australian companies, as well as Australian and International
Bribery Act
(UK) and the
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 1977
§§ 78dd-1 have been amended and updated to tackle a number of global
concerns. These international statutes have
a broad reach, covering US and UK
companies operating in Australia, as well as Australian companies operating
internationally.
The damage of
reputation for the Reserve Bank of Australia (through its subsidiary Securency
Note Printing); Lend Lease’s fraud
settlement for US$56million and even
the News Limited phone hacking scandal, are immense.
The question for the board is about the perception of risk, as much as the
actual likelihood of risk, to the board, for breaching
either case law or the
developing legislation. Boards need to be educated, advised and guided, but not
so as to be paralysed by fear
of making an incorrect decision. This requires a
tricky balancing act.
Diversity in the Boardroom
One of the continuing debates in the field of corporate reform is the role of
diversity in the boardroom. The days in which all directors
personally knew each other, and/or had a series of mutual friends, should have
changed decades ago. The problem with the
debate on diversity is that it gets
bogged down on just gender diversity, thus overlooking the need for cultural
giversity (traditionally
expressed as race, now more commonly as ethnicity),
generational diversity (baby-boomers to generation ‘Y’ or even
‘i-Generation’)
to diversity in the use of technology!
There is research to support the proposition that diversity in the boardroom
will increase profitability and sustainability of
organisations.
In respect of
gender, the celebration of International Women’s Day on 8 March 2012 saw
the release of a report by the Australian
Institute of Company Directors on
female appointments to ASX listed companies. In 2012, the percentage had
increased in the top 200
companies to 13.8%, compared to only 11.2% in 2011 and
below 10% in 2010. This translates as 68 new female appointments to ASX 200
boards, which is one in three of all new appointments. There is a strong
representation in the biggest companies, thus the ASX top
20 companies have 20%
female directors and top 100 ASX companies have
The European Union (EU) is planning to impose mandatory quotas in order to
increase the number of women on boards. In 2012, a three-month
consultation
outlining the EU’s proposals has commenced. It will seek views on the
levels of quotas and methods for monitoring
and enforcement. The EU Justice
Commissioner stated that this is necessary as so little progress has been made
towards a 40% target,
as a minimum proportion of women on boards. The EU figures
show only 13.7% of board members at large listed companies as women. In
of the UK, there are just ten all-male boards in the FTSE100 and the proportion
has increased to 14.9% from 12.5% last
Following from the discussion around gender diversity, there needs to be some
recognition of the impact of cultural
This might include
race or ethnicity issues or generational aspects. The majority of directors on
listed companies would be classified
baby-boomers,
Generation ‘X’
Thus, a technology
company might wish to have inter-generation board members to reflect its
workforce, customers or other stakeholders.
To take the line of thought further,
it might be a technology gab that requires diversity within the
The move from fixed devices and controlled standard operating environments
will most likely change to a policy of
drastic impacts on the way businesses operate. The flexibility and cost transfer
will be positive, but security, viruses,
bandwidth/downloads and support costs
will change dramatically.
III SHAREHOLDERS, INSTITUTIONS AND AGMS
There are a number of internationally developing themes relating to the
question of the influence and power of shareholders; the role
of institutional
investors and in part a question as to the real value of the annual general
meeting (AGM). This part of the paper
simply summarises some of the key issues
and provides an elementary discussion and observation.
Annual General Meetings (AGMs)
The annual general meeting continues to be as a necessity, as the
Corporations Act
requires all public companies to go through the
mechanics, albeit without any evaluation of the costs nor benefits of this
The 2011 AGM season is likely to be challenging for many
There has been limited research on the true costs and benefits of AGMs. One
key question is the changing face of shareholders and
the role of technology at
AGMs. There needs to be much more analysis of the appropriateness and
effectiveness of all meetings, but
in particular the traditional AGM. In 1995
Parliament deemed the AGM unnecessary for private companies, but felt it was
still appropriate
for public companies.
The real contentions seem to be around the voting issues at AGMs, the role of
the notices and proxy appointments and the need for
an overall communication
strategy with shareholders – both individuals and large institutional
Impact of Executive Remuneration on Meetings
There has been a huge debate on the merits of disclosing executive
remuneration and the value of shareholders voting on a non-binding
resolution.
The laws have been amended over time to result in an ambiguous
‘two-strikes rule’ under the
Corporations Act
, as well as
provisions in the APRA Guidelines and ASX Corporate Governance Council’s
Principles.
A bigger question around the growth in institutional power and through the
block voting capacity of superannuation trusts, is the
diminishing role of
minority members. Well over half of the adult Australian population owns shares
in publicly listed companies
directly (and a huge number, indirectly, through
superannuation).
At the time the original ‘non-binding vote’ was passed into law
in 2005, I personally wrote a submission to Treasury,
recorded in Hansard,
equating ‘it [to] being as useful as a chocolate tea-pot’. Senator
Stephen Conroy, at the time,
disagreed and we would have to wait and see what
would eventuate. The fact that, in 2012, we now have legislation requiring the
two-strikes
rule means that it is safe to assume that the previous provisions
did not work as expected! There are questions around whether laws
million companies, are the same as the 20,000 public companies and the sub-set
of 2,100 listed public companies on the securities
IV GLOBAL CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
There have been many reviews, reports, commissions, academic scholarly works
on, and practical application to, the question of whether
corporate governance
adds value to an organisation, and in turn, whether one system better than
another. The answers have not always
been carefully provided and there is
overwhelming, corroborative, empirical evidence as to the impact of
sustainability in governance.
There is also a growing body of evidence as to the value-add of governance and
international scholarship to demonstrate that one
system is not superior to
another. Thus, there is no direct evidence that the Anglo-American system of
governance is superior to
the European two-tiered boards or the examined
Japanese or other Asian family-based (small control span) entities.
The 2008 global financial crisis (GFC) and the many 2011-2012 aftershocks
with the European financial crisis, can be stated to be
a consequence of the
failure of corporate governance. Without a doubt this is too simplistic an
approach and a greater understanding
of how global corporate governance actually
works is required. There is an arguable connection or correlation, but is it
significant
enough of a result to have a major change in government policy or a
need for the private sector to react differently? It is fair
to say that the
debate as to what constitute ‘good corporate governance’ is still
open; practical and empirical research
in law, economics, finance, accounting
and management, does not always arrive at the same conclusions.
Convergence Debate
There is a level of arrogance in the Anglo-American literature that the one
model of corporate governance is far superior to the other
purported systems of
governance. In the early 2000s there was a lot of material written by academic
scholars suggesting that there
would be a natural convergence of corporate
governance practices into a single model.
But subsequently there has been
a very strong argument that governance is jurisdictionally irrelevant and that
culture can play a
major role in economic development. It is not appropriate to
maintain a simplistic view of insider corporate governance systems,
or for that
matter for countries like Germany and Japan to receive global pressure in favour
of a ‘superior’, shareholder
orientated, outsider corporate
governance system, such as those applied in the USA, UK and Australia. This is
not really convergence,
but a move to transformation of capital markets and an
end to globalisation.
Corporate governance is not a moral position for a few jurisdictions, but
rather is naturally open to all types of jurisdictions and
capital markets. Over
the last several decades it has proven to be a strong economic indicator, but
not a predictor, of corporate
failure in any country.
Changing Nature of Governance – Global
Communication
The last 20 years of contemporary corporate governance, post the 1992 Cadbury
and its equivalent
reviews in New Zealand, Australia, USA, South Africa and many other countries,
have seen a major shift, which
is described well in
Boards that
The ease of
communication, around the world, enables not only the multi-national or even
transnational corporation to access the latest
governance trends, but simple
‘Google searches’ provide ample resources to examine, in depth, the
practical and theoretical
governance.
The ability to
compare and contrast successes and failures of systems of governance around the
globe has become an effective tool
in governance developments. In Australia, it
was common for a director to sit on a board in Melbourne and get ideas for the
he or she might sit on in Sydney. Now with a click of an iPad or
smartphone, the innovative director can be checking on governance
developments
in Poland, Sweden or even New Zealand.
Global Trends
There are numerous studies as to the benefits of corporate governance for
global entities, whether they be transnational corporations
or the more
traditional multi-national
However, by far the
majority of business entities are privately owned (and/or family businesses)
with a small percentage being quoted
on a local stock exchange, in a single
legal jurisdiction. As such, the often cited ‘trickle-down effect’
of big business
adds on the cost of compliance without any real tangible
benefit. For an interesting and detailed analysis of corporate governance
Asia-Pacific region, ‘Corporate Governance: An Asia-Pacific
is an excellent
starting point, with the 2012
Global Corporate Governance Forum
bringing the
literature right up-to-date.
The breath in literature and issues of governance, primarily from the legal
regulation literature (rather than accounting, economic,
finance or management)
includes Professor Farrar on the developments in greater
to Professor Armstrong
dealing with tangible value of governance
Professor Tomasic in
2000 analysed the international challenges of good corporate
to Dr Tricker on
cultural dependence of
to the more local
focus of Dr Comino’s article on better corporate regulation in
All demonstrate a move
away from convergence and towards a global transformation model.
Conflict with Role of Global Governance
If there is little agreement with the role of corporate governance by legal
scholars, there is even less so by economists. This conflict
of views was
illustrated at the CSA national conference in December 2011, when David
described the impact of
the BRIC economies with a positive slant, which was immediately followed by
Satyajit Das
on the unstable
economic state of affairs. Therefore one can conclude that governance is not a
clear indicator of economic growth
or stability.
Useful Resources
The academic and practical literature continues to grow on what seems to be a
monthly basis. This reflects the global understanding
of the importance of
corporate governance. Two recent resources, in late 2011 and January 2012,
provide reliable sources. One has
a very practical framework and was produced by
the global consulting firm Deloitte, whereas the other is by two academics
referred to, Claessens and Yurtoglu.
Deloitte’s ‘
Director360°’
(November 2011)
which is freely
available on the internet, and was based on research conducted on Deloitte
clients, and covered 215 directors in
12 different countries. The reports
subtitle ‘Changing Roles, New Challenges’ reflects practical
outcomes of concerns
directors are facing in an economic downturn. What is
interesting to note is that the findings across South Africa, Sweden, Germany,
India, Japan, UK, Australia and USA are very similar to the empirical study
conducted by Professors Clarke and Adams on purely Australian
listed entities in
The focus of the study by Deloitte was on how boards were evolving in
strategy, overseeing risk and board effectiveness generally.
They also asked the
directors to rate what was on the current board agendas, as well as the top
issues for next 24 months. There
is a clear debate over the monitoring role of
the board of management (in particular the CEO), the performance of CEO and his
her capacity to act as a mentor. Key findings included that more than half of
the directors are experiencing high levels of scrutiny
by the regulators and 85%
felt they were developing strategy for the corporation. The majority of
directors felt the board had a
balance between governance and performance, but
that compliance was a distraction in the economic downturn. The economic
were forcing the board and management to clarify roles and the top
agenda items were consistent around the world.
At a much more substantial level, one of the most detailed international,
comparative reviews of the corporate governance literature
over the last decade
was undertaken by Professors Claessens and Yurtoglu. This covers economics,
finance, management and legal scholarship
and studies in many different
countries and jurisdictions. The survey provides overwhelming evidence of the
importance of corporate
governance at a number of economic points.
Claessens and Yurtoglu’s ‘
Focus: Corporate Governance and
Development – An
is a document
that provides evidence of a link between economic development and corporate
governance, based on extensive studies
in many countries, sectors and business
organisations (from state-owned corporations to public listed entities). In
sifting through
the scores of academic studies the article attempts to determine
what matters most in the way corporate governance can support economic
development and what is needed to implement good practices.
The extensive cross-country research shows financial development, such as
sophisticated and quality banking systems is a powerful
determiner of sound
economic growth. Weak corporate governance prevails in financial markets, which
tend to function poorly. Poor
governance increases market volatility, through a
lack of transparency and by giving insiders the edge on information crucial to
the market integrity and the basis of fair trading. Blind faith is not a
substitute for a thorough verifiable reporting by firms,
led by boards of
directors that clearly articulate their responsibilities and duties.
Countries and companies adopting corporate governance best practices are not
guaranteed success, but rather a move towards sustainability
and establishing
long-term success. This report provides ample evidence as to why adopting good
corporate governance practices is
a worthwhile activity and goal of every
Education May be the Answer...
There is no doubt that boards of directors need to be continually educated,
across a range of matters. In
Lighting the Way to a Better Future
Mandela said that ‘[e]ducation is the most powerful weapon we can use to
change the world’.
applies to everyone, in every capacity. There has been much discussion about the
‘life-long learners’ and the need
for continuing professionalism.
Directors, particularly non-executive, heavily rely upon the professional
expertise of the company
secretary and others within the management team. As
such, the idea to continuously up-date education aspects beyond formal courses,
so as to be up-to-date is critical. The demand for financial literacy courses
since the outcome of the
Centro litigation
has been exponential. It is
understandable that directors are nervous about their legal responsibilities and
are truly accountable
to shareholders, creditors and the regulators.
V CONCLUSION
It is easy to be side-tracked by the latest trend of cases (such as the High
Court decision in the
James Hardie
or the latest
changes in legislation (such as the application of the
). However,
the board’s focus has to be on the company’s strategy and
performance. It is notoriously difficult to predict
but we need to learn
from the mistakes of the past. We can be prepared as governance develops in what
has previously been discussed
as clear trends, locally, regionally and
internationally. This paper is intended to start the conversation to help
educate boards
on an on-going basis. Directors, like all humans, have a variety
of learning styles, which means that anything from reading a document,
watching a TED YouTube video,
listening to a good presentation can be effective.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Articles/Books/Reports
Adams, Michael, ‘The Convergence of International Governance –
Where is Australia Heading?’
Keeping Good Companies
Adams, Michael, ‘Are All Directors Created Equal? Reassessing the Role
of the Chair in the Light of
ASIC v Rich
Keeping Good
Adams, Michael, ‘Whether to Protect or Punish: Legal Consequences of
Contravening the
Corporations Act
Keeping Good
Adams, Michael, ‘Officers’ Duties Under the Microscope’
Keeping Good Companies
Adams, Michael ‘Officers’ Duties – Are We Keeping Up With
the Changes?’
Keeping Good Companies
Adams, Michael ‘Lessons for Non-Executives from
James Hardie
Litigation’
Keeping Good Companies
Ahrens, Michael and Georgie Farrant, ‘Bribery of Foreign Officials
– Key Steps in Mitigating the Risks’ (2012) March,
the Australian
Corporate Lawyer
Adams, Michael and Marina Nehme, ‘No New
Specific Legislation Required to Deal With “Greenwashing”’
Keeping Good Companies
Armstrong, Anona, ‘Corporate Governance Standards: Intangibles and
Their Intangible Value’,
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Comino, Vicky, ‘Towards Better Corporate Regulation in Australia’
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Corporations and Markets Advisory Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Guidance for Directors Report
Das, Satyajit, ‘A Vulnerable State – The Economic Outlook for
64 Keeping Good Companies
Dignam, Alan and Michael Galanis,
The globalization of Corporate
(Ashgate, 2009)
Dooley, Greg, ‘2011 AGM Season – Providing Clues to What Lies
Keeping Good Companies
Douglas, Marnie, ‘Putting Workplace Health and Safety Laws to
Keeping Good Companies
Editor, ‘Embracing Technology in the Boardroom by Moving Board Papers
Into the Digital Realm’
Keeping Good Companies
Editor, ‘EU Outlines Plan for Board Gender Quotas’ (London) April
Chartered Secretary
Farrar, John, ‘Developing Corporate Governance in Greater China’
[2002] UNSWLawJl 29
(2002) 25(2)
UNSW Law Journal
Ferguson, Adele, ‘More Women Join Boards but Glass Ceiling Remains
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney) 08 March 2012
Gilkison, Flora, ‘Diversity and the Governance Double Glazing
Keeping Good Companies
Hargovan, Anil,
‘Directors’ and Officers’ Duty of Care Following
Keeping Good Companies
Anil, ‘Raising the Bar for General Counsel and Company Secretaries - High
Court Decision in
James Hardie
Keeping Good Companies
Harpur, Andrew ‘It’s a Privilege – Company
Secretary’s Notes of Legal Advice to Board Protected’
Keeping Good Companies
Harris, Jsaon, Anil Hargovan and Michael Adams,
Australian Corporate
, (LexisNexis:Butterworths, 3
ed, 2011) 449
Harris, Jason and Nicholas Mirzai, ‘The
Personal Property Securities
and Company Secretaries’
Keeping Good Companies
Head, Michael, Scott Mann and Simon Kozlina (eds),
Transnational
Governance: Emerging Models of Global Legal Regulation
(Ashgate, 2012)
Head, Richard, ‘Directors and Officers Still in the Firing Line –
A Guide to Managing Risk’
Keeping Good Companies
Kiel, Geoffrey and Gavin Nicholson, ‘The Changing Nature of Corporate
Governance’ in
Boards That Work: A New Guide for Directors
(McGraw-Hill, 2003)
Klettner, Alice, Thomas Clarke, and Michael Adams, ‘Balancing Act
– Tightrope of Corporate Governance Reform’
Good Companies
Klettner, Alice, Thomas Clarke and Michael Adams, ‘Corporate Governance
Reform,: An Empirical Study of the Changing Roles and
Responsibilities of
Australian Boards and Directors’
Australian Journal of
Corporate Law
Low (Ed), Chee Keong,
Corporate Governance: An Asia-Pacific Critique
(Sweet & Maxwell Asia, 2002)
MacGibbon, Ainslie, ‘Smarter Use of Home Devices’,
Morning Herald (Sydney) 28 May 2012,
MacMillan, Claire, ‘Impact of Regulatory Reforms on Executive
Remuneration in Australia – AGMs in 2011’
Keeping Good
Mandela, Nelson,
Lighting the way to a better future
(South Africa,
Martin, Peter, ‘Housing a Worry but Economy Booming, Says
Sydney Morning Herald
23 May 2012,
Moodie, Anne Maree, ‘International Governance – Leading a Truly
Diversely-Composed Board’
Keeping Good Companies
Morgan, Gemma, ‘De Facto Directors and Duties –
Chameleon Mining
Keeping Good Companies
Nicholson, Diana and Josh Underhill, ‘Government Releases First Tranche
of Reforms to Company Officer Liability’
(2012) 64(2)
Keeping Good
Nicholson, Gavin and Natalie Elms, ‘Corruption, Corporate Culture and
the Board’s Responsibility’
Keeping Good Companies
Thomas, David, ‘Building With New BRICs’
Good Companies
Thomas, Keith ‘The
Case – Could Creditors Stop
a Company’s D&O Insurers Paying Defence Costs to Directors?’
Keeping Good Companies
Tomasic, Roman, ‘Good Corporate Governance: The International
Challenge’,
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Tricker, Bob ‘Culture Dependence of Corporate Governance’
Keeping Good Companies
Wood, Leonie, ‘Funder Gets $60m from Centro Deal’
Morning Herald
11 May 2012, 3
Yeates, Clancy, ‘Advisers Allowed ‘Opt-In’ Exemption’
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney) 23 March 2012, 3
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Adler
[2002] NSWSC 171
(2002) 168 FLR
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Fortescue Metal Group
[2009] FCA 1586
(2009) 264 ALR 201
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Fortescue Metals Group
[2011] FCAFC 19
(2011) 190 FCR 364
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Healey
[2011] FCAFC 717
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Hellicar
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v MacDonald (No 11)
[2009] NSWSC 287
(2009) 230 FLR 1
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v MacDonald (No 12)
(2009) 259 ALR 116
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Rich
[2003] NSWSC 85
(2003) 174 FLR
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Vines
[2005] NSWSC
Australian Securities and Investment Commission v Vizard
[2005] FCA 1037
Grimaldi v Chameleon Mining NL (no 2)
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
Hall v Poolman
[2007] NSWSC 1330
(2007) 215 FLR 243
Hodgson v Amcor
[2012] VSC 94
James Hardie Industries NV v Australian Securities and Investment
[2010] NSWCA 332
(2010) 274 ALR 85
Kirby v Centro Properties Ltd (No 2)
[2012] FCA 70
(2012) 87 ACSR 229
Morley v Australian Securities and Investment Commission
[2010] NSWCA 331
[2005] NSWSC 274
R v Williams
[2005] NSWSC 315
(2005) 216 ALR 113
Re German Mining Co; ex parte Chippendale
[1854] EngR 664
(1853) 43 E.R. 415
Rich v Australian Securities and Investment Commission
[2004] HCA 42
(2004) 220 CLR
Shafron v Australian Securities and Investment Commission
[2000] HCA 43
(2000) 201 CLR 603
South Australia State Bank v Clark
[1996] SASC 5499
(1996) 66 SASR
Steigrad & Ors v BFSL 2007 Ltd & Ors
[2011] NZHC
Legislation
Bribery Act 2010
Business Names Registration Act 2001
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Corporations Act 2001
Criminal Code Act 1995
Financial Services Reform Act 2001
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 1977
Joint Stock Companies Act 1844
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
Trade Practices Act 1974
Australian Standard on
Fraud and Corruption Control
(AS8001-2008) and
International Standard ISO31000:2009
Risk Management: Principles and
Australian Stock Exchange,
2010 Australian Share Ownership Study
http://www.asx.com.au/documents/resources/2010_australian_share_ownership_study.pdf
http://asicconnect.asic.gov.au
(viewed 1 June 2012)
Commonwealth, The HIH Royal Commission
, The failure of HIH
http://www.hihroyalcom.gov.au/finalreport/index.htm
(viewed 25 May 2012)
Claessens, Stijn and Burcin Yurtoglu,
Corporate Governance and Development – An Update
, (2012) Global
Corporate Governance Forum
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/cgf.nsf/Content/Focus10
Director360°
http://www.deloitte.com/view/en_GX/global/press/dc1da3e2f7213310VgnVCM3000001c56f00aRCRD.htm
http://www.youtube.com/user/TEDtalksDirector
http://www.treasury.gov.au/contentitem.asp?NavId=037 & ContentID=1182
(viewed 10 August 2012)
Sir Adrian Cadbury,
The Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance
http://www.ecgi.org/codes/documents/cadbury.pdf
(viewed 1 June 2012)
Professor Michael Adams is the
Dean of School of Law at the University of Western Sydney and any comments may
be emailed to:
Michael.Adams@uws.edu.au
DRAFT paper
is from a presentation delivered at the
2012 Annual
Corporate Update¸
held in Sydney on 30
Melbourne on 5
June. The paper may only be quoted with
author’s express permission.
Peter Martin, ‘Housing a
Worry but Economy Booming, Says OECD’,
Sydney Morning Herald
23 May 2012,
Australian Financial
Commonwealth, The HIH
Commission, The failure of HIH
http://www.hihroyalcom.gov.au/finalreport/index.htm
(viewed 25 May 2012).
Alice Klettner, Thomas Clarke,
and Michael Adams, ‘Balancing Act – Tightrope of Corporate
Governance Reform’
Keeping Good Companies
Alice Klettner, Thomas Clarke
and Michael Adams, ‘Corporate Governance Reform: An Empirical Study of the
Changing Role and
Responsibilities of Australian Boards and Directors’
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Michael Adams, ‘Are All
Directors Created Equal? Reassessing the Role of the Chair in the Light of
ASIC v Rich
Keeping Good Companies
Adams, ‘Officers’ Duties Under the Microscope’
Keeping Good Companies
; and Michael Adams, ‘Officers’
Duties – Are We Keeping Up With the Changes?’
Good Companies
Corporations Act 2001
http://www.treasury.gov.au/contentitem.asp?NavId=037 & ContentID=1182
(viewed 10 August 2011)
[2012] VSC 94.
[2012] FCAFC 6
(2012) 200 FCR 296
Morgan, ‘De Facto Directors and Duties –
Keeping Good Companies
Corporations and Markets
Advisory Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Guidance for Directors
Honourable East India Company, 1600
Joint Stock
Companies Act 1844
Jason Harris, Anil Hargovan
and Michael Adams,
Australian Corporate Law
, (LexisNexis:Butterworths,
[2000] HCA 43
(2000) 201 CLR
[1996] SASC 5499
(1996) 66 SASR
[2002] NSWSC 171
(2002) 168 FLR
[2003] NSWSC 85
(2003) 174 FLR
[2004] HCA 42
(2004) 220 CLR 129.
detailed discussion on this case, see Michael Adams, ‘Whether to Protect
or Punish: Legal Consequences of Contravening
Corporations Act
Keeping Good Companies
[2002] NSWSC 171
(2002) 168 FLR
R v Williams
[2005] NSWSC 315
(2005) 216 ALR 113.
[2005] NSWSC
ASIC v Vizard
[2005] FCA 1037
(2005) 145 FCR 57..
[2005] NSWSC 738.
detailed discussion of this case, see: Michael Adams, ‘Officers’
Duties Under the Microscope’
Keeping Good Companies
[2007] NSWSC 1330
(2007) 215 FLR
ASIC v MacDonald (No
[2009] NSWSC 287
(2009) 230 FLR 1
and penalties imposed at
ASIC v MacDonald (No 12)
(2009) 259 ALR 116.
[2010] NSWCA 331
(2010) 247 FLR 140.
[2010] NSWCA 332
274 ALR 85.
For more detailed
discussions see Anil Hargovan, ‘Directors’ and Officers’ Duty
of Care Following
James Hardie
Keeping Good Companies
and Richard Head, ‘Directors and Officers Still in the Firing Line
– A Guide to Managing Risk’
Keeping Good Companies
(2012) 86 ALJR 522
Michael Adams, ‘Lessons for Non-Executives from
James Hardie
Litigation’
Keeping Good Companies
(2012) 86 ALJR 584; see
Anil Hargovan, ‘Raising the Bar for General Counsel and Company
Secretaries - High Court Decision
James Hardie
Keeping Good Companies
[2009] FCA 1586
(2009) 264 ALR
[2011] FCAFC 19
(2011) 190 FCR
The Full Bench of the
Federal Court has remitted the matter of penalties to a single judge of the
Federal Court for determination.
Mr Forrest and FMG have appealed to the High
Court of Australia.
[2011] FCAFC 717
278 ALR 618.
Leonie Wood, ‘Funder
Gets $60m from Centro Deal’
Sydney Morning Herald
(Sydney) 11 May
[2012] FCA 70
(2012) 87 ACSR 229
Andrew Harpur, ‘It’s a Privilege – Company Secretary’s
Notes of Legal Advice to Board Protected’
Keeping Good
[2011] NZHC 1037
(‘Bridgecorp case’); see Keith Thomas, ‘The
Case – Could Creditors Stop a Company’s D&O Insurers Paying
Defence Costs to Directors?’
Keeping Good Companies
[1854] EngR 664
(1853) 43 E.R.
Diana Nicholson and Josh
Underhill, ‘Government Releases First Tranche of Reforms to Company
Officer Liability’
(2012) 64(2)
Keeping Good Companies
Clancy Yeates,
‘Advisers Allowed “Opt-In” Exemption’,
Sydney Morning
(Sydney) 23 March 2012, 3.
Jason Harris and Nicholas
Mirzai, ‘The
Personal Property Securities Act
and Company
Secretaries’
Keeping Good Companies
http://asicconnect.asic.gov.au
(viewed 1 June 2012).
Marnie Douglas,
‘Putting Workplace Health and Safety Laws to Work’
Keeping Good Companies
Michael Adams and Marina
Nehme, ‘No New Specific Legislation Required to Deal With
“Greenwashing”’
Keeping Good Companies
Australian Standard on
Fraud and Corruption Control
(AS8001-2008) and International Standard
ISO31000:2009
Risk Management: Principles and Guidelines
Gavin Nicholson and Natalie
Elms, ‘Corruption, Corporate Culture and the Board’s
Responsibility’
Keeping Good Companies
Ahrens and Georgie Farrant, ‘Bribery of Foreign Officials – Key
Steps in Mitigating the Risks’ (2012)
the Australian Corporate
Flora Gilkison,
‘Diversity and the Governance Double Glazing Trap’
Keeping Good Companies
Adele Ferguson, ‘More
Women Join Boards but Glass Ceiling Remains Intact’,
Sydney Morning
(Sydney) 8 March 2012,
Editor, ‘EU Outlines
Plan for Board Gender Quotas’ (London) (2012) April,
Ann-Maree Moodie,
‘International Governance – Leading a Truly Diversely-Composed
Keeping Good Companies
Identified as those
notionally born after the World War II (between 1946 and 1961) by Bernard Salt
The Big Shift
(Hardie Grant Books, 2004).
Notionally born between
1962 and 1981 (then replaced with Generation ‘Y’ after 1982, and it
is argued that there is
a Generation ‘Z’ or
‘iGeneration’ from 1995 to now).
See Editor,
‘Embracing Technology in the Boardroom by Moving Board Papers Into the
Digital Realm’
Keeping Good Companies
BYOD means ‘bring
your own device or sometimes’ BYOT, bring your own technology.
Ainslie MacGibbon,
‘Smarter Use of Home Devices’
Sydney Morning Herald
28 May 2012,
Greg Dooley, ‘2011
AGM Season – Providing Clues to What Lies Ahead’
Keeping Good Companies
Claire MacMillan,
‘Impact of Regulatory Reforms on Executive Remuneration in Australia
– AGMs in 2011’
Keeping Good Companies
For a detailed discussion,
see Australian Stock Exchange,
2010 Australian Share Ownership Study
http://www.asx.com.au/documents/resources/2010_australian_share_ownership_study.pdf
Alice Klettner, Thomas
Clarke and Michael Adams, ‘Corporate Governance Reform: An Empirical Study
of the Changing Roles and
Responsibilities of Australian Boards and
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
In fact the author wrote a
series of articles arguing this was the likely outcome: see Michael Adams,
‘The Convergence of
International Governance – Where is Australia
Keeping Good Companies
Alan Dignam and Michael
The Globalization of Corporate Governance
(Ashgate, 2009).
Sir Adrian Cadbury,
Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance
http://www.ecgi.org/codes/documents/cadbury.pdf
(viewed 1 June 2012)
Geoffrey Kiel and Gavin
Nicholson, ‘The Changing Nature of Corporate Governance’ in
Boards That Work: A New Guide for Directors
(McGraw-Hill, 2003).
Stijn Claessens and Burcin
10 Focus: Corporate Governance and Development – An
, (2012) Global Corporate Governance Forum
http://www.ifc.org/ifcext/cgf.nsf/Content/Focus10
For an interesting
discussion of issues relating to transnational corporations, see Michael Head,
Scott Mann and Simon Kozlina (eds),
Transnational Governance: Emerging Models
of Global Legal Regulation
(Ashgate, 2012).
Chee Keong Low (Ed),
Corporate Governance: An Asia-Pacific Critique
(Sweet & Maxwell Asia,
Claessens and Yurtoglu,
above n 70.
John Farrar,
‘Developing Corporate Governance in Greater China’
[2002] UNSWLawJl 29
(2002) 25(2)
UNSW Law Journal
Anona Armstrong,
‘Corporate Governance Standards: Intangibles and Their Intangible
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Roman Tomasic, ‘Good
Corporate Governance: The International Challenge’,
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Bob Tricker, ‘Culture
Dependence of Corporate Governance’
Keeping Good Companies
Vicky Comino,
‘Towards Better Corporate Regulation in Australia’
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
David Thomas,
‘Building With New BRICs’
Keeping Good Companies
Satyajit Das, ‘A
Vulnerable State – The Economic Outlook for Australia’
Keeping Good Companies
Director360°
http://www.deloitte.com/view/en_GX/global/press/dc1da3e2f7213310VgnVCM3000001c56f00aRCRD.htm
Alice Klettner, Thomas
Clarke and Michael Adams, ‘Corporate Governance Reform,: An Empirical
Study of the Changing Roles and
Responsibilities of Australian Boards and
Australian Journal of Corporate Law
Claessens and Yurtoglu,
above n 70.
Nelson Mandela,
the way to a better future
(South Africa, 2003).
Note that a UK works
inspector Lucy Deane, identified a clear link between asbestos and lung disease,
Niels Bohr (Danish
physicist, 1885-1962) stated “prediction is very difficult, especially
http://www.youtube.com/user/TEDtalksDirector
June 2012).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (2.29 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter