URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AdminRw/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:44:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ludwig, Joe --- "The Freedom of Information Act - No Longer a Substantial Disappointment" [2010] AdminRw 3; (2010) 59 Admin Review 4
The Freedom of
Information Act
—no longer a substantial disappointment
The role of freedom of information in administrative law
Problems with the Act
Restoring trust and integrity in government through FOI reforms
Removing conclusive certificates
Modernising the objects of the Act
Establishment of the Office of the Information Commissioner
Creation of a publication scheme
Two-tier merits review
Rationalising, reorganising, narrowing and clarifying exemption provisions
Eliminating prohibitive costs and delays
Other important transparency measures in the FOI Reform Bill
The importance of cultural change
The Freedom of Information
Act—no longer a substantial disappointment
Senator the Hon. Joe
In the last two years there has been a renewed focus on freedom of
information laws at both the Commonwealth and the state and territory
, resulting in a raft of
reforms. At the Commonwealth level the renewed focus is the result of the
election of a Labor Government
committed to restoring trust and integrity in
government, including reforming FOI laws. Labor’s FOI platform was
largely in response to the secrecy of the Howard government,
evidenced by its high-profile use of conclusive certificates to prevent
disclosure of government
information.
Government’s platform was also informed by, among other things,
Australia’s Right to Know, the public campaign
for free speech by a
coalition of 12 major media organisations and journalists.
In this paper I first discuss FOI in the field of administrative law in
Australia and briefly set out the main events leading to enactment
Commonwealth’s
Freedom of Information Act 1982
. Second, I outline
the main problems with the FOI Act in its current form and, third, I identify
aspects of the reforms the Government
has proposed in order to redress these
I conclude with a discussion of the need for cultural change in departments
and agencies if the Government’s ambitious FOI reform
agenda is to be
The role of freedom of information in administrative
The legislation that constitutes the system of administrative law in
Australia is important in defining the relationship between citizens
government: it not only sets out the principles governing the proper exercise by
government of its decision-making powers
but also provides for the right of
individuals to challenge the exercise of those powers. Put broadly,
administrative law provides
individuals a general right of access to information
held by government.
The bases of the administrative law framework are the concepts of open and
accountable government. The concept of openness is based
on citizens’
right to know about their government and the actions it takes or does not take
on their behalf. The concept of
accountability is based on government decision
making being both open and subject to review.
It is well known to administrative lawyers that the recommendations of the
Kerr Committee
and the subsequent
Committees constitute the
architecture of the modern system of Australian administrative
Although enactment of the FOI
Act was not a recommendation of the
Bland or Ellicott Committees,
the right of access to government‑held information is principally
facilitated through the FOI
Act. In this way the FOI Act operates as an integral
part of the administrative law framework.
In 1983, in the foreword to the first annual report on the FOI Act, the then
Attorney-General, Gareth Evans, described the basic purposes
legislation:
• to improve the quality of decision-making by government agencies in
both policy and administration matters by removing unnecessary
surrounding the decision-making process;
• to enable groups and individuals to be kept informed of the
functioning of the decision-making process as it affects them
and to know the
kinds of criteria that will be applied by government agencies in making those
• to develop further the quality of political democracy by giving the
opportunity to all Australians to participate fully in
the political
• to enable individuals, except in very limited and exceptional
circumstances, to have access to information about them held
on government
files, so that they may know the basis on which decisions that can fundamentally
affect their lives are made and may
have the opportunity of correcting
information that is untrue or misleading.
Although a Liberal government under Malcolm Fraser enacted the FOI Act,
creation of such an Act had become Labor Party policy long
before, in 1972. That
policy was detailed in a speech by the then Leader of the Opposition,
Gough Whitlam:
A Labor Government will introduce a Freedom of Information Act along the lines
of the United States legislation. This Act will make
mandatory the publication
of certain kinds of information and establish the general principle that
everything must be released unless
it falls within certain clearly defined
exemptions. Every Australian citizen will have a statutory right to take legal
challenge the withholding of public information by the Government or
Australians’ right to have access to government information proved,
however, a difficult and lengthy task. The then
Attorney-General, Lionel Murphy,
established an interdepartmental committee to ‘identify the modifications
required and any
important issues involved in adapting the United States Freedom
of Information Act to the Australian constitutional and administrative
structure’.
The committee
reported to government in September 1974. In 1975, under the Fraser government,
another interdepartmental committee
was established to ‘study and report
… on policy proposals for freedom of information legislation, taking into
the Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on Proposed Freedom of
Information legislation that was tabled in parliament in
Following provision
of that report to government in November 1976, the first FOI Bill was introduced
into the Senate on 9 June 1978.
The Bill was subsequently referred to the Senate
Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs, which reported back to
parliament in 1979. Two years later, on 2 April 1981, a second FOI Bill
was introduced into the Senate. That Bill eventually passed
the House of
Representatives on 24 February 1982 and came into force on 1 December
As is apparent from the sequence of events just described, establishing the
FOI Act in Australia was a prolonged, tortuous affair.
This was largely because
it was such a contentious matter (as it continues to be) both within and outside
government. At the heart
of the contention within government is a debate about
the compatibility of freedom of information with one of the strongest traditions
of the Westminster system of responsible government—the provision of
frank, candid and confidential advice by public servants
to ministers.
It cannot be denied that a tension does exist between the fundamental goal of
freedom of information—namely, access to government
information—and
the Westminster tradition of confidentiality. Like the 1979 Senate Standing
Committee, however, I believe claims
that the two are incompatible are
overstated. This is because the FOI Act, through the application of the
exemptions and the public
interest test, gives both decision makers and review
bodies sufficient scope and instructive precedent to support the weighing up
competing interests.
The Australian Government’s reforms shift this balance further towards
openness. It is the Government’s intention, as
outlined in the following
sections, to make the disclosure of government information the starting point
for decision makers through
its FOI reforms.
Problems with the Act
The Freedom of Information Act, which has remained largely unchanged since
its inception, has been criticised for failing to live
up to its originally
expressed purposes. Sir Anthony Mason diplomatically described it in 2007 as a
‘substantial
disappointment’.
have been less kind, describing it as a ‘regime … in danger of
terminal decline’
at least one member of the fourth estate has gone so far as to describe it as
‘a sick joke, marked by delays, obstruction
and a presumption against
releasing documents’.
The problems with the operation of the Act and its application by decision
makers are not new. In fact, many of them were noted in
the 1995 joint
Australian Law Reform Commission – Administrative Review Council report
Open Government
those problems are the following:
• that the operation of a ministerial veto through the application of
conclusive certificates is inconsistent with the objects
• that there is a need for an independent monitor and advocate for freedom
of information who is responsible for promoting
the Act and its
• that the costs associated with making FOI applications and seeking to
have decisions reviewed both internally and externally
can discourage use of the
• that processing delays are one of the most common problems FOI
applicants experience
• that the starting point for many agencies when considering an FOI
application is not one of
• that the Act is not universally accepted by public servants as an
integral part of the way democracy in Australia
just one example, delays in processing FOI requests continue to be a problem,
although there is room for some optimism in
view of recent improvements.
It was recorded in the 2007–08 FOI annual report (which covers both the
former and the current governments’ terms in office)
that agencies took
longer to make FOI decisions than in the previous reporting period. The
proportion of decisions made and notified
within 30 days in 2007–08 was
67.9 per cent, a fall from 77.2 per cent in 2006–07. Further,
the proportion of requests
taking over 90 days more than doubled between
2006–07 (7.1 per cent) and 2007–08
(14.9 per cent).
The 2008–09 annual report shows, however, that the promptness of
responses has improved markedly: 83.3 per cent of decisions
within 30 days and only 1.77 per cent took more than 90 days during the
reporting period.
These figures
demonstrate that there is much room for improvement in the operation and
application of the FOI Act.
Problems such as delays in processing FOI requests are not unique to the
Commonwealth. In fact, many, if not all, of the problems
identified in the
Open Government
report apply equally to the states and territories. These
difficulties have been noted in various reports, among them the report
Independent Audit into the State of Free Speech in Australia (conducted by
Ms Irene Moss AO and commissioned by Australia’s Right to
, the Solomon
, the New South Wales
Ombudsman’s report
Tasmanian Justice Department’s directions
Restoring trust and integrity in government through
FOI reforms
In 2007 Labor in Opposition produced a detailed FOI policy, set out in the
document entitled
Government Information: restoring trust and
Commitments were
made to do the following:
• revise the FOI Act to promote a culture of disclosure and
transparency
• appoint a statutory FOI Commissioner
• rationalise the exemption provisions
• publish guidelines with the overriding principle that information is
withheld only when to do so is in the public interest
• review FOI charges to ensure that they are compatible with the
objectives of disclosure and
transparency.
reality of government slowed the pace of change but, despite the pundits, real
reform continued. The reforms have progressed in
two stages. In stage one, on
26 November 2008 the Government introduced into the Senate a Bill to remove
the availability of conclusive
certificates as a device for preventing full
merits review of FOI decisions to refuse access to documents. The
Information (Removal of Conclusive Certificates and Other Measures) Act 2009
came into force on 7 October 2009.
In stage two, on 26 November 2009 the Government introduced into the
House of Representatives the
Information Commissioner Bill 2009
of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
. Both Bills are products of a
participatory process. The Government released exposure drafts of each Bill for
public comment in March
2009 and received a number of public submissions, which
were taken account of in the preparation of the final Bills introduced into
Parliament.
The Bills contain wide-ranging reforms to the FOI Act, with the purpose of
revitalising the Act so that it delivers on the important
objects of increasing
participation in and the accountability of government. A number of these reforms
are discussed in the paragraphs
that follow.
Removing conclusive certificates
The question of conclusive certificates had both a real and a symbolic impact
during the FOI debate. The certificates were able to
be issued under specific
exemption provisions of the FOI
and operated to establish
conclusively the exempt status of identified documents.
Removing the power to issue conclusive certificates means all decisions by
agencies to refuse access to documents are subject to full
merits review and a
minister is no longer able to override an adverse decision made by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
Modernising the objects of the Act
It is more than a quarter of a century since the FOI Act came into operation.
The Government proposes to amend the objects of the
Act to more accurately
reflect the modern philosophy that is the basis of FOI laws. This will be
achieved by including in the objects
clause the purposes of the legislation and
by removing the existing references to limitations on the right of access to
information
being limited by exceptions and exemptions, so as to reflect the
Government’s proposed emphasis on disclosure.
The purposes to be included in the objects clause are as follows:
• to promote Australia’s representative democracy by contributing to
increased public participation in government processes,
with a view to promoting
better informed decision making and increasing scrutiny, discussion, comment and
review of government’s
• to recognise that information held by government is to be managed for
public purposes and is a national resource
• to facilitate and promote public access to information, promptly and at
the lowest reasonable cost.
Although the proposed objects clause
does not import any obligation on decision makers to construe exemption
provisions narrowly
proposed amendments in the FOI Reform Bill require agencies to have specific
regard to the Act’s objects clause when
they determine what material to
publish in accordance with the proposed publication scheme and when decision
makers apply the public
interest conditional
exemptions.
Establishment of the Office of the Information
Commissioner
The centrepiece of the Government’s FOI reforms is the establishment of
the Office of the Information Commissioner. This will,
for the first time, bring
oversight of both the privacy and the FOI regimes together in a single office.
The office will be headed
by a new statutory officer, the Information
Commissioner, who will be vested with both FOI and privacy
The Information
Commissioner will be supported by the Privacy Commissioner, who will mainly
perform the privacy-related functions.
The Information Commissioner will also be
supported by a new FOI Commissioner, who will mainly perform the FOI-related
The Information Commissioner will have the additional responsibility of
providing to government advice on broader information management
policy and will
report to the Cabinet Secretary on matters relating to government information
policy and practices.
Among the FOI functions of the Information Commissioner are the
• promoting the FOI Act
• issuing guidelines on the administration of the FOI Act, including
operation of the publication scheme (discussed shortly)
and application of the
public interest test
• providing training to FOI decision makers
• providing assistance to members of the public and agencies handling FOI
The Information Commissioner will also be responsible
for investigating complaints made by applicants in relation to agencies’
handling of FOI requests. Further, the commissioner will have the power to
conduct own‑motion investigations into agencies’
compliance with the
Act. The Ombudsman will continue to have jurisdiction to investigate FOI matters
where appropriate—for
example, when an FOI complaint forms only a small
part of a larger complaint against an agency.
Creation of a publication scheme
Another important element of the Government’s proposal is the
establishment of a new information publication scheme for the
publication of government information. This scheme—which embraces the
notion of the ‘push model’ identified
in the Solomon
report—reconceptualises the role of freedom of information in facilitating
access to government information.
It does this by establishing an entirely new
scheme that requires agencies to routinely and proactively publish information
absence of FOI requests.
Under the proposed reforms every agency will be required to prepare a plan
showing what information it proposes to publish and how
and to whom it is to be
published. Plans are to be kept up to date and, in conjunction with the
Information Commissioner, agencies
must review the operation of their schemes
not less than every five years.
Agencies will also be required to publish various categories of information,
including the information in documents agencies routinely
provide to parliament
or to applicants in response to FOI requests.
Two-tier merits review
The FOI Reform Bill establishes a two-tier system of merits review, the first
tier being conducted by the Information Commissioner
and, if a party is not
satisfied, the second being conducted by the Administrative Appeals
It is envisaged that, on receipt of an application for review of a decision
to refuse access, the Information and FOI Commissioners
will first try to
resolve the dispute through mediation and, failing resolution, make a decision.
Although there will be the capacity
for the Information Commissioner to conduct
formal hearings, it is envisaged that the vast majority of these reviews will be
on the papers. Applicants will be able to elect not to seek internal
review of an agency decision to refuse access to documents and
go directly to
the Office of the Information Commissioner.
The objective of this reform is to give applicants a quick, free mechanism
for resolving access disputes, while at the same time,
and if needed, affording
both applicants and agencies the opportunity to resolve disputes in a fully
contested hearing in the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.
Considering that more than 50 per cent of all applications to the AAT
for review of FOI decisions in the three years to 2008–09
were resolved by
consent or were withdrawn without a
, it is expected that the
majority of contested FOI applications will be resolved by the Information
Commissioner.
Rationalising, reorganising, narrowing and
clarifying exemption provisions
A major focus of the Government’s reforms is ensuring that the right of
access to documents under the FOI Act is as comprehensive
as possible, limited
only when a stronger public interest lies in refusing access. It is this
philosophy that has guided the Government’s
proposed reforms to the Part
III request regime.
Consistent with recommendations in the
Open Government
report, the
Government will repeal the exemptions for Executive Council documents and
documents arising out of companies and securities
legislation.
The exemption provisions will be reorganised into two categories—those
that are subject to a public interest test, referred
to as ‘public
interest conditional exemptions’, and those that are not, referred to
simply as ‘exemptions’.
Further, a public interest test is to be
added to the personal privacy, business affairs (but not trade secrets or
commercially valuable
information) and research exemptions, as well as to the
reformulated national economy exemption.
Additionally, there will be a single formulation of the public interest test,
in contrast to the three formulations at present in
the FOI Act. The proposed
formulation of the test is as follows: ‘The agency or Minister must give
the person access to the
document if it is conditionally exempt at a particular
time unless (in the circumstances) access to the document at that time would,
balance, be contrary to the public
This test makes
it abundantly clear that disclosure is the starting point for decision makers
when considering whether or not to
release conditionally exempt documents.
The test is further clarified by listing in the FOI Reform Bill specific
matters that must not be taken into account when deciding
whether access to a
document is contrary to the public interest, as well as specifying matters that
favour disclosure of a document
in the public interest. The factors favouring
non-disclosure are not listed because most of the conditional exemptions
encapsulate
a harm threshold that in itself is a factor against disclosure. The
reformulated national economy exemption, for example, states
in part that a
document would fall within that category of exemption only if ‘its
disclosure … would, or could be reasonably
expected to, have a substantial
adverse effect on Australia’s economy’. The fact that the disclosure
of a document would
reasonably be expected to have a substantial adverse effect
on Australia’s economy would undoubtedly weigh strongly against
when applying the public interest test. For conditional exemptions that do not
contain a harm threshold—for example,
the ‘deliberative
process’ exemption—the process of identifying factors against
disclosure might be more contested.
The proposed factors that cannot be taken into account when deciding whether
access to a document would on balance be contrary to
the public interest are as
• that access to the document could result in embarrassment to the
Government or cause a loss of confidence in the Government
• that access could result in any person misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document
• that the author of the document was or is of high seniority in the
• that access could result in confusion or unnecessary
Among the factors favouring access to a document are
where giving access would:
• promote the objects of the FOI Act
• inform debate on a matter of public importance
• promote effective oversight of public expenditure
• allow a person access to their own personal
information.
The Government also proposes a reformulation of the
Cabinet exemption. Under the reformulation, the exemption will be narrowed so
to apply only to documents brought into existence for the dominant
purpose—as opposed to the single purpose—of submission
consideration by Cabinet. In line with this amendment, the proposed exemption
will not apply to documents just because they are
merely attached to Cabinet
The existing scope of the Cabinet exemption will also be extended to make it
clear that briefing notes created for the dominant purpose
of briefing a
minister on Cabinet submissions or proposed submissions are excluded. In
addition, drafts, copies or extracts of Cabinet
documents will also be
Eliminating prohibitive costs and delays
Prohibitive costs and delays have regularly been identified as major
impediments for FOI applicants.
The Government proposes to deal with the question of costs in two ways.
First, all FOI application fees will be removed. The first
decision-making time will be free of charge for all applicants, and journalists
and not-for-profit organisations will receive
five free hours of decision-making
time. Individuals’ FOI requests for their own information will be
processed completely free
of charge, a measure that is particularly significant
in view of the fact that the vast majority of FOI applications are made by
individuals seeking access to their own
information.
Applicants will, at no cost, be able to seek full merits review by the
Information Commissioner of decisions by agencies and ministers
to refuse FOI
requests in full or in part. This contrasts with the current situation whereby
applicants wishing to seek an external
merits review by the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal must first pay an application fee of $682. There is no doubt
that this fee operates
as a substantial impediment to merits review.
Second, the Government has announced that it will ask the Information
Commissioner to carry out a full review of the FOI charging
regime within 12
months of the commissioner’s appointment, offering the potential for
further reforms to FOI fees and charges.
On the question of delays, the FOI Reform Bill proposes that agencies unable
to process an FOI request within the required period
of 30 days because the
request is complex or voluminous must seek an extension of time from the Office
of the Information Commissioner.
If agencies fail to process FOI applications
within the required time frame, including as extended, they must process those
applications
free of charge.
Other important transparency measures in the FOI
Reform Bill
The Government proposes to amend the
Archives Act 1983
by changing the
open access period for most government records, including Cabinet documents,
from 30 years to 20 years and for Cabinet
note books from 50 years to 30
years. Access is to be phased in over 10 years, with the first multi-year
release beginning on 1 January
The Government also proposes to extend the FOI Act to cover documents of
contracted service providers and subcontractors delivering
services for and on
behalf of the Commonwealth insofar as the documents relate to the delivery of
those services to members of the
community. Although FOI requests for such
documents will be made to the relevant agencies, it will be incumbent on the
agencies to
ensure that suitable contractual measures exist with the contracted
service providers in order to facilitate access.
The importance of cultural change
It is well understood that agencies have varying approaches to freedom of
information. Some agencies appear to have embraced the philosophy
underpinning
the FOI Act, but it seems that others have been slower to do this. Mr Andrew
Podger, a former public servant who held
several senior positions in the Public
Service between 1990 and 2005
recently referred to attempts in departments to thwart FOI applications,
including by destroying
Another mechanism
involved establishing ‘systematic arrangements to tie as much policy
advice to Cabinet papers as possible’
in an attempt to gain the benefit of
the Cabinet exemption.
Although the Government’s proposed legislative reforms will, if passed,
result in extremely important pro-disclosure changes
to the FOI Act, the reforms
will not of themselves achieve the Government’s stated aim of restoring
trust in and the integrity
of government: they must be accompanied by cultural
change. And if cultural change is to occur there must be leadership not only
from the Government but also from senior management within agencies. To this
end, my predecessor Senator Faulkner wrote personally
to all agency heads,
calling on them to:
… take a lead role in facilitating the Government’s policy objective
of enhancing a culture of disclosure across agencies.
This includes making it
clear to FOI decision-makers in your department or agency that the starting
point for considering FOI requests
should be a presumption in favour of giving
access to documents.
In addition, Senator Faulkner called on FOI practitioners
to support the Government’s reform objectives:
I also seek your support … Those of you handling or advising on FOI
applications have a vital role to play in ensuring that
changes in FOI law are
carried through to changes in FOI practice. We will be relying on you to ensure
that these reforms actually
deliver more open and
more accountable
Government also recognises that a major focus of both the Information
Commissioner and the FOI Commissioner will be bringing about
the required
cultural change. It is envisaged that the commissioners will do this by
deploying various mechanisms, among them high-level
provision of training, issuing of guidelines, reviewing of decisions and
investigation of FOI administrative
The legislation now before the Parliament comprises a strong package of
measures to improve public access to government-held information.
legislation will achieve the Government’s goal of greater openness and
transparency in government through the FOI Act.
To ensure that the reform
package does bring about effective change, the FOI Act and the Information
Commissioner Act will be reviewed
two years after the reforms are
introduced.
Transparency and accountability are cornerstones of good governance. They are
principles that have great importance for administrative
law, and they underlie
the purpose of FOI legislation. I am confident that the revitalised FOI Act,
combined with leadership from
the Government, the Office of the Information
Commissioner and the senior levels of the Public Service, will lead to the
development
of a greater pro-disclosure culture throughout government.
Senator Ludwig is the Rudd
Government’s Cabinet Secretary and Special Minister of State. After this
article was sent for printing,
on 13 May 2010, the
Australian Information
Commissioner Bill 2010
Freedom of Information Amendment (Reform) Bill
, passed through the Parliament.
In Queensland, the new
to Information Act 2009
came into force on 1 July 2009 following
receipt of recommendations from an expert panel chaired by Dr David Solomon
AM, as contained
in the report entitled
The Right to Information: reviewing
Queensland’s Freedom of Information Act
, published in June 2008
(the Solomon report). In New South Wales, the
Government Information (Public
Access) Act 2009
was assented to on 26 June 2009 but is not
expected to commence until early 2010. The assent followed the release on
5 February 2009
of the NSW Ombudsman’s report entitled
Opening up Government: review of the
Freedom of Information
. The new Tasmanian
Right to Information Act 2009
commence on 1 July 2010. This Act follows the release in March 2009 of
the Tasmanian Justice Department’s directions paper
Strengthening Trust in Government … everyone’s right to
McKinnon v Secretary of
the Treasury Department
(2006) 229 ALR 187.
Administrative Review Committee
, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.
Commonwealth of Australia 1973,
Interim Report
of the Committee on Administrative Discretions
Parl. Paper no. 53; Commonwealth of Australia 1973,
Final Report of the
Committee on Administrative Discretions
, Parl. Paper no. 316.
Commonwealth of Australia 1973,
Prerogative Writ Procedures: report of Committee of Review
, Parl. Paper
Sir Anthony Mason 2007,
‘The 30th anniversary: a judicial perspective’,
Admin Review
, no. 58, 13.
Although the Kerr Committee
did not recommend an FOI Act, it did recommend that the government should enact
legislation which provided
for the disclosure of official documents where it was
relevant to an administrative tribunal. See n 3, [343]-[344] and recommendation
Interdepartmental Committee
Proposed Freedom of Information Legislation
, Commonwealth
Parliament, Canberra, Appendix A.
Commonwealth of Australia
Policy Proposals for Freedom of Information Legislation:
of Interdepartmental Committee
, Parl. Paper no. 400.
Sir Anthony Mason 2007,
‘The 30th anniversary: a judicial perspective’,
Admin Review
no. 58, 14.
Denis O’Brien 2005,
Freedom of Information Law in Need of Overhaul
, Democratic Audit of
Australia, 1,
http://democratic.audit.anu.edu.au/papers/200503_obrien_foi.pdf
viewed 2 June 2009.
Laurie Oakes 2009,
‘Legal strategies to protect dark secrets’,
Daily Telegraph
Australian Law Reform
Commission & Administrative Review Council 1995,
Open Government: a
review of the federal
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, Report no. 77 &
report no. 40, ALRC & ARC, Sydney & Canberra.
ibid. 181–91.
Commonwealth of Australia
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Annual Report 2007–08
www.pmc.gov.au/foi/docs/annual_report_0708/FOI_annual_report_2007-2008.pdf
viewed 2 June 2009.
Commonwealth of Australia
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Annual Report 2008–09
www.dpmc.gov.au/foi/docs/annual_report_0809/FOI_annual_report_0809.pdf
viewed 2 February 2010.
Australia’s Right to
Report of the Independent Audit into the State of Free Speech in
, 31 October.
Kevin Rudd MP & Senator
Joe Ludwig 2007,
Government Information: restoring trust and integrity
Labor Party election policy document,
www.alp.org.au/download/now/071026_government_information_policy.pdf
viewed 2 June 2009.
Sections 33
(‘Documents affecting national security, defence and international
relations’), 33A (‘Documents affecting relations
states’), 34 (‘Cabinet documents’), 35 (‘Executive
Council documents’) and 36 (‘Internal
working documents’).
See, for example,
Corporation Ltd v National Companies and Securities Commission
(1984) 1 FCR
Arnold v Queensland
[1987] FCA 148
(1987) 73 ALR 607
Searle Australia
Pty Ltd v Public Interest Advocacy Centre
[1992] FCA 241
(1992) 36 FCR 111.
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth), proposed ss 9A and 11B(3).
Commonwealth Ombudsman Prof.
John McMillan AO was appointed Information Commissioner Designate on 26 February
The Information
Commissioner’s functions, as set out in s 7 of the
Information
Commissioner Bill 2009
, include reporting to the Cabinet Secretary on any matter
that relates to the ‘Commonwealth Government’s policy and practice
with respect to: the collection, use, disclosure, management, administration or
storage of, or accessibility to, information held
by the Government; and the
systems used, or proposed to be used for … [those]
activities …’
Information Act
annual reports
for 2006–07 to 2008–09,
www.dpmc.gov.au/foi/annual_reports.cfm
viewed 2 February 2010.
Freedom of Information
Amendment (Reform) Bill 2009
(Cth) cl 11A(5).
In 2007–08,
85 per cent of all FOI applications fell within this category. See the
Freedom of Information Act
annual report for 2007–08, [1.9],
www.dpmc.gov.au/foi/docs/annual_report_0708/FOI_annual_report_2007-2008.pdf
viewed 2 June 2009.
Between 1993 and 1996 and
2002 and 2004 Andrew Podger held the positions of Secretary of the Department of
Administrative Services
and the Arts and the Department of Health and Family
Services and was the Australian Public Service Commissioner. In addition, he
Chair of the Review of Health Services Delivery in the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet between 2004 and 2005.
Andrew Podger 2009,
Role of Departmental Secretaries: personal reflections on the breadth of
responsibilities today
Letter from Senator the Hon.
John Faulkner to departmental secretaries and agency heads,
30 April 2009,
www.cabinetsecretary.gov.au/media/2009/docs/Letter_to_Secretaries_FOI.rtf
viewed 2 June 2009.
Senator the Hon. John
Faulkner, Speech delivered at the FOI Practitioners Forum, Canberra,
3 April 2009,
www.cabinetsecretary.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp_20090403.html
viewed 2 June 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (110 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter