URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2010/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stroud, N --- "The Koori Court Revisited: a Review of Cultural and Language Awareness in the Administration of Justice" [2010] UMonashLRS 12
The Koori Court Revisited: A Review of Cultural and
Language Awareness in the Administration of
Natalie Stroud, PhD Candidate, Faculty of Law, Monash University.
There is currently an over-representation of Indigenous offenders in the
Australian prison system. An understanding of the relationship
language and the law is an essential component of the administration of justice,
even more so when dealing with disadvantaged
offenders. This review is part of
a preliminary sociolinguistic study of one of the specialist court programs in
Australia which
aims to demonstrate that understanding - the Koori Court of
Victoria. A key question guiding the review, is to identify whether
awareness of cultural and language difference in the administration of justice
has continued to be the focus of this court since
its inception in 2002.
Miscommunication can occur between Indigenous offenders and legal
professionals in the mainstream legal system, when an assumption
is made that
because a person speaks English, they understand what is being said. This does
not take into consideration cultural
and language difference, and disadvantage
may occur for an offender who is unable to understand the legal process or
communicate
his story in his own words.
Cultural and Language Disadvantage
Linguist Diana Eades refers to
the ‘linguistic impact’
that colonization has had on the
Aboriginal people, with most Indigenous languages no longer spoken on a daily
their language, culture and lands has resulted in issues of homelessness,
discrimination, unemployment, drug and alcohol
dependence, poor health, lack of
education, and this has contributed to the disproportionately high percentage of
Indigenous Australians
currently in the Corrections System.
Indigenous Offenders in the Australian Prison System
According to
the 2006 Australian Census, the number of people who identified themselves as
Indigenous was around half a million, or
2.5% of the total population of 21
is compared with the high number of 6,091 Indigenous people in the Corrections
Systems, or 24% of a total prisoner population
it is clear
that mainstream methods of punishment have not been particularly effective in
rehabilitating a cultural group which has
been seriously disadvantaged for over
In spite of Victoria having the lowest imprisonment rate of Indigenous
defendants in Australia,
are 12 times
more likely to be placed in an adult prison, compared with non-Indigenous
prisoners. Victoria’s Koori population
is young. More than half are
aged under 25, and more than a third are under 15 years! Nearly 40% of
Indigenous families are sole
parent families, compared to 15% of
non-Indigenous.
Young Koori males and females are over-represented in the Criminal Justice
system often with dependent children, and their stories
are ones of heartbreak.
To incarcerate them, breaks up families and leaves children parentless. It is
far preferable to break the
cycle of crime and disadvantage by treating the
issues that may have contributed to the offence in the first place.
Communication difficulties
Difficulties for Aboriginal speakers in
legal settings have been recorded and analysed in depth by linguists such as
and Pauwels
which may contribute to miscommunication in the courtroom include cultural
differences between participants such as an
imbalance of power; formality of the
court process; ideological differences such as assumptions; pragmatic, semantic,
differences of discourse; differences in perceptions of politeness,
for example the use of silence; cultural taboos which prevent
the naming of a
deceased person; a question/answer format, which may be difficult for people
used to an oral culture; language accommodation
may be one way, towards the
dominant speaker; ‘gratuitous
concurrence’
may occur, with the defendant answering ‘yes’ to questions, but
meaning only ‘yes, I hear you’.
Indigenous speakers come from a rich cultural heritage of oral languages
which involve a different way of thinking. Cultural and
language heritage
remains embedded in their discourse, with variation in politeness, taboos,
terminology used for specific occasions
and different words to speak to people
in a different relationship. Time and place are described in different ways.
To an Indigenous
Australian ‘language defines who he is, defines his
The Koori Court of Victoria
The Koori Court Pilot Program was
initiated by the Victorian Government following recommendations made by the
Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in
legal system be adapted to the cultural needs of Aboriginal offenders and their
communities.
While similar in many respects to other specialist courts in operation
throughout Australia, this model is unique to Victoria, incorporating
features of existing models.
The Koori Court is a sentencing court, under the jurisdiction of the
Magistrates’ Court, and one of its aims is to allow greater
participation
by the Aboriginal (Koori) community in the court process. Deputy Chief
Magistrate, Jelena Popovic suggests that ‘the
dynamics of the courtroom
are changed from the traditional, adversarial process of assertion and denial to
the sharing of information
and plans to address the defendant’s
behaviour’...‘the offender is part of the interaction rather than an
speaking through their
Eligibility
To be eligible for a case to be heard in adult Koori
courts, a person must be Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander; be charged with
an offence that can be heard in a Magistrates’ Court that does not involve
family violence or sexual assault; live within or
have been charged within, the
boundary area of a Koori Court; plead guilty to the offence; and be willing to
take responsibility
for their actions. Eligibility is widened in the Koori
Children’s court, and may include a ‘not guilty’ plea to
criminal charge.
Layout of the Courts
The Koori Courts have been established in
existing court complexes, but all are culturally designed and similar in layout.
example is the Koori Court in regional Shepparton (Yorta Yorta
country), a well-designed modern court, with Indigenous art on the
the medium size room dominated by an oval shaped table in the centre. Three
flags, the Australian, Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander flags, stand
together on poles at the front of the court.
Figure 1: Interior of the Koori Court, Shepparton
Photograph by Simon Greig. Reproduced with the permission of the Law
Institute Journal
The Magistrate is seated at the table, facing front, with the Respected
Person or Community Elder on either side (called ‘Aunty’
‘Uncle’). To the left of the Elder is the Corrections Officer, then
the Police Prosecutor, the defending lawyer,
the defendant, then on his/her
left, family members and/or support person, and on their left the Koori Court
Officer, completing
the full circle. The defendant sits directly across the
table from both the Magistrate and the Elders. Support agency representatives
and extra family members or public are seated around the courtroom but close to
participants at the table. The hearing is conducted
in an informal manner.
A Koori Court Magistrate would hear around eight or nine cases in a day.
Compare this with a mainstream Magistrates’ court,
where despite
magistrates who are sympathetic to cultural issues, the high number of cases
heard per day prohibit time being taken
to observe any language and cultural
difficulties that may arise. One magistrate could hear around 80-90 cases in
one day in this
Expansion of the Koori Court Program
Since the commencement of the
first Koori Court in
the program
has expanded to a total of seven Adult Koori Magistrates’ Courts and two
Children’s Koori Courts for 10-17
operation throughout the state. The locations of the courts were chosen after
consultation with Elders and Respected persons
of Indigenous communities where
there was a high incidence of Indigenous re-offenders, and also where adequate
support and rehabilitation
programs were already established.
Figure 2: Location of Koori Courts throughout Victoria
Based on the success of the pilot program, the County Koori Court opened in
Morwell in country Victoria in November
serious cases are heard in this court, which is Australia’s first
sentencing court
for Aboriginal offenders
in a higher
County Koori Court
The layout and seating in the County Koori Court
is similar to the Koori Magistrates’ Court, but with a Judge presiding. A
feature of this court is the beautiful elliptical table where all participants
are seated for the ‘Sentencing
Conversation’.
This is not only a work of art, but an example of Koori communities working
together, as the 10,000 year old ancient red gum timber
was brought from Yorta
Yorta country in the Shepparton area and crafted with care in the Ganai-Kurnai
country for use in the County
Koori Court.
Where this Court differs from the Magistrates’ Koori Court is that
matters before the court are heard in three stages. The
first stage is the
formal arraignment, where the defendant enters a formal guilty plea. The Koori
Elders and Respected Persons are
not present. The second stage is the
‘Sentencing Conversation’, similar to the informal hearings
conducted in the Magistrates’
Koori Court. The third stage of the hearing
is the sentence, usually conducted on a separate day after deliberation of all
by the Judge. Proceedings are formal, with the Judge and legal
representatives returning to the courtroom in wig and gown, and
the defendant
hearing the verdict from the dock. The Elders and Respected Persons are seated
at the back of the court, in order
to show that the sentence is the decision of
the Judge alone.
Observations and Discussion
The Victorian Aboriginal Affairs Report
2007-2008 was released by the State Government in February 2009, and highlights
both the difficulties
faced, and progress made so far, to address the imbalance
in life opportunities for Koories in Victoria.
At all hearings the researcher attended there appeared to be an awareness by
legal professionals of any cultural and language difficulties,
and the process
enabled the Judicial Officer to address these difficulties, while dealing with
the offence in the court system.
Many underlying issues such as drug and
alcohol dependence, the need for anger management, adequate housing, lack of
education or
employment, are now voiced in the Koori Courts which would not be
the case in a mainstream court when the defendant is silent and
only speaking
through his or her lawyer. Some defendants find it too confronting to have to
face their Elders and take responsibility
for their actions, so choose to remain
in the mainstream court system.
At a recent hearing, two Elders spoke about the shame a defendant had brought
to her community, but another Elder sitting in the body
of the court interrupted
proceedings and spoke at length about how she knew the defendant’s family
very well and how they were
a respected family over several generations. She
gave an insight into the defendant’s character and background that would
only be available with personal knowledge, and the Judge thanked her for her
contribution.
At another hearing, the Elders emphasized their horror at the offence,
(assault with violence), and commented on the ‘mob behavior’,
fuelled by alcohol. The Elder, Uncle ‘B’, shared his life story,
saying that ‘it wasn’t easy growing up
as a black fella coming from
a settlement, but you’ve got to get out there and fight for
respect’. He put his hand on
his heart and talked to the defendant about
having ‘pride’ and ‘heart’, but added
‘you’ve got
to move on now. We’re proud of you caring for your
son – make it worthwhile’. But there was a word of warning
Aunty ‘M’, ‘we are from the community - the grapevine is very
strong – we’re watching, especially
your Grandma who has battled so
The Court is adaptable to cultural needs. At one hearing at the County Koori
Court, the hearing was about to proceed when it was
found that Aboriginality had
not yet been proven. The case could therefore not go ahead in the Koori Court,
so a normal court had
to be convened in the same courtroom, but with all the
formalities including Judge and legal professionals in wigs and gowns and
defendant in the dock.
Miscommunication in the Court is kept to a minimum by the use of plain
English. Elders provide cultural knowledge, and each participant
table is given the time to speak. On one occasion the grandmother and the
mother of the defendant were sitting beside
him, and although the mother was
very shy, Grandma exercised her right to be heard at great length. The
Magistrate heard her story
patiently, clarified parts of the story with her,
with the result that several underlying issues were revealed and attended
At most hearings attended, language accommodation appeared two-way, with the
Judicial Officer directing proceedings but simplifying
conversation to the
defendant, thus decreasing the social distance. Repeated checking by the
Judicial Officer that the defendant
understood proceedings also meant that
‘gratuitous concurrence’ was not evident at the hearings attended by
this researcher,
however detailed analysis would be required to support this.
At one court sitting, the Elder fixed the defendant with a steely eye and
said ‘look at me and show me respect’. This
contradicts the claim
that Aboriginal speakers cast their eyes down as a measure of respect.
Mainstream magistrates and lawyers
in the past have considered this a mark of
uncooperative behaviour or guilt, however this appears more an arbitrary
occurrence depending
on the elder and/or the offender at that particular
Formality is dispensed with in all Magistrates’ Koori Courts, but only
in Stage 2 of the County Koori Court. Stages 1 and
3 in this court are
conducted in a formal manner. As this court is in a higher jurisdiction,
there may be a need for the separation
of the judiciary from the offender to
emphasis the seriousness of the offence. An evaluation of the pilot program
will reveal the
success of this approach, and whether the exclusion of the
Elders from two stages of the hearing affects the success of the program.
Koories are becoming more aware about the workings of the Koori Court. At
first many were suspicious that it was ‘white fella
law’, but now
that they realize they have a voice, they see that ‘white justice’
and ‘black justice’
are one. A continuing theme running through the
hearings is that attitudinal change is occurring, both within and outside the
Justice System. Some Koories who come to the Court walk in to the
hearing with a brash and cocky attitude, but after sitting opposite
Magistrate and being told by the Elders of their community that they bring shame
to their culture and family, they often burst
into tears or hang their heads (a
jug of water in the middle of the table and a box of tissues exemplifies the
emotion which often
occurs in this court). This is where the Elders play a
very important role in the administration of justice. They command authority
and respect, and the offender responds to this. Often for the first time, the
defendant can tell their story in their own way and
in their own time.
Increased programs and workshops on Aboriginal Cultural and Language
Awareness run by the Judicial College of Victoria have included
discussion with
members of Aboriginal communities. Activities such as ‘Building Bridges
with Koori Elders’ build relationships
and enhance dialogue between the
judiciary and Indigenous Victorians.
Many young disadvantaged Koories do not have functional literacy or numeracy,
and the government is working in partnership with Indigenous
communities to
correct this. Teachers, students, apprentices, are all encouraged to have a
new culture of high expectation. In
Victoria, a number of language reclamation
projects are currently being carried out in partnership with linguists and
communities, with the aim of re-connecting Koories with their
language and culture.
In his independent evaluation of two courts in the pilot program over the
period 2002-2004, Harris found a ‘high level of support
for the Koori
Court model’, and that it was a ‘resounding
The Australian Government echoed this, releasing a Productivity Commission
Report on 2
July 2009 on ‘Overcoming Indigenous
Disadvantage’, which listed the Koori Court and other alternative
sentencing courts
as ‘things that work’ in overcoming Indigenous
disadvantage.
Harris reported a reduction in the level of recidivism of Indigenous
offenders over the period evaluated, of 12.5% at Shepparton and
Broadmeadows, compared with 29.4% over the same period for all Victorian
defendants. According to Fitzgerald, however,
this claim was ill-founded, as
it involved an inappropriate comparison group of more serious
Marchetti and Daly also queried Harris’ findings, noting inadequate
follow-up periods and the counting of court files rather
defendants.
spite of this lack of consensus, this report remains a comprehensive evaluation
of the first years of the Koori Court Program,
and many of Harris’ 19
recommendations have since been implemented.
In a recent day of hearings in the Koori Court, there were nine matters
listed, including failure to comply with a Community Based
Order, aggravated
burglary, alcohol and drug related charges, and driving offences. For one
defendant it was a first offence, another
was on remand, and another already in
a program dealing with drug and alcohol dependence and anger management. The
range of offences
and degree of seriousness differed to such an extent that it
would be very difficult to quantify to gain a true picture.
Current statistics from Corrections Victoria identify that there is still a
high percentage of Indigenous offenders in the Criminal
Justice System.
However this does not reflect the steady improvement in the lives of many
defendants who have passed through the
Koori Court in the past few years.
There has been not only a decrease in the severity
of the offences, but a
change in the types of offences, and many offenders are now in rehabilitation
programs or have returned to
study or employment. This supports the view that
any statistical analysis of recidivism rates should be measured in decades
than years, in order to provide a more accurate picture of the outcome of
alternative sentencing courts.
The aim of the Koori Court is to replace custodial sentences with Community
Based Orders, with backup from support services which
assist the offender to
re-connect with family and community and get the offender back to work or study.
Of course there are also
some very serious offences heard in the Koori Court.
Some offenders end up incarcerated after being given a number of opportunities
Collaborative Approach to Justice
Innovative partnership and
support programs put in place by the Victorian Government together with the
Courts and Indigenous organizations
have increased markedly since the
introduction of the Koori Courts. These concentrate on helping Koories who
come in contact with
the Criminal Justice system, instead of merely punishing
the offence. The government has encouraged the development of Local
networks (LIN’s), and there are more than 170 community-run
organizations which provide support and services to Indigenous
communities.
Some programs emphasise
education and training, while others are diversionary in nature, for example the
Wulgunggo Ngalu Learning
Place, a residential program at Yarram built on the
site of the old Won Wron Prison, for young male adults placed on Community Based
Orders (CBO’s). This is a long term solution to recidivism where they can
learn a trade or land management, with cultural
input, such as the making of
boomerangs and digeridoos.
Other programs are a Credit/Bail Support (CBS) program for early
intervention; a Court Integrated Services Program (CISP); youth mentoring
programs; programs in partnership with the AFL to ‘close the gap’ in
the area of employment for Koories; and a ‘Build
Ya Life’ program
for young Koories at risk of contact with the Criminal Justice System.
The National Apology to members of the Stolen Generations by the Prime
Minister of Australia in February 2008 was well received, and
an opportunity for
Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians to strengthen their relationship,
recognize past injustices and move
forward towards a better future. Major
cultural or sporting events around Victoria now commence with an acknowledgement
and respect
paid to the Aboriginal culture and heritage, and Elders past and
This review has found that the level of awareness of
cultural and language differences in the Criminal Justice system has increased
in several areas and continues to be the focus in the Koori Court of Victoria.
Partnership and support programs have expanded and
encourage rehabilitation.
Judicial officers are increasingly taking part in ongoing education and training
workshops. Defendants
are now more aware of the need to take responsibility for
their actions and deal with the issues that caused the offence in the first
place, thus reducing re-offending; and the physical presence of the Elders,
sitting directly across from the defendant, brings an
awareness of Aboriginal
culture and language to the court process.
The Koori Court program is much more than a quick fix. All the disadvantages
and underlying issues for Indigenous people such as
health, housing, jobs,
education, drug and alcohol dependence and anger management, must continue to be
dealt with urgently. As
Deputy Chief Magistrate, Jelena Popovic comments
“we have made a promising start – it’s a
beginning.”
This paper was
presented to the 9
Biennial Conference of the
International Association of Forensic Linguists on Language and Law, 6-9 July,
2009, Amsterdam.
Courtroom Talk and Neocolonial Control
(2008), Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin
Corrections Victoria 2001-2 –
background, ‘Koori’ is a term in popular use for Indigenous
Australians in the south eastern states of
Victorian Government Indigenous Affairs Report 2007/08, Department of Planning
and Community Development,
Eades, D, “A case of communicative clash: Aboriginal English and the legal
system” (1994), In J Gibbons (ed)
Language and the Law,
Group, Harlow 234-264; “Aboriginal English on trial: the case for Stuart
and Condren” (1995), In D Eades (ed)
Language in Evidence: Issues
Confronting Aboriginal and Multicultural Australia,
University of New South
Wales Press, Sydney 147-174; “Legal recognition of cultural differences in
communication: The case
of Robyn Kina” (1996), 16
Language and
Communication
215-227; “I don’t think it’s an answer to
the question: Silencing Aboriginal witnesses in court” (2000), 29
Language in Society
161-195; “Telling and retelling your story in
court: Questions, assumptions and intercultural implications”
Criminal Justice
; (2008) above at n1.
Gibbons, J,
“Introduction: language and disadvantage before the law” (1994), In
J Gibbons (ed)
Language and the Law,
Longman Group, Harlow 195-198;
Forensic Linguistics: An Introduction to Language in the Justice System
(2003), Blackwell Publishing,
M, “Interactional styles in the courtroom: an example from northern
Australia” (1994), In J Gibbons (ed
) Language and the Law,
Group, Harlow 217-233; “Tainted evidence: literacy and traditional
knowledge in an Aboriginal land claim” (1995),
In D Eades (ed),
Language in Evidence: Issues Confronting Aboriginal and Multicultural
University of New South Wales Press, Sydney 97-124.
“Aboriginal evidence in the cross-cultural courtroom” (1995), In D
Language in Evidence: Issues Confronting Aboriginal and
Multicultural Australia,
University of New South Wales Press, Sydney 55-96.
“Language and communication in Aboriginal land claim hearings”
(1991), In S. Romaine (ed),
Language in Australia
, Cambridge University
Pauwels, et. al (eds),
Cross-cultural communication in legal settings
(1992), Language and Society Centre, National Languages and Literacy Institute
of Australia, Monash
University.
This conversation strategy described by Liberman, and used by some Aboriginal
people in court, may cause problems in a legal context.
See Liberman, K,
“Ambiguity and gratuitous concurrence in intercultural
communication”, 3
Human Studies
Stick, ABC1, Sunday 3rd May 2009.
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody National Report, (1991), Australian
Government Publishing Service, Canberra.
Briggs, D and
Auty, K, “Koori Court Victoria – Magistrates’ Court (Koori
Court) Act 2002”, Paper presented
at the Australian and New Zealand
Society of Criminology Conference, Sydney, October
Problem Solving Courts – response by the Magistrates’ Court of
2004), Magistrates’ Court, Melbourne.
Established
under the Magistrates’ Court (Koori Court) Act
Established under the
Children and Young Persons (Koori Court) Act
Established under the County Court Act Amendment (Koori Court)
coined by the inaugural Magistrate Dr. Kate Auty at the Shepparton Koori Court,
which describes very well the philosophy behind
the success of these courts, and
how they differ from a mainstream
Harris, M, “A Sentencing Conversation: Evaluation of the Koori Courts
Pilot Program October 2002-October 2004”, (2004),
Department of Justice,
Australian Government Productivity Commission Report, “Overcoming
Indigenous Disadvantage”, 2
Fitzgerald, J, “Does Circle Sentencing Reduce Aboriginal Offending?”
Crime and Justice Bulletin: Contemporary Issues in Crime and
Marchetti, E, and Daly, K “Indigenous Sentencing Courts: Towards a
Theoretical and Jurisprudential Model”
[2007] SydLawRw 17
Sydney Law Review
Court – a sentencing conversation’ - DVD, viewed 14/5/09 at
Broadmeadows Koori Court. Produced by Department
of Justice Indigenous Issues
Unit, 2007.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (8.12 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter