URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lee, Ricky J --- "Strict Compliance and the Fraud Exception: Balancing the Interests of Mercantile Traders in the Modern Law of Documentary Credits" [2008] MqJlBLaw 7; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 137
STRICT COMPLIANCE AND THE FRAUD EXCEPTION: BALANCING THE INTERESTS OF MERCANTILE TRADERS IN THE MODERN LAW OF DOCUMENTARY CREDITS
I Introduction
II The Basic Letter of Credit
A Historical Beginnings
B Payment by Letter of Credit
C Opening the Credit
D Negotiating the Credit
E Shipping Documents
III Sources of Law
A The Uniform Customs and Practices
B The Uniform Commercial Code
IV Strict Compliance
B Authorities Opposing Strict Compliance
C Standard of Compliance
D Rules Concerning Specific Documents
1 Commercial Invoices
2 Bills of Lading
3 Certificates
E Documents Produced or Transmitted Electronically
F Remedies for the Applicant
V Withholding Payments and the Fraud Exception
A Withholding Payments Generally
B Fraud Exception
C Position of Issuing Banks
VI Concluding Observations
STRICT COMPLIANCE AND THE FRAUD EXCEPTION: BALANCING
THE INTERESTS OF MERCANTILE TRADERS IN THE MODERN LAW OF DOCUMENTARY
RICKY J. LEE
Introduction
In every country it always is and must be the
interest of the great body of the people to buy whatever they want of those who
it cheapest. The proposition is so very manifest, that it seems ridiculous
to take any pains to prove it; nor could it ever have
been called in question,
had not the interest sophistry of merchants and manufacturers confounded the
common sense of mankind.
This fundamental principle of trade, as stated in the landmark
work of Adam Smith, has established and maintained trade relations
from the very
dawn of civilisations. The basic reason that merchants and manufacturers
“confound the common sense of mankind”
has been the necessity for
all parties involved in international transactions to seek security for
themselves. The exporter generally
seeks to receive payment before it dispatched
the goods for shipment to protect itself against default by the importer.
the importer would seek to protect itself by demanding to receive and
inspect the goods before effecting payment. These two irreconcilable
have partly ensured the universality of the documentary credit as means of
payment over recent centuries. However, despite
its popularity, it became
apparent that the documentary credit required the development of a unique set of
legal principles to protect
the respective interests of the parties. Two of the
main principles that have developed as a result are the strict compliance of
documents and the importer’s ability to demand the withholding of payments
by the bank in cases of fraud.
It is clear that, even with the documentary credit being considered mutually
advantageous to both the importer and the exporter, the
system is more
beneficial to the exporter as it would inevitably get paid well before the goods
are received or inspected by the
importer. As a result, the jurisprudence of
courts and evolving international custom developed some important legal
principles, such
as the principles of strict compliance and the fraud exception
to give some additional protection to the interests of the importer.
times, however, there are three other important factors that are also driving
the need to reform the law in relation to
documentary credits.
Firstly, despite centuries of experience with the strict compliance
principle, there is a large body of evidence that suggested the
nevertheless tend not to present documents that conform to the letter of
The documents would either
be late, missing or fail in matching the terms and conditions specified in the
letter of credit. Several
recent surveys and observations observed that the rate
at which exporters presented discrepant or missing documents ranged from around
forty-five to sixty per
was also observed that the rate of rejection of documents by banks was similar
for both large and small trading firms, indicating
that this is not a feature
that is restricted to small or inexperienced
There also continued to be a
significant number of cases where traders, predominantly importers, have been
defrauded through letter
transactions.
At various times, the
rules of strict compliance have either been too rigid as to hinder legitimate
transactions, or insufficiently
enforced, allowing exporters to take advantage
of the importer for illegitimate gain.
Secondly, the volume of litigation concerning the interpretation and
enforcement of letters of credit has increased significantly
was only recently observed that “the start of every war, many revolutions,
and realignments of a government of a country
can cause disruptions serious
enough to lead to letter of credit litigation — although in peaceful
times, there is virtually
This is clearly no
longer true today, as litigation has dramatically increased despite there being
an unprecedented era of peace
and cooperation between the world’s major
trading nations. As Shaw observed, most of the recent litigation has been
at the duties and role of the issuing bank towards either the importer
or the exporter and subjected them to detailed
The two duties that have
been most hotly contested are ensuring the documents tendered comply strictly
with the terms of the credit
and resisting importers’ instructions to
withhold payments except in cases of fraud. The sheer volume of these cases,
with the divergent views taken by courts of various jurisdictions, lend
further support to the suggestion that there is need for
clarification and
reform in the law relating to these issues.
Thirdly, the existing principles and rules in relation to letters of credit
are inadequate in dealing with the implications of electronic
For example, the
International Chamber of Commerce (“ICC”) has seen the need to
introduce a “Supplement for Electronic
Presentation” to its Uniform
Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (“UCP”) in order to
accommodate the presentation
of electronic
“eUCP”, which came into force on 31 March 2002, was not able to
resolve the problems involved in authenticating and
verifying electronic
“documents”, making the possibility of true electronic transactions
a distant reality. The failure
of the proposed ICC Uniform Rules and Guidelines
for Electronic Trade and Settlement (“URGETS”) to gain acceptance
the merchant community only serve to underline the inability of the
existing legal framework to move beyond a world of original hard-copy
in which it is far easier to verify the compliance of tendered documents with
the terms of the credit.
When these three observations are taken together, it
appears that the existing balance of interests between the importer and the
under a documentary credit is now under challenge. This article reviews
the law and practice of banks and courts in relation to strict
compliance and
the fraud exception and suggests ways by which the balance of interests can be
restored or improved. It is prudent
in such a context to first examine the
relationships that are created in a typical documentary credit transaction.
II The Basic Letter of
A Historical
From even as early as the twelfth century, the most
fundamental form of international credit, a “bill of exchange” or
“draft”, was created to address the need for an alternative to
merchants travelling with large amounts of
Bills of exchange are simply requests or orders by a creditor to a debtor that
requires the debtor to pay its debt to a third party.
In other words, an
importer in Sydney would issue a bill of exchange to a Japanese exporter’s
agent, for example, who would
take the bill to the third party in Tokyo for
payment. Such bills became negotiable instruments, accepted or otherwise, as
they attracted
an irrevocable obligation by a merchant or a bank to pay a
specified sum.
From the seventeenth century, merchants came about the idea of strengthening
the bills by adding a declaration of guarantee from the
third party payer that
it would insure the acceptance and payment of the bills, which became the letter
Some commentators and
cases have referred to the letter of credit as purely a device of contract or a
negotiable instrument.
it may be more appropriate to describe the letter of credit as resembling a
guarantee or a third party beneficiary contract,
though it is best to regard it
as a unique device of payment.
B Payment by Letter of
The principal reason for the importer opening a
documentary credit is to give performance to an underlying contract of sale
giving both parties a degree of financial protection. Such a contract may
be formed by a negotiated document between the parties
or by the exchange of
standard form documents, such as pro forma invoices, commercial invoices and
purchase orders. While it is beneficial
for both parties to specify the
requirements of the credit in the terms of the contract, such as revocability,
dates and currency
requirements, often the contract would do no more than
stipulate “payment by opening of a confirmed irrevocable letter of credit
in favour of the seller”.
This is because of the commonly held belief that the contract should avoid
specifying excessive details relating to the credit, as
the banks would have to
engage in excessive analytical work to satisfy the terms of the
Soproma SpA v Marine & Animal By-Products Corp
, the contract
between the New York exporters and Italian importers specified that payment for
the sale of one thousand tons of Chilean
fullmeal fish meat was to be
“against letter of credit, confirmed, irrevocable with Marine and Midland
Trust Co, New
The credit that was opened by the importer, however, was defective in that it
was not confirmed and not opened in time to cover the
whole shipment period.
McNair J held that the exporter could not object to the terms of a credit opened
pursuant to a contract if
its terms and conditions are “fair and
reasonable and not inconsistent with the terms of the contract
This effectively
armed the importer with a wide discretion to dictate the terms and requirements
of the credit before payment to
the exporter was effected and subject only to
equitable and statutory requirements, such as those provided under the
Practices Act 1974
(Cth) in Australia, the
Unfair Contract Terms Act
(UK) in the United Kingdom and the equivalent statutes of other
If the requirement to pay by letter of credit is specified in the contract,
the exporter cannot attempt to bypass the terms of the
credit by presenting the
necessary documents directly to the
This is because, in
law, it would be inconsistent with the contract for the exporter to have an
alternative right to obtain payment
from the importer unless such an option was
specifically provided for in the
In practice, this
would also provide the exporter with the ability to seek payment from both the
importer directly and from the banks
for the same shipment using duplicate,
fraudulent or electronic documents. As a result, the courts would generally
require that the
contractual requirement to pay and receive payment by a letter
of credit be adhered to and observed unless the circumstances make
impossible.
C Opening the
The letter of credit is a documentary instrument
representing several contracts under which the bank is required to pay a
amount to the exporter upon presentation of documents that comply with
the terms of the credit.
Firstly, the importer and the exporter would enter into a contract of sale (the
“sales contract”), either through a negotiated
contract or by the
exchange of pro forma invoices and purchase orders between the parties. As
required under the sales contract,
the importer (the “applicant”)
then applies to its bank (the “issuing bank”) for credit in favour
exporter (the “beneficiary”) pursuant to the terms of the
application (the “application contract”). In other
issuing bank would, in consideration of the payment of a fee from the applicant,
open a credit in favour of the beneficiary
subject to the terms of the credit
(the “credit
contract”).
The issuing bank would then contact a bank located in the country of the
exporter (the “advising bank”) with instructions
for that bank to
advise the exporter of the existence of the credit and its terms. The advising
bank would do so as agent for the
issuing bank with the responsibility of
verifying that the documents received strictly comply with the terms of the
credit. In this
way, three contractual relationships arise: the first between
the issuing bank and the applicant under the application contract;
between the issuing bank and the advising bank, being a contract of agency; and
the third being the credit contract between
the issuing bank and the
Sometimes the issuing bank would be instructed by the importer to request a
bank in the exporter’s country to confirm the credit,
whereby this
“confirming bank” would guarantee the payment by the issuing bank
under the credit. In this case, the confirming
bank acts not as an agent for the
issuing bank but instead as its guarantor, providing further security to the
interests of the exporter.
D Negotiating the
Once advised of the opening of the credit by the
issuing bank, the beneficiary would then proceed to arrange for the shipment of
goods. When the goods are shipped, the exporter would present the documents
required under the credit, often including the bill of
lading or other type of
transport document, a commercial invoice, insurance policy and/or a quality
inspection certificate, to the
advising bank. Just as the advising bank is under
a duty to the issuing bank to examine the documents and ensure their compliance
with the terms of the credit, it also owes duties to the beneficiary to process
the documents within a reasonable time and notify
the beneficiary, with its
reasons, of its acceptance or rejection of the tendered documents.
If the advising bank accepts the tendered documents, it must pay the
beneficiary in accordance with the terms of the credit. Generally,
may require the beneficiary to be paid immediately, or for the beneficiary to
accept a bill of exchange to give an obligation
to pay at a later date. In
either case, the exporter beneficiary would then be armed with an irrevocable
and unconditional entitlement
to be paid. Once payment has been made, the
issuing bank would then reimburse the advising bank and seek repayment from the
in accordance with the terms of the credit application. This may
involve a direct debit from the accounts of the applicant or providing
the applicant.
In some cases, the exporter would prefer to deal with its own bank and would
therefore instruct it to negotiate the credit on its
behalf with the advising
bank. Where such a negotiating bank is involved, the legal relationships between
the parties have not changed
as the negotiating bank would be acting as agent of
the exporter, just as the advising bank would be acting as agent for the issuing
Aotearoa International Limited v Westpac Banking Corporation
the plaintiff beneficiary was advised by the ANZ Bank in Auckland of a credit
being opened in its favour by the United Commercial
Bank of New Delhi, acting on
behalf of the applicant in
The beneficiary
instructed its bankers, the defendant, to negotiate the credit and the defendant
credited the amount to the plaintiff’s
accounts and then sought
reimbursement from the issuing bank, which refused to do so as a result of
discrepant documents. Tompkins
J held that, provided the negotiating bank had a
valid indemnity or bill of exchange executed by the beneficiary, it would have
against the beneficiary for payments made to it under a letter of
credit. If the negotiating bank had neither an indemnity nor a
bill of exchange,
then it would have, in effect, acquired the documents as the credit as
negotiable instruments in its own right
and bore the risks accordingly.
In the context of international sale of goods, the
credit would require the beneficiary to tender a marine bill of lading or
form of transport documents to the banks, which serves three important
functions. Firstly, the transport document evidences the terms
of the shipping
contract between the exporter and the
Even though the contract is formed at the time when the exporter booked space on
the carrier’s vessel, the contract is not
reduced to writing until the
bill of lading is issued.
Secondly, the document serves as a receipt issued by the carrier to the exporter
for the goods specified in the document. The bill
of lading would specify
whether the goods have been “received for shipment” by the carrier
or “shipped on board”
a specified vessel, the latter of which is
generally required for the purpose of satisfying a
Further, the Hague,
Hague-Visby and Hamburg Rules relating to international shipping all require the
shipper to show “the leading
marks necessary for identification of the
goods, the number of packages or pieces, or their quantity or weight as the case
and the apparent order or condition of the
Thirdly, the
transport document serves as a ticket, by “custom of merchants”,
that entitles the holder to demand possession
of the goods when they arrive at
their port of destination.
Enichem Anic SpA v Ampelos Shipping Co Ltd (The Delfini
), Mustill LJ held
that the bill of lading was a “key to the warehouse” that allowed
for constructive possession of the
goods that was
transferable.
These features of a transport document allow the importer-applicant, through
the issuing and advising banks, to ensure that the exporter-beneficiary
complied with the terms of the contract in relation to the nature and quantity
of the goods, the terms of its carriage and its
ability to receive the goods
upon its arrival. Similarly, the exporter is assured that, if the document is
accepted, it will be paid
under the credit opened in its favour before the
importer has the ability to take possession of the goods from the carrier. It
be noted that the contract for shipping the goods is between the
beneficiary and the carrier and, as a result, the applicant would
not be able to
pursue the carrier for any breaches of the carriage contract in common law. This
absence of privity between the beneficiary
and the carrier, at least in the case
of a bill of lading, required statutory intervention in the form of the
of Lading Act 1855
(UK) and equivalent provisions in Australian state and
territory law. Section 1 of that Act provides that:
Every consignee of goods named in a bill of lading and every indorsee of a bill
of lading to whom the property in the goods therein
mentioned shall pass, upon
or by reason of such consignment or indorsement, shall have transferred to and
vested in him all rights
of suit, and be subject to the same liabilities in
respect of such goods as if the contract contained in the bill of lading had
III Sources of
The Uniform Customs and Practices
The ICC was created in 1919, partly to provide some
consistency and uniformity in the customs of merchants in international
As part of these efforts, the ICC saw the need in 1933 to devise the
UCP in order to regulate the duties and obligations of banks
in dealing with
international letter of credit transactions. The latest revision, as issued in
2007, is referred to as the “UCP
600” and contains specific rules
relating to the application, opening, advising, confirming, negotiating and
reimbursement
of documentary credits by compliant banks, as well as the standard
requirements imposed on transport documents.
Article 1 of the UCP states:
The [UCP 600] are rules that apply to any documentary credit
(“credit”) (including, to the extent to which they may be
applicable, any standby letter of credit) when the text of the credit expressly
indicates that it is subject to these rules. They
are binding on all parties
thereto unless otherwise expressly modified or excluded by the
This was a notable departure from the formulation found in the
UCP 400 (one of the previous revision adopted in 1983), which provided
UCP would apply to all documentary credits unless otherwise expressly agreed.
This was because the ICC does not have legislative
power over countries and,
similarly, no government has sought to implement the UCP by domestic
legislation. The change in formulation
reflected the commonly held view that the
UCP cannot have effect on a letter of credit unless the credit had incorporated
as part of its terms.
In common law, the principle of the freedom to contract allowed the parties
to incorporate or exclude the UCP as binding terms of
their contractual
obligations. Banks may voluntarily agree to accept the principles contained in
the UCP as express terms of their
contracts. As such, they are subject to the
principles of common law, such as fairness, unconscionability and
reasonableness. In
the case of third parties, such as confirming banks, the
predominant view is that the UCP would not apply unless the bank has consented
to them being part of the terms of its confirmation of the
In civil law jurisdictions, the difficulty is in determining the precise
legal status of the UCP. In Quebec, for example, the Supreme
Court of Canada
held that even though the UCP does not have force of law, there were “no
reasons or principles why [the UCP
and related international precedents] should
not be applied … under Quebec law … particularly so because of the
desirability
of as much uniformity as possible in the law with respect to these
vital instruments of international
The same position can be found, without legislative intervention, in most
European and Asian civil law
B The Uniform Commercial
While in most jurisdictions, the incorporation of
the UCP into the terms of the contract would be the end of the matter, that is
the case in the United States as a result of the applicability of Article 5
of the Uniform Commercial Code (“UCC”). Article
5 of the UCC
provides that the parties are free to bind themselves to the UCP, subject to any
prohibition contained in the UCC. Section
5-102(3) also demonstrates deference
to existing banking rules and customs, especially those relating to the
acceptance of documents.
There are US authorities to suggest that, in common
law, the courts would already accept the UCP as evidence of banking custom and
This is difficult to reconcile with the clear intention of the Banking
Commission of the ICC to not only restate banking custom in
the UCP but also
guide the evolution of the practice (as seen with the attempted adoption of the
eUCP). While the courts in future
may be increasingly reluctant to justify
regarding the terms of the UCP as a whole to be “accepted” banking
custom without
express terms of incorporation into contracts, they may continue
to do so for the sake of commercial convenience and mercantile uniformity.
Some jurisdictions within the United States, such as Alabama, Arizona,
Missouri and New York, have a non-conforming amendment to §
5-102(4) of the
UCC that provides deference to the UCP over the UCC where the parties have
expressly or by usage of trade adopted
the UCP to the extent that the UCC would
not apply to such credits. As Dolan pointed out, the UCC has the advantage of
specifically
addressing issues such as warranties or improper dishonour, which
the UCP leaves to the courts, whereas the UCC does not deal with
expiry dates or
specific transport documents which the UCP covers in explicit
A further unintended
issue is the extent of the applicability of the UCC in such non-conforming
to a credit. For example, in
Corp v Shanghai Commercial Bank Ltd
, the Court refused to apply rules
contained in the UCC where the UCP applied even though the UCP did not address
the issue in dispute.
authorities have suggested that, in these jurisdictions, the courts are required
to look at the law before the adoption
of the UCC in deciding cases concerning
documentary credits governed by the
This appears to be contrary
to the original intention of the amending states, which was to direct the courts
to defer to non-UCC
law, such as the UCP and its local and overseas practice,
rather than to pre-UCC law in precedence over the UCP.
In any case, it is clear that the duties of banks towards the applicant and
the beneficiary are governed by the provisions of the
UCP and, in the case of
the United States, the UCC, as they are interpreted by the courts of law. In the
common law jurisdictions,
specific domestic legal principles have developed to
supplement the compliance requirements and the rules relating to fraud.
The Common Law
After the conclusion of an international contract
that requires payment by a letter of credit, the importer-applicant has a
contractual
duty to arrange for the opening of a credit in favour of the
exporter-beneficiary. Until a bank has provided a credit upon application
importer, the exporter is customarily under no obligation to perform its
contractual
obligations.
When the importer applies for a credit from a bank, it enters into a contractual
obligation with the bank to provide credit to the
exporter in return for a
commission. Provided that the bank performs its obligations under this contract
strictly to the letter,
the applicant is under an obligation to indemnify the
bank of its payments under the credit. It is this duty of the banks to perform
their obligations strictly that has been under the detailed scrutiny of the
Equitable Trust Company of New York v Dawson Partners Ltd
applicant instructed the issuing bank to open a confirmed credit for drafts to
be accompanied by shipping documents and a certificate
of quality from the
colonial Dutch East Indies Government (as Indonesia then
The contract was for the
sale of prime quality Java vanilla beans. The applicant subsequently wrote to
the issuing bank informing
it that the Dutch Government would not issue
certificates of quality but that “a certificate of quality to be issued by
who are sworn brokers” would be acceptable, so the credit was
amended accordingly with the consent of the beneficiary. The
issuing bank
transmitted the amendment to the confirming bank but inadvertently changed the
requirement of sworn brokers from the
plural to the singular. The beneficiary
duly found one sworn broker to sign a certificate and then proceeded to ship old
and rubbish to the applicant.
In the House of Lords, Viscount Sumner held that:
It is both common ground and common sense that in such a transaction the
accepting bank can only claim indemnity if the conditions
on which it is
authorised to accept are in the matter of the accompanying documents strictly
observed. There is no room for the documents
which are almost the same, or which
will do just as well. … The bank’s branch abroad, which knows
nothing officially
of the details of the transaction thus financed, cannot take
upon itself to decide what will do well enough and what will not. If
it is told, it is safe; if it declines to do anything else, it is safe; if it
departs from the conditions laid down, it
acts at its own
This principle thus requires the
issuing bank and its agent, the advising bank, to ensure strict compliance of
the tendered documents
with the terms and requirements of the credit before
paying the beneficiary and obtaining reimbursement from the applicant. This
part of the existing obligation of the banks to ensure compliance of the credit
under its contract with the applicant. As Bailhache
Scottish and Australian Bank Ltd v Bank of South Africa
It is elementary to say that a person who ships in reliance on a letter of
credit must do so in exact compliance with its terms.
It is also elementary to
say that a bank is not bound or indeed entitled to honour drafts presented to it
under a letter of credit
unless those drafts with the accompanying documents are
in strict accord with the credit as
Conversely, the beneficiary cannot compel the issuing bank to
purchase or negotiate documents that do not strictly conform to the
terms of the
credit. For example, in the English case of
J H Rayner and Co Ltd v
Hambro’s Bank Ltd
, the defendant received instructions from the
applicant to open a credit in favour of the plaintiffs relating to
“Coromandel
groundnuts”.
The plaintiff
presented bills of lading for “machine-shelled groundnut kernels”
accompanied by a commercial invoice for
“Coromandel groundnuts”. At
first instance, Atkinson J held on the basis of submitted evidence that it was
universally
understood in the trade that the two were identical and, as a
result, the bank had improperly dishonoured. However, the Court of
reversed the decision by holding that there was no obligation on the bank to
know the customs of a particular trade and that,
in view of the discrepancy in
the description in the bill of lading presented and the letter of credit issued,
the bank was justified
in refusing to
Goddard LJ went further by
holding that even if the Bank did know independently of this custom or trade
practice, it would nonetheless
be obliged to comply with the strict requirements
of the terms of the credit.
There is now little doubt that the decision of the Court of Appeal is the
correct or, at the very least, the preferable one. In Australia,
this principle
was adopted by the High Court in
Saffron v Société Miniére
, in which the bill of lading indicated that only 637 long tons
instead of 665 tons of chrome ore were shipped and that it was not
endorsed by the person to whom it was made out, as required by the terms of the
In that case, the Court appropriately held that the bank had properly refused to
In the United States, the courts have consistently applied the common law
requirement of strict compliance on the banks. In
Corporacion de Mercadeo
Agricola v Mellon Bank International
, the exporter was the beneficiary of a
standby credit given as security in case of default by the applicant, which
called for a “statement
of facts” from the
It was clear that, in
the case of default, the importer certainly would not sign any statement of
facts to allow the beneficiary
to be paid under the credit. The US Court of
Appeals held that the beneficiary had agreed to the terms to its detriment and
“it is black letter law that the terms and conditions of a letter of
credit must be strictly adhered
Similarly, in
Beyene v Irving Trust Co
, the US Court of Appeals held that the bank was
justified in rejecting a document in which the name of one of the parties was
Further strengthening the strict compliance doctrine and the corresponding
protection of the applicant’s interests are the later
US authorities,
which held that the strict compliance rule would apply against the interests of
the beneficiary even if, in equity,
the beneficiary would have been entitled to
payment. In
North Woods Paper Mills Ltd v National City Bank
beneficiary mistakenly presented drafts and invoices for amounts less than it
was entitled to under the
The US District Court
held that the bank had properly dishonoured the subsequent drafts, as it did not
accompany the necessary documents
of the earlier drafts. Similarly, in
Head Sports Wear, Inc v Ray Scott’s All-American Sports Club, Inc
bank was held to have properly refused payment for a bill of lading that showed
shipment to Columbus, Indiana, instead of Scottsdale,
Arizona, even though the
goods had already been shipped and there was no indication that the applicant
would not be able to retrieve
the goods from
Partly as a result of these cases, the question was posed by Davis as to
“whether the seller, by demanding ‘payment by
credit’, agrees thereby to release the buyer from liability for payment
under the sales contract; whether, in
other words, the seller agrees to take the
letter of credit as absolute payment or whether it constitutes conditional
payment only”.
This is important as the latter allows recourse against the
applicant in equity on the basis of the underlying
Société Miniére Cafrika
, the High Court discussed the issues
but declined to give a general answer, except to point out that “where the
stipulation
is for an irrevocable but not confirmed credit, there would be less
reason for regarding the provision of the credit as being all
that is required
by the buyer in any
circumstances”.
as Gutteridge and Megrah stated, a confirmed credit “might perhaps not
unreasonably be regarded as a stipulation for
the liability of the confirming
bank in place of that of the buyer”, requiring the beneficiary to pursue
its payment through
This does not appear to be a satisfactory outcome. While it is justified and
proper for the courts to protect the documentary credit
as it is applied in
mercantile custom, they should refrain from doing so in an absolutist fashion
and trample over existing principles
of equity, such as unjust enrichment, that
would have applied to the contract. The stipulation in the sales contract that
be made by letters of credit should not be regarded as any more than a
direction for payment for the purposes of enforcing the contract.
recourse would be available to the exporter to seek payment from the importer if
its cheque was dishonoured, the beneficiary
of a letter of credit should also be
able to seek recourse from the applicant where the rules of law and equity would
have allowed
it to do so.
clear that the courts must take the courage to answer the question that Davis
has posed and provide the answer that any court
of equity would reasonably have
Authorities Opposing
Strict Compliance
Despite the overwhelming majority of cases
supporting the strict compliance principle, there remain a distinct minority of
that applied the traditional formulation of
“substantiality” and “equity” to reject the strict
Banco Espanol de Credito v State Street Bank and Trust
, the credit stipulated that the inspection certificate state that
“the goods are in conformity with the
The certificate
tendered by the beneficiary was based on a ten percent sample that concluded
that the whole was “found conforming
to the conditions estipulated [sic]
on the Order-Stock-sheets”. The US Court of Appeals held that the
certificate was compliant
with the terms of the credit. The Court’s
decision was due to the terms of the credit being “unreasonable” and
the applicant having deliberately interfered with the work of the inspector in
order to avoid the sale.
However, it is difficult to see how the beneficiary could be blameless in not
insisting on clearer requirements for the certificate
and, similarly, it is
difficult to reconcile this opinion with the principle that the bank should be
undertaking no more than the
“ministerial” function of verifying the
conformity of the documents.
One further objection made to
Banco Espanol de Credito
has been that
it effectively required the banks to know the appropriate means of sampling for
the specific goods being traded, thus
requiring the banks to have knowledge of
the industry involved. Both § 5-109 of the UCC and Dolan have pointed out
require banks to have such knowledge is to insist on the
impossible”.
the decision of
Flagship Cruises Ltd v New England Merchants National
, which required banks to understand that a reference to a “letter
of credit” instead of a “draft” under the
letter of credit is
a case of the greater including the smaller, imposes an unreasonable burden on
the banks to go beyond their ministerial
There have also been other US authorities that have relaxed the rule of
strict compliance without rejecting it altogether. In
Fair Pavilions, Inc v
First National City Bank
, for example, the credit stated that it may be
revoked by an affidavit citing one or more events of default, but the New York
of Appeals required that the affidavit thus produced must reasonably
include details in relation to the nature of the alleged default
even though no
such requirement was imposed in the
Similarly, in
Industries, Inc v Second New Haven Bank
, the credit required a certificate
stating that payment had been demanded before the credit could be paid, but the
Court held that
the presence of unpaid invoices was sufficient to satisfy the
requirement.
It may be prudent
to observe that these cases could be justified only if the beneficiary cannot
seek recourse from the applicant,
thus requiring the intervention of the courts
in equity to provide payment to the beneficiary. Otherwise there is no reason
courts would need to deviate from the rules regarding strict compliance
in order to provide for the legitimate or equitable interests
C Standard of
The general standard applied in verifying compliance
of documents is “codified” under the UCP. Specifically, Article 14
of the UCP provides that:
(a) A nominated bank acting on its nomination, a
confirming bank, if nay, and the issuing bank must examine a presentation to
on the basis of the documents alone, whether or not the documents
appear on their face to constitute a complying presentation.
(d) Data in a document, when read in context with the credit, the document
itself and international standard banking practice, need
not be identical to,
but must not conflict with, data in that document, any other stipulated document
or the credit.
(f) If a credit requires presentation of a document other than a transport
document, insurance document or commercial invoice, without
stipulating by whom
the document is to be issued or its data content, banks will accept the document
as presented if its content
appears to fulfil the function of the required
document and otherwise complies with sub-article 14(d).
The two fundamental requirements from these two Articles are
that the banks are to determine whether the tendered documents
comply with the terms of the credit
on the basis of the documents
. Article 16(b) of the UCP allows the banks, in their sole discretion,
to approach the applicant for a waiver of any discrepancies
or to reject the
documents. As both the UCP and the common law required the banks to do no more
than these two requirements, the
issuing bank must pay on an irrevocable credit
provided the documents conform on their face to the terms of the credit. This
would apply even where there were doubts as to whether the requirements of
the underlying contract have been satisfied and even where
it has an interest in
the transaction. For example, where the credit requires a “Certificate of
Inspection” with no more
stated specifications, all that is required was
that a document falling within the description that served as evidence of an
of whatever kind would be
sufficient.
Where there is an ambiguity as to whether the documents conform on their
face, such ambiguities are resolved in favour of the construction
Midland Bank Ltd v
, the applicant sued the issuing bank where the documents appeared to
conform to the credit but under which the beneficiary shipped
rubbish to the
Devlin J held that,
firstly, it is only necessary for all the documents, as a set, to consistently
conform to the requirements of
the credit and that, therefore, it is not
necessary for all documents to comply with the descriptive requirements under
the credit.
Secondly, as there
was a strict compliance requirement imposed on the banks, it is up to the
applicant to make clear in its instructions
in relation to the documentary
requirements.
As a result, the
applicant cannot rely on an ambiguity in its instructions to deny the
beneficiary, as it was the applicant who created
the ambiguity in the first
However, Article 39 of the UCP provides for some allowances to be given in
the description of quantity of the goods being shipped.
Article 30(a) provides
that the words “about” or “approximately”, when used to
refer to the amount or unit
price under the credit, an allowance of ten percent
may be given. Similarly, Article 30(b) allow for a tolerance of five percent
the quantity of goods shipped, unless the credit specifically stipulates the
number of packages or expressly prohibits any tolerance
in the quantity shipped.
These allowances are given in order to allow some flexibility where the exact
weight or number is difficult
to control, such as mineral ores.
The standard imposed under the UCP and the common law reduced the tasks of
the banks to no more than a ministerial task of verifying
the documents as
against the terms of the credit. If the banks are required by law to go beyond a
mere physical verification and
undertake analysis of the documents tendered, it
would require the banks to have an understanding of the relevant trade and the
contract, both of which is not the concern of the
Further, to require the
banks to undertake a discretion beyond a physical verification may result in the
bank to go outside the authority
provided to it by the applicant in the
acceptance of documents, possibly causing the banks to be in breach of their
D Rules Concerning
Specific Documents
Article 18(c) of the UCP requires that the
description in the commercial invoice must correspond with the description in
the credit.
It is clear that the intention was for the two to have the same
meaning but not necessarily the identical
As held by the Court in
J H Rayner and Co Ltd v Hambro’s Bank Ltd
, a bank was entitled to
reject documents describing the goods as “machine-shelled groundnut
kernels” instead of “Coromandel
groundnuts” as required by the
credit, even though the two terms are considered interchangeable in the
Similar authorities can
also be found in US
jurisprudence.
Article 37 of the UCP 500 imposes further obligations on commercial invoices
in that they cannot call for a higher amount than the
credit and that they must
be issued by the applicant and addressed to the beneficiary. In
Pacific (USA), Inc v Toronto Dominion Bank
, the invoice was ruled to be
defective under the UCP for it called for an amount greater than the amount
available under the credit,
even though the drafts presented did not seek
payment in excess of the credit.
The difficulty with this principle is that the beneficiary did not seek payment
in excess of the invoice, though it can be justified
in that, by accepting the
invoice, the bank would in effect be accepting for the applicant the liability
to pay the excess amount.
While this principle can be easily reconciled under
strict compliance, in a case where the letter of credit is given as a security
at a lower amount, this would force the exporter to either issue two separate
invoices or to issue a new invoice that provides for
a lower amount than that
negotiated in the sales contract, rendering the rule somewhat unjust for the
exporter if no legitimate or
reasonable exceptions can be made in equity. This
was resolved by the adoption of the UCP 600, Article 18(b) of which allows the
banks to accept an invoice for a lower amount provided that the bank had not
honoured or negotiated for the excess.
Bills of Lading
The UCP provides for the specification and
acceptance of several types of transport documents, including the bill of
lading, multimodal
transport documents, sea and air waybills, road or rail
transport documents, courier or postal receipts and freight forwarder
These options are
available even though in some cases, such as courier receipts or air waybills,
the goods may well arrive at their
destination earlier than the negotiation of
the credit and the ability of the applicant to take possession of goods shipped
means do not generally require the presentation of any documents.
Consequently, letters of credit are somewhat unsuitable in the
payment for goods
shipped by these means and most letter of credit cases deal with marine or
multimodal transport.
Article 20 of the UCP requires bills of lading to be signed by a named
carrier or its named agent and that the goods have been loaded
on board or
shipped on a named vessel from a named port to a named destination. Generally,
the courts would be inclined to defer
to evidence of international custom or
practices in a particular industry. For example, in
Board of Trade v Swiss
Credit Bank
, the US Court of Appeals required a lower court to consider
evidence of banking industry custom to determine whether “full
on board bills of lading” would include air
Conversely, in
Marine Midland Grace Trust Co v Banco del Pais SA
, the Court refused to
excuse a beneficiary’s failure to present truck bills with an
“on-board” stamp even though
persuasive evidence was presented to
show that the trucking industry in Mexico did not issue such
It is the latter position
that would be preferable as there was no reason why the beneficiary would not
have been able to indicate
this fact to the applicant before the contract or the
issue of the credit.
In relation to the description of goods, while it is not necessary for the
description to be identical to that in the credit or the
commercial invoice, the
description must be at least consistent with the credit. In the English case of
Banque de l’Indochine et de Suez v J H Rayner (Mincing Lane) Ltd
the Court of Appeal held that “however general the description, the
identification must … be
unequivocal”.
Glencore International AG v Bank of China
, the Court held that it is
sufficient for the document in question to be part of “a set of documents
which was in turn unequivocally
linked to the goods the subject of the
credit”, so that there would be no doubt that the corresponding goods have
In the US, this approach has been developed in relation to the description in
bills of lading.
This principle, as stated in the UCP and in both English and US authorities,
appears to be a deviation from the strict compliance
principle for the sake of
business efficiency and convenience. Presumably, it is suggested that carriers
would not have described
goods with the same level of specificity as the
mercantile traders. However, it is difficult to see how the carriers would have
able to identify all the different types of goods shipped without some
direction from the exporter, though it would be in the interest
of the carrier
to avoid liability for providing too much specificity in its description. As the
carrier is likely to be guided by
the exporter in the description of the goods
in any event, there is no reason why the distinction between the descriptions
in commercial invoices and those in other documents should be
maintained. After all, if the beneficiary could not convince the carrier,
had seen the goods, of what the goods actually were, there is no reason why the
beneficiary would be allowed to convince the
bank, which has not seen the goods,
that the different descriptions in the documents refer to the same goods.
Certificates
Where the credit requires a certificate to be presented, failure to do so
would clearly excuse the issuing bank from honouring the
credit. The principle
of strict compliance in relation to certificates does no more than require the
banks to ensure that the terms
of the credit are satisfied. In other words, the
bank cannot impose any conditions beyond those specified in the credit, even if
the accepted banking or mercantile custom would have required the additional
conditions.
Where the credit expressly makes specific requirements, they must be strictly
complied with by the beneficiary and the issuing bank.
Eximetals Corp v
Pinheiro Guimares, SA
, the credit required an inspection certificate signed
by the president of the importer containing a specific description of the
The beneficiary submitted
a certificate signed by the president that omitted the description and sought to
remedy the omission by
submitting a pro forma invoice. The Court held that the
bank was justified in rejecting the documents, as the certificate itself
comply with the terms of the credit. The same strict requirement would apply
even if it was impossible in the circumstances
for the beneficiary to tender a
compliant certificate.
courts or the UCP to provide otherwise would have required the banks to either
abandon the strict compliance principle or
to go beyond the ministerial task of
verifying documents. This would have placed the interests of the importers under
undue risk.
E Documents Produced or Transmitted
Electronically
The traditional rule relating to the production of
documents is that, in the absence of any express stipulation in the credit, the
beneficiary must tender original documents and copies are not
acceptable.
Article 17(c) of the
UCP modified this requirement in this way:
Unless a document indicates otherwise, a bank will also accept a document as
original if it:
(i) appears to be written, typed, perforated or stamped by the document
issuer’s hand; or
(ii) appears to be on the document issuer’s original stationery; or
(iii) states that it is original, unless the statement appears not to apply to
the document presented.
Glencore International AG v Bank of China
negotiating bank tendered a beneficiary’s certificate that was created on
a word processor, printed on blank paper and
photocopied.
Evidence was
produced that the document tendered was a signed photocopy of the original
printed document, which was held by the Court
to be an invalid tender, as it was
not “marked as
The Court held
that a signature merely authenticates the copy and does not render a copy an
original, as could be seen by Article
17 (c) treating a signature as an option
only. This appears to be a satisfactory decision for otherwise the security
which the documentary
credit system provided to the importer would be undermined
by the relative ease by which original and, presumably, forged documents
produced and tendered by the beneficiary. Of course, there was nothing
preventing the beneficiary from producing multiple
originals of the document in
Further, Rix J suggested at first instance that the requirement is for the
document to be marked “original” after the
production of the
document by a word processor, for if the document was printed
“original”, it would not prevent the
production of multiple
Again, this reasoning
is, with respect, difficult to accept as there would have been nothing
preventing the beneficiary from producing
multiple print-outs or photocopies
that it could then mark as originals.
F Remedies for the
In England and, presumably, Australia, the issuing
bank has no right of recourse against the applicant for reimbursement if it
to observe strict compliance of the tendered documents. In
Trust Company of New York v Dawson Partners Ltd
, both Viscount Cave LC and
Viscount Sumner held that, as a matter of contract, the applicant required the
issuing bank to accept
documents only if they strictly complied with the terms
of the credit.
The US position is significantly different, as the courts imposed a different
standard on the contract between the applicant and the
issuing bank, being an
ordinary contract that required no more than substantial compliance. This rule
gave effect to the autonomy
principle that considered the letter of credit as a
separate transaction to any of the other contracts, including the application
contract that established the credit. In
Transamerica Delaval, Inc v
Citibank, NA
, the Court provided a further justification in that, as the
language of the credit is written by the issuing bank, the applicant
complain if the beneficiary did not comply strictly with the language of the
credit as stated.
Dolan justified this bifurcated standard by suggesting that it is appropriate
to apply the special strict compliance rule to the letter
of credit, but the
courts had rightly recognised that the application contract was no more than an
ordinary contract that required
only the traditional formulation of substantial
compliance.
However, by
sustaining this position, the US courts have created the absurd situation where
the banks are required to accept documents
only if they strictly comply with the
credit, but reimbursement by the applicant would be available even if the banks
have only complied
substantially. Further, the decision in
Bank of Montreal v
which held that the law of agency between the applicant and the
issuing bank required no more than substantial compliance of the
credit is, with respect, wrong.
The authority of the issuing bank, as agent of the applicant, allowed the bank
to accept documents only if they strictly complied
with the terms of the credit.
The bank would have acted outside its authority as agent if it failed to observe
strict compliance
and the applicant would thus be under no obligation to
reimburse its agent.
The fundamental reason for the strict compliance principle is to minimise the
risk of non-conforming goods being shipped by the beneficiary.
However, the
applicant is unlikely to discover any fault with the goods until it reimbursed
the issuing bank and has received the
shipping documents. Article 45 of the
Vienna Convention on the International Sale of Goods gives importers the right
to repudiate
a contract where the exporter has failed to ship goods that conform
with the description or failed to tender the correct shipping
This effectively
gives exporters two rights to repudiate a contract: the first in rejecting
non-conforming documents and the second
in rejecting non-conforming goods,
except that in the latter case the exporter would have been paid already.
The problem here is that, under a documentary credit, the importer would lose
its right to reject the documents once they are accepted
by the banks. The only
reasonable course available to the importer is to resell the goods and sue the
exporter for the loss suffered,
either through litigation in domestic courts or
international arbitration through the ICC, which are both very unappealing
considering the time and the costs involved in either mechanism.
However, it is also clear that, without more, the strict compliance
would be the maximum protection available for the applicant.
It is often suggested that the popularity of the documentary credit is
because it appears to provide equal security to both the importer
exporter. While the documentary credit displays a strong tilt in favour of the
applicant through the principle of strict
compliance, it nevertheless does not
produce the mutually secure outcome that was promised. The documentary credit
arms an exporter
that can present seemingly conforming documents with an
irrevocable and unconditional entitlement to be paid, irrespective of the
and nature of the goods actually sent. Without the possibility of the applicant
withholding payments in the case of fraud,
it may be appropriate to suggest that
the strict compliance principle would not provide adequate protection to
importers in most
international transactions.
V Withholding Payments
and the Fraud Exception
Withholding Payments Generally
The letter of credit provides the exporter that can
tender compliant documents with an irrevocable and unconditional entitlement to
payment. This is because the letter of credit requires the issuing bank to enter
into a contractual relationship with the beneficiary
and, once the credit has
been advised to the beneficiary, the applicant cannot revoke
This is because the
applicant cannot revoke a contract between the issuing bank and the beneficiary
to which it is not a party. Accordingly
the applicant would remain liable to the
issuing bank, just as the bank is liable to pay under the credit to the
beneficiary.
In the English case of
Ian Stach Ltd v Baker Bosley Ltd
, Diplock J (as
he then was) held that:
The commercial purpose of a banker’s credit is more than a mere method of
payment: it creates a direct liability upon the banker
that if the seller
presents the required documents in the required time, he will receive payment of
the contract
In the US case of
American Steel Company v Irving National
, the plaintiff was the applicant who contracted to buy tin plates from
the MacDonnell Chow Corporation, with payment to be effected
by a confirmed
credit in favour of the latter.
The applicant failed to obtain an export licence for the tin plates and
subsequently sought to cancel the credit. The Court held
that the importer did
not have the right to modify the contract between the bank and the exporter but
observed that, even though
the importer could have applied for the credit to be
“subject to an export licence being granted”, the importer did not
do so and was therefore bound by the terms of the credit as it was opened.
Consequently, it is the general rule that the applicant could not stop
payment under a credit, as it is autonomous from both the sale
contract and the
application contract of the credit. If the goods were defective or undelivered,
the applicant could sue on the underlying
contract but could not stop payment on
the credit or avoid reimbursing the issuing bank in order to compel it to seek
recourse against
the beneficiary. This reinforces the idea that a letter of
credit arms the exporter with an unconditional entitlement to be paid
deprives part of the force and effect of the applicant’s right to
repudiate the contract under the Vienna Convention.
Kingdom of Sweden v New York Trust Co
, the credit was already paid
when a government agency seized the shipment of toluene and the applicant
subsequently sued the issuing
bank seeking
Similarly, in
Rosenfeld v Banco Internacional
, the issuing bank dishonoured drafts
under instructions from the applicant as the Government of Argentina seized the
merchandise.
The Courts held in
both cases that the applicant could not reverse payment or instruct the banks to
dishonour the credit, even though
the goods were not delivered to the applicant.
The only recourse available to the applicants was through the underlying sale
with the beneficiaries.
In addition to the non-delivery of goods, there have been several other
situations where applicants had attempted and failed in withholding
the banks to beneficiaries. For example, in
Berman v LeBeau Inter-American,
, the credits were part of a fraudulent scheme in violation of laws
prohibiting corporate dividends and fraudulent
conveyances.
nevertheless held that the payments made under the credit were enforceable, as
unlawfulness of the underlying contract
did not affect the credit itself.
The insolvency of the applicant also presented a significant issue for
documentary credit transactions in the United States. In
Postal v Smith; In
re Marine Distributors, Inc
, the trustee in bankruptcy of Marine
Distributors, Inc sought to enjoin the exporters from drawing under the
The US Court of
Appeals held that no property of the bankrupt was involved in the credit as a
result of its autonomy from the underlying
dispute between the parties and so
the application was refused. However, in
Twist Cap, Inc v Southeast Bank; In
re Twist Cap, Inc
, the Court granted a temporary restraining order as the
beneficiaries were regarded as unsecured creditors who might be seeking to
benefit from a voidable preference arrangement under the Bankruptcy Code
This was overturned in
Page v First National Bank; In re Page
, where the Court held that the
proceeds of the credit were not assets of the bankrupt’s
The fundamental flaw
in the reasoning of
, as rectified in
, was that the
issuing bank had an irrevocable duty to pay the beneficiary and, consequently,
it was the issuing bank’s assets,
rather than the applicant’s, that
pass to the beneficiary under the credit.
English Courts had been equally determined to deny attempts by applicants to
withhold payments to beneficiaries. In
Hamzeh Malas & Sons v British Imex
Industries Ltd
, the parties involved were buying and selling reinforced
steel rods from Britain to Jordan in two
instalments.
After the first
instalment of goods was found to be defective, the applicant sought to restrain
the beneficiary from claiming under
the second credit for the second instalment.
While recognising that the credit gave the beneficiary an advantage in having an
unconditional
entitlement to be paid, despite the shipment of goods being
defective, the Court of Appeal decided not to grant an injunction on
discretionary grounds. This is because:
When [exporters are reselling goods bought from third parties] and when they are
being paid by a confirmed letter of credit, their
practice is … to finance
the payments necessary to be made to their suppliers against the letter of
credit. That system of
financing these operations, as I see it, would break down
completely if a dispute as between the vendor and the purchaser was to
effect of “freezing”, if I may use that expression, the sum in
respect of which the letter of credit was
Similarly, the same deference to banking customs and traditions
was to be found in
Discount Records Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd
Megarry J held:
I would be slow to interfere with banker’s
irrevocable credits, and not the least in the sphere of international banking,
a sufficiently grave cause is shown; for interventions by the court that
are too ready or too frequent might gravely impair the reliance
which, quite
properly, is placed on such
It is clear from the authorities in England and the United
States that, just as the courts had vigorously enforced the strict compliance
doctrine at the expense of beneficiaries, the autonomy doctrine had been
enforced against applicants with equal vigour. The strictness
by which courts
enforced both principles against the respective parties has been seen as
necessary to preserve the mercantile custom
and confidence in the use of
documentary credits. It is not surprising, therefore, that when the beneficiary
or a related party undertakes
a fraudulent act to deliberately undermine this
mercantile custom and confidence, the courts have created and maintained the
“exception” to the principle.
Although authorities have often referred to the
principle allowing payments to beneficiaries to be withheld on the basis of
as the fraud “exception”, it is curious to note that it is
really not an exception at all. For example, in
Bank of Nova Scotia v
Angelica-Whitewear Ltd
, it was suggested that it is a “fraud exception
to the autonomy of documentary
As the credit
deals with the documents that would be subject to the alleged fraud, there is no
need to venture outside the four corners
of the credit and violate the autonomy
principle in order to reject fraudulent documents. The fraud
“exception” is really
no more than the expression of the
bank’s general legal duty not to be part of any fraud on the applicant
that it has knowledge
The UCP does not deal with the issue of fraudulent documents and, as a result,
most jurisdictions have adopted divergent practices
in defining the limits and
applications of the fraud
However, most
common law and civil law jurisdictions have nevertheless adopted the principle
of the fraud exception.
Angelica-Whitewear
, it was suggested that there are several
important issues to be considered in discussing the law governing the fraud
exception, including:
(a) whether the fraud exception is confined to forged or false documents or
would it extend to fraud in the underlying transaction;
(b) the standard of proof required to permit a bank to dishonour a draft or
to allow an injunction to restrain a bank from honouring
(c) whether the fraud exception extends to fraud on the part of third parties
of which the beneficiary of the credit is
One of the earliest statements of the fraud exception was the US case of
Sztejn v J Henry Schroder Banking
In that case, the
plaintiff alleged that the beneficiary shipped cow hair and other rubbish
instead of bristles as contracted. Shientag
J held that:
In such a situation, where the seller’s fraud has been called to the
bank’s attention before the drafts and documents
have been presented for
payment, the principle of the independence of the bank’s obligation under
the letter of credit should
not be extended to protect the unscrupulous seller.
… No hardship would be caused by permitting the bank to refuse payment
where fraud is claimed … where the bank has been given notice of the fraud
before being presented with the drafts and documents
It can be observed from
that the fraud in that
case can be characterised as both a fraud on the documents, where the documents
do not represent the goods
actually shipped, and a fraud in the underlying
transaction, where the exporter deliberately shipped rubbish to the applicant.
position in the US became codified into § 5-114(2) of the UCC, which
applies the exception to both types of fraud. Where the
issuing bank has notice
of fraud, it may exercise its discretion in good faith as to whether to honour
the draft, but the applicant
of the credit may restrain it from doing so through
the courts.
While it is clear that forged or fraudulent documents would fall under the
exception, there is no clear authority on what level of
fraud in the underlying
transaction would be required for the exception to apply. Some commentators have
suggested that it is necessary
for the fraud to be so intimate to the credit as
to relate to an express or implied term of
Industries, Inc v Girard Trust Bank
, the Court held that the exception
applied where the “wrongdoing of the beneficiary has so vitiated the
entire transaction
that the legitimate purposes of the independence of the
issuer’s obligation would no longer be
authorities had supported this narrow exception for fraud in the underlying
transaction.
This is to be compared with the board approach found in
NMC Enterprises,
Inc v Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc
, in which the Court held that, where
the sales contract was tainted with fraud in its inducement, then any document
required by the
credit to be submitted was equally
This position now appears to be the dominant position, with support from
judicial authorities and
commentators.
International Systems, Inc v Citibank, NA
, the Court went so far as to
describe “outright fraudulent practice” as any situation where
beneficiaries have acted
in such a manner as to prevent the performance of the
underlying contract to attempt to reap the benefit of the
England, on the other hand, appeared to have adopted the narrower approach in
requiring the fraud to be established clearly to justify
the fraud exception. In
Discount Records Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd
, the Court held that a mere
allegation of fraud was
insufficient.
In the case of
an applicant that sought an injunction to restrain the bank from paying the
beneficiary, the applicant must further
demonstrate that an injunction should be
granted on the balance of convenience, especially in the case of a
injunction.
English law requires an existing legal cause of action to which the injunction
is merely incidental or, in other words,
that the injunction cannot be of itself
the cause of action.
United Trading Corp SA v Allied Arab Bank Ltd
, the Court of Appeal held
that the issuing bank owed the applicant a duty of care not to pay under a
credit where it is clear on
the evidence that the demand is based on
A cause of action
would thus lie in negligence against the issuing bank, for which an injunction
restraining payments would be ancillary
relief and may be granted.
In Australia, as in England, the position is that the applicant must
establish actual fraud or gross unconscionable conduct to warrant
intervention of a court in a documentary credit
transaction.
is not necessary for there to be an existing cause of action to be established
for an injunction to be granted against the
bank, one would be required along
with evidence showing that the beneficiary was likely to organise its affairs to
frustrate any
judgment awarded to the applicant for the courts to grant a
injunction.
The requirement of an existing cause of action in England to justify the
exercise of the power of the courts to grant interlocutory
injunctions is reasonable as they are no more than ancillary or incidental to
the enforcement of the applicant’s existing rights.
In Australia, however,
there is no such requirement because, as Harfield suggested, the courts
intervened to allow the applicant
to assert derivatively the “rights
possessed but not utilised by the
This is, with
respect, illogical as it would in effect allow the applicant to restrain the
issuing bank from performing its duties
because it has enforceable rights
against the beneficiary, a third party. The courts, while not able to rely on
the security of a
statutory provision as in the United States, should have
recourse to their inherent powers in equity to allow injunctive relief in
of fraud or unjust enrichment of the beneficiaries. Consequently, English courts
should not require proof of an existing cause
of action, but it should only do
so by deference to the prescription of an international custom or code. Such a
development would
be welcomed internationally, if for no other reason than
bringing England in line with the position of the other common law
On the subject of whether the fraud exception extends also to fraud on the
part of third parties to which the beneficiary is innocent,
the English case of
United City Merchants (Investments) Ltd v Royal Bank of Canada
unequivocally that the exception did not
In this case, the
loading brokers had fraudulently misrepresented the date of shipment on the bill
of lading and Lord Diplock stated
the fraud exception has application when
“the seller for the purpose of drawing on the credit, fraudulently
presents to the
confirming bank documents that contain, expressly or by
implication, material representations of fact that
to his knowledge
This position
was adopted in the Canadian decision of
Bank of Nova Scotia v
Angelica-Whitewear Ltd
as being part of the law of Quebec and Canada.
Presumably, the same position is found in Australia and the
This position is easily justifiable on the basis that the beneficiary in such
a situation would have done nothing to defraud the applicant
and the issuing
bank. However, it does seem strange that the courts would not intervene to
prevent the issuing bank from paying the
beneficiary even when the bank is armed
with the knowledge that a third party has fraudulently produced documents or
shipped goods
that would otherwise have given the applicant the right to
repudiation. It is difficult to see why the courts would allow the applicant
short-circuit the repudiation process in the case of fraud by the beneficiary
but not in the case of fraud by a third party, even
though the loss suffered by
the applicant is the same and that the causes of action in the common law
been the same.
Position of Issuing Banks
The strongest criticism that has been made of the fraud exception is not
legal but procedural in nature. It has been observed that
the bank can adopt a
range of “responses” or “stances” in the face of
injunction proceedings, as it may adopt
a defensive position and aggressively
resist the injunction or it may take a nominal position and adopt a
“neutral” position
similar to that of an
Some commentators
suggested that it is the proper, or even only, position for the banks to
However, as a result
of this stance, the courts are more likely to grant the injunctions sought, as
in the case of
R D Harbottle (Mercantile) Ltd v National Westminster Bank
I feel bound to say that I doubt whether I should have ever granted any of these
injunctions in the first place, even ex parte. If
the bank had opposed their
continuation I should have discharged
If the bank chose not to oppose the injunction at all, it would
bear the risk of exposing itself to liability for improper dishonour.
of Canton Ltd v Republic National Bank of New York
, the District Court of
New York held that the bank, in improper dishonour proceedings, could not argue
that its performance was made
impossible by a judicial order unless it could
show that it did not consent to the
Consequently, it is
clear that an issuing bank would be exposing itself to legal risk of improper
dishonour if it did not oppose
the injunction proceeding, though the bank is
likely to do so as the result of a commercial decision rather than a legal one.
changes to the law should be made to compel banks to at least make a
nominal opposition to the injunction, as it should not be up
to the banks to
rely on their commercial judgments to decide whether they would consent, oppose
or remain neutral in an injunction
proceeding.
In terms of risk minimisation for the issuing bank, there is the possibility
of inserting waiver clauses into the application contract
between the applicant
and the issuing bank. However, it is likely that the courts would not enforce a
clause whereby the applicant
waived its right to bring an injunction, as it
would be against public policy to allow a fraud by the beneficiary. The best
the issuing bank could do would be to require injunction proceedings not to
and for the issuing bank’s legal costs to be paid
for by the applicant in advance. This should remove some of the factors that
influence the decision of banks to refrain from opposing injunction proceedings
that would prejudice the interests of the beneficiaries
under the credit.
It is clear from the above discussion that the principles relating to the
fraud exception are far from settled and vary from jurisdiction
to jurisdiction.
The difficulty involved here is that even though the issuing bank and the
applicant are likely to be in the same
would have to be taken out in the jurisdiction where the collecting bank and the
beneficiary
are located. As a result, the next revision of the UCP should
provide the rules for the conduct of banks and courts in relation to
exception, especially the role that the bank should play in injunction
proceedings and what standards the courts should
adopt in exercising its
discretion, in order to provide fairness in protecting the interests of both
VI Concluding Observations
R D Harbottle (Mercantile) Ltd v National
Westminster Bank Ltd
, the Court stated that:
It is only in exceptional cases that the courts will interfere with the
machinery of irrevocable obligations assumed by banks. They
are the lifeblood of
international commerce. Such obligations are regarded as collateral to the
underlying rights and obligations
between the merchants at either end of the
It is for this judicial reluctance that the courts of most
and the fraud exception without further reference to their contexts in the
common law. However, this deference to mercantile custom
may have caused the
development of principles and legal applications that are inconsistent over time
and incompatible with accepted
principles of civil and commercial law and, as a
result, deprived the exporters and importers of some of the protections
available to them in law and equity.
The doctrine of strict compliance forces the exporter to tender documents
strictly in conformity to the requirements of the credit,
but it gives the
beneficiary the benefit of being paid only when it can demonstrate that the
goods have been shipped in accordance
with the contract. Although this may
appear to tilt the system in favour of the applicant, it is clear that there are
where the doctrine goes too far and, in other situations, not far
enough. In any event, this benefit is offset by the exporter’s
irrevocable
and unconditional entitlement to be paid by the bank, even though it may have
shipped no more than rubbish to the importer.
Since the documentary credit provides the exporter payment in advance of
performance, it is subject to the risk that the exporter
may abuse this and
defraud the importer through presenting fraudulent documents or in the
underlying transactions. While the fraud
exception has the effect of tilting the
balance back near equilibrium, it is clear that its onerous requirements on
proof of fraud,
the requirement that the issuing bank has knowledge of the fraud
and the divergent practices of courts in the absence of uniform
custom cause the
system to remain firmly in favour of the exporters. It is through enforcing the
rules of strict compliance and reforming
the practice of courts and banks in
relation to the fraud exception that the balancing of interests between
exporters and importers
may in future allow this “lifeblood of
commerce” to flow both ways.
LL.M. B.A.(Int.St.)(Hons.)
LL.B.(Hons.) G.D.L.P. F.C.L.A. Associate, Legal, PricewaterhouseCoopers,
Australia. Member of the International
Sales Committee of the International Bar
Association. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author
personally and are
not necessarily those of any business or organisation with
which the author is affiliated. The author’s thanks go to Peter
Solicitor, PricewaterhouseCoopers, for proofreading and editing this
An Inquiry into the
Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations
(1776, reprinted 1973), at
Mann, “The Role of
Letters of Credit in Payment Transactions”
(2000) 98 Mich L Rev 2494
Midland Bank,
Credit Management and Control
(1985); Maulella, “Payment Pitfalls for
the Unwary: How to Make Your Letter of Credit Work” [1999:4] World Trade
“Martin Shaw Claims There Are Better Ways to Reduce
Discrepancies and That ICC Should Take Advantage of Them” [1999]
Documentary Credit Insight
Midland Bank, above note
See, for example, the recent
letter of credit fraud cases in China and Hong Kong as reported on DC-PRO Focus,
http://www.dcprofessional.com/ezine/content/news1.htm
, 29 March 2002,
last accessed on 11 April 2002; and those relating to United States scams in
“Scam Survey”, [2001:5]
Documentary Credit World
See Harfield, “Enjoining
Letter of Credit Transactions”
(1978) 95 Bank LJ
Kimball and Sanders, “Preventing Wrongful Payment of Guaranty Letters of
Credit — Lessons from Iran” (1984)
39 Bus Lawyer
Shaw, “Enjoining Payment under a Letter of Credit — A Nominal
Response? An Anglo-American Perspective”
(1990) 1 JBFLP
Folsom, Gordon and Spanogle,
International Business Transactions: A Problem-Oriented Coursebook
ed., 1995), at 200.
Shaw, above note 6, at
Lee, “The Implications
of Electronic Commerce on International Documentary Credit Transactions”
[2001] Bus L Int’l
International Chamber of
Commerce, “Documentary Credits Go Electronic”, 16 November 2001,
http://www.iccwbo.org/home/news_archives/2001/eucp.asp
, last accessed on
5 March 2002.
International Chamber of
Commerce, Electronic Commerce Project, 23 October 2000,
<www.austriapro.at/links/dokumente/ECP_65_URGETS_Annex_1_W2.doc>,
accessed on 6 March 2002.
Holdsworth, “The
Origins and Early History of Negotiable Instruments (II)”
(1915) 31 LQR
; and Kozolchyk, “The Legal Nature of the Irrevocable Commercial Letter
(1965) 14 Am J Comp L
Holdsworth, “The
Origins and Early History of Negotiable Instruments (IV)”
(1916) 32 LQR
; and Dolan,
The Law of Letters of Credit: Commercial and Standby Credits
(1984), at 2-2.
Cases that have referred to
a letter of credit as a contractual device include
Bossier Bank & Trust
Co v Union Planters National Bank
[1977] USCA6 163
(1977) 550 F (2d) 1077
Industries, Inc v Girald Trust Bank
(1975) 336 A (2d) 316
; and cases that
have referred to it as a negotiable instrument only include
(1842) 21 F Cas 68
; and in Story,
Commentaries on the Law of Bills
of Exchange, Foreign and Inland, as Administered in England and America
(1843), at 2.
Purvis and Darvas,
Law and Practice of Commercial Letters of Credit, Shipping Documents and
Termination of Disputes in International Trade
(1975), at 15.
Law of International Business Transactions
(2nd ed, 1999), at
[1966] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
Ibid, at 386.
Maran Road Saw Mill v
Austin Taylor Ltd.
[1975] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 156.
Soproma SpA v Marine
& Animal By-Products Corp
, above note 18, at 386.
W J Alan & Co Ltd. v
El Nasr Export & Import Co
[1972] EWCA Civ 12
[1972] 2 QB 189.
Justice, “Letters of
Credit: Expectations and Frustrations”
(1977) 94 Bank LJ 424
at 425; and
Kimball and Sanders, above note 6, at 418.
A credit of US$1,000,000.00
would often require a fee of around $3,000.00: see Mann,
Payment Systems and
Other Financial Transactions
(1999) at 217.
[1984] 2 NZLR 34.
Sewell v Burdick
(1884) 10 App Cas 74
Leduc & Co v Ward
(1888) 20 QBD 475
SS Ardennes (Cargo Owners) v SS Ardennes (Owners)
[1951] 1 KB 55.
Leduc & Co v
, above note 26, at 479 (Lord Esher MR).
Originally, the position in
Marlborough Hill v Cowan & Sons Ltd
[1921] 1 AC 444
and s 7 of the
Sea-Carriage of Goods Act 1924
(Cth) provides that the two are equally
effective as a document of title, but this was repealed by the
Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act 1991
Davies and Dickey,
Shipping Law
(2nd ed, 1995), at 254. See also Article 3 of the
Hague-Visby Rules and Article 15.1 of the Hamburg Rules, as contained in Sch 1
Sch 2 of the
Carriage of Goods by Sea Act
Lickbarrow v Mason
[1794] EngR 2244
(1794) 5 TR 683
101 ER 380.
[1990] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
252 at 268. See also
Sanders v Maclean
(1883) 11 QBD 327
at 341 (Bowen
This is reproduced in
Australia in the
Bills of Lading Act 1859
Sale of Goods Act
Goods Act 1958
Mercantile Acts
(Qld) and the
Bills of Lading Act 1857
Instituto Nacional de
Commercializacion Agricola (Indeca) v Continental Illinois National Bank &
(1982) 530 F Supp 279.
Voest-Alpine International Corp
v Chase Manhattan Bank, NA
(1982) 545 F Supp 301
, which held the contrary
Bank of Nova Scotia v
Angelica-Whitewear Ltd
(1987) 1 RCS 59
See, for example, Chae,
“Letters of Credit and the UCP 500: The Negotiating Bank and the Fraud
Rule in Korea — A Recent
Korean Supreme Court Case Study” (1998) 12
Fl J Int’l L 127.
AMF Head Sportswear, Inc
v Ray Scott’s All-American Sports Club, Inc
(1978) 448 F Supp 222.
Dolan, above note 14, at
(1975) 369 NYS (2d)
See, for example,
Décor by Nikkei International, Inc v Federal Republic of Nigeria
(1980) 497 F Supp 893
United Bank Ltd v Cambridge Sporting Goods Corp
(1976) 41 NY (2d) 254
W Pat Crow Forgings, Inc v Moorings
Aero Industries, Inc
(1978) 403 NYS (2d) 399.
The Law Relating
to Commercial Letters of Credit
(2nd ed, 1954), at 51.
(1926) 27 Ll L Rep 49.
Ibid, at 52. This passage
was cited with approval by MacKinnon LJ in
J H Rayner & Co Ltd v
Hambro’s Bank Ltd
[1942] 1 KB 37
(1922) 13 Ll L Rep 21 at
J H Rayner & Co
, above note 43.
Ibid, at 41 (MacKinnon
Ibid, at 43 (Goddard
[1958] HCA 50
(1958) 100 CLR 231.
Ibid, at 238 (Dixon CJ,
McTiernan and Menzies JJ).
[1979] USCA2 765
(1979) 608 F (2d) 43
Ibid at 47.
[1985] USCA2 406
(1985) 762 F (2d) 4.
(1953) 121 NYS (2d)
AMF Head Sportswear,
, above note 37.
Davis, above note 41, at
, above note
48, at 244 (Dixon CJ, McTiernan and Menzies JJ).
Ibid, at 244.
There is limited support
for this in Davis, above note 41, at 43. In
Habib Bank Ltd v Bank of South
Australia Ltd
[1997] SASC 6715
(1997) 70 SASR 14
, Williams J of the Supreme Court of South
Australia did not preclude the possibility that, once the goods have been
rejected and
instructions were sent to the issuing bank to withhold payment, it
was nevertheless open to the exporter or the advising bank to
importer directly for payment under the contract.
[1967] USCA1 121
(1967) 385 F (2d) 230.
Ibid, at 232-233.
Dolan, above note 14, at
6.05[1][a].
[1978] USCA1 18
(1978) 569 F (2d) 699
(1967) 19 NY (2d) 512.
(1978) 462 F Supp 662.
See Article 14(f) of the
UCP 600 and
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Ltd v Jalsard Pty Ltd
[1973] AC 279.
Burnett, above note 17, at
[1955] 2 Lloyd’s Rep
Ibid, at 152.
Ibid, at 153.
This was supported by the
Privy Council, reversing the decision of the Supreme Court of New South Wales,
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Ltd
, above note 67.
National City Bank v
Seattle National Bank
(1922) 209 P 705
, the issuer of the credit is expected
to know nothing about sugar;
J H Rayner & Co v Hambro’s Bank
above note 43, in which the banks are not expected to be concerned with the
customs of “gentlemen who deal … on contracts
Lane”. This became codified into § 5-109(1)(c) of the UCC. However,
Banco Espanol de Credito v State Street Bank & Trust Co
(1967) 266 F
appears to hold the contrary view, requiring banks to have some
understanding of the appropriate sampling technique of the relevant
Early American authorities
have described the issuing bank as the agent of the applicant:
Montreal v Recknagel
(1888) 109 NY 482.
UCP 500 & 400
(1993) at 100.
J H Rayner & Co.
Ltd. v Hambro’s Bank
, above note 43.
See, for example,
Portuguese-American Bank v Atlantic National Bank
(1922) 200 A.D. 575
Courtaulds North America, Inc v North Carolina National Bank
[1975] USCA4 767
528 F (2d) 802.
(1974) 357 NYS (2d)
UCP 600, Articles
(1979) 25 UCC Rep Serv
(1966) 261 F Supp 884.
[1983] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
228 at 233 (Donaldson MR).
[1996] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
135. See Bennett, “Strict Compliance under UCP 500:
Glencore v Bank of
” [1997] Lloyd’s Marit & Comm L Q 7.
Laudisi v American
Exchange National Bank
(1924) 239 NY 234.
Bank of Canton Ltd v
Republic National Bank of New York
[1980] USCA2 1022
(1980) 636 F (2d) 30
, in which the court
held that the issuing bank cannot rely on New York banking custom to require a
Hong Kong bank to obtain a Federal
Communications Commission certificate to be
issued to the shipper, where the credit did not specify any requirements in
to the addressee of the certificate.
(1979) 422 NYS (2d)
Marino Industries
Corp v Chase Manhattan Bank, NA
[1982] USCA2 734
(1982) 686 F (2d) 112
Equitable Trust
Co of New York
note 44, where the credits required
certificates issued by the exporter’s government or the importer’s
consulate in the
exporter’s jurisdiction. The Court required strict
compliance in the former case and an amendment to the credit was required
latter case to effect the transaction.
Documentary
Credits: The Law and Practice of Documentary Credits including Standby Credits
and Demand Guarantees
(2nd ed, 1993) at 161.
Glencore International
, above note 82.
Ibid, at 153 (Bingham
Ibid, at 148.
Equitable Trust Co of
note 44, at 52 (Viscount Cave LC) and at 52 (Viscount
(1982) 545 F Supp 200.
Dolan, above note14, at
9.03[1][a].
Bank of Montreal,
above note 74.
Vienna Convention on
Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, opened for signature on 11 April
1980, 1498 UNTS 3
(entered into force on 1 January 1988).
Sovereign Bank of Canada
v Bellhouse Dillon & Co
[1911] 23 LR (KB) 413.
[1958] 2 QB 130
(1920) 266 F 41.
(1949) 197 Misc 431.
(1967) 27 AD (2d) 826.
[1981] USCA2 716
(1981) 679 F (2d) 872.
J Zeevi & Sons v Grindlays Bank (Uganda) Ltd
(1975) 37 NY (2d) 220
the Court held that the applicant cannot complain when the issuing bank honours
a credit despite attempts by the Government of Uganda
to make it unlawful under
Ugandan law.
[1975] USCA9 510
(1975) 522 F (2d)
(1979) 1 Bankr 284.
(1982) 18 Bankr 713.
Printing Department, Inc v Xerox Corp; In re Printing
Department, Inc
(1981) 20 Bankr 677 found that the automatic stay provision
found in § 362(a) of the Bankruptcy Code (US) did not apply as a
does not constitute an act obtaining the property of the bankrupt’s
[1958] 2 QB 127.
[1975] 1 All ER 1071
Bank of Nova
, above note 35, at 169 (Le Dain J).
It is perhaps for this
reason that early fraud cases are framed in the plea of negligence on the part
of the bank: see, for example,
United Trading Corp SA v Allied Arab Bank
[1985] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 554 at 560.
Shaw, above note 6, at
For civil law
Le Credit Documentaire
(1957) at 327; and
Commercial Letters of Credit in the Americas
Bank of Nova
, above note 35, at 168 (Le Dain J).
(1941) 31 NYS (2d)
Ibid, at 634.
See, for example,
Letters of Credit
(1979) at 84-85.
(1975) 336 A (2d)
See, for example,
York Life Insurance Co v Hartford National Bank & Trust Co
(1977) 378 A
First Arlington National Bank v Stathis
(1980) 413 NE (2d)
Foreign Ventures LP v Chemical Bank
(1977) 399 NYS (2d)
(1974) 14 UCC Rep
See Van Houten,
“Letters of Credit and Fraud: A Revisionist View”
(1984) 62 Can Bar
at 380-381;
Dynamics Corp of America v Citizens & Southern
National Bank
(1973) 356 F Supp 991
United Bank Ltd v Cambridge
Sporting Goods Corp
(1976) 360 NE (2d) 943.
[1983] USCA2 932
(1983) 719 F (2d)
Discount Records
, above note108. This is in contrast to the case in
NMC Enterprises,
, above note119, in which the Court held that a
prima facie
showing of fraud in the underlying transaction of sale was sufficient to invoke
the fraud exception.
Wedderburn, “The
Injunction and Sovereignty of Parliament”
(1989) 23 J Assoc L Teachers
Shaw, above note 6, at
United Trading Corp
, above note 110, at 560; and
Intraco Ltd v Notis Shipping Corp (The
Bhoja Trader)
[1981] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 256.
Hortico (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Energy Equipment Co (Australia) Pty Ltd
(1985) 1 NSWLR 545.
Ibid, at 557.
Harfield, above note 6,
[1983] 1 AC 168.
Ibid, at 183. Emphasis
Bank of Nova
, above note 35, at 177 (Le Dain J).
See, for example,
Contronic Distributors Pty. Ltd. (rec & mgr apptd) v Bank of New South
[1984] 3 NSWLR 110
at 114; and
Shaffer v Brooklyn Park Garden
(1977) 250 NW (2d) 172
See, for example, Ho,
“The Fraud Rule in Letters of Credit Transactions” and Ellinger,
“Documentary Credits and
Fraudulent Documents” in Chinkin
Current Problems of International Trade Financing
Singapore Conference on International Business Law (1983), at 248 and 212
respectively.
[1977] 2 All ER 862
Bank of Canton
above note 36, at 1319.
R D Harbottle
(Mercantile) Ltd.
, above note 134, at 870.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (424 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter