URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gerard, Alison; Gainsford, Annette --- "Dispossession Cycles and Resistance: Historical Continuums in the Deportation of First Nations Peoples" [2024] SydLawRw 16; (2024) 46(3) Sydney Law Review 315
I Introduction
II Indigenous Sovereignty, Crimmigration and Deportation
A Legal Framework of Visa Cancellation and Removal
B Crimmigration: Merging Immigration and Criminal Law
C Sovereignty, Crimmigration and First Nations Peoples
D Love v Commonwealth
IV Historical and Contemporary Context of Deporting First Nations Peoples
A Cyclical Nature of Colonisation and Deportation: WSML and Minister for Home Affairs
B Indigenous Resistance to ‘Transformative Coloniality’: Montgomery v Minister for Immigration
V Conclusion
Dispossession Cycles and Resistance: Historical Continuums in the
Deportation of First Nations Peoples
and Annette
This article surveys the historical and contemporary context of Indigenous
peoples’ entanglement in systems of criminal justice
and migration
control. Government attempts to remove First Nations peoples from Australia
under visa cancellation provisions present
a striking contemporary development
in border control. Despite the High Court of Australia’s ruling that
‘Aboriginal
Australians’ cannot be ‘aliens’ and
therefore subject to visa cancellation provisions, Indigenous peoples continue
to be targeted for exclusion and subject to the gaze of border control
authorities. We use documentary research and draw on two case
studies to explore
the historical use of deportation to target First Nations peoples. We identify
previous attempts to achieve law
reform to rectify past injustices and prevent
Indigenous peoples from being caught up in migration laws aimed at excluding
non-citizens.
We review the extensive literature on
Love v Commonwealth
and analyse the expanded visa cancellation provisions that have resulted in
increased numbers of people being targeted for removal,
and removed, from
Australia. When analysed against the long shadow of colonisation, we argue that
these applications of criminal
and migration law represent a continuation of
attempted exclusion and dispossession that has been, and continues to be,
resisted by Indigenous peoples. In analysing the cyclical nature of
dispossession and its resistance, the complex interaction of
criminal and
migration law can be seen to have created novel impacts for First Nations
peoples in Australia.
Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge the traditional custodians of the lands upon which this
article was written, in particular the lands of the Wiradyuri
and Ngunnawal. We
acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the sovereign
peoples of this land we now call Australia.
We express our gratitude and respect
to the Elders-in-Residence at our respective university campuses for their
guidance as part
of our professional development across the areas of curriculum,
research and governance.
Introduction
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have occupied this land since
time immemorial.
peoples’ connection to this Country now known as Australia is unique and
embodies complex notions such as law, identity,
place, language, spirituality,
culture, family and sustenance.
This connection, recognised in international
widely understood as the foundation for health and
and core to Indigenous resistance and
Despite this, Indigenous
peoples, families and communities continue to endure the prospect of removal
from Australia, and containment
within immigration detention, under the
Australian government’s newly expanded visa cancellation powers. Over the
decades, the government has significantly shifted its focus from
external border controls to the removal of non-citizens lawfully
Australia through administrative processes based on the ‘character
Migration Act 1958
Before, and even after, the High Court’s decision in
Commonwealth
that ‘Aboriginal Australians’ could not be
Indigenous peoples were and are being entangled in protracted legal disputes
with immigration authorities regarding permanent exclusion
case involved Daniel Love and Brendon Thoms, both of whom
identified — and were accepted by their communities — as
Aboriginal,
but who were not born
in Australia and did not have Australian citizenship. Although visa cancellation
is the focus of this article,
we note that, historically, Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples ‘were denied citizenship’ and basic
citizenship
This article surveys the historical context and
contemporary social reality of Indigenous peoples’ entanglement in systems
criminal justice and migration control. Migration control and colonisation
are tightly linked through their contested relationships
with, and access to,
sovereign territory. Contemporary and historical writings on immigration and
racism in settler colonies have
been criticised for failing to ‘take
Indigenous decolonization
as the ‘question of land as contested space is seldom taken
Migration controls
impact First Nations peoples against a backdrop of rising rates of incarceration
and victimisation globally as
colonisation and its ongoing effects continue to
The legal fiction of the declaration of terra nullius
led to the swift
possession of Australia. As Indigenous legal scholar Aileen Moreton-Robinson
writes, whereas international customary
law required that colonies be
established under conquest or cession, ‘Australia was taken on a different
basis’, denying
the customary proprietary rights and the rights of
Indigenous peoples as ‘subjects of the
The application of this legal fiction led to the Frontier Wars and to the
systematic dispossession (attempted and actual), including
the forced relocation
of Indigenous peoples, which continues today. The laws, policies and practices
of colonisation are, and have
been, resisted by Indigenous peoples with the
Uluru Statement from the Heart
calling for Voice,
Truth-Telling
as central to
efforts to reconcile this past and ongoing contemporary legacies.
Deportation, in particular, has unique impacts on Indigenous peoples
Government attempts to remove First Nations peoples from Australia under visa
cancellation provisions present a striking contemporary
development in border
control. This article contributes to existing analysis of the High Court ruling
that ‘Aboriginal Australians’ cannot be
focusing on two central arguments. First, the targeting of Indigenous peoples
for exclusion represents a continuation of colonisation
practices and a
rejection of recommendations to the contrary. Second, Indigenous peoples remain
entangled in migration controls and
actively resist containment and exclusion.
In concluding our analysis, we highlight the important role of legal education
in providing
a vehicle for truth-telling, and recognising the role played by our
discipline and profession in addressing ongoing
of this article, we review the literature on deportation and
analyse the expanded visa cancellation provisions that have resulted
increased numbers of people being targeted and removed from Australia. The
intensifying interplay between criminal and immigration
law, termed
‘crimmigration’,
is said to be uniquely shaping the differential and more-punitive experience of
non-citizens. We use this framing to understand the
impact of crimmigration on
First Nations peoples and sovereignty. In
we outline our methodological
approach. Documentary research and two case studies are relied upon to explore
the historical continuities
in deportation and to platform the experiences,
strength and resistance of First Nations peoples caught up in this push to
and exclude non-citizens permanently from Australia.
of this article, we discuss the history and present practices of
deportation of First Nations peoples which form the context of the
studies. The first of our case studies, pre-dating
and Minister for Home
a successful appeal on merit to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(‘AAT’) concerning a citizen from Aotearoa New Zealand
who claimed
both Aboriginal and Māori identity. In this case study we investigate the
routine entanglement of Indigenous peoples
with visa cancellation powers. We
explore how historical legacies of colonisation reverberate in the present
through contemporary
practices of visa cancellation and removal. Our second case
Montgomery v Minister for Immigration
, a case which also
concerned a New Zealand citizen who identifies as an Aboriginal
Australian.
In this case study we analyse the continuous need for Indigenous peoples to
argue against exclusion, and how the advocacy and resistance
of Indigenous
peoples and lawyers, including native title organisations, continue in the
aftermath of the High Court’s pronouncement
. We argue that
Indigenous peoples continue to be subject to the gaze of border control
authorities for removal. We argue that more
needs to be done to counter the
contemporary reality whereby only a ‘wafer thin’ majority prevented
the government from
deporting a traditional custodian from
Indigenous Sovereignty, Crimmigration and
Deportation
The move to deport, or attempt to deport, First Nations peoples from
Australia reveals the ‘foundational and continuing role
“race” and “whiteness” in the formation of Australian
sovereignty and
citizenship’.
In the Australian setting, Moreton-Robinson writes that racism is
‘inextricably tied to the theft and appropriation of Indigenous
the first world’ despite the ‘omnipresence of Indigenous
sovereignties’.
prevalence of what Moreton-Robinson terms ‘patriarchal white
sovereignty’
that Indigenous sovereignty is perceived as threatening and enhances the fear of
dispossession from a ‘foreign other’,
as represented by asylum
seekers and refugees. Louise Boon-Kuo draws on Moreton-Robinson’s work in
her analysis of punitive
approaches in border control, understood as ‘part
of the expressive performance of patriarchal white sovereignty responding
crisis of legitimacy of its illegal
foundation’.
security policy is thus intrinsically connected to the denial of Indigenous
sovereignty,
and stands to have
a differential impact on First Nations peoples.
Legal Framework of Visa Cancellation and Removal
Australia’s visa cancellation and removal framework is so robust there
is now a ‘suite of tools’ available to exclude
non-citizens.
Historically, the main mechanism for removal was the criminal deportation power,
contained within
Section 201
provides that a non-citizen can be ‘deported’ if
convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to imprisonment for at
year. Long-term residents (initially, people who had been in Australia for 5
years, a period increased to 10 years in
were recognised as
occupying a different position and exempted from
deportation.
Section 200
main deportation power used until the early 1990s when a series of migration law
reforms was introduced that expanded the
use of visa cancellation and removal,
in effect unseating deportation
The dominant provision now relied upon to effect the visa cancellation of
non-citizens is ‘character grounds’ found in
Migration Act
. A visa can be refused or cancelled if the non-citizen does
not pass the ‘character test’ as defined in
The original
‘character test’, introduced in 1992, enabled the Minister to refuse
or cancel a visa if satisfied the person
was not of good
Notably, when
was originally introduced the provisions were aimed at visa
refusal and not removal.
contained no exemption for long-term residents, in contrast to the criminal
deportation power in
Section 501
was bolstered
Migration Legislation Amendment (Strengthening of Provisions
Relating to Character and Conduct) Act 1998
(Cth), which shifted the onus
onto the applicant as a ‘character test’ that applicants must
It introduced the
‘substantial criminal record’ provision, which meant that someone
did not pass the ‘character
test’ if they were sentenced to
imprisonment for more than 12
Finally, the amendments
allowed the Minister to cancel a visa without applying natural
and gave the Minister
the power to overturn a decision of a merits review
This already
represented a dramatic enhancement of the Minister’s powers, but even more
powers to exclude were to follow.
Section 501 was significantly bolstered by amendments in 2014 to introduce
mandatory visa cancellation and expand existing discretionary
grounds for visa
cancellation.
Amendment (Character and General Visa Cancellation) Act 2014
stipulated that a visa must be cancelled if a non-citizen receives a prison term
of 12 months or more or is convicted of sexually
based offences involving a
child, and is serving a term of
imprisonment.
Where sentences
are to be served concurrently, the whole length of each term is used to
calculate whether or not a person has reached
the 12-month
The reforms also
introduced much broader discretionary provisions in s 501(2) that identify
people for visa cancellation based on
their risk of committing crime or other
forms of conduct labelled suspicious. A strengthened ‘character
test’ set out
in s 501(6) stipulates that, in addition to having a
criminal record, a person will fail the ‘character test’ if the
Minister ‘reasonably suspects’ that they have been, or are, a member
of a group or organisation or have had ‘an
association’ with a
group, organisation or person ‘involved in criminal
The provisions
have been widened to include risk as a basis on which to cancel a visa under the
discretionary provisions in s 501(2).
To illustrate, under s 501(6)(d) a visa
can be cancelled if there is a risk that the person would engage in criminal
The introduction of mandatory visa cancellation to cancel a visa without
natural justice or prior notice to the visa holder was accompanied
by a process
through which a visa holder could seek ‘revocation’ of the visa
cancellation decision.
Migration Act
gives the Minister or a delegate the power
to revoke a decision to cancel a visa under
if the person makes
representations in accordance with the invitation and the Minister or delegate
is satisfied that the person passes
the ‘character test’ (as defined
and including all limbs), or there is another reason why the original
decision should be revoked.
those unsuccessful in their application for revocation, a merits review process
is available in limited circumstances. Application
can be made to the AAT for a
merits review of a decision by a delegate of the Minister not to revoke a
decision to cancel a visa.
Minister can still set aside a decision of the AAT not to cancel a visa if
satisfied that the cancellation is in the national
Ministerial
Directions, issued under
Migration Act
, provide guidance to
delegates of the Minister, and AAT Members, in making decisions around the
refusal and cancellation of visas
and the revocation of mandatory visa
cancellation.
Direction No 110
is the most recent at the time of
and sets out five ‘primary considerations’:
(1) protection of the Australian community from criminal or other serious
(2) whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) the strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia;
(4) the best interests of minor children in Australia;
(5) expectations of the Australian
In taking these considerations into account, the Ministerial Direction makes
clear that the protection of the Australian community
from criminal or other
serious conduct in para 8(1) is ‘generally to be given greater
weight’ than the other primary
considerations.
considerations’ taken into account include the legal consequences of the
decision, extent of impediments if removed,
and impact on Australian business
The strengthening of the ‘character test’ in 2014 was presented
as a necessary aspect of ensuring the integrity of Australia’s
The Australian
government asserted at the time that the community expected there to be ‘a
low tolerance for criminal, noncompliant
or fraudulent behaviour by
noncitizens’.
unclear what evidence was relied upon to support this assertion. The 2014
changes have resulted in a dramatic increase in the
numbers of non-citizens,
including First Nations peoples, having their visas cancelled. In total terms,
the 2014 amendments increased
the number of people having their visas cancelled
and 1,284 in
The figures
continue to fluctuate and for 2022–23 the number was 626, almost all of
which were mandatory visa
cancellations.
It is understood
that just under half of those affected are New Zealanders, and Māori and
Pasifika New Zealanders are proportionally
over-represented in the statistics on
cancellation.
We know from media sources, and some case law, that First Nations peoples are
included in these figures,
exact figures are unobtainable.
Crimmigration: Merging Immigration and Criminal
New theoretical approaches have sought to capture the way in which criminal
and immigration law have combined to enhance the precarity
non-citizens.
intensification has been referred to by law scholar Juliet Stumpf as
‘crimmigration’, or the merging of immigration
and criminal laws to
exclude. Stumpf originally coined the term ‘crimmigration’ to
characterize developments in three
domains: the overlapping of substantive
criminal and immigration law; the similarities between strategies and
technologies used to
detect and prosecute criminal and immigration law offenses;
and the procedural way in which both immigration and criminal law are
Stumpf’s thesis,
which is based on membership theory, asserts that the merger is draconian and
aims to exclude those who are
not part of a social contract with government,
with criminal and immigration law providing the tools to
Deportation provides
the method of expulsion.
all attributes have become part of the merger, with Stumpf noting that
protections in criminal law available to defendants
are not part of the
In later writing, Stumpf
analyses the crimmigration process as a form of punishment of non-citizens,
noting it is often harsher than
that faced by citizens who commit similar
Scholars applying Stumpf’s work have sought to use it to capture what
they term ‘transformations’. Analysing the
Norwegian context, Katja
Franko Aas writes about a ‘transformation’ in criminal justice
— a more exclusionary penal
culture directed at
non-citizens.
Perhaps this
characterisation as ‘transformational’ reflects the fact that
Western Europe has some of the highest rates
of imprisonment of non-citizens in
For Western Europe,
citizenship has become a technique of ‘bordered
Applying this to the Australian context tests the claim that this is a new
phenomenon, because an exclusionary penal culture, and
restrictions on legal
citizenship,
have existed since
It was also central to the law-making efforts of our first federal Parliament in
The over-representation of First Nations peoples in child protection
and incarceration
shows that criminalisation and other techniques of exclusion persist. This makes
the impact of crimmigration on
First Nations peoples, and its resistance, an
important site of analysis.
Sovereignty, Crimmigration and First Nations
The governing of mobility is a key demonstration of the state’s
sovereign power.
crimmigration scholars have begun to recognise the ‘racialised dimensions
of crimmigration’, ‘the role
of settler colonialism as constitutive
of racial formation remains
The Australian
context provides a rich basis for analysing the role of settler colonialism and
the unique way in which criminal and
migration systems are intertwined. The
merging of immigration and criminal law is not new for Australia given our
history of colonisation
and the White Australia
Australia is also the
site for the routine criminalisation and differential status of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples,
such that the assumption of protections in the criminal justice system, depicted
as eroded by crimmigration, may not be as ‘protective’
in the first
Building on Stumpf’s thesis that crimmigration privileges sovereign
power over membership, Boon-Kuo argues that
utilising the sanction of deportation for Aboriginal people who are not
Australian citizens and have been convicted of criminal offences
communicates
not only condemnation of the non-citizen offender, but also denial of First
Nation sovereignties, and works ideologically
to naturalise a raced notion of
citizenship that is embedded in ‘patriarchal white
sovereignty’.
Crucially, Boon-Kuo argues that the visa cancellation
decision-making process ‘operates as a forum for the production of
evaluations of Aboriginality and community
connection’.
alerts us to the risk ‘that decision-making in this field has and will
increasingly become another vehicle in which
state practice effects the
separation of First Nation families and
communities’.
Attempts to deport Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples from
Australia represent the physical severing of connections to
land. While
Indigenous sovereignty persists regardless of removal, disconnection from land
‘“compromises cultural connections”
and causes extreme
distress and powerlessness commonly felt by many Indigenous groups
worldwide’.
Removal under
Migration Act
means permanent exclusion from Australia; one
can never return. Indigenous relationships to land are spiritual and political,
an important site of resistance and
sustenance.
As Bonita Lawrence
and Enakshi Dua write, they also have ‘tremendous
longevity’.
connections between Indigenous cultures and Country are recognised in the
United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
Analysing deportation cases from Canada and Australia, Karl Gardner
introduces the notion of Indigenous ‘anti/deportation’
the contestation of deportation and its impact on Indigenous sovereignty and
solidarity movements between migrants and
Given the sacred nature
of connection to Country, it might be expected that this reality, evidenced
within several Royal Commissions
and national
would be given prominence in policy and laws and might temper the application of
visa cancellation and deportation.
Love v Commonwealth
The decision by the High Court in February 2020 in
significant one for Australian legal scholarship and a litmus test of how
Australian jurisprudence understands Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
peoples, sovereignty, connection to Country and the severance of that connection
through removal or deportation.
By a slim majority of four judges to three, the
High Court ruled that ‘Aboriginal Australians’ cannot be aliens and
be deported.
According to
Asmi Wood, ‘in seeking to deport two Aboriginal men the current executive
is attempting to do what not even the
most racist of their forebears’
Wood argued for constitutional
recognition
and called ‘on
the non-Indigenous peoples, who now share this continent to shake off their
apathy and force their recalcitrant
leaders to “do the right thing by
Blacks” something they claim to have done for the immigrants to this
continent’.
Wood stated
bought Australia time to ‘do the right
A considerable amount has been written on
much of it focusing on the implications for constitutional recognition of
Indigenous sovereignty.
academics have argued that
represents ‘aggressive judicial
activism by the High
The case involved
Daniel Love and Brendon Thoms who were not born in Australia and did not have
Australian citizenship.
born in Papua New Guinea and Thoms in Aotearoa New
Both had been
permanently living in Australia since they were six years old (Love since 1985
and Thoms since 1994).
being convicted of a criminal offence, both were sentenced to periods of
imprisonment that triggered mandatory visa cancellation
Migration Act
was taken into immigration detention upon commencing court-ordered
Love was taken to
immigration detention after serving almost two months of his sentence, then
released almost two months later when
the cancellation of his visa was
The appellants
argued in the High Court that they have ‘special status’ as a
‘non-citizen,
non-alien’.
identifies as a member of the Gunggarri people, and is a native title holder as
recognised by the Federal Court of
Love identifies as
Kamilaroi ‘and is recognised as such by one Elder of that
The central
contention of the plaintiffs was that ‘the common law of Australia
recognises the unique connection which Aboriginal
people have with land and
Australia’.
Each judge wrote their own judgment which gives a sense of the complexity and
wrangling of unique approaches to get to the majority
decision that Aboriginal
people could not be deported. The majority ruled that ‘Aboriginal
Australians (understood according
to the tripartite test in
Mabo [No 2])
are not within the reach of the “aliens” power conferred by
Constitution
The tripartite test was set out by Brennan J in
Mabo [No 2]
as follows:
Membership of the indigenous people depends on biological descent from the
indigenous people and on mutual recognition of a particular
membership by that person and by the elders or other persons enjoying
traditional authority among those
This approach supported earlier expressions of the tripartite
test by Deane J in
Commonwealth v
and followed
what had been adopted by federal government departments as the ‘working
definition’ of Aboriginality since
The Australian Law Reform Commission has urged use of a flexible
definition,
these matters should be determined by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people themselves, working through their
own communities, institutions and
consultation
processes’.
the tripartite test requires Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander descent,
self-identification and community
recognition.
The minority in
argued that ‘alien’ was akin to
‘citizen’ and a legislative issue for Parliament, concluding that
Indigeneity
was irrelevant to determining
citizenship.
determination is reminiscent of what Irene Watson characterises as ‘a
violent space within which Aboriginality is measured
for its degree of
authenticity, and where those who do the measuring are ignorant or deniers of
the history of
colonialism’.
contention were whether or not Aboriginal Elders should have the power to
determine the boundaries of membership of Aboriginal
and whether
connection to Country means connection to a particular nation group or the whole
of Australia.
Ultimately the
Court found that Indigenous peoples’ connection to Country was
‘constitutionally
significant’.
Brendan Thoms’ Indigeneity had been already ‘proven’ he was
released from immigration detention, whereas Daniel
Love’s proof of
Indigenous status was sent to the Federal Court for
determination.
aftermath of the decision, nine Indigenous people who had demonstrated that they
satisfied the tripartite test articulated
Mabo [No 2]
were released
from detention, and a further 20 were reported to be having their claims
Thoms lost a
subsequent case seeking compensation for the 500 nights he spent in immigration
detention and not in the community with
, the Standard Operating Procedures of immigration
authorities now stipulate that officers can only detain a person under the
Migration Act
if they reasonably suspect ‘the person does not meet,
or probably does not meet, all three limbs of the tripartite
The three limbs of the test as set out in the Procedures are:
1. the person must be biologically descended from Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander people, and
2. the person must self-identify as a member of those same Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander people, and
3. the person must be recognised as a member of those same Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander people by elders or other persons
enjoying traditional
authority among those people.
As a result, First Nations peoples who are non-citizens and who might not
meet the tripartite test continue to be the subject of migration
controls, as we
explore below.
In this article we use documentary research to analyse ‘historical
patterns of
bordering’.
Marinella Marmo’s method of analysing interconnections between past and
present interdisciplinary approaches corresponds with
Cindy Blackstock and
colleagues’ Indigenous ontological perspective that is critical of
‘new approaches’ and discoveries
recognises that an Indigenous ontological approach places connection to culture
and lived experience as a central part
of Indigenous ways of knowing, being and
thereby reinforcing
Indigenous peoples’ distinctive sense of belonging to the physical and
spiritual environment through cultural
and kinship ties.
To explore ‘historical patterns of bordering’ and their
resistance,
this article adopts a case study approach drawing on two cases decided either
side of the High Court’s decision in
Our selection of
each case study did not occur through a systematic case law or media analysis,
which would constitute a useful area
for future research. Instead, as we detail
below, our case studies were derived from our literature review and from media
at the time of undertaking this research on the visa cancellation of
Shayne Montgomery, who asserted Aboriginality through cultural
A case study
approach was adopted as it enables a contextual and in-depth understanding of
contemporary practices and their historical
legacy using a variety of
We used documentary
research and information that was publicly available through judgments and media
interviews instead of directly
interviewing people subject to visa cancellation
and removal. We took this approach as it offered a less intrusive way to
the experiences of those subject to the tumult of visa
cancellation.
This research is of particular significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples and as such engages the Australian Institute
of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Studies Code on the ethical and responsible conduct of
research (‘
The four principles underpinning the
AIATSIS Code
and reflected in this
research are (1) Indigenous self-determination, (2) Indigenous leadership, (3)
impact and value, and (4) sustainability
accountability.
principle involves a number of responsibilities for researchers, and we were
alive to these at every stage of the research.
Our responsibilities around
respect and recognition were in some ways more onerous given we were relying on
documentary research.
As a non-Indigenous and Indigenous researcher with a long
history of collaboration, we walked together in this inquiry privileging
Indigenous leadership within the research team and outside it, responding to
calls from Indigenous leaders for Indigenous sovereignty
to be respected within
visa cancellation
Our ongoing commitment, advanced in this collaboration, is to participate in
research that benefits Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and
contributes to a more socially just future in fulfilment of the
Selecting case studies from before and after
was important to us
in understanding how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples continue to
be entangled with border control.
Our first case study was identified through a
literature review on the topic of Indigenous peoples and visa cancellation and
recently written about the case of WSML, a New Zealand citizen who descended
from peoples living in North-East Lutruwita/Tasmania.
This ancestral link led us
to focus on the historical operation of deportation of Aboriginal peoples, using
the contemporary case
We came to our
second case study through the media attention given to the case of Shayne
Montgomery when Senator Lidia Thorpe called
on the government to discontinue a
High Court appeal challenging a decision not to deport Montgomery, who
identified as an Aboriginal
person through cultural
The High Court case
was an appeal by the Commonwealth that sought to re-open or limit
Elisa Arcioni
and Kirsty Gover write that the case
highlights the challenges entailed in efforts to determine the scope of the
Australian Parliament’s power to determine membership
constitutional polity, and appropriately describe Aboriginal Australians in a
way that respects the complexities of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
identity and membership.
We consider the resistance to the deportation of Aboriginal
people by analysing submissions by Indigenous stakeholders in the High
Both the Northern Land Council (‘NLC’) and the National Native Title
Council (‘NNTC’) intervened and
their submissions were the first
contribution of Indigenous organisations to the High Court on questions of
membership and deportation.
Analysing these acts of resistance amplifies the knowledges, leadership and
sovereignty of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples. It also counters
the harmful deficit narratives that dominate representations of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples
in law and justice
discourses.
We begin our
analysis with a historical overview of the use of deportation on First Nations
Historical and Contemporary Context of Deporting
First Nations Peoples
Deportation has been operationalised as a tool of colonisation since European
Bringing Them Home
, the final report of the National Inquiry
into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Children from Their
(‘Stolen Generations
Inquiry’), revealed through
powerful storytelling
primary uses of the power to deport. The first use was the forced removal of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to
remote islands
Australia. The terminology of deportation had been used to describe the removal
of Indigenous peoples to island settlements, such
as Palm Island in Queensland,
and Flinders Island and Sara Island in
Lutruwita/Tasmania.
case of Palm Island, deportation had many aims including enabling Aboriginal
parents to be separated at a distance that made
it impossible for them to visit
their children.
On Flinders
Island, deportation targeted (unsuccessfully) the removal of all Aboriginal
people from Lutruwita/Tasmania to seize land
and stop the ‘Black
War’, an 1820s conflict between Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal
We return to
Flinders Island in our case study in Part IV(A).
The second use of deportation, and the primary focus for this article, was
the forced removal of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples from
Australia, including children fostered or adopted into families as part of the
policies informing the Stolen
Generations.
This aligns with
the definition of deportation in international law which requires the crossing
of an international border.
The Stolen Generations
Inquiry heard testimony from those impacted by the
deportation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples who sought to
to Australia but remained non-citizens. As the report states, an
‘unknown number’ of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
forcibly removed from their families and communities were subsequently taken
overseas by foster families or adoptive
Deportation through forced removal resulted in the loss of citizenship by
current and future generations of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples.
The Stolen Generations Inquiry heard about ‘Jack’, whose grandmother
was forcibly taken from
the Torres Strait in the early
It is understood that
Jack’s grandmother was taken by missionaries to Fiji to work in domestic
service. Jack came to Australia
on a tourist visa in 1988, overstayed his visa,
and at the time of the Stolen Generations Inquiry was liable to deportation.
had re-established family and community ties, was working and was accepted
by relatives and community, yet he was not eligible for
citizenship or even
permanent residence. According to his great-uncle who testified at the
[T]he Australian Government owes a historical debt to Jack’s grandmother
(my sister) which it can only repay by granting Jack
the right to remain in this
country. Jack’s birthright was stolen from him by Missionaries acting with
the consent of the Queensland
Government at the turn of the century and he is
morally entitled to compensation. The least that can be done to compensate him
be to grant him a right to reside in his own
Jack’s grandmother was not a citizen when removed from
Australia as citizenship was only extended to Aboriginal people with
the passing
Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948
(Cth), well after his
grandmother was removed.
do not know what happened to Jack and whether he was deported. The generational
impact of colonisation and its intersection with
migration is enlivened by the
courageous testimony provided by his family to the Inquiry.
The Stolen Generations Inquiry found that for people impacted by forced
removal such as Jack, and those who could not afford to return
to establish
ties, ‘the Commonwealth should assist those living overseas to return to
this country permanently should they
The Inquiry
found this should occur in ‘recognition of the fact that forcible removal
was wrongful and of the need of many
to re-establish their Indigenous identity,
kinships and cultural
The Inquiry
produced a number of recommendations in
Bringing Them Home
that pertained
to addressing the impact of deportation on those who told their stories to the
Recommendation 31a: That the Commonwealth create a special visa class under the
Migration Act 1951
(Cth) to enable Indigenous people forcibly removed
from their families and from Australia and their descendants to return to
and take up permanent residence.
Recommendation 31b: That the Commonwealth amend the
Citizenship Act 1948
(Cth) to provide for the acquisition of citizenship by any person of
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent.
Recommendation 31c: That the Commonwealth take measures to ensure the prompt
implementation of the
International Transfer of Prisoners Bill
the government asserts that these recommendations have been fulfilled, it is
hard to see this claim realised when Aboriginal
peoples without the security of
citizenship continue to face the same challenges in returning and staying in
On the citizenship and visa recommendations (31a and 31b), the government has
argued that provisions already exist in migration and
citizenship legislation
for granting entry to people removed from Australia, or the children of those
A Senate Committee examining the implementation of the recommendations from the
Stolen Generations Inquiry stated that, in receiving
this submission from the
government, ‘the Committee received no evidence to suggest that this
response was insufficient, or
that members of the [Stolen Generations] had
experienced difficulties in returning to
Australia’.
particular submission from the government and the then Minister for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, John Herron,
also characterised
as a ‘misrepresentation of the historical record’ and
discussed at length the ‘benign’ intent of government
policies that
led to the Stolen
Generations.
) Notwithstanding
this assertion, it remains the case that if recommendation 31b had been
implemented, Daniel Love and Brendan Thoms
would not need to have taken their
case to the High Court.
Despite the government stating that these recommendations have been
implemented, Indigenous peoples forcibly removed from Australia
challenges in returning. Recommendation 31c sought to enable the return of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
deported and then jailed overseas.
Russell Moore, whose adopted name was James Hudson
was born to a Koori
mother in Victoria in 1963 and as a newborn forcibly removed and adopted to a
couple who emigrated to the United
States when he was six years
By his early teens he
was homeless and caught up in the criminal justice
In 1991 he was
sentenced to life imprisonment for
Moore’s birth mother and other family members located him while he was in
a United States prison. Following the
Bringing Them Home
recommendations, the Commonwealth did pass legislation to enable his transfer to
yet his bids to
His bids to return were
supported by the Victorian and Australian
governments.
campaigned for his return but passed away in
Russell Moore also died
in Apalachee Correctional Institution in Florida of a sudden medical emergency
He had already
served his sentence but was not able to leave jail or return home. This tragic
outcome of forced removal and deportation
reverberates in the current moment
where Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples continue to face deportation
and permanent
exclusion from Australia. It is also illustrative of the
significant stressors faced by people detained indefinitely. We now turn
examine contemporary examples of the threatened or attempted deportation of
First Nations peoples.
Cyclical Nature of Colonisation and
Deportation: WSML and Minister for Home Affairs
Contemporary examples of the visa cancellation and attempted removal of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples from Australia
show the ongoing
and cyclical nature of colonisation. Australia’s history of dispossession
and resistance links concretely
to the 2019 case of
permanent exclusion from Australia after receiving a notice that he may not pass
the ‘character test’ and
that his visa was liable to cancellation
based on discretionary cancellation provisions in s 501(2) of the
Migration Act
was born in Aotearoa New Zealand and entered Australia on a temporary visa at
age 22 with his partner (later
While his partner took
up Australian citizenship in
WSML did not. WSML has
Aboriginal and Māori ancestral ties, having learnt at a family reunion some
years prior that his family
tree was traced to the Palawa people of
Lutruwita/Tasmania.
time of the tribunal hearing, WSML had two children, both of whom identified as
Aboriginal, and his partner was
WSML’s visa
had been cancelled by a delegate of the Minister for Immigration and so he
applied to the AAT for merits review
of this decision. At the AAT he submitted:
Even though I was born in New Zealand, I identify as indigenous Australian as my
mother has ancestral connections to the indigenous
people of Tasmania. My
grandfather (5 generations back) [name omitted] left Tasmania for New Zealand to
escape the massacre of Tasmania’s
indigenous people. My material (sic)
family has always recognised its indigenous ties to Australia and I have applied
to become a
member of the [name omitted] Aboriginal Corporation. Many of my
maternal family members are already members of the Corporation and
recognised as being of Aboriginal descent. Both of my sons identify as
indigenous Australians as
article reported in more detail about his links to Lutruwita/Tasmania.
Interviewed by journalist Hannah Ryan, WSML stated
that his ancestors were
removed from the Tasmanian mainland and taken to the settlement of Wybalenna on
His ‘nan’s great grandfather, escaped [Wybalenna] by sailing to New
Putting these
threads together, WSML’s family were deported to Flinders Island and
escaped to New Zealand. WSML returned to
Australia and was then subject (again)
to deportation as a result of having his visa cancelled under the
. Evaluating this context brings the cyclical nature of deportation to
the surface and into full view.
Deportation, understood as ‘a constituent element of historical
genocides’,
was one of several strategies undertaken by the British government against the
Aboriginal peoples of Lutruwita/Tasmania. Lutruwita/Tasmania
was invaded by the
British in the early 19
In a period known
then as the Black War, violent conflict between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
peoples ensued.
Martial law
was declared on 30 October
Lutruwita/Tasmania
being one of only three locations in Australia where this
Aboriginal people
were ‘methodically hunted down’ in ‘hunting
expeditions’,
lands stolen in a series of land ‘grants’ to non-Aboriginal people.
This culminated in the establishment of
a ‘final all-out
operation known as the Black Line which involved 2,000 men walking in a line
across Lutruwita/Tasmania, seeking to drive
the Aboriginal population to the
south-east.
This was a costly
military operation and ultimately unsuccessful, leading to the pursuit of
deportation as a strategy.
Deportation to Flinders Island was intended to expel Aboriginal peoples to be
‘remade as human beings in British
It took place
under ostensibly ‘humanitarian’ terms by its champion, George
Augustus Robinson.
Humanitarianism is regularly invoked in securitisation discourse as a mode of
‘suggested to the government that he negotiate with [Aboriginal people to
gain their trust] and offer protection,
food, clothing and shelter away from the
records the impact of this so-called ‘friendly
More than 200
Aboriginal peoples were moved to the newly created Wybalenna settlement on
Flinders Island by 1835.
Children were forcibly separated on the island and sent to live with the
storekeeper and catechist.
Devastatingly, by 1843, only about 50 people remained due to inadequate shelter,
insufficient rations and
Forty-eight
survivors from Wybalenna were moved to Oyster Cove on the Tasmanian mainland in
1847, with children again separated and
sent to an orphan school in
Those of ‘mixed
descent’ again had to leave Oyster Cove in 1855, and by 1876
‘everyone left had
This use of
deportation had catastrophic consequences.
The impact on WSML and his family of the prospect of visa cancellation,
removal and being detained in immigration detention was immense.
He slipped into
‘deep depression’ for which he was
Both he and his
wife had expected that notification of his Aboriginality would prompt the
proceedings against him to be
His Aboriginality
had been recognised by other government departments, and in
recognised by the AAT.
Despite this, the Department’s view was that WSML was still a
non-citizen.
In November 2018
he was taken into Yongah Hill immigration detention centre, separating him from
his family, for whom he was the
primary breadwinner, and his employment. His
wife, who was pregnant at the time, was the only parent to support the
These impacts on WSML
and his family could have been prevented had the recommendations of the Stolen
Generations Inquiry been implemented.
If the discretion under s 501(2) had
been exercised differently by immigration authorities, WSML could have avoided
spending over
two months in immigration detention. Ultimately, the AAT set aside
WSML’s visa cancellation and made a decision in substitution
discretion should not be exercised to cancel the
WSML may still be
liable to visa cancellation in the future.
Departmental officers and AAT members are instructed to take different
matters into account when assessing the discretionary cancellation
of visas and
when considering when cancellation should be revoked or set aside, as outlined
in Part II(A) above.
Ministerial Direction which applied at the time of this decision,
, contained no reference to Aboriginality, Indigenous sovereignty, or
the importance of cultural ties, specifically to land and
Moreover, while the
best interests of the children are a primary consideration, the Direction did
not list the impact on Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander children of
separating them from their families and communities. We know from other policy
without specific reference to these particular collective rights of
Indigenous peoples, the result can be
discriminatory.
As Marcelle
Burns writes, ‘policy driven by the normalised and universalised values
may too easily become “colour-blind”
to Indigenous needs and
aspirations’.
The lack of any reference to the specific collective rights of Indigenous
peoples in the Ministerial Direction continued in the three
Directions that
and remains the case
In relation to child
protection, the lack of consideration given to ‘cultural connection’
in determining the best interests
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
children has been heavily
criticised.
Writing in the
context of child protection, Krakoeur and colleagues argue that ‘the
values and ideologies that are prioritised
when “best interests” are
conceptualised through an Anglo-European lens can result in problematic
assumptions about risk
and safety for Indigenous
They advance
their own definition of cultural connection that emphasises subjectivity and the
complexity of this connection:
We conceptualise cultural connection as a process of culturally connecting that
encompasses the complexity of culture and identity,
where subjectivity is
pertinent. In this way, individual experiences of culturally connecting are
diverse (as are First Nations cultures
and identities), and are impacted by the
broader settler-colonial environment within which identity is formed and
cultures are
and colleagues write that it is important to harness self-determination to
navigate these complexities.
They argue that this principle of cultural connection risks becoming a
bureaucratic site of compliance rather than the source of
health and wellbeing
Aboriginal activists intended this to be.
In contrast, at a state level, in Western Australia, where WSML resides, the
government had an emphasis on cultural ties to family
and land. Its Building
Safe and Strong Families strategy of September 2016 recognises ‘the long
history of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples on this land and
acknowledges that the past is not just in the past. The past, the present and
are, as they always are, part of each other — bound
the Director General of the Department for Child Protection and Family Support
recognises that a ‘critical measure
of the success of earlier intervention
and family support must be to establish improvement in the outcomes and life
circumstances
for Aboriginal children and
By contrast
with this emphasis, the Australian government was seeking to separate this
family by deporting WSML to New Zealand. The
impact of forced separation on
families, particularly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families, is
yet the Australian
government was seeking to do this again, in a repeat of the past. As noted at
the end of Part II(C), given the
sacred nature of connection to Country, it
might be expected that cultural connection would be given prominence in policy
on visa cancellation and removal.
Indigenous Resistance to ‘Transformative
Coloniality’: Montgomery v Minister for Immigration
Despite the victory in
however slim, the effect of
‘transformative
coloniality’
‘shape-shifting’
can be seen in what happened next. The government sought to re-open, or limit,
decision with a High Court appeal against
this case the Federal Court had ordered the release from immigration detention
of an Aboriginal man with New Zealand citizenship
whose Special Category
(Temporary) visa had been
Shayne Montgomery
identified as Aboriginal and was the father of five
He identifies as a
member of the Mununjali people and is recognised by Elders, having been
culturally adopted decades before these
proceedings.
The Commonwealth
argued that the decision in
was ‘entirely novel’ and
‘not carefully worked out in a succession of
It argued that ‘biological descent’ was defined in a positivist way
to preclude cultural
despite the
prevailing view otherwise in native title determinations, under international
law, and in most indigenous communities
Ultimately, the Commonwealth argued that Montgomery did not meet one of the
limbs of the tripartite test of
Indigeneity
‘biological descent’ — which the Commonwealth argued should
apply in all cases where the definition of
‘alien’ in accordance
considered.
challenged by Montgomery’s legal team and several organisations, including
the NNTC and the NLC who intervened to
resist the re-opening of
the Commonwealth’s claims.
Shayne Montgomery was born in New Zealand and came to Australia as a 15 year
old in 1997.
In the same
year, he was placed in Dundalli House, a homeless shelter for Aboriginal youth
in Brisbane.
He learned about
Aboriginal cultures from Elders and was taken on
He was initiated by
Mununjali Elders in 2000,
lived with an Aboriginal family in Brisbane from 1998 to
Prior to his
initiation, he had registered with Centrelink and Aboriginal and legal medical
services as an Aboriginal person. Commonwealth
government agencies had
considered Shayne Montgomery to be Aboriginal for
In 2018 Montgomery received a 14-month sentence of imprisonment upon which
his visa was cancelled under mandatory visa cancellation
provisions in
s 501(3A) of the
He requested
revocation of this decision and was taken into immigration detention in February
2019 after serving 11 months in
After more than a
year in immigration detention without an outcome on his revocation request, in
May 2020 he made an application
to the Federal Court seeking a writ of mandamus
to obtain a result on the revocation application with the Department of Home
A few days after
filing this claim, the Minister decided not to revoke the visa
cancellation.
This meant that
the decision could not be appealed on a merits basis to the AAT and
Montgomery’s only option became judicial
review in the Federal
Montgomery then
amended his Federal Court application seeking review of the Minister’s
decision, adding a writ of habeas corpus,
a declaration that he is not an
‘alien’ within
Constitution
order that he not be detained under ss 189 and 196 of the
In November 2021,
the Federal Court granted his application and ordered that Montgomery be
released from immigration detention and
the matter be sent back to the Minister
for determination.
time, Shayne Montgomery had spent close to three years in immigration detention.
Shortly after Montgomery’s release from immigration detention, the
Commonwealth lodged an appeal in the High Court, and several
organisations, lawyers and advocates — alongside the Australian Human
Rights Commission (‘AHRC’) and
the Attorney-General of Victoria
— intervened. Senator Lidia Thorpe called upon the government to
discontinue the case, a request
echoed by Dr Eddie
Submissions by
Indigenous lawyers and advocates, rallied by the Indigenous Law and Justice Hub
at the University of Melbourne, led
by Dr Cubillo, created a Black Caucus,
‘a group of Indigenous organisations who pool their resources to have the
greatest impact’.
explore below, the impact was significant. After several rounds of hearings and
submissions, the new Labor Government abandoned
the High Court appeal in July
2022. The Department of Immigration then revoked Montgomery’s original
visa cancellation.
so, it is unclear whether or not immigration authorities can cancel
Montgomery’s visa in the future. This has the
effect of creating
protracted legal uncertainty, and a change of government could again threaten
deportation. Montgomery’s
lawyer told
The Guardian
her client had
‘lost years of his life fighting to remain with his children, his family,
including his parents and siblings,
community’.
The High Court submissions by the NNTC and the NLC resist the ongoing impacts
of colonisation that saw Montgomery entangled in visa
cancellation and removal.
was absent an Indigenous ‘voice at the table’ which the
NNTC states was ‘wholly
unsatisfactory’.
absence was also noted by Gageler J in
submissions, the NNTC and the NLC set out the complexities of defining
Indigeneity and of seeking to place limits on Indigenous
connections to Country. The NLC is a land council of the Northern Territory
representing the northern half and is
a recognised representative body under the
Native Title Act 1993
Native Title Act
NNTC is the peak native title body in Australia. Both submissions illustrate the
knowledge of Indigenous peoples since
time immemorial and the impact that
deportation and attempts to sever connection to Country create. In the view of
provides recognition of what Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people ... have always known, that people are part of ‘an
organic part of
one indissoluble whole’ with the land, and that this connection is of the
most profound ‘cultural and
significance.
the NNTC and the NLC argued that only Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples should decide who is Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander. It was a
matter for self-determination as reflected in art 26 of the
NLC stated that
self-identification and community acceptance are probative of descent ... The
better view, in the NLC’s submission, is to understand
the concept of
descent as capturing the principles of descent that are recognised by the
Aboriginal peoples concerned in accordance
with their customs and traditions
determining status or membership, which may not be confined to a European view
of genealogy.
The NNTC and NLC refer to this position being accepted in native
title determinations.
The NLC went on to outline how the government’s preoccupation with
defining Aboriginality was a historical legacy of colonisation
with ongoing
impacts. The NLC referred to the ‘bewildering array of legislative and
administrative acts that imposed genetically
and fractionally based (blood
quantum) definitions of
Aboriginality’.
stated that these were racist and discriminatory measures that ‘reflected
the misconceptions of Aboriginal social organisation
that underpinned the
doctrine of terra
NLC’s submission outlined research highlighting that ‘assessments of
descent were unreliable and capable of giving
offence, and failed to take
account of self-identification and community
acceptance’.
highlighted art 33(1) of the
which provides that ‘it is the
right of Indigenous peoples to determine their own identity or membership in
accordance with
their customs and
traditions’.
normative standard should be ‘set by the customs of the Aboriginal peoples
concerned’.
the ‘arguments of administrative convenience put by the Commonwealth
parties ... cannot control the point of principle
An international survey of the constitutions and membership codes of
Indigenous peoples across the globe revealed that naturalisation
is common in
over half of those surveyed.
Gover writes:
Contemporary expressions of indigenous citizenship reveal the legal pluralism of
settler states by showing that many indigenous persons
are dual nationals, and
that legal indigeneity is the product of a jurisdictional relationship between
settler and tribal
governments.
In 2008 Gover did a survey of 535 ‘tribal constitutions
and membership codes’ and found that all ‘use descent to
citizenship’.
57% of the surveyed documents contain a pathway to naturalisation for
non-descendants ‘at the discretion of the tribal
decision-makers’.
Membership by social descent is common within Aboriginal communities, as also
highlighted in the AHRC’s submissions in
understandings of descent offer a pointed contrast to the government’s
narrow view of sovereign power and membership.
This Indigenous knowledge has the
potential to influence policy and jurisprudence in migration law, as it has in
native title determinations,
such that belonging is better understood. To
illustrate, this approach may assist to determine appropriate limits on the
cancel visas and remove people from Australia.
The NNTC and NLC submissions do not set out a test for Aboriginality. The
NNTC rejected the idea that the tripartite test was ‘a
universally
applicable test of “Aboriginality”’ and considered that
‘given the plurality and diversity of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander communities ... a single legal test for determining who is Aboriginal
Australian may be
inappropriate’.
emphasised that the legal framework and timeframes of the proceeding did not
allow for ‘the kind of extensive consultations
with memberships that
should, in the NNTC’s view, be conducted in order to reach a collective
view about the appropriate test
to apply in factual circumstances’ like
Since that time, however, the definition of Aboriginality captured by
immigration authorities and applied is the tripartite test
, as documents released under freedom of information laws
The NNTC rejected the conflation of ‘Aboriginal Australians’ and
‘native title holders’. It stated that
while all native title holders may be ‘Aboriginal Australians’, not
all ‘Aboriginal Australians’ hold native
title’. So much flows
from the judgments in
, in recognising the existence of Aboriginal
Australian identity distinct from the existence of native title rights. The NNTC
acknowledges
that some Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander peoples do not know
which first people they connected to or belong to. This is a product
settler-colonialism.
The NNTC submission spelt out the way in which dispossession has
precluded, for many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples,
any capacity
to show continuous observance of their traditional customs, or inhabitancy, such
that they can apply for and attain
legislative native title
The NNTC and NLC took
issue with the Commonwealth’s submissions that sought to narrow
to native title holders
communities the NNTC knows and represents, traditional law and custom is
determinative of belonging. Belonging is not
impacted by whether the communities
have claimed or hold native
The NNTC argued
it can bring a perspective on
(a) the recognition of individuals within a wider traditional collective as
applied under traditional law and custom, as well as through
] and alternative legislative and policy processes;
(b) understanding of the challenges of coming to a unified position amongst
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples on the appropriate
‘test(s)’ for ‘Aboriginality’ in various contexts,
including constitutional contexts, given the plurality
of groups and
(c) the impact of colonisation on ... connections to culture and land and the
challenges of native title law; and
(d) the likely impacts of [the current proceedings] on native title claims
and rights holders.
The NNTC also drew the distinction between the government’s arguments
and the National Agreement on Closing the Gap which recognises
the ‘unique
and enduring connection’ of Indigenous peoples to this land and a
commitment ‘to no longer make decisions
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples without the genuine involvement of
the “community” through representative
News of the discontinuance of the High Court appeal was welcomed by different
advocacy groups. NNTC chief executive Jamie Lowe wrote,
‘We applaud the
Albanese government for their intervention so those First Nations people could
be set free on their own
According to
The Guardian
, 12 people were released from detention as a result of this
One of them was
Jack Hobson, a New Zealand citizen with Aboriginal ancestry and recognised by
the Darug people, whose visa had been
cancelled for suspicion of being a member
of a bikie gang, a claim he
Hobson had never been
charged or convicted of a crime, but spent time in immigration detention which
he described as an ‘awful
place’ that aimed to ‘break your
: ‘I’m happy, I’m relieved. Hopefully, I can move
on to a better life and not have to look over my
Nations peoples will continue to face the effects of ‘crimmigration’
into the future. This highlights that
lasting change is needed at all levels,
including legal education, to transform skills, knowledge and attitudes to
appropriately
recognise Indigenous sovereignty.
This article has analysed how deportation and colonisation continue to
overlap by examining the case studies of
analysis makes visible the historical legacy relevant to the contemporary moment
in which First Nations peoples again face deportation
from Australia under s 501
Migration Act
. Critically, this article reveals that if the
recommendations of
Bringing Them Home
had been implemented, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples would not have faced the crimmigration gaze
leading to deportation
and would not have endured immigration detention and the
concomitant impact on families and communities.
The attempted and actual deportation of First Nations peoples from Australia
has multiple tributaries including the lack of recognition
of Indigenous
sovereignty and self-determination, and the contemporary legacy of colonisation
that is chiefly implicated in the ongoing
criminalisation of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples. Since the
decisions, many Indigenous peoples have been released from detention but many
others still face an uncertain future.
Migration policy has a lot to gain from Indigenous peoples’
understanding of belonging and membership. Membership by social
common within Indigenous communities and is a sharp contrast to the Australian
government’s narrow view of sovereign
power and membership. It could teach
policymakers much about ties and belonging and the measure of fairness in visa
cancellation,
removal and deportation.
This article has explored the current and historical appetites for expulsion
and severing connections to Country/family/culture in
deporting, or attempting
to deport, First Nations peoples. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples,
scholars and organisations
have been resisting these ongoing forms of
colonisation, and the article highlights these contributions as strength-based
to navigating previously unthinkable developments to control our
borders. Clearly more needs to be done to recognise Indigenous sovereignty
prioritise realising the specific collective rights of Indigenous peoples. Two
ways this can be achieved are through the Ministerial
Direction on visa refusal
and cancellation under s 501 and revocation under s 501CA, and through the
broader policy process applied
by immigration authorities. At present, these
collective rights are silenced in the migration control system, which uniquely
First Nations peoples yet continues to be resisted.
For many years there have been repeated calls for legal education to prepare
graduates who have the knowledge and professional capabilities
effectively with and for First Nations peoples across the legal
profession.
Decolonisation
requires recognition of the leadership of First Nations
and legal education
provides one avenue for this. Legal education plays a pivotal role in shaping
the perspectives and approaches
of future lawyers, particularly in relation to
Indigenous communities. By integrating professional capabilities to work with
for Indigenous peoples, legal education ensures that future lawyers are well
prepared to understand and address the unique challenges
faced by Indigenous
communities. This not only helps close the gap between Indigenous and
non-Indigenous Australians but also promotes
a more inclusive and equitable
To date there continues to be limited action by law schools in Australia to
embed professional capabilities into legal education,
with only a few
demonstrating a commitment to the
Exploring the concept
of sovereignty and the sovereign rights of First Nations peoples, understanding
First Nations peoples’
unique connection to Country, and recognising how
First Nations peoples were impacted by colonisation — including through
deportation
— are essential knowledge requirements for legal education.
This article has shown how the incorporation of such understandings
is critical
to shifting the operation of criminal, migration and citizenship law to prevent
further injustice to First Nations peoples.
As Michael Guerzoni and Maggie
Walters argue, decolonisation requires recognition of the colonial nature of a
discipline and its
use of Western perspectives, people and power as the
It also requires
revision and reconfiguration for the betterment of Indigenous peoples.
Please cite this article as:
Alison Gerard and Annette Gainsford, ‘Dispossession Cycles and
Resistance: Historical Continuums in the Deportation of First
[2024] SydLawRw 16
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20596
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
∗ Professor, Canberra Law School, University of Canberra, Australian
Capital Territory, Australia. Email: alison.gerard@canberra.edu.au;
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6756-8491.
† Professor, Associate Dean Learning and Teaching, Office of the
Pro-Vice Chancellor (Indigenous Leadership and Engagement),
University of
Technology Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Email:
annette.gainsford@uts.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0000-000
-8473-0681.
Michael Mansell,
‘Australians and Aborigines and the
Decision: Just Who Needs
Whom the Most?’
[1993] SydLawRw 13
(1993) 15(2)
Sydney Law Review
Australian Institute of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies,
Welcome to Country
https://aiatsis.gov.au/explore/welcome-country>.
United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
GA Res 61/295, UN Doc
A/RES/61/295 (2 October 2007, adopted 13 September 2007) art 26
Marcelle Burns, ‘Closing
the Gap between Policy and Law: Indigenous Homelands and a “Working
(2009) 27(2)
Law in Context
, 119; Jacynta
Krakouer, Sana Nakata, James Beaufils, Sue-Ann Hunter, Tatiana Corrales, Heather
Morris and Helen Skouteris, ‘Resistance
to Assimilation: Expanding
Understandings of First Nations Cultural Connection in Child Protection and
Out-of-Home Care’ (2023)
Australian Social Work
Patricia Dudgeon and Abigail Bray, ‘Indigenous Relationality: Women,
Kinship and the Law’ (2019) 3(2)
Dudgeon and Bray (n
Leanne Weber and Alison
Gerard, ‘Robodeport or Surveillance Fantasy? How Automated is Automatic
Visa Cancellation in Australia?
Frontiers in Sociology
1336160:1–16, 1.
See also Mary Crock and Kate Bones, ‘The
Creeping Cruelty of Australian Crimmigration Law’
[2022] SydLawRw 8
(2022) 44(2)
, 173; Peter Billings, ‘Regulating Crimmigrants through
the “Character Test”: Exploring the Consequences of Mandatory
Cancellation for the Fundamental Rights of Non-Citizens in Australia’
(2019) 71(1)
Crime, Law and Social Change
, 7 (‘Regulating
Crimmigrants’).
Love v Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152
, 192 [81] (Bell J) (‘
Paul Karp, ‘Albanese
Government Urged to End Legal Fight over Power to Deport Aboriginal
The Guardian
(online, 18 June 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/‌‌2022/‌jun/‌‌18/albanese-government-urged-to-end-legal-fight-over-power-to-deport-aboriginal-people>
(‘Government Urged to End Legal Fight’).
) 191–2 [79] (Bell J), 215
[157]–[158] (Keane J).
Michael Dodson,
‘Citizenship in Australia: An Indigenous Perspective’
[1997] AltLawJl 22
(1997) 22(2)
Alternative Law Journal
, 57. See also Dodson at 57–8; Peter
Prince, ‘Was Namatjira an Alien? The High Court’s Flawed History of
in Australia’ in Kate Bagnall and Peter Prince (eds),
Subjects and Aliens:
Histories of Nationality, Law and Belonging in
Australia and New Zealand
(ANU Press, 2023) 151, 166.
Bonita Lawrence and Enakshi
Dua, ‘Decolonizing Antiracism’
(2005) 32(4)
Social Justice
Amanda Porter,
‘Aboriginal Sovereignty, “Crime” and Criminology’
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Aileen Moreton-Robinson,
The White Possessive: Property, Power, and Indigenous Sovereignty
(University of Minnesota Press, 2015) 4–5.
Uluru Statement from the
(Statement, First Nations National Constitutional Convention,
26 May 2017). The Uluru Statement from the Heart was issued to the
Australian people in 2017 by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in
attendance at the First Nations National Constitutional
Convention (‘Uluru
Convention’). It called for a First Nations Voice to Parliament, a process
to follow that for agreement-making,
and truth-telling. These proposals are
known as Voice, Treaty, Truth: see Megan Davis and George Williams,
Everything You Need to Know about the Uluru Statement from the Heart
(UNSW Press, 2021) 6.
signifies a First Nations Voice to the Commonwealth Parliament that is enshrined
Constitution
: see Dani Larkin and Kate Galloway,
‘Constitutionally Entrenched Voice to Parliament: Representation and Good
Governance’
(2021) 46(3)
Alternative Law Journal
referendum to establish a permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice
to Parliament was defeated in October 2023 and
it remains unclear how this
proposal will be realised.
In the Regional Dialogues
that led to the Uluru Convention and the creation of the Uluru Statement from
the Heart, First Nations
participants emphasised that ‘truth was not about
them as victims, survivors or as resistance fighters but about all Australians
— now and, through ongoing educational programs, in the future’:
Megan Davis, ‘Speaking Up: The Truth about Truth-Telling’
Griffith Review
Karl Gardner,
‘Indigenous Anti/Deportation: Contesting Sovereignty, Citizenship, and
Belonging in Canada and Australia’
(2024) 33(2)
Social & Legal
) 192 [81].
Annette Gainsford, Alison
Gerard and Emma Colvin, ‘Challenges and Strategies for Incorporating
Indigenous Laws and Histories
across Legal Education Curriculum’ in Nicole
Watson and Heather Douglas (eds),
Legal Education Through an Indigenous Lens:
Decolonising the Law School
(Routledge, 2025).
Juliet Stumpf, ‘The
Crimmigration Crisis: Immigrants, Crime, and Sovereign Power’
(2006) 56(2)
American University Law Review
, 376 (‘The Crimmigration
WSML and Minister for
[2019] AATA 41
Montgomery v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2021] FCA 1423
Asmi Wood, ‘Australia
and Pandemics v BLM: No,
Lost (at the High Court)’
Alternative Law Journal
Louise Boon-Kuo,
‘“Race”, Crimmigration and the Deportation of Aboriginal
Non-Citizens’ in Peter Billings
Crimmigration in Australia: Law,
Politics, and Society
(Springer, 2019) 39, 40.
Moreton-Robinson (n
See, eg, ibid 138.
Boon-Kuo (n
Moreton-Robinson (n
Evidence to Joint Standing
Committee on Migration, Parliament of Australia, Canberra, 27 June 2018, 4
(Justine Jones). The
Migration Act 1958
’) provides a range of powers to cancel visas under
‘character grounds’ in
and ‘specified grounds’
The criminal deportation
power, formerly in s 12 of the
Migration Act
), was amended by the
Amendment Act 1983
(Cth) to become s 200 and apply to all non-citizens
convicted and sentenced to at least one year of imprisonment: see Khanh Hoang
and Sudrishti Reich, ‘Managing Crime through Migration Law in Australia
and the United States: A Comparative Analysis’
(2017) 5(1)
Comparative
Migration Studies
1, 8; Rebecca Powell, ‘A Return to the 10-Year Rule?
The Deportation of Convicted New Zealander Long-Term Residents from Australia
Section 501
Migration Act
(2024) 36(3)
Issues in Criminal Justice
, 349–50; Peter Billings and Khanh
Hoang, ‘Characters of Concern or Concerning Character Tests? Regulating
Risk through
Visa Cancellation, Containment and Removal from Australia’ in
Peter Billings (ed),
Crimmigration in Australia: Law, Politics, and
(Springer, 2019) 119, 121.
Migration Act
Hoang and Reich (n
The original version of the
‘character test’ was s 180A and was inserted in 1992: Michelle
Foster, ‘“An
‘Alien’ by the Barest of Threads”:
The Legality of the Deportation of Long-Term Residents from Australia’
[2009] MelbULawRw 18
(2009) 33(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Ibid 510. See also Powell
Hoang and Reich (n
Migration Act
) s 501(7).
Migration Legislation
Amendment (Strengthening of Provisions Relating to Character and Conduct) Act
(Cth) sch 1 item 23, inserting s 501A(4).
Ibid sch 1 item 23,
inserting s 501A.
Migration Amendment
(Character and General Visa Cancellation) Act 2014
(Cth) sch 1 item 8
inserted s 501(3A) which introduced mandatory visa cancellation for non-citizens
who were deemed to have failed
the ‘character test’. Under s
501(3A), which applies retrospectively, the Minister must cancel the visa of a
they have been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 12 months or
more or have been convicted of sexually based offences involving
a child, and
are serving the sentence full-time in a custodial institution. For a description
of the key legislative provisions see
Billings, ‘Regulating
Crimmigrants’ (n
Migration Act
) s 501(3A).
Ibid s 501(7A).
Ibid s 501(6)(b).
Ibid s 501(6)(d)(i).
Ibid s 501CA. See Weber and
Ibid s 501CA(4)(b). See
Weber and Gerard (n
Approximately three-quarters of those who have their visa cancelled do apply for
revocation of the mandatory visa cancellation
decision: see Department of Home
Affairs (Cth),
Freedom of Information Request: FA21/02/00558
2021) questions 3, 4, 5.
Migration Act
) s 500(1)(b).
Ibid s 501BA(2).
Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (Cth),
Direction No 110: Visa Refusal
and Cancellation under Section 501 and Revocation of a Mandatory Cancellation of
a Visa under Section
(7 June 2024) (‘
Direction No
Ibid para 8(1)–(5).
Ibid para 7(2).
9(1)(a)–(c).
Commonwealth,
Parliamentary Debates
House of Representatives, 24 September
2014, 10325 (Scott Morrison, Minister for Immigration).
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection (Cth),
Annual Report 2013–14
(Report, 2014)
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection (Cth),
Annual Report 2014–15
(Report, 2015)
Department of Immigration
and Border Protection (Cth),
Annual Report 2015–16
(Report, 2016)
Department of Home Affairs
Character (Section 501) and General Cancellation Statistics
June 2023) table 2. In 2022–23, of the 626 visa cancellations 9 were
discretionary cancellations under s 501(2) of the
Migration Act
) and 617 were mandatory visa
cancellations under s 501(3A).
) 348, 354;
Elizabeth Stanley,
‘Expanding Crimmigration: The Detention and Deportation of New Zealanders
from Australia’
(2018) 51(4)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
, 524; Henrietta McNeill and Marinella Marmo,
‘Past–Present Differential Inclusion: Australia’s Targeted
Deportation
of Pacific Islanders, 1901 to 2021’ (2023) 12(1)
International Journal of Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
Non-citizens with
Aboriginal ancestry have been deported: see, eg,
Wehi v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 1176
, [20] (Rangiah J).
Stumpf, ‘The
Crimmigration Crisis’ (n
Alison Gerard,
‘Crimmigration and the Australian Legal Lexicon: Reflecting on Border
Control, Theory and the Lived Experience’
in Peter Billings (ed),
Crimmigration in Australia: Law, Politics, and Society
(Springer, 2019)
Stumpf, ‘The
Crimmigration Crisis’ (n
Juliet Stumpf,
‘Crimmigration: Encountering the Leviathan’ in Sharon Pickering and
Julie Ham (eds),
The Routledge Handbook on Crime and International
(Routledge, 2013) 237.
Katja Franko Aas,
‘Bordered Penality: Precarious Membership and Abnormal Justice’
(2014) 16(5)
Punishment & Society
Ibid 531–2.
This is not expanded upon
in this article, but for a review see John Chesterman and Brian Galligan,
Citizens Without Rights: Aborigines and Australian Citizenship
University Press, 1997).
In support of our use of
the term ‘invasion’ see Moreton-Robinson (n
) 34; Teela Reid, ‘The Power of
the First Nations Matriarchy: Warrior Women Reckoning with the Colony’
Griffith Review
Mark Finnane and Andy
Kaladelfos, ‘Australia’s Long History of Immigration, Policing and
the Criminal Law’ in
Peter Billings (ed),
Crimmigration in Australia:
Law, Politics, and Society
(Springer, 2019) 22.
Productivity Commission
Closing the Gap: Annual Data Compilation Report
(Report, July
2024) 33 (socio-economic areas 11, 12).
Mary Bosworth,
‘Border Control and the Limits of the Sovereign State’
(2008) 17(2)
Social & Legal Studies
, 199. See also Gardner (n
Boon-Kuo (n
See ibid; McNeill and Marmo
) 42; Finnane and Kaladelfos (n
Boon-Kuo (n
) 41, referencing
Moreton-Robinson’s ‘patriarchal white sovereignty’.
Jonathan Kingsley, Mardie
Townsend, Claire Henderson-Wilson and Bruce Bolam, ‘Developing an
Exploratory Framework Linking
Australian Aboriginal Peoples’ Connection to
Country and Concepts of Wellbeing’ (2013) 10(2)
International Journal
of Environmental Research and Public Health
678, 682–3.
Irene Watson,
‘Aboriginal Relationships to the Natural World: Colonial
“Protection” of Human Rights and the Environment’
(2018) 9(2)
Journal of Human Rights and the Environment
119, 124. See also
Moreton-Robinson (n
Lawrence and Dua (n
) 170, citing Peter Nyers,
Citizenship, Immigration, and Deportation
(Routledge, 2019).
Royal Commission
into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
(National Report, 1991) vol 1, 295; Human
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission,
Bringing Them Home: Report of the
National Inquiry into the Separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Children from their
(Report, April 1997) (‘
Bringing Them
’); Australian Law Reform Commission,
The Recognition of
Aboriginal Customary Laws
(ALRC Report No 31, 1986) 95; Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Pathways to Justice: An
Inquiry into the Incarceration Rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
(Report No 133, December 2017) (‘
Pathways to
’); Australian Human Rights Commission,
Wiyi Yani U
(Women’s Voices): Securing Our Rights, Securing Our Future
) 192 [81].
Lost Pt 1’ (n
178; Asmi Wood, ‘Australia and Pandemics v BLM: No,
the High Court)’ (Pt 2) (20012021) 46(4)
Alternative Law Journal
Lost Pt 2’).
Lost Pt 1’ (n
Lost Pt 2’ (n
Lost Pt 1’ (n
Lost Pt 2’ (n
See, eg, Johnny M Sakr and
Augusto Zimmermann, ‘Judicial Activism and Constitutional
(Mis)Interpretation: A Critical Appraisal’
[2021] UQLawJl 5
(2021) 40(1)
University of
Queensland Law Journal
; Mischa Davenport, ‘
Commonwealth
: The Section 51(xix) Aliens Power and a Constitutional Concept
of Community Membership’
[2021] SydLawRw 25
(2021) 43(4)
Sydney Law Review
Aird and Allan Ardill, ‘A “Kind of Sovereignty”: Toward a
Framework for the Recognition of First Nations
Sovereignties at Common
[2023] MelbULawRw 1
(2023) 46(2)
Melbourne University Law Review
Arcioni and Rayner Thwaites, ‘Constitutional Law and Citizenship:
Aboriginal Australians not Vulnerable to Deportation’
[2020] (65)
Society of NSW Journal
68; SA McDonald, ‘The Detention of Non-Aliens
Suspected of Being Unlawful Non-Citizens: Thoms v Commonwealth’
Public Law Review
; Boon-Kuo (n
See, eg, Shireen Morris,
in the High Court: Implications for Indigenous Constitutional
Recognition’
(2021) 49(3)
Federal Law Review
; Daniel Lavery,
‘Judicial Distancing in the High Court:
Love/Thoms v
Commonwealth
’ (2020) 26
James Cook Law Review
159; Flyn Wells,
‘Heartbeat in the High Court:
Love v Commonwealth
(2020) 375 ALR
597’ (2020) 41(2)
Adelaide Law Review
Sakr and Zimmermann (n
) 169 [2] (Kiefel CJ).
Ibid 214 [152], 215
[157], [159] (Keane J).
Ibid 215 [159] (Keane
Ibid 234 [225] (Keane
Ibid 170 [3] (Kiefel
[2012] FCA 651
Foster v Queensland
[2014] FCA 1318.
) 170 [3] (Kiefel CJ).
Ibid 175 [21] (Kiefel
Ibid 192 [81] (Bell J,
for the majority).
Mabo v Queensland [No
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Mabo [No 2]
Commonwealth v
[1983] HCA 21
(1983) 158 CLR 1
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Essentially Yours: The Protection of Human Genetic Information in
(Report No 96, 2003) 914–15 [36.14] (‘
Essentially
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
The Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws
No 31, 1986) [95].
Essentially Yours
) 913 [36.10].
Mabo [No 2]
) 70 (Brennan J).
) 170 [4] (Kiefel CJ).
Irene Watson, ‘In
the Northern Territory Intervention: What Is Saved or Rescued and at What
Cost?’ (2009) 15(2)
Cultural Studies Review
) 253 [271] (Nettle J).
Harry Hobbs,
‘Drawing an Implied Limitation to the Race Power’
(2021) 32(3)
Public Law Review
) 260 [288] (Nettle J).
‘Government Accused of “Shirking Responsibility” in Bid to
Overturn Ruling Against Aboriginal Deportation’,
The Guardian
(online, 16 October 2021)
<https://www.theguardian.com/‌australia-news/2021/oct/16/government-accused-of-shirking-responsibility-in-bid-to-overturn-ruling-against-aboriginal-deportation>.
Commonwealth
[2022] HCA 20
(2022) 276 CLR 466.
Department of Home
Affairs (Cth),
Interviewing Located Persons
(Standard Operating
Procedure, Document ID (PPN) BC-5436, 5 August 2021) 7 (‘
Interviewing
Located Persons
Marinella Marmo,
‘Continuity and Durability of Violent Border Policies and Practices
Directed at Undesirable Migrants in Britain
and Australia: Some Reflections on
the Past–Present Continuum’ (2022) 40(1–2)
Immigrants &
Cindy Blackstock, Muriel
Bamblett and Carlina Black, ‘Indigenous Ontology, International Law and
the Application of the Convention
to the Over-Representation of Indigenous
Children in Out of Home Care in Canada and Australia’ (2020) 110(1)
Child Abuse & Neglect
Cindy Blackstock,
‘Why Addressing the Over-Representation of First Nations Children in Care
Requires New Theoretical Approaches
Based on First Nations Ontology’
(2009) 6(3)
Journal of Social Work Values and Ethics
Studying and
understanding resistance is a counterweight to the deficit discourses that
pervade education, health, law and justice
framing of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples: see Melitta Hogarth, ‘Speaking Back to the
Deficit Discourses: A
Theoretical and Methodological Approach’ (2017)
Australian Education Research
21, 32; William Fogarty, Melissa
Lovell, Juleigh Langenberg and Mary-Jane Heron, ‘Deficit Discourse and
Strengths-Based Approaches:
Changing the Narrative of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Health and Wellbeing’ (Report, Lowitja Institute, 2018);
Burns, Simon Young and Jennifer Nielsen, ‘“The Difficulties
of Communication Encountered by Indigenous Peoples”:
Moving Beyond
Indigenous Deficit in the Model Admission Rules for Legal Practitioners’
(2018) 28(2)
Legal Education Review
Karp, ‘Government
Urged to End Legal Fight’ (n
John W Creswell and J
David Creswell,
Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
(Sage Publications, 6
ed, 2023) 14.
Australian Institute of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies,
AIATSIS Code of Ethics for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research
See, eg, Northern Land
Council, ‘Proposed Submissions of the Northern Land Council’,
Submission in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
v Shayne Paul Montgomery
Case No S192/2021, 9 March 2022, 3 [10]
NLC Submission
’); National Native Title Council,
‘Submissions of the National Native Title Council Seeking Leave to
Intervene’,
Submission in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs v Shayne Paul Montgomery
Case No S192/2021, 9
March 2022, 4 [7] (‘
NNTC Submission
’); Indigenous Law and
Justice Hub, ‘Swift Successes Towards Indigenous Justice’,
University of Melbourne
<https://www.‌unimelb.edu.au/alumni/impact/community/swift-successes-towards-indigenous-justice>.
AIATSIS Code
) 20–1 principle 3.
Boon-Kuo (n
Karp, ‘Government
Urged to End Legal Fight’ (n
Transcript of
Proceedings,
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v Montgomery
[2022] HCATrans 51.
Elisa Arcioni and Kirsty
Gover, ‘Aboriginal Identity and Status under the
Constitution
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v Montgomery
[2022] SydLawRw 5
(2022) 44(1)
NLC Submission
NNTC Submission
See generally Burns,
Young and Nielsen (n
Narelle Bedford,
‘Storytelling in Our Legal System: Healing for the Stolen
Generations’
(2019) 45(2)
Australian Feminist Law Journal
Bringing Them Home
Ibid 79–80.
Ibid 211–14,
Vincent Chetail,
‘Is There Any Blood on My Hands? Deportation As a Crime of International
(2016) 29(3)
Leiden Journal of International Law
Bringing Them Home
Ibid (Confidential
evidence 138, Victoria).
Indigenous Australians
automatically became Australian citizens with the passing of the
Nationality
and Citizenship Act 1948
(Cth), but there was a difference between status
and rights for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples: see John
and Brian Galligan,
Citizens Without Rights: Aborigines and
Australian Citizenship
(Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Bringing Them Home
Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission,
Healing: A Legacy of Generations
(Parliamentary
Paper No 410, November 2000) 28 [1.105] (‘
Healing: A Legacy of
Generations
’), citing Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Affairs (Cth), Submission No 36 to Senate Legal and Constitutional
References Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into the Stolen
(21 March 2000) 599–600.
Healing: A Legacy of
Generations
) 28 [1.105].
Minister for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Affairs (Cth), Submission No 36 to Senate Legal and
Constitutional References
Committee, Parliament of Australia,
Inquiry into
the Stolen Generation
(21 March 2000) 599–600.
Bringing Them Home
Erin Pearson,
‘Indigenous Man Dies in US Prison Following 30-Year Fight to Come
Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 3 June 2021)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/indigenous-man-dies-in-us-prison-following-30-year-fight-to-come-home-20210603-p57xra.html>.
International
Transfer of Prisoners Act 1997
Ibid [3] (Senior Member
Ibid [143].
Ibid [5], [122].
Ibid [113], [122],
Hannah Ryan, ‘This
Man Was Told That Just Because He’s Aboriginal That Doesn’t Make Him
an Australian’,
(online, 5 March 2019)
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/hannahryan/aboriginal-‌deportation-new-zealand-home-affairs-dutton>.
John Docker, ‘A
Plethora of Intentions: Genocide, Settler Colonialism and Historical
Consciousness in Australia and Britain’
(2015) 19(1)
International
Journal of Human Rights
, 79–80, citing Raphaël Lemkin,
Rule in Occupied Europe
(Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,
) 75, 80, citing Ian McFarlane,
Beyond Awakening: The Aboriginal Tribes of North West Tasmania
Bookshop, 2008).
Bringing Them Home
One of the other sites
for martial law was the authors’ hometown of Bathurst: see Alison Gerard,
Andrew McGrath, Emma Colvin
and Annette Gainsford,
Children, Care and Crime:
Trauma and Transformation
(Routledge, 2023) 29–30.
Ian McFarlane,
Awakening: The Aboriginal Tribes of North West Tasmania
(Fullers Bookshop,
2008), quoted in Docker (n
James Boyce,
Diemen’s Land
(Black Inc, 2008), quoted in Docker (n
Bringing Them Home
Ibid 79–80.
) 258–9. See also Alison Gerard
and Leanne Weber, ‘“Humanitarian Borderwork”: Identifying
Tensions between
Humanitarianism and Securitization for Government Contracted
NGOs Working with Adult and Unaccompanied Minor Asylum Seekers in
(2019) 23(2)
Theoretical Criminology: An International
Bringing Them Home
Bringing Them Home
Ibid [150].
Ibid [174].
Migration Act
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection (Cth),
Direction No 65: Visa Refusal and Cancellation
under Section 501 and Revocation of a Mandatory Cancellation of a Visa under
(22 December 2014) (‘
Direction No 65
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs (Cth),
Direction No 79:
Visa Refusal and Cancellation under Section 501 and Revocation of a Mandatory
Cancellation of a Visa under Section
(20 December 2018); Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (Cth),
Direction No 90: Visa Refusal and Cancellation under Section 501 and
Revocation of a Mandatory Cancellation of a Visa under Section
March 2021); Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
Direction No 99: Visa Refusal and Cancellation under Section 501 and
Revocation of a Mandatory Cancellation of a Visa under Section
January 2023)
Direction No 110
) is the current Ministerial
Direction at the time of writing.
Krakouer et al (n
Department for Child
Protection and Family Support (WA),
Building Safe and Strong Families:
Earlier Intervention and Family Support Strategy
(September 2016) 2.
Bringing Them Home
Moreton-Robinson (n
Ibid 6 [2].
Ibid 18 [53].
Commonwealth,
‘Submissions of Appellants and Attorney General for the Commonwealth
(Intervening)’, Submission in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v Shayne Paul Montgomery
S192/2021, 28 January 2021, 9 [21] (‘
Appellants Submission
Ibid 21 [53].
Kirsty Gover,
‘Indigenous Citizenship in Settler States’ in Ayelet Shachar, Rainer
Bauböck, Irene Bloemraad and
Maarten Vink (eds),
The Oxford Handbook of
Citizenship
(Oxford University Press, 2017) 453.
Mabo [No 2]
) 70 (Brennan J).
) [1], [26] (SC Derrington J).
Shayne Paul Montgomery,
‘Amended Submissions of Respondent’, Submission in
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs v Shayne Paul
Case No S192/2021, 5 April 2022, 3 [5].
Ibid 3 [8].
Ibid [29]–[30].
Ibid [29], [31].
See ibid [8].
Ibid [160]; Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs and Minister for Home
Affairs, ‘Appellants’
Chronology’, Submission in
for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs v Shayne Paul
, Case No S192/2021, 28 January 2022, 3–4.
Karp, ‘Government
Urged to End Legal Fight’ (n
Indigenous Law and
Justice Hub (n
Rachael Knowles,
‘Labor Stops High Court Appeal Aimed at Skittling Aboriginal
“Aliens” Ruling’,
(online, 28 July 2022)
<https://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/article/labor-stops-high-court-appeal-aimed-at-skittling-aboriginal-aliens-ruling/a90yxtxfx>.
Paul Karp, ‘Labor
Drops Coalition Bid to Overturn High Court Ruling that Indigenous Australians
Can’t Be Aliens’,
The Guardian
(online, 28 July 2022)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/‌2022/jul/28/labor-drops-coalition-bid-to-overturn-high-court-ruling-that-indigenous-australians-cant-be-aliens>
(‘Labor Drops Coalition Bid’).
NNTC Submission
NNTC Submission
) 7 [16], citing
) 260 [290] (Gordon), 314 [451]
(Edelman J), 276 [349] (Nettle J).
NLC Submission
) 14 [33] (citations omitted).
Ibid 6 [16].
Ibid (citations
Ibid 7 [17].
Ibid 7 [19].
Ibid 9 [23].
Ibid 15 [34], citing
Appellants Submission
Australian Human Rights
Commission, ‘Submissions of the Australian Human Rights Commission Seeking
Leave to Appear As Amicus
Curiae’, Submission in
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs v Shayne Paul Montgomery
Case No S192/2021, 9 March 2022, 13 [34].
NNTC Submission
) 17–18 [50].
Ibid 8 [19].
Interviewing Located
NNTC Submission
Ibid 12 [32].
Ibid 12 [31];
NNTC Submission
Ibid 5–6 [12].
Ibid 8 [20] (emphasis in
Giovanni Torre,
‘Number of Indigenous People Facing Threat of Deportation Revealed after
Court Case Canned’,
National Indigenous Times
(online, 9 August
<https://www.nit.com.au/‌number-of-indigenous-people-facing-threat-of-deportation-revealed-after-court-case-canned>.
Karp, ‘Labor Drops
Coalition Bid’ (n
Royal Commission
into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody
(National Report, 1991) vol 1, 295, 91;
Bringing Them Home
Thalia Anthony, Harry
Blagg, Carly Stanley and Keenan Mundine, ‘
Decolonizing Criminology Theories by Centring
First Nations Praxis and Knowledges
’ in Chris Cunneen, Antje Deckert,
Amanda Porter, Juan Tauri and Robert Webb (eds),
The Routledge International
Handbook on Decolonizing Justice
(Routledge, 2023) 504.
Larissa Behrendt, Steven
Larkin, Robert Griew and Patricia Kelly,
Review of Higher Education Access
and Outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People
(Final Report,
July 2012) xi; Marcelle Burns, Anita Lee Hong and Asmi Wood,
Cultural Competency for Legal Academics Program
(Final Report, 2019) v.
See Alison Gerard,
Annette Gainsford and Kim Bailey, ‘Embedding Indigenous Cultural
Competence: A Case Study’ in Kevin
Lindgren, François Kunc and
Michael Coper (eds),
The Future of Australian Legal Education: A
(Thomson Reuters, 2018) 323; Ambelin Kwaymullina, ‘Teaching
for the 21st Century: Indigenising the Law Curriculum at UWA’
Legal Education Review
; Burns, Hong and Wood (n
). See also Gainsford, Gerard and
Michael Guerzoni and
Maggie Walter, ‘Decolonizing Criminological Research Methodologies:
Cognition, Commitment, and Conduct’
in Chris Cunneen, Antje Deckert,
Amanda Porter, Juan Tauri and Robert Webb (eds),
The Routledge International
Handbook on Decolonizing Justice
(Routledge, 2023) 492.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (298 KB)
PDF format (413 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter