URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JlLawInfoSci/2017/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:11:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ho, Chih-Hsing --- "Challenges of the EU General Data Protection Regulation for Biobanking and Scientific Research" [2017] JlLawInfoSci 5; (2017) 25(1) Journal of Law, Information and Science 84
Introduction
1 Biobanking and Biomedical Research in Context
1.1 The Features of Biobanks
1.2 Substantial Public Interest
3 Processing of Personal Data
3.1 The Definition of Personal Data
3.2 Processing of Sensitive Personal Data
3.3 Anonymisation and Pseudonymisation
4 Challenges to Harmonisation and the Application of Scientific Exemptions
4.1 Privately Funded Research
4.2 Designing a Compliance Framework for Research
Challenges of the EU
General Data Protection
for Biobanking and Scientific Research
CHIH-HSING HO
This paper discusses challenges arising from the application of the EU
General Data Protection Regulation
context of biobanking and biomedical research. Medical and health research has
increasingly relied on processing and
linking vast amounts of genetic- and
health-related data. The traditional, highly-specific consent form and
anonymisation required
for privacy protection may not be appropriate for
data-intensive longitudinal population-based research. After long debates and
efforts from the health and research communities in the EU, the
has been revised to adopt a more research-friendly approach by
including several derogations for consent and processing of data for
purposes. However, challenges remain in that the scope of scientific exemptions
is as yet unclear, and the rules adopted
by EU Member States have yet to be
harmonised. Setting up a more accountable governance framework that can work
with existing ethics
review mechanisms to allow for biomedical research,
especially when privately funded research entities are involved, poses questions
worthy of further analysis. This paper elucidates these challenges and attempts
to provide a suitable resolution for making exemptions
so that research can be
carried out in the public interest.
Introduction
On 14 April 2016, after a long process of debate and negotiation, the
European Parliament adopted the European Union (‘EU’)
Data Protection Regulation
reform proposed by the European Commission in 2012 to address EU Member
States’ fragmented EU data protection rules derived
Protection Directive
The main purpose of
is to set out an EU-wide legal framework for the protection of
personal data that at the same time facilitates the free flow of such
within the European Union. The
’s predecessor, the EU
Directive 95/46/EC
, defined the basic elements of data protection, upon
which EU Member States enacted individual national legislation. Contrastingly,
will apply directly to each Member State and will override
national data protection laws in the EU. The
will be applicable two
years after adoption, and will be effective from 25 May
sets forth a number of key changes to the EU
Protection Directive
and several principles relating to enhanced rights for
individuals who are data subjects: for example, the right to be forgotten;
right to data portability; the processing of personal data; the obligations of
data controllers and processors, such as the mandatory
appointment of a Data
Protection Officer; and carrying out mandatory data protection impact
assessments. The
stipulates that personal data need to be processed
‘lawfully, fairly, and in a transparent manner in relation to the data
In addition, in order to reinforce data subjects’ control over their
personal data, in the
proposal, specific consent was introduced as a
default consent model for data collection and therefore re-consent was required
data processing for different purposes apart from those for which data was
This gave rise to
serious concerns within scientific communities in the EU that the proposed
would have devastating impacts on scientific research, which relies
heavily on access to data for prospective unknown studies, and
would hamper the
future development of data-intensive health research.
Several European medical and health research organisations, such as the
Medical Sciences Committee of Science Europe, the Wellcome
Trust, the Public
Health Genomics (‘PHG’) Foundation, and the Biobanking and
BioMolecular Resources Research Infrastructure
– European Research
Infrastructure Consortium (‘BBMRI-ERIC’) submitted position papers
proposal in order to reconcile the public interest in
research with a broader framework of individual rights to privacy. The arguments
in these position papers elaborated the common concern with the draft
lack of distinction between the use of data for scientific
purposes and other forms of processing data, such as personal profiling
subjects or direct marketing by commercial
These research
communities urged EU policy makers to be aware of the possibility that the
may hinder patients’ interests. They proposed the
derogation for consent and reuse of data for scientific research purposes,
arguing that existing ethical safeguards, such as the approval from ethics
committees, guidelines and codes of conduct, were already
adopted as general
practices in medical and health research prior to the
After prolonged negotiations, in June 2015, the Council of the European Union
took a more research-friendly approach by including
special provisions for
scientific exemptions in the draft
However, what impact
will have on scientific research, especially on existing
biobanking activities, remains to be discussed. For genomics studies, biobanks
have been deemed a useful part of the infrastructure for facilitating wide
ranging, population-based prospective longitudinal studies.
Such biorepositories
usually collect extensive samples and data, including medical, health and life
data, and make these available
to researchers who apply for access for
unspecified future research
In order to maximise
the utility of samples and data stored in biobanks, and to reduce the costs of
re-contacting participants, broad
consent has replaced specific consent for data
collection in the biobank practices.
The extent to which this particular form of consent to governance is
compatible with the
or falls within special provisions for
scientific research is worth further analysis.
In addition, the
specifies that pseudonymised data must be
treated as personal data, so further data processing requires consent or
legitimate purposes.
may contradict the general practice in medical research that treats
pseudonymised data as anonymous and permits third parties, who
do not possess
the key code, to access data for the necessary linkage in the long-term
follow-up research.
This paper focuses on challenges arising from the
, particularly
those relating to the consent and anonymisation approach for data-intensive
biomedical research. It analyses the
’s conditions and
elucidates why some rules in the
may not be suitable in the context
of biomedical research, given the different types of risks involved and the
nature of the scientific
studies. Further, this paper illustrates the remaining
challenges for harmonisation for the
after the adoption of the
scientific exemptions, including the involvement of privately funded research
entities in a broad interpretation
of ‘research’. Finally, it
attempts to provide a possible resolution to address these challenges to balance
the requirements
of data protection and the need to carry out scientific
research for the benefit of the public.
1 Biobanking and Biomedical Research in
In recent years, due to rapid developments in information technology and the
application of big data techniques, the general practice
in biomedical research
has changed significantly. Personal data concerning health can be aggregated
through data mining techniques
and linkages to yield valuable resources for
further use and analysis. Such data includes data collected from electronic
health records
(‘EHRs’), electronic medical records
(‘EMRs’), clinical trial data, and genetic, genomic and other
life-related
data. As most complex diseases and cancers that affect large
populations are typically caused by a combination of genetic and environmental
factors, rather than individual genes alone, scientists generally recognise that
studying the population genome, that is, the entirety
of a species’ genes
across whole populations, is necessary to understand fully the complex and
subtle interactions between
incidences of disease, genes, and the
environment.
Such population
studies in genomics require extensive collections of high-quality tissue
samples, and have fuelled the drive for
the establishment of large-scale
population biobanks.
1.1 The Features of Biobanks
The collection and storage of human tissue samples for medical research has a
decades-long history. However, biobanks are a sophisticated
technological
innovation, which facilitates the continuous collection of all types of human
samples and making of linkages with associated
epidemiological, clinical and
research data.
The wide use of
biobanks and associated data creates difficulties, as the different types of
collections with different structures
and purposes may give rise to different
technological, ethical and legal
considerations.
According to
OECD Guidelines
, the extent and type of consultations necessary for the
establishment of human biobanks must take into consideration the nature,
and scope of biobanks. The greater the variety of invited participants, the more
numerous the tissue samples and data to
be collected, which may cause greater
risks in samples and data
Although a number of significant variables, such as the size, scale and
nature of the samples, will influence the range of biobank
activities, including
recruitment, consent practices and governance arrangements, human biobanks
typically share a number of common
For instance, they
usually anticipate unspecified future research and so have an ongoing and
open-ended nature that challenges the
traditional practice of specific informed
consent. Furthermore, in order to link collected biospecimens with phenotypic
banked samples and data may need to be re-identifiable by biobank
custodians even though that data may have been encrypted and the
identification removed. Since it is not possible to ensure that the samples and
data are completely secure against identification,
appropriate mechanisms need
to be set for data management to minimise the risk of individuals being
identified.
In addition, as
biobanks are more concerned with the public benefit for future generations than
with the individual benefit of participants
themselves, they focus on the common
good and as a result their proper governance needs to balance individual and
collective interests.
The nature of biobank collections can be classified in terms of the purely
prospective integrations of pre-existing collections, or
some combination
thereof. In terms of the extent to which data linkage is possible, types of
biobanks may be categorised depending
on the coding system or anonymisation
procedures used for data protection. If funding sources and business models are
account, the categorisation may be further refined into distinctions
between public or private, commercial or non-commercial. Different
biobanks require different governance frameworks for issues regarding consent
and privacy. For instance, whether or not
a biobank is commercially oriented may
have a significant influence on people’s willingness to participate, as
the business
model of profit maximisation may not be accepted by a participant
who might otherwise wish to contribute samples to a public, non-commercial
Biobanks may also be distinguished from other collections of biospecimens,
created for research or other purposes but also used for
research, even though
the boundaries between the biobanks and these kinds of collections may not be
easily drawn. For instance, the
genetic research database used for the
International HapMap Project
stored de-identified genetic information compiled from multiple donors. Even
though the samples and cell lines used by the project
could be identified as
coming from one of the four populations taking part in the study, they were not
linked to any individual participant.
This is very different from a biobank in
which re-identification and data linkage are necessary. Making these
distinctions not only
also assists in elucidating a more appropriate governance framework for data
protection in the context of biomedical research.
1.2 Substantial Public Interest
Biobanks provide scientific researchers with important resources in two main
areas: the interaction between genetic factors underlying
common complex
diseases and the environment, and the translation of biomedical research into
diagnostic and therapeutic applications
through pharmacogenomics in pursuit of
personalised medicine.
ultimately provides an improvement in public health.
In the past, medical care was unable to take account of an individual’s
genetic variability. Instead it focused on standards
of care based on
epidemiological studies of large cohorts. Traditionally, clinical diagnosis and
treatments were based on patients’
symptoms and their medical and family
histories. As such, medical treatment was reactive rather than prospective. In
other words,
clinics offered medication only after symptoms appeared.
Recent advances in genomics have introduced a new means of identifying and
understanding certain diseases, especially in terms of
the functioning of genes
and their impact on the development of complex diseases. The HapMap project has
laid the groundwork for
deepening our understanding of similarities and
differences in genetic makeup at an individual level, and made possible for the
application
of a new tool, Genome-Wide Association
(‘GWAS’), to
examine how one’s genome may affect a person’s susceptibility to
GWAS could have a significant impact on medical care, especially the
development of precision medicine, for which it is important
to understand how
genetic variations contribute to common, complex diseases. Studies are expected
to benefit health management when
it is widely applied to medical care. They sit
alongside other innovative technologies, so that health professionals can tailor
programs to patients according to their genetic makeup, to lower
health management costs to a greater
These rapid developments in biomedical studies have turned traditional
medical research into a data-intensive field. This paradigm
shift encourages
cross-border exchange of human biological resources and associated data. A
well-tailored data protection framework,
as it has been argued by many EU health
research communities, will be able to ease access to, and the sharing of, data
for scientific
research purposes, and enable further biomedical innovation. This
will bring greater benefit and wellbeing to patients and citizens.
As it is widely recognised that personal data is of critical importance in
maintaining and advancing scientific research, the EU medical
communities have demonstrated a strong support for derogations set out in the
to continue performing outstanding research. In addition,
since scientific and medical research aims at fostering knowledge and developing
new treatments to prevent or cure disease, the BBMRI-ERIC, along with other
scientific networks, urged EU institutions to consider
scientific research as
being of substantive public
The adoption of
scientific exemptions is essential to make a necessary distinction between data
processing for research purposes
and other purposes that lack a substantial
public interest.
Reconciling patients’ interests and individual rights to privacy has
been of foremost priority for many EU medical and health
research communities.
In the position paper of Science Europe, EU institutions were recommended to set
up a governance framework
to ensure privacy protection, while at the same time
facilitating access to data and medical research across Europe.
Concerns were raised that the proposed
did not proportionately
reconcile these rights, nor appropriately distinguish between the commercial and
academic environments in
which medical and health research are
Similarly, the term
‘high public
used in the
for the processing of sensitive data, had been criticised
in the BBMRI-ERIC position paper as constituting an unnecessary politicisation
of research.
A change of the
wording to ‘public interest’ was recommended by the scientific
communities.
A comparable
request for derogations can be found in data processing that involved
psuedonymisation under the ‘highest technical
standards’. According
to the BBMRI-ERIC position paper, the change of the wording to ‘reasonably
high’ standard
was strongly recommended, in order to avoid unnecessary
conditions set up under the
that will have a detrimental impact on
scientific discovery.
provides a clear definition of consent. Article 4(11)
stipulates that a valid consent obtained from the data subject needs to be
‘freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous’. In addition,
such consent must take the form of a clear affirmative
action, indicating the
data subject’s agreement to the processing of his or her personal data.
This definition of consent is
based on the dominant specific consent model that
brings challenges to biobanking activities, which mainly rely on broad consent.
When consent was obtained for data collection for the establishment of existing
biobanks, it was not possible to predict what kinds
of research would be
possible in the future. The same is true of new collections; we cannot
anticipate all their potential future
research uses. Moreover, treating biobanks
as an important infrastructure makes them valuable resources for research. They
like bio-libraries or bio-repositories, continuing the collection and
storage of human specimens and associated data in order to
make them available
for unspecific future research. As a result, it has been recognised that the
traditional specific consent model
is not practical for biobanking operations.
Broad consent involves consenting to a general governance framework rather than
research purpose. In biomedical practice, this broad consent provides
an alternative and legitimate solution to longitudinal population-based
research, which is reliant on vast amounts of data being processed and further
linked for later research.
Broad consent, used frequently in biobanking, is slightly different from
blanket (or open) consent. The latter refers to permission
given by the data
subject to further processing and reuse of his or her specimens and associated
data for any nonspecific future
Considering that
re-consent costs are simply too high and burdensome for participants to be
re-contacted every time there is a need
to obtain their consent for a new
research purpose, blanket consent has been used to replace specific informed
consent in order to
facilitate medical and health research. Concerns about open
consent usually focus on the absence of continuous supervision of the
tissue samples and data after consent has been given at the time of data
collection. Broad consent is a compromise between
the two ends of the consent
spectrum: open consent and traditional specific informed consent. Broad consent
authorises the use of
samples for unspecific research purposes, but it relies on
ethics (or user) committees to review applications for access to biobanks
data processing or linkage. In practice, review by ethics committees focuses on
the governance framework provided by the
Such a governance
framework provides guidance for various biobank stakeholders, and covers the
rules and guidelines on data protection,
confidentiality and the criteria for
access. This provides an important safeguard to supplement the broad consent
model. The UK biobank
and many biorepositories associated with the BBMRI
Consortium have adopted broad consent models as default mechanisms for
consent in the context of biobanking research. It is hoped that a
proper balance will be reached between respect for individual autonomy
facilitating medical research.
In the proposed draft
, the broad consent model had not yet been
considered a valid form of consent, according to the strict definition of
consent set out
in the provisions. This caused major concerns for medical and
health communities in the Europe about the legitimacy of existing biobanking
projects and future biobank activities. After a long process of discussion and
lobbying by scientific communities, in the final version
legislators recognised that it would be impractical to use specific consent in
longitudinal studies and they took a more research-friendly
position by
including scientific exemptions in the
. In recital 33 of the
, it is acknowledged that it is often not possible to identify fully
the purpose, use and processing of personal data for scientific
research at the
stage of data collection. As a result, data subjects should be permitted to give
their consent to certain broad areas
of scientific research, rather than being
asked to specifically consent to particular purposes, so long as such practice
complies with ethical standards for scientific
Given this flexibility
in consent requirements, personal data can now be repurposed for secondary use,
which is approved by ethics
committees. There is no need to obtain further
consent for additional processing of data once broad consent has been given by
subjects at the time of data collection.
Processing of Personal
3.1 The Definition of Personal Data
As both the EU
Directive 95/46/EC
govern only the
collection and processing of ‘personal data’, any information not so
defined is therefore outside of
the scope of the data protection rules, and
researchers need not pay heed to data protection principles. As a result, how
data is defined is critical to the appropriate application of the
According to article 4 (1) of the
, personal data refers to
‘any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person
subject’)’.
stipulates that an identifiable person is
one who can be identified, directly or indirectly in particular by reference
to an identifier such as a name, an identification
location data, online identifier or to one or more factors specific
to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural
social identity of that person.
The definition of personal data in
Directive 95/46/EC
remains mostly
unchanged under the
, however, several new identifiers, such as
location data, online identifiers, and genetic data have been explicitly
included in the
, which may result in additional compliance
obligations for some associated organisations. In addition, the
maintains the existing distinction between sensitive data and non-sensitive
data, and makes sensitive data a special category of
personal data subject to
additional protection.
categories of the sensitive data are largely the same as that covered by the EU
Directive 95/46/EC
. Nevertheless, as a result of consideration of
scientific developments, the
now enlarges its categories by
explicitly including genetic and biometric data as sensitive personal
Processing of Sensitive Personal Data
The processing of sensitive personal data, like genetic and health data, is
prohibited under the
, except in certain defined circumstances.
Article 9(2) of the
enumerates the justifications for processing of
sensitive data. This list of legal processing is exhaustive, and the processing
sensitive data outside of the enumerated situations is considered illegal
One of the required conditions is the explicit consent of the data
As mentioned earlier,
that consent, according to the definition in the
, must be given
freely, and must be specific, informed and
unambiguous.
In addition, the
consent needs to satisfy the ‘purpose limitation’ requirement. As a
result, consent to processing sensitive
data cannot be permitted for prospective
unknown purposes, as is the practice under the broad consent model in biobanking
However, the
permits derogations for research, and Member
States can delineate under what circumstances the prohibition against processing
data may not be lifted by the specific consent
requirement.
also permits the processing of sensitive data when it is in
the public interest for reasons of public
Examples of the public
health exemption include ‘protecting against serious cross-border threats
to health’ or ‘ensuring
high standards of quality and safety of
health care and of medicinal products or medical
Under these
circumstances, processing of sensitive data can be permitted if it is on the
basis of EU or Member State law that provides
suitable measures to safeguard the
rights and freedoms of the data
In addition, the justifications apply when such processing of sensitive data
is necessary for scientific research
Under this scenario,
the processing needs to be subject to appropriate safeguards, which must ensure
that technical and organisational
measures are in place to comply with the
principle of data minimisation.
According to the
, such measures may include techniques of
pseudonymisation. However, if anonymisation rather than pseudonymisation can
satisfy the
purpose of processing sensitive data, that technique should
Furthermore, under the
, there can be limitations on a data
subject’s rights, including the right to access, the right to
rectification, the right
to restriction of processing and the right to object,
as scientific exemptions are applied to the processing of sensitive
However, such exemptions
are subject to the same conditions and safeguards as stipulated in the
to the extent that such rights are likely to render impossible or
seriously impair the ends of scientific research, and such derogations
necessary for the fulfilment of these
Nevertheless, the
scope of derogations is not without limitation. According to the
Member States have discretion to maintain or introduce further conditions,
including limitations for processing several special
categories of sensitive
personal data, such as genetic data, biometric data or data concerning
Anonymisation and Pseudonymisation
Directive 95/46/EC
apply only to
personal data, data that can no longer be connected to, or under any
circumstance be associated with a particular individual,
are considered
anonymised data that falls outside of the application of data protection rules.
As the anonymisation of data is irreversible,
it cannot be used to identify data
subjects by any method. Thus the processing and reuse of such data do not need
to comply with
data protection principles. Several researchers have studied the
effectiveness of various anonymisation techniques. In reality, it
possible to claim any technique is absolutely effective at anonymisation,
especially considering the advances in big data
applications that make it easier
to single out a particular individual through data mining. Under the
, however, data can be considered anonymised so long as such data can
no longer identify an individual by further processing of that
data, or by
processing it together with any other available
information.
Pseudonymisation is a technique used for processing of personal data, under
which information can no longer be attributed to a specific
data subject without
the use of additional information. That additional information must be kept
separately and subject to appropriate
measures to ensure that it cannot be used
to help identify the data
According to this
definition, pseudonymised data can be considered to have had personal
identifiers removed and kept separately,
so the data can no longer identify an
individual directly without the inclusion of an identifier key or algorithm. As
it is still
possible for the identity of the data subject to be re-connected to
the pseudonymised data, such data is explicitly recognised by
a type of personal data.
The Medical Sciences Committee of Science Europe (‘MED
Committee’) recommended that EU institutions take into consideration
adoption of a risk-managed approach in the case of pseudonymised data, to ensure
that the regulatory burden on research is kept
According to its
position paper, the MED Committee suggested that the
should exclude
pseudonymised data for medical and health research from the category of personal
data, so long as there are appropriate
technical safeguards in the research
practices to minimise the risk of re-identification. In biomedical research, the
technique of
pseudonymisation is used frequently in population-based research
and large-scale biobanks. These research types involve the longitudinal
collection of a large amount of participants’ data, which must be further
processed or cross-linked to other databases for
future unspecific research.
Pseudonymisation makes these databases an extremely valuable research
infrastructure as it permits cross-linkage
between different datasets, such as
national health registries or medical and life data, in order to discover the
causes of diseases.
This type of population-based research has been practiced
impressively in many jurisdictions in Europe, for example, by the National
Institute of Statistics in Nordic countries, the Scottish Informatics Programme
(‘SHIP’) in Scotland, the UK Biobank,
and the UK Longitudinal Study
Center in England.
technically speaking, pseudonymisation may create a greater risk of
re-identification than some anonymisation techniques,
several safeguards and
mechanisms, such as reviews from ethics committees for access to databases, have
been employed to protect
participants in biomedical research.
Foreshadowing that this suggestion might not be accepted by legislators (a
correct assumption, as it turned out), the MED Committee’s
position paper
continued to highlight the importance of EU institutions making amendments that
recognise the existing, well-established
protocols for the responsible use of
pseudonymised data in medical and scientific research. The aim was to ensure
that the regulatory
requirements for treating pseudonymised data as personal
data are proportionate to a relative lower risk of re-identification. In
addition, the Committee recommended a case-by-case approach, along with
appropriate oversight, clear procedures and suitable controls
decryption keys with pseudonymised data for re-identification purposes in
scientific studies.
Committee further suggested that this approach ought to be built on the existing
safeguards for processing pseudonymised data
that have been commonly adopted in
scientific research communities across Europe.
Challenges to Harmonisation and
the Application of Scientific Exemptions
4.1 Privately Funded Research
Even though the medical and health research communities have been delighted
to see EU institutions take a more open position to welcoming
data-intensive
research, several challenges remain in the application of scientific exemptions
. The first, and most important, concerns the unclear scope
of scientific exemptions and their interpretation. According to recital
adopts a broad definition of ‘research’ regarding the
processing of personal data that includes not only fundamental and
research, but also privately funded
Given the broad
interpretation of research, there is little room to distinguish between research
carried out by public or private
entities, so long as ‘data
processing’ satisfies the purpose of scientific research. It brings an
immediate challenge
to the issue of privately funded research. For example, it
is unclear whether commercial market research may be classified as scientific
research and therefore be covered by the exemptions under the
Generally, under the
, the processing of personal data for
secondary uses or purposes cannot be permitted except under such circumstances
that the processing
with the purposes for which the
personal data were initially
However, this
restriction on secondary processing of personal data may be exempted for data
controllers who process personal data
for the purpose of
Article 5(1)(b) of the
reverses this general presumption on the purpose of limitation.
Under such an exemption, where technical and organisational measures
place, secondary uses of data are possible even without considering if the
purpose of the process is compatible with the original
purpose for which data
were collected.
This raises
concerns about the consent given by the data subjects, as they might not be
willing to give the same consent had they
known that the entities of the data
controllers or processors would change in the future.
Several studies have demonstrated the public’s concerns with commercial
access to health data. A survey carried out by Ipsos
MORI, a social research
institute, for the Royal Statistical Society reveals that only between four and
seven per cent of the respondents
agree that they have a high level of trust in
the appropriate use of personal data by commercial entities, such as internet,
and telecommunications
This study further
illustrates that among two of the top three reasons for the respondents to stop
using a company are the loss or
sale of personal data—but that far
outweighs other reasons such as charging more than other competitors or damaging
the environment.
contrary, the poll showed relatively low opposition (17 per cent) for the
government sharing anonymised data among universities
and academic organisations
for the purpose of public funded
Subsequently, a more sophisticated survey was commissioned by the Wellcome
Trust to further investigate ways in which the public would
distinguish between
different types of commercial access, and whether different types of data and
data users would be factors influencing
attitudes towards commercial access to
health data for the public.
so doing, it is hoped that better safeguards can be established to ensure public
trust in the sharing of health data with private
entities for research purposes.
The report found that the public regards there to be a hierarchy of acceptable
commercial entities.
For those private research companies working closely with
the National Health Service (‘NHS’) in the UK, the public has
relatively higher trust and more acceptance attitude towards their data
processing activities.
popular are pharmaceutical companies with agendas that are seen as being at odds
with the public interest. Even though the
role of pharmaceutical companies in
the development of new therapies has been gradually recognised, most people
still prefer that
certain kinds of regulations should be used to place checks on
these companies, due to concerns with their profit motive.
In the survey, some companies are reported as falling short of public
expectations. For example, the investigation showed that participants
want insurance companies to have access to their health data at all. This public
distrust is caused by the health industry’s
business operations: charging
high rates but paying out little or nothing, which is perceived by the general
public as operating
contrary to the basic principle of the public health
Similarly, marketing
companies have also been listed as non-favoured entities for access to personal
data. This demonstrates the general
concerns about online marketing
platforms’ privacy intrusions and how individuals might have been targeted
for direct marketing
through big data
application.
With regards to
third party access, the survey illustrates public unease with passing data on to
others beyond the original use,
especially fear that data subjects will lose
control when third party access is allowed but proper safeguards are yet to be
established.
Indeed, commercial
companies frequently seek to profit from re-selling data. However, most of these
companies have inadequate mechanisms
to ensure transparency and data security.
adopts a broad definition of research and explicitly
includes privately funded research in such a category, the scientific research
exemptions will apply to commercial entities and pharmaceutical companies for
data processing and re-use. Mitigating public concern
to ensure that the common
good is protected and to ease the challenges that accompany the application of
the scientific exemptions
is crucial. In addition to relying on ethics committee
review as a safeguard mechanism for data access, it is necessary to increase
transparency and accountability in the governance framework for processing data
transfer and access applications. A proper notification
system may help build up
a trust relationship between data controllers and data subjects, and needs to be
included in the overall
data flow supervision. Finally, in the broad consent
mechanism, an opt-out option is required so that data subjects will have an
opportunity to further control (even though passively) the use of, and access
to, their data and to decide if they would prefer to
withdraw from research
projects when commercial entities are involved.
Designing a Compliance Framework for
In addition to the uncertain interpretation of the scope of exemptions,
another challenge for the
lies in how to design an appropriate
compliance framework for carrying out research. A solid safeguard for data
processing requires
suitable technical and organisational measures that can be
well-designed into an overall framework, to balance respect for privacy
need to perform research. Under certain circumstances, the GDPR allows for
Member States to set up implementing rules for
the research exemption. As a
result, there is some (necessary) flexibility to apply the
medical and health research contexts. However, the fragmented implementation
rules enacted by the Member States may inevitably
bring new challenges to the
harmonisation of different data protection rules for research across the EU. How
to avoid this regulatory
fragmentation, which will hinder data sharing and
cross-border research collaboration, will be another crucial issue worth taking
into consideration.
In biomedical research, many codes of conduct, ethical standards, and
self-governance mechanisms have been developed over years to
safeguard data
processing and facilitate collaboration of transnational research. A practicable
compliance framework for the GDPR
should be built on these existing good
practices to avoid conflicts between the rules of data protection and biomedical
activities.
The safeguard mechanisms, such as Privacy Impact Assessments
(‘PIAs’) for risk management and the requirements for transparency
and accountability must also be built in by design, as integral parts of
technical and organisational compliance safeguards. The
adoption of PIAs plays a
crucial role in assessing the risks associated with research projects and data
processing and usage. It
is worth noting that a PIA should be performed
according to the specific context. A PIA identifies and evaluates related risks
data protection, and must consider not only physical security for data
storage and encryption methods, but also the data subject’s
expectations,
access policies and the safeguards adopted by research institutes and associated
research partners. This assessment
is particularly important if data is
transferred for further use or linkage.
Introducing a system of data breach notification may further improve tracking
of network data usage in real time and help monitor
the data flow accountably.
It is recommended that the data protection authorities work closely with
research and health institutes
to seek input from scientific communities, to
enable them to implement rules and meet the common goal of supporting research
respecting the individual’s privacy. In addition, even though the
scientific exemptions under the
permit re-consent to be waived under
certain circumstances when technical and organisational safeguards are in place,
it is important
that advanced techniques of encryption and data anonymisation
should not be deemed an automatic replacement of consent. Independent
from ethics committees must be required to stick with a comprehensive governance
framework in which a contextual assessment
of data protection impact and risk
management have been embedded.
has been viewed as a milestone in data protection reform as
it aims to harmonise the existing fragmented data protection rules in
Its implementation in May 2018 will require widespread standardisation and
unification of data privacy requirements, and
will have a broader impact on
cross-border data transfers. However, to what extent both the ambition for the
protection of consumers
and the promotion of innovation can be achieved will be
a challenge for the implementation of the
. After a long process of
lobbying and debate, the derogations for research have been accepted by policy
makers in the EU, but the
adoption of scientific exemptions remain challenging
This paper has discussed these challenges in the biobanking and biomedical
research context. It elucidated why dominant mechanisms
such as specific consent
and anonymisation, as requested by privacy protection rules, may not be
appropriate for biomedical research,
which generally is of a data intensive
nature, open to unspecific future research, and requires the linkage of
different datasets
for longitudinal population-based research. The derogations
permitted under the
allow for broad consent and processing of
sensitive data without considering if the secondary use is compatible with the
obtained for the initial data collection. Given the broad definition of
‘research’ adopted by the
, these exemptions will
question the proper scope of the secondary use of data from privately funded
research entities, and further
harmonisation of implementation rules enacted by
each Member State may be required. This paper suggested that a transparent and
accountable
governance framework including privacy impact assessments,
notification and an opt-out option should be set up. The framework should
upon the existing ethics review safeguards, which allow for scientific research
to meet the requirement of doing good science
while benefitting public interest.
Assistant Research
Fellow, Institute of European and American Studies, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan. LLM (Columbia), JSM (Stanford),
PhD in Law (London School of Economics).
E-mail: chihho@sinica.edu.tw. The author appreciates the research assistance
provided by
Janos Meszaros and anonymous referees for comments. This paper was
presented at the APSN 2016 annual conference held at the University
of Auckland.
The author would like to thank the conference organisers, and the helpful
comments and discussions raised by the APSN
members and participants.
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Date Protection
Regulation)
[2016] OJ L 119/1 (‘
Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data
[1995] OJ L 281/31; See Directorate-General for
Justice and Consumers,
Reform of EU Data Protection Rules
(2016) European
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/reform/index_en.htm
Directive 95/46/EC
Directorate-General for
Justice and Consumers,
Reform of EU Data Protection Rules
(2016) European
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/reform/index_en.htm
[2016] OJ L 119/1,
art 5(1)(a).
[2016] OJ L 119/1,
arts 6(1)(a), 7.
See the joint statement
released by the Wellcome Trust and other research organisations: Wellcome Trust
et al, Impact of the draft
European Data Protection Regulation and proposed
amendments from the rapporteur of the LIBE committee on scientific research,
<https://wellcome.ac.uk/sites/default/files/wtvm054713.pdf>.
[2016] OJ L 119/1,
arts 5, 6, 9, 89.
Helen Swede, Carol L Stone
and Alyssa R Norwood, ‘National population-based biobanks for genetic
research’ (2007) 9
Genetics in Medicine
M G Hansson et al,
‘Should donors be allowed to give broad consent to future biobank
research?’ (2006) 7(3)
The Lancet Oncology
[2016] OJ L
119/1, art 32(1)(a).
See National Human Genome
Research Institute,
Frequently Asked Questions About Genetic and Genomic
(2 March 2016)
http://www.genome.gov/19016904
When it is used in this
article, the term biobank refers to large collections of human biological
materials that may be linked with
personal and health information for use in
health and medical research as in the definition given by the OECD. See also
Mark Stranger
and Jane Kaye, ‘Governing Biobanks: An Introduction’
in Jane Kaye and Mark Strange (eds),
Principles and Practice in Biobank
(Ashgate, 2009) 2.
Margaret Otlowski, Dianne
Nicol and Mark Stranger, ‘Biobanks Information Paper’ (Information
Paper E110, National Health
and Medical Research Council, 2010) 9
<https://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/publications/attachments/e110_biobanks_information_paper_140520.pdf>.
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
Guidelines on Human Biobanks and
Genetic Research Databases
(22 October 2009) 1
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/41/47/44054609.pdf
Mats G Hansson,
‘Ethics and Biobanks’ (2009) 100
British Journal of Cancer
Georg Lauss et al,
‘Towards Biobank Privacy Regimes in Responsible Innovation Societies: ESBB
Conference in Granada 2012’
(2013) 11(5)
Biopreservation and
International HapMap
Consortium, ‘The International HapMap Project’ (2003) 426
It refers to the notion
that all medical decisions and treatment, including preventive and therapeutic
care can be tailored to adapt
to each individual’s particular genetic
A genome-wide association
study is a new method for scientists to strategically search genetic markers
that involves rapidly scanning
SNPs across the complete set of human genomes to
find genetic variations associated with a particular disease. See National Human
Genome Research Institute,
Genome-wide Association Studies
http://www.genome.gov/20019523
For more information about
the application of the genome-wide association studies, see National Human
Genome Research Institute,
Genome-wide Association Studies
http://www.genome.gov/20019523#gwas-3
Biobanking BioMolecular
Resources Research Infrastructure (‘BBMRI-ERIC’), ‘Position
Paper on the General Dara
Protection Regulation’ (Position Paper, October
http://www.bbmri-eric.eu/wp-content/uploads/BBMRI-ERIC-Position-Paper-General-Data-Protection-Regulation-October-2015_rev1_title.pdf
Scientific Committee for
Medical Sciences of Science Europe, ‘The Benefits of Personal Data
Processing for Medical Sciences
in the Context of Protection of Patient Privacy
and Safety’ (Opinion Paper, Science Europe, May 2013) 5
<https://www.scienceeurope.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/ScienceEuropeMedicalPaper.pdf>.
Parliamentary amendments
for Recital 123a and Article 81(2a) (a.o.) of the draft
Biobanking BioMolecular Resources Research Infrastructure, above n 23, 3.
Biobanking BioMolecular
Resources Research Infrastructure, above n 23, 8.
Dara Hallinan and Michael
Friedewald, ‘Open consent, Biobanking and Data Protection Law: Can Open
Consent be ‘informed
‘under the Forthcoming Data Protection
Regulation’ (2015) 11(1)
Life Sciences, Society and Policy
See UK Biobank Ethics and
Governance Council,
UK Biobank Governance Framework-Version 3.0
<https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/EGF20082.pdf>.
[2016] OJ L
119/1, rec 33.
Ibid art 4(1).
Ibid recitals 10, 34, 35,
51, art 9(1).
Ibid art 9(2)(a).
Ibid art 4(11).
Ibid art 9(2)(a).
Ibid art 9(2)(i).
Ibid art 89(1).
Ibid art 89(2).
Ibid art 89(4).
See Office of the Data
Protection Commissioner (Ireland),
Anonymisation and psuedonymisation
https://www.dataprotection.ie/docs/Anonymisation-and-pseudonymisation/1594.htm
[2016] OJ L
119/1, art 89(5).
Scientific Committee for
Medical Sciences of Science Europe, above n 24, 8.
[2016] OJ L
119/1, recital 159, [1].
Michelle Goddard,
‘The Changing Face of Compliance: Preparing Healthcare Researchers for EU
Data Protection Reforms’ (Speech
delivered at the British Healthcare
Business Intelligence Association Annual Conference, London, 9 May 2016) 8
<https://www.bhbia.org.uk/downloads/4162/0/BHBIA_Keynote_Speech_Changing_Face_of_Compliance_-_Formatted_Handout_v1.0.pdf.aspx.>.
[2016] OJ L
119/1, art 6(4), rec 50.
Ibid art 5(1)(b).
Ibid: ‘[F]urther
processing for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific
or historical research purposes or statistical
purposes shall, in
accordance with Article 89(1), not be considered to be incompatible with the
initial purposes’.
See Royal Statistical
Society, ‘Royal Statistical Society research on trust in data and
attitudes toward data use / data sharing’
(Briefing Note, 22 July
http://www.statslife.org.uk/images/pdf/rss-data-trust-data-sharing-attitudes-research-note.pdf
See Ipsos MORI Social
Research Institute, ‘The One-Way Mirror: Public attitudes to commercial
access to health data’
(Report prepared for the Wellcome Trust, March
<https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/publication/5200-03/sri-wellcome-trust-commercial-access-to-health-data.pdf>.
Ibid 10. However, the
extent to which this higher trust remains is not without debate. On March 2017,
for example, there was a devastating
security breach of one of the major
computer systems used by GPs. This breach involved over 26 million NHS
patients’ medical
records and triggered the Information Commissioner (ICO)
to start an investigation. At the end of August 2017, the ICO announced
IT system’s provider was required to address the need to improve security
measures to guarantee the fair and lawful
process of patient data on the system.
See Information Commissioner’s Officer, ‘ICO updated statement in
relation to
the potential risk to patient medical records held by GPs on TPP
SystmOne’ (Media Release, 30 August 2017)
<https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2017/08/ico-updated-statement-in-relation-to-the-potential-risk-to-patient-medical-records-held-by-gps-on-tpp-systmone/>.
Ibid 10–11.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (390 KB)
PDF format (355 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter