URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydUPLawBk/2011/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:39:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle --- "Chapter 2 - Decision Making and Relationships" [2011] SydUPLawBk 4; in O'Neill, Nick; Peisah, Carmelle (eds), "Capacity and the Law" (Sydney University Press, 2011)
2. 1. Introduction
2. 2. Indicators and patterns of influence
2. 3. Vulnerability to influence of cognitively impaired adults
2.3.1. Dependency and isolation
2.3.2. Pawns in family conflict
2.3.3. Appraisal of others
2.3.4. Protective factors against influence
2.3.5. The need for caution when taking instructions or assessing capacity
2. 4. Capacity to enter into and sever relationships
2.4.1. Capacity to consent to sexual relationships
2. 5. Capacity to marry
2. 5. 1. The common law
2. 5. 2. Capacity to marry in Australia
2. 5. 3. The standard and onus of proof when challenging capacity to marry or the validity of a marriage
2. 5. 4. The assessment of the capacity to marry
2. 6. Capacity to divorce
2. 6. 1. Capacity of substitute decision-makers to initiate or continue divorce proceedings on behalf of an incapable person
Chapter 2 – Decision-making and relationships
2. 1. Introduction
Decisions by cognitively impaired adults are rarely made in an interpersonal
vacuum. Significant others, including family, friends,
carers and other service
providers, usually play a part. Conversely, cognitive impairment may impact on
a person’s capacity
to form or sever relationships. Thus, careful scrutiny
is required when there is a significant change in the nature of interpersonal
relationships of a person with dementia, particularly if this change results in
the execution of legal documents.
This chapter will address the interaction between decision making and
relationships, particularly with reference to adults with
dementia. It includes
a discussion of: (i) indicators and patterns of influence; (ii) the
vulnerability of cognitively impaired persons
to influence; and (iii) the
assessment of the capacity to form and cease interpersonal relationships.
2. 2. Indicators and patterns of influence
Lawyers and health care professionals involved in the execution of legal
documents by cognitively impaired adults should be mindful
of the potential for
influence by others on such vulnerable individuals. As described in Chapter 4,
the term “Undue Influence”
is a legal concept referring to the
specific circumstances of coercion or subversion of will in the will-making
process. Until now
that construct has been quite narrowly defined and difficult
to establish and has rarely been successfully raised in the courts in
A broader working
definition of influence, where others seek to persuade cognitively impaired
individuals to make decisions or execute
legal documents in their favour, is
probably more useful.
Common indicators that the cognitively impaired person is being adversely
influenced are:
1. Sequestration and isolation of the impaired person such that outside
disconnected, the
house in which the impaired person lives is heavily barred or no-one seems to be
2. Previously trusted family members or friends are no longer favoured or
trusted by the cognitively impaired person;
3. Longstanding patterns of formalising such trust (e.g. by making trusted
persons attorneys, guardians, executors or major beneficiaries
in wills) are
4. The person of influence instigates changes in legal documents such as
wills or powers of attorney and is involved in the procurement
5. The lawyer whose professional services are sought is not well-known to the
cognitively impaired person.
It is not unusual for an older wealthy person who is surrounded by conflict
between family members and friends vying for their influence
to be drawn into
that conflict. Most commonly, the person in the position of influence is a
family member, often a child. Situations
of adverse influence usually occur
between an elderly cognitively impaired person and the following persons:
1. a cohabiting family member such as an adult child;
2. a non-resident child;
3. a helpful neighbour or friend;
4. a formal or informal carer;
5. a more distant family member such as a niece or nephew;
6. a “suitor” who may, or may not become a de facto partner or
spouse, usually significantly younger and cognitively intact;
7. professionals such as lawyers, doctors, accountants, clergy and policemen.
2. 3. Vulnerability to influence of cognitively
impaired adults
2.3.1. Dependency and isolation
Physical dependency in a community-dwelling, ageing, cognitively impaired
person lends itself to the development of a situation where
the carer becomes
central to maintaining the person at home. They may or may not be living with
the impaired person, but close and
frequent contact between the carer and the
impaired person leads to a special relationship and puts the carer in a unique
of influence.
The carer may be paid or be a family member who has lived with the older
person for some time. The carer may be a friend or neighbour
or more distant
family member who was previously uninvolved until they became aware that the
older person needed assistance. Often
the relationship is newly formed or there
has been a change in the impaired person’s attitude to the other person,
with the onset of the persons’ disability or frailty. When
this involves a change in previous alliances, the older person
persuaded to make changes in important legal documents such as wills, powers of
attorney or guardianship to ratify their
new-found faith in or gratitude to the
carer. Sometimes they marry the carer. Often there are threats or promises -
sometimes unrealistic
– to keep the ageing person out of residential care.
Changes in documents such as wills may be made in a desperate attempt
care, support or comfort at a time when the impaired person feels increasingly
vulnerable or threatened.
Isolation of the impaired person from significant others may intensify the
power of the person of influence. The courts or the guardianship
tribunals are
often called on to intervene when previously established or now needed access to
the impaired person is impeded by
a person of influence, particularly if their
influence has been asserted recently. However, it is usually difficult to
enforce access
as a matter of practice. This is particularly the case where the
older person supports the lack of contact.
2.3.2. Pawns in family conflict
Recent research lends support to clinically-based observations of family
relations in older life which suggest that having a dependent
parent provides an
opportunity for siblings to play out a competition to be the best, most caring
The role of carer sometimes
allows a previous “black sheep” to become newly respected for their
competence or to be listened
to for the first
Unresolved issues of
attachment may emerge and pre-existing patterns of insecure, anxious attachment
may predispose an adult child
to enmeshment or excessive closeness with the
ageing, disabled parent.
be threatened by assistance from or involvement of others in the life of the
disabled parent.
Strawbridge and Wallhagen found that 40% of 100 adult child caregivers were
experiencing relatively serious conflict with another
family member, usually a
sibling, and usually because they failed to provide sufficient help to the
caregiver. In addition to lack
of support and acknowledgement of the caregiver,
other sources of conflict include: (i) differences around issues of impairment
seriousness of the patient’s disability); (ii) disagreements over
the amount and quality of attention given to the patient
by the other family
members; and (iii) the process of
institutionalisation.
family disagreements align with the older person’s views (e.g. “Mum
hasn’t got dementia”, “she
doesn’t need any help”
or “she doesn’t need to go to into a home”) family members (or
indeed any protagonist
in the conflict) may collude with the older
person’s denial or lack of insight. Problems with decision making may be
exacerbated
in this way.
2.3.3. Appraisal of others
Appraisal of others is often tainted by dementia, even in the early stages.
People with dementia may change their attitudes towards
significant others
during the course of the illness. This change is usually triggered or fed by
the disease process as well as the
natural frictions within families. The person
with dementia may develop antipathy towards or show favour towards family
members previously
disfavoured.
This reduced ability to appraise others may be understood in the light of
many of the neuropsychological deficits typically associated
with common forms
of dementia. First, deficits in recent and autobiographical memory may effect
a person’s decisions about
significant others.
Deficits in recent memory may cause people with dementia to forget that family
members have visited and they may form adverse opinions
members as a result. It is not uncommon to hear the complaint: “no-one
comes to see me” despite regular
daily visits by family members.
Impairment in autobiographical memory may make recall of past relationships,
good times and bad times, including past disputes, difficult.
For example, an
elderly man had a twenty year history of conflict with two of his children
expressed in pages of vitriolic correspondence,
a court case over property and a
pattern of wills which favoured his other son. When he began to suffer from
dementia he forgot
his previous conflict and began favouring the two previously
disfavoured children.
Second, people with deficits in working memory may only be able to consider
information that is concrete and physically in front of
them or consider one
issue at a time, rendering them unable to weigh and consider the merits of one
person versus another.
with such deficits may be unable to appraise their relationships in the context
of the past and present simultaneously and
they may be particularly vulnerable
to those with whom they are in frequent visual contact.
Thirdly, deficits in judgment and reasoning may render the affected person
unable to consider the meaning, significance or moral import
of another’s
behaviour, weigh up priorities and come to well-reasoned decisions.
This may render them prone to making shallow, superficial and impulsive
judgments of people.
Fourthly, personality change towards apathy and passivity will render a
person with dementia vulnerable to the influence and opinions
of others. For
example, having been previously forthright, opinionated and able to scoff at and
discourage rivalries between her
children, an elderly lady with dementia sat
passively and accepted her two eldest daughters’ criticism of her
previously beloved
youngest daughter. She thereafter questioned the integrity
and loyalty of her youngest daughter.
Finally, paranoid ideation may poison affections and new alliances may be
formed based on the exploitation of these poisoned affections.
For example, an elderly man with
dementia misinterpreted his two previously adored daughters’ attempts to
procure services for
him as being: “all about the house and my
money”. This in turn was exploited by his son who fed his father’s
and paranoid ideas about his sisters in order to gain favour with his
A case file review of 50 cases of family and systems conflict in cases of
dementia brought to the Guardianship Tribunal of New South
Wales demonstrated
how previously trusted family members might be alienated during the course of
It was found that the
person with dementia was involved in the conflict in 76% of cases.
Surprisingly, family conflict occurred
most often in mild to moderate dementia
as reflected by the mean Mini Mental State Examination score of subjects which
Alliances between the person with dementia and the protagonists were
always associated with accusations of undue influence with regards
legal documents, forming adverse opinions of various family members (“he
poisoned her about us”) or accepting
their input into care. When the
person with dementia suffered paranoid ideation and was involved in the family
conflict, their suspiciousness
and paranoid ideation was fuelled by hostile
family camps who fed the person with dementia accusations of financial abuse or
wanting to dump” the person with dementia into a nursing home.
2.3.4. Protective factors against
Suspiciousness and paranoid ideation are common in dementia and may have a
general or specific focus. While suspiciousness with a
specific focus may
render a person with dementia amenable to undue influence from others about the
object of their mistrust, non–specific
suspiciousness directed at all and
sundry may protect a person against influence. Similarly, the rigidity that
sometimes accompanies
progressive dementia may render a person resistant to the
opinion and advice of others.
Further, the nature of family dynamics may be protective against undue
influence. Families won’t invariably splinter in response
to the friction
created by caring for a person with dementia. “Collectivist”
families emphasise kinship ties, belongingness
and family responsibility over
other personal roles and obligations.
A sense of common goal in care-giving is promoted and negative
perceptions and distorted views expressed by the person with dementia
glossed over or dismissed.
Sometimes the need to involve formal tribunals or courts in formalising
changes in decision making powers may be averted by conciliatory
family therapy. Simple measures which are often very helpful include:
(i) psychoeducation – educating the family or protagonists about the
potential for cognitive deficits such as memory loss and
judgment to distort the
perceptions of the person with dementia about their significant others, thereby
“externalizing”
the source of the problem by “blaming”
the dementia;
(ii) discouraging protagonists from “buying into” distortions of
the person with dementia such as “no-one visits
(iii) encouraging protagonists to check the veracity of statements such as
“he stole my money” which might be fuelled
by paranoid ideation;
(iv) finding common ground (e.g. to care or advance wellbeing) amongst
protagonists which might be expressed differently.
A referral to a family therapist or conciliator might be thus considered
before embarking on formal legal processes. Conciliation
is sometimes achieved
within the context of court or tribunal hearings. In the aforementioned study of
New South Wales Guardianship
cases, conciliation successful in 30% of cases.
Success was often achieved by finding common ground between family members and
or giving positive connotation to family members’ mutual
accusations. For example, a typical case of sibling conflict involved
son who was accused by his sister, brother and health care professionals of
being “inflexible, secretive and lacking
the skills” to care
adequately for his mother, with whom he had an “excessively
enmeshed” relationship. Accusations
of the son’s incapability were
re-labelled by the Tribunal as concern for her welfare and his brother and
sister were engaged
by the Tribunal in supporting him to obtain respite and
pursue his own interests. An attempt at conciliation was deemed neither
possible nor appropriate in 26% of cases due to (i) absence of crucial family
members; (ii) “entrenched or severe conflict”;
or (iii) conflict
based on the person with dementia’s delusions or lack of insight. In 14%
of cases the Tribunal was unsuccessful
in bringing the parties to a settlement
despite its best endeavours.
2.3.5. The need for caution when taking
instructions or assessing capacity
The considerations set out above suggests the need for those taking
instructions from, and those asked to assess the capacity of,
people with
cognitive impairment to execute legal documents such as powers of attorney,
enduring guardianship and wills to obtain
very careful histories of family
relationships of the people they are assessing. An assessment of the
person’s understanding
of any conflicts or tensions in his or her
environment particularly involving those under consideration for appointment is
Attempts should be made to procure the history of previous documents when
health care professional are asked to assess competency
of a person with
cognitive impairment to sign legal documents or lawyers are asked to draft such
documents. The rationale behind
changes in such documents should be carefully
scrutinised, particularly if there are changes from an established pattern of
or favouring certain family members. Both those assessing capacity and
the lawyers involved should ask themselves: what is the will-making
or power of
attorney-granting pattern of the person with cognitive impairment and has this
Those assessing capacity should enquire whether the lawyer is the
person’s usual lawyer or whether a person in a position of
influence has
used their own lawyer or procured a lawyer with whom the person with cognitive
impairment is unfamiliar.
It is important to ensure that the person is executing the document freely
and voluntarily and is not being “schooled”
appointment.
assessments or interviews of older people who wish to execute legal documents
are best done in private. Notwithstanding
these precautions, interviewing or
assessing a person in private does not preclude the need for the kind of proper
enquiry and careful
probing outlined above. A person can still be seen in
private and ‘influenced’ by the presence of a significant other
sitting outside in the waiting room. Those with dementia and frontal lobe
impairment often have a tendency to respond to the environment
rather than being
able to recall and manipulate recalled facts of their life including
relationships. It is much easier for such
a person to recall and consider the
needs or demands of those most recently and concretely in their presence (e.g.
the person who
brought them to the appointment and is sitting outside in the
waiting room) than recall and hold in their minds the needs of others
lives who they may not have seen recently.
2. 4. Capacity to enter into and sever relationships
2.4.1. Capacity to consent to sexual
relationships
Deciding to enter into a sexual relationship is obviously a personal decision
which normally does not require any formal contract
or test of capacity. Short
of intervening in cases of abuse, the courts cannot make that decision on behalf
of people with cognitive
impairment over 16, although society has an obligation
to ensure that their choices are voluntary. Anyone who is over the legal
consent may have a sexual relationship with anyone else over that age, provided
that those involved are consenting.
However, this raises the question are those involved able to consent to
such a relationship?
To this end, doctors or other health care professionals are sometimes asked
both of whom have
cognitive impairment or developmental disability – entering into a sexual
relationship. Family members
or service providers often have concerns about
people with cognitive impairment arising from dementia, intellectual disability,
brain injury, psychological condition or some other cause entering into
a sexual relationship. Their concerns may be about exploitation,
pregnancy or
the risk of infection or may arise from their opposition to and the possibility
of the person with the disability marrying
or becoming a
Sometimes such concerns are based on ignorance, insensitivity to the sexual
needs of cognitively impaired individuals and, in the
case of elderly residents,
ageist beliefs. Residential staff and families alike report discomfort,
confusion and embarrassment in
dealing with the sexuality of older residents.
Yet, sometimes such concerns are well-founded. Importantly, the risk of
emotional harm as a result of sexual abuse is sometimes underestimated
regards to cognitively impaired people such as those with Alzheimer’s
disease who cannot recall recent events and
experiences.
In particular, it
has been argued that the burgeoning literature regarding implicit memory shows
that people with Alzheimers’s
disease can still be affected in a lasting
manner by experiences that they may not be able to consciously recall having
Therefore, when the appropriateness of a sexual relationship involving at
least one cognitively impaired individual is called to question,
two issues need
to be considered: (i) do the individuals have capacity? and (i) is there harm or
abuse? With regards to capacity,
as yet no legal test has been developed in the
common law to deal with consent to sexual relationships in the context of civil
Nevertheless, it has been suggested elsewhere that the test in the English
Court of Appeal case
Re MB (Medical Treatment)
would be the appropriate
To have capacity under
this test, the person must be able to understand and retain information about
what is involved, be able to
weigh the information in the balance and make a
The particular
circumstances of the individuals involved must also be taken into account.
Building on suggestions made elsewhere,
we consider that it is appropriate to
take the following factors into account when assessing capacity to consent to
sexual relations;
1. What is the person’s understanding about what is involved in sexual
intercourse?
2. What is their knowledge of the emotional obligations of romantic
relationships in general and in relation to the specific object
affections?
3. What is their knowledge (at a basic level) of the risks of pregnancy and
sexually transmitted diseases?
4. Can they advocate for their interests, and terminate the relationship if
they choose?
As a separate issue, when considering issues of abuse, harm or exploitation,
one might consider:
1. What kind of relationship do they have? Is there a power imbalance or
element of coercion?
2. Is there a significant discrepancy between the two people’s
cognitive capacity?
3. What pleasure (or otherwise) do they experience in the relationship? Are
they willing or content for it to continue?
It is important that the two issues of capacity and abuse/harm be considered
separately. In the absence of harm or abuse, a lack of
capacity to consent
formally to sexual relations does not necessarily mean that the relationship
should be prevented or
discouraged.
This issue commonly
arises in residential care where the subject of sexual behaviour is complex and
fraught with a minefield of systemic,
legal and ethical issues. Nursing homes
have a duty to provide residents with liberty - both intimate and sexual - to
associate freely
with others while protecting them from abuse, injury and
Achieving the right
balance between these two responsibilities is a difficult task and there is a
need to treat each case on its individual
merits. Ehrenfeld et al studied the
sexual behaviour of 48 patients with Stage I –II dementia and found their
behaviour to
be mostly heterosexual but ranging from love and caring to romance
and outright eroticism. Staff and family responses were variable
but behaviour
at the level of eroticism aroused the strongest staff reactions, often
rejection, disgust and anger. The most extreme
reactions were to cases of sexual
harassment by male residents with dementia towards female residents or staff;
however, erotic relationships
between two “infirm” residents posed
the biggest dilemma for staff, especially when staff learned that one partner
passive while the other was active.
A scenario described in the latter study of Ehrenfeld and observed commonly
in clinical situations is one in which a resident’s
attraction towards
another resident is based on misidentification or failure to recall their own
marital status. Family and staff’s
reactions to this will differ depending
on the marital status of either resident. However, if both partners are single
of widowhood or otherwise) and there appears to be no coercion
involved, should the relationship be facilitated despite a likely
capacity to enter into the relationship in at least one of the parties involved?
Berger reported on a case of a romantic
couple of mixed cognitive capacities, a
situation where one would normally be wary of exploitation. However the couple,
both widowed
(one of whom had mild dementia) developed a close companionship
within the nursing home and “were obviously contented with
the camaraderie
and support the other provided”. The cognitively intact resident then
created a dilemma for staff by requesting
private space for
An important ethical consideration discussed in relation to this case and
many of the other cases of sexuality in this context is
the competing notions
that may guide decision making for demented persons i.e. the role of precedent
autonomy (the manifestation
of the patient’s pre-dementia, long-held
values) versus the present-orientated demented self in determining choices.
The conclusion Berger comes to in relation to this case is a thoughtful and
pragmatic solution to the wide variety of such clinical
situations with which
health care professionals are presented
Staff should be flexible in their actions as advocates, and need to evolve their
role as conditions warrant. The staff may be obligated
to disallow a physically
intimate relationship if Mrs. H’s interests are not served…. They
may actively assist her in
maintaining a satisfying sex life.
[Staff] should negotiate with the couple some limited breaches of privacy in
order to assess, over time, the kind of advocacy Mrs
H. needs, and whether the
relationship continues to serve Mrs H’s interests. These interventions
might include serial assessments
of Mrs H’s capacity, and discussion with
the couple of the physical expressions and emotional nature of the relationship.
greater the resident’s cognitive capacity the less parentalistically
the staff should behave.
2. 5. Capacity to marry
As we have already emphasised, the right to form relationships is a
fundamental human right into which neither the courts nor doctors
have a right
to interfere unless the exercise of that right involves abuse or exploitation,
which, in the case of marriage may be
of a sexual or financial nature, or
involve sequestration of the person by the spouse. As with other areas of
decision making, capacity
is assumed unless evidence calls this presumption into
doubt. Whose responsibility is it to trigger a challenge to a person’s
decision to marry? In the case of late marriage or remarriage, extreme caution
is needed to distinguish between proper and reasonable
concern of family members
and family conflict arising from, for example, disgruntled children who resent
the remarriage of a parent.
2. 5. 1. The common law
2. 5. 1. 1. Capacity to marry in England
There is no test, strictly speaking, for capacity to marry. In 2004 Munby J
of the Family Division of the High Court of Justice in
England summed up the law
on capacity to marry in four propositions:
1. It is not enough that someone appreciates that they are taking part in a
marriage ceremony or understands its words.
2. They must understand the nature of the marriage contract.
3. This means that they must be mentally capable of understanding the duties
and responsibilities that normally attach to marriage.
4. Nevertheless, the contract of marriage is in essence a simple one, which
does not require a high degree of intelligence to comprehend.
The contract of
marriage can readily be understood by anyone of normal
intelligence
The question is whether a person has the capacity to marry at all, not
whether they have the capacity to marry a particular person
rather than another
particular person. That question is distinct from the question of whether it is
wise to marry at all or to marry
a particular
The duties and responsibilities that normally attach to marriage have
undergone substantial change over the last century. As a result,
Today both spouses are the joint, co-equal heads of the
family. Each has an obligation to comfort and support the other. It is not
the husband alone to provide the matrimonial home or to decide where the family
is to live. Husband and wife both contribute.
And where they are to live is,
like other domestic matters of common concern, something to be settled by
agreement, not determined
unilaterally by the husband. Insofar as the concept of
consortium – the sharing of a common home and a common domestic life,
the right to enjoy each other's society, comfort and
assistance.
was also concerned that the test for capacity to marry not be set too high,
noting that:
There are many people in our society who may be of limited
or borderline capacity but whose lives are immensely enriched by marriage.
must be careful not to set the test of capacity to marry too high, lest it
operate as an unfair, unnecessary and indeed discriminatory
bar against the
mentally disabled.
Equally, we must be careful not to impose so stringent a
test of capacity to marry that it becomes too easy to challenge the validity
what appear on the surface to be regular and seemingly valid
2. 5. 1. 2. No substitute decision-maker may consent to marry on behalf of
an incapable person
If a person does not have the capacity to marry that is that, no court or
tribunal or substitute decision-maker can consent to marriage
on behalf of an
adult who lacks the capacity to marry
2. 5. 1. 3. Injunction to restrain marriage of incapable person?
However, following Munby J’s analysis of the English common law,
Australian Supreme Courts because of their parens patriae jurisdiction
certainly their declaratory jurisdiction together with their jurisdiction to
make interim and final injunctions, may grant an
injunction to restrain the
marriage of someone who lacked the capacity to
Munby J dealt with these matters in a case in which Sheffield City Council
sought an order to prevent the marriage of a young woman
with an intellectual
disability to an older man with an extensive history of committing sexual
offences, but his judgment is confined
to the preliminary issue of the
definition of capacity to give a valid consent to
2. 5. 2. Capacity to marry in Australia
In the English case which is treated as the leading authority on the question
of capacity to marry in both England and Australia,
In the Estate of Park
deceased, Park v Park
, supports the proposition that a person has the
capacity to marry if they are capable of understanding the contract they are
into. To do this they must be mentally capable of appreciating that the
contract involves the responsibilities normally attaching
This brief formulation is built
upon the statement of Sir James Hannen when President of the Probate, Divorce
and Admiralty Division
of the High Court of Justice in England that:
[I]t appears to me that the contract of marriage is a very simple one, which
does not require a high degree of intelligence to comprehend.
engagement between a man and a woman to live together and love one another as
husband and wife, to the exclusion of all
However, he went on to note that mere appreciation of the words of the
promises exchanged was not enough, there had to be a real appreciation
engagement apparently entered into
Some Australian cases show that the issue of capacity to marry is not as
simple as Sir James Hannen thought, particularly when at
least one of the
parties has a diagnosis of dementia. Chisholm J of the Family Court of Australia
noted that mere awareness of going
through a marriage ceremony was not enough; a
person must also understand the nature and effect of the ceremony involved.
Nevertheless,
he was clear from the authorities that the law does not require a
person to have a detailed and specific understanding of the legal
consequences
of the marriage ceremony but that a valid consent involved either a general
understanding of marriage and its consequences,
or an understanding of the
specific consequences of the marriage they were entering into for the person
whose consent was in issue
2. 5. 2. 1. Challenging capacity to marry and the validity of a marriage
in Australia
As already suggested, following Munby J’s suggestion in
City Council v E
, it may be possible to obtain an injunction in an
Australian Supreme Court to restrain the marriage of someone who lacks the
More often the way the
matter has been dealt with has been an application to the Family Court of
Australia for a declaration of
A marriage can be
declared void for a short list of reasons including that the consent of either
of the parties was not a real consent
1. the consent was obtained by duress or fraud,
2. a party was mistaken as to the identity of the other party or as to the
nature of the ceremony performed, or
3. a party was mentally incapable of understanding the nature and effect of
the marriage ceremony.
If it is proved that any one of these grounds is made out, the marriage will
be declared void because of the lack of true consent
on the part of one of the
parties to it. However, that is not an easy matter to achieve as the onus of
proof is on the person seeking
the decree of nullity. In the case in which he
set out his understanding of capacity to marry,
, Chisholm J
dismissed the application for a declaration of nullity because he was not
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
the wife lacked consent to
He did this even though the couple
had first married in 1947 but had divorced in 1993 and, at the time of their
remarriage, both
were in their 80s. The wife was in a nursing home suffering
from dementia and under guardianship. The remarriage ceremony occurred
husband had taken her away from the nursing home during one of his visits to
her. Other family members were unaware of
the remarriage for some time.
Chisholm J acknowledged that there was a problem of identifying precisely
what it was that the person must understand to have the
capacity to marry, a
matter that was dealt with in some detail in a case in the Family Court of
Western Australia.
In that case
the husband was aged 82 and had been suffering from dementia. He married the
woman with whom he had been living in a
de facto relationship for 15 years
although for nine months before the marriage they had been living apart. The
husband had been
in the hospital and the wife continued to live in the home,
visiting him nearly every day. She had been his companion since 1965
behaved in all respects as a wife. (The husband’s first wife died in
1956.) At the time of the marriage the husband
had difficulty recognising his
own daughters, with whom he had had minimal contact in the years previously, but
had no difficulty
in recognising the wife.
McCall J concluded that the husband not only understood that he was getting
married but that he understood the nature and effect of
the marriage ceremony as
it applied to him and the particular person he married. McCall J also noted
The nature of the contract, and the responsibilities attaching to the particular
marriage must vary from couple to couple. In the
circumstances of this marriage
the responsibilities were very different to many others. The parties were,
perforce, to live apart
because of the husband's illness and the inability of
the wife to properly care for him. It was a marriage in which the husband would,
from then onwards, be confined to living in a hospital or nursing home situation
where appropriate nursing care was available to
him. The wife, in the meantime,
would continue to live in what had been their matrimonial home for 15 years.
They had during their
time in Mandurah been regarded as husband and wife and the
wife had apparently been known in the community as Mrs Brown. Marriage,
did not involve living together. Nor did it involve undertaking any new
responsibilities by either, or any change in an
existing and long standing
relationship or situation. As the Reverend Barratt said in this context he
assumed the husband knew what
marriage was. The marriage was regularising a
case, Mullane J of the Family Court expressed the view that while the
Marriage Act 1961
does not require parties to a marriage to have a
detailed and specific understanding of the legal consequences of marriage, they
must have more than a general understanding of what marriage involves, they must
have the capacity to understand the effect of the
marriage that they are
entering into.
That case is a good example of a late remarriage involving a woman who had
lost the capacity to give a valid consent to marry. Mrs
B was an 82 year old
widow with one married son and Mr S was 66 when they participated in a marriage
ceremony in September 2004.
. Mr S began boarding at Mrs B’s premises when
her first husband was still alive and had been engaged for some years to assist
with jobs around the house for minimal rent. Although he claimed that he and Mrs
B began a relationship while her husband was alive
and in a nursing home, the
son stated that his mother did not mention any sort of relationship with the
boarder and rather complained
was lazy, gambled his money, didn’t help, was not paying his way, would
make anyone a good husband and that she would never marry anyone like him.
From 2002 subtle changes had been noticed in Mrs B’s demeanour. Her son
and daughter-in-law noted that she was forgetful, had
begun to neglect her
appearance and housework and had become suspicious of her family, accusing them
of stealing her jewellery and
crockery. In mid 2004 a referral was made to the
local Aged Care Assessment Team who recorded neglect of personal hygiene, a
mini-mental
scale examination (MMSE) score of 11/30, poor planning on clock
drawing test and an inappropriate, fatuous affect.
Soon after her house was put on the market and then withdrawn. Thereafter
by a change in her
telephone number and Mrs B being sequestered at home behind locked gates. The
son made an application to the
Guardianship Tribunal for guardianship and
financial management orders. The day before the hearing, in December 2004, the
out that his mother had married the boarder.
At the Guardianship Tribunal hearing Mrs B denied having remarried and when
the boarder was referred to as her husband she loudly
objected to this, saying
she was not married to him. Because there had been several failed attempts to
have her assessed the Tribunal
adjourned the hearing to allow full
neuropsychological and psychiatric assessments to be made. The Tribunal made an
interim financial
management order with the Protective Commissioner as interim
manager. She was subsequently assessed and found to have a moderate
cognitive impairment probably due to vascular dementia and alcohol abuse. At the
next hearing Tribunal appointed the Public
Guardian as Mrs B’s guardian.
The son then applied to the Family Law Court to have the marriage declared a
nullity. A psychiatrist who conducted a court-ordered
assessment of Mrs B noted
her to be dishevelled in presentation, perseverative, environmentally responsive
(e.g. when showed photos
of the examiner’s children she claimed they were
her own children) and affectively labile i.e. alternately suspicious, happy,
tearful and angry. The boarder often tried to prompt her responses (e.g. he
asked her to
talk about love
). She scored 2/24 on the MMSE. Paranoid
delusions about her son and daughter-in-law were prominent. She stated she had
two husbands
before, whom she loved, and that they both died but she
couldn’t remember their names! She acknowledged the boarder as her
husband but denied any intimate relationship between the two of them. In
response to the question, “what happens when people
marry?” she was
able to reply: “they live together, help each other, stay together”
and that a husband was closer
than a friend.
Mullane J found that Mr S had married Mrs B for financial advantage and that
was his priority. He was not motivated to act to promote
her physical or
emotional health, her personal hygiene, her relationships with her family or her
financial security
Mullane J issued a decree of nullity. He accepted
that Mrs B may have had a good understanding of what marriage was, but he found
that she was mentally incapable of understanding the effect of the marriage
ceremony and of considering the effect of the marriage
2. 5. 3. The standard and onus of proof when
challenging capacity to marry or the validity of a marriage
It is not easy to displace the inference that when the marriage was
celebrated the parties understood the nature of the ceremony and
the effect of
the marriage on them and gave their valid consent. The evidence to displace
that inference needs to be strong.
The onus of proving the lack of capacity to consent to the marriage is on the
party disputing its validity.
However, if there is proof of insanity generally then the burden shifts to
the party asserting the validity of the marriage.
2. 5. 4. The assessment of the capacity to marry
As stated earlier, the standard for assessing capacity to marry is based on
an assessment of the person’s understanding of the
nature and effect of
the marriage ceremony. In making such assessments the health care professional
should assess the person’s
overall mental status and cognitive function
with a specific emphasis on the specific cognitive functions of judgement and
In particular, the expert should ascertain whether a mental disorder
has influenced the person’s judgment of or affections
towards the proposed
spouse and the person’s understanding of the proposed marriage to the
proposed spouse, and the responsibilities,
duties and effect of marriage to that
specific person.
2. 6. Capacity to divorce
In a 1972 case the President of the Probate Division of the High Court of
Justice in England, Sir George Baker, stated that the test
for a person to give
a valid consent to the dissolution of their marriage was “exactly the same
as the test for the validity
of the contract of marriage” and that,
although the husband had a mental illness, he had given a valid consent to the
dissolution
of his marriage as he had understood the nature of his consent and
appreciated its effect.
However, Baker P
stated that a guardian ad litem could not give such a consent on behalf of an
incapable person.
In an earlier case
Ungoed-Thomas J, sitting in the Court of Protection, took the view that the
Court could take a role in the matter.
Early in the life of the Probate Division, in 1880, the then President of the
Division, Sir James Hannen, specifically considered
the matter and held that the
court could empower the then equivalent of an administrator to commence
proceedings for divorce on behalf
of the person whose estate they were
His decision was upheld by the
full court of the Division
2. 6. 1. Capacity of substitute decision-makers
to initiate or continue divorce proceedings on behalf of an incapable
2. 6. 1. 1.
New South Wales
In New South Wales at least the approaches of Hannen P and Ungoed-Thomas J
have been followed. The Supreme Court in its protective
an administrator to commence or defend matrimonial causes proceedings on behalf
of the person whose estate
they are managing with the Court having a supervisory
role. When dealing with the issue of whether an administrator could, on behalf
of the person whose estate they are managing, commence or defend proceedings
relating to the dissolution of the person’s marriage
or proceedings to
have their marriage declared void, Powell J of the New South Wales Supreme
Court considered it well established
that, while such litigation when being
managed by an administrator or incapable person (for whom an administrator could
be appointed)
was governed by the rules and practice of the Family Court of
Australia, the Supreme Court could make orders and give directions
authorities for the conduct of the litigation in the name, or on behalf, of the
person whose estate was being managed.
The Supreme Court has a discretion whether or not to give such give
directions or authorities. When deciding whether or not to exercise
discretion, the Court will consider whether the proposed proceedings will be for
the benefit of the person whose estate was being
managed. The Court will not
limit itself to merely material considerations or to considerations relating
only of the person whose
estate was being managed, but will consider the
interests of members of their family.
Powell J indicated that the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction applied not
only to those whose estates were being managed but also
to incapable persons.
Powell J indicated that the
following matters may be of importance in particular cases:
1. the wishes of the person whose estate was being managed or the incapable
person in relation to the proposed proceedings,
2. the likely effect of the proposed proceedings on their domestic
arrangements,
3. the likely financial consequences if the proposed proceedings were
sanctioned, or not sanctioned.
2. 6. 1. 2.
Because the common law on the question of whether or not administrators may
continue or commence divorce, annulment of marriage, separation,
settlement or similar post marriage proceedings appears to be developing, it is
useful to note approaches being taken in
other jurisdictions. In Canada there
appear to be two lines of authority. One is to follow Hannen P and allow
administrators to
commence proceedings for divorce on behalf of the person whose
estate they were administering, provided that seeking a divorce was
in the best
interests of that person, to continue such proceedings begun by that person or
to defend such proceedings taken against
the person whose estate they were
administering.
The second line
of authority is to allow the administrator continue divorce proceedings
commenced by the person now lacking the capacity
to continue to conduct them,
provided to do so was in the best interests of that person. That line of
authority also allows an administrator
to commence divorce proceedings on behalf
of the person whose estate they were managing but only if they continue to have
the capacity
divorce which is seen as requiring a lower level understanding and
thus capacity than giving instructions in relation to the divorce
proceedings
In the 1997 case setting out the second line of authority, Benotto J of the
Ontario Court of Justice noted the opinion of Dr William
Molloy, one of the
leading medical researchers in the field of decision-making capacity, that
different aspects of daily living and
decision-making are now viewed separately
and that the ability to manage finances, consent to treatment, stand trial,
manage personal
care, make personal care or health decisions, all require
separate decision-making capabilities and assessments. Benotto J then went
identify three levels of capacity relevant to divorce namely, capacity to
separate, capacity to divorce and capacity to instruct
counsel in connection
with the divorce.
Benotto J considered separation as the simplest act, requiring the lowest
level of understanding which was the person knowing with
whom they did or did
not want to live. Next was divorce, which while still simple, required “a
bit more understanding”.
It required the desire to remain separate from
and to be no longer married to one's spouse. While it involved the undoing of
marriage contract, something which has been described as the essence of
simplicity, not requiring a high degree of intelligence to
comprehend, it
followed that if marriage was simple, divorce must be equally
In relation to the capacity to instruct a lawyer, Benotto J noted that there
was a distinction between the decisions a person makes
regarding personal
matters such as where or with whom to live and decisions regarding financial
matters. Financial matters require
a higher level of understanding. This put the
capacity to instruct a lawyer significantly higher on the competency hierarchy
capacity in relation to the other two matters because it involved the
ability to understand financial and legal
2. 6. 1. 3.
United States of America
The American Courts have recognized that the mental capacity required for
divorce is the same as required for entering into marriage.
It is also the
established position that a mentally incompetent persons cannot sue for
dissolution of marriage, either on their own
behalf or by a guardian or next
friend. The basis for the rule is said to be that the decision to seek
dissolution of one’s
marriage is so strictly personal that the marriage
should not be dissolved except with the personal consent of the party seeking
divorce. That consent cannot be given when the party is mentally
incompetent.
However, the
established position is not seen as applying in every case. In a 1985 case the
Supreme Court of Washington State commented:
The collected cases often rely upon the truism that a decision to dissolve a
marriage is so personal that a guardian should not be
empowered to make such a
choice for the incompetent. As a general proposition that rationale is valid.
However, in these days of
termination of life support, tax consequences of
virtually all economic decisions, no-fault dissolutions and the other vagaries
a vastly changing society, we think an absolute rule denying authority is not
justified nor in the public
In a 1993 decision,
In re Ruvalcuba
, the Court of Appeals of Arizona
gave considerations more protective of the incapable adult as its reasons for
moving away from the
absolute rule. The Court said:
To deny incapacitated spouses the
means to withdraw from abusive, or merely extinguished marriages, by leaving
them captive to the
representations of their competent spouses is, at best, to
deprive them of their dignity and, at worst, to potentially condemn them
exploitation, physical injury and, possibly even death at the hands of the
competent spouse. This is a result that a system of
justice should not and
The Court found nothing in the legislation expressly prohibiting a guardian
ad litem from filing and pursuing an action for dissolution
of marriage on
behalf of an incompetent adult. It also found that such an action may be brought
by the guardian (meaning administrator
in the Australian context) as it was
within an administrator’s general powers to act on behalf of the person
whose estate they
were administering.
In a 2004 case a Court of Appeal in California held that a conservator (an
administrator) with full management and control of an incapable
estate could be authorized to act to the extent necessary to protect the
property interests of the person whose estate
they were administering and could
do this by seeking an order for legal separation. They would be under a duty to
initiate such proceedings
where it was necessary to do so to protect the
incapable person’s interests. That outcome could be achieved without
to seek a divorce.
Peisah C. Brodaty H, Quadrio
C. (2006) Family conflict in dementia: prodigal sons & black sheep Int J Ger
Psychiatry (2006) 21(5):485-492
This may have changed as a
result of the restatement of the standard of proof required to establish
testamentary undue influence in
Nichoson v Knaggs
[2009] VSC 64.
Shulman, K., Cohen, CA., Kirsh
F.C., Hull, I.M., Champine, P.R. Assessment of testamentary capacity and
vulnerability to undue influence
American Journal of Psychiatry 2007; 164(5):
Op cit, Peisah C. Brodaty H,
Quadrio C. (2006) Family conflict in dementia: prodigal sons & black sheep
Int J Ger Psychiatry
(2006) 21(5):485-492
Knight B. 1986.
Psychotherapy with older adults
. Sage: California p155
Neidhardt ER, Allen JA. 1993.
Family Therapy with the elderly. Sage: California. p59
Strawbridge WJ, Wallhagen MI.
1991. Impact of family conflict on adult child caregivers.
Gerontologist
31: 770-777.
Kazui, H., Hashimoto, M.,
Hirono, N., et al (2000) A study of remote memory impairment in Alzheimer's
disease by using the family
Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord
Fromholt P, Larsen SFJ. 1991.
Autobiographical memory in normal aging and primary degenerative dementia
(dementia of Alzheimer type).
Masterman, D.L., and
Cummings, J.L. (1997) Frontal-subcortical circuits: the anatomic basis of
executive, social and motivated behaviors
J Psychopharmacol,
11, 107-14.
Kertesz, A., and Clydesdale,
S. (1994) Neuropsychological deficits in vascular dementia vs Alzheimer’s
Arch Neurology,
51, 1226-1231.
Ready, R.E., Ott, B.R.,
Grace, J., et al. (2003) Apathy and executive dysfunction in mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer disease.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry,
11, 222-228
op cit, Peisah C. et al,
Pyke K.D. Bengston V.L. Care
more or less: individualistic and collectivist systems of family elder care.
Journal of Marriage and the Family
1996; 58, 379-392.
Peisah et al,, op cit
Shulman et al., op cit.,
Cockerill, J, Collier B.
Maxwell K. (2005) Legal requirements and current practices In Mental Capacity
Ed., Collier B., Coyne C,
Sullivan K The Federation Press : Sydney.p 52
Intellectual Disability
Rights Service,
Questions of Rights – A guide to the law and rights of
people with an intellectual disability
, Chippendale, Redfern Legal Centre
Publishing, 1992, p. 40.
British Medical Association
and The Law Society,
Assessment of Mental Capacity – Guidance for
doctors and lawyers
, London, BMJ Books, 2
. Ed. 2004, p.
Kamel H.K. Hajjar
R.R.Sexuality in the nursing home,
Part 2:managing
abnormal behavior-legal and
ethical issues.
Journal of American Medical Director’s Association
2004; 5(S2):S48-S52.
Ehrenfeld M, Bronner G.,
Tabak, N., Alpert R., Bergman R. Sexuality among institutionalized elderly
patients with dementia
Nursing Ethics
(1999) 6(2): 144-149.
Berger, J.T. Sexuality and
intimacy in the nursing home: a romantic couple of mixed cognitive capacities
Journal of Clinical Ethics
(2000); 11(4): 309-313.
Sabat, SR. Capacity for
decision-making in Alzheimer's disease: selfhood, positioning and semiotic
Aust N Z J Psychiatry
. (2005) 39(11-12):1030-5.
[1997] 2 FLR 426; British
Medical Association and The Law Society, op. cit. p. 99.
Re MB (Medical
[1997] 2 FLR 426, 437.
British Medical Association
and The Law Society, op. cit. p. 100
Op cit., Berger et al ,
British Medical Association
and The Law Society, op. cit. p. 100
Op cit Kamel H.K. Hajjar
Op cit., Ehrenfeld et al.,
Op cit., Berger et al.,
Davis J.K. (2002) The
concept of precedent autonomy.
16: 114-133
Op cit., Berger et al,
Sheffield City Council v
[2004] EWHC 2808 (Fam)
Ibid. [83]-[84].
Ibid. [131].
Ibid. [144]-[145].
Ibid. [100].
Ibid. [[96] and [108].
Sheffield City Council v
[2004] EWHC 2808 (Fam).
[1954] P 112
recent Australian acceptances of the
Fam C 1006 and
Berrand v Coxall
[1999] QSC 352
Durham v Durham
[1885] UKLawRpPro 18
(1885) 10 PD 80
[2005] Fam C
1006 [21], [24] and [29].
[2004] EWHC 2808 (Fam)
Family Law Act 1975
Marriage Act 1961
[2005] Fam C 1006.
Marriage of Brown; re
[1982] FamCA 21
(1982) 8 Fam LR 1.
S. 23B(1)(d0(iii)
Babich & Sokur and Anor
[2007] FamCA 236
[249] and [255].
Ibid. [256].
Cooper v Crane
[1891] UKLawRpPro 50
(1891), P 369
Mason v Mason
In the Estate of Park deceased, Park v Park
[1954] P 112
cited as authority.
Mason v Mason
, 306. See also
Masterman-Lister v Brutton & Co
[2002] EXCA Civ
In re W (EEM)
Baker v Baker
[1880] UKLawRpPro 14
Baker v Baker
[1880] UKLawRpPro 34
Re An Incapable Person
[1983] 2 NSWLR 590
Ibid. 595. For an example
from Western Australia see,
[2008] WASAT 13.
Re Schwartz
Beadle v Beadle
(1947) 7 DLR (4
Calvert v Calvert
(1997) 32 OR (3d) 281
O (MK) v C (ME
2005 BCSC 1051.
Calvert v Calvert
(1997) 32 OR (3d) 281
Ibid. [53]-[54].
Ibid. [55]-[56].
In the Marriage of
482 NE 2d 1005
(1985). See also
In the Marriage of Burgess
707 NE 2d 125
(1998), but note the views of Cousins J on the need to change the
law, 129-130.
In re the Marriage of
702 P 2d 465
, 467 (1985).
850 P 2d 674
Michael J v Superior
15 Cal Rptr 3d 196, 200 (2004). See also
Michael J v Superior
2007 WL 1207261.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
PDF format (118 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter