URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLawRw/2005/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ellis-Jones, Ian --- "Book Review: Michael Head and Scott Mann, LAW IN PERSPECTIVE: ETHICS, SOCIETY AND CRITICAL THINKING" [2005] UTSLawRw 10; (2005) 7 University of Technology Sydney Law Review 208
Book Review: Michael Head and Scott Mann, LAW IN PERSPECTIVE: ETHICS, SOCIETY AND CRITICAL THINKING, UNSW Press, Sydney, 2005
Reviewed by Ian Ellis-Jones
In the introduction to this book the authors state that the principal aim
of the book, which has been designed “first and foremost,
introductory textbook”,
“encourage critical, responsible and creative thinking about law as a
system of ideas and as a social
institution”.
is divided into three main sections. The first section, “Logic, Science
and Law”, seeks to explore the interrelationships
between those three
disciplines. The second, “Ethics, Social Theory and Law”, discusses
what the authors regard as the
“principal theoretical approaches to the
nature and social role of law”. The third, “Law and Contemporary
Problems”, seeks to evaluate the role played by the law in the
alleviation or exacerbation of major social conflicts.
I found the first
two sections of the books the most interesting, perhaps because I share with the
authors a deep concern that learning
to think in the thought forms of a lawyer
requires, among other things, the ability to think logically and in an ethically
fashion. Sadly, all too many law courses these days neglect these
two areas. Little, if any, time is spent on logic and legal reasoning
principled sense, and our approach to ethics tends to focus almost entirely on
the legal rules made by or on behalf of the
professional bogies regulating the
actual conduct of the legal profession, rather than exposing law students to the
range of ethical
theories that have been expounded over the years.
The authors make it clear
see substantial dangers in both legal positivism (with its “strongly
disciplinary and black-letter approach”)
and the epistemological anarchy
of “faddish postmodern deconstructions lacking in all substantive
content”. What is required,
according to the authors, is for students to
master “basic tools of critical thinking and analysis at the earliest
stage of their
agree more and, if I had my way, I would make the study of logic and basic
philosophy an essential part of any
law degree as it once was in some places.
Being very much of an Andersonian
I do not, however, accept
the authors’ working definition of logic as “the science that
evaluates arguments”.
is not so much a body of rules, principles and methods for evaluating and
constructing arguments as a description of how things
are related to each other.
In other words, logic is about
, not thought. Logical thinking
means relating (that is, putting together or distinguishing) different pieces of
information about
facts or alleged facts. In that sense, logic is a description
of reality. Logic helps us to find facts and see the connections
between one
set of facts and another. It teaches us that a fact can be explained
as following logically from other facts occurring on the same level
of observability. Even opinions and ideas can be said to be
true or false when
attention is directed,
to the opinion or idea itself, but to the
thing that the opinion or idea or value is
The test of a true
opinion or idea is to see whether or not something
The authors rightly assert
there is no special kind of logic called “legal logic”. They also
assert, somewhat self servingly, that while logic
has “undergone
continuous development and evolution for more than 2,000 years” few
contemporary Australian law texts
have kept abreast with those developments.
True, there are many schools of logic, but I remain unconvinced that there is
one way in which we can speak meaningfully about the universe other
than by means of the Aristotelian propositional form. (Call
me old fashioned
but I am firmly of the opinion that good old fashioned Aristotelian logic has
never been bettered.) Although the
authors are to be commended for providing an
informative, intelligible and workable overview of the basic rules of applied
that are relevant to legal thinking, they don’t make it all that
clear what school or schools of logic they’re endorsing,
although what
they generally do expound
the most part, not inconsistent with traditional Aristotelian logic and should
prove very useful both to law students and
legal practitioners.
The part of the book dealing with
is extremely good in its
exposition of the inherent weaknesses of both moral relativism and the
“command” theory of ethics.
As regards the former, the authors make
the valid point that just “because there are differences between the
values of different
cultural groups does not mean that there are no correct
Good stuff,
but, regrettably, the authors, whilst admirably drawing attention to some of the
inanities of the “subjectivist”
view of ethics, fail to give
meaningful consideration to the “objectivist” view of ethics which
asserts that there
indeed objective moral values that do not depend
upon the command theory. For example, that whatever promotes or enhances human
well being, is
intrinsically
good, can be considered to be an objective
moral value. Of course, it is, as Anderson used to point out, a
“relativist”
mistake (that is, purporting to define something by
reference to its relations to other things) to enquire as to the conditions for
goodness or fairness just as it is a mistake to enquire as to the conditions for
redness, for we can speak meaningfully only in terms
of what are the conditions
for something being fair, being good, being beautiful, being red, and so forth.
However, that is not
to be taken to be a question about the conditions of
fairness, goodness, beauty or redness itself. For example, the features of
fair hearing in law—that is, those things that must be done in order for
there to be fairness—are not what constitute
a thing’s fairness.
They simply permit appreciation or recognition of its fairness.
Also, there are, according to the “objectivist” view of ethics,
certain self evident ethical truths such as “unnecessary
suffering is
wrong”, “equals are to be treated equally”, and so forth and I
would have liked the authors to deal
with that matter. Their attack on the
assertion in the US Declaration of Independence that there are certain
“self-evident
truths” as being simply the result of “the
struggle of the aspiring American capitalist class against British colonial
domination”
view, far too dismissive and cynical and sidesteps the real issue.
Be that as it may, the authors rightly and robustly expose the fundamental flaws
of the command theory, more than adequately pointing
out that what is
“right” and “wrong” do not, and cannot, depend upon
external authority or the commands or
existence of God. As philosopher A.K.
Stout and many others have pointed out, religion is
a logical basis
for morality. Why? Because religion appeals to authority (God, Bible, Pope, and
so forth), and the argument from
authority is no argument at all and no
definition of good, nor does it constitute a theory of ethics. Also, as David
Hume pointed
out, one can’t logically derive a value judgment or normative
proposition (‘we ought to do X’) from a factual statement
(“God commands X”, “X is right”).
The book contains a very good description of such matters as natural law and
legal positivism, with references to such notables as
Locke, Austin and H.L.A.
Hart. There is also an excellent treatment of “distributive
Regrettably,
the book tends to become a bit polemic and doctrinaire when dealing with such
matters as Marxist theory (e.g. “capitalist
production is driven by
pursuit of profit”),
anti-terrorism measures (“a grave threat to basic democratic
measures”),
and the plight
of asylum seekers (‘In most cases they have broken no laws, and have not
been convicted of any
As regards the
first mentioned matter, the authors obviously accept the classical theory of the
firm that firms are solely motivated
by the desire for profit maximisation, a
view which seems self evidently true but which is otherwise quite simplistic in
many respects.
Although I personally have few, if any, problems with the views
expressed by the authors in this third section of their book, the
polemic tone
of much of this third section of the book will alienate many more conservative
Although I have a few qualms concerning the content of the book, it is
nevertheless an excellent and wide-ranging introduction to
the law and critical
legal thinking and is suitable as a legal text commencing with first year
students. I will be recommending
it to my students.
C.f. John Anderson
(1893–1962), Challis Professor of Philosophy, University of Sydney, from
1927 to 1958. Anderson’s
central thesis is that there is only one order
or level of reality, that of ordinary things in time and space, and that a
logic applies to all
p. 11. The authors
cite with approval what Patrick Hurley, in his
Concise Introduction to Logic,
5th ed (Wadsworth, Belmont CA, 1994), wrote (on p.1), viz., that the aim of
logic is to “develop a system of methods and principles
that we may use as
criteria for evaluating the arguments of others and as guides in constructing
arguments of our own”.
See, especially, the
material on “deduction” and “induction” on pp.
See, especially,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter