URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/HRD/2007/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:01:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Liebenberg, Sandra --- "Protecting Economic, Social and Cultural Rights under Bill of Rights: The South African Experience" [2007] HRightsDef 21; (2007) 16(3) Human Rights Defender 2
Protecting Economic, Social & Cultural Rights under Bills of Rights: THE SOUTH AFRICAN EXPERIENCE
The debates regarding the inclusion of socio-economic rights in the
Constitution
Overview of the relevant provisions
The Constitutional Court’s jurisprudence on socio-economic rights: Reasonableness Review
The overlap between socio-economic rights and equality rights
Reviewing violations of negative duties
Impact on the common law
Remedial jurisprudence
Evaluating the transformative potential of the jurisprudence
Concluding reflections
Protecting Economic, Social & Cultural Rights
Bills of Rights: THE SOUTH AFRICAN EXPERIENCE
Sandra Liebenberg
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa, 1996
Constitution
’) has been widely described both in academic
literature and in judgments of the courts as a ‘transformative’
Constitution
Unlike many classic liberal constitutions, its
primary concern is not to restrain State power, but to facilitate a fundamental
change in the legacy of injustice produced by over three centuries of colonial
and apartheid rule.
Notwithstanding, deep racial, gender and
class divisions persist in South African society, in spite of over a decade of
governance. Large parts of our population still experience
unemployment, a lack of access to decent services and productive assets
land. Poverty and social marginality has been intensified by the HIV/AIDS
epidemic ravaging the country. Moreover, South
Africa remains one of the
countries with the highest levels of income inequality in the world.
The South African
Constitution
is internationally renowned for its inclusion
of a holistic set of socio-economic rights. These rights are regarded as
integral to
advancing the transformative goals of the
Constitution
. This article
assesses the extent to which the enforcement of socio-economic rights by the
courts is contributing to the realisation
of the transformative vision of the
Constitution
The debates regarding the inclusion of
socio-economic rights in the Constitution
During the drafting of South Africa’s Constitution there were extensive
debates regarding the inclusion of socio-economic rights.
Those opposed to their
inclusion argued that the judicial enforcement of these rights would result in a
breach of the separation
of powers doctrine by forcing judicial usurpation of
government powers over budgetary matters and social policy. It was argued that
the judiciary has neither the institutional legitimacy nor the requisite
training and skills necessary to make these determinations.
There was also a critique emanating from the tradition of leftist legal
scholarship arguing that, given the background and class of
the judiciary, they
could not be entrusted with decisions which have implications for socio-economic
redistribution. The effect of
judicial intervention in these areas would be to
erode the influence of civil society and impoverish participatory democracy. It
was accordingly argued that socio-economic rights should be entrenched in the
Bill of Rights in the form of judicially unenforceable
Directive Principles of
State Policy, following the Indian and Irish models.
In the end all political parties and a large constituency of civil
supported the inclusion, in the Bill of Rights, of a full
range of socio-economic rights as fully justiciable. Three arguments were
particularly persuasive in this context.
First, it was argued that the Bill of Rights – as the supreme law
reflecting the highest normative commitments of the nation
– should make
explicit provision for the redress of the systemic socio-economic discrimination
and deprivation experienced
by the black population in South Africa under
colonial and apartheid rule.
Second, it was argued that without access to a basic level of socio-economic
services and resources, there could be no effective enjoyment
of many of the
civil and political rights enshrined in the
Constitution
. In the words of former
President Nelson Mandela:
A simple vote, without food, shelter and health care is to use first generation
rights as a smokescreen to obscure the deep underlying
forces which dehumanise
people. It is to create an appearance of equality and justice, while by
implication socioeconomic inequality
is entrenched. We do not want freedom
without bread, nor do we want bread without freedom. We must provide for all the
fundamental
rights and freedoms associated with a democratic society.
Third, socio-economic rights were regarded as integral to
the building of a transformed society based on social justice and a more
equitable distribution of resources.
Re Certification of the
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa,
the Constitutional Court overruled objections to the
inclusion of socio-economic rights as justiciable rights in the Bill of Rights.
It pointed out that many civil and political rights such as the right to vote,
the right to a fair trial and equality rights also
have budgetary implications.
Overview of the relevant provisions
The core provisions on socio-economic rights are contained in
sections 26
(2)(e). I will focus particularly on
sections 26
because these are the provisions in respect of which the Court has developed the
foundations of its socio-economic rights jurisprudence.
Sections 26(1)
Constitution
entrench the right of everyone to have access to: adequate
housing; health care services, including reproductive health care; sufficient
food and water; and social security, including, if they are unable to support
themselves and their dependants, appropriate social
assistance. The State is
required, under
sections 26(2)
(2) to ‘take reasonable legislative
and other measures, within its available resources, to achieve the progressive
realisation
of each of these rights’.
Section 26(3)
is a guarantee against
arbitrary evictions and provides that no-one may be evicted from their home or
have their home demolished
without a court order made ‘after considering
all the relevant circumstances’.
Section 27(3)
provides that no one
‘may be refused emergency medical treatment’.
The Constitutional Court’s jurisprudence on
socio-economic rights: Reasonableness Review
The Court has developed a distinctive approach to reviewing claims which seek
to enforce the positive duties imposed by socio-economic
rights, rejecting an
interpretation of the provisions in
that would entitle
individuals to the direct provision of essential, basic level of goods and
services from the State (a so-called
‘minimum core obligation’
derived from the General Comments of the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
The Court argued that it lacked the
necessary information to specify the content
Damon Kowarsky,
Poplac and Podujevo
, 2005, etching with
aquatint, 32.5 x 46cm, Courtesy the artist and Dickerson Gallery, Sydney.
of minimum core obligations given the diversity of needs of different
and that the notion was inconsistent with the institutional
roles and competencies of the judiciary.
Instead, in the landmark decisions of
Government of the RSA and Others v
Grootboom and Others
Minister of Health and Others v
Treatment Action Campaign and Others
it adopted a model of
‘reasonableness review’ in which the key question is whether the
measures the State has taken
towards the progressive realisation of the relevant
rights are reasonable.
In the first major test case on socio-economic rights decided by the
Constitutional Court,
Soobramoney v Minister of Health,
KwaZulu-Natal
the Court established criteria for assessing the
reasonableness of a government program impacting on socio-economic rights,
The programme must be comprehensive, coherent,
coordinated;
Appropriate financial and human resources must be
It must be balanced and flexible and make
appropriate provision for short, medium and long-term
It must be reasonably conceived and implemented;
It must be transparent, and its contents must be made know effectively
known to the public.
In addition, the Court held in
that the concept of
reasonable measures requires consideration of the
degree and extent of the denial of the right they endeavour to realise. Those
whose needs are most urgent and whose ability to enjoy
all rights is therefore
most in peril, must not be ignored by the measures aimed at achieving
realisation of the right. It may not
be sufficient to meet the test of
reasonableness to show that the measures are capable of achieving a statistical
advance in the
realisation of the right. Furthermore, the
Constitution
that everyone be treated with care and concern. If the measures, though
statistically successful, fail to respond to the
needs of those most desperate,
they may not pass the test.
This requirement of the
reasonableness test is justified particularly in terms of the value of human
The assessment of the reasonableness of government programmes is influenced
by two further factors. The internal limitations of
sections 26(2)
require that the rights may be ‘progressively realised’
and that the availability of resources is ‘an important factor in
determining what is reasonable’.
While both concepts provide
the State with a potential justification for failing to ensure access to
socioeconomic rights, they
can also support a finding of unreasonable acts or
omissions by the State.
the Court found that the Government’s housing
program, though in other respects rational and comprehensive, was inconsistent
Constitution
in that it failed ‘to provide relief
for people who have no access to land, no roof over their heads, and who are
intolerable conditions or crisis situations’.
Court did not specify what form this relief should take, but simply made a
declaratory order to the effect that the State’s
housing program should
include ‘reasonable measures’ to provide relief for this group of
housing beneficiaries.
case concerned a challenge to the Government’s
restrictive policy on providing anti-retroviral therapy for the purpose of
the rate of mother-to-child transmission of HIV throughout the public
health sector. The Ministry of Health had implemented a pilot
program in which
it provided Nevirapine, an anti-retroviral drug with proven efficacy in the
reduction of the mother-to-child transmission
of HIV during childbirth, at two
clinics in each province. These pilot sites catered for only for 10 percent of
all births in the
public health sector. Despite being pressed repeatedly to do
so by the Treatment Action Campaign, the Ministry of Health refused
to make any
commitment as to whether and when the program would be rolled out throughout the
public health sector. The Government
defended its restrictive policy on
mother-to-child transmission by raising a range of concerns ranging from the
efficacy and safety
of Nevirapine to a lack resources and capacity to roll-out a
comprehensive programme to prevent motherto-child transmission of HIV
the public health sector.
The Court closely scrutinised and ultimately rejected all of these
justifications. It held that it was an unreasonable failure by
the Government
not to take measures without delay to permit and facilitate the use of
Nevirapine throughout public health care facilities
in South Africa for the
purpose of preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV. These omissions
violated the right of access to
health care services entrenched in
section 27.
The Court made a range of mandatory orders against the State, requiring it to
remove the restrictions which prevent Nevirapine from
being made available for
the purpose of reducing the risk of mother-tochild transmission of HIV at public
hospitals and clinics and
to facilitate and expedite the use of Nevirapine at
hospitals and clinics throughout the public health sector.
The overlap between socio-economic rights and
equality rights
The Court has applied a particularly rigorous standard of scrutiny
(approaching a proportionality analysis) in cases where there is
overlap between socio-economic rights and the right to equality. This is
illustrated by the case of
Khosa & Mahlauli v Min of Social
Development
which involved a challenge to the exclusion of
permanent residents from social assistance legislation. This legislation made
for the payment of means-tested, non-contributory social grants to
defined categories of vulnerable groups such as children, the
elderly and people
living with disabilities. However, eligibility for these grants was confined to
South African citizens.
The Court took a hard look at the State’s resource and policy
justifications for excluding permanent residents from social grants
them wanting. The main factors underlying the more rigorous review standard were
the fact that the Government had already
enacted social legislation which
excluded a relatively small group. Also significant was the overlap between the
right to social security and the
prohibition on unfair
discrimination. On this basis the Court found that the exclusion of permanent
residents was both an unreasonable
denial of the right of everyone to have
access to social assistance in
section 27(1)(c)
Constitution
constituted ‘unfair’ discrimination against permanent residents as a
particular class of non-citizens.
Reviewing violations of negative
The case of
Jaftha v Schoeman and Others; Van Rooyen v Stoltz and
involved a challenge to the constitutionality of
provisions of the Magistrates’ Court Act 32 of 1944
(‘Magistrate’s
Court Act’) that permitted the sale in
execution of people’s homes in order to satisfy (sometimes trifling) debts
judicial oversight. The Constitutional Court characterised the
provisions of the Magistrate’s Court Act as authorising a negative
violation of section 26(1) in that it permitted ‘a person to be deprived
of existing access to adequate housing’. This
negative duty is not subject
to the qualifications in subsection (2) relating to resource constraints and
progressive realisation.
According to the Court, the deprivation of existing
access to housing (and by implication, other socio-economic rights), constitutes
a limitation of citizens’ rights which fails to be justified in terms of
the stringent requirements of the general limitations
clause (section 36). The
general limitations clause in the Bill of Rights requires that rights can only
be limited in terms of a
law of general application ‘to the extent that
the limitation is reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society
based on human dignity, equality and freedom’.
The Court found no justification for the overbroad provisions of the
Magistrate’s Court Act and read into it provisions requiring
oversight of executions against the immovable property of debtors taking into
consideration ‘all relevant circumstances’.
Impact on the common law
The courts are under a general duty to develop the common law and customary
law to ‘promote the spirit, purport and objects’
of the Bill of
Socio-economic rights have the potential to promote changes
in many areas of the common law which regulate people’s access
socio-economic resources such as the rules of property and contract law. In
South Africa these developments have occurred primarily
in the context of cases
involving the interpretation of legislation enacted to give effect to the
guarantee in section 26(3) against
evictions made without a court order in which
all relevant circumstances are considered. Although the Court has not gone so
to recognise an unqualified right to alternative accommodation in
eviction cases, it has, in cases such as
Port-Elizabeth Municipality v
Various Occupiers
, requiredserious consideration of the impact
of the eviction and the availability of feasible alternatives to avoid
The jurisprudence of the courts on housing rights and the protection of
people against procedurally and substantively unfair evictions
has helped to
promote a more balanced notion of property rights which takes into the interest
of poor people in the protection of
their homes and in avoiding
Remedial jurisprudence
have been prepared to apply a wide range of remedies
in socio-economic rights cases, ranging from declaratory orders,
mandatory orders,
‘reading-in’ orders,
and structural interdicts. The latter orders typically
require the State to put in place a plan or program that will give effect
relevant right and to take concrete measures in terms of that plan. The
applicants and their attorneys are also given an opportunity
to comment on the
plan and implementation thereof. Courts retain supervision over the case by
assessing the adequacy of the plan
and the steps taken to implement it.
Evaluating the transformative potential of the
jurisprudence
A major focus of academic criticism in South Africa has been that
reasonableness reviews do not force the courts to engage sufficiently
with the content and scope of socio-economic rights, meaning it can easily
become a highly deferential standard of review.
On the other hand,
reasonableness review has the advantage of being a flexible, context-sensitive
model of review for socio-economic
claims. Government’s justifications are subjected to stringent scrutiny
by the courts and it is required to present convincing
reasons why particularly
vulnerable sectors of society are excluded from accessing basic socio-economic
services and resources.
However, in order to ensure that the courts’ socio-economic rights
jurisprudence remains on a transformative trajectory, it
is crucial that the
courts ensure that reasonableness review receives a sufficiently substantive
interpretation. This in turn requires
assessing the reasonableness of the
State’s acts or omissions in the light of the purposes and values which
socio-economic
rights are intended to promote. All three of the foundational
constitutional values of human dignity, equality and freedom can contribute
significantly to the substantive content of reasonableness review. Assessing the
impact of socio-economic deprivations on these constitutional
values would
require the courts to undertake a rigorous analysis of the position of the
claimant in society, the nature and historical
causes of the deprivation
experienced and its impact on her and others in a similar situation.
Concluding reflections
What lessons can be learnt from South Africa’s experiment with
justiciable socio-economic rights?
In the first place, the caution of sceptics that socio-economic rights
adjudication would cast the courts in an inappropriate and
unmanageable role has
proven to be unfounded. The courts have been quite capable of developing a model
of review for adjudicating
socio-economic rights. This model enables the courts
to respect the competencies and roles of the other branches of government whilst
playing a meaningful role in enforcing socio-economic rights.
The second concern was that justiciable socio-economic rights would
undermine participatory democracy and possibly result in the
courts frustrating
important socio-economic reforms. Although we are still at a relatively early
stage in our constitutional journey,
the indications thus far are that
socio-economic rights are making a contribution to deepening democracy and
socio-economic transformation.
There is a burgeoning jurisprudence on these
rights which has made a tangible contribution in many cases to improving the
of life of disadvantaged groups. Cogent examples are the provision of
anti retroviral treatment for people living with HIV/AIDS,
winning of social security benefits for non-citizens and the significant
procedural and substantive protections for people
facing evictions from their
Moreover, as holders of rights that protect their socio-economic welfare,
marginalised groups can require their voices to be heard
in policy-making
processes and the design and implementation of social programs. When democratic
institutions neglect their socio
economic welfare, they can ultimately turn to
the courts for a reasoned consideration of whether the conduct of the State or
parties is consonant with the socio-economic rights in the Bill of
Sandra Liebenberg is H. F. Oppenheimer Professor in Human Rights
Law, Department of Public Law, Stellenbosch University. This is an
edited version of the annual human rights lecture of the Centre for
Human Rights, University of New South Wales delivered by the author
on 4 October 2007. A more comprehensive version of this paper was
presented at the conference, Protecting Human Rights, convened by
Centre for Comparative Constitutional Studies, Melbourne Law
25 September 2007. I wish to express my gratitude to both
institutions
for the opportunities to deliver these addresses.
Karl Klare, ‘Legal culture and transformative
constitutionalism’
South African Journal on Human
; Pius Langa ‘Transformative constitutionalism’
3 Stellenbosch Law Review 351.
See further
S v Makwanyane
1995 (6) BCLR
665 (CC) [262];
Bato Star Fishing (Pty) Ltd v Minister of Environmental
Affairs and Tourism and Others
2004 (7) BCLR 687 (CC) [73][74].
Jeremy Seekings and Nicoli Nattrass, Class, Race and Inequality in South
Africa (2005).
See Dennis Davis ‘The case against the inclusion of socio-economic
demands in a Bill of Rights except as directive principles’
(1992) 8 South
African Journal on Human Rights 475.
See also the discussion of this argument by
Judge Albie Sachs, ‘Concluding comments on the panel discussion’
ESR Review 17 <www.communitylawcentre.org.za/ser/esr_review.php>
at 14 November 2007.
See the Petition to the Constitutional Assembly by the Ad Hoc Campaign for
Social and Economic Rights (19 July 1995) [on file with
the author].
Nelson R Mandela, ‘Address: On the occasion of the ANC’s Bill
of Rights Conference’ in A Bill of Rights for a
Democratic South Africa:
Papers and Report of a Conference Convened by the ANC Constitutional Committee,
May 1991 (Centre for Development
Studies, 1991) 9, 12.
Ex parte Chairperson of the Constitutional Assembly: In re
Certification of the
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa,
(4) SA 744 (CC)
The concept of ‘minimum core obligations’ was initially adopted
by the Committee in its
General Comment 3 The nature of States parties
obligations (art 2(1) of the Covenant),
UN Doc E/1991/23 (1990) [10]. The
concept has since been followed in subsequent general comments.
Government of the RSA and Others v Grootboom and Others
2001 (1) SA
Minister of Health and Others v Treatment Action Campaign and Others
2002 (5) SA 721, [37]-[38].
2001 (1) SA 46 (‘
2002 (5) SA 721(
1997 (12) BCLR 1696 (CC).
2001 (1) SA 46, [39]-[40].
Ibid [40]-[43]
2002 (5) SA 721, [123].
2001 (1) SA 46, [44].
Ibid [83]. See also Sandra Liebenberg, ‘The value of human dignity
in interpreting socio-economic rights’ (2005) 21
South African Journal
2001 (1) SA 46, [46].
Ibid [2(b) of the Order].
2004 (6) BCLR 569 (CC) (‘
2005 (1) BCLR 78 (CC)
Section 39(2)
Constitution
2004 (12) BCLR 1268 (CC) (‘
PE Muncipality
President of the RSA and Another v Modderklip Boerdery (Pty)
2005 (8) BCLR 786 (CC)
City of Johannesburg v Ran
Properties (Pty) Ltd
2007 SCA 25 (RSA) (judgment in Constitutional Court
appeal pending).
Port Elizabeth Municipality v Various Occupiers
2004 (12) BCLR 1268
The courts have, by virtue of s 172(1), wide remedial powers under the
Constitution
2001 (1) SA 46.
2002 (5) SA 721.
2004 (6) BCLR 569 (CC) and
BCLR 78 (CC).
2005 (8) BCLR 786 (CC).
See Mark Heywood, ‘Shaping, making and breaking the law in the
campaign for National HIV/AIDS Treatment Plan’ in Peris
Kristian Stokke (eds),
Democratising Development: The Politics of
Socio-Economic Rights in South Africa
(2005) 181.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (70.3 KB)
PDF format (296 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter