URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/10.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lynch, Tim; Gerbrecht, Rick --- "Commentary: United States-Canadian maritime boundary interface relations in the Asia Pacific region" [2008] MarStudies 10; (2008) 159 Maritime Studies 11
United States-Canadian maritime boundary interface relations in the Asia Pacific region
The Strait of Juan de Fuca and cooperative vessel traffic service
Transport Canada
Canadian Coast Guard
US Coast Guard
Canada Border Services Agency
US-Canadian border law enforcement
RCMP West Coast Marine Services Detachment
Canadian military and law enforcement
Canada Command
The Vancouver 2010 Integrated Security Unit
States-Canadian maritime boundary interface relations in the Asia Pacific
The phrase ‘good fences make good neighbours’ is frequently used
to describe how people should learn to get along and
respect each other’s
differences. Border relationships between the United States of America (US)
(2007 population estimate:
301,621,157) and Canada (2007 population estimate:
33,091,200) are all about respecting each other’s differences.
Prior to 9/11, Americans and Canadians often referred with pride to the 6,440
kilometre (km) border between their two countries as
the world’s largest
undefended border. It was portrayed as a model for all international boundaries.
In the post 9/11 era,
Canada is striving to adapt to a new reality of living so
close to the US rather than surrender to calls by US officials for a North
American perimeter.
Such arrangements are seen as Canada having to give up some of her
sovereignty in such areas as immigration. The US authorities are
investing in
many forms of technology to reduce illegal border crossings from Canada to the
US. A March 2008 report by the Canadian
Broadcast Corporation (CBC) estimated
that Canada has spent 24 billion dollars updating its border security and
defence arrangements
Canadians are having to adjust to the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative,
a US law that requires all travellers, including Canadians
and Americans
returning from Canada, to carry a passport or other appropriate secure
documentation, when travelling to the
Most Canadians live a long way from the coast. In large part, they have
gained a nautical sense of their country from speeches made
by their political
leaders describing Canada as ‘a country from sea to sea to sea’
thereby emphasising Canada’s
Atlantic, Polar and Pacific shorelines. On
its Atlantic coast the principal Canadian port city, Halifax, is 659 kilometres
West of the US port City of Boston. Most of the northern shores of Canada
are along the polar shoreline which faces the North Pole.
Parts of British
Columbia share a common boundary with the State of Alaska. Global warming means
that Canadians are becoming increasingly
aware of their polar coastline, the
Northwest Passage and the need to defend their country’s maritime domain
in that region.
The Pacific maritime boundary between the US and Canada is more complex than
the Atlantic maritime boundary because the two mainland
ports, Vancouver in
Canada and Seattle in the US, gain access to the Pacific Ocean via the Strait of
Juan de Fuca which is bisected
by the international boundary. This requires
shipping to cross the international boundary arriving at or leaving their
call. This paper outlines from a civilian perspective the unique
features of US-Canadian maritime boundary management on the Pacific
supporting access to the ports of Seattle and Vancouver. It also provides an
account of the kind of law enforcement and
military arrangements between both
nations that serve to combat transnational crime and subversive elements
threatening their societal
The methodology for developing this paper involved interviewing individuals
who are knowledgeable about maritime affairs on the West
Coast of Canada. An
example of such an interview with Rear Admiral Roger Girouard (Canadian Forces
(Retired)) was published in
Maritime Studies
The authors acknowledge that
this paper would not have been possible without the cooperation and insight
provided by those who agreed
to be interviewed.
The Strait of Juan de Fuca and cooperative vessel
traffic service
Figure 1: Juan de Fuca Strait
www.worldatlas.com
The Strait of Juan de Fuca (SJDF) is 161 km long and 18-27 km wide. Its
northern shoreline is Vancouver Island, British Columbia.
Its southern shoreline
is Washington State (see Figure 1). The Strait links the Pacific Ocean with the
Canadian Strait of Georgia
and the US Puget Sound, both regions being a treasure
trove of marine wildlife and idyllic island
communities bisected by an invisible international boundary. The
Strait’s largest port, Victoria, British Columbia, is located
eastern end on Vancouver Island.
The Pacific North West coastline of North America facing the Pacific Ocean
has not been commercially developed. It is largely uninhabited
for most of the
year due to extreme weather. Similarly, with the exception of some aboriginal
communities (Macah Indians), both the
Canadian and US coastlines of SJDF are
largely uninhabited. The Strait is frequented by pleasure craft during regattas
fishers and some tourism adventurers visit the areas on both sides of
the Strait in the summer months. At the western entrance from
the Pacific Ocean
there is no serious traffic intersecting the shipping lanes in SJDF going from
Vancouver Island to Washington State
and vice versa. At its eastern entrance
there are ferry routes between Victoria and Seattle and Port Angeles as well as
between Sidney
and Anacortes.
There are several scheduled ferry services connecting Vancouver Island with
the Canadian and US mainland. Vessels of all description,
from industrial barges
to pleasure craft and fishing boats, cross the area all year round. The Canadian
Forces Maritime Command operates
its fleet of seven major and six minor warships
out of Esquimalt harbour, which is located four km west of downtown Victoria.
US Navy operates a carrier battle group and squadron of Los Angeles
submarines out of Everett and Bangor Washington respectively.
In 1979, at the time many countries were setting up Vessel Traffic Services,
SJDF was recognised as a highway on the water. It was
realised that it would be
impractical to have the Americans going in and out on one side and the Canadians
doing the same on the
other side. In December 1979, the US and Canadian
governments established an arrangement that ensures safe travel of marine
travelling in SJDF and crossing Boundary Pass between the Canadian Gulf
Islands of British Columbia and the US San Juan Islands of
Washington State and
protects the delicate marine ecology in the area. This agreement, the
Cooperative Vessel Traffic Service (CVTS),
is administered under the authority
of the Commissioner of the Canadian Coast Guard and the Commandant of the US
Coast Guard.
Through the CVTS agreement, the monitoring of a vessel is handed over from
one country to the other when the vessel passes between
the jurisdictions.
Routing systems are facilitated to reduce the risk of casualties, including
traffic separation schemes, two-way
routes, recommended tracks, areas to avoid,
inshore traffic zones, roundabouts, deep water routes and precautionary areas. A
‘precautionary
area’ is a routing measure comprising an area within
defined limits where ships must navigate with particular caution and within
which the direction of traffic flow may be recommended. ‘Recommended
route’ means a route of undefined width, for the
convenience of ships in
transit, which is often marked by centreline buoys. Sectors within the
applicable waters are geographically
defined for purposes of allocating the
responsibility for vessel traffic management to one of the jurisdictions
independent of the
international boundary.
Traffic Separation Streams starts before entry into SJDF. This process is
managed by the Canadian Coast Guard’s, Marine Communications
and Traffic
Services (MCTS), at Tofino. Transport Canada puts out regulations concerning the
size and kind of vessels that are required
to report to
The Tofino station directs
traffic coming in through US waters and out through Canadian waters. At the
‘hand off line’,
vessels enter the Victoria Area and their routing
is managed by a US network of radar stations located along the Olympic
The US manages all vessels going out of Canadian waters and coming
into US waters. Canada manages vessels proceeding into the Vancouver
Victoria Port.
All ships coming through SJDF are un-piloted because this waterway is deep.
Ships are required to participate in the traffic scheme
by carrying out minor
course alterations during passage. The US and Canada require vessels greater
than 300 tons to retain the services
of pilots in order to aid navigation among
the islands and river ways. Pilots embark in Port Angeles for travel into US
in Victoria for Canadian
MCTS Victoria picks up responsibility to make sure vessels get past Victoria,
up into Haro Strait and around Turn Point and on through
Boundary Pass into
Vancouver. The MCTS operator at Taff Bay on the west coast of Vancouver Island
directs vessels passing through
US waters. Here we have Canadian services
managing ships in US waters. Most of the traffic here is Canadian, with some US
going to Point Roberts on a peninsular of the Canadian mainland that is
south of the US-Canadian boundary and only accessible by
land through
The quid pro quo to these arrangements is that the US manages traffic coming
out of Canadian waters. Both countries have mutual responsibility
for traffic in
these waters, in order to reduce the threat of collisions and environmental
contamination. The centre in Seattle takes
over traffic that comes down and goes
into US waters. There is complete inter-change of responsibility between
stations at Tofino,
Victoria and Seattle. Under the CTVS agreement, Coast Guard
personnel from both nations are at ease operating within each other’s
in the world.
Transport Canada
Anything to do with marine traffic lanes in Canadian waters is the
responsibility of Transport Canada (TC) under its administration
of the Canada
Shipping Act 2001. TC makes all the regulations concerning shipping. These
regulations are managed by the Canadian
Coast Guard (CCG), which is administered
within the federal government as a special operating agency of the Department of
and Oceans (DFO). CCG has no regulatory authority over shipping in
Canadian waters. TC inspectors are responsible for all aspects
of marine safety,
including ship inspections, marine examinations and issuing operating
certificates. They also oversee the emergency
movement of ships going in and out
of harbours.
TC is responsible for the policy coordination of Canada’s marine
transportation security activities through its leadership as
Chair of the
Interdepartmental Marine Security Working Group. TC provides horizontal
coordination among federal departments in assessing
marine security threats and
risks, identifying gaps and recommending mitigation strategies. It represents
Canada at the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) and is responsible for
negotiating bilateral marine transportation security arrangements with the US,
which are designed to harmonise the marine security regimes of the two
countries. TC is also responsible for the operational oversight
and enforcement
of marine security regulations – its inspectors monitor and enforce
security regulations within Canadian waters,
including port facilities and
vessels. The department administers the requirement for vessels to provide
‘96 Hour Pre-Arrival
Reports’ before their arrival in Canadian
waters. These reports are valuable tools for making security decisions on a
worthiness to enter
TC maintains close ties
with its regulatory counterparts internationally, particularly those in the US,
the United Kingdom, and
TC serves the Government of Canada in policy coordination of the following
areas: developing regulations in support of marine security
initiatives notably
the International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) Code and Canada’s
Marine Transportation Security
Clearance Program; managing the oversight and
enforcement of the Marine Transportation Security Act (MTSA) and Regulations
and managing the 5-year $115 million Marine Security Contribution
Program (which is designed to assist ports and port facilities
to meet the
requirements of the ISPS Code and MTSR). TC, in partnership with the US, has
established enhanced security procedures
for vessels entering the Great Lakes-St
Lawrence Seaway system. It also works with international organisations (notably
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), Organization of American
States (OAS) and G8) to develop new international marine security
requirements
and capacity-building programs.
Through its involvement with IMO, Canada is in the process of implementing
Long Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT) capabilities.
This satellite-based
technology will allow Canada to receive information about ships entitled to fly
its flag irrespective of their
location, as well as ships that have indicated an
intention to enter a port within its jurisdiction, and ships entitled to fly the
flag of other participating States if they are navigating within 1,000 nautical
miles of the Canadian coastline.
Canadian Coast Guard
The CCG, in addition to managing ship-land communications, operates the
tender ships for the maintenance of buoys and marine markers
in Canada’s
lakes, rivers and seaways. The CCG also has a role to play in Search and Rescue
(SAR), which is under the mandate
of the Canadian Forces. The Commander of
Maritime Forces Pacific (a Rear-Admiral) is the head of SAR located in Her
Canadian Dockyard Esquimalt. The CCG has no regulatory authority
over ships, security or safety. They may have a role to take Royal
Mounted Police (RCMP), officers and TC Inspectors out for embarkation purposes,
but they are not trained or authorised to
provide armed assistance in support of
embarked law enforcement officials. Currently the role and responsibilities of
under some significant policy review and debate within
US Coast Guard
The US Coast Guard is a para-military fleet. It is a mandated maritime law
enforcement agency. The Puget Sound area is served by US
Coast Guard Pacific
District 13. It operates two cutters and is supported by three dedicated rotary
wing aircraft. Coast guard personnel
are trained in boarding operations, small
arms marksmanship and law enforcement. The US Coast Guard is concerned with
domestic operations.
On very rare occasions they may request assistance from the
Canada Border Services Agency
The Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) administers customs and immigration
services, and oversees close to one hundred pieces of
legislation on behalf of
other federal departments, provinces and territories. Its law enforcement duties
include the detention of
individuals deemed to be inadmissible to Canada for
such reasons as posing a danger to the public or to national security, being
unlikely to appear for an immigration process or for whom identity has not been
CBSA personnel have traditionally been unarmed Peace Officers responsible for
overseeing the administration of their legislation.
They relied on the RCMP for
backup in law enforcement situations. In 2006, the Canadian Government budgeted
$101 million over two
years to begin the process of providing CBSA officers with
firearms and hiring 400 new officers. Approximately 4,800 officers at
marine ports of entry, as well as officers who perform enforcement,
investigative and intelligence work inland, will be
trained and equipped with
firearms, like members of the RCMP, once the arming initiative is fully
implemented. During this period
of transition, CBSA officers will continue to
perform their duties as un-armed Peace Officers, relying on the RCMP to provide
if the need arises.
In April 2004, CBSA marine security operations established the Advance
Commercial Information (ACI) program. Under this program, importer
must report marine data on all containers destined for Canada to CBSA 24 hours
before loading shipping containers at ports
of departure. This program provides
an intelligence function that assesses the need for inspection of containers
prior to their arrival
The CBSA’s National Risk Assessment Centre conducts risk assessments on
vessels and containers heading for Canada. Decisions
are made based on this
information about whether to inspect cargo at a foreign port to investigate
potential security threats. The
ACI program is part of the Canada-US Smart
Border Declaration. Currently the ACI program is only used in maritime security.
plans are in place to expand its application to air, highway and rail
transportation gateways and corridors.
In October 2005, CBSA and US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) signed a
Container Security Initiative Partnership Arrangement. This
agreement allows
CBSA officers to travel to foreign ports to assess any security risk associated
with a specific container shipment
heading for Canada in collaboration with the
country of origin. The purpose of this program is to protect the Canadian public
offshore subversive elements, organised crime or terrorists and ensure that
the Canadian economy is not affected by such activities.
The Canada-US Joint In-Transit Container Targeting at Seaports Initiative
serves to achieve maximum effectiveness in identifying high-risk
containers at
the first point of arrival in North America, and to share important
law-enforcement information between the US and
Canada through their respective
immigration and customs officers.
Under Action Point 18 of the Smart Border Declaration, CBSA officers are
stationed at seaports in the US and CBP officers are stationed
at Canadian
seaports. By working together, Canada and the US can improve container
inspection by jointly targeting marine in-transit
containers that arrive in
Canada or the US en route to the other country. US officials are stationed at
Vancouver, while Canadian
officials are stationed in Seattle-Tacoma and Newark.
The program simplifies the inspection process and helps to avoid the duplication
of examinations.
US-Canadian border law enforcement
There are significant differences in the organisation of law enforcement
practices between the US and Canada. Canada has a national
police force, the
RCMP, which is responsible for compliance with Canadian federal legislation
concerning customs, immigration and
border security. US federal law enforcement
practitioners are more diffused. They are located in several departments,
including Border
Patrol, Immigration Customs Enforcement (ICE), US Coast Guards,
and some agencies such as the Drug Enforcement Agency.
Law enforcement along the US-Canada border, on land and at sea, is managed
through Integrated Border Enforcement Teams (IBET). These
teams comprise law
enforcement officers from both countries. In the marine sector along the Pacific
coastline, members of the RCMP
marine unit work in coordination with US ICE and
the US Coast Guard. The three law enforcement agencies share intelligence when
situation demands through the Integrated Border Intelligence Team that is
located in Blaine, Washington.
In a 2007 pilot project, referred to as ‘Shiprider’, RCMP and US
Coast Guards operated as joint crew on RCMP and US Coast
Guard law enforcement
vessels. During this project, arrangements between both countries gave law
enforcement authority to the participating
officers on both sides of the border
independent of their national affiliation. The program enabled pursuits to
continue across maritime
boundaries. When US law enforcement officers were in
Canadian waters they had the status of Canadian Peace Officers with full
authority and a similar arrangement existed for Canadian officers in
US waters. These arrangements required the front line officers
special training in the laws of the host country.
The Shiprider intiative is seen as a successful initiative and is being
assessed by both countries for permanent implementation. It
allowed cross
designations pursuant to statutory authorities in each country and those
designations were to specific individuals
for the two month duration of the
initiative.
The challenge with giving reciprocity to US and Canadian law
enforcement officers on both sides of the maritime border is that it
sovereignty issue. Such matters have to be negotiated by Foreign Affairs
(Canada) and the State Department (US).
There are many statutory and political hurdles that must be overcome before
such arrangements could become routine. An example is
Canada’s Import
Export Permits Act (R.S., 1985.c.E-19), which requires all firearms coming into
Canada to have a permit. That
means every time an American police officer
crosses the border into Canada she/he needs to have a permit in order to carry a
- this is not practicable when chasing criminals or terrorists across
international borders.
During the Shiprider initiative, a procedure was put in place so that at the
start of a shift phone calls were made to the customs
authorities in both
countries. The names of the officers involved and their shift start was reported
to the customs authority of
each country. These arrangements were necessary to
comply with the Customs Act which stipulates that all officers must report to
customs officer immediately upon entering the country. Both law enforcement
entities are subject to the laws of their own country
as well as the one they
are visiting, as is any citizen from either country. Law enforcement officers
have not been exempted from
these requirements.
RCMP West Coast Marine Services Detachment
The RCMP provides a West Coast Marine Services (WCMS) Detachment as part of a
Provincial Policing Services Agreement between the Canadian
Government and the
British Columbian Government. The RCMP provides police services for most
communities in British Columbia under
contract with each municipal authority.
Larger municipalities, such as the cities of Vancouver, Victoria, New
Westminster and Port
Moody, have their own police forces which work in close
collaboration with the RCMP. WCMS provides policing service to 350 coastal
island and mainland communities that are only accessible by air or water.
The Waterfront Joint Forces Operation (JFO) works at the Vancouver Port
Authority and consists of RCMP resources from Border Integrity
National Ports Enforcement and Customs and Excise), Drug Enforcement, and
Criminal Intelligence. The Vancouver Police
Department Marine Unit is a uniform
police unit that works closely with the Waterfront JFO. CBSA also has personnel
who are part
of the JFO. The JFO works closely with CBSA Marine. The JFO also
has a marked RCMP enforcement rigid hull inflatable boat (RHIB)
enabling the JFO
to have a marked police presence on the water in the port environment. The JFO
is responsible for conducting organised
crime investigations in the Vancouver
Fraser Port Authority as well as any other port facilities within the BC lower
A similar JFO is established in Prince Rupert with five resources from Border
Integrity (Customs and Excise and Federal Enforcement
Section), two Drug
Enforcement and two Criminal Intelligence Resources. Police supervision at the
Port of Prince Rupert is much less
complicated than in the Vancouver port
environment because in Prince Rupert the RCMP is the Federal, Provincial and
Municipal police.
There are currently no National Port Enforcement
resources in Prince Rupert but hopefully there will be in the future.
WCMS has four 70 foot Catamaran Patrol Vessels and seven RHIBs that are
funded by the Province of British Columbia. Each catamaran
has a crew of four
plus an engineer. The crews are in a program where they achieve qualifications
and designations in accordance
with TC regulations. The highest designation that
vessel skippers can achieve is a ‘350 ton Command Endorsement’.
The mandate of WCMS is to support general police operations and to provide a
police presence in remote coastal communities where there
are no shore based
police detachments. The catamarans are also able to participate in border
enforcement operations. They are crewed
by four fully trained RCMP officers who
choose a career path in the WCMS detachment.
The RCMP Border Integrity Program has RHIB enforcement vessels in Victoria
and Vancouver that are deployed as part of IBET’s
mandate to conduct
border enforcement in conjunction with US agencies (ICE and US Coast Guard).
These services are part of the federal
government’s mandate and are funded
as part of the IBET program. The members of the IBET Marine Team are RCMP
Officers who
are experienced in conducting complex investigations and also have
marine experience. They are provided with the necessary training
to operate the
Canadian military and law enforcement
The Canadian Forces have no statutory mandate to conduct domestic law
enforcement operations. Through Memorandum of Understanding
protocols and
Federal Government direction, Canadian Forces routinely provide support to the
RCMP and the Department of Fisheries
and Oceans (DFO) as the two Federal
Government Law Enforcement Agencies with statutory jurisdiction in the maritime
domain. The Naval
Formation in Esquimalt operates a ‘Ready Duty
Ship’, either a major or minor warship, which is in a state of
preparedness
to deploy at short notice in support of SAR or missions of other
government departments. The Ready Duty Ship is mandated to respond
twenty-four hour basis every day of the year and is typically trained to
intercept and board a vessel for inspection or seizure
when providing direct
support to an accompanying RCMP or DFO officer. A dedicated ship-borne
helicopter may be assigned to the warship.
If necessary, it will be controlled
by Canadian Forces authority.
Canada Command
On 1 February 2006 the Canadian Forces established Canada Command as part of
the widely publicised plan to transform the armed services
into a fully
integrated and responsive military force to interact with federal, provincial
and local government authorities to support
domestic operations.
The main priority of Canada Command is to ‘Defend and Protect
Canada’. Canadian Forces are not only fighting abroad, but
are also deeply
committed to the protection and defence of Canadians at home. Canada Command
focuses on the areas of preparedness
and response, and is aimed at providing
specific capabilities and expertise in some of the most extreme scenarios.
Canada Command
leads SAR operations and also responds to requests from civil
authorities for assistance in a wide spectrum of operations such as:
1. disaster relief;
2. territorial and aerial surveillance and protection;
3. coast surveillance; and
4. support to federal Counter-Drug Operations.
The Naval headquarters at Esquimalt have been transformed into Joint Task
Force Headquarters Pacific and the Rear-Admiral commanding
the Pacific fleet is
appointed as the Joint Task Force Commander who has the authority to task air
force and army assets in the Pacific
region (via concurrence of Commander of
Canada Command) to coordinate and provide assistance to civilian authorities in
expertise, equipment and personnel. Assistance to law enforcement
agencies and the protocols to trigger such support have not changed
Canada Command concept. Additionally, in the context of the Canadian Pacific
Fleet, the area of responsibility and level
of cooperation between US law
enforcement agencies have not changed given long-established working
relationships that are not in
conflict with the mandate of Canada Command.
Canada Command serves as the operational link with
US Northern
The North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) is a bi-national US and
Canadian organisation charged with the missions of aerospace
warning and
aerospace control for North America. Aerospace warning includes the monitoring
of human-made objects in space, and the
detection, validation, and warning of
attack against North America whether by aircraft, missiles, or space vehicles,
through mutual
support arrangements with other commands. Aerospace control
includes ensuring air sovereignty and air defence of the airspace of
From its inception in 1940, the NORAD Agreement has undergone several
renewals. The March 1996 renewal redefined NORAD’s missions
as aerospace
warning and aerospace control for North America. In May 2006, the Agreement was
renewed to include a maritime warning
mission, which requires both countries to
share in their awareness and understanding of the activities conducted in the US
and Canadian
maritime approaches, maritime areas and inland waterways. The
command is currently developing a concept for implementing the new
warning mission.
The Vancouver 2010 Integrated Security Unit
The security aspects of boundary management procedures described above will
be put to the test during the Vancouver 2010 winter Olympic
and Para-Olympic
Games. The Vancouver 2010 Integrated Security Unit (ISU) has been formed in
preparation for this event. It comprises
members from the RCMP, Vancouver Police
Department, West Vancouver Police Department and the Canadian Forces. The unit
the RCMP. The ISU is responsible for
- criminal record background checks for accreditation of credentials,
aviation security and management over designated Olympic venues
- tactical emergency response;
- working with RCMP units responsible for Internationally Protected Persons,
other ‘very important persons’ and Olympic
family security;
- communications security;
- security within designated Olympic venues and sites;
- community relations relating to olympic planning;
- traffic control during the games timeframe; and
- training for police involved in securing the games.
Prior to the Olympic Games, policing in Olympic venues and sites remains the
responsibility of the police force of jurisdiction, even
if the matter is
related to the Olympics.
This paper has presented an overview of the procedures in
place between the US and Canada for managing their complex Pacific maritime
boundary. It is written from a Canadian perspective highlighting the Canadian
government agencies involved. Such a review from the
US perspective would
involve a greater appreciation of the many federal, state and municipal agencies
that are involved in border
management.
The events of 9/11 have increased tensions between the two countries. There
has always been concern expressed by some US politicians
and media outlets that
Canada, with its more liberal laws and views, could be harbouring terrorist
threats to the US.
trade arrangements between the US and Canada, the emphasis from the Canadian
perspective will always be one of accommodation
and cooperation in accepting the
new post 9/11 reality. The Shiprider pilot program between the US Coast Guard
and the RCMP is an
example of sorting out the challenges around sovereignty of
the two countries. Perhaps the Shiprider program will become a precursor
new US-Canada maritime agreement similar to the 1979 CTVS Agreement.
Rather than adopt a single North America perimeter customs and immigration
policy, Canadians have shown no intention of giving up
their sovereignty to the
US in response to 9/11. Canada expects all visitors, as well as landed
immigrants and citizens, to abide
by Canadian law. It is the application of
these laws that Canada believes will enable it to deal with any subversive
element threatening
Canadian societal values within or approaching its borders.
As is demonstrated by the collaboration between CBSA and US Border Agencies,
Canada is committed to integrating its security procedures with the US so that
both countries are able to protect their citizens
and achieve a common
understand of potential threats.
This paper has attempted to show how the influence of the military and law
enforcement cultures in the US and Canada influences maritime
border management.
US society appears to be impacted by battles fought in far off lands; many
American families will display pictures
in their homes of family members who are
serving, or have served, in the military. The presence of a military culture is
not as overt
in a Canada. That said, as is evident from the support given to
Canadian soldiers in Afghanistan, and the pride and compassion displayed
Canadians when fallen soldiers are brought home, Canadians do have a high
respect for their military. While it did not support
the US going to war in
Iraq, Canada has a strong combat presence in
Afghanistan.
The tradeoffs between placing Canadian soldiers in harm’s way and
spending public funds to do so, relative to providing social
support programs at
hotly debated among Canadians.
In contrast, as a general rule, the US is more accepting of a world policing
role, even at the expense of domestic social programs.
Canada has benefited by
contributing to the world policing role adopted by the US. Such bilateral
relations have provided Canada
with the opportunity for developing a strategic
military defence through its active participation in such organisations as NORAD
Maritime border management arrangements between US and Canada depend on both
countries respecting each other’s sovereignty and
understanding and
respecting each other’s cultural differences. The arrangements for marine
safety and transport between the
US and Canada in the Pacific region were
defined and established in the CTVS 1979 Agreement. The continued application of
this agreement,
its ability to adjust to an exponential growth in all kinds of
marine traffic, and its effectiveness in the post 9/11 world, is testament
the tradition between US and Canada being able to figure out ways of getting
along like good neighbours.
Tim Lynch is a public policy
analyst living in Steveston, British Columbia. Related maritime policy articles
are available at
www.infolynk.ca/bcmaritimepolicy.html
tim@infolynk.ca
Commander (Retired) Rick
Gerbrecht is a former Chief of Staff to Commander Canadian Fleet Pacific. He
currently works in the defence
sector based out of Victoria, British Columbia.
rgerbrecht@hotmail.com
Lynch, T. 2001.
‘American/Canadian Relations Post 9/11: Accommodation or
Surrender?’,
International Travel Insurance Journal
(October-November): 3
www.infolynk.ca/bcmaritimepolicy.html
Gillespie, B. 2008. ‘The
9/11 effect: Has $24 billion made Canada safer?’, CBC News’ security
correspondent, 21
www.cbc.ca/news/viewpoint/vp_
gillespie/2008/03/the_real_cost_of_911_has_24_bi.html
For analysis of these changes
in relationships, and their impact on Canadian and Mexican border relations, see
Hussain, I. Pattnayak,
S. and Hira, A. 2008.
North American Homeland
Security: Back to Bilateralism?
Praeger Publishers, International Security
Series (forthcoming).
Lynch, T. 2007.
‘Challenges Confronting Canada in Maritime Security: An Interview with
Rear Admiral Roger Girouard (Canadian
Forces, Ret’d).’
Transport Canada’s Radio
Aids to Marine Navigation, (Pacific and Western Arctic) Canadian Coast Guard,
Marine Communications
and Traffic Services, Annual Edition, 2007. This
publication is revised on a monthly basis when required through Notice to
Lynch, T. 2006. ‘Marine
Piloting: A Symphony of Movement.’
Mariner Life
. November: 10-13
www.infolynk.ca/bcmaritimepolicy.html
Marine Transportation Security
Act 1994, c-40.
Transport Canada. 2006.
Marine Security Overview: Transportation Security Action Plan
The following site provides
a summary the role of the main federal departments involved in Marine
Transportation in Canada:
http://www.tc.gc.ca/
MarineSecurity/policy/enhancing/roles.htm
Report of the Marine
Security Standing Committee, Canadian Marine Advisory Committee, Ottawa, 30
April - 3 May 2007.
Senate of Canada Committee
on National Security and Defence, March 2007. This report recommends that CCG
assume a constabulary or
paramilitary role
www.parl.gc.ca/common/Committee_SenRep.asp?Language=E&Parl=39&Ses=1&comm_id=76
; Lynch T, 2007. ‘Canada’s Coast Guards at the Cross
Fisherman Life
, August: 10-14
www.infolynk.
ca/bcmaritimepolicy.html
See Canadian Border Services
Agency website
http://www.cbsa-asfc.gc.ca/agency-agence/what-quoi-eng.html
Lynch T, 2007.
‘Canadian Maritime Security: From the Navy on Patrol: to the Police on the
Maritime Studies
. 152: 22- 26.
See Canada Command website:
http://www.
canadacom.forces.gc.ca
and United States Northern Command US NORTHCOM :
http://www.northcom. mil/
See North American Aerospace
Defence Command website:
www.norad.mil/about/index.html
Lynch, 2001, supra note 1.
As of 4 April 2008, the US
has experienced 4,013 deaths (1.33 per 100,000 population) in Iraq. Canada has
experienced 82 deaths (0.25
deaths per 100,000 population) in Afghanistan.
The Honourable John Manley,
P.C. (Chair), Independent Panel on Canada’s Future Role in Afghanistan,
January 2008 © Her
Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, Minister of Public
Works and Government Services, 2008 Cat. No: FR5-20/1-2008.
Chase, S. and Galloway, G.
2008. ‘PM (Prime Minister Stephan Harper) leaves door open to extend
Afghan mission’,
Globe and Mail
, 3 April; Chase, S. 2008.
‘NATO answers Harper’s request for troops’,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter