URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AULegHist/2007/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:36:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Prest, Wilfred --- "Law for Historians: William Blackstone on Wives, Colonies and Slaves" [2007] AULegHist 12; (2007) 11(1) Legal History 105
Law for Historians: William Blackstone on Wives, Colonies and Slaves
Law for Historians: William Blackstone on Wives,
Colonies and Slaves
WILFRID PREST
We are often exhorted to break down the various barriers inhibiting free
commerce between the academic disciplines. So far as law
and history are
concerned, such urgings are almost redundant. While historians have long drawn
upon legal records and texts as sources
of evidence about the widest conceivable
range of individual and social experience, legal argument and doctrine
frequently embody
much at least quasi-historical content. Yet problems can arise
when historians employ legal sources, no less than when lawyers seek
historical evidence into court. The great legal historian F W Maitland famously
suggested that historians and lawyers operate
on quite distinct wavelengths,
using two different modes of argument; these he characterised as ‘the
logic of authority and
the logic of evidence’. Lawyers, according to
Maitland, are primarily interested in finding legal authorities, the more recent
the better, with which to support the cases of their clients. Historians, on the
other hand, recognize themselves as bound by no
authority, except evidence
bearing on the event or phenomena they study; generally speaking, the closer
that evidence in time to
their subject, the greater its credibility and utility.
Thus, according to Maitland,
The process by which old principles and old phrases are charged with a new
content is from the lawyer’s point of view an evolution
of the true intent
and meaning of the old law; from the historian’s point of view it is
almost of necessity a process of perversion
and misunderstanding ... The lawyer
must be orthodox otherwise he is no lawyer; an orthodox history seems a
contradiction in
Particularly concerned in his Cambridge inaugural lecture as Downing
Professor of the Laws of England to underline the propensity
of lawyers to
misread and misuse history, Maitland almost certainly exaggerated the gap, both
formal and psychological, between legal
and historical reasoning. Or so it seems
today, in the light of both late twentieth-century jurisprudential reactions
against the
strongest forms of legal positivism, and contemporaneous
post-modernist revolt against variants of historical positivism which exaggerate
the scientific character of historians’ working methods and the
objectivity of their results. But whether or not lawyers are
prone to distort or
oversimplify historical evidence, historians, for their part, frequently
misinterpret legal sources. This may
occur because the historian fails to
understand the technical significance of documents originally generated for some
specific legal
purpose, as for example when the young Lawrence Stone
unfortunately confused large sums of money specified in penal bonds given as
security for their loans by aristocratic Elizabethan and early Stuart debtors
with the amounts they had actually
But legal texts of a less
intricate or esoteric nature can also present problems of historical
interpretation.
Many scholars have drawn on William Blackstone’s
Commentaries on the
Laws of England
for an authoritative summary of English law and government
at the beginning of George III’s reign, before the disruptive impact
industrialisation, population growth, urbanisation, the American and French
Revolutions, the Napoleonic wars, and the major transformation
substantive law and legal institutions during the Victorian era. This is a
perfectly legitimate procedure in principle. For
Blackstone’s
Commentaries
represent the first successful attempt to provide an outline
map of English law, both public and private, at a point when Britain’s
imperial destinies were about to be decisively transformed by the loss of her
North American colonies (with the significant exception
of Canada) and an
expanding imperial presence in Asia, Africa and the Pacific. Yet difficulties
arise when modern scholars seek to
appropriate Blackstone’s
meticulously-crafted words for their own present purposes.
In the first place, it is entirely possible to invoke Blackstone's powerful
authority without actually consulting his words. Thus
the following passage
appears in a volume of historical essays recently published by Australia’s
foremost academic press:
Eighteenth-century British law canonised a crucial precedent for men’s
‘ownership’ of the conjugal body. Sir William
Blackstone judged that
the man who physically beat his wife with a stick no thicker than a
‘man’s thumb’ was doing
so ‘for her own good’.
For, he argued, ‘even the disabilities which the wife lies under are for
the most part intended
for her protection and benefit’.
Blackstone’s rule of thumb legitimated marital abuse of
The sole bibliographical reference for this passage directs readers to the
1771 Dublin edition of the
Commentaries
, which for the first two volumes
follows the text of the third Oxford edition of
Here are the words Dr (not
yet Sir William) Blackstone actually wrote, in Book I (‘The Rights of
Persons’) ch. 15 ‘Of
Husband and Wife’ of his
Commentaries
The husband also (by the old law) might give his wife moderate correction. For,
as he is to answer for her misbehaviour, the law
thought it reasonable to
intrust him with this power of restraining her, by domestic chastisement, in the
same moderation that a
man is allowed to correct his servants or his children;
for whom the master or parent is also liable in some cases to answer. But
power of correction was confined within reasonable bounds; and the husband was
prohibited to use any violence towards his wife,
aliter quam ad virum, ex
causa regiminis et castigationis uxoris suae, liciter et rationabilier
[other than licitly and reasonably pertains to a husband for ruling
and chastising his wife]. The civil law gave the husband the
same, or larger
authority over his wife; allowing him, for some misdemeanours
flagellis et
fustibus acriter verberare uxorem
[with whips and rods sharply to beat his
wife], for others, only
modicam castigionem adhibere
[to apply moderate
chastisement]. But with us, in the politer reign of Charles the second, this
power of correction came to be doubted:
and a wife may now have security of the
peace against her husband; or in return, a husband against his wife. Yet the
lower rank of
the people, who were always fond of the old common law, still
claim and exert their antient privilege; and the courts of law will
still permit
a husband to restrain a wife of her liberty, in case of any gross
misbehaviour.
These are the chief legal effects of marriage during the coverture; upon which
we may observe, that even the disabilities, which
the wife lies under, are for
the most part intended for her protection and benefit. So great a favourite is
the female sex of the
No mention of thumb-sized sticks. Our modern author clearly derived that
conceit from some other, uncited, source, together with the
authenticating reference to Blackstone’s text. A genealogy, or
rogues’ gallery, of such false and misleading
‘authorities’ has been compiled by Henry Ansgar Kelly, who besides
professing English in the University of
California at Los Angeles takes a
special interest in ‘legal
mythology’.
Despite its
somewhat obscure place of publication, at least so far as the historical
profession is concerned, Kelly’s prize-winning
paper should have
demolished, once and for all, the false notion that English law ever gave
husbands the right to beat their wives
with a rod no thicker than their thumb,
let alone the myth that Blackstone’s
Commentaries
endorsed such a
rule. Yet as recently as 2005 a distinguished colonial American historian from
Kelly’s own university could
still claim that
Deeply embedded in England's common law, and encoded in Blackstone’s
Commentaries on the Laws of England
, the rule of thumb made it
permissible for husbands to beat their wives so long as the stick or club did
not exceed the thickness
In fact Blackstone’s text nowhere asserts the legality of wife-beating
in his own day. On the contrary, his readers are informed
that although once
permitted under the common law, this practice was ‘doubted of’ after
the restoration of Charles II
in 1660, and a legal remedy provided for abused or
threatened wives (and husbands). Blackstone’s arch allusion to the
impolite behaviour of the ‘lower rank of the people’
sufficiently indicates where his own more self-consciously enlightened
sympathies lay, besides conceding (or asserting) the law’s practical
impotence in this domestic realm. Finally, the reference
to the wife’s
disabilities under coverture forms part of the conclusion to this entire
chapter; its final sentence is perhaps
merely a semi-facetious flourish or
variation on the
Commentaries’
largely positive view of the common
law – although we note that Blackstone does not claim a wife’s legal
disabilities
‘intended for her protection and
Notwithstanding his paternalistic acceptance of female dependency in marriage
– scarcely a novel doctrine in the mid-eighteenth
century, however
unpalatable today – the man whose brother-in-law recorded that he
passed near nineteen Years in the Enjoyment of the purest domestic and conjugal
Felicity (for which no man was better calculated)
and which, he used often to
declare, was the Happiest part of his Life
was scarcely endorsing ‘marital abuse’ of women, let alone
‘judging’ that a man who physically assaulted his
‘doing so for her own
author’s references to ‘precedent’ and to Blackstone as having
‘judged’ may point to misunderstandings
Commentaries’
institutional status. Nevertheless, even granting
that the ironical tone of the Blackstone’s text could complicate its
neither lack of technical (or at least legal) expertise, nor any
particular difficulties of interpretation presented by the distinctive
content of Blackstone’s writings appear to be the prime source of error
So much for the words Blackstone wrote and published, as distinct from their
reception or interpretation. But we might also seek to
know how, and to what
effect, his writings on the increasingly sensitive topic of marital violence
were construed by later generations,
not just in England but throughout the
common-law world. Kelly has conducted some research along precisely these lines
in North American
sources; he concludes that an 1824 case in Mississippi
Bradley v State
) and an 1871 Alabama judgment ‘wrongly assumed
that Blackstone was upholding the [wife-beating] privilege claimed by the lower
classes as still supported by the common law’. Unfortunately no such data
is forthcoming for colonial Australia or New Zealand;
we have merely the
attribution, or assertion, of a long-term influence (legitimating marital
violence – presumably in a domestic
as well as juridical context) to
Blackstone’s words - albeit words Blackstone never wrote.
Distinguishing between Blackstone’s own words, or intended meaning, and
readings of those words and meanings by later generations,
is particularly
important with respect to Indigenous or Aboriginal land rights. In 1982 the
first chapter of Alex Castles’s
Australian Legal History
the profound influence of Blackstone’s writings on decisions by both
Australian and British courts as to the reception
of English law in British
Five years later the
Australian historian Henry Reynolds published
The Law of the Land
tract for the times which famously argued that English common law (properly
understood) had recognized the existence of Aboriginal
land rights in Australia
as both predating and surviving British settlement. This thesis directly
contradicted what Reynolds represented
as the lawyers’ ‘traditional
view ... that before 1788 Australia was
Reynolds relied heavily upon Blackstone’s
Commentaries
discussing both the nature of property, occupancy and possession in relation to
the issue of British sovereignty over Australia
and the transfer of English law
to British colonies, including Australia. In his Introduction to Book I of the
Commentaries
, which deals with ‘Countries subject to the Laws of
England’, Blackstone divides colonies into two types. On the one
there were those which had been acquired by conquest or treaty; here any
existing local laws would continue to prevail unless
and until they were changed
by the British Crown as incoming sovereign. On the other hand lay colonies of
settlement, ‘claimed
by right of occupancy only, by finding them desart
and uncultivated, and peopling them from the mother country’ –
laws ‘are immediately there in force’(i.26-8). Reynolds
asserted that by ‘desart and uncultivated’ Blackstone
meant ‘uninhabited’ (because he would otherwise have written,
uncultivated’). That being so, the
Commentaries
‘could have been used to prove that nomadic peoples like the
Aborigines were in possession of their
Reynolds further
quoted Blackstone’s scathing condemnation of ‘the seizing of
countries already peopled and driving out
or massacring the innocent and
defenceless natives’ as powerful evidence against any attempt to
appropriate his powerful authority
as that of a ‘
for the expropriation of Aboriginal
Indeed Reynolds
claimed that colonial ‘lawyers continued to babble about a desert and
uninhabited land when all informed observers
knew that was nonsense’,
precisely because they understood and accepted Blackstone’s views about
the necessary connection
between lack of an indigenous population and lack of a
pre-existing legal regime in a settled
The argument is complex and somewhat confused, perhaps partly because one of
Reynolds’s aims
was to persuade Australia’s High Court to
reverse a long line of judicial authority by accepting the continued existence
Aboriginal rights in land, or native title. For this reason, it has been
suggested, Reynolds ‘turned the dispossession of Aboriginal
people into a
legal event’, rather than an act of more or less violent imperial invasion
and dispossession.
juridical scenario Blackstone and his
Commentaries
plainly had to figure,
given their prominence in contemporary English legal culture, even though (as
Reynolds himself pointed out)
the first edition of the
Commentaries
published well before Captain Cook returned from his first Pacific voyage in
So we can only guess whether Blackstone, who died in 1780, would have
classified post-1788 Australia as a settled or a conquered colony
something else again). When discussing colonies he plainly had in mind those of
classical times, and Britain’s American
plantations. Reynolds is entirely
justified in underlining Blackstone’s personal disapproval of the violent
expropriation of
indigenous peoples by European, including British, colonists,
very much in line with his Enlightenment principles. Indeed Reynolds’s
interpretation of Blackstone’s own moral stance is reinforced by the
latter’s sardonic reference to Britain’s North
American plantations
as having been obtained ‘by right of conquest and driving out the natives
(with what natural justice I
shall not at present enquire)’. (i.105). On
the other hand, in an immediately adjacent passage which Reynolds does not
Blackstone also stated that conquered or ceded colonies were
‘already cultivated’. These words suggest that Blackstone,
John Locke’s theoretical approach to the institution of private property,
regarded absence of agriculture, not mere
lack of human habitation, as the prime
criterion of a settled colony.
Of course this is all somewhat hypothetical, since Blackstone obviously had no
opportunity to comment on the case of Australia.
In a lecture delivered at the Australian National Library in 1986 and
subsequently published, Reynolds noted that an important 1971
judgment of Mr
Justice Blackburn had confirmed the Privy Council's decision in the 1889 leading
Cooper v Stuart
. Here England’s Law Lords had held that
pre-1788 Australia ‘a tract of territory practically unoccupied, without
inhabitants or settled law’. Reynolds commented as follows:
‘The authority for that view was Blackstone’s
Commentaries
published in 1765-69. So Australian law in the 1970s leapt straight from
Blackstone to
Blackburn...’.
Here we see
Reynolds himself portraying Blackstone as an apologist for the expropriation of
Aboriginal lands, only a year before
The Law of the Land
first appeared
in print, with its claim that Blackstone was no such apologist (because he
evidently disapproved of the violent dispossession
of Indigenous peoples by
Europeans). Yet the contradiction is more apparent than real. Whatever
Blackstone’s personal convictions,
and however unsatisfactory his
distinction between settled and conquered colonies, the dominant legal view in
1987 was indeed as
voiced by Mr Justice Blackburn in 1971 (following the Privy
Council in 1889), that Blackstone’s expression ‘desert and
uncultivated’ must be taken to include any non-European ‘territory
in which live uncivilized people in a primitive state
It was precisely
this longstanding legal interpretation – or fiction – which
Law of the Land
sought to overturn. Yet what role if any Reynolds's book
played in bringing about the Australian High Court’s acceptance of
title in its 1992 Mabo judgment remains a matter of lively dispute.
As it happens, not all nineteenth-century lawyers, whether British or
Australian-British, were content to ‘babble about a desert
uncultivated land’. In 1836 counsel defending an Aboriginal charged with
murder argued before NSW Supreme Court that
It was laid down in First Blackstone, 102, and in fact in every other work upon
the subject, that land obtained like the present
were not desart [sic] or
uncultivated, or peopled from the mother country, they having a population of
[their] own more numerous
than those who have since arrived from the other
country ... therefore in point of strictness and analogy to our law, we were
to obey their laws, not they to obey
Needless to say, the bench unanimously rejected this plea to its
Blackstone which support the doctrine of undivided Crown sovereignty. But as
Castles has pointed out, they might equally have
followed Blackstone if they had
wished to recognize Aboriginal customary practices as part of the common law of
New South Wales.
All of which
goes to show that the
Commentaries
covered a wide swathe of legal
territory, and have been quite variously read and employed since their first
publication, not least
in relation to particular colonial circumstances of which
their author plainly had no foreknowledge.
So far I have urged the desirability of going to Blackstone’s own
words, not someone else’s version of them, and then
of distinguishing, so
far as possible, what Blackstone originally wrote or meant from subsequent
constructions of his text. Yet attempting
to establish what Blackstone
originally wrote, or meant, is a complicated business. The
Commentaries
first appeared in four volumes from 1765 to 1769, the end-product of a course of
Oxford lectures given and revised over a thirteen-year
span from 1753 onwards.
The book went through eight consecutive editions during its author’s
lifetime; a ninth appeared in
1783 ‘with the last corrections of the
author’, although some minor changes may well have been the work of its
Richard Burn. Obvious difficulties of interpretation arise from this
state of affairs: when a passage of his text has been heavily
reworked, how can
we hope to know which variant represents the authentic views of William
Blackstone, as distinct from, say, second-
or third thoughts, to which he might
have been persuaded by others? This problem is best illustrated by a final
In 1974 Blackstone’s pronouncements on the institution of slavery were
sharply criticised by the African historian Folarin Shyllon,
who set out to show
that successive editions of the
Commentaries
diluted an initial outright
condemnation of slavery, in pusillanimous deference to the more cautious
position of Blackstone's powerful
professional ‘patron and mentor’,
William Murray, Lord Mansfield, Chief Justice of King’s Bench from 1756 to
This was not an altogether
novel accusation. In 1820 the first biographer of Granville Sharp, who a
half-century before had effectively
secured the judicial outlawing of slavery in
England by sponsoring the momentous Somerset test case, asserted that Blackstone
'corrected' the text of his first edition during the course of Sharp’s
litigation; a later commentator read this as ‘an
insinuation against
Blackstone ... that he altered his text on account of the actions brought by
Sharp’. Indeed Sharp himself
had claimed that Blackstone was
‘induced (as it was said) by the sentiments of the Chief Justice of the
King’s Bench
to withdraw’ his former opinion, although not in or as
the result of the law suits Sharp mounted on behalf of slaves in
However Shyllon presented a more detailed and specific indictment, devoting a
whole chapter of his book to the ‘
Commentaries
of Sir William
Blackstone on Slavery’. He gave particular attention to correspondence
exchanged between Blackstone and Granville
Sharp in relation to the rewording of
a passage on slavery in the first chapter of Book I of the
Commentaries
Here, at the end of a paragraph eulogizing British liberty, Blackstone
originally wrote that 'this spirit of liberty is so deeply
implanted in our
constitution, and rooted even in our very soil, that a slave or a negro, the
moment he lands in England, falls under
the protection of the laws, and with
regard to all natural rights becomes
eo instanti
[from that point] a
freeman’. So ran the first (1765) edition. But the second edition of Book
I, which appeared next year (November
1766), changed the sentence following the
word ‘laws’ to read ‘and so far becomes a freeman; though the
right to his service may probably still continue’. The same
qualification appears in the third (1768) edition, although from
edition of 1770 onwards the word ‘probably’ was replaced by
‘possibly’.
In a letter of February 1769 to Sharp, who had previously sent Blackstone a
manuscript draft of his
A Representation of the Injustice and Dangerous
Tendency of Tolerating Slavery in England
, the latter claimed that his first
alteration merely brought the text into line with a later discussion in chapter
14 of Book I.
Here, after
condemning slavery as repugnant to both reason and natural law, and affirming
that ‘the law of England abhors,
and will not endure the existence of,
slavery in this nation’, Blackstone nevertheless noted that while a slave
became a freeman
on arrival in England, ‘Yet with regard to any right
which the master may have acquired, [‘lawfully acquired’ and
‘by general not by local law’ from the fifth edition of 1773
onwards] by contract or the like, to the perpetual service
of John or Thomas,
this will remain exactly in the same state as before; for this is no more than
the same state of subjection for
life, which every apprentice submits to for the
space of seven years ...’(
Commentaries
, i. 412-413).
According to Shyllon, Blackstone’s letter to Sharp ‘merely
repeated what he had said’ in the second edition of the
Commentaries
; his attempted defence of his changes ‘though
apparently ingenious, is downright contradictory ... lamentable and
For Shyllon could accept no compromise: ‘On a matter of
life or death, freedom or slavery, there is not and never can be a
house.’ That stance is incontrovertible from a late twentieth-century
vantage point. But the issue could hardly have
appeared so straightforward to
English lawyers in the 1760s and early ‘70s. As Ruth Paley hasrecently
noted, ‘Case law
on the subject of slavery in England before
was confused and uncertain. The precedents were not only badly reported but
contradictory.’
of this complexity is conveyed by the concluding paragraph of the February 1769
letter, which Shyllon does not print in
full. Here Blackstone had assured Sharp
You want no assistance with regard to the nature of Villenage; a thing totally
distinct from that of Negro Slaving; except that it
may be Collected from the
Law of Villenage, how little a matter will serve (in the humanity of the English
Law) for an Evidence of
Manumission. The only Argument that can be drawn from it
against you, is, that as Villenage was allowed by the Common Law; it cannot
argued that a state of Servitude is absolutely unknown to and inconsistent
Shyllon suggests that while Blackstone might have been ‘polite and
affable’ to Sharp, ‘his loyalty and “personal
were elsewhere’.
as with Simon Schama’s recent spirited account of this same episode,
Shyllon may well both exaggerate the extent and
distort the significance of the
personal bond between Mansfield and
Blackstone.
Long after both men
were dead, Mansfield’s biographer published a lengthy anecdotal passage
suggesting that their relationship
was one of mentor and client, while no less
an authority than the late Dame Lucy Sutherland
asserted that the two
enjoyed ‘a long
friendship’.
corroborative evidence is not thick on the ground. No letters between Blackstone
and Mansfield appear to have survived, nor indeed
other contemporary indications
of a close relationship between the two, even if Mansfield (then plain Mr
Solicitor-General Murray)
was very likely one among those ‘most eminent
Men’ at the bar with whom Blackstone ‘contracted an
Acquaintance’
when attempting to establish his legal practice in the late
Schama‘s suggestion
that Murray ‘had been decisive in procuring for Blackstone the Vinerian
Chair at Oxford’ seems
based on a misunderstanding of Holliday’s
story (perhaps following Shyllon). It may well be that Murray’s patron,
earl of Newcastle, was given Blackstone’s name by Murray as a
potential candidate for Oxford’s vacant chair of Roman
or civil law in
1752. But after his rejection for that post on political grounds,
Blackstone’s successful campaign for the
new Vinerian chair of common law
seems to have been a wholly domestic affair, with no documented intervention
from outside the university.
We do know that after volume I of the
Commentaries
appeared Mansfield
and his judicial colleague Sir John Eardley Wilmot both supplied Blackstone with
suggested corrections and revisions
for a second edition. Mansfield’s
modern biographer suggests that this editorial assistance sufficiently explains
the changed
passage on slavery, as the result of a correction in the interests
of internal consistency, without either imputing any improper
Mansfield’s part to make Blackstone toe the former’s judicial line,
or accusing Blackstone of undue timidity
in maintaining his own
No evidential
justification exists for Schama’s further claim that ‘Mansfield, in
all likelihood, had prevailed upon
William Blackstone to excise the embarrassing
passages concerning the illegitimacy of slaveholding under the Common Law from
later editions of his
Commentaries
’. Moreover (as already
noted) Blackstone continued fiddling with his text even after the Somerset
verdict, so that the fifth
(1773) and later editions further problematised the
supposed property rights of masters over negro servants bought as captives.
is ample evidence in other contexts of Blackstone’s singular
independence of mind, sometimes at the expense of his personal
career prospects.
Not for nothing did he choose for his professional motto the Latin tag
secundus dubiisque recte
[‘whatever the circumstances, he is
In conclusion, Blackstone’s
Commentaries
holds out the promise
of providing an authoritative account of English law and politico-legal
institutions on the eve of the nineteenth
century. Unfortunately for such hopes,
many topics which interest modern historians receive only cursory or slight
treatment in the
Commentaries
. This is hardly surprising, given that
early modern English law was far from treating all aspects of life in equal
detail. Nor was
the law which the
Commentaries
expounded altogether fixed
and certain in substance and application. But while problems of this nature
complicate attempts to use
law books as historical sources, such texts hardly
differ from other forms of evidence, in that they most amply repay careful,
and contextualised reading.
ARC Professorial Fellow,
University of Adelaide.
F W Maitland, ‘Why the
History of English Law is Not Written’ (1888) in H A L Fisher (ed),
Collected Paper of F W Maitland
(1911) 490-1.
See H R Trevor-Roper,
‘The Elizabethan Aristocracy: an Anatomy Anatomized’ (1951)
Economic History Review
J Eveline, ‘Feminism,
Racism and Citizenship in Twentieth-Century Australia’ in P Crawford and P
Maddern (eds),
Women as Australian Citizens: Underlying Histories
For the complex publishing
history of the
Commentaries
, see C S Eller,
The William Blackstone
Collection in the Yale Law Library: A Bibliographical Catalogue
W Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1768-9) i.432-3.
H A Kelly, ‘
and the Folklaw of the Husband’s Stick’
Journal of Legal Education
The Unknown
American Revolution
(2005) 204.
E Foyster, ‘At the
Limits of Liberty; Married Women and Confinement in Eighteenth-Century
England’ (2002) 17
Continuity and Change
42-3, notes that
Blackstone’s text was among other ‘rulings’ which ‘did
not give husbands a general right
to confine their wives, but limited that right
to husbands whose wives were thought to be abusing their freedoms in some way,
example by being “extravagant”’.
J Clitherow (ed),
of Cases ... Compiled by the Honourable Sir William Blackstone ... With a
Preface Containing Memoirs of His Life
(1781) i.xvi. See also J Bailey,
‘Favoured or Oppressed? Married Women, Property and
“Coverture” in England, 1660-1800’
Continuity and
A C Castles,
Australian Legal History
(1982) 11-19.
H Reynolds,
(1987) 12; M Connor,
The Invention of Terra Nullius: Historical
and Legal Fictions on the Foundation of Australia
(2005) is a hypercritical
and largely unconvincing attack on Reynolds's work.
Reynolds, above n 11,
Reynolds, above n
Reynolds, above n
B Attwood, ‘
Law of the Land
or the Law of the Land? History, Law and Narrative in a
Settler Society’ (2004) 2
History Compass
See further S Banner,
Terra Nullius?
Anthropology and Property Law in Early
Australia’ (2005) 23
Law and History Review
H Reynolds,
Law Rights in Colonial Australia
Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty
Ltd and the Commonwealth of Australia
201; Cf J Bray, ‘Underestimating
the Fundamentals’ (Feb 1988) 47
Adelaide Review
R v Murrell and
(1836), cited from on-line report at www.law.mq.edu.au/scnsw.
Castles, above n 10,
F O Shyllon,
Slaves in Britain
(1974) ch 5
Granville Sharp, Esq
(1828) i. 137-9 and see also i. 59, reference to Sharp
receiving ‘little satisfaction’ from [Blackstone’s] opinion
slavery; E Fiddes, ‘Lord Mansfield and the Somersett Case’ (1934) 50
Law Quarterly Review
506; Hoare,
The Letters of Sir
William Blackstone
,W Prest (ed), (2006) 138-9.
R Paley, ‘After
: Mansfield, Slavery and the Law in England, 1772-1830’ in
N Landau (ed),
Law, Crime and English Society 1660-1830
(2002) 168.
Blackstone Letters,
above, 23, 139.
Shyllon, above n 21, 63;
writing to Blackstone on 4 October 1768 Sharp mentioned ‘the polite and
affable reception’
received when he called upon Blackstone at his house in
Lincoln’s Inn Fields, seeking assistance in a suit with the West Indian
slave owner David Lisle : Gloucestershire Record Office, D 3549 13/1/B25.
Blackstone’s note acknowledging Sharp’s ‘Valuable
present’ of a copy of his
Representation of the Injustice ... of
Tolerating Slavery
(1769) ‘sincerely wishes him Success on his humane
undertaking’, a passage quoted by Shyllon without comment.
Crossings: Britain, the Slaves and the American Revolution
(2005) 39-40.
Schama also understates Blackstone’s principled rejection of slavery,
asserting that ‘he was not judging
the propriety or even legitimacy of a
master’s right to enslave’.
John Holliday,
of William Late Earl of Mansfield
(1797) 88-9; L. S. Sutherland,
‘Blackstone and the Legal Chairs at Oxford’, in R.Wellek and A
Ribiero (ed.),
Evidence in Literary Scholarship
(1979) 230-5.
Clitherow, above n 9,
D J Ibbetson,
‘Charles Viner and His Chair: Legal Education at Eighteenth-Century
Oxford’ in J A Bush and A Wiiffels
earning the Law: Teaching and
Transmission of English Law, 1150-1900
(1999) 315-28. The anecdote reprinted
by Shyllon from the
Gentleman’s Magazine
of 1793, representing
Blackstone as unaware of Mansfield’s Scottish antecedents, hardly points
to a close personal relationship.
English Common
Law in the Age of Mansfield
(2004) 316-17. Carole Pateman,
(1988) while generally following Shyllon, also notes the fourth
edition rendering of ‘possibly’ in the key passage of
Book 1, ch 1,
commenting ‘Certainly, his original statement sat very oddly with another
argument in the first edition, in book
I, chapter 14 ...’ (145).
The Order of
Serjeants at Law
(1984) 216, 482; the phrase derives from Horace,
4, 9, 35-6:
‘secundis temporibus dubiisque rectus'
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (97.9 KB)
PDF format (409 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter