URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2017/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Asquith, Nicole L; Dwyer, Angela; Simpson, Paul --- "A Queer Criminal Career" [2017] CICrimJust 21; (2017) 29(2) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 167
Contemporary Comment
A Queer Criminal Career
Nicole L Asquith,
Since the publication of Moffitt’s (1993) important research on
adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent offending, there
renewal of the often tacit goal of criminology of identifying the individual
factors that facilitate and inhibit deviant
behaviour. In focusing on early
childhood biological, genetic and psychological development, and considering
social environment only
as a mediating factor, these approaches miss some of the
queer pathways to crime. We argue that examining offending by queer people
inevitably destabilises taken-for-granted ideas about offending and desistance
from offending. Moreover, given the increasing numbers
of young people
identifying as queer, and that they are more likely to be sanctioned by criminal
processing systems, we highlight
the importance of exploring the experiences of
queer young people. A queer criminological lens can offer up an alternative,
criminal career, which starts not with bio-psychological dysfunctioning,
but with social exclusion and criminalisation of identity.
queer – crime – offending – young people
– criminal career
Introduction
Since the publication of her important research in 1993, Moffitt’s
findings on the attributes of individuals persistently criminalised
life-course has reinvigorated a tacit goal of criminology — particularly,
biocriminology — of identifying
the individual factors that determine
‘criminality’. With the determinants identified and
‘evidenced’, this
criminal justice agencies the ability to focus their resources on those who cost
harm the most: the ‘life-course-persistent offender’ (Moffitt
1993). The explosion of life-course and neurodevelopmental
research over the
last 20 years has provided some evidence of the transitory nature of
rule-breaking for the majority of young people
who come in contact with the
criminal processing system. These young people commonly age out of behaviour
that attracts police intervention
by 25 when certain transition
‘rituals’ provide a pathway to social conformity and criminal
desistance (Maruna 2001,
2011). However, for a small proportion of people
(5–10 per cent), contact with the criminal processing
is persistent
throughout the life-course (Moffit 1993).
Those that are subject to life-course-persistent criminalisation share a
range of biological and neurodevelopmental characteristics
that can present as
early as 17 months (Tremblay et al. 2004) and are measurable from age three. The
Dunedin study has identified
under-controlled temperament, neurological abnormalities, and delayed motor
development at age three, and low intellectual ability,
reading difficulties,
and low scores on memory and hyperactivity between age three and 13 as strong
predictors of ‘life-course-persistent
offending’ (Moffitt &
Caspi 2001; Moffitt 2006). Research has also identified links between
early-onset violent offending
and infant nervous system maldevelopment (Raine,
Brenan & Mednick, 1994; Raine et al. 1996), prenatal malnutrition and
Personality Disorder (Neugebauer, Hoek & Susser 1999), enlarged
corpus callosum, abnormal corpus callosum connective function
and low levels of
the enzyme monoamine oxidase A and the development of antisocial behaviour at
various points in the life-course
(Caspi et al. 2002; see Moffitt 2006 for an
overview of this neurodevelopmental research). These bio-psychological factors
with dysfunctional social and family environments, which are often
connected to parental/carer mental health issues, drug misuse,
socio-economic disadvantage (Moffitt 2006). These biosocial factors are thought
to interact to create the conditions for disengagement
from school and the
development of negative social capital such as the creation of peer groups that
engage in antisocial behaviour
— conditions and social formations that
attract over-policing (Crowthers 2004; Dwyer 2012). Moffitt (2006) argues that
neurodevelopmental
issues in early childhood lead some people into
life-course-persistent criminalisation processes, while social factors such as
pressure and family breakdown in adolescence are the key factors leading to
adolescence-limited criminalisation.
From a critical perspective, it is often difficult to get past the first and
most significant stumbling block with Moffitt’s
(1993) initial framing of
the problem: that crime — and thus, criminality — is socially
constructed. As it is not a fixed
variable, any consideration of the propensity
to criminality must first account for the shifting sands of what is and is not
over time, and then conceptualise and operationalise variables to
account for the under- and over-policing, judgment, and incarceration
people. Already the syntax for the quantitative equation is too complex to then
overlay criminal and biomedical surveillance
data collected by a state that
defines both crime and the allocation of criminal processing resources. Some of
the most important
critiques of biocriminology come from feminists, who point to
the ways in which Moffitt’s (1993, 2006) conceptualisation of
the problem
deepens the gender assumptions about criminality already embedded in
criminological theory and practice (Brown
2006; Daly 2010
; Chesney-Lind &
Morash 2013). To this, we add a queer critique of lifecourse and developmental
criminology.
As with much experimental research reliant upon large (and in the case of
Moffitt’s Dunedin study, longitudinal) data sets,
marginal experiences are
often excluded as outliers.
In these margins exists alternative criminal career pathways that may have
more to do with familial, social, and institutional characteristics
biological or neurodevelopmental factors identified by Moffitt (2006). It is
these marginal experiences and queer pathways
that are of most interest to our
discussions here. Granted, it is likely that there are some queer career
criminals who have the
bio-psychological indicators of Moffitt’s
life-course-persistent offenders. However, it is important to consider how a
pathway to life-course-persistent behaviour might be wholly different to
that documented by Moffitt and other life-course and neurodevelopmental
criminologists. In these marginal narratives of criminalisation, we are offered
alternative resistance and desistance strategies
for those who are similarly
criminalised.
The everyday social lives of queers — of school runs, bill paying,
colds and flus — has remained opaque until quite recently,
especially in
Australia, where we are still grappling with the rights of queers to marry,
adopt and access fertility treatment. Queer
lives are (in)visible lives; all too
visible in laws and practices that regulate our rights to citizenship, and
invisible in everyday
cultural practices that embed us in the meaning of that
citizenship. The logics of governmentality and claims-making requires that
queers are visible enough to constitute a stakeholder in decision-making, yet
this visibility means that queers more easily surveilled
and subject to a series
of manoeuvres that reframe their queerness as part of the norm. This
normalisation, however, is reserved
for only those queers who are not ‘too
queer’; those who want to marry, not those who want to destabilise the
concretised
dichotomous gender order.
Social and legislative recognition of non-normative sexuality and gender
enables us to consider the experiences of queers, and to
begin considering the
wider implications of alternative pathways through the criminal processing
system. Importantly, though, this
is not inclusion of our own making. Even as
some gay men and lesbians are empowered by the state to marry, have or adopt
and be recognised as next-of-kin, how these rights are articulated and
implemented in policies and practices is heteronormative and
cisnormative
— and, we argue, a privileged global North analysis of the critical issues
facing queers worldwide. Ball (2017)
suggests that in addition to a noun and
adjective, ‘queer’ is also a transitive verb, which captures the
process of destabilising,
reforming, critiquing, which can ‘spoil the
effect or success of;
one’s plans’ (Merriam-Webster
Online 2017). Rather than just adding queers to the mix of criminological theory
and practice,
Ball (2017) argues that engaging with the peculiarity of queer
lives necessary means that we must queer the very foundations on which
criminological knowledge is knowable.
We argue the acknowledgement of queers in the criminal processing system
necessarily thwarts the heteronormative and cisnormative
functioning of the
criminal processing system. In effect, queer lives are so peculiar that we must
reconsider some of the unspoken
assumptions about how sexuality and gender are
embedded in the criminological enterprise (Ball 2017). Rather than outliers in
quantitative
analyses, we suggest that the marginal experiences of queer
criminal careers represent a disruption of the taken-for-granted criminal
‘justice’ processes. While our interest in this comment is squarely
upon queers, the hypothesised role of familial exile
and the consequential
survival crimes is a pathway shared by others who are without the necessary
familial and social resources to
resist crime and circumvent criminalisation
Queers and criminality
Building on earlier research (Mason 2002; Tomsen 2009), the last five years
has seen a growing scholarship in an area that has come
to be known as
‘queer criminology’. While most attention has been on queer people
as victims, queer criminologists have
also begun to examine the unique
characteristics of queer offending. Recognition by criminal justice agencies
(and criminology more
generally) has been critical in making some in-roads into
the barriers faced by queer offenders. However, this recognition of sexuality
and gender diversity (in law and practice) necessarily causes disruptions to
normalised conceptions of criminality and justice, including
those embedded in
biocriminology. For many, their queer criminal career is initiated by familial
and cultural forces beyond their
control (such as family exile due to
heterosexism and cis-sexism) and sustained through the normal adolescent-limited
boundary testing
and into a life-course of being subject to criminalisation.
Importantly, our intent here is to problematise the biological assumptions of
criminal career research by considering the impact of
sexuality and gender on
our understandings of criminal injustice. However, this is only one intersection
informing these complex
lives. Queers do not come in one white, middle-class,
ableist package and, as with others similarly criminalised, queer career
are likely to experience criminal injustice through the multiple
intersections of class, race, (dis)ability, gender and sexuality.
criminal career research has considered the sex differences in
life-course-persistent criminalisation (Benda 2005; Mazerolle
et al. 2000;
Moffitt & Caspi 2001), our survey of the field has identified that the
impact of sexuality and gender identity has
yet to be considered by
developmental and life-course criminology. The existing research has also
ignored how marginalisation experienced
by queers undermines the efficacy of
traditional desistance models (Graham 2016; Laub & Sampson 2001), especially
for young people
in contact with the criminal processing system whose lives are
marked by family exile. As identified in the criminal career (Moffit
1993, 2006)
and desistance (Graham 2016) research, reduced familial and social capital are
critical to the onset and entrenchment
behaviours deemed criminal, which, unless
addressed, could be inhibitors to desistance across the lifecourse.
Demographic attributes for sexuality are becoming more commonplace in
criminological research (Jenness 2010) and awareness about some
experiences of gay men and lesbians have now been documented in mainstream
research (Butler et al. 2010). However, as the
Australian census (and the United
States (‘US’) census) is yet to ask about sexuality, it is difficult
to talk of prevalence
in the population or in the criminal processing system.
Additionally, while gay men and lesbians are more commonly considered in
criminological research, this is not the case for the other queers, such as
those who identify as transgender, gender non-conforming,
bisexual, asexual, or
pansexual. Queer offenders’ experiences are rarely considered or are often
excluded on methodological
grounds. Definitional concerns also make identifying
these subpopulations in prisons difficult as they may not identify while
or incarcerated given the safety issues documented in the literature
(Jenness 2010; Robinson 2011; Simpson et al. 2016; Wilson et
The most significant problem in identifying the number and proportion of
queers entering the system is the absence of demographic
intake data relating to
sexuality and gender at most points in the criminal processing system (Robinson
Despite constituting a relatively small proportion of
prisoners, transgender people are more likely to come to the attention of
processing and corrective services. This is because their gender
identity can be documented on intake when they request housing appropriate
their gender — if their gender clashes with the sex markers on their
identity documents — or by prison officers in
risk assessment (Sumner
& Jenness 2013; Jenness 2010; Robinson
2011; Scott 2013).
segregated housing or isolation and ‘trans pods’ have been variously
used in Australia and the US to manage
the safety of transgender prisoners. The
former cloaks punishment as security, while research on the latter has indicated
that violence
from staff increases in these ‘safe spaces’ (Sylvia
Rivera Law Project 2007). Even so, we still have no precise Australian
how many queers are detained by police, subject to court proceedings,
incarceration or community sentences. These issues
are made more complex in the
context of young people’s offending given the sensitivities and risks
around disclosure of sexuality
and gender identity in carceral settings.
The only Australian study to have collected reliable population data on queer
prisoners is the Sexual Health and Attitudes of Australian
Prisoners study
(Richters et al. 2008). In brief, for each New South Wales (‘NSW’)
and Queensland prison (except for
remote and isolated settings like work camps)
a random sample was drawn from a list of all current prisoners. Of those invited
participate, 2351 men and women were interviewed (participation rate 80%). Of
these, 37 per cent of female prisoners identified as
lesbian or bisexual (vs
3.4% in the community), five per cent of male prisoners identified as gay or
bisexual (vs 3.2% in the community),
and 0.3 per cent transgender or sister-girl
(Butler et al. 2010; Richters et al. 2008; Richters et al. 2014) (The term
‘sistergirls’
typically refers to Australian Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander persons assigned at birth as male but who identify as or live
women. In traditional communities the word ‘sistergirl’ can also
include sisters or gay men (Costell & Nannup
1999). For a discussion of
recent sistergirl experiences, see Hodge (2015))
With 38,845 adult
prisoners housed in Australia (35,745 in men’s prisons and 3094 in
women’s prisons (ABS 2016)), the
above estimates imply approximately 2932
lesbian, gay and bisexual, and 117 transgender, prisoners in Australian prisons.
If we account
for prison ‘throughput’ — the number of people
who enter and exit the prison system over a period of time, exceeding
average number of people in prison measured on any given day — these
figures would be significantly higher. (For Australian
estimates of throughput,
see Avery & Kinner 2015.) Nearly one in three of lesbian or bisexual female
prisoners is estimated to
be Indigenous, and one in five gay or bisexual male
prisoners is Indigenous (Butler et al. 2010), highlighting that any work on the
over-incarceration of queers in Australia is also about the over-incarceration
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
International research shows that
queer populations are
particularly at risk of imprisonment, with US studies consistently finding
higher rates of imprisonment for
queer offenders (Belknap et al. 2013; Curtin
2002; Richie 2014). Belknap et al. (2013) found that 13.4 per cent of young
people sampled
from Ohio juvenile detention facilities identified as lesbian,
gay or bisexual (27% of girls and 5% of boys). Of juvenile offenders
surveyed in
six US juvenile justice jurisdictions, Irvine (2010) found 15 per cent
identified as lesbian, gay bisexual or transgender,
gender non-conforming
(people whose gender expression diverges from the norms expected for their
gender, but still identify with
the sex they were designated at birth (Irvine
2010)), or questioning their sexuality (11% of boys and 27% of girls). Six per
of Irvine’s participants identified as transgender or gender
non-conforming (Irvine 2010). In Australia, where increasing numbers
people are being detained and remanded in some states (AIHW 2015) — and
increasing numbers of young people are identifying
as LGBTIQA+ (Hillier et al.
2010; Robinson et al. 2014) — there is a pressing need to understand queer
young people’s
experiences of these settings.
Queering criminal careers
The over-representation of queers in the criminal processing system can be
attributed to two distinct processes:
social exclusion
due to sexuality
and gender identity; and
criminalisation processes
in terms of the
construction and application of cisnormative and heteronormative laws and
criminal justice practices. Social exclusion
as mediated by structural
inequalities is a significant factor in understanding the queer criminal career.
Abuse, harassment, discrimination
and its antecedents (such as homelessness,
alcohol and other drug misuse, and mental health issues) re-instantiate queers
margins of society (Hunt, & Moodie-Mills 2012; Irvine 2010; Grant et
al. 2011; Hillier et al. 2010; Mays & Cochran 2001;
Perkins et al. 1994;
Prestage et al. 2007). While this marginality could arguably build resilience
for some, it is nonetheless important
to understand how marginality impacts on
the production and trajectory of queer criminal careers, and how this
marginality may facilitate
criminalised queer subjects. Further, it is
increasingly important to explore the experiences of queer young people
specifically
given that more young people are now identifying as queer in some
way (Hillier et al. 2010; Robinson et al. 2014) and research from
suggests they are more often subject to schooling and criminal justice sanctions
(Himmelstein & Bruckner 2011). Such marginality
may be expressed and
informed by the inter-related issues of criminalisation of identity, family
exile and homelessness, and barriers
to employment.
Criminalisation of sexuality and gender identity
Sexuality and gender diverse people have a long history of estranged,
violent, and problematic relationships with criminal processing
systems as both
victims and offenders (Dwyer 2012; Asquith 2012). Young queer people experience
criminalisation for same-sex sexual
behaviour (Dwyer 2014; Curtin 2002; Hunt
& Moodie-Mills 2012), especially those queer people residing in states where
age of consent has applied to same sex relationships (Dwyer 2011;
Dennis 2013). Queers have been subject to overpolicing in the night
time economy
(Dwyer 2012; Dwyer & Ball 2009), with gay men criminalised for their use of
public spaces (such as beats) (Dalton
2008), and all queers overpoliced in
quasi-private spaces (such as using ‘sniffer dogs’ in LGBTQ
nightclubs; Dwyer 2011)
and police raids on LGBTQ identified nightclubs, like
the raid on the Tasty nightclub in Melbourne in 1994 (Russell 2015).
Transgender people experience differential treatment from police without
cause (Dwyer 2012; James et al. 2016), with US research showing
some trans women
are arrested for simply having identification that mismatches their appearance
(Sylvia Rivera Law Project 2007).
James et al. (2016) found that of the 27,715
respondents to the
US Transgender Survey
, two per cent had been
arrested in the previous year, and that 22 per cent of these respondents
believed they were arrested because
they were transgender. Another example of
differential treatment relates to US police targeting and searching trans women
workers for condoms as evidence of engaging in
‘prostitution-related offenses’, and the use of condoms as evidence
‘prostitution-related offenses’ in criminal proceedings (Wurth et
al. 2013). Similarly, the distribution of black-market
another crime impacting trans people (Sylvia Rivera Law Project 2007). When
hormones are refused to trans men and trans women by
medical practitioners, or
legal access to hormones is too expensive, black-market hormones can often be
the only option to maintain
their gender identity. All these factors highlight
the importance of documenting in detail
young queer people come to be
involved in queer criminal careers (Rogers, Asquith & Dwyer 2017).
In each of these examples, it is the exceptional characteristics or
behaviours of an individual’s gender identity, sexual behaviour,
sexuality that is criminalised. What research does exist on queer offending
focuses on the sex, gender, and sexuality-related
offences experienced
differentially by queer offenders (such as the criminalisation of sodomy,
differential ages of consent, policing
of beats, unprotected sex, and
paedophilia) (Ball 2017). In this sense, queer offending is exceptionalised and
festishised in and
by the criminal processing system. Queer people are subject
to laws that their heteronormative peers are not, and it is important
document the ways in which heteronormative and cisnormative laws constructed the
queer body as criminal. However, with few exceptions
(such as Panfil’s
(2017) ground-breaking work on queer gang members), we know little of how
sexuality and gender diversity
shapes everyday offending and is subject to
everyday criminalisation.
Family exile and homelessness
A central characteristic of queer criminalisation is the experience of
(Abramovich 2012;
Valentine et al. 2003). Exiled lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth experience
higher rates of homelessness that can
lead to ‘survival crimes’ such
as property theft and selling drugs, and other criminalised economies such as
unregulated
sex work (Irvine & Canfield 2015–16). In Australia, people
who identify as LGB were twice as likely to experience homelessness
heterosexual counterparts (McNair et al. 2017) and in the US, gay, lesbian, and
transgender youth make up 40 per cent
of the young homeless population despite
making up only five to seven per cent of young people (Hunt & Moodie-Mills
2012). This
brings queers into contact with the criminal processing system at
higher rates than their heterosexual and cisgender peers (Curtin
2002; Richie
2014; Hunt & Moodie-Mills 2012; Irvine 2010).
gender is the
opposite to
gender, and denotes those women who identify with their
sex at birth. Homeless transgender people are two to two-and-a-half times
likely to be incarcerated (Grant et al. 2011; James et al. 2016) and are
incarcerated for minor homelessness-related offences,
such as loitering or
sleeping outside (Sylvia Rivera Law Project 2007).
absence of protective factors against the onset of criminal
behaviour and a
critical support network to enhance desistance. The social structures assumed to
exist for others (such as stable
family and secure housing), and used to help
them desist from crime and avoid criminalisation, may be absent for many queers.
instance, service providers interviewed by McNair et al. (2017) noted family
conflict and rejection as key reasons for LGBTQ homelessness,
and reasons why
LGBTQ people were leaving home at a younger age than their peers. Oparah (2012)
also notes these issues as a core
reason why transgender young people run away
or are exiled from family homes in the US. Meiners (2007), in examining the
of sex offender registries in the US, argues how the construction of
‘stranger danger’ within sexual violence prevention
discourse (at
sites such as the school) work to legitimise and reaffirm the myth that the
heteronormative nuclear family is a site
of safety and protection — a myth
only sustained if we overlook how gender and sexuality plays out in such
heteronormative/heteropatriarchal
social formations (Irvine & Canfield
In addition to highlighting the queer factors that trigger the onset of
criminalised behaviour (such as family exile), queer criminal
careers also
highlight the heteronormative assumptions underlying some desistance theory and
practices (such as a family or community
that accepts and embraces sexuality and
gender diversity). While families-of-choice may mediate and buffer queers’
experiences
of exile from families-of-origin, the scant existing research on
these alternative family forms means that it is difficult to assess
strengthening families-of-choice will ameliorate the harms caused, and
trajectories initiated, by the original exile from
family-of-origin (Dewaele
Employment barriers
Queers experience high rates of unemployment and employment discrimination
(Asquith 1999; Drydakis 2014; Tilcsik 2011; Willis 2009).
In Australia, Barrett,
Lewis and Dwyer (2011, p. 9) found that queer workers were disclosing their
sexuality and gender diversity
more often, but they experienced more
discrimination at work as a result, including ‘death threats (80%),
threats of physical
abuse via telephone (67%), property damage (33%), verbal
threats of sexual abuse (30%), verbal threats of physical abuse (29%) and
threats of sexual abuse via telephone (25%)’. The International Gay and
Lesbian Association (2014) found that at least
20 per cent of European lesbians
and gay men had experienced discrimination, and that 31–49 per cent were
closeted at work
due to fear of discrimination (IGLA 2014; James et al. 2016).
James et al. (2016) found that transgender people were three times
more likely
than their US peers to be unemployed, and twice as likely to be living in
poverty. Additionally, 15 per cent of respondents
who had employment were
verbally harassed, physically attacked, and/or sexually assaulted, 23 per cent
had experienced forms of workplace
discrimination because of their transgender
status, and 15 per cent had resigned due to discrimination or violence (James et
Employment insecurity such as this can lead some queers into the
‘underground economies’ (James et al. 2016) of illicit
drug selling
and street-based sex work, which in many jurisdictions remains criminalised.
These economies attract high police surveillance
and intervention (Scott 2013;
Sylvia Rivera Law Project 2007). Irvine’s (2010) study of 2100 lesbian,
gay, bisexual, questioning,
and gender non-conforming young people in juvenile
detention found there were significant proportional differences in sex work
between heterosexual boys (1%) and girls (5%) and lesbian, gay,
bisexual and queer boys (10%) and girls (11%). At least 11 per cent
transgender people had engaged in sex work (Grant et al. 2011; James et al.
2016), which contrasts substantially with the Prostitutes’
Network’s estimation of only one per cent of cisgender women (Grant et al.
2011). Further, Garofalo et al. (2006)
found 76 per cent of trans women engaging
in sex work had been arrested and 37 per cent had been incarcerated.
Importantly, the over-representation
of queers cannot be solely attributed to
negative life choices stemming from social exclusion such as family exile. The
term ‘survival
crime’ is only relevant in those jurisdictions where
sex work remains criminalised. We argue that in those jurisdictions where
work is decriminalised and regulated, the decision to engage in this work could
be considered strategic given the level of autonomy
and lack of employment
barriers. As legal employment is a key protective and desistance factor, we need
to understand how
criminalised
unregulated
work impacts on the
development of queer criminal careers.
Queering criminal career research
A critical outcome in the development of criminal career research has been
the identification of transitional and developmental points
between childhood,
adolescence and adulthood that facilitate the decision to (dis)engage in
behaviour deemed criminal. DeLisi and
Piquero (2011) have identified the lack of
methodological and sampling diversity within existing
life-course criminology, and recommend the expansion of the field to address
the critique — largely from critical realist, radical,
feminist and
critical criminologists (see, for example, Burt & Simons 2014; Carrier &
Walby 2015; Draper et al. 2015; Mangels
2000; Walby & Carrier 2010) —
that research to date has not deployed qualitative approaches to understand
typologies of
career offending, or fully considered the ‘cardinal
demographic’ of sex and the situational contexts of offending. They
advise that biosocial approaches will continue to elicit a ‘so
what?’ critique until such time that they can identify
the critical,
early-life factors that shape decisions in relation to
criminality (DeLisi & Piquero 2011), such as family dysfunction and family
As critical criminologists, we suggest that in the disruptions to statistical
models, we may find narratives that tell us more about
the familial, social, and
institutional contexts of resistance, persistence, and desistance. In adopting
alternative methodologies
(such as appreciative enquiry and life-course
mapping), critical criminologies such as queer criminology may offer a new model
understanding the key developmental and social factors that produce and
influence queer criminalisation, especially in relation to
the developmental
contexts that have been shown as instrumental in offending patterns of career
criminals, such as social capital
and family exile. For example, Ryan et al.
(2009) found family rejection was a significant predictor of a range of negative
including increased likelihood of attempted suicide (84%), depression
(59%), and use of illegal drugs (34%).
In the context of queer criminal careers, where exile from family is possible
and social exclusion is probable, traditional desistance
strategies may simply
miss the mark for queer young offenders, especially when these young people are
often excluded not only from
family but also from peer and schooling networks.
Another gap in the career criminal research is the critical
factors that enhance desistance such as marriage, employment, and parenthood
(DeLisi & Piquero 2011). In each of these areas,
queer people are likely to
have a differential experience from those documented in conventional career
criminal research. Programs
and policies that do not account for these
differences will undermine attempts at desistance from queer criminal careers.
It is also important to acknowledge that even where marriage is a legal
option for those in same-sex relationships, such a legal investment
to equality
can work at re-instantiating social exclusion for many queers. For those whose
identities, intimate relationships and
families are not binary, monogamous
and/or nuclear, respectively, can be rendered ‘abject, unworthy, or unable
to be assimilated
into either heteronormative or homonormative
citizenship’ (Agathangelou et al. 2008 cited in Quinn & Meiners 2013,
This logic suggests that some queer people are worthy of state
recognition and support while others are deemed unworthy, thus contributing
the very factors that can lead to being subject to criminalisation (Quinn &
Meiners 2013).
We must also strive to understand the impact of these human rights
deficiencies in Australian policies and practices (Richards &
Dwyer 2014),
and consider how restrictions imposed on queer peoples’ social citizenship
(through limitations on recognition
of same-sex relationships and rights to
adopt) may also shape their experience of incarceration (such as conjugal rights
and Victorian offenders, and access visits from non-biological children)
(Indig et al. 2009; Wiggum 2008–09; Wolfe 2008). In
addition to
heterosexist attitudes and violence from criminal processing staff, the lack of
awareness and acknowledgement of queers
in police detention, prisons, and on
community sentences can mean that rehabilitation, education and support programs
may exclude
their needs (Belknap et al. 2013; Curtin 2002; Richie 2014; Dennis
2013; Irvine 2010).
The queer criminal career is an alternative pathway into and out of crime.
Researchers and practitioners working on the development
of desistance programs
are unlikely to identify the ways that heteronormative and cisnormative
assumptions can inhibit desistance
for queer career criminals unless they
consider the experiences of queers transitioning through the criminal processing
system. Further,
offender support programs that assume that
‘pro-social’ is a neutral concept may not understand the significant
in which heteronormative and cisnormative ideals shape Australian social
citizenship. Focusing on the exceptional experiences of
queer offenders is
important in the short term if we are to develop appropriate resistance and
desistance strategies. Understanding
the trajectories of the queer criminal
career and the queer pathways to desistance can provide new knowledge about
others who share
the criminalisation of identity, family exile, social
exclusion, and partial social citizenship. This laudable short-term goal of
making life just a little easier for queer career criminals, however, must be
matched with the longer term goals of displacing the
criminalisation of
sexuality and gender, and given that ‘their laws will never make us
safer’ (Spade 2013), disrupting
the carceral enterprise unpinning
criminology. In this respect, the criminological enterprise as a whole —
but especially,
life-course and developmental criminology — could benefit
from a queer lens.
Abramovich, IA 2012, ‘No safe place to go’,
Canadian Journal
of Family & Youth
, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 29–51.
Asquith, NL 1999, ‘Sexuality at work’,
New Zealand Journal of
Industrial Relations
, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1–24.
Asquith, NL 2012, ‘Vulnerability and the art of complaint making’
in I Bartkowiak-Théron & NL Asquith (eds.),
vulnerability
, Federation Press, Crow’s Nest, NSW.
Ault, A 1996, ‘The dilemma of identity: bi women’s
negotiations’ in S Seidman (ed.),
Queer theory/sociology
, Blackwell
Publishers, Cambridge.
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016,
Prisoners in Australia 2016
no.4517.0, ABS, Canberra.
Australian Institute of Health & Welfare 2015, ‘Youth detention
population in Australian 2015’,
Bulletin 131
, viewed 6 October
2017, www.aihw.gov.au/getmedia/c24d5548-c10e-4ce4-b8b3-b6414a8f3bfb/
19489_1.pdf.aspx?inline=true.
Ball, M 2016,
Criminology & queer theory: Dangerous bedfellow?
Palgrave, London.
Barrett, N, Lewis, J & Dwyer, A 2011, ‘Effects of disclosure of
sexual identity at work for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender
and intersex
(GLBTI) employees in Queensland’ in
Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Australian and New Zealand Academy of Management Conference
, Australian and
New Zealand Academy of Management, 7–9 December 2011, Amora Hotel,
Wellington.
Belknap, J 1996,
The invisible woman: gender, crime, and justice
Wadsworth, Belmont.
Belknap, J, Holsinger, K & Little JS 2013, ‘Lesbian, gay and
bisexual youth incarcerated in delinquent facilities’
in D Peterson &
VR Panfil (eds.),
Handbook of LGBT communities, crime, and justice
Springer, London & New York.
Benda, BB 2005, ‘Gender differences in life-course theory of
recidivism: a survival analysis’,
International Journal of Offender
Therapy and Comparative Criminology
, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 325–42.
Brown, M 2006 ‘Gender, ethnicity, and offending over the life course:
women’s pathways to prison in the Aloha State’,
Criminology
, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 137–58.
Burt, CH & Simons, RL 2014, ‘Pulling back the curtain on
heritability studies: biosocial criminology in the postgenomic
Criminology
, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 223–62.
Butler, JP 1990,
Gender trouble: feminism and the subversion of
, Routledge, New York.
Butler, T, Richters, J, Yap, L, Papanastasiou, C, Richards, A, Schneider, K,
Grant, L, Smith, A & Donovan, B 2010,
Sexual health and behaviour of
Queensland prisoners: Queensland and New South Wales comparisons
Drug Research Institute, Curtin University & Public Health & Community
Medicine, UNSW, Perth & Sydney.
Carrier, N & Walby, K 2015, ‘Is biososcial criminology a
predisposition not to learn from the social sciences?’,
Theoretical & Philosophical Criminology
, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
Caspi, A, McClay, J, Moffitt, TE, Mill, J, Martin, J, Craig, IW, Taylor, A
& Poulton, R 2002, ‘Role of genotype in the cycle
of violence in
maltreated children’,
, vol. 297, pp. 851–54.
Chesney-Lind, M & Morash, M 2013 ‘Transformative feminist
criminology: a critical re-thinking of a discipline’,
Criminology
, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 287-304.
Costell, M & Nannup, R 1999,
Report of the National Indigenous
Sistergirl Forum
, Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations, Sydney.
Crowthers, C 2004, ‘Over-policing and under-policing social
exclusion’ in RH Burke (ed.),
Hard cop, soft cop: dilemmas and debates
in contemporary policing
, Routledge, London & New York.
Curtin, M 2002, ‘Lesbian & bisexual girls in the juvenile justice
Child & Adolescent Social Work Journal
, vol. 19, no.
4, pp. 285–301.
Dalton, D 2008, ‘Gay male resistance in “beat” spaces in
Australia: a study of outlaw desire’,
Australian Feminist Law
, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 97–119.
Daly, K 2010, ‘Feminist perspectives in criminology: a review with gen
Y in mind’ in T Newburn & T Jefferson (eds.),
handbook of criminological theory
, SAGE, London & Thousand Oaks.
DeLisi, M & Piquero, AR 2011, ‘New frontiers in criminal careers
research, 2000–2011: A state-of-the-art review’,
Criminal Justice
, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 289–301.
Dennis, JP 2013, ‘The LGBT offender’ in D Peterson & VR
Panfil (eds.),
Handbook of LGBT communities, crime, and justice
Springer, London & New York.
Draper, MR, Olsen, JM, McGraw, J & Sturtevant, D 2015, ‘An
interpretivist introduction to the bio-criminology and critical
criminology
Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Criminology
7, pp. 42–60.
Drydakis, N 2014, ‘Sexual orientation and labor market outcomes’,
IZA World of Labor
, no. 111, viewed 29 September 2017,
www.prideinclusionprograms.com.au/content/uploads/2015/06/sexual-orientation-and-labor-market-outcomes-1.pdf.
Dwyer, A 2011, ‘Policing LGBT young people as a research gap’,
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 415–33.
Dwyer, A 2012, ‘Policing visible sexual/gender diversity as a program
of governance’,
International Journal of Crime and Justice
no.1, pp. 14–26.
Dwyer, A 2014, ‘“We’re not like these weird feather
boa-covered AIDS-spreading monsters”: how LGBT young people
and service
providers think riskiness informs LGBT youth-police interactions’,
Critical Criminology
, vol. 22, no.1, pp. 65–79.
Dwyer, A & Ball, M 2009, ‘Policing sexualities’ in RG
Broadhurst & SE Davies (eds.),
Policing in context: introduction to
police work in Australia
, Oxford University Press, South Melbourne.
Garofalo, R, Osmer, E, Doll, M, Harper, GW & Deleon, J 2006,
‘Overlooked, misunderstood & at-risk: exploring the lives
and HIV risk
of ethnic minority male-to-female transgender youth’,
Adolescent Health
, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 230–6.
Graham H 2016,
Rehabilitation work: supporting desistance and
, Routledge, London & New York.
Grant, JM, Mottet, LA, Tanis, J, Harrison, J, Herman, JL & Keisling, M
Injustice at every turn: a report of the national transgender
discrimination survey
, National Center for Transgender Equality,
Washington.
Hillier, L, Jones, T, Monagle, M, Overton, N, Gahan, L, Blackman, J &
Mitchell, A 2010,
Writing themselves in 3: the third national study on the
sexual health and wellbeing of same sex attracted and gender questioning
, Australian Research Centre in Sex, Health & Society, La Trobe
University, Melbourne.
Himmelstein, KEW and Bruckner, H 2011, ‘Criminal justice and school
sanctions against
non-heterosexual youth: a national longitudinal study’,
, vol. 127, no. 1, pp. 49–57.
Hodge, D 2015,
Colouring the rainbow: blak queer and trans
perspectives
, Wakefield Press, Adelaide.
Hunt, J & Moodie-Mills, A 2012,
The unfair criminalization of gay and
transgender youth
, Center for American Progress, Washington.
Indig, D, Topp, L, Ross, B, Mamoon, H, Border, B, Kumar, S & McNamara, M
2009 Health inmate survey: key findings report
, Justice Health,
International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans & Intersex Association (ILGA)
Europe 2016,
Annual review of the human rights situation of lesbian,
gay, bisexual, trans and intersex people in Europe
, IGLA, Belgium.
Irvine, A & Canfield, A 2015–16, ‘The overrepresentation of
lesbian, gay, bisexual, questioning, gender nonconforming
and transgender youth
within the child welfare to juvenile justice crossover population’,
American University Journal of Gender, Social Policy & the Law
24, pp. 243–61.
Irvine, A 2010, ‘“We've had three of them”: addressing the
invisibility of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and gender nonconforming
youths in the
juvenile justice system’,
Columbia Journal of Gender and Law
19, no. 3, pp. 675–701.
James, SE, Herman, JL, Rankin, S, Keisling, M, Mottet, L & Anafi, M 2016,
The report of the 2015 US transgender survey
, National Center for
Transgender Equality, Washington.
Jenness, V 2010, ‘From policy to prisoners to people: a “soft
mixed methods” approach to studying transgender prisoners’,
Journal of Contemporary Ethnography
, vol. 39, no. 5, pp.
Laub, JH & Sampson, RJ 2001, ‘Understanding desistance from
crime’ in M Tonry (ed.),
Crime and justice: a review of research
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
McNair, R, Andrews, C, Parkinson, S & Dempsey, D 2017,
Mangels, NJ 2000, ‘Latent biases in biocriminological research’,
The Justice Professional
, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 105–23.
Maruna, S 2001,
Making good: how ex-convicts reform and rebuild their
, American Psychological Association Books, London & Washington,
Maruna, S 2011, ‘Reentry as a rite of passage’,
, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–28.
Mason, G 2002,
The spectacle of violence: homophobia, gender and
, London, Routledge.
Mays, VM & Cochran, SD 2001, ‘Mental health correlates of perceived
discrimination among lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults
in the United
American Journal of Public Health
, vol. 91, no. 11,
pp. 1869–76.
Mazerolle, P, Brame, R, Paternoster, R, Piquero, S & Dean, C 2000,
‘Onset age, persistence, and offending versatility: comparisons
Criminology
, vol. 38, no. 34, pp. 1143–72.
Merriam-Webster Online 2017, ‘Queer’, viewed 28 September 2017,
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/queer.
Moffitt, T 1993, ‘Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent
antisocial behavior: a developmental taxonomy’,
Psychological
, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 674–701.
Moffitt, TE 2006, ‘Life-course-persistent versus adolescence-limited
antisocial behavior’ in D Cicchetti & DJ Cohen
Developmental psychopathology: risk, disorder, and adaptation
Wiley, New York.
Moffitt, TE & Caspi, A 2001, ‘Childhood predictors of differentiate
life-course persistent and adolescence-limited pathways,
among males and
Development and Psychopathology
, vol. 8, pp.
Neugebauer, R, Hoek, HW & Susser, E 1999, ‘Prenatal exposure to
wartime famine and development of antisocial personality
disorder in early
adulthood’,
Journal of the American Medical Association
vol. 281, pp. 455–62.
Oparah, JC 2012, ‘Feminism and the (trans)gender entrapment of gender
nonconforming prisoners’,
UCLA Women’s Law Journal
no. 2, pp. 239–71.
Panfil, VR 2017,
The gang's all queer: the lives of gay gang members
NYU Press, New York.
Perkins, R, Griffin, A & Jakobsen, J 1994,
Transgender lifestyles and
HIV/AIDS risk: national transgender HIV/AIDS needs assessment project
Prestage, G, Degenhardt, L, Jin, F, Grulich, A, Imrie, J, Kaldor, J &
Kippax, S 2007, ‘Predictors of frequent use of amphetamine
among HIV-negative gay men’,
Drug & Alcohol Dependence
91, no. 2–3, pp. 260–8.
Quinn, T & Meiners, ER 2013, ‘From anti-bullying laws and gay
marriages to queer worlds and just futures’,
QED: A Journal in GLBTQ
Worldmaking
, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 149–75.
Raine, A, Brennan, P & Mednick, SA 1994, ‘Birth complications
combined with early maternal rejection at age 1 year predispose
to violent crime
at age 18 years’,
Archives of General Psychiatry
Raine, A, Brennan, P, Mednick, B & Mednick, SA 1996, ‘High rates of
violence, crime, academic problems and behavioural problems
in males with both
early neuromotor deficits and unstable family environments’,
of General Psychiatry
, vol. 53, pp. 544–9.
Richards, K and Dwyer, A 2014, ‘Unspeakably present: the
(un)acknowledgement of diverse sexuality and gender human rights in
youth justice systems,
Australian Journal of Human Rights
no. 2, pp. 63–79.
Richie, B 2014, ‘Queering anti-prison work: African-American lesbians
in the juvenile justice system’ in J Sudbury (ed.),
Global lockdown:
race, gender, and the prison-industrial complex
, Routledge, London & New
Richters, J, Butler, T, Yap, L, Kirkwood, K, Grant, L, Smith, A, Schneider, K
& Donovan, B 2008,
Sexual health and behaviour of New South Wales
, Public Health and Community Medicine, UNSW, Sydney.
Robinson, KH, Bansel, P, Denson, N, Ovenden, G & Davies, C 2014,
Growing up queer: issues facing young Australians who are gender variant and
sexuality diverse
, Young & Well Cooperative Research Centre,
Robinson, RK 2011, ‘Masculinity as Prison’,
California Law
, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 1309–408.
Rodgers, J, Asquith NL & Dwyer, A 2017, ‘Cisnormativity,
criminalisation, vulnerability: transgender people in prisons’,
Briefing Paper
, no. 12, pp. 1–12.
Russell, E 2015, ‘Revisiting the Tasty raid: lesbian and gay
respectability and police legitimacy’,
Australian Feminist Law
, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 121–40.
Ryan, C, Huebner, D, Diaz, R & Sanchez, J 2009, ‘Family rejection
as a predictor of negative health outcomes in white and
Latino lesbian, gay, and
bisexual young adults’,
, vol. 123, no. 1, pp.
Scheingold, SA 1984,
The politics of law and order
, Longman, New York.
Scott, S 2013, ‘“One is not born, but becomes a woman”: a
14th amendment argument in support of housing male-to-female
transgender
inmates’, U
niversity of Pennsylvania Journal of Constitutional Law
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1259–98.
Simpon, PL, Reekie, J, Butler, TG, Richters, J, Yap, L, Grant, L, Richards, A
& Donovan, B 2016, ‘Factors associated with
sexual coercion in a
representative sample of men in Australian prisoners’,
Archives of
Sexual Behaviour
, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1195–205.
Sumner, J & Jenness, V 2013, ‘Gender integration in sex-segregated
US prisons’ in D Peterson & VR Panfil (eds.),
Handbook of LGBT
communities, crime, and justice
, Springer, London & New York.
Sylvia Rivera Law Project 2007,
‘It’s war in here’: a
report on the treatment of transgender and intersex people in New York State
men’s prisons
, SRLP, New York, viewed 16 November 2017,
http://archive.srlp.org/resources/pubs/warinhere.
Tilcsik, A 2011, ‘Pride and prejudice: employment discrimination
against openly gay men in the United States’,
American Journal of
, vol. 117, no. 2, pp. 586–626.
Tomsen, S 2009,
Violence, prejudice and sexuality
, Routledge, New
Valentine, G, Skelton, T & Butler, R 2003, ‘Coming out and
outcomes: negotiating lesbian and gay identities with, and in,
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space
pp. 479–99.
Walby, K & Carrier, N 2010, ‘The rise of biocriminology: capturing
observable bodily economies of “criminal man”’,
Criminology
& Criminal Justice
, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 261–85.
Wiggum, KE 2008–09, ‘Defining family in American prisons’,
Women’s Rights Law Reporter
, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 357–424.
Willis, P 2009, ‘From exclusion to inclusion: young queer
workers’ negotiations of sexually exclusive and inclusive spaces
Australian workplaces’,
Journal of Youth Studies
, vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 629–51.
Wilson, M, Simpson, PL, Butler, TG, Richters, J & Yap, L 2016,
‘“You’re a woman, a convenience, a cat, a poof,
a thing, an
idiot”: transgender women negotiating sexual experiences in men’s
prisons in Australia’,
Sexualities
, vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
Wolfe, Z 2008, ‘Gay and lesbian prisoners: recent developments and a
call for more research’,
Prison Legal News
, 1 October, viewed 17
November 2017,
http://www.prisonlegalnews.org/news/2008/oct/15/gay-and-lesbian-prisoners-recent-developments-and-a-call-for-more-research/.
Wurth, MH, Schleifer, R, McLemore, M, Todrys, KW & Amon, JJ 2013,
‘Condoms as evidence of prostitution in the united states
criminalization of sex work’,
Journal of the International AIDS
, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–3.
Young, J 1986, ‘The failure of criminology: the need for a radical
realism’ in R Matthews & J Young (eds.),
Confronting
, SAGE, London.
Associate Professor in
Policing & Criminal Justice, School of Social Sciences and Psychology,
Western Sydney University, PO Box
1797, Penrith NSW 2751, Australia. Email:
n.asquith@westernsydney.edu.au.
Associate Professor in
Police Studies and Emergency Management, the School of Social Sciences,
College of Arts, Law and Education,
University of Tasmania, Private Bag 22,
Hobart Tas 7001, Australia. Email: angela.dwyer@utas.edu.au.
Research Fellow, Justice
Health Research Program, The Kirby Institute, Wallace Wurth Building, University
of New South Wales NSW
2052, Australia. Email: psimpson@kirby.unsw.edu.au.
As with elsewhere in our
work, we use this term ‘criminal processing system’ to reflect, as
others have done (Belknap
1996; Sheingold 1984), on the fact that as there is
little justice in the ‘criminal justice system’ especially for
and gender diverse people.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (387 KB)
PDF format (700 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter