URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Weis, Lael K; Dixon, Rosalind --- "Rethinking 'On Just Terms': Commonwealth v Yunupingu" [2024] SydLawRw 18; (2024) 46(3) Sydney Law Review 363
I Introduction
II Not Just a Power: Duty-Based Dimensions of Section 51(xxxi)
III A Broader and More Flexible Approach: Considerations of Principle and Prudence
IV ‘On Just Terms’ and Native Title
V Conclusion
Before the High Court
Rethinking “On Just Terms”:
Commonwealth
v Yunupingu
and Rosalind
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
raises a number of constitutionally
significant issues concerning the scope of the Commonwealth Parliament’s
power under s
51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
relationship to the territories power in
One issue that is not directly
raised by the questions before the High Court of Australia, but that will
nevertheless inform the
Court’s answers, concerns the meaning of ‘on
just terms’. Is ‘on just terms’ a narrow and inflexible
requirement to provide full market-based compensation? Or does it permit a
broader and more flexible approach to determining the
obligations of the
Commonwealth and territory governments, which would allow for structural
reparations and non-pecuniary remedies?
We suggest that a broader and more
flexible approach is generally to be preferred as a matter of both principle and
prudence and
that such an approach is especially relevant for the Court as it
considers the consequences of its answers to the questions before
Introduction
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
the High Court of Australia will consider the scope of s 51(xxxi) of the
Constitution
, which gives the Commonwealth Parliament the
power to make laws for the acquisition of property ‘on just terms’.
Specifically,
the Court will be asked to consider: (1) whether laws made
exclusively under the territories power in
attract the ‘on just
terms’ requirement; and (2) whether laws that amount to the
acquisition of native title rights attract
the ‘on just terms’
requirement. (The case also involves interesting questions concerning the
operation of the doctrine
of precedent; this is addressed in another
contribution and will not be taken up
The purpose of this contribution is to draw attention to a set of issues that
underpin the High Court’s approach to questions
, but that has received insufficient attention: namely, issues
concerning remedies and the character of the ‘on just terms’
requirement. It is clear that if a Commonwealth law acquires property that it
must do so ‘on just terms’. But what does
that requirement demand?
What is the nature of the Commonwealth’s constitutional obligation?
Not Just a Power: Duty-Based Dimensions of
Section 51(xxxi)
, questions concerning the scope of
the context of a compensation application made by the Gumatj Clan or Estate
Group under
Native Title Act 1993
’) on the basis that certain acts under the
Territory (Administration) Act 1910
(Cth), including the reservation of
minerals to the Crown,
‘past acts’.
terms, ‘past acts’ are legislative acts prior to 1 July 1993 or any
other act prior to 1 January 1994, which
are invalid because of the existence of
native title. The question of compensation in
thus turns, inter
alia, on whether the acts in question qualify as an ‘acquisition of
property’ on other than ‘just
terms’ within the meaning of s
51(xxxi), which would render them invalid (and therefore ‘past acts’
for the purposes
of the compensation regime under the
Native Title Act
The Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia held that they
and the Commonwealth has
appealed that decision. The Commonwealth’s principal submissions on appeal
are that: (1) laws made
do not attract the ‘on just
terms’ requirement under
and (2) native title rights are ‘inherently defeasible’ and
therefore do not attract the ‘on just terms’
requirement under
Given this framing of the questions on appeal, issues concerning remedies and
the character of the Commonwealth’s constitutional
obligation do not,
strictly speaking, arise. Remedies for the extinguishment of native title are
statutorily defined, and it can
be accepted that the
Native Title
’s compensation regime, however imperfect, satisfies the ‘on
just terms’ requirement. However, the statutory regime
for compensation
created by the
Native Title Act
cannot displace the meaning of the
requirement. Nor can it exhaust the ways of satisfying it — and,
ultimately, the
Native Title Act
’s terms are subject to potential
is a power-conferring provision, it has long been
understood as a constitutional guarantee. Given the dual function of
and its status as a constitutional guarantee, the questions that the Court has
to consider cannot be addressed as pure questions
of legislative power. They are
also questions about constitutional obligations. This aspect of
attention to the normative dimensions of legislative power, including the manner
in which it is conferred, and the manner in
which it is
A Broader and More Flexible Approach:
Considerations of Principle and Prudence
The High Court has long assumed that the phrase ‘on just terms’
is a requirement to provide monetary compensation for
any property rights that
have been acquired, using fair market value as the benchmark. This, however, is
not the only construction
open to the Court. The phrase ‘on just
arises in a distinctive context: that of a
constitutional provision at once conferring power on the Commonwealth, and at
time limiting that power by imposing a
Accepting, as the High Court
constitutional guarantee and not merely a supplementary grant of legislative
power means that the phrase should be interpreted
like a constitutional
That is, it should be interpreted in a broad and purposive manner that reflects
both: (1) the
underpinning the constitutional protection of
property; and (2) notions of
reasonable limitations
on the enjoyment of
property rights that are implicit in the constitutionally prescribed system of
government.
Values underpinning the constitutional protection of property include, at a
minimum, values associated with preventing arbitrary confiscation.
This is how
Dixon J described the purpose of
Grace Bros v
Commonwealth
and it is a view that many High Court justices have endorsed over
Although not always explicit, values associated with this purpose clearly inform
the Court’s analysis. For instance, in the
course of asking whether the
essential character of a law meets the description of an ‘acquisition of
property’, notions
of legitimate expectations often inform the High
Court’s analysis.
such considerations arguably underpin the notion of ‘inherent
defeasibility’ or ‘inherently susceptible
to variation’ as a
disqualifying feature
central issue in
. Moreover, these values can be seen as
connected to a broader set of constitutional values related to the rule of
The High Court’s s 51(xxxi) jurisprudence has also consistently
recognised reasonable limitations on property — albeit
here, too, often
only implicitly through the lens of characterisation. For instance, in the
course of upholding the water licensing
ICM Agriculture v
Commonwealth
, members of the majority emphasised that: water conservation is
an important social policy;
regulation of water entitlements via a statutory licensing regime is a rational
method for achieving that social
and the burden on
property rights was reasonable, given the reciprocity of benefits and burdens
inherent in such a regulatory
A broader and more flexible approach to the ‘on just terms’
requirement would allow the Court to more openly articulate
these kinds of
considerations, rather than having to subsume them within the singular concept
of an ‘acquisition of
Reasons for the
result in cases such as
ICM Agriculture
would be better captured by
openly articulating why, in the Court’s view, the burden imposed on
private property owners was
A broader and more flexible approach would also open up the possibility that
only some, and not all, acquisitions of property require
compensation equivalent
to full market-based value. This possibility might arise, for example, because
the burdens imposed by a regulatory
scheme are justified in light of the
importance of the objective, the lack of reasonable and equally effective
alternatives, and
the overall reciprocity of benefits and burdens achieved by
the scheme. Again,
ICM Agriculture
is arguably such an
Moreover, a broader and
more flexible interpretation of the ‘on just terms’ requirement also
opens up the possibility
of non-monetary
either in addition to or else as an alternative to monetary
compensation.
As discussed
below, this possibility is particularly relevant to the native title
Considerations of both principle and prudence support such an approach.
Starting with considerations of principle, the approach just described would
promote consistency and coherence in constitutional doctrine
by bringing the
analysis of
in line with the High Court’s well-established
approach to other constitutional guarantees, such as the freedom of interstate
and the implied freedom of political
communication.
In both of those
contexts, the Court approaches the question of constitutional validity through a
wider requirement of justification
that encompasses both values and reasonable
limitations —
through a narrow and inflexible approach that
focuses exclusively on the law’s essential character.
The usual tools of constitutional construction — text, structure and
purpose as discerned from drafting history — also
support such an
approach. The Commonwealth’s constitutional obligation is not described as
a requirement for ‘compensation’
but a requirement that acquisitions
of property be ‘on just terms’. As Dixon J once observed,
‘[u]nlike “compensation”,
which connotes full money
equivalence, “just terms” are concerned with
’s description of this obligation is a distinguishing
feature of the
Constitution
: whereas reference to
‘compensation’ is commonplace (used in at least 167 constitutions),
only five other constitutions
use the phrase ‘on just terms’ (and
only one other constitution
There is evidence that
the framers of the
Constitution
selected the phrase ‘on just
terms’ in order to incorporate notions of fair dealing that go beyond the
payment of compensation.
Interpretation of the obligation contained in
‘must not be
unmindful of its specially Australian
character’.
In addition, there is strong historical support for interpreting the
Constitution
in a manner that allows the state to play a
role in the protection of individual and social
This was a key commitment of the social liberal ideas and Chartist movement that
influenced many of the framers, and is an enduring
idea in Australian social and
political thought.
A broad and
flexible approach to the notion of ‘just terms’ supports this role.
Often, the acquisition of property by
the Commonwealth occurs in the context of
programs that have a substantial public interest. Requiring the government to
market-based compensation for
acquisition of property has
the potential to deter socially beneficial state
Finally, there is High Court precedent that supports approaching the
‘on just terms’ requirement as a broader and more
flexible demand
for justification that admits of a wider range of remedial
possibilities.
Overall, it is
fair to say that the possibility of a broader and more flexible approach has not
been rejected, but has simply been
International v Commonwealth
French CJ left open the possibility of
adopting such an approach, deferring ‘careful consideration’ to
‘an appropriate
We suggest that
any future consideration of remedies following the decision in
may provide such an occasion.
To be clear, in advancing this argument from principle, we are not suggesting
that market-based compensation is never required under
s 51(xxxi).
cases where providing less than full market-based compensation could create
other problems: for example, encouraging rent-seeking
behaviour and resulting in
programs that fail to meet a cost-benefit test, or that impose substantial
injustice on individuals by
asking them to bear a disproportionately high
individual cost.
Our point is
simply that in some cases less than full market-based compensation may be
required to satisfy the requirements of justice.
The Court’s approach to
should be flexible enough to accommodate that possibility.
Turning to prudential considerations, there are arguments for adopting a
broad and flexible approach to the ‘on just terms’
requirement that
appeal to the Court’s institutional role. A strict requirement of
market-based compensation may lead to outcomes
that attract substantial public
disapproval, and even political backlash — for example, because of a
perception that the relevant
compensation is too generous to individuals,
relative to the public interest, or even because of a perception that monetary
compensation
is an inappropriate form of redress.
There is, of course, room for debate as to whether public perceptions should
inform the Court’s approach to constitutional construction:
some scholars
suggest that it is a relevant, if not decisive,
whereas others suggest
that it is a consideration only in cases of immediate threat to a court’s
institutional legitimacy.
Notwithstanding this debate, it is a factor that militates in favour of a
broader and more flexible approach to the ‘on just
requirement under
s 51(xxxi).
Moreover, the potential impact of the ruling on the Court’s
institutional legitimacy has clear relevance to
itself. It is
not improbable that a large-scale compensation award could attract substantial
political backlash, given past responses
Mabo v Queensland [No
Wik Peoples
v Queensland
The Gageler
Court has already experienced substantial backlash following its decision in
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
Arguments for
prudential flexibility in the Court’s approach to the constitutional
questions presented in
are thus especially timely and
compelling.
The political stakes are put front and centre in the Commonwealth’s
submissions, which emphasise the potentially ‘enormous
ramifications’ of finding that there has been an acquisition of property
within the meaning of
s 51(xxxi):
If the Full Court is correct, then for almost seven decades a vast but
indeterminate number of grants of interests in land in the
Territory would have
been invalid. Further, upon the validation of those grants by the
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ... the Commonwealth would have become liable to pay
compensation of a vast but presently unquantifiable amount (including
potentially going back to
not, in our view, a reason to accept the Commonwealth’s argument that laws
made exclusively under the territories power
do not attract the
‘on just terms’ requirement. But it does provide an additional
reason for the Court to endorse a broad
and flexible approach to the content of
this requirement that allows for consideration of whether monetary or in-kind
forms of compensation
(which, of course, could themselves be controversial) are
more likely to be capable of winning ongoing democratic support.
‘On Just Terms’ and Native Title
does not require the Court to decide the precise scope or
content of any requirement of just terms under 51(xxxi), as applied to
Instead, if the Court were to uphold the decision of the Full Court of the
Federal Court, it would then be for the Commonwealth and
the territory
governments to decide whether to enact new legislation explicitly acquiring the
relevant native title interests and
providing just terms.
There are also good arguments for the Court to avoid pre-judging this
question. It is not strictly necessary to decide and doing so
would reduce the
scope for the Commonwealth and territory executives and parliaments to
contribute to answering this question. Moreover,
the Court has not had the
benefit of full argument on this issue. Nevertheless, the Court may still
provide useful guidance regarding
the process of executive and legislative
deliberation, and reassure the broader public that there is scope for a broad
and flexible
approach to the ‘on just terms’ requirement that can
accommodate a range of remedial possibilities suited to the specific
issues that
arise in the native title context.
In emphasising the benefits of a broader and more flexible approach to the
‘on just terms’ requirement in the native title
context, we are not
suggesting that such an approach should
apply to native title
interests. This would clearly be problematic, and potentially even be in breach
of commitments to racial non-discrimination
of the kind found in the
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth). As discussed in
, above, we think
that a broader and more flexible approach is supported as a matter of
constitutional principle and would better
capture the factors that the High
Court routinely considers in s 51(xxxi) cases, which concern a range of
different proprietary interests.
Nevertheless, the native title context provides
a powerful illustration of why such an approach is needed.
Native title is a distinctive form of proprietary interest, the attributes of
which should inform any approach to the notion of ‘just
First and foremost, as Celia Winnett notes, native title is a form of spiritual,
non-commodified interest that is not
readily valued in monetary terms and
therefore demands consideration of non-monetary
obligations.
Second, and
relatedly, because native title is a non-alienable, non-transferrable interest
for which there is no direct market, there
are conceptual difficulties in
applying market-based notions of compensation. Although
Northern Territory v
has opened up the
possibility of compensation for non-economic losses, the spiritual and cultural
dimensions of native title cannot
be captured through a narrow and inflexible
approach to the just terms requirement, which reduces Country to ‘real
and value to ‘monetary valuation’. Third, native title
is a form of collective property that is constitutive of community:
figuratively
speaking, communities hold native title for the benefit of current and future
generations. This collective and inter-temporal
nature of native title underpins
the notion of custodianship and may inform the notion of just terms for any
interruption to or change
in that custodianship.
It is, therefore, quite likely that just terms for the acquisition of native
title would include recognition of
and encompass forms of spiritual and cultural redress, which recognise rather
than repudiate the status of traditional native
title holders and their
connection to land and, wherever possible, find ways of facilitating that
ongoing connection. Such redress
might include, for example, memorials and
public displays, land restitution and other land-related
Just terms for the acquisition of native title would also likely include
recognition that the relevant economic harms to First Nations
take the form of a
lost opportunity for economic self-sufficiency and the means of self-governance.
Appropriate redress for such
harm could, in turn, take the form of a requirement
that previous native title holders receive priority in employment opportunities
in any economic activity conducted on the relevant land, or else forms of
revenue sharing in the context of taxes or royalties generated
Equally, a broader and more flexible approach to just terms would highlight
the importance of consultation by governments with First
Nations, or
‘free, prior and informed consent’ to changes in the use and
incidents of native title.
reflects the broader context in which native title interests are embedded: a
structure that includes a commitment to indigenous
recognition and
self-determination, including as understood and defined by international
There is no straightforward answer to how these considerations should be
evaluated or balanced in any given case. Other countries
have grappled with
similar issues in the context of the award of compensation to indigenous peoples
for a variety of harms, including
harms associated with the wrongful removal of
children, institutional abuse and under-funding of indigenous welfare programs.
for example, has made several large-scale compensation awards to its
First Peoples for harms of this kind. The most recent award,
of over CAD23
billion, for harms associated with the under-funding of indigenous family
welfare programs
also involves a
mix of individual compensation and collective redress in the form of structural
programs aimed at overcoming past
harms and disadvantage, and empowering future
generations through better funded and targeted forms of family support. The
example also underscores the existence of comparative precedent for a
broad and flexible approach to notions of collective compensation
injustices.
At the same time, we acknowledge that there is no direct analogy between
these harms and the harms associated with the past or future
extinguishment of
native title interests. We also do not suggest any precise answer to the way in
which harms of this kind should
be measured or addressed, including but not
limited to providing monetary compensation. Our argument is simply that, should
uphold the decision of the Full Court of the
Federal Court, it should also lend its approval for a broad and flexible
approach to
the ‘on just terms’ requirement, which encompasses
notions of fair dealing and allows for the consideration of these
A fundamental principle of the common law is that there is no right without a
remedy. The same can be said of constitutional guarantees.
This column has
suggested that although remedial questions do not, strictly speaking, arise in
the questions before the High Court
, they nonetheless loom
large. Conceptually and practically speaking, issues concerning remedies and the
character of the Commonwealth
Parliament’s constitutional obligation
— what ‘on just terms’ requires — cannot be neatly
from questions concerning the scope of the Commonwealth
Parliament’s power under s 51(xxxi).
This is also true as a political matter: the Gageler Court has already
weathered a political storm, which has arguably left its sociological
substantially diminished,
especially among political conservatives. Whether the Court is positioned to
weather an even larger storm in the context of native
title is a question that
should be on the minds of all of those concerned with constitutionalism and the
rule of law in Australia.
Perhaps the Court is live to these questions, in which case our arguments
from principle and prudence may well converge: in order
for the Court to
recognise the past harms of an unconstitutional acquisition of property by the
Northern Territory, it may need to
anticipate at least the conceptual
possibility of a remedial standard that political elites and the general public
can live with.
The Court’s answer to the constitutional questions in
might therefore depend — albeit indirectly — on the
meaning of the ‘on just terms’ requirement.
Please cite this column as:
Lael K Weis and Rosalind Dixon, ‘Rethinking “On Just
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
[2024] SydLawRw 18
(2024) 46(3)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.19744
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
* Associate Professor, Melbourne Law School, Melbourne University, Victoria,
Australia. Email: lweis@unimelb.edu.au; ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4642-9289.
† Professor, School of Global and Public Law, UNSW Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia. Email: rosalind.dixon@unsw.edu.au; ORCID
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-66
We thank Celia Winnett for helpful comments, and Brad Marzol for outstanding
research assistance.
Commonwealth v Yunupingu
(High Court of Australia, Case No D5/2023).
See Ashleigh Barnes,
‘Stare Decisis and Constitutional Guarantees:
Commonwealth v
[2024] SydLawRw 17
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
Mining Ordinance
(NT) s 107.
Native Title Act 1993
Yunupingu v Commonwealth
(2023) 298 FCR 160.
Commonwealth,
‘Appellant’s Submissions’, Submission in
Commonwealth v
, Case No D5/2023, 28 March 2024, 6–8 [12]–[19]
(‘Appellant’s Submissions’).
See Lael K Weis, ‘The
Constitutional Office of the Legislature’
(2020) 70 (Supplement
University of Toronto Law Journal
; Rosalind Dixon and Lael K Weis,
‘Legislative Constitutional Duties and the Judicial Role’
Rosalind Dixon,
‘Overriding Guarantee of Just Terms or Supplementary Source of Power?
Constitution
[2005] SydLawRw 34
(2005) 27(4)
; Lael K Weis, ‘Property’ in Cheryl Saunders and
Adrienne Stone,
The Oxford Handbook of the Australian
Constitution
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 1013.
Australian Tape
Manufacturers Association Ltd v Commonwealth
(1993) 176 CLR 480
(Mason CJ, Brennan, Deane and Gaudron JJ).
Lael K Weis,
‘“On Just Terms”, Revisited’
(2017) 45(2)
Federal Law
(‘On Just Terms’).
Grace Bros Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 11
(1946) 72 CLR 269
Mutual Pools
& Staff Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 9
(1994) 179 CLR 155
Health Insurance Commission v Peverill
[1994] HCA 8
(1994) 179 CLR 226
255 (Toohey J) (‘
Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd
v Commonwealth
[1997] HCA 38
(1997) 190 CLR 513
, 659 (Kirby J);
Commonwealth v WMC
Resources Ltd
[1998] HCA 8
(1998) 194 CLR 1
26 [44] (Toohey J)
ICM Agriculture Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[2009] HCA 51
240 CLR 140
207 [176] (Heydon J) (‘
ICM Agriculture
JT International SA v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
(2012) 250 CLR 1
(Kiefel J) (‘
JT International
A-G (NT) v Emmerson
(2014) 253 CLR 393
, 446 [109], 449 [119], 452 [132] (Gageler J)
Cunningham v Commonwealth
[2016] HCA 39
(2016) 259 CLR
, 559–60 [57] (Gageler J) (‘
) 243–4 (Brennan J), 249
(Dawson J), 267 (McHugh J);
Airservices Australia v Canadian Airlines
(2000) 202 CLR 133, 179 [96], 181 [101] (Gleeson CJ and Kirby J), 255
[351]–[354] (McHugh J), 297–8 [492]–[493]
(Gummow J);
[7]–[8], 554 [39], 557 [50] (French CJ, Kiefel and Bell JJ), 583 [151],
583–4 [153], 585–6 [166], 588 [169]
(Keane J), 602–3
[224], 603 [226], 608–9 [237], 609 [239] (Nettle J). See also Simon Evans,
‘When is an Acquisition
of Property Not an Acquisition of Property? The
Section 51(xxxi)
Public Law Review
‘Property’ (n
Australian Communist
Party v Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
(1951) 83 CLR 1
, 193 (Dixon J). See also
v Commonwealth
(1998) 195 CLR 337, 381 [89] (Gummow and Hayne JJ).
For instance, at the outset
of the joint reasons of Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ, their Honours acknowledge
that ‘water and rights
to use water are of critical importance ... to
society as a whole’:
ICM Agriculture
) 182 [90].
The history of the
regulation of water entitlements is considered at length in both majority
judgments: ibid 174–6 [58]–[67]
(French CJ, Gummow and Crennan JJ),
191–5 [116]–[129] (Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ).
Arguably, important
considerations here were the fact that the licence holders’ rights were
replaced rather than simply eliminated,
and the fact that they received
structural adjustment payments to help offset their losses: ibid 159–60
[6]–[7] (French
CJ, Gummow, and Crennan JJ).
For a general argument
‘The Functional
Constitution
: Re-Reading the 2014 High Court
Constitutional Term’
(2014) 43(3)
Federal Law Review
Dixon, ‘Functionalism and Australian Constitutional Values’ in
Rosalind Dixon (ed),
Australian Constitutional Values
(Hart Publishing,
See Weis, ‘On Just
See Celia Winnett,
‘“Just Terms” or Just Money?
Section 51(xxxi)
, Native Title
and Non-Monetary Terms of Acquisition’
[2010] UNSWLawJl 32
(2010) 33(3)
UNSW Law Journal
See Weis, ‘On Just
On the call for even
greater consistency in the application of proportionality-style logic and
considerations across all areas of
Australian constitutional jurisprudence, see
Rosalind Dixon, ‘A New Australian Constitutionalism? Purpose,
Proportionality
and Process-Theory in the High Court of Australia’ (George
Winterton Memorial Lecture, University of Western Australia, 11
April 2024).
Nelungaloo Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
(1948) 75 CLR 495
, 569 (Dixon J) (‘
See Weis, ‘On Just
See Duane L Ostler,
‘The Drafting of the Australian Commonwealth Acquisition Clause’
[2009] UTasLawRw 10
University of Tasmania Law Review
Nelungaloo Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth
[1952] HCA 11
(1952) 85 CLR 545
, 600 (Kitto J) (‘
Adrienne Stone, ‘More
than a Rule Book: Identity and the Australian
Constitution
’ (High Court of
Australia Public Lecture, High Court of Australia, 9 November 2022); Ashleigh
Barnes, ‘Constitutional
[2023] MelbULawRw 10
(2023) 46(3)
University Law Review
; William Partlett, ‘Australian Popular
Political Constitutionalism’ (2024)
Federal Law Review
(forthcoming); Will Bateman, ‘Federalising Socialism without
Doctrine’ (2024) 52(3)
Federal Law Review
(forthcoming); Lynsey
Blayden, ‘Active Citizens and an Active State: Uncovering the
“Positive” Underpinnings of
the Australian
Constitution
Federal Law Review
(forthcoming).
); Bateman (n
Rosalind Dixon, ‘Fair
Market Constitutionalism: From Neo-Liberal to Democratic Liberal Economic
Governance’
(2023) 43(2)
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
(arguing that constitutions need to protect property rights, but in a relatively
weak or flexible way that allows for less than full
market-based compensation,
in certain cases of clear social benefit) (‘Fair Market
Constitutionalism’).
) 279–80 (Latham CJ),
285 (Starke J), 290–1 (Dixon J);
Nelungaloo 1948
) 569 (Dixon J);
Nelungaloo 1952
) 600 (Kitto J);
Wurridjal v
Commonwealth
(2009) 237 CLR 309
, 424–5 [305], 426 [309] (Kirby J);
) 446 [109]
(Gageler J).
) 102–3 [262] (Kirby J) (observing
that there has been very ‘little judicial elaboration of what the phrase
JT International
) 64 [158] (French CJ).
Dixon, ‘Fair Market
Constitutionalism’ (n
See, eg, Theunis Roux,
‘Principle and Pragmatism on the Constitutional Court of South
(2009) 7(1)
International Journal of Constitutional Law
; Theunis Roux,
The Politics of Principle: The First South African
Constitutional Court, 1995–2005
(Cambridge University Press, 2013);
Rosalind Dixon, ‘The Forms, Functions, and Varieties of Weak(ened)
Judicial Review’
(2019) 17(3)
International Journal of Constitutional
; Roni Mann, ‘Non-Ideal Theory of Constitutional
Adjudication’ (2017) 7(1)
Global Constitutionalism
Cf Richard H Fallon Jr,
Law and Legitimacy in the Supreme Court
(Harvard University Press,
Mabo v Queensland [No 2]
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
Wik Peoples v Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1.
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 415 ALR 254.
Appellant’s
Submissions (n
Northern Territory v
[2019] HCA 7
(2019) 269 CLR 1.
See Winnett (n
See ibid 803–4.
United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
, GA Res 61/295, UN Doc
A/RES/61/295 (2 October 2007, adopted 13 September 2007) art 19. See also United
Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, ‘Free, Prior and Informed
Consent of Indigenous Peoples’ (Fact Sheet, September 2013).
‘Final Settlement
Agreement on Compensation and Agreement-In-Principle for Long-Term Reform of
First Nations Child and Family
Services and Jordan’s Principle’,
Government of Canada
(Web Page, 20 March 2024)
<https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1646942622080/1646942693297>; Indigenous
Services Canada, ‘Revised
Settlement Agreement of $23B Reached to
Compensate First Nations Children and Families’ (News Release, 5 April
2023); Darren
Major and Olivia Stefanovich, ‘Judge Approves Historic $23B
First Nations Child Welfare Compensation Agreement’,
24 October 2023)
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/judge-approves-23-billion-first-nations-child-welfare-agreement-1.7006351>.
On the concept of
‘sociological legitimacy’, see Rosalind Dixon,
Judicial Review: Democracy and Dysfunction in the Modern Age
University Press, 2023) 97–8.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
PDF format (269 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter