URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UMonashLRS/2009/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:42:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Weller, P --- "Human Rights and Social Justice: the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the quiet revolution in international law" [2009] UMonashLRS 16
Human Rights and Social
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the quiet revolution in international law
On the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) the
Commonwealth Attorney-General announced a national
public consultation
concerning the need for better human rights protection in Australia and the
viability of a federal human rights
charter. Whether or not the anticipated
charter includes social, economic and cultural rights is directly relevant to
of social justice in Australia. This paper argues that the legislative
acknowledgment of civil and political rights alone will not
adequately address
the human rights problems that are experienced in Australia. The reluctance to
include economic, social and cultural
rights in human rights legislation stems
from the historical construction of an artificial distinction between civil and
rights, and economic social and cultural rights. This distinction was
articulated and embedded in law with the translation of the
UDHR into binding
international law. It has been accepted and replicated in judicial
consideration of the application of human rights
legislation at the domestic
level. The distinction between the two forms of rights underpins a general
ambivalence about the capacity
of human rights legislation to deliver social
justice and echoes a critical tradition in legal philosophy that cautions
against the
reification of law. Coming into force early in the 21st century, the
Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)
illustrates the
effort of the international community to recognize and eschew the burden of the
false dichotomy between civil and
political and economic, social and cultural
rights. Acknowledging the indivisible, interdependent and indissociable nature
rights in Australia is a crucial step toward achieving human rights
based social justice.
Convention on
the rights of persons with disabilities
People living
with mental illness
Introduction
anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights
Commonwealth Attorney-General announced a national public consultation about the
need for better human rights protection in
National Human Rights Consultation Report (the Report) was delivered to the
Federal Attorney-General on 30
September 2009. The
Report recommends that Australia adopt a federal Human Rights Act
based on the
As was widely
anticipated,
Report supports a legislative model similar to the model adopted in the
Australian Capital Territory and
emphasises civil and political
leaves open the question of the inclusion of economic social and cultural
It recommends
if economic and social rights are listed’
should not be justiciable. Rather, complaints regarding violation of economic
social and cultural rights should be heard
by the Australian Human Rights
Commission.
Furthermore, the Report recommends that if economic and social rights are
listed, priority should be given to the right to an adequate
standard of living,
including adequate food, clothing and housing, the right to the enjoyment of the
highest attainable standard
of physical and mental health, and the right to
education. This tentative engagement with economic social and cultural rights
a shift in Australian human rights debate.
The hesitation to include economic social and cultural rights in Australian
legislation reflects the idea that to do so infringes
the doctrine of
parliamentary sovereignty and the separation of powers and encourage
While this argument has been cogently
challenged,
arguments that emphasize the dangers of implementing social, economic and
cultural rights, also fail to take account of the quiet
revolution that has
occurred in international law concerning the recognition of the indissociable,
indivisible and interdependent
nature of all human rights. The
Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD), which entered into force
internationally on 3 May
embraces the
notion that human rights are interconnected, socially embedded processes. This
article traces the development of the
emerging rapprochement in international
law between civil and political and economic, social and cultural rights. It
argues that
the ‘quiet revolution’ in international law
obligesAustralia to include full recognition of economic, social and cultural
rights in a federal Human Rights Act.
Social justice and the critique of rights
Persistent ambivalence
of rights that exploded in the
usually understood as unrelated perspectives, Bentham’s distinction
between the ‘nonsense’ of declared
or ‘rhetorical
rights’ and the rights that flow from the substantive duties that are
embedded in legal systems correlates
with Marx’s theory of alienation and
his analysis of the ephemeral nature of legal rights that fail to take account
of material
conditions.
these analyses have continued to influence critical debate about international
human rights law and its translation into domestic
law throughout the 20th
embedded in the various critiques of rights associated with ‘critical
realism’, legal sociology and the emergence
of the law and society
movement. Following the accelerating introduction of rights based legislation
and the amplified attention
given to rights based rhetoric and practice that
characterised the second half of the 20
century, by
the close of the century critical literature was dominated by a sense of the
irrelevance of law. Human rights law was
seen, at best, as a clumsy vehicle for
the achievement of social
worst a damaging cultural facade. In this vein, Costas Douzinas announced the
end of the age of
In the 21st century, a closer and more detailed analysis of the translation
of the abstract principles of human rights into the content
of domestic law has
Meckled-Garcia and Cali, for example, trace the impoverished translation of
human rights principle into
They note the
way in which legal practices and accepted rules of law stultify or nullify
legislative provisions that are intended
to give effect to human rights. From
this point of view, the structures of both international and domestic law are
identified as
barriers to achieving social justice through human rights based
legal change. Of course, strong support for human rights based law
existed in tandem with the various rights critiques. Notwithstanding that
support, critical engagement with the law as
a barrier to social change is
important because it provides impetus for a reappraisal of human rights law as a
tool for social justice.
Human rights and social justice
In 1948 the
Declaration of Human Rights
(UDHR) expressed the aspirations of a fledgling
human rights movement. The UDHR was adopted as a non-binding statement. It
both civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural
rights in an integrated account of human dignity. Almost 20 years
later, the two
foundation Covenants, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
(ICCPR) and the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights
(ICESCR), translated UDHR principles into binding
international law.
The ICCPR and the ICESCR divide the UDHR principles into two sets of rights.
This strategic division resolved a pointed debate within
the United Nations.
Some nations agued for exclusion of economic, social and cultural rights from a
binding covenant because they
were not immediately realizable, could not be
ascribed through legislation and required expenditure by States. Rather, they
only be guaranteed by sound national policy and achieved progressively
when necessary resources were
rhetorical compromise allowed less economically robust member States to pursue
economic, social and culture rights according
to the principle of
‘progressive realization’ as set out in Article 2 of the ICESCR. It
also accommodated an ideological
divide over the primacy of civil and political
rights as the emblem of democratic freedom, and the importance accorded to the
of economic, social and cultural infrastructure for the well being of
people in socialist systems. In developed western nations,
the conceptual
division of rights coincided with the demise of welfare liberalism and the
post-war ascendency of neoliberal economic
theory and practice. Progressive
development in the west was to be legitimately achieved with the assistance of
market forces.
The division of rights between the ICCPR and the ICESCR crystallized in law a
perception of the difference between the two categories
of rights. Civil and
political rights were understood as concrete rights. They were characterized as
clearly definable, immutable
and capable of immediate application. They were
seen as essential elements of democratic governance and the rule of law. They
negative rights that legitimately constrained the state. Their
justiciability was
unquestioned.
contrast, economic, social, and cultural rights were characterized as positive,
aspirational
seen as quasi-rights that required positive action on the part of the state.
They required expenditure and the development
of policy. They were not fixed
because their content was subject to modification or amendment according to
cultural and practical
circumstances and available resources. They were
malleable, discretionary and non-justiciable. The underlying message was that
realization of economic, social and cultural rights ultimately endangered,
rather than strengthened the state. The clear distinction
between two, and the
consequent deference toward civil and political rights was strategically
disguised by neoliberalism. In theory,
social and cultural needs could be
included in the dynamics of market-driven demand. In practice, these areas of
social life lack
the defined economic markers that drive the creation of
capitalist markets.
The conceptual division between civil and political rights and economic,
social and cultural rights fed into the bourgeoning dominance
neoliberalism. Global neoliberalism has emerged as the key regulatory force in
the second half of the 20th
global stage, the division between the two categories of rights preconfigured
and reinforced the reliance upon neoliberal
economics in international
institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank
(WB) and was accordingly
exported to nations seeking assistance from these
international
organizations.
At the domestic level, neoliberalism also works to undermine the
implementation of human rights. For example, neoliberalism encourages
valorisation of isolated, individual autonomous ‘choice’. The model
of bare choice encourages the idea that individual
rights in law should
privilege isolated self-directed decision-making, rather than decisions that are
embedded in personal, community
corollary is the notion that the consequences of ‘choice’ are the
sole responsibility of the decision-maker. Furthermore,
neoliberalism subsumes
ideas about the social realm and its impact on human experience within the
notions of risk assessment and
risk management. This is illustrated, for
example, in accounts of ‘managerialism’ as the regulatory expression
of neoliberal
philosophy at the domestic, micro-political
The myth of the division between civil and political rights and economic,
social and cultural rights was exploded by the ground-breaking
work of Nobel
Laureate Amartya
demonstrated the essential interrelationship between civil and political rights
and economic, social and cultural rights in his
comparative study of famines.
Sen’s insights are complemented by feminist analyses that highlight the
gendered nature of the
constructed contrast between the two categories of rights
and the realms of public and private life. Feminist accounts query the
assumption that public, political rights, which are traditionally exercised by
men, should be regarded as naturally defendable in
the courts, whereas rights
associated with the work of women in the home, in subsistence economies, in
health care and in the education
of the family, were not. Thornton, for example,
has illustrated the gendered dissonance in law surrounding the public and
Charlesworth and Chinkin illustrate similar limitations in the structures and
rationales of international
The quiet revolution
The theoretical critique of law and the
legalization of human rights has both informed and been influenced by the
experience of people
who remain subject to human rights abuse despite changes in
lead to a quiet revolution in international law, evidenced by the international
community revising its approach to developing
the content of international human
rights instruments. In particular, it has worked toward articulating human
rights approaches that
respect the perspectives, experiences and aspirations of
people who are subject to abuse. Two key processes underpin this quiet
revolution.
The first is recognition that reconciliation of the two categories
of rights is an essential precondition for the realization of
socially embedded
human rights. The United Nations World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in
1993 adopted the
Vienna Declaration and Program of Action
specifically recognizes human rights as universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated. Article 5 of the
Vienna Declaration
5. All human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent and
interrelated. The international community must treat human rights
globally in a
fair and equal manner, on the same footing, and with the same emphasis. While
the significance of national and regional
particularities and various
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the
duty of States, regardless
of their political, economic and cultural systems, to
promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The second process involved reform of the United Nations system to enable the
active participation of non-government organizations
in the formal deliberations
of the United
The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
is the first international convention to be drafted following the adoption of
Vienna Declaration and Program of Action
, and with the collective and
collaborative action from people with
disability.
views and aspirations of disability organisations involved in the drafting of
the CRPD are therefore reflected in the
traveaux preparatoire
carry interpretive weight. This shifts the focus toward the subjective
experience of human rights violation.
The reconciliation of the two categories of rights is expressed in the
structure and content of the CRPD and its adoption of the social
disability.
social model of disability emphasizes the responsibility of society to dismantle
the physical and attitudinal barriers that exclude
and stigmatize people on the
basis of their physical or mental
CRPD seeks to limit mechanisms that replicate and reinforce the social exclusion
and marginalization of people with disabilities.
To achieve this it sets out the
foundation human rights of non-discrimination, equality and social participation
as entitlements
that must be constructed in the social fabric. For example,
Articles 1 to 7 set out the general principles that establish people
disability are the subject of rights. Articles 8 and 9 seek to raise awareness,
foster respect, combat stereotypes, prejudices
and harmful practices, including
the exclusion of people with disabilities from physical environments and
essential services. Articles
11 to 17 reflect the priority given to physical and
mental safety and well-being as a precondition for social inclusion. Articles
to 30 recognise the barriers to effective social participation as the interplay
between the embodied experience of disability
and the disabling effects of
active and passive
discrimination.
Although the CRPD does not purport to create new
critical contribution to the human rights landscape is a new articulation of how
the rights are conceived, expressed and realised.
This requires an astute
examination of legal frameworks with a view to the realisation of integrated
ICCPR and ESCR rights.
The CRPD in Australia
In Australia, debate about the implementation of the
Convention the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD) remains enmeshed in the traditional
separation of negative (civil and political) and positive (economic, social and
rights. In the context of mental health care, this is reflected in a
preoccupation with the question of involuntary detention and
treatment, at the
expense of discussion about the positive obligations imposed by the CRPD.
Australia signed the CRPD on 30 March 2007 and ratified on 17 July
into force in Australia on 16 August 2008. Australia also acceded to
the CRPD Optional
August 2009. The Optional Protocol allows the Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities to receive communications
from or on behalf of individuals or
groups of individuals who claim to be victims of a violation by that State Party
of the provisions
ratification, Australia lodged an interpretive
declaration.
The first two paragraphs of the
declaration
relevant to this discussion and read as follows:
Australia recognizes that persons with disability enjoy legal capacity on
an equal basis with others in all aspects of life. Australia
declares its
understanding that the Convention allows for fully supported or substituted
decision-making arrangements, which provide
for decisions to be made on behalf
of a person, only where such arrangements are necessary, as a last resort and
subject to safeguards;
Australia recognizes that every
person with disability has a right to respect for his or her physical and mental
integrity on an equal
basis with others. Australia further declares its
understanding that the Convention allows for compulsory assistance or treatment
of persons, including measures taken for the treatment of mental disability,
where such treatment is necessary, as a last resort
and subject to
safeguards;
The Joint Standing Committee on
Treaties (JSCOT) conducts public consultation and makes recommendations to the
Federal Government
regarding the incorporation of
Report on the CRPD, the JSCOT explains the declaration as an attempt to clarify
Australia’s position in relation to
substituted decision-making and
compulsory treatment.
JSCOT notes that while different
views were expressed in relation to substituted
decision-making
and compulsory
majority of disability organisations supported a declaration that would clarify
Australia’s understanding of its ability
to continue existing practices
related to substituted decision-making and compulsory
The declaration indicates that both substituted decision-making and
compulsory treatment will only be accepted as last resorts and
with appropriate
safeguards. There is sufficient evidence from inquiries into the current
provision of mental health services in
Australia to suggest that, in practice,
the provision of mental health services often fails to conform with
Australia’s declared
understanding of the
The material
also suggests that the content and operation of human rights safeguards is
inadequate. These deficiencies can be are
illustrated by a brief discussion of
the scope of Articles 12, 17 and 25. In sum, the quiet revolution requires an
assessment of
the practical application of the relevant legal frameworks that is
informed by the perspectives of people whose rights are infringed.
The effect of Articles 12, 17 & 25
For example, Articles 12,
with Article 5 and 13, encompass the right to non-discrimination and equal
protection and benefit of the
enshrines a presumption of capacity for all persons with disability, and imposes
obligations to provide the support which
may be necessary to exercise capacity.
The strong emphasis in the CRPD on
participation
suggests that the obligation to include people with mental illness in
decision-making may require processes that provide a higher
standard than is
currently provided to other people. Substituted decision-making may be
acceptable provided it is activated only
after the possibilities for
self-directed decision-making are exhausted. Article 12(3) requires that
substituted decision-making
“.....respect the rights, will and preferences of the person, are
free of conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional
and tailored
to the person's circumstances, apply for the shortest time possible and are
subject to regular review by a competent,
independent and impartial authority or
judicial body.”
“ shall be proportional to the degree to which such measures affect
the person's rights and interests.”
In all Australian jurisdictions, treating mental health practitioners are
legislatively empowered to make decisions about compulsory
treatment. The
decisions that a person with mental illness may make about their own future care
when they have capacity, or decisions
made by an appointed representative, are
overridden by compulsory
may be argued that the authority given to treating practitioners facilitates
prompt treatment, human rights principles
require that health interventions
taken without the consent of the person or contrary to their expressed
preferences are strictly
justified, subject to real safeguards, and demonstrably
proportionate to the risk that is being averted. Any accompanying restrictions
on rights must also be proportionate. This suggests that it is necessary to
closely examine current practice in order to ascertain
whether the exercises of
power are appropriate.
The right to respect for physical and mental integrity in Article 17 must
also be evaluated through the lens of the quiet revolution.
Article 17 is linked in the
structure of the CRPD to the prohibition against torture, inhumane and degrading
treatment and the right
to protection from exploitation, violence and abuse.
Tina Minkowitz argues that this position, coupled with the full weight of
international
human rights law, invests Article 17 with the force of a
prohibition against all involuntary
Bernadette McSherry suggests that Article 17 is more correctly viewed as a
limitation on practices of restraint and seclusion, and
as providing protection
from both unbeneficial treatment and overly intrusive
writers imply that Article 17 requires, at least, an evaluation of the
‘taken for granted’ practices in mental health
care that may
infringe Article 17, including non-therapeutic practices that are imposed for
administrative purposes, convenience
or as punishment.
The interpretation of Article 12 and Article17 as requiring a critical
evaluation of current practice is reinforced by the content
of Article 25 on the
right to health.
requires that
people with disability are provided with
adequate, appropriate and accessible services, guided by the overarching
principles of non-discrimination
and the obligation to elicit free and informed
consent. Article 25 also emphasises the importance of providing health
professionals
with human rights training and developing human rights based
professional ethics. Giving appropriate weight to Article 25, in particular,
illuminates the social dimensions of the human rights framework in the CRPD.
Together Articles 12, 17
and 25 illustrate the shifts in debate engendered by the quiet revolution. In
contrast, the Australian declaration
emphasises the continuation of existing
practices. It represents a missed opportunity to evaluate mental health care
from a contemporary
human rights perspective. The commitment to international
human rights norms also requires the development of appropriate legislative
frameworks to support good practice. This will be facilitated by the formal
recognition of human rights in Australian law, particularly
the inclusive
recognition of economic social and cultural rights. New regional human rights
instruments provide templates for an
inclusive iteration of human rights. For
example, both the
Constitution
of the Republic of South Africa
Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union
integrated approach and could provide templates for Australian federal
legislation. The federal Charter could usefully draw
on these examples.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities bracket a period in which
the social justice
principles were subsumed within a false division between civil and political and
economic, social and cultural
rights. The revitalised social justice agenda in
human rights law recognises the indivisible, interdependent and interrelated
of all human rights. The real challenge is to recognise the full
implications of the quiet revolution. With or without a comprehensive
Act, engagement with the CRPD will develop a deeper a human rights sensibility
in Australia.
http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/
National Human Rights Consultation website:
www.humanrightsconsultation.gov.au
Recommendation 18, p xxxiv.
http://www.humanrightsconsultation.gov.au/www/nhrcc/RWPAttach.nsf/VAP/(4CA02151F94FFB778ADAEC2E6EA8653D)~NHRC+Report+(Prelims).pdf/$file/NHRC+Report+(Prelims).pdf
Ibid, Recommendation
National Human Rights Consultation: Submission on a Human Rights Act for All
Australians (May 2009) available at
http://www.hrlrc.org.au/content/topics/national-human-rights-consultation/a-human-rights-act-for-all-australians/
Human Rights Acts 2004
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
note 3, Recommendations 24 &25.
Both the ACT and
Victoria have indicated that they will consider the inclusion of social,
economic and cultural rights in the future.
Above note 3,
Recommendation
discussion paper
Engage, Educate, Empower: Measures to Promote and Protect
Human Rights
available at
www.hrlrc.org.au/files/hrlrc-the-national-human-rights-cusultation-engaging-in-the-debate.pdf
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/disabilities-convention.htm
.The draft convention was finalised at the Eighth Session (14 - 25 August 2006)
and adopted by the general assembly on December 13th
2006. It opened for
signature on 30th March 2007. Australia signed in New York on
March 2007.
http://www.ohchr.org/english/press/newsFrameset-2.htm
access 2/3/07.
Shestack, J ‘The Philosophical Foundations of Human Rights’
20 Human Rights Quarterly
States of Injury-power and freedom in late modernity
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1995)
Weller, P Reclaiming a sociological voice
in mental health law (Published Conference Paper, TASA Melbourne Dec. 2008)
‘Unreasonable rights: mental illness and the limits of the law'
Journal of Law and Society
; Foucault, M.,
Power/Knowledge:
selected interviews and other writings 1972-1977
(Harvester Press, Brighton,
1980); Hunt, A. and Wickham, G
Foucault and law- towards a sociology of law
as governance
(Pluto Press, London,
Douzinas, C,
The end of human rights: critical legal thought at the turn of
the century
(Hart Publishing Oxford, 2000); Douzinas, C,
Human Rights and
Empire: the political philosophy of consmopolitanism
(Routledge-Cavendish,
Adingdon, New York,
Cotterrell, R,
Law, culture and society: legal ideas in the mirror of social
(Ashgate, Aldershot, 2006); Nijman, J and A Nolkaemper,
Perspectives and the Divide Between National & International law
Oxford, 2007); Deflem, Mathieu,
Sociology of Law: visions of a scholarly
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
Meckled-Garcia, S. and Cali, B.,
The Legalization of Human
Rights-multidisciplinary perspectives on human rights and human rights law
(Routledge, London, New York, 2006);
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
http://www2.ohchr.org/English/law/ccpr.htm
International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights
http://www2.ohchr.org/English/law/cescr.htm
The ICCPR adopted by UN Resolution 2200A (XXI) on 16 December 1966 entered into
force on 23 March 1976. The ICESR adopted by UN
Resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16
December 1966 entry into force 3 January 1976.
Sohn, L 'The
New International Law: Protection of the Rights of Individuals Rather than
States' (1982 –
The American University Law Review
Forsythe, D
Human Rights in International Relations
(2nd ed, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, New York, Melbourne,
A, ‘The right to treatment of persons with psychosocial disabilities and
the role of the courts'
(2005) 28(2)
International Journal of Law and
above note 14 at
Profit over people: neoliberalism and global order (
Stories Press, New York,1999);
Yeates, N ‘Globalization and Social
Policy: From Global Neoliberal Hegemony to Global Political Pluralism.’
Global Social Policy.
2002; 2: 69-91
Kennedy D, The Dark side of virtue:
reassessing international humanitarianism (Princeton University Press, Princeton
and Oxford,
2004); Farmer, P Pathologies of Power: Health, Human Rights, and the
New War on the Poor, (Berkeley, Cal.: University of California
Press,2003).
Davidson, A
and Spegele, R.D,
Rights Justice and Democracy in Australia
, Melbourne:
Longman Cheshire,
S, New Managerialism: administrative reform in Whitehall and Canberra, (London,
Open University Press, 1994); Kirkpatrick,
I, Ackroyd, S and Waker RM,
new managerialism and the public service professions: change in health, social
services and housing,
(London, Palgrave MacMillan,
Poverty and Famine
(Oxford: Oxford University Press,1983); Sen, A.
Famine and other crises
(Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2001); Sen, A
Development as Freedom
(Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1999); Sen A and
The quality of Life (
Oxford: Oxford University
Press,1993).
Thornton, Margaret,
Public and Private : feminist legal debates
University Press, Melbourne,
Charlesworth, H and Chinkin, C,
The boundaries of international law : a
feminist analysis
(Manchester University Press, Manchester,
T 'Disability as a Subject of International Human Rights Law and Comparative
Discrimination Law' in Kerr, S. Gostin, L.
Koh, H (eds)
The human rights of
persons with intellectual disabilities
. (Oxford and New York. Oxford
University Press,
Conference on Human Rights, Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (1993).
UN Doc A/CONF.157/23
http://www.unhchr.ch/huridocda/huridoca.nsf/(Symbol)/A.CONF.157.23.En?OpenDocument
Chinkin, C,
'Monism and Dualism: the impact of private authority on the dichotomy between
national and international law' in Nijman,
J and Nolkaemper, A (eds),
Perspectives and the Divide Between National & International law
University Press, Oxford,
Legal Capacity in the Disability Rights Convention: Stranglehold of the Past
or Lodestar for the Future?,
Syracuse Journal of International Law
Syracuse (2007) 429-441, p432
and B Fogarty. (2007) 'The Rights and Dignity of Person with Disabilities'
Alternative Law Journal
Quinn, G. and
Human Rights and Disability: the current use and future potential
United Nations human rights instruments in the context of
(New York & Geneva: United Nations, 2002); Dejener, T
'Disability as a Subject of International Human Rights Law and Comparative
Discrimination Law' in Kerr, S. Gostin, L. Koh, H (eds)
The human rights of
persons with intellectual disabilities
, (Oxford and New York: Oxford
Press,2003)
Weller, P ‘Supported Decision-Making and the Achievement of
Non-Discrimination: The Promise and Paradox of the Convention on
the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities’ in McSherry B (ed)
International Trends in
Mental Health Laws
(The Federation Press, Sydney,
L 2006 UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. Press release statement on the Ad
Hoc Committee's adoption of the International
Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities New York 5
http://www.ohchr.org/english/press/newsFrameset-2.htm
access 2/3/07.
United Nation Treaty database.
http://www.un.org
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
Doc. A/61/611, New York, 13 December 2006. In force
3 May 2008, in accordance
with article 13(1).
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/disabilities-op.htm
Article1, Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. Accession indicates that the State consents
to becoming a party to
that treaty by depositing an "instrument of accession". Accession has the same
legal effect as ratification.
Asian Legal Resource Centre, Definitions
http://hrli.alrc.net/mainfile.php/glossary/130/
interpretative declaration is a declaration by a State as to its understanding
of some matter covered by a treaty or its interpretation
of a particular
provision. Declarations clarify a State's position and do not purport to exclude
or modify the legal effect of a
http://treaties.un.org/Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=IV-15&chapter=4&lang=en#EndDec
Nations Treaty Database: http://www.un.org accessed 1/10/2009.
http://www.aph.gov.au/house/committee/jsct/index.htm
Report No 95, Joint Standing Committee on
Treaties (JSCOT), 16 October 2008, Chapter 2: Convention on the Rights of
Persons with
Disabilities, para 2.7.
refers to Substituted Decision Making as the process whereby decisions are made
on behalf of people who are considered
not capable of being able to make
decisions for
themselves.
This paper refers to Compulsory Treatment as treatment of mental illness that
is conducted without consent, or contrary to the wishes
of the person receiving
Above note 34 para
Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
National Inquiry into the Human
Rights of People with Mental Illness
Vol. 1 & 2 (HREOC,1993)
http://www.humanrights.gov.au/human_rights/mental_illness/national_inquiry.html;
Senate Select Committee on Mental Health, First Report& Final Report :
national approach to mental health – from crisis to community
http://www.aph.gov.au/Senate/committee/mentalhealth_ctte/report/index.htm
;Mental Health Council of Australia, Brain and Mind Research Institute, &
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. (2005).
Not for Service
Canberra: Mental Health Council of Australia.
http://www.hreoc.gov.au/disability_rights/notforservice/index.html
Australian Health Minister's Advisory Council. (2003).
Evaluation of the
Second National Mental Health Plan
http://www.alrc.gov.au/inquiries/title/alrc103/index.html
accessed 9/8/2009.
Ogloff J. (2002). Identifying the needs of mentally ill people in goals and
Psychiatry, Psychologyand Law, 9
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities: New Rea Or False Dawn? 34(2)
Syracuse Journal of International
Law & Commerce
Syracuse (2007) 583-608, p
reference to participation is included in preamble e, k, m, y, articles 1, 3,
19, 24, 16 19, 30,34.
Biegler P, Stewart C, Savulescu J and L Skene (2000)
‘Determining the Validity of Advance Directives’ (2000) 172
545. Willmott E, White, D and R Howard (2006) ‘Refusing Advance
Refusals: advance directives and life sustaining medical treatment’,
(2008) ‘Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities’
ANZAPPL Conference, Keynote address, ANZAPPL
Annual Conference, Manly Pacific
Hotel, Manly, NSW, October 2008. Lawson, A (2008) ‘People with
Psychosocial Impairments or
Conditions, Reasonable Accommodation
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: Changing
World?’ in McSherry, B (ed)
Law in Context
Federation Press.
Minkowitz, T,
‘The United Nations Convention on The Rights Of Persons With Disabilities
and The Right To Be Free From Non-consensual
Psychiatric Interventions' 34(2)
Syracuse Journal of International Law & Commerce
(2007) 405-428,
McSherry, B., 'Protecting the Integrity of the Person: Developing Limitations on
Involuntary Treatment' in McSherry, B (ed)
International Trends in Mental
(Federation Press, Annandale, 2008)
‘What does the "right to health" have to offer mental health patients?'
(2005) 28(2)
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry
http://www.info.gov.za/documents/constitution/index.htm
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (303 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter