URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/DTLJ/2003/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:54:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Windsor, Julia --- "Parallel Importation and its Effect on Information Technology" [2003] DigTechLawJl 3; (2003) 4(1) Digital Technology Law Journal 3
Importation and its Effect on
Information Technology
Student Murdoch
Introduction
rights, so as to protect the expression of the idea as
opposed to the
idea itself.
There is a trade-off as to
whether these rights focus on the moral rights of the author or the
economic rights of the consumer.
emphasis that each country places on these two spheres of rights is
based on the historic development of copyright. Australia
adopted the
British view of protecting the publishing industry under the
Statute of Anne
1709 where emphasis on the rights of
authors’ only came later.
2. Australia has taken a moral view that not only protects the use and production of
author’s work, but also its distribution
and importation under the
provides greater incentives to invest in creative endeavours, due to the
assurance of an economic return.
However this is at the expense
of making the work available to the public at
a reasonable price, and goes far beyond merely protecting
the author.
Due to this trade-off the economic rights of the Australian consumer
have suffered with software prices being significantly
higher compared
to the United States, Britain and New Zealand, and decreased
availability of computer software.
This has been attributed to
parallel importation bans.
3. In 2002 the
Parallel Importation Bill”)
was proposed to allow the parallel importation of computer
software. Although the Parallel Importation Bill will combat the
that Australian consumers are facing, the effect it will have
in light of
Australia’s current legal position and obligations
changing market place needs to be examined. The experiences of other
industries and countries also warrants investigation
to provide a
comparative
basis for the changes proposed by the Parallel Importation Bill.
is Parallel Importation?
4. Parallel importation refers to a good
that has been produced and sold legally but illegally imported into Australia, without the
consent of the copyright owner.
Thus parallel imported goods are often
referred to as ‘grey goods’ because they are produced with
consent of the
restriction provides that the same material does not compete with
itself on price.
Consequently geographical product monopolies are set
5. Software is a collection of computer programs and so
is protected as a work under
section 10(1)
a set of statements or instructions to be used directly or
indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a certain result. Due
to the nature of this definition a computer program is usually embodied
in an object such as a diskette, CD, DVD or ROM. Thus for
infringement of copyright to occur, a substantial part of the
computer program must be embodied on that object.
The arguments
to be addressed would also apply to patented computer prog rams,
however additional factors would have to be addressed,
as patenting
requires registration and protects the idea over the expression of
6. Parallel importation of literary works has been legislated
sections 37
that infringement occurs when a person, without the licence of the
of copyright, imports an article into Australia for
the purpose of
selling, letting or distributing the article for the purpose of trade
the importer ought reasonably to have
known that if the article had
been made in Australia by the importer, it would have infringed the
applies the same provisions to distributors of parallel
imported material. Thus an action for either sections can be brought
concurrently
or in relation to two different people.
sections have been judicially considered in a number of cases.
Positive and Exclusive Licences
7. The definition of
‘licence’ in
established in
Interstates Parcel v Time-Life
International
to mean ‘consent’.
can be oral or implied by conduct.
Gibbs J illustrated
this as when an American copyright owner sells a commercial quantity of books
to a buyer in Australia who they
know to be a bookseller.
a licence cannot be inferred from the mere fact that the owner has sold the
goods without any express restriction on their
subsequent disposal.
Computermate v Ozi-Soft
Sheppard, Spencer and Gummow JJ differentiated between bare, positive
and exclusive licences. A bare licence can be revoked at will
and thus is
not a sufficient form of licence under
section 37.
An exclusive licence is defined by
as a written licence authorising the licensee, to the exclusion of all
other persons, to do an act that the owner of the copyright
right to do. A positive licence is given with reference to particular
transactions by particular parties,
however positive permission
or consent can be implied from the conduct of the copyright owner and does not
necessarily need to be
Their Honours held that only a positive licence was required under
and not an exclusive licence due to the purpose of the
It was reiterated that the
burden of proof is placed on the copyright owner to prove the absence
of such a licence and not on the
importer to prove the existence of a
Thus the effect of only having a positive licence was not
distinguished from an exclusive licence as in
. This allows
for more than one importer and distributor of the copyrighted
material who all have the consent of the copyright owner.
Circumvention of the
an attempt to circumvent
sections 37
. Vacolan was set up as an
intermediary agent between Australian
consumers and Seltec Computer Products in America. Neither Vacolan
Seltec Computer Products had a licence to sell software in Australia.
Despite there being no conclusive evidence as to
who imported Lotus’ software into Australia, Davies J held that
purchaser was not the importer, there was an infringement of
. The fact that Vacolan was a mere agent was immaterial as
they distributed the software and thus infringed
section 38.
Vacolan submitted that the court should not formulate an order that was
so broad that it would prevent a legitimate reorganisation
of Vacolan’s
business. Davies J replied that there were no practical means by which a
business such as Vacolan could avoid
sections 37
Broderbund v Computermate
Computermate cross-claimed under
Trade Practices Act
”) to the action brought under
sections 37
Section 46(1)
that a corporation that has a substantial degree of power in
a market shall not take advantage of that power for the purpose
elimination or substantially damaging a competitor, preventing the
of a person in the market or deterring or preventing
a person from
engaging in competitive conduct in any market.
Section 46(3)
determining the degree of power the court should have regard to the
of its competitors and persons to or from
whom it supplies or acquires
11. Beaumont J held in relation to
that the computer program, “Where in the world is
Carmen Santiago?”, was classified
in the educational game market.
even though Broderbund
had monopoly rights to produce the computer program, and Dataflow had a
monopoly right to import and
distribute the game in Australia, this did
amount to a market monopoly of the educational game market. There was
significant
barrier to entry of this market as the programs sales where
only 10-17% of the total market sales. This did not amount to a near
monopoly and thus there was no substantial degree of power in the
12. In obiter, Beaumont J examined where a firm could take
advantage of their market power for any of the purposes proscribed by
This was primarily based on distinguishing the unreported judgment
of the Court of the European Communities
Independent Television
from the facts of
Broderbund v Computermate.
Beaumont J found that Broderbund did not
take advantage of any market power, as they did not prevent the emergence of new products
on the markets to secure market
monopoly. Neither did Broderbund go beyond what was necessary to fulfil the
essential function of
the copyright as permitted in common law.
Section 45(2)
states that a corporation shall not make
a contract or give effect to a
provision if the contract contains an ‘exclusionary’
provision or
a provision of the contract has the purpose, or likely effect, of substantially lessening
competition. Beaumont J held
that Broderbund was an American manufacturer, an
international supplier of computer software products who distributed in
by appointing exclusive distributors. Thus there is no competition in
relation to the supply of the program between the cross- claimants.
13. Beaumont J’s findings limit the application of the
very specific
circumstances. A copyright owner must have sufficient market monopoly
take advantage of this market power to
lessen competition of new
products. This has no application to parallel imports, as by definition
programs are the same as
those distributed by the exclusive licensee
and not new products. Also due to the nature of supplying copyright
imported goods would come from one original supplier and
there is no competition. Thus the TPA has little effect on prohibiting
importation under the current framework.
Parallel Importation and the
Circuit Layouts Act
Circuit Layouts Act
Layouts Act
”) states in sections 24(2) and 24(3) that despite
sections 37
exploitation of an integrated circuit containing a copy or adaptation
of a work is not an infringement of the EL rights
in the layout or the
infringement of that copyright.
was used as a defence to parallel importation of copyright material in
Avel v Wells
In that case, Wells imported
and distributed a
substantial part of the program stored on ROMs, EPROMs and OTPROMs.
ROMs are used
store simple programs, which are to be utilised in mass- produced
consumer products. OTPROMs are produced in a blank form but are
designed to enable erasing of a program and so are non re -usable.
similar to OTPROMs but the program loaded into
them can be erased and
so the EPROMs can be used indefinitely. Thus the ROMs were made with
program encoded in them by the chip
manufacturer, but the copyright
owner encoded the EPROMs and OTPROMs subsequent to production. All the
ROMs fell within the
definition of an eligible circuit
layout as they were representations in a material form, integrated circuits and made in an eligible
foreign country,
Thus sections 24(2)
and 24(3) applied and commercial exploitatio n could not be an
infringement of the copyright in the work. This
provided a defence to the copyright infringement of parallel importation.
does not operate as a defence to other copyright infringements such as
reproducing the computer program on the ROMs,
without the consent of
the copyright owner. So although the ROMs can be imported there is a
limited market for them.
17. Section24 has also been applied to the
importation of cinematographic films on ROMs in
Galazy Electronics v
There seems to be no intention to change this legislation in light of the protection of film in the
Importation Bill.
Daily Digitalisation and
The use of computers and the Internet has rapidly
become an integral part of everyday life with most Australians working
computers on a daily basis. Computers allow the accurate, quick
of copyright material to take place. The Internet allows
of copyrighted material almost instantaneously. Software can be
loaded and delivered electronically
within an ever-decreasing period of
The use of the
Internet to sell goods and service has led to the emergence of an
international market place with direct consumer-distributor
When this is coupled with the high level of
information and efficiency available on- line, the most important
a cyber-consumer is price.
This new technology has drastically reduced the effect of parallel importation bans
within Australia, primarily due to the development
of e-commerce
importation for trade, thus an individual can import copies of
material for personal use without infringing.
E-commerce facilitates
importation of copyrighted material for personal use. In 1999 $A920
was spent on-line primarily
on books, CDs, videos and computer
products. Two thirds of these sales took place through offshore web
sites. Thus
Australian retailers
not only lost domestic retail and e-commerce sales
but also international sales due to higher prices.
Current restrictions on parallel importation puts Australian e-
commerce at a disadvantage, as retailers cannot purchase their products
the cheapest price and thus are at a disadvantage when trying to
compete on price (see Appendix 1). Limitation of distribution
means that products that are available in America are not sold in
Australia and thus Australian e-commerce retailers cannot
Australia needs to be able to capture this market now as e-commerce will continue to grow exponentially for the next few years.
Alternatives to allow Parallel Importation
light of technological changes to the market and the effect on consumers, four
options were proposed to deal with the problem
of prohibiting parallel
importation. Each option was then analysed as to the constraints which
would make it non-viable, and the
impact it would have on groups directly
affected by any changes to the
as it stands.
Option 1 was to retain the existing restrictions. This was rejected as
continue to prevent consumers from realising potential
benefits from
the removal of the ban on parallel imports. Consumers would also
continue to bear the costs of restrictions of competition.
22. Option 2 would allow the parallel importation of a narrow range of business
and home use ‘standard’ applications such
as spreadsheets, word
processing, database management and graphics programs. This would
directly affect software manufacturers, distributors
and retailers as well
as consumers of business software.
23. Option 3 would allow the parallel importation of a wider range of products
including business, educational and recreational products
while still
maintaining a status quo to protect the film industry. This is
necessary as due to technical convergence as DVDs contain
both computer programs
and cinematography films.
24. Option 4 would allow parallel
importation of all products containing software, which would impact upon other
25. Option 3 was supported as
the proposed change in the
Parallel Importation
prohibits the importation of a feature film longer than 20 minutes as a non-infringing accessory to a computer program
The benefits of removing the parallel importation ban are that it will
lead to a reduction in prices and increase in the availability
of copyright
works. The economy will benefit, as market forces will determine the optimal
investment in creativity instead of in
distribution.
The argument for leaving parallel import requirements in place is that
it provides an incentive for investment in local production
promotion of copyright material as well as post-sale support. Parallel
importation restrictions also have a secondary effect
and censorship.
Effect of Allowing Parallel Importation
Australia is a relatively small and isolated market, which is
attractive because it has a high income per capita. It is also a
importer of copyright
Parallel importers benefit
consumers as they
increase the availability of genuine articles at a cheaper price. A
free competitive
market equates the cost of producing goods with the
price an individual consumer is prepared to pay. This maximises the
use of resources. As intellectual property rights
restrict this they cause market failure, the cost of which consumers
discrimination is the difference in price between the price of a good
bought in Australia and the price of the same
bought anywhere else in the world. In 1999 the ACCC found that
Australian consumers pay on average 27% more for business software,
for top selling games and individual packages such as Myst were on
average 84%
more expensive than the same products in
Software is a significant cost to both business and government. In 1995
the federal government spent $130 million on package software.
This only represented 8.4% of the total market revenue of package
Thus there is substantial potential
for price reductions. However copyright owners use these increased
profits to create new knowledge
and information, and to serve new
markets that would otherwise be unavailable under competitive pricing.
So although prices may fall moderately, profits fall substantially.
Countries and Parallel Importation
The effect of removing price discrimination also needs to be examined
in relation to developing countries. We are heading towards
a knowledge
society where
the capital that most matters is intellectual capital. This shift
overcomes the
major impediment to development
– the shortage of finance.
Intellectual
capital is also far more widespread in developing countries and thus
be nurtured
and encompassed.
This is why most
developing countries do not ban parallel imports and support
international exhaustion,
particularly as there are
no substitute goods available in developing countries. Neither is
there an extensive market for goods,
such as computer programs, except in the
richer income classes.
By charging developed countries like Australia a higher price,
price. If price discrimination is lifted, copyright owners would not be
able to provide the product to both
countries at a uniform
price and thus the developing country would lose
on vital information.
The export of presently lower
priced goods by developing countries could not happen, as there would be few countries with considerably
lower prices.
Australia is not a significant producer of intellectual
property and thus there would be a positive effect on the economy by
parallel imports. However, this would be at the expense of
countries and owners of intellectual property rights who have
future development, which Australians enjoy.
Thus Australia
would become a free-rider of copyright material and development as they
would use the knowledge without contributing
to the costs. This may
result in those who pay for the technology slowing the pace of
technology diffusion, leaving Australia behind.
It may also force copyright owners to use other more costly
methods of price discrimination, dissipating what profits they retain
competitive behaviour.
Software Producers and Parallel
Importation
Revenue from Australian produced software for 1995-1996 was $821.4
million. However, exports accounted for only 12 per cent of
produced software. This shows a strong market for
locally produced software in Australia. This is as Australia’s
software industry focuses on developing specialist applications.
As the Australian industry is cost competitive with overseas producers
in specialist products the removal of parallel importation
it. Allowing parallel importation will reduce the price of ‘off
the shelf’ software and actually
have a positive effect on
Australian software producers, as this imported software is used to
development.
Although computers have become a part
of everyday life, the general population has limited knowledge in
to computer-related
technology based problems. Thus post-sale service
and support is often a necessary inclusion with hardware and software
sales. Parallel
imports would allow cheaper products to be sold without
support. IBM’s greatest concern with this is that it will dilute
goodwill associated with developers. Copyright owners would also be
unable to enforce contractual agreements as to the profile and
representation of itself or control the flow of goods, which
may ultimate reduce the copyright owners’ profits.
However this argument loses
its impact with respect to the growing e-commerce market and consumers
choosing lower prices over support.
34. The above argument is very similar to that raised in
Levi-Strauss
in re lation to the parallel importation of
trademarked goods
the trademark owners claimed that the prestige
of their goods was damaged by selling their respective products in
Tesco and Costco
and in large quantities at a low price. A trademark
a product with its producer and his reputation and thus is distinct
from copyright protection.
Laddie J in
stated that prestige was a parasitic right that
interfered with the distribution of goods and bears very little or no
relationship
to the proper function of the trade mark right.
it has even less to do with copyright.
Piracy is an international organised crime and a very
lucrative business. The same technology that is impacting on parallel
importation
also makes piracy easier. Piracy is a major concern for the
software industry in Australia. In 1998, losses from software piracy
were estimated to amount to 33% of packaged software where sales now
exceed $A1 billion.
Parallel imports provide an additional
hurdle for importers of pirated software as it channels imported software
through recognised
distribution arrangements, assisting Australian
36. Section 130B of the
Parallel Importation Bill
the onus of proof so that now there is a pre sumption that the copy is
an infringing copy. Copyright owners are also trying
combat piracy themselves. Microsoft is checking the Internet for
computer programs.
EMI has release
new ‘copy-control’ software to protect the copying of CDs.
The software industry is also attempting to develop anti-copying
37. A monopoly over distribution of material allows for the
policing of censorship classification, as all software materials are imported
by a small group of ‘majors’.
Limiting importation also limits censorship discrepancy between two different imports of the same software, particularly in
to violent games. The incentive to have software classified is
undermined by the need to capture the market quickly before someone
These laws need to be re-examined in
light of market changes due to allowing parallel importation.
Additional key concerns of those opposed to lifting the ban on parallel importation are:
the reduced ability of software providers to exploit the Australian market;
the reduced
attractiveness of Australia for software creation;
retaliation;
the threatening of independent distributors’
reduced profitability of the retail
reduced incentives for overseas developers to establish Australian bases;
reduced availability of software
in Australia;
the facilitation of dumping.
39. Most of these concerns are well founded but their limited
impact is a trade- off for the increased benefits to the Australian
Australia’s International Intellectual Property
Obligations
40. Australia has international obligations due to being
a signatory of a number
of agreements. The
World Intellectual Property Organisation
agreements set minimum standards. These standards are directed toward
making the IP system more efficient and
international in
Article 14 of the
Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
grants authors of literary works the exclusive right of authorising the adaptation, reproduction and
distribution of the work.
Article 6 of the
WIPO Copyright
1996 grants the author exclusive right of authorising the
making available to the public the original copies of their work. The
WIPO Copyright Treaty
also provides that nothing in the treaty shall affect the freedom of contracting parties to determine their
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
agreement (“TRIPS”) strengthened the international IP
environment by setting
minimum standards of protection for
domestic enforcement, and by making
IP issues a core element of the international trading regime. Adherence
TRIPS is a requirement
for membership of the
World Trade Organisation
(“WTO”). Thus the dispute mechanisms of the WTO
can be used to resolve disputes arising under TRIPS.
Article 6 of TRIPS states that nothing in the agreement should be used
to address the issue of the exhaustion of intellectual
property rights.
This means that Australia can adopt whichever exhaustion model it feels
is in the national interest.
issue of intellectual
property protection is when the rights should be exhausted. The idea
behind exhaustion is that once a
product has been marketed the owner
longer exercise the rights of commercial exploitatio n.
be implemented at a number of levels. National exhaustion rights end
first sale within a nation. Thus the copyright
owner cannot limit
domestic distribution but can prevent parallel trade from other
countries. Regional exhaustion permits parallel
trade among a group of
but not from outside. International exhaustion exhausts rights on fist
anywhere and parallel
imports are permitted.
The New Zealand Australia Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement
(“CER”) created a WTO free trade area encompassing
Australia and New Zealand. Article 5 provides that quantitative
restrictions on all goods originating in the territory shall be
progressively liberalised and eliminated. The Steering Committee
Officials in
1990 found that provisions preventing import were potentially a
‘distinct impediment to trans-Tasman trade’
but noted that
the laws of both countries were essentially in harmony.
However this is no longer the case as New Zealand repealed parallel import
restriction in
44. The explanatory memorandum for the
Parallel importation Bill
mentions the US Government’s consistent argument that Australia
should not lift parallel importation restrictions.
The Intellectual
Property and Competition Review Committee did not independently look at
the United States but concludes that any
proposed changes are
consistent with Australia’s international
obligations.
Further there has been
no challenge to any country that has lifted parallel importation
restrictions beyond severe protests.
New Zealand allowed parallel importation the US trade
representative and ambassador to New Zealand warned of “severe
consequences”
and that the move would go “far beyond the
New Zealand marker” and have an impact on overall world trade. To
Shipley, the New Zealand Prime Minister, responded: “We
will not be
told how to run our country.” Nothing more happened.
As Allan Fels points out, the US itself enacted laws in October 2000
enabling the re
-importation of brand- name pharmaceuticals
as US prices were often 30
to 50% higher than in other nations. However, the American Secretary of
Health and Human Services refused
to implement the bill in December
2000, effectively cancelling it. However, the Bush Administration
has not announced plans to repeal
International Experience
In 1998, New Zealand removed the prohibition on parallel importing
provided that products were manufactured legitimately. This
in line with Singapore and
However, New Zealand is now attempting to reintroduce
a ban on the parallel imports of films, videos and DVDs for nine months
a title's first international release.
due to concerns about the future of regional cinemas but could also be
to protecting New Zealand’s growing
film industry. A bill has not
yet been introduced into parliament, and legislative discussion has
limited to a number of press
In 2001, Hong Kong
amended the
to exclude computer programs from the
class of ‘infringing copies’. This includes anything
embodied in the same article
as the computer program at the time of
importation, however, excludes films longer than 20 minutes & sound
recordings. This is
similar to Japan’s provisions and those proposed by Australia and New Zealand.
47. The European
Union (“EU”) implemented a regional exhaustion plan in line with the
‘four freedoms’ of the
European Community, the free movement of
goods, capital, services and people, but still limiting the parallel
importation of goods
from outside the EU. For example, section 22 of the British
1988 still contains limitations similar to section 37 of the Australian
J stated that parallel importat
ion could not be prevented unless there was full and explicit
contractual restrictions on each
player in the chain supplying the
This sent shockwaves throughout the EU as it effectively allowed
parallel importation of trademarked goods. However, when this case
joined with the
cases and heard before the
European Court of Justice, they stated that for parallel importation to
be allowed there must be expressed,
positive and unequivocal consent
on behalf of the trademark owner. The Japanese Supreme Court, however,
adopted a similar approach
to Laddie J in
BBS Wheels III
where the court stressed the importance of unimpeded international trade.
Whether this will be expanded to
49. Canadian law permits parallel importation in some circumstances. Parallel importation of copies are
permitted where the copy was
made by the person who licensed the exclusive
licensee, or assigned the copyright, for Canada. However, border measures exist
prevent the parallel importation of copies from countries that are not members of the WTO or of the
Berne Convention
50. The US has a national exhaustion policy and is strongly
opposed to parallel importation despite the fact that it was one of the
countries to benefit from Australia lifting import restrictions of CDs.
This is because the US is a large producer of intellectual property and is concerned about the free-rider policy.
Parallel Importation in the Book Industry
amendments of 1991 relaxed the restrictions on parallel
importation of books to a 30/90-day rule.
This was an attempt to
address the problem of availability rather than price, as it provides
incentives to publish and distribute.
It also promotes printing of the
locally to meet the 30-day rule. In substance, the amending Act creates
an open market when
the book is not first published in Australia or
within 30 days of first publication elsewhere. If this 30 day rule is
person can import copies of a book with the licence of the copyright.
the order must be for only so many copies as are
needed to satisfy that
reasonable requirements. The copyright owner is required to give
notification to the person
placing the order, within 7 days, that the
order would be filled within 90 days of that date. If these conditions
not met the
person can import the book from anywhere.
This system
inevitably incorporates certain loopholes. It is permissible for an
order to be placed with the copyright owner, the
owner’s licensee
owner's agent. There is also no requirement that the subsequent
parallel import is equivalent to the
amount initially ordered. Thus, if
order is not responded to in 7 days, or not filled within 90 days, the
the order by importing as many copies as they wish.
Additionally, the copyright owner’s right to control imports only
until another order
is placed. Therefore, the copyright owner runs the risk of sacrificing
control every time an order is placed,
regardless of who places
Parallel Importation of Sound
53. Parallel imports of sound recordings were allowed in
1998. Despite this there is no consensus on how much Australia CD prices
dropped since 1998, but the ACCC puts it at around 20% or $8.
One reason for this is that retailers continue to extract a
“double reward” by using low price countries of export and
high price countries of importation.
This is due to the
markets relatively high willingness to pay.
54. In August 1999, the ACCC instituted legal proceedings against Universal, Sony and
Warner Music and their executives
claiming that they had taken
unlawful action to discourage or prevent Australian businesses from selling
competitively priced parallel
imports hence contravening the TPA.
The allegation was that even though parallel import restrictions were
lifted the industry was still attempting to control distribution.
settled out of court
but Warner and Universal were found, by Justice Hill of the Federal
have misused their market
power and engaged in exclusive dealing to
prevent parallel imports of CDs, thus breaching sections 45, 46 and 47
of the TPA.
Another reason for prices failing to drop
dramatically is that parallel imports are susceptible to changes in
exchange rates.
Parallel importers will try to gain a double reward by
purchasing the product as cheaply as possible and selling it at the
price. Thus parallel exports are not a reliable source of foreign
exchange, particularly for developing countries.
fluctuating Australian dollar, price and availability of parallel
imports can change dramatically in a short period of time.
significant
change since parallel importation was allowed is non-specialist retail
outlets being able to sell low priced
top 40 CDs, for example
Woolworth's in the
Eastern States.
Specialist stores
and producers have also targeted this onslaught of cheap CDs by
marketing limited ‘enhanced’ CDs which
contain special
only’ bonus tracks or videos.
Although the ‘true’ role of copyright
protection is to protect the author from illegitimate use of their
work, copyright
is a bundle of rights. These rights include protecting
rights of the producer and distributor who ultimately bring the
work to the public. Employment in copyright industries is becoming
increasingly
specialised as authors require outside expertise
such as lawyers,
accountants,
producers, advertisers and marketing specialists. The rights associated
these contributions to
the expression of the idea
also require
protection.
57. The rights of future works
and developing countries also need to be protected. The profits from
sales of computer software go
redevelopment and new programs. Although it can be argued that
consumers are paying too much for computer software
discrimination is
still required as part of international trade and to ensure the
utilisation of
developing nations.
58. The approach adopted by the
Importation Bill
one of international exhaustion. A timed exhaustion
policy would diminish the effects on parties affected, due to the
to benefit Australian consumers. The 30/90- day rule used in
industry would still create price discrimination and increase
availability but would offer either too much or too little protection
than is necessary due to
the nature of the rule.
59. The nine- month
period of protection, proposed in relation to the New Zealand film
industry, would be a more
appropriate form
of protection. This allows price discrimination for a
set number of months, licensing of distributors, and an additional
piracy and censorship. This time period would also allow an
opportunity for copyright owners to recoup their investment, whereas
would benefit from price reductions post the period. Thus, those
consumers who wish to purchase the software immediately
can do so at a
higher price but if consumers would rather wait for a cheaper price
they can forego a period of use. This would also
allow Australian
suppliers to capture the secondary wave of purchasers. However, the
correct period required would have
to be investigated to allow
that the rights of those associated
with helping copyright works
reach the public and the Australian consumer are both
Postscript:
Parallel Importation
was passed by the Federal Parliament on 27 March 2003.
(Australian retail store) (Australian on-line) (US on-line) Price
A$ Price A$ Plus freight A$ Price A$ Plus freight A$ Adobe
Photoshop 1100.00 1495.00 1504.00 1014.06 1023.46 Macromedia Dreamweaver
550.00 569.00 578.00 467.19 476.59
Satellite 4100XDVD
57000.00 5730.00 5755.00 4819.00 4939.00
Thinkpad 600E
6082.00 6922.00 6947.00 6181.65 6301.65
DC290 1999.00 1783.00 1792.00 1658.97 1743.97 HP Deskjet
880C 494.00 479.00 498.00 552.97 652.97
by Bloomberg
28.95 34.95 42.45 22.52 31.82
Strident Crosstrainers
125.00 112.95 118.20 90.61 106.53
from: Software Engineering Australia,
Further submission to the
Intellectual Property and Competitive Review Committee
(December 1999)
Intellectual Property and Competition
http://www.ipcr.gov.au/SUBMIS/docs/furthersubsea.pdf
Dr Stephen Corones, ‘Parallel Importing Computer Software:
Consumer Welfare Considerations’ (1992) 3 Australia Intellectual
Property Journal 188,
Professor Allan Fels, ‘Intellectual Property, Competition
and Trade Policy Implications of Parallel Import Restrictions’
(Paper Presented at the Meeting on Competition, Trade & Development,
Rome 23 May 2001) Australian Competition and Consumer
http://www.accc.gov.au/speeches/2001/fels%5Frome%5Fjune%5F22%5F2001.htm
at 24 November 2002
Kerrie Henderson, ‘Copyright, Parallel
Imports and Development’
(1992) 10(2) Copyright Reporter
Peter Knight, ‘Computer Products, Parallel Import
and copyright in Australia and New Zealand’
(1992) 5 Software Law
Fels, above note 2.
Christopher Heath,
‘Parallel Imports and International Trade’
(1997) 28(5)
International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law 623
Intellectual Property
Organisation
http://www.wipo.int/sme/en/activities/meetings/pdf/atrip_gva_99_6.pdf
at 24 November 2002, 1.
Mark Davison, ‘Parallel Importing of
(1997) 25 Federal Law Review 263
Lotus Development Corp and Others v Vacolan Pty Ltd and Another
(1989) 16 IPR 143.
Interstates Parcel Express Co Try Ltd v Time-Life
International (Nederlands) BV and Another
[1977] HCA 52
[1977] 138 CLR 534.
was the Copyright owner who licensed its Australian rights to
Time-Life. Interstate Parcel Express purchased the copyrighted
imported them into Australia and sold them at a competitive price.
Computermate
Products (Aust) v Ozi-Soft Pty Ltd and Others
(1988) 12 IPR 487
of Australia). Ozi-Soft purchased legitimate diskettes in the UK and
imported them into Australia. Computermate was the Australian
but did not fall within the definition of an exclusive
Broderbund Software Inc and Another v Computermate Products (Australia) Pty Ltd and Others
(1991) 22 IPR
Lotus Development Corp and Others v Vacolan Pty Ltd and
(1989) 16 IPR 143 (Federal
Court of Australia).
Broderbund Software Inc and Another v Computermate Products (Australia)
Pty Ltd and Others
(1991) 22 IPR 215 (Federal
Court of Australia).
Broderbund were the copyright owner. Computermate approached Broderbund
seeking to distribute the rights in
Australia. However Data
flow was already the exclusive distributor in Australia which
Broderbund made clear thus Beaumont J held
that there would be no
consent. Computer parallel imported American copies of the program
Independent Television Publications Ltd v Commissioner of the European
Communities (Court of First Instance of the European Communities,
1991, unreported).
Broderbund, above note 24, 243.
Avel Pty Ltd and Others v Jonathon Wells
[1991] FCA 590
(1991) 22 IPR 305
Court of Australia).
Layout Act; Ibid
Galazy Electronics Pty Ltd & Anor v Sega Enterprises Ltd
& Anor [1997] 403 FCA (23 May 1997).
Explanatory Memorandum,
Engineering Australia, Further submission to the Intellectual Property and
Competitive Review Committee (December 1999)
Intellectual Property and
Competition
http://www.ipcr.gov.au/SUBMIS/docs/furthersubsea.pdf
November 2002, 6.
Australian Video Retailers Association Ltd v Warner Home Video Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1719
(7 December 2001).
Explanatory Memorandum, above note 33, 8-10.
Davison, above note 7, 271.
Intellectual Property and Competitive Review Committee, Final Report:
Review of Intellectual Property Legislation Under the Competitive
Principles Agreement (September 2000) Intellectual Property and
Competitive
http://www.ipcr.gov.au/IPAustralia.pdf
at 24 November
2002, 62; Henderson, above note 3, 6.
Fels, above note 2.
Explanatory Memorandum, above note 33, 3.
Hausman and Jeffrey MacKie-Mason, ‘Price discrimination and patent
policy’ (1988) 28(5) RAND Journal of Economics,
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, ‘Freedom from want’ Millennium Report
(2000) United Nations http://www.un.org/millennium/sg/report/ch2.pdf
November 2002.
Jayashree Watal, ‘The TRIPS Agreement and Developing Countries: Strong, Weak, or Balanced Protection?’
(1998) 1(2) Journal
of World Intellectual Property Protection, 283.
Carsten Fink, ‘Entering the Jungle of Intellectual Property
Exhaustion and Parallel Imports’, (Paper Presented
Competitive Strategies for Intellectual Property Protection Conferences
organised by the Fraser Institute in Santiago April
19, 1999 and Buenos
April 22, 1999) World Bank
http://www1.worldbank.org/wbiep/trade/c_papers/fink-parallel.pdf
November 2002, 11.
Watal, above note 49, 283.
above note 50, 12.
Hausman and MacKie-Mason,
above note 47, 265.
Explanatory Memorandum, above note 33,
IPCRC, above note 43, 55.
Strauss v Tesco (C-415/99) and Levi Strauss v Costco (C-416/99).
Zino Davidoff SA v A & G Imports Limited
[1999] 3 All ER 711.
Fink, above note 50, 8.
Davidoff, above note 59,
IPCRC, above note 43, 57.
http://copycontrol.emi.com.au
Explanatory Memorandum, above note 33, 16.
IPCRC, above note 43, 28.
Ibid; Fels, above note 2.
IPCRC, above note 43, 45.
Robinson, ‘Parallel Imports: US warns as New Zealand lifts ban’
Financial Times 20 May 1996, 20.
Fels, above note 2
News in Arts, Culture and Heritage from the Office of Hon
Judith Tizard (December 2001-January 2002) Issue No 03, LiveUpdater
<http://www.liveupdater.com/labourparty/LiveArticle.asp?ArtID=-1771013376
at 24 November 2002.
Fels, above note 2.
Davidoff, above note 59, 725.
decision of 1 July 1997, 29 IIC 331
Heath, above note 6, 3.
Senate Legal and
Constitutional Committee, Australian democrats dissenting report to the
, Parliament of
http://www.aph.gov.au/senate/committee/legcon_ctte/copyright/demcrat1.htm
at 24 November 2002.
IPCRC, above note 43, 48; Fels, above note
Knight, above note 4, 123; Halsbury's
Laws of Australia INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY '30/90 day rule' para
Fels, above note 2, 6.
Knight, above note 4,
IPCRC, above note 43, 63.
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission v Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd;
Australian Competition & Consumer Commission
v Sony Music Entertainment
(Australia) Ltd
[2000] FCA 1086
(1 August 2000).
Fels, above note
Fink, above note 50, 23.
Fels, above note 2,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter