URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ritter, David --- "The Myth of Sir Owen Dixon" [2005] AUJlLegHist 13; (2005) 9(2) Australian Journal of Legal History 249
The Myth of Sir Owen Dixon
I Introduction
II Origins of the Myth of Dixon16
III Content of the Myth
IV Employing the Myth
V The Internal Functioning of the Myth
VI Skeptical Conclusions
The Myth of Sir Owen Dixon
He was more than just a batsman, he was something like a tide
More than just one man, he was the whole damn side…
Now the players all wear colours
The circus is in town
And I no longer can go down there
Down to that sacred
I Introduction
On Monday 13 April 1964, Owen Dixon addressed the High Court of Australia for
the final time, at the end of a career of twenty-three
years as a Puisne Judge
and then twelve years as Chief Justice. Dixon’s leaving was a grand
ceremonial occasion but he claimed
not to be its architect, informing those
assembled that: ‘I would have thought it satisfactory to all of you that
Justice should just
disappear’.
After leaving the
High Court in 1964, Dixon resigned all offices and emphatically withdrew from
public life, but he did not vanish.
An anthology of Dixon’s extra-curial
papers and addresses was published in
and the volume was widely
Dixon’s death in
1972 precipitated a wave of public
remembrance,
followed much later by
celebrations on the hundredth anniversary of his
and again on the twentieth
anniversary of his death.
Court’s Centennial celebrations in 2003 included particular emphasis on
amplified by the publication
of the much anticipated first full
This article is a
survey of what has been written and said about Dixon since
retirement.
The relevant
literature is examined in political and legal-historical context to reveal how
the former Chief Justice has been mythologised
and to what ends the
‘myth’ of Dixon has been
In this article, the term ‘myth’ is used neither in a derogatory
sense nor as a synonym for ‘falsehood’. Rather,
the expression is
applied to describe a belief structure that is clothed in the language of the
actual, but distorts, condenses,
disguises and exaggerates its subject. Such
‘myths’ perform a powerful ideological and socio-cultural function,
to explain and justify positions and events while simultaneously
frustrating interrogation. The recitation of a myth can confer legitimacy,
removing the further need for specific description of a subject or the
explanation of a proposition.
Modern myths of the exceptional qualities and exploits of heroic leaders are
common enough
and although most
obviously associated with military, political or artistic figures, judges too
can be mythologised.
article is concerned with the myth of Dixon; the ideologically marked account of
the judge that has developed and which conveys
certain assumptions, values and
goals associated with judicial role and technique and the functioning of the
II Origins of the Myth of
Owen Dixon was born in Melbourne in 1886 to a modest bourgeois home marked by
some domestic difficulties.
Dixon did well enough at school to achieve entry to the University of Melbourne
where he studied classics and law with success if
not great distinction, later
gaining admission to the bar in 1910. Dixon married Alice Brooksbank in 1920 and
they went on to have
two sons and two daughters. A series of successful
performances as counsel led to Dixon becoming a KC in 1922, followed by
appointment
to the High Court of Australia in 1929 and then Chief Justice in
1952. Unusually, Dixon twice left the High Court to perform acts
extra-judicial public service, first in a diplomatic posting to America during
the Second World War and subsequently as United
Nations mediator in relation to
the Kashmir imbroglio. Dixon was knighted in 1941 and received a range of other
accolades and prizes.
enjoyed success both early
at length and when he died in 1972 he was, in the words of a brother High Court
Judge, ‘full of years and
Dixon’s resume is on the face of it extraordinary, but there are still
further, if perhaps less tangible, sources of the legend.
sequestration, Menzies suggested that ‘those who are of a newer
generation’ would ‘never quite
understand the absolute
dominance’ which the retiree had exercised when a practising barrister.
Even at the Bar you were not only a point of reference, but also a voice of
authority. To appear with you was a liberal education;
to appear against you was
calculated to reduce any normal human being like me to the depths of
From primacy at the bar, Dixon is said to have gone on to ‘transform
the atmosphere’ of the High Court from an arena in
which barristers were
treated with aggression and disdain by the bench to one of friendliness, where
‘the debate was dedicated
to the pursuit of truth rather than to the
vindication of egos’.
Undoubtedly, making the Court a friendlier work-place would have universally
endeared the Chief Justice to the advocates who were
Dixon’s unusual absences from the Court on representative duties in
Washington and the sub-continent are also sources of renown.
Dixon was said to
have been highly respected in America, while his efforts at mediating over
Kashmir are still regarded by some as
the best attempt yet at engineering a
lasting peace over the province.
Undoubtedly, Dixon’s ‘success on the international stage’ was
an additional source of admiration in an Australia
in which many (including
Dixon) still saw England as ‘home’ and properly recognised America
as the new centre of world
The acclaim accorded to
Dixon in the two most influential nations of the English speaking world showed
him to be a ‘true champion’
who, by virtue of that success, brought
honor to the Australian nation at large.
There are also structural reasons for Dixon’s prima facie claim to
‘greatness’: he emerged to prominence as a barrister
Commonwealth was in its infancy and served on the bench for more than three
decades, then more than half of the High Court’s
life. As one reviewer
wrote in 1965, ‘the Court may be said to have grown up with
Dixon was also
favoured by the times, serving as Chief Justice during what was largely a period
of great national political
As political
scientist Brian Galligan has suggested in
Politics of the High Court
entrenchment of the conservative Menzies government during Dixon’s tenure
at the head of the Court made for few great
constitutional
Indeed the reputations
of both the Prime Minister and the Chief Justice no doubt benefited from their
mutual association and admiration;
Menzies had, after all, been Dixon’s
first pupil at the bar.
must have been a sense in the ‘long’ nineteen-fifties that the heads
of both the executive and judicial arms of
government in Australia were
The length of Menzies’ tenure also meant that the Court
was packed with appointments approved of by Dixon, ensuring a commonality
judicial approach.
Robert Menzies appointed first cousin Douglas Menzies to the bench and the
latter later noted that the Court had ‘inevitably’
‘something of the quality of its Chief
III Content of the Myth
Dixon has been actively and deliberately mythologised by various admirers and
and his life and
character have been described with the most abundant praise. The quality perhaps
most commonly ascribed to Dixon
‘greatness’.
called Dixon ‘the greatest legal advocate I saw either here or
Arthur Dean,
former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Victoria regarded Dixon as
‘the greatest lawyer so far produced in
Australia’, probably
‘the greatest lawyer of his time’ and a ‘great
S E K Hulme, a
Melbourne barrister writing in 1997 said that Dixon’s
‘greatness’ could ‘be taken as
undisputed’.
superlatives have also been applied: historian Peter Ryan wrote that the late
judge was a ‘stupendous
while Dean also said
of Dixon that he was ‘the very epitome of wisdom to guide us
Dixon was compared
It has been suggested
that the virtuous hero in
The Lawyer and the Libertine
, a novel written
by current High Court judge Ian Callinan, is in part modelled on
Dixon’s first full biography, written by Phillip Ayres is distinctly
hagiographical.
When launching
in Sydney in 2003, Jim Spigelman, Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of NSW, commented that
[Dixon] possessed the most formidable legal mind in all of our history. If there
was a Nobel Prize for reasoning he was the most
likely Australian to have been a
recipient. Amongst the philosophers of the world, and particularly amongst the
lawyers, over the
first seven decades of the 20
century, his
particular genius for reasoning and power and clarity of expression placed him
in the first
Spigelman was only one of a range of reviewers and launchers who took the
opportunity presented by the publication of
to heap praise on
the subject of the
Robert Ferguson has written a thoughtful analysis of the figure of judge
Oliver Wendell Holmes, whose memory is honored in America
in a manner that bears
comparison to the way in which Dixon is revered in
In Ferguson’s
words, ‘veneration is the appropriate term’ because the language of
adulation of Holmes (and Dixon)
‘transcends every usual limit’ in
‘a ceremony of
Indeed, the
‘difficulty with a ledger’ of Holmes (and Dixon’s)
‘virtues and accomplishments is that it does
not explain the additional
level of adulation that the career has
The unabashed
admiration heaped on Dixon is often justified by reference to qualities well
beyond supremacy as a barrister or erudition
and effectiveness as a judge and on
occasion becomes a tendency to treat him as ‘faultless
Thus Dixon has been
fêted for absolute honesty, complete integrity, faultless courtesy,
remarkable intellectual span, as well
as being ‘happily married’ and
‘a devoted family man’, when evidence suggests far more ambiguous
conclusions
might be appropriate in relation to each of these
Perhaps unsurprisingly,
studying the example of the great judge’s life is seen by some to be
morally instructive.
Importantly, the myth of Dixon is not derogated by the existence of published
criticism of the Judge.
Commentators have expressed reservations at, for example, Dixon’s old
fashioned values, including expressed xenophobia and
There has also been at
least some suggestion that the promulgation of the Dixon legend can be explained
away, at least in part, as
a product of the Melbourne establishment in its
ongoing cultural war for supremacy with Sydney. One prominent NSW counsel, for
is quoted as having dismissed the Dixon legend with the observation
that ‘Melbourne is always true to its
These various
examples are exceptions to the general flow of the literature, but the
functioning of the myth of Dixon the
is not impaired by the
existence of some unbelievers and heretics. Barrister Laurence Maher, in
particular, has written of both breaches
of judicial propriety, and political
activity as a ‘covert’ Cold War warrior, on the part of
Maher and others have
drawn attention to Dixon’s striking and repeated breaches of
constitutional convention.
such criticisms are of a deep and serious order, the myth of Dixon acts to
frustrate and silence interrogation and to prevent
a more nuanced reading of the
former Chief Justice that seeks to explain such matters, rather than merely
dismissing them as incidental
to the narrative of
A recent passage in a
short article from High Court Judge Ian Callinan nicely depicts the dynamic of
the myth acting to confine and
stultify consideration of Dixon’s
It seems to me that Sir Owen Dixon was not devoid of some of the ordinary
frailties of man and especially legal kind. His reputation
as a very great
judge, undoubtedly one of the greatest of the twentieth century, has placed him
on a pedestal upon which no human
being could comfortably always stand. It comes
as something of a shock to learn that he also had failings … a narrowness
out of an abstention from indulgence in any external interests except the
classics which coloured his perception of
There is even sometimes a tendency for what seems to be evidence of
Dixon’s human failings to be re-framed as yet more verification
brilliance of the ‘great
It appears, for
example, that Dixon was not an entertaining speaker, but that rather, he read
out speeches in a manner that Arthur
Dean remembers as being ‘without any
attempt at oratory or
Nevertheless,
Dean was grateful to the late Judge for deliberately lecturing in a monotone, as
any speechifying or rhetoric would
have ‘distracted the audience from the
difficult enough task of absorbing what he
Another example is
afforded by the recollection of Hulme that, after becoming Chief Justice, if
Dixon bumped in to young barristers
in Melbourne after he had completed repast
at ‘one of his
the junior would
be offered a lift in the large automobile provided by the Commonwealth. However,
once ‘the car reached the
Court’, even ‘if it were
raining’, the vehicle ‘was not sent on the further hundred yards or
the bar chambers. In Hulme’s view the act of putting out
one’s subordinate passengers into inclement Victorian weather
display of moral fibre: the ‘car was provided by the Australian taxpayers
to drive the Chief Justice of Australia, not
to let him give rides to
friends’ even just for a short distance, and there was ‘no such
concept as that of reasonable
honesty’, as far as Dixon was
Far more seriously,
the biographer Ayres dismisses the deeply troubling revelation that Dixon
advised Prime Minister Menzies about
proposed amendments to legislation the
subject of current litigation, by pleading that the issue ‘was a matter of
importance’ and the Chief Justice ‘believed he had a civic
duty to remain informed’.
The myth of greatness does not admit of qualification in the hands of the most
ardent of proponents.
Ferguson has noted the tendency for the cultural figure of the judge to
become an idealised type and refers to legal theorist Ronald
invention of the hypothetical ‘Justice Hercules’, who is a
‘lawyer of superhuman skill, learning,
patience, and
In some of the
literature Dixon is indeed idealised as an antipodean Justice Hercules; a
judicial manifestation of the
near-divine.
Robert Menzies made
a joke of the perception of Dixon’s godliness in a reflection published in
Twenty-five years later
another former High Court Chief Justice, Sir Anthony Mason, described his
predecessor as, ‘in manner
and appearance’, conveying a ‘sense
of Olympian omniscience and
detachment’.
Ayres’ widely admired biography depicts Dixon in a manner that is an
unwitting echo of Dworkin’s half-comic
ideal, attributing the subject near
human perfection and portraying him after the manner of an ancient Greek
Above all, the myth of Dixon’s ‘greatness’ rests on his
elucidation of the judicial function, referred to most frequently
‘legalism’ or ‘strict logic and high
technique’.
Dixon’s address upon taking the oath of office in Sydney as Chief Justice
of the High Court on 21 April 1952, he set out
certain views on constitutional
interpretation:
[I]t is not sufficiently recognised that the Court’s sole function is to
interpret a constitutional description of power or
restraint upon power and say
whether a given measure falls on one side of a line consequently drawn or on the
other, and that it
has nothing whatever to do with the merits or demerits of the
Such a function has led us all I think to believe that close adherence to legal
reasoning is the only way to maintain the confidence
of all parties in federal
conflicts. It may be that the Court is thought to be excessively legalistic. I
should be sorry to think
that it is anything else. There is no other safe guide
to judicial decisions in great conflicts than a strict and complete
Some years later, Dixon revisited the role of the courts in an oration
entitled ‘Concerning Judicial Method’ that he delivered
receiving a prize from Yale. Dixon returned to the theme of legalism in
exhorting what he termed (quoting Maitland) ‘the
strict logic and high
technique of the common
which he explained
in the following terms:
Law is confined to the realm of ideas. It is concerned with human conduct but
otherwise it has no relation to objective fact …Ours
is a system of law
which makes the utterances of judges the best evidence of the state of the law,
that is provided the utterances
are delivered from the Bench … But in the
end it is what the courts choose to say, the courts considered as an entire
hierarchical
system, that determines the substance of the law … Such
courts do in fact proceed upon the assumption that the law provides
doctrine which governs the decision of a given case. It is taken for granted
that the decision of the court will be ‘correct’
‘incorrect’, ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ as it
conforms with ascertained legal principles and applies
them according to a
standard of reasoning which is not personal to the judges themselves … The
court would feel that the function
it performed had lost its meaning and its
purpose, if there were no external standard of legal correctness … [T]he
is assumed of a body of ascertained principles or doctrine which both
counsel and judges know or ought to know and there is a constant
appeal to this
body of knowledge … The presupposition is that there exists a definite
system of accepted knowledge or thought
and that judgments and other legal
writings are evidence of its
Dixon envisioned a judicial method that would be objective in that it was
based on a clear system of logic that was exterior to any
individual mind. The
‘conclusion of a judge should not be subjective or personal to him but
should be the consequence of his
best endeavour to apply’ the
‘external standard’ of ‘positive knowledge’ of the
common law.
Evolution of the law
would still occur because it was acceptable for
a court to seek to extend the application of accepted principles to new cases or
to reason from the more fundamental of settled legal
principles to new
conclusions or to decide that a category is not closed against unforeseen
instances which in reason might be subsumed
thereunder.
However, Dixon warned that it was an entirely different and altogether
ill-advised ‘thing for a judge, who is discontented with
a result held to
flow from a long-accepted legal principle, deliberately to abandon the principle
in the name of justice or of social
necessity or of
convenience’.
IV Employing the Myth
The myth of Dixon has been invoked in relation to numerous causes and debates
as some examples will suffice to illustrate. In 1995,
historian Bruce Kercher
cited Dixon in support of a nationalist interpretation of Australian legal
Ayres saw Dixon’s
views as providing support to a critically sceptical view of the
Lawyer and Liberal
Senator, George Brandis, drew on Dixon in defence of Judges’
superannuation entitlements,
while Labor Member of the House of Representatives, Barney Cooney, invoked the
name of Dixon as moral ballast when criticising Commonwealth
immigration laws.
even speculated that if it had been a Chief Justice more like Dixon who had
advised the Governor General on dismissing
the Whitlam administration in 1975,
rather than Garfield Barwick, that the response would have been less
Dixon has been
summoned both for and against the current Federal Government’s so-called
‘counter-terrorism’
as well as to criticise
the conduct of a former Governor of
In the course of the debates associated with the Mason, Brennan and Gleeson
the name and legacy of
Dixon has been regularly engaged to bolster arguments or positions. Predictably,
critics of the so-called
‘activisim’ of the Mason and Brennan Courts
have summoned Dixon to make unfavourable
comparisons.
Dyson Heydon is one
high profile critic of judicial activism, who delivered a strongly worded rebuke
at a dinner hosted by
, just prior to being elevated from the NSW
Court of Appeal to the High Court by the Howard
administration.
The address
contains a stirring rendition of the myth of Dixon and a loud denunciation of
(un-named and un-footnoted) ‘activist
judges and their defenders’
who Heydon claimed had targeted the former Chief Justice ‘either as a
bogeyman or as an object
In making the
speech, Heydon became the most readily identifiable successor to the Dixonian
legacy. The ideological lineage from
Dixon to Heydon was even given
pseudo-biological expression in one of the reviews of the Ayres biography.
One of the young men who came under the sway of Sir Owen’s strong
character was Keith Aickin, appointed as Dixon’s associate
in 1939. He was
destined to be a judge of the High Court (1976-1982) … as Third Secretary
of the Australian Legation …
[Aickin also] went to Washington with Dixon
in 1942 … Dixon’s Second Secretary was another young man by the name
Heydon. … In March 1943 Peter Heydon’s wife Naomi gave
birth in Canada to a son, John Dyson Heydon. Young Dyson was destined
appointed to the High Court of
Thus the ‘ancestry’ of Heydon can be traced back to the mythic
hero, Dixon himself, symbolically confirming the legitimacy
of the new appointee
in epic fashion.
What is, on the face of it, much more surprising is that, while Dixon is used
against the Mason and Brennan Courts, he is also utilised
Speaking on
‘future directions in Australian law’, then Chief Justice Mason
Sir Owen Dixon’s outline of the judicial function ‘resembles an
elegantly constructed mansion in which some of the windows
deliberately left open. The message is not so much an injunction against
reasoning by reference to considerations of justice
and social utility as a
proscription of the judge who, in defiance of the great tradition of legal
continuity, turns his back on
the accumulated wisdom of the past and overthrows
well settled doctrine in order to reach the result which he considers just in
Almost certainly the most famous and contentious decision of the Mason Court
Mabo v Queensland (2)
in which Justice Brennan wrote the lead
Whether the doctrine of native title formed part of the common law of
Australia was not the subject of any Court decision until the
year before
Dixon’s death, so it is not a matter that the former Chief Justice is
likely to have considered.
Nevertheless the recognition of native title in Australia in
the conclusion that pastoral leases did not extinguish native title in
generated debates in which the name of Dixon became valuable
currency. Industrialist Hugh Morgan, then Managing Director of Western
Corporation and one of the most trenchant critics of
, expressly
based an outspoken attack of the decision on the precepts of
and it was a line of
remonstration that recurred.
contrast, writing in 1995 Justice Santow of the Supreme Court of NSW expressly
situated a lengthy defence of the
case within the ‘Dixonian
According to
Santow, the judicial restraint evident in the method of Dixon was again on show
when the Mason Court decided
. Others simply defended
no more than a victory for the common
How does one explain the
evident malleability of the myth of Dixon?
V The Internal Functioning of the
The myth of Dixon functions by marrying the epic reputation of the
‘greatest judge in Australian history’ to certain hegemonic
associated with judicial technique and the role of law. The dynamic is one of a
mutually reinforcing binary: Dixon was the
greatest judge, the greatest judge
must, ergo, have had the greatest technique, while correspondingly, it must have
been strict adherence
to legalist principles which rendered the maestro supreme.
The ‘high technique’ of the ‘Bradman of the law’
gave him a metaphorical average of 99.94 and demonstrated the only proper way to
bat: accordingly, to criticise either the
man or the method would be foolish and
disrespectful. Thus the myth of Dixon fuses the legend of the champion with the
jurisprudential
creed for which he stood, making for an enduring legal-cultural
symbol linked to powerful broader values. Writing in 1987, then Chief
the High Court of Australia, Sir Anthony Mason described the
‘virtues’ of legalism as ‘continuity, objectivity
and absence
of controversy’;
attributes calculated to induce public confidence in the administration of
justice and respect for the law. Legal formalism provides
a mantle of legitimacy
for the non-elected judiciary in a democratic society. If the principles of law
are deductible from past precedents,
there is no place for the personal
predilections and values of the individual judge
Unsurprisingly then, ‘legalism’ has a powerful ‘hold’
on the public imagination as well as that of the community
of lawyers, perhaps
epitomising the social role that the community hopes and implicitly assumes that
Judges can fulfil.
Dixon’s espousal of legalism, it is not unexpected that, as current High
Court Judge Michael Kirby has remarked, even
‘today, long after he has
gone, the power of Dixon’s exposition and example continues to influence
the ideology of what
it is to be a judge in
Australia’.
However, while Dixon’s view of the judicial method has been the subject
of much commentary, the literature reveals widely divergent
understandings even
among the most distinguished commentators of what ‘legalism’
actually entails. In Robert Menzies’
view, Dixon approached ‘the
task of interpreting the Australian Commonwealth
Constitution
’ strictly,
applying ‘legal concepts, and not political ones’
‘no partisanship’ or ‘sociological objectives to
On the other
hand, in Kirby’s view, ‘Sir Owen Dixon would not have denied’
that the ‘function of constitutional
interpretation’ is
‘creative’ and ‘inescapably political’, at least
‘in a broad
The employment of the reputation of the ‘great judge’ and the
baggage of associated values on different sides of the same
debates abundantly
illustrates both the pliability but also the ultimate emptiness of the myth of
Dixon. Broader ontological debates
exist about the political nature of knowledge
and the impossibility of value-free information, but such intellectual
cross-currents
should not too quickly be conflated with subtler shifts within
the universe of judicial convention. Former Judge Hal Wootten put
plainly in an article about
published in 1995:
Judges work within a professional tradition and environment in which they have
not only studied but spent their working lives. There
is a recognised
authoritative literature expressing share values. … Judges work within a
specified hierarchy of authority,
and appellate courts are multi-member, with
the constraints of group decision-making. They work in public and give detailed
for what they do, reasons which are subject to the scrutiny not only of
interested parties and the practising profession, but also
a large body of
academic scholars. Precedents cannot be ignored, and if they are to be
distinguished or overruled, the judges’
professional reputations will be
on the line when they give their reasons. A major constraint on judicial
waywardness is the knowledge
that the legal system, for which the judges have a
major responsibility, can work only if there is a reasonable degree of
predictability and continuity.
The general legal virtues with which Dixon is associated are very rarely
questioned; nobody seriously advocates judges as policy makers,
traditional constraints. Dixon may be held up as the paradigm of a ‘great
judge’, but it is an example amenable
to multiple and competing
interpretations within the accepted parentheses of Australian legal discourse.
VI Skeptical Conclusions
The most recent retiree from the High Court, Michael McHugh, suggested during
his last twelve months on the bench, that the alleged
Gleeson Court is ‘more imagined than
and ‘more a
matter of tone and style than of
substance’.
In the same
speech McHugh suggested that judges ‘cannot escape the currents of their
‘consciously or unconsciously, the idea of a new Australia influenced the
approach of the Mason Court to
Perhaps many
of the invocations of Dixon by politically conservative commentators are
explicable in the same way, as reactions to
change in Australian society.
If the ‘idea of a new Australia’ associated connotes an open
economy, increased engagement with Asia, greater individual
choice, the rise of
complex identity politics and declining certainty about work, community and
social hierarchy, then it is a vision
that is not universally
Among lawyers,
wistful nostalgia for the vanished Australia of the Menzies era can be expressed
by nostalgic reference to Dixon;
an evocative personification of the ‘good
However, the
Federal Government’s cultural and public policy programme, of course, has
undergone radical alteration since the
ascendancy of the Howard Government in
1996 and while a commitment to economic rationalism has survived the transition,
much of the
previous administration’s agenda has been
jettisoned.
In the current
climate, Dixon is invoked by legal and political conservatives to legitimise the
‘counter-reformation’.
Claims to the legacy of Dixon should be treated with scepticism. Dixon was a
remarkable figure whose catalogue of achievements is
necessarily impressive, but
the mythology functions by exaggerating the man, turning him into a paradigm; a
hero of exemplary qualities,
wedded to an over-arching array of legal values
which enjoy broad approval. The consequence is that myth of Dixon is both
and empty and can be used to rhetorically legitimatise multiple and
sometimes even competing positions. The debates associated with
Brennan and Gleeson Courts in particular provided a vivifying context for the
employment of the Dixon mythology. More
than thirty years after Dixon’s
passing, the Bradman of the law remains a powerful figure with which to
BA (Hons) LLB (Hons).
David Ritter is a lecturer at the Law School of the University of Western
Australia and a doctoral candidate jointly in history and
law at the same
institution. Thanks to Hal Wootten, George Williams, Richard Bartlett, Gillian
Cowlishaw, Sarah Knuckey, Richard
Bosworth and Frances Flanagan for reading
drafts of the article. Thanks also to Andrew Buck for ‘sort of’
commissioning
the article. Any errors of course remain my own.
Paul Kelly and the Coloured
Girls ‘Bradman’ on
Under the Sun
, Mushroom Records, 1987.
‘Retirement of the Chief
Justice’ (1964) 110
Commonwealth Law Reports
Jesting Pilate and
Other Papers and Addresses
See for example P F P Higgins,
‘Jesting Pilate and other Papers and Addresses’
[1966] UTasLawRw 7
(1996) 2(3)
University of Tasmania Law Review
; G A Kennedy, ‘Jesting
Pilate and other Papers and Addresses (by Sir Owen Dixon)’
[1967] UWALawRw 10
(1967) 8(1)
University Of Western Australia Law Review
; A D G Adam,
‘Jesting Pilate and Other Papers (Sir Owen Dixon)’
[1967] MelbULawRw 8
(1967) 5(4)
Melbourne University Law Review
and P D Phillips, ‘Jesting
Pilate and Other Papers and Addresses (By Sir Owen Dixon)’
[1967] FedLawRw 14
(1966) 2(1)
Federal Law Review
In 1973 a selection from
Dixon’s judgments was published: N H Dooley (ed),
Selections from the
Judgements of Sir Owen Dixon by Lawyers in Victoria
(1973). Curiously, as
one reviewer pointed out, some of the judgments in the collection are joint
judgments that seem unlikely to
have been written by Dixon: J R S Forbes,
‘Selections from the Judgments of Sir Owen Dixon by Lawyers in Victoria,
[1972] UQLawJl 6
(1973) 8(1)
University of Queensland Law Journal
Sir Owen Dixon A
Celebration
See for example P W Young,
‘Sir Owen Dixon’ (1992) 66(7)
Australian Law Journal
F Kitto, ‘Some recollections of Sir Owen Dixon’ (1992) 66(7)
Australian Law Journal
See for example S E K Hulme,
‘Recollections, Mainly to do with the Dixon Court’
Australian Law Journal
and P W Young (ed), ‘High Court
Centenary: Sir Owen Dixon’
Australian Law Journal
See for example A Dean,
Multitude of Counsellors. A History of the Bar of Victoria
220 and G Lindsay, ‘Owen Dixon a Biography’
Australian Bar Review
An earlier effort at a biography by J D
Merralls was never completed: see J D Merralls, ‘Biography of a
Professional: Sir Owen
Dixon’ (1996) 99
Victorian Bar News
also Stephen, above n 6, 37.
Not including judicial
references within judgments. It would of course be possible to study the
influence of Dixon on his successors
by citation analysis: see W M Landes, L
Lessig and M E Solimine, ‘Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of
Federal Courts
of Appeals Judges’
Journal of Legal
The ‘myth’ of
Dixon is referred to in L W Maher, ‘Owen Dixon: Concerning his Political
(2003) 6(2)
Constitutional Law and Policy Review
See G F Flood,
Myth: A Theoretical Introduction
(1996). See also P Fitzpatrick,
Mythology of Modern Law
Flood, above n 12, 220.
See P B Kurland,
‘Judicial Biography: History, Myth, Literature, Fiction, Potpourri’
New York University Law Review
and Robert A Ferguson,
‘Holmes and the Judicial Figure’ (1988) 55(2)
University of
Chicago Law Review
See Flood, above n 12,
In 1973 constitutional law
academic Colin Howard wrote that It was ‘easy to be sidetracked into
fascination with the reasons
why Dixon CJ attained the dominating position which
he did. Well-worn stories abound. Mostly they purport to illustrate an almost
supernatural capacity for tricking anyone in any situation. They are undoubtedly
aprocryphal, pallid reflection of the difficulty
of outmatching a superior
intellect’. See C Howard, ‘Sir Owen Dixon and the
Constitution
[1973] MelbULawRw 2
Melbourne University Law Review
The principal public source
of information about Dixon is now P Ayres,
‘Privy Councillor,
Knight Grand Cross of St Michael and St George, Order of Merit …
honoris causa
from both Oxford ands Harvard … and the
treasured Howland Prize from Yale’: Stephen, above n 6, 36.
He appeared in his first
High Court matter 24 and 42, at the time of his appointment he was the youngest
High Court judge to have
been appointed.
D I Menzies, ‘The
Right Honourable Sir Owen Dixon, OM, GCMG’
[1973] MelbULawRw 1
University Law Review
‘Retirement of the
Chief Justice’ (1964) 110
Judges of the
(1986) 111. See also Kitto, above n 7, 401-402.
See for example Ayres,
above n 17, 218.
Ibid ch 3 and 8.
Higgins, above n 4,
327-330, 327.
Young, above n 7, 399-401,
B Galligan,
The Politics
of the High Court
(1987) 203.
See ‘Sir Owen
Dixon’ in R G Menzies,
The Measure of the Years
Galligan, above n 27,
Menzies, above n 20, 3.
See for example comments
reported in Lindsay, above n 9, 198 and 209. Compare the ‘beatification of
Oliver Wendell Holmes’
described in ch 8 of A W Alschuler,
Law Without
Values: The Life, Work, and Legacy of Justice Holmes
I have here used different
examples of Dixon being referred to as ‘great’ to those cited in D
Ritter, ‘Greatness
as Measure? Recent Writings on the High Court of
Australia’ (2004) 50(3)
Australian Journal of Politics and History
434-439. Is it possible to come up with ‘objective’ indicia for
‘judicial greatness’? Michael Gerhardt has
suggested that judicial
greatness is ‘often in the eye of the beholder. Many of the standards
adopted for determining the greatness
of a judge are designed to ensure the
selection of particular judges or to favor judges who reach certain substantive
See M J Gerhardt, ‘The Art of Judicial Biography’
Cornell Law Review
‘Retirement of the
Chief Justice’ (1964) 110
Commonwealth Law Reports
Dean, above n 9, 219.
S E K Hulme,
‘Tait’s case, and Sir Owen Dixon’ (1997) 101
Victorian Bar
P Ryan, ‘Sir Owen
Dixon: An Intellectual Man of Passion’
[1986] MelbULawRw 14
(1986) 15(4)
University Law Review
Dean, above n 9 218.
Hulme, above n 8, 654; S E
K Hulme, ‘Sir Owen Dixon’ (1998) 104
Victorian Bar News
31-33, 31; P Heery, ‘A Towering Figure of the Law in this Country: Owen
Dixon – Book Review’
(2003) 77(10)
Australian Law Journal
, 684 and G Fricke,
Judges of the High Court
Heery, above n 38, 684.
M Grattan, ‘Judging
the Plot so Far’
Sydney Morning Herald
, 18 June 1999.
Ayres, above n 17. I have
commented on this further in Ritter, above n 32, 434-439. Justice Callinan, in
a comment which may reveal
much of his Honour’s own views of humanist
scholarship has suggested that in ‘the tradition of the best biographers,
of whom Ayres is one, the facts in his biography of Dixon are neatly and
comprehensively assembled, but the judgements on them are
left to the
reader’: I D F Callinan, ‘Comment on Phillip Ayres’s article:
Dixon’s View of the Privy Council’
Australian Bar
J J Spigelmen, ‘Book
Launch: Sydney – Speech by Chief Justice Spigelman’ (2003) 77(10)
Australian Law Journal
686-690, 686.
See Lindsay, above n 9, 198
and 209; P Ryan, ‘Judge of the Century’
The Weekend
, 24-5 May, 2003, R8, R9; Heery, above n 38; P W Young,
‘Melbourne Gentlemen of the Thirties: Owen- Dixon – Book
(2003) 77(10)
Australian Law Journal
and J Young,
‘Book Launch: Melbourne – Speech by Sir John Young’ (2003) 77
Australian Law Journal
Holmes has since been
subjected to deconstruction in A W Alschuler,
Law Without Values: The Life,
Work, and Legacy of Justice Holmes
Robert A Ferguson,
‘Holmes and the Judicial Figure’ (1988) 55(2)
University of
Chicago Law Review
507-47, 518.
Ibid 507-47, 519.
The expression in this
context is taken from Kurland, above n 14, 500.
Ritter, above n 4,
Hulme has suggested that it
‘is important to help keep alive an awareness of one of Australia’s
greatest sons’
and that ‘we forget such men at our peril’:
Hulme, above n 38, 31 and 33.
G Winterton, ‘Barwick
[1998] UNSWLawJl 37
(1998) 21(1)
UNSW Law Journal
, 110. See also Maher,
above n 11, 33-49, n 5.
See for example F Brennan,
‘Tales from the Bench’ (2003)
Eureka Street
Forbes, above n 5, 94.
Winterton, above n 50, 110.
L Maher, ‘Tales of
the Overt and the Covert’
Federal Law Review
See D Rose, ‘Sir Owen
(2003) 6(1)
Constitutional Law and Policy Review
Maher, above n 11, 33-49 and Lindsay, above n 9, 203-5.
One might imagine, for
example, a full length work about Dixon that seeks to assimilate the kind of
matters set out in Maher, above
n 11, 33-49, with Dixon’s professed
commitment to legalism and that would situate the analysis in a textured study
life and intellectual and political milieu.
Callinan, above n 41, 21.
Even the extent to which Callinan is critical of Dixon here is quite unusual
See also Ritter, above n
Dean, above n 9, 219.
Dean, above n 9. See also
Lindsay, above n 9, 205-6.
Hulme, above n 38, 32.
Hulme, above n 38, 33. One
wonders indeed what the precise terms of Dixon’s use of the car included.
The issue is dealt with
(along with various other worrying involvements of Dixon) in Maher, above n 50,
40, so I know I am not imagining
things. Justice Callinan is ‘particularly
interested in the way Dixon has so far escaped criticism for expressing an
on a current legal problem’: Callinan, above n 41, 21.
Ferguson, above n 45, 511;
Taking Rights Seriously
(1977) 105.
In America, Oliver Wendell
Holmes was mythologised as ‘The Yankee from Olympus’. See C D Bowen,
Yankee from Olympus
R G Menzies, ‘Sir
Owen Dixon’ in R G Menzies,
The Measure of the Years
A Mason, ‘Reflections
on the High Court of Australia’
[1995] MelbULawRw 21
(1995) 20(2)
Melbourne University Law
See Ritter, above n 41,
Maher, above n 11, 33.
S Woinarski (ed),
Jesting Pilate and Other Papers and Addresses by Sir Owen Dixon
Ibid 154-6.
Child: A History of Law in Australia
(1995) 168-9, 177.
P Ayres, ‘Owen
Dixon’s Causation Lecture: Radical Scepticism’
(2003) 77(10)
Australian Law Journal
G Brandis, ‘Matters
of Public Interest: Superannuation: Judges’
Senate Hansard
2004, 20673.
B Cooney, Speech at the
second reading stage of the Migration Amendment Bill 2003,
HR Hansard,
September 2001, 27706.
J Waterford, ‘The
Barwick Judgment’ (1997) 7(7)
Eureka Street
P Ruddock, ‘A New
Framework: Counter Terrorism and the Rule of Law’ (Address to the Sydney
Institute, 20 April, 2004);
G Williams, ‘Hardline Laws can go too
The Australian
, 18 April 2002 and R McClelland, 9 October
2003, 21114,
, speech at the second reading stage of the
Telecommunications Interception and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2003:
it was Justice Dixon who said, in the Communist Party dissolution
case, that the greatest intrusions on the liberty of subjects inevitably
from the executive itself’. See also M Head,
‘“Counter-Terrorism” Laws: A Threat to Political Freedom,
Civil Liberties and Constitutional Rights’ (2004)
Melbourne University
J Albrechtsen,
‘Butler’s Duty to Serve the People, not to Play Politics’
The Australian
, 27 August 2003.
To some extent of course,
all generalisations about the Court at a given time are odious, as Justice
McHugh points out in M McHugh,
‘The Constitutional Jurisprudence of the
High Court: 1989-2004’ (The Inaugural Sir Anthony Mason Lecture in
Constitutional
Law, 26 November 2004, Sydney). Currently unpublished, but
available on the High Court’s web site at:
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/mchughj.
Between 1987 and 2005 there was a
complete turn-over in the composition of the bench.
See discussion of this
phenomenon M Kirby, ‘Judicial Activism? A Riposte to the
Counter-Reformation’
(2004) 24(3)
Australian Bar Review
J D Heydon, ‘Judicial
Activism and the Death of the Rule of Law’
Australian Bar
Lindsay, above n 9,
See for example Kirby,
above n 83; A Mason, ‘Judicial Review: The Contribution of Sir Gerard
Brennan’ in R Creyke and
The Brennan Legacy: Blowing the
Winds of Legal Orthodoxy
(2002) 38; S Gageler, ‘Sir Gerard Brennan and
some themes in Judicial Review’ in R Creyke and P Keyzer,
The Brennan
Legacy: Blowing the Winds of Legal Orthodoxy
(2002) 70 and G F K Santow,
‘Aspects of Judicial Restraint’
(1995) 13(2)
Australian Bar
A Mason, ‘Future
Directions in Australian law’
[1987] MonashULawRw 6
(1987) 13(3)
Monash University Law
Mabo v Queensland (No
Commonwealth Law Reports
Australian Law Reports 1
Heery has rather
surprisingly suggested that ‘Dixon was a strong supporter of the White
Australia Policy and his comments
book [the Ayres biography] suggest that he would not have found himself in the
’: Heery, above n 38. Naturally one rather hopes
and suspects that none of the Judges in
made their decision on the
basis of whether they ‘liked Aborigines’ or not.
Reported in P Chamberlin,
‘Morgan condemns PM over Mabo’,
Sydney Morning Herald
See for example T Smith, 25
September 1997, 8481,
, speech at the second reading stage of
Native Title Amendment Act
Santow, above n 87,
R H Bartlett, ‘Mabo:
Another Triumph for the Common Law’
[1993] SydLawRw 14
(1993) 15(2)
Sydney Law Review
; G Nettheim, ‘Judicial Revolution or Cautious Correction?’ (1993
1; M Kirby, ‘In Defence of Mabo’ in M
Goot and T Rowse (eds),
Make a Better Offer: The Politics of Mabo
and S Churches, ‘Mabo: A Flexible Sinew of the Common Law’ (1993) 20
8. See also H Wootten, ‘Mabo and the Lawyers’ (1995)
The Australian Journal of Anthropology
Mason, above n 88.
A C Hutchinson,
on the Threshold: Critical Essays on Modern Legal Thought
, (1988) 23.
Kirby, above n 83, 221.
Menzies, above n 65, 236,
238 and 240.
Kirby, above n 83,
Wootten, above n 94,
M McHugh, ‘The
Constitutional Jurisprudence of the High Court: 1989-2004’ (The Inaugural
Sir Anthony Mason Lecture in
Constitutional Law, 26 November 2004, Sydney).
Currently unpublished, but available on the High Court’s web site at:
http://www.hcourt.gov.au/speeches/mchughj,
Ibid 14. Interestingly
though in the same address, McHugh J was more inclined to see certain
non-constitutional decisions of the
Mason Court as ‘radical’.
In the context of the
law, the proceedings of the Sir Samuel Griffiths Society published each year
under the title
Upholding the
Constitution
are an abundant source of
evidence of such disquiet.
Kirby, above n 83,
There are of course
numerous works on this subject. See for example R Manne (ed),
Kirby, above n 83.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (160 KB)
PDF format (521 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter