URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlSSWC/2010/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bernhard, D�rte; MacEachen, Ellen; Lippel, Katherine --- "Disability Management Experts and the Impact of Jurisdiction on Practice: An Ontario Example" [2010] IntJlSSWC 2; (2010) 2(1) International Journal of Social Security and Workers Compensation 1
I BACKGROUND: THE RELEVANCE OF CONTEXT FOR DISABILITY MANAGEMENT
II STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS
III RESULTS
IV DISCUSSION
V CONCLUSION
VI METHODICAL CONSIDERATIONS
VII ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
DISABILITY MANAGEMENT EXPERTS AND THE IMPACT OF JURISDICTION
ON PRACTICE
AN ONTARIO EXAMPLE
AND KATHERINE
Introduction
The role, tasks and competencies of disability management
professionals (DMPs) have increasingly become a focus of research in the
decade. However, the legal context in which DMPs work, how this affects their
daily practice, and how this impacts their training
curricula, has been
neglected. This omission is problematic given that international training
programs of disability management (DM)
operate across different jurisdictions.
Our study describes DMPs’ practice in Ontario, Canada and considers
elements of disability management practice.
The study is based on seven interviews and a focus group with
five participants, who are either certified disability management professionals
or who are involved with DMPs’ training, as well as documentary analysis
of the legal context of these professionals’
The study shows how DMPs’ practice is affected by the
local legal context. The jurisdiction’s socio-political framework
DMPs to distinguish between occupational and non-occupational cases, a
distinction which affects their practice and their
recommendations to employers.
This is in contrast to DM training which emphasises equal treatment of all
people with disabilities.
Conclusions The research suggests that disability management practices may
differ from one jurisdiction to the next and therefore
emphasises the need to
consider socio-political aspects in DMPs’ practice as well as in the
development of training programmes
and cross-jurisdictional research.
I BACKGROUND: THE RELEVANCE OF CONTEXT FOR DISABILITY
The participation of a person with a disability in society and in the labour
market does not just depend on a person’s ability
to adjust to their
society or workplace environment, but also depends on the society’s or
workplace’s ability to let
the person participate. In a workplace context,
this would mean a match between the needs of the disabled person and the
accommodation
by the workplace. According to the World Health
Organizations’ International Classification of Functioning, and its
biopsychosocial
model, attention is needed to contextual factors and their
impact on improving the situation of persons with disabilities. Within
framework, the socio-political context plays a crucial role in any intervention
aimed at increasing the participation of disabled
people in the workplace and
Across jurisdictions and at different times there are different laws,
policies, procedures and traditions for supporting the vocational
rehabilitation
and integration of injured and disabled workers. For instance, when comparing
the German and Canadian systems, Shrey
and Hursh noted that European systems
focus on regulation whereas systems in English-speaking countries rely on
persuasion.
When comparing
different international systems of return to work (RTW) and rehabilitation it
has to be considered that workers’
compensation systems, like those in
Ontario and Germany, operate on a different framework than a sickness insurance
system, such
as those in Scandinavia and in the
Netherlands.
When applying the World Health Organization’s framework to RTW as well
as to disability management and labour market participation,
attention is drawn
to workplace factors, such as continued contact with the workplace and
procedures for managing disability.
The task of returning disabled workers to work as well as integrating them at
the worksite is linked to legal, administrative, social
and political
challenges. It requires an interplay between all participants: the
health-impaired disabled worker, health care provider,
physician, workers’
compensation or the disability insurance provider, union and rehabilitation
professionals who all take
on important roles in the RTW process and the labour
integration context. Their roles, responsibilities and support systems are
in guiding the worker on the path back to
Disability management professionals (DMPs), such as disability management
coordinators and rehabilitation counsellors, guide the health-impaired
and facilitate their social integration and labour market participation. They
are not required to have a health background.
The particular roles of DMPs vary.
They might be employees within a company, work for themselves or a consultancy
that provides services
to a variety of different companies. They also might be
employed at a social insurance organisation such as a workers’
compensation
practices have been conceptualised into two practice levels: as system-oriented
or more service (client)-oriented. While
the system-oriented disability
management refers to administrative and managerial tasks with a focus towards
the organizational level,
the service-oriented approach applies when there is a
direct contact with the client, when disability managers are working as case
The DMPs are responsible for setting up and running DM programs that aim to
promote successful and early RTW as well as cost reduction
compensation costs.
This includes
conducting audits of companies’ RTW and DM practices and incorporates,
among other things, the collection and
analysis of disability cost data
(evaluation of disability management practices), monitoring of RTW and reduction
of disability management
costs. The audits focus on disability management policy
and workplace resources, disability prevention and early
intervention.
Due to different socio-political and legal frameworks, there may be
differences in the tasks and role of DMPs across different countries
and between
different systems within a jurisdiction. To support people with illnesses and
disabilities according to their personal
and disability-related needs at the
work-site, DMPs may need certain competencies based on the socio-political
context such as understanding
the impact on disability management practice of
particular state policies and support systems. Given that the work of DMPs
a system-level focus, their tasks include support for employers to
understand socio-political issues such as systems governing compensation
policies and employee benefits.
In some jurisdictions, like Germany and Ontario, the participation of disability
managers is neither mandated nor officially acknowledged
by the legislation.
There is a body of research on disability management rules and norms in
different workplaces as well as among different stakeholders
within the policy
context of Ontario.
studies do not highlight the professionals’ actual practice. With some
exceptions, the relationship between DMPs and
either jurisdiction or the
socio-political context has not been extensively researched, either locally or
with an international scope.
This lack of jurisdiction-focused research with respect to DMPs’ practice
is surprising, given the number of studies emphasising
the impact of local laws
and policies on workers as well as on employers in RTW and disability
management.
Training in disability management has been established to standardise quality
and to provide necessary skills. A prominent training
program for DMPs is
provided by NIDMAR, the National Institute of Disability Management and
Research, based in Canada, launched in
1994 and described by NIDMAR as ‘an
internationally recognised organisation committed to reducing the human, social
and economic
disability’.
NIDMAR might be considered a founder of modern DM certification and actively
provides DMPs’ training in international jurisdictions
including Germany
and 13 other countries.
Canada, where the disability management training was developed, but where
certification is not mandatory for practitioners in
DM, there are 142 certified
disability management professionals
in Germany there are 728
The NIDMAR training is based on nine knowledge
It provides a broad conception of occupational and non-occupational
disability management. The modules are general and designed to
situations. This program takes a generic, cross-jurisdictional approach to DM,
and emphasises the notion of ‘duty
to accommodate’, a human rights
provision, which is present in legislation in many countries where DM is
Being certified is seen as important with respect to competence in practice.
In recent years, researchers have become increasingly
interested in the
licensing process in the field of rehabilitation counselling as can be seen from
an ongoing analysis of the position
of rehabilitation
counsellors.
Within the last 20
years, a number of studies on ‘disability management and rehabilitation
counselling practice’ have
contributed to an empirical base for
understanding this domain.
Although findings of this research have been integrated into training programs,
there is a lack of research based on the DMPs’
practice taking an
educational/ pedagogical perspective and conceptualising implications for
curricula development within disability
management. The above mentioned studies
conclude that study findings contribute to revision of curricula but how they
impact curriculum
development is not discussed clearly. There is a lack of
independent research regarding specific training programs such as the NIDMAR
This paper examines the impact of local legislation on DMPs’ practice.
The study aims to uncover factors that are relevant when
assessing the impact of
legislation on the skills, work and tasks of DMPs. What are the relevant issues
that are important to consider
when comparing different disability management
systems in different jurisdictions? The NIDMAR trained DMPs and the situation in
Canada, are the subject of this case study. A guiding hypothesis of
this study is that, as NIDMAR is a Canadian-based program, it
sensitivity to Canadian socio-legal context.
This investigation emerges from an initial focus on the broad adoption of the
NIDMAR certification in disability management in Germany,
which prompted
questions about the particular training needs of DMPs
internationally.
focussed on the situation in Ontario, the study allows for broader consideration
of the kinds of issues that might need
to be considered by DMPs in different
II STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS
This qualitative study consisted of document analysis of laws and policies
pertinent to disability management in Ontario, and interviews
and a focus group
with DMPs held in February/March 2009.
The interview questions were devised by the three authors following an
analysis of Ontario and Canadian legislation. The questions
were piloted in two
initial interviews and then refined and further developed in the process of data
collection. For instance, it
became apparent that DMPs preferred to talk about
ideal practice (how disability management should work) and that particular
would be necessary to prompt them to speak about actual practice.
The semi-structured, open-ended interviews, as well as the focus group,
investigated the role and tasks of DMPs in Ontario, the impact
of legislation on
their practice, the handling of occupational versus non-occupational accidents,
the impact of sickness insurance,
relevant skills and training needs with
reference to jurisdiction, and experiences with NIDMAR training as well as with
alternative
programs. Interview questions explored the following issues:
1. What role does the legal framework play in DMPs’ practice?
2. What kinds of jurisdiction-specific training needs exist?
3. How does the NIDMAR training prepare these DMPs for practice?
Criteria for recruitment of DMPs were that they were NIDMAR certified, or
involved in NIDMAR training, and that they represented a
range of DM practices.
Data was collected from ten DMPs in Ontario and two who worked at the
national level for a total of 12 DMPs in interviews and the
focus group. The
interviews were conducted by telephone (six) and face-to-face (one). The focus
group included an additional five
participants. Nine participants were NIDMAR
certified and the remaining three were involved with NIDMAR in other ways, such
on the Board of NIDMAR or responsible for designing NIDMAR training.
All interviews and the focus group were audio-recorded and transcribed
verbatim. All participants were assured of anonymity and data
confidentiality at
the beginning of each interview. The names associated with the quotes provided
in the paper are pseudonyms. The
participants agreed to publication and
dissemination of results from this study and were assured of receiving any
material published.
The interviews were analysed thematically following the steps of a
qualitative content analysis.
This involved repeated reading of the transcripts and ordering all data by
category, for instance, all responses relating to DMPs’
practice according
to whether or not the injury was occupational. Data were then reviewed for
themes that illustrated jurisdiction-specific
DM issues. At this point, accounts
were compared and contrasted and contradictions were examined.
Trustworthiness of the data was enhanced by verbatim transcribing of the
audio-recorded interviews by the lead author, and by discussion
and analysis of
the data by the three authors, who have broad occupational health research
experience and represent different knowledge
III RESULTS
Results are presented in four sections. First, the socio-legal context for DM
in Ontario, Canada is described, to explain issues that
need to be navigated by
DMPs in their local practice. Next, the interview study and focus group of
Ontario DMPs highlight three primary
aspects of DM practice relevant to the
socio-legal context: (a) that disability training focuses on the generic needs
of all people
with disabilities and the duty of employers to accommodate these
needs regardless of the source of the injury, be it occupational
or not; (b)
that in practice, disability management involves consideration of distinct
socio-political conditions. In Ontario, this
is evident in the distinction
raised by DMPs between the management of occupational as compared to
non-occupational injuries; and
c) that disability management training lacks
systematic consideration of socio-political issues. In the discussion we
consider the
challenges arising when DMPs’ training does not incorporate
these socio-legal issues.
A Socio-legal context for disability management in
The socio-legal analysis identified four policy contexts relevant to DM in
Ontario: the workers’ compensation system administered
by the Workplace
Safety and Insurance Board, human rights legislation, employment insurance and
private salary insurance for short-term
and long-term disability leave.
1 Workplace Safety and Insurance Board
Each province in Canada has its own workers’ compensation legislation,
and each has particular provisions for issues such as
eligibility, coverage, and
RTW. In Ontario, workers’ compensation is governed by the
Safety and Insurance Act
This Act is based on the
Meredith Principles (1913) which lay the ground for a no-fault approach where
workers receive compensation
at no cost and employers pay premium rates
depending upon the industry.
The system is administered by a neutral workers’ compensation agency
with exclusive jurisdiction over all matters arising out
of the enabling
legislation.
The Ontario
Workplace Safety and Insurance Board (WSIB) began as the Workmens’
Compensation Board in 1915. The system requires
workers to give up the right to
sue for occupational injuries, irrespective of fault, in return for guaranteed
compensation for accepted
compensation and WSIB salary insurance to workers covers 85
per cent of their
Workplace Safety and Insurance Act
(1997) and Early and Safe
workers to engage in RTW:
: Employers of firms with more than 20 workers are
required to re-integrate work-injured workers into their workplace, an
that lasts for two years from the time of injury. The obligation only
applies to workers with at least one year’s
Experience-rated insurance premiums
: For all WSIB employers,
experience-rating provides a strong incentive to return workers to work quickly
as every dollar paid by
the WSIB to workers who are off work due to an injury
increases the employer’s WSIB
Duty to cooperate
: Workers and employers have a ‘duty to
cooperate’ with RTW plans established for them. If workers do not comply,
compensation benefits can be reduced or
Employers are also required to cooperate in
It is important to note that no specific provisions of the workers’
compensation legislation in Ontario provide guidelines
for DMPs. In other words,
there is no legal obligation for employers to hire or consult with DMPs; it is a
purely discretionary and
voluntary arrangement between DMPs and the employers.
For this reason there is no accreditation process, and the services are not
for by WSIB so no fee schedule exists.
2 Human Rights legislation
The provisions governing workplaces’ ‘duty to accommodate’
workers with injuries and disabilities are found in human
legislation,
and if the source
of the disability is a work injury, the obligation to accommodate is also
integrated in the WSIA.
employer must adapt the work or the workplace to accommodate the worker with a
disability to the extent that the accommodation
does not cause the employer
undue hardship. However, when the source of the disability is not a work injury,
recourse under the Human
Rights Code is the only remedy. It is a
complaints-based procedure with little enforcement and no institution is
mandated proactively
to ensure that people are accommodated; therefore outside
of the workers’ compensation process, if there is no formal complaint,
there will be no sanction of employers who violate the duty to
accommodate.
When it is a work
accident, the compensation board will take much more assertive
initiative.
Rules governing
employers’ obligations and the limit of undue hardship are created by this
legislation, and interpreted and
applied by the courts if the worker files a
This legislation
applies to all workers and all forms of disability.
3 Employment
There is a modest public sickness benefit available through federal
employment insurance but many people are ineligible because of
contribution
requirements. It starts on the third week of illness, lasts 15 weeks and
provides 55 per cent of salary. To be eligible
for employment insurance
benefits, workers need to have contributed premiums for several hundred hours of
employment in the previous
52 weeks (currently 600
This is particularly problematic for people with chronic illness and those
with short-term or intermittent employment contracts,
as they often do not work
the required number of hours.
4 Private Salary Insurance
Some workers in Ontario have supplementary privately-purchased sickness
insurance, usually provided by employers as an incentive.
This insurance
provides income replacement for both short-term and long-term disability in
situations where there are non-work related
injuries and illnesses. There is no
legal obligation to provide salary insurance to workers and 38 per cent of
Canadian workers have
The likelihood of access to those additional benefits is far higher for
unionised employees on full-time and permanent job contracts
in large companies.
It is less often available to workers who work for small businesses, and in
certain sectors of employment, where
precarious employment is
B The generic training of disability
The skills described by DMPs as necessary for practice were overwhelmingly of
a generic nature. DMPs noted that one needs to be a
‘people person’
and have empathy and compassion. Participants also mentioned the need for
interpersonal and communication
skills as well as organizational and problem
solving skills. The NIDMAR training program in Canada does not require students
a training background in physical or mental health. They referred to the
need to be clear about tasks and problems and about recognizing
the role and
responsibilities of the other RTW stakeholders.
The DMPs described the NIDMAR training as providing a structure for practice
and a place for ongoing education at a ‘high level’:
I couldn’t do the job without NIDMAR training because it sets out a format
that is fairly easy to follow. It gives you the
structure you need to organize
it. (Sarah)
Participants described their NIDMAR certification as
leading them to a wider understanding of injury management situations. For
this workers’ compensation board participant described how it
widened her perspective to include injuries that were not work-related:
Before my certification, my knowledge was very focused on workers’
compensation matters and the matters that apply to that
legislation. So, by
being certified it gave me a broader understanding of other things that impact
an individual, whether it is a
work-related injury, non work-related, the
different legislations that might come into play. It just gave me a more
wholesome understanding
of disability management. (Laure)
DMPs also emphasised that the training prepares them to provide help to people
to return to work, regardless of whether their
health problem is work-related or
Whether someone is off on sick leave or off on workers’ compensation, it
doesn’t matter to us. The process is the same.
DMPs were aware that their practice was affected by legislative or mandatory RTW
provisions. They referred to the
Ontario Human Rights Code (OHRC)
Occupational Health and Safety
Workers’ Safety and Insurance Act (WSIA)
as the basis for their
practice. Some also mentioned the impact on disability management practice of
the collective agreements applicable
to unionised workers.
We found that DMPs’ training appears to focus on the generic needs of
all people with disabilities and the duty of employers
to accommodate these
needs regardless of the source of the work injury.
C Socio-political conditions in disability
1 Awareness and different treatment of work-related versus non
work-related cases
An important aspect of DM practice was the DMPs’ stance of treating all
situations equally to avoid a two-tier system for workers
with occupational or
non-occupational injuries:
We try to treat them all the same. …….. If you break your arm
falling here or falling at home, it doesn’t matter
to us. Not all
employers are like that, but we work really hard, because we don’t want a
two tier system. We don’t want
employees who get hurt at work treated
better than employees who get hurt at home.
However, in their descriptions of practical
situations it was apparent that jurisdictional conditions affected both
DMPs’ ability
to support people with injuries or disabilities and the type
of support being sought by the DMPs’ employers. When asked about
practice differences for occupational versus non-occupational related health
problems, several differences in RTW case management
were revealed, relating to
activities.
DMPs mentioned that in the case of occupational injuries, protection of
workers’ personal information was a challenge. These
injured workers had a
lower level of protection of their right to privacy than workers who had a
non-compensable injury because requirements
of cooperation provided for in the
workers’ compensation legislation were more invasive than any constraints
associated with
the application of the
Ontario Human Rights Code (OHRC)
which does not actively oblige workers to participate in return to work
activities if they choose not to do
The danger of intrusion and the need for consent of the work-injured worker
in the RTW process were raised as issues.
Consideration of differences between occupational and non-occupational
disability illustrated the significance of the different legal
frameworks.
Compensation for occupational injuries is funded by the WSIB, while other cases
can be dealt with through employer-based
insurance for either short or long term
disability.
In both situations,
there were different employer responsibilities. DMPs referred to stronger and
more precise policies (such as
work-related injuries. With work-related injuries there was a faster
return-to-work after
the accident because employers wished to reduce costs
related to experience-rated workers’ compensation premiums, which
the employer for worker absence due to work injury. As mentioned in
the description of the socio-legal context, experience rating
is used by the
WSIB as a strong economic incentive to employers, as premiums increase
significantly if employers fail to reintegrate
injured workers in a timely
manner. Such incentives would not normally apply in private insurance
Participants described work-related injuries as subject to stricter and more
precise legislation and therefore a greater obligation
is placed on employers
when handling occupational injuries and on workers who are obliged to comply
with the RTW process to avoid
losing their
DMPs noted that when
an injury was occupational, the employer had more influence over the injured
worker while workers’ compensation
board had more authority over the
employer of injured workers.
Another difference noted between occupational and non-occupational injuries
was that non-occupational injuries required less documentation
follow-up. With temporary non-occupational injuries, employers had no mandate to
put in place early RTW provisions. Interestingly,
DMPs mentioned that employers
often lack knowledge of how to reintegrate workers with non-occupational related
health problems. They
also noted that some employers were unfamiliar with how
such injury impacts their short and long term disability costs.
Finally, participants mentioned that conducting disability management audits
provided them with insight into differences between non-occupational
occupational injuries. The audits included questions on statistics and data as
well as on the existence of policy. The DMPs also
mentioned that these audits
reinforced their belief that occupational and non-occupational cases were dealt
with in different ways:
When I do audits of organisations…. we audit the organizations’ DM
as a whole, whether it is work related or not. That’s
when you begin
really to see the differences and sometimes even different policies applied for
the different types of injuries. And,
you always see… more distinct
policies for the work related injuries than you do for the non-work related.
2 How costs drive DMPs’ practice
The cost factor, or as one DMP (Lilly) termed it ‘the return on
investment of Disability Management’, was another issue
raised by DMPs as
relevant to their practice.
When economic times get tough, then there is less receptiveness on the
employer’s part to bring people back to work. So, you
know, I think,
that’s certainly one of the things that you have to be cautious about,
when you are doing Disability Management.
And, you just have to know, how to
manage the return to work period, so that the production floor doesn’t
have too many modified
DMPs suggested
that accommodation of injured workers can be seen by employers as unattractive
because, according to the
Ontario Human Rights Code
, employers must adapt
employment conditions up to the point of ‘undue hardship’, and this
might be costly:
..., and undue hardship could be identified as money, you know, it could be that
you don’t have the money to do it, but the
level is pretty high in terms
of money, and because we are a government agency [workers’ compensation]
we really can never
use that excuse, we might be allowed to phase it in over a
year, if it’s something major, but generally we are not allowed
that as an excuse.
The DMPs also noted that
work-related incidents were seen by employers as costly because of premium
expenses associated with experience-rated
workers’ compensation premiums.
These considerations showed that the focus of DMPs is not only on the injured or
disabled worker
but also on the finances of the company:
Anyone who is contacting the designated individual who is trained in this, it is
more of a cost saving measure, how can I save money,
and that’s the end
result of good programming, and because it is time sensitive, they want it
immediately, in other words,
in this case, I want results, I want my costs
reduced. ... There will be management decisions at all aspects of our lives that
going to… conflict with what you want. This is a business need, for a
business requirement or decision. (Viktor)
There is also sometimes a cost impact. It’s costly for organisations to
have workers off work whereas the cost for non work-related
seems to be not as
much in their face. Ultimately, it does cost everyone. (Laure)
The principle is to be cost effective and show cost benefit,... I don’t
see as extra because we do it no matter what the economy
is but there is a
definite need to demonstrate to employers the economic benefits of disability
management.
D Formal DM training lacks consideration of
socio-legal issues
DMPs talked of the relevance of socio-legal issues to their practice when
they referred both to the need to guide employers about
legislation compliance
or educating employers about the benefits of DMPs’ services when compared
with the costs. Although the
DMPs referred to making individual efforts to learn
relevant laws, policies and current research, their formal training lacked these
1 Lack of detailed knowledge on the legal
The DMPs referred to the need to ensure that they had an understanding of all
the different legislation that impacted workers with
injuries and disabilities.
They emphasized that human resource personnel intervened on a variety of
different employment issues and
therefore did not have the same focused approach
to disability management as a dedicated DMP.
Quite often, the people who are running the human resource areas..., disability,
is one of the functions they run. So, their understanding
of that legislation is
somewhat lacking, when to use it, how, to use it, it doesn’t work. They
have rights and obligations
that they really don’t understand.
The DMPs were aware that legislation was stricter in
cases of occupational injuries and diseases, and saw as one of their tasks the
responsibility to ensure that other RTW stakeholders in the companies were
familiar with the legislation so that each was aware of
their duties, roles and
responsibilities:
What we do is, we actually bring to the attention of employers and unions ...
that there are really kind of two types of legislation
governing the whole duty
to accommodate… because they need to know that they need to be in
compliance with the legislation
as part of their risk management. (Pauline)
Sometimes just making sure, that people are aware of the different legislation
and their obligations. I find many people aren’t
clear on their roles and
responsibilities, to ensure that they are meeting legislative requirements
… Educating people on the
legislation and what is expected of them in the
legislation and the consequences if they aren’t able to comply with it.
According to the DMPs, employers lacked understanding of
the legislation relevant to non-occupational injuries:
They don’t understand how this impacts their short term and long term
disability, costs, their wage replacement, those kind
The DMPs mentioned that employers had a growing
responsibility for RTW issues. They noted that RTW rules and related legislation
employers to initiate RTW programs and engage the services of DMPs. The
DMPs saw themselves in a position to teach and support employers,
to raise their
awareness and to ensure that employers were familiar with the legislation. The
DMPs had a strong orientation to employers’
needs with respect to RTW
costs and also legislation compliance.
One of the areas that… I work a lot on… in services and professional
development and additional training is a financial
aspect or the return on
investment of disability management, so that’s probably one of the areas
that need some additional
thought around them. (Nelly)
DMPs had general knowledge of relevant legislation, they seemed to have little
specific knowledge. Only a few DMPs seemed
aware of the changes occurring to
relevant legal frameworks. Some saw legislation as unchanging over time while
others discussed
legislation as having changed quite dramatically in 1998 when
the workers’ compensation legislation was revamped in Ontario.
were generally unaware of details of RTW such as employers’ duty to
reemploy a person injured at work as a provision
that applies for two years
after initial injury and that only applies to employers with more than 20
In addition, the worker’s ‘duty to cooperate’ was only
mentioned once as a legal provision.
The DMPs mentioned individual efforts to engage in socio-political training
needs. They gained knowledge at conferences, hearings
where they heard about
legal decisions, employers’ associations and through the Vocational
Rehabilitation Association of Canada.
What is pertinent is that DM training, as exemplified by NIDMAR training,
focussed on generic issues. The reality of disability management,
in the context
of the workplace environment, was that practical cost and legal-policy issues
shaped practice. While the DMPs recognised
a gap between theory and practice,
they tended to follow workplace practice requirements:
Having to apply the theory of NIDMAR to the organisation, … … The
principles ... work, no question about it. [With] the
application of the
principles, there are difficulties .... because it does take a different
thinking, a different way of doing business
and understanding that [in]every
business there is a production [requirement]. No question about it, and at the
end of the day …
there are certain things that have to be met: bottom
lines, that way of doing work. (Alf)
IV DISCUSSION
With this exploratory case study of DMPs’ practice in Ontario we find
that cost and socio-political considerations play an important
role in the
practice of professionals guiding the injured or disabled person back to work.
Our results allow for broader consideration
of issues that might need to be
considered by DMPs in different countries.
Internationally applied training modules as well as an internationally valid
certification system for disability management professionals
tend to take a
generic approach to disability management. The programs are focused on the
common needs of disability management across
situations and jurisdictions. It is
assumed that there is no need to distinguish between work-related and non
work-related injuries
as all workplaces have a ‘duty to
accommodate’. This study was conducted to examine the more particular
needs that DMPs
might have for successfully engaging in their practice. We were
interested in the impact of local legislation on DMPs’ practice.
of the study was to uncover factors that are relevant when assessing the impact
of legislation on the skills, work and tasks
of DMPs. Is it possible that such a
generic focus could miss out – due to an all market orientation – on
a detailed application
of problems and issues in different jurisdictions? In
other words, is an equitable treatment of all people with disabilities,
of the cause of their disability, possible in DMPs’ practice in
all jurisdictions? Also, how are differences dealt with in
The discussion focuses on two issues raised by this study. First, that DMPs
are oriented to meeting the needs of employers, and second,
practice varies according to different RTW needs established by legislative
frameworks that distinguish between
work injury and disability that is not
necessarily related to a workplace injury.
A Supporting the employer
The DMPs emphasised that their job includes ensuring that employers know
employers to ensure
legal compliance, the DMPs are also helping employers to avoid exposure to
DMPs tend to work in occupational health departments of large firms and as
consultants to firms. Results suggest that the work setting
of DMPs affects
their own focus. This issue has also been addressed in
In effect, according
to the participants in the study, DMPs are almost always hired by employers,
rather than by workers, and this
can shape their orientation. Even in the case
of those Ontario DMPs who work at the WSIB, a social insurance organisation, a
study indicates that staff view employers, and not workers, as the key
funder of their organisation and key
The findings suggest that workplace cost is an important element of
disability management practice and impacts the behaviour of DMPs.
The DMPs in
this study noted employer concerns about workers’ compensation costs and
were, in turn, conscious of this issue
as it related to the need for a faster
RTW pace for occupationally injured workers. Conversely, because of relatively
reduced cost
pressures, employers did not direct DMPs to be as concerned about
RTW with non-occupational injuries. This employer focus on cost
rather than
rehabilitation was noted by Roberts-Yates, who found that within the Australian
system the ‘primary focus on cost
containment [is] taking precedence over
the diverse needs of the injured
Research has
shown that the RTW process can actually be harmful if only seen as an economic
These issues raise concerns about the role of DMPs and the direction of their
work. Is the fundamental priority of DMPs to help to
get people back to work or
to help employers to comply with legislation and to manage costs? The answer to
this question may well
depend on the specific jurisdictional context in which
they do their work. If the ‘market’ determines the need for DMPs
rather than a legislative mandate designed to promote disability prevention,
then it is likely that their profession will be shaped
by the needs of the
‘market’ which will be synonymous with the needs of employers. Thus
it is possible that DMPs in different
countries, while having the same
accreditation, may have significantly different skills, allegiances and
B Differences in disability management between
work-related
versus non work-related cases
The DMPs’ description of their orientation to treat all people with
disabilities in the same way illustrates a disability management
operates in tension with the demands of daily practice. The DMPs’
descriptions of how they deal with work-related
versus non work-related cases,
reflects policies and legislative conditions that created quite different
conditions for disability
management practice. That DMPs emphasized differences
between occupational and non-occupational injuries might be seen as a due
approach, or a way to assist employers by helping them avoid exposure
to financial and legal liability. It could also be that the
workers and injuries from the purview of the
workers’ compensation system,
also affects DMPs’ practice whose focus is particularly on those who are
covered by the
compensation
The ‘contradiction’ between what professionals were trained for
and what they desire, as compared to what they actually
end up doing because of
policy-driven realities, reveals the relevance of socio-legal context. It raises
the question as to whether
it is appropriate for DMPs to distinguish between
disability management of occupational and non-occupational health conditions. We
find a conflict of norms, in that norms specific to DM promote an inclusive
approach while giving priority to the importance of cost-effectiveness.
leads to a weaker disability management focus on workers whose disability is not
work-related.
The findings of this study raise several questions, which we address below.
What are the implications, from an equity perspective,
when DMPs apply different
practices for occupational and non-occupational groups? Is the NIDMAR conceptual
framework achievable in
disability management practice in jurisdictions like
Ontario? Do DMPs need to go beyond the knowledge provided by recognised training
programs such as NIDMAR in order to understand local jurisdictional rules and
legislation, as well as the labour market and the work
environment of work
organisations? If, as it appears, disability management is oriented to employer
needs, how well do workers benefit
V CONCLUSION
The DMPs’ allegiance to employers, as well as differences in the case
management of work and non work-related injury and disability,
illustrations of the impact of legislation on the skills and tasks of Ontario
DMPs. If a system provides economic incentives
to employers to reduce
disability, this will make the investment in a DMP more attractive. If the
system fails to provide that kind
of incentive, this will influence the
DMPs’ role and may focus attention on only those cases where economic
incentives exist.
If the drive for DM services were to be mandated by
legislative requirements to ensure services rather than economic incentives to
reduce costs, perhaps the practices of these professionals would be
The results of the study suggest that the goal to ‘promote equitable
treatment of diverse individuals’ without ‘biases’,
all injured and disabled people the same – as stated in the NIDMAR
training framework
– can be difficult to implement in practice. The DMPs in Ontario were
aware of the equal treatment ideal, but in their practice
it appeared that
employers were seen as the key customer and that their focus was more strongly
on workers with occupational injuries
rather than those hurt outside the course
of their work. This appeared to be because the workers’ compensation
system provides
strong economic incentives to return those workers to work as
quickly as possible.
The findings suggest that, when designing studies to examine RTW practices of
DMPs, jurisdiction-specific legislation and policy should
be considered. As this
study has shown, the distinction between occupational and non-occupational
health problems becomes an issue
of concern. Researchers need to be aware of the
stakeholder’s
role. This is of particular relevance when designing
cross-jurisdictional studies. The socio-political system and policy governing
work disability are important factors to be considered when designing studies on
RTW and when researching the effect of jurisdiction-specific
The training of DMPs might benefit from the inclusion of more specific
analysis of jurisdictional issues such as laws and policies
that provide varying
incentives to different parties to engage in DM in particular ways. If achieving
equitable treatment of all
injured and disabled workers is a challenge for DMPs,
there may be a need for nonpartisan support for injured and disabled workers
the RTW process. In Germany, due to the design of the legal framework, some DMPs
also have the mandate to act as representatives
of severely disabled persons and
can provide peer support.
this at the same time can also create a conflict of interests. Do DMPs in other
for workers, and if so what
are the legal incentives to do so and what are the differences in DM practice
between these DMPs and
those in jurisdictions such as Ontario where they are
predominantly hired by employers? Cross-jurisdictional research might shed
further light on these issues.
VI METHODICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Since the impact of jurisdiction on DMPs’ practice has not been
previously investigated thoroughly in research, the goal of
the study was to be
exploratory. The small sample reflects a ‘pilot study’ approach to
the topic, and limits the generalisability
of the findings. Focussing on one
Canadian province can be seen as limiting; however, it also allows for sketching
one specific framework
and outlining how this case particularly impacts
DMPs’ practice. The qualitative methods used for this study were useful
they provided a way to reveal particular issues in DM practice that
might be explored further in qualitative or measurement studies.
The findings
raise awareness about the impact on the DM practice of the rules in one
other jurisdictions with similar
legal frameworks, thus identifying issues that require further exploration.
VII ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Without the collaboration of the DMPs and their readiness to participate in
the interviews and the focus groups this study would not
have been possible. The
authors warmly thank the participants. Furthermore, this work was supported by
Canadian Institute of Health
Research (CIHR) funding the Work Disability
Prevention Program grant(s) FRN: 53909.
PhD, Postdoctoral
researcher, Department of Medical and Health Sciences, National Centre for Work
and Rehabilitation, Linkoping
University, Sweden.
PhD, Scientist,
Institute for Work & Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
Professor, Canada
Research Chair on Occupational Health and Safety Law, Law Faculty, University of
Ottawa, Canada.
Kay Schriner, ‘Disability Studies
Perspective on Employment Issues and Policies for Disabled People’ in Gary
L Albrecht,
Katherine D Seelman and Michael Bury (eds),
Handbook of
Disability Studies
(Sage Publications, 2001) 642.
Donald E Shrey and Norman C Hursh,
‘Workplace Disability Management: International Trends and
Perspectives’ (1999) 1
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
For a detailed analysis of international
influences on Dutch social security law, and for a detailed analysis of the
Dutch system
and the ways in which it differs from North American systems, see
Frans Pennings,
Dutch Social Security Law in an International Context
(Kluwer, 2002).
Shrey and Hursh, above n 2, 46; Susanne M
Bruyère and Donald E Shrey, ‘Disability management in industry: A
joint labor-management
process‘ (1991) 34(3)
Rehabilitation Counselling
227, 242; Rochelle V Habeck, Allan H Hunt and Brett Van Tol,
‘Workplace factors associated with preventing and managing work
disability’ (1998) 42(2)
Rehabilitation Counselling Bulletin
Renee-Louise Franche et al,
‘Workplace-Based Return-to-Work Interventions: Optimizing the Role of
Stakeholders in Implementation
and Research’ (2005) 15(4)
Occupational Rehabilitation
525, 542; Ellen
‘Systematic review of the qualitative literature on return to work after
injury’ (2006) 32(4)
Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment and
257, 269; Christian Stahl et al, ‘A matter of trust? A study of
coordination of Swedish stakeholders in return-to-work’
(2010) 20(3)
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
299; Amy Ahrens and Kate
Mulholland, ‘Vocational rehabilitation and the evolution of disability
management: An organizational
case study’ (2000) 15
Vocational Rehabilitation
Glenn Pransky et al, ‘Development
and validation of competencies for return to work coordinators’ (2010)
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
Fong Chan et al,‘Disability
Management Practitioners: A work behaviour analysis’ (2000) 15
of Vocational Rehabilitation
47, 56; David A Rosenthal et al, ‘A
Survey of current Disability Management Practice: emerging trends and
Implications for
Certification’ (2007) 50(2)
Rehabilitation Counseling
Renee M Williams et al,
‘Disability Management Practices in Education, Hotel/Motel, and Health
Care Workplaces’ (2005)
American Journal of Industrial Medicine
International Disability Management
Council, ‘Implementing Disability Management Quality Standards’
(Paper presented
at 9th European Conference on Rehabilitation, Copenhagen, 9-10
November 2010)
http://www.rehabiliteringsforum.dk/fileadmin/filer/ERC_2010/Wolfgang_Zimmermann.pdf
Ahrens and Mulholland, above n 5, 46;
Janna Calkins, John Lui and Christopher Wood, ‘Recent Developments in
integrated disability
management: implications for professionals and
organizational development’ (2000) 15
Journal of Vocational
Rehabilitation
31, 37; Chan et al, above n 7, 56; William Shaw et al,
‘A Literature Review Describing the Role of return-to-work Coordinators
Trial Programs and Interventions Designed to Prevent Workplace Disability’
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
Joan M Eakin, Ellen MacEachen and Judy
Clarke, ‘‘Playing it smart’ with return to work: Small
workplace experience
under Ontario’s policy of self-reliance and early
return’ (2003) 1(2)
Policy and Practice in Health and Safety
41; Michael K Schweigert et al, ‘Treating physicians’ perceptions of
barriers to return to work of their patients
in Southern Ontario’ (2004)
Occupational Medicine
425, 429; Renee M Williams et al,
‘Disability Management Practices in Ontario Health’ Care Workplaces
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
153, 165; Williams et
al, above n 8, 226; Renee M William and Muriel G Westmorland,
‘Perspectives on workplace disability management:
a review of the
literature’ (2002) 19(1)
Irmo Marini, ‘What
rehabilitation counsellors should know to assist Social Security beneficiaries
in becoming employed’
and Lesley M
Security Legislation Creates Ticket to Work and Work Incentives Improvement
Act’ (2004) 9
Topics in Spinal Cord Injury
Rehabilitation
26, 32; Lena
Edén et al,
‘Return to work still possible after several years as a disability
pensioner due to musculoskeletal disorders: A population-based
study after new
legislation in Sweden permitting ‘Resting disability pension’’
147, 155; Kevin Purse, ‘Workers compensation-based
employment security for injured workers: A review of legislation and
enforcement’
Journal of Occupational Health and Safety -
Australia and New Zealand
61, 66; Johannes R Anema et al, ‘Can Cross
Country Differences in Return-to-Work After Chronic Occupational Back Pain be
An Exploratory Analysis on Disability Policies in a Six Country
Cohort Study‘ (2009) 19
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation
424; Katherine Lippel, ‘L'intervention précoce pour éviter la
chronicité': enjeux juridiques’, Barreau
du Quebec (ed),
Développements récents en santé et sécurité du
(Éditions Yvon Blais, 2008) vol. 284, 137.
Industry Canada,
National Institute
of Disability Management and Research
http://www.ic.gc.ca/app/ccc/srch/nvgt.do?lang=eng & prtl=1 & sbPrtl= & estblmntNo=234567030935 & profile=cmpltPrfl
& profileId=21 & app=sold
International Disability Management
Council, above n 9.
National Institute of Disability
Management and Research,
Current Listings CDMPs
http://www.nidmar.ca/certification/cdmp/cdmp_certified.asp
Deutsche Unfallversicherung,
Disability management, Stand in Deutschland, Mai 2009
(2009) available
http://www.vdima.de
National Institute of Disability
Management and Research,
Examination Preparation Guide
http://www.nidmar.ca/certification/cdmp/CDMP_Examination_Preparation_Guide.pdf
Philip M Berkowitz, Thomas
Müller-Bonanni and Anders Etgen Reitz,
International labor and
employment law
(2008) vol 2,
Human Rights Code
, RSO 1990, c H19.
Vilia M Tarvydas, Michael J Leahy and
Stephen A Zanskas, ‘Judgment Deferred: Repraisal of Rehabilitation
Counseling Movement
Toward Licensure Parity’ (2009) 52
Rehabilitation
Counseling Bulletin
Fong Chan et al, ‘Training needs
of certified Rehabilitation Counselors for Contemporary Practice’ (2003)
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin
82, 91; Kenneth F Currier et al,
‘Functions and knowledge Domains for Disability Management Practice: A
Delphi Study’
(2001) 44(3)
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin
143; Glenn Pransky et al, ‘Development and Validation of Competencies for
Journal of Occupational
Rehabilitation
1, 8; David A Rosenthal et al, ‘A Survey of current
Disability Management Practice: emerging trends and Implications for
Certification’
(2007) 50(2)
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin
86; William Shaw et al, ‘A Literature Review Describing the Role of
return-to-work Coordinators in Trial Programs and Interventions
Designed to
Prevent Workplace Disability’ (2008) 18
Journal of Occupational
Rehabilitation
2, 15; Susan M Skully, Rochelle V Habeck and Michael J Leahy,
‘Knowledge and Skill Areas Associated with Disability Management
for Rehabilitation Counselors’ (1999) 43
Rehabilitation Counseling
20, 29; George N Wright, Michael J Leahy and Pamela Riedesel
Shapson, ‘Rehabilitation Skills Inventory: Importance of counsellor
Competencies’ (1987) 31
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin
Dörte Bernhard,
Weiterbildung
betrieblicher Akteure im Kontext der beruflichen Integration behinderter
Menschen. Eine Bildungsbedarfsanalyse
(Shaker, 2008) 19; Dörte
Bernhard, Mathilde Niehaus and Britta Marfels, ‘Changes in managing
disability at the workplace
in Germany: Chances of professionalization’ in
Henry Harder and Thomas Geisen (eds),
Disability Management. Theory, History,
Research and Methods
Philipp Mayring,
Einführung in
die qualitative Sozialforschung
(Beltz Verlag, 2002).
Workplace Safety and Insurance
(1997) SO 1997
See generally on the foundations and
the application of the workers compensation systems in Canada: Terence G Ison,
Workers' Compensation in Canada
(Butterworths, 2nd ed, 1989). See also
the information available at Association of Workers’ Compensation Boards
History of Workers’ Compensation
http://www.awcbc.org/en/historyofworkerscompensation.asp
Terence G Ison, above n 25
Workers' compensation: foundations for reform
(University of Toronto Press, 2000); and Association of Workers’
Compensation Boards of Canada, above n 25.
On coverage, see the information
available at Association of Workers’ Compensation Boards of Canada,
Assessment/Premiums
http://www.awcbc.org/en/assessmentpremiums.asp#Scope%20of%20Coverage
On benefits see Association of Workers’ Compensation Boards of Canada,
Workers' Compensation Benefits & Rehabilitation
http://www.awcbc.org/en/workerscompensationbenefitsandrehabilitation.asp#Benefits
on the implications of coverage, see Rachel Cox and Katherine Lippel,
‘Falling through the legal cracks: the pitfalls of
using workers’
compensation data as indicators of work-related injuries and illnesses’
(2008) 6(2)
Policy and Practice in Health and Safety
63, 84. For an
overview of the application of the Ontario legislation, see Garth Dee and Gary
Ontario Workplace Safety and Insurance Act & Commentary
(LexisNexis Canada Inc, 2008 ed).
Workplace Safety and Insurance Board,
Early and Safe Return to Work
(Policy 19-02-01)
http://www.wsib.on.ca/wsib/wopm.nsf/Public/190201
s 41;Workplace Safety and
Insurance Board,
Re-employment Provisions
(Policy 19-04-02)
http://www.wsib.on.ca/wsib/wopm.nsf/Public/190402
Experience rating based on frequency
and costs of injuries is mandated by
s 83(1) which explicitly
includes as an objective ‘to encourage employers to reduce injuries and
occupational diseases and
to encourage workers’ return to work.’ See
also policy detailing the implementation of experience rating: Workplace Safety
and Insurance Board,
http://www.wsib.on.ca/wsib/wsibsite.nsf/Public/EmployersPIhowmuch
s 40(2); Workplace Safety
and Insurance Board,
Workplace Party Co-operation
(Policy 19-02-03)
http://www.wsib.on.ca/wsib/wopm.nsf/Public/190203
s 40(1); Workplace Safety
and Insurance Board,
Re-employment Provisions
(Policy 19-04-02)
http://www.wsib.on.ca/wsib/wopm.nsf/Public/190402
Human Rights Code
, RSO 1990, c
H19, s 11(2).
For a discussion of the difficulties
in winning complaints based on Human Rights Codes complaints for failure to
accommodate see
Judith Mosoff, ‘Lost in translation?: The disability
perspective in Honda v. Keays and Hydro-Québec v. Syndicat’,
Review (2009) 3
McGill Journal of Law and Health / Revue de droit et de la
santé de McGill
Anne-Marie Laflamme and Sophie
Fantoni, ‘L'obligation d'accommodement au Canada et L'obligation
Française de Reclassement:
Convergences, Divergences et Impacts sur le
Maintien en Emploi du Salarie en État d'incapacité’ (2009) 3
McGill Journal of Law and Health / Revue de droit et de la santé de
Mosoff, above n 36, 149.
See generally, Georges Campeau,
From UI to EI: Waging war on the welfare state
(UBC Press, 2005).
Service Canada,
http://www.servicecanada.gc.ca/eng/ei/types/special.shtml
Katherine Marshall, ‘Benefits of
the job’ (2003) 4(5)
Perspectives on Labour and Income
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/75-001-x/00503/6515-eng.html
Ibid Table 2.
RSO 1990, c O1.
Marie-Claude Chartier, ‘Human
Rights and the Return to Work: The State of the Issue’ (Research presented
to the Canadian
Human Rights Commission, 28 April 2006)
http://www.chrc-ccdp.ca/research_program_recherche/rtw_rat/toc_tdm-eng.aspx
Ellen MacEachen et al, ‘A
deliberation on ‘hurt versus harm’ logic in early-return-to-work
policy’ (2007)
Policy and Practice in Health and Safety
Human Rights Code
, RSO 1990, c
H19; given that, as we have seen above, the same threshold applies to
accommodation of injured workers under the
this differentiation is
somewhat surprising.
s 47; Workplace Safety and
Insurance Board, ‘Re-employment Provisions’ (Policy 19-04-02).
http://www.wsib.on.ca/wsib/wopm.nsf/Public/190402
Fong Chan et al, ‘Training needs
of certified Rehabilitation Counselors for Contemporary Practice’ (2003)
Rehabilitation Counselling Bulletin
Joan Eakin, Ellen MacEachen and Judy
Clarke, ‘The logic of practice: An ethnographic study of front-line
service work with
small businesses in Ontario’s Workplace Safety and
Insurance Board’ (Working Paper No 346, Institute for Work and Health,
http://www.iwh.on.ca/working-papers
Christine Roberts-Yates, ‘The
concerns and issues of injured workers in relation to claims/injury management
and rehabilitation:
the need for new operational frameworks’ (2003) 25(16)
Disability and Rehabilitation
898, 900, 907.
Katherine Lippel, ‘Workers
describe the effect of the workers' compensation process on their health: A
Québec study’
International Journal of Law and
, 443; Lorraine Sager and Carole James, ‘Injured
workers' perspectives of their rehabilitation process under the New South Wales
workers' compensation system’ (2005) 52
Australian Occupational Therapy
Cox and Lippel, above n 28, 84.
Examination Preparation
http://www.nidmar.ca/certification/cdmp/CDMP_Examination_Preparation_Guide.pdf
Bernhard, above n 26, 70.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter