URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqLawJl/2019/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:21:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Douglas, Kathy; Popa, Tina; Plata, Christina; Colasante, Meg --- "Technology-Aided Learning in Dispute Resolution and Evidence: Combining Video with Online Annotation/Discussion in a Blended Learning Design" [2019] MqLawJl 9; (2019) 18 Macquarie Law Journal 189
TECHNOLOGY AIDED LEARNING IN DISPUTE RESOLUTION AND
EVIDENCE: COMBINING VIDEO WITH ONLINE ANNOTATION/DISCUSSION IN A BLENDED
KATHY DOUGLAS,
The legal industry is expanding its use of technologies, which stimulates
legal education practitioners to extend technology-enhanced
opportunities. Law teachers can adopt innovative pedagogy to use the media of
video to demonstrate dispute resolution skills
such as negotiation/mediation and
advocacy, supported by online discussion technology for granular analyses of
skills demonstrated
in the video. When teaching legal skills in two courses,
Negotiation and Dispute Resolution (NDR) and Evidence, we argue that there
value in adopting a blended learning design that prepares students for practice
through video and online annotation/discussion.
The skills demonstrated by
practitioners and built by students through this method offers scaffolds toward
active student generation
of authentic legal capability (eg practice through
role-play) and written artefacts (eg a file note and cross-examination
questions).
This article explores the use of granular video
annotation/discussion and key considerations for law teaching when adopting a
learning design. It outlines two examples and provides a road map of how
to approach blended learning when using video annotation/discussion
in the legal
education context.
I INTRODUCTION
In Australia, legal education increasingly acknowledges the need to teach
elective and core
curricula dealing with such issues.
There are now subjects that provide the opportunity to build computer
applications to solve legal problems and core courses include
information on
issues such as smart contracts and blockchain. For example,
application devised to help the public implement strategies to deal with fines,
was initially developed by RMIT University students
in an elective course and
was later made available through the Moonee Valley Legal Service, funded by a
grant from the Victoria Law
Foundation.
Understanding
blockchain arguably should be part of contract courses due to the nature of
blockchain providing a verifiable trail
to changes in contract
A major area of development
is online dispute resolution (ODR) and the changing nature of judging. Whilst
alternative dispute resolution
(ADR) has long been part of the legal landscape,
providing the opportunity for dispute resolution that is quicker, lower cost and
more informal than litigation,
options are also now becoming more widespread. Tania Sourdin canvasses the
various initiatives in ODR including online negotiation,
mediation or
decision-making portals and ‘bots’ as
However, there has been
some robust criticism of this approach due to concerns about ODR methods not
providing the same standard
of justice as traditional
This is because the
experience of ODR is markedly different from the experience of a court hearing
with the accompanying procedural
protections. Alongside changes to courts and
dispute resolution are changes to the organisation of law firms, the use of
intelligence in basic legal work such as discovery, and outsourcing
of common tasks such as research.
These developments point to an unsettled state of emergent technology in the
legal landscape that adds to a context of digital advancement
with caution for
legal university educators.
Law students will not only encounter digital disruption in the nature of
their legal work, but they are also experiencing change in
the teaching of the
law curriculum at university. Higher education is evolving with faculty staff
increasingly engaged ‘with
options and technologies, including
collaboration tools, video and
where video, as a
visualisation medium, taps into ‘the brain’s inherent ability to
rapidly process visual information,
identify patterns, and sense order in
complex situations.’
However, making sense of complex material is not necessarily guaranteed without
the appropriate scaffolded learning experiences that
are designed and supported
by a sound understanding of online
To provide quality
learning experiences, digital technologies are best used as tools of
participation and communication to foster
collaborative knowledge
construction.
Academics have
long argued in legal education that there is value in teaching legal skills in
substantive areas of law,
teaching legal skills in higher education through the use of technology is
intended to enhance student learning and engagement
with digital change. While
digital video can be used to scaffold learning for students and encourage
reflection,
it has often been
used in legal education primarily for passive experiences. By combining video
with online annotation or discussion
it is possible to develop a more impactful
learning design that improves student
A recent study that
contrasted passive viewing of a demonstration video of a cardiopulmonary
resuscitation procedure with student
annotation of the same video found that
students who engaged with discussion via annotation experienced improved
learning through
concentration.
Other studies have shown that there is value in scaffolding skills through
the viewing of video of an industry representative performing
a task or sharing
professional practice insights.
This kind of learning design incorporates an authentic approach to learning
where ‘real world’ skills are
Use of video combined
with online discussion can be a highly effective method of adopting digital
technology in legal education.
This article explores the use of video in two courses (subjects) in a Juris
Doctor program.
Negotiation and Dispute Resolution
(NDR) teaches the
legal skills of negotiation and mediation while
advocacy. Through various learning and teaching investment grants from RMIT
University, videos and curriculum designs were
developed to prepare students
with the legal skills and knowledge required to engage in role-plays or engage
in legal writing tasks.
The theory of blended learning was used in the learning
designs to ensure that use of video and video-based discussion in the online
environment was purposefully aligned to the face-to-face learning experiences.
Blended learning refers to the intentional combination
of online and
face-to-face teaching and learning modes within the one
In the designs discussed
in this article, students actively engage with the video material through peer
co-construction in online
annotation and discussion. In the NDR course, we
filmed a video with an industry partner that demonstrated the skills used in
a mediation. The students discussed sections of the video online to
learn about mediation theory and practice and later demonstrated
these skills in
a weekend intensive class devoted to role-playing. In the Evidence course, a
video was made of a cross-examination.
Students watch the video and then discuss
aspects of cross-examination practice online in a discussion forum. They later
demonstrate
their learning regarding the skill of cross-examination by crafting
their own questions to a new scenario. A summary of the two courses
is provided
in Table 1 below (and detailed descriptions are provided in Section VII).
Summary of the use of video-based discussion in the two
case examples
Course (Subject)
Legal skills demonstrated in video
Legal practitioner input in video
Discussion technology
Negotiation and Dispute Resolution (NDR)
Negotiation/mediation skills
Lawyer/mediator and parties enacting a mediation session
Discussion Board
Advocacy skills
enacting cross-examination of a witness
Discussion Board
In this article, we first discuss the value of the legal skill demonstrated
to the law students in these courses. Next, we outline
the value of combining
face-to-face student experiences with technology through the theory of blended
learning. Later, after providing
our two case examples, this article culminates
with a roadmap of specific steps when using blended learning and video in the
education context.
Drawing upon research conducted in an initial video annotation project we used
those research findings to underpin blended learning
designs for the two courses
of NDR and Evidence which are intended to be transferable to other university
legal skills teaching contexts.
II ADR PEDAGOGY
ADR includes the key legal skills of negotiation
and mediation, which are both knowledge areas and legal skills that are commonly
taught in courses titled Dispute
Resolution.
Law school offerings
in this pedagogical area can combine civil procedure and ADR or offer ADR
courses that are subjects in their
In late 2016, the Law
Admissions Consultative Committee revised the Model Admission Rules for legal
practice, altering Civil Dispute
Resolution (formerly Civil Procedure) to
include the teaching of ADR and thus including it in the core required areas for
to legal practice.
This course area will often include learning about the knowledge and skills used
by a mediator in disputes through experiential
role-plays.
Additionally, this
area may also include consideration of the role of the
in the ADR processes.
Lawyers are said to gain a ‘standard philosophical
through their legal
education. This map usually privileges the role of litigation in dispute
resolution and arguably derives from
the nature of legal pedagogy. Put simply,
the focus on adversarial means of dispute resolution in a legal curriculum (such
as litigation)
can influence law students and encourage an adversarial mindset
in them as lawyers. The focus in law schools on the teaching of appellate
decisions and the use of Socratic or case-based teaching methods has been said
to promote an adversarial approach in students’
orientation to
ADR learning can
temper this traditional adversarial mindset and promote a collaborative
problem-solving frame for law students when
considering legal
Role-play is one teaching approach aimed at drawing out negotiation skills as
compared to adversarial skills, and which can be supported
through purposeful
online preparation and face-to-face enactment. One of the benefits of the wide
use of role-play in ADR courses
is that the pedagogy adopted is more
than in most traditional
law courses. It employs experiential learning approaches that incorporate
authentic learning scenarios and
is therefore an important tool for skills
development and the practical application of negotiation/mediation
Nadja Alexander and
Michele LeBaron argue that role-plays, while sometimes effective, can be
overused with many students disconnecting
from set roles, particularly where the
scenarios and characters are culturally
inappropriate.
New thinking in
ADR pedagogy, whilst still largely endorsing thoughtfully designed role-plays
used in a targeted manner,
advocates a variety of learning and teaching practices including adventure
(where students venture
out of the classroom to engage in ‘real life’ negotiations), and
online learning.
The next step
in ADR pedagogy is arguably the use of blended learning. This kind of pedagogy
can provide an additional layer of deep
learning for students via online
experiences such as the viewing of video and
annotation.
In the same ways,
learning about advocacy (discussed next) can be taught through engagement with
video and online discussion.
III ADVOCACY PEDAGOGY
An adversarial system of trial, as is used in Australia, requires lawyers to
have a range of advocacy skills to present and persuade
a trial judge of
contentious facts. Advocacy skills are taught in the second of our case
examples, that of Evidence (see Table 1).
In an adversarial system, a party’s principal objective is to persuade
the court that their client’s version of the facts
should be accepted in
order to secure a favourable outcome. Thus, advocacy skills are crucial for law
students who ought to be equipped
with a range of skills for practice, including
oral and written communication skills, persuasive argument and
cross-examination.
These crucial skills can be taught in a range of subjects in
a law degree including in civil
litigation,
evidence law,
or specific
advocacy electives. Anthony Hopkins emphasises the need for
‘active-learning’ through simulations by having
students adopt and
perform the role of prosecution and defence lawyers in a
mock-trial.
However, this
approach to assessment design is not without challenges as it is dependent on
sufficient hours in the course to teach
both theory and practice, availability
of moot-court facilities, and the course being led by a lecturer with trial and
advocacy experience.
There are a variety of technological tools that can aid in the teaching of
advocacy simulations and these tools are part of 21
century legal
For instance, in New
South Wales, Joel Butler and Rachel Mansted have attempted to bridge the gap
between legal education and legal
practice by developing a course where students
can undertake mooting, appellate advocacy, and legal practice skills in a mock
environment.
the preparation and teaching techniques, the authors relied on an in-class
deconstruction of an advocacy simulation video.
The use of video and visual
media in teaching law courses can be particularly beneficial in leading to
positive student engagement
and enhanced communications
The use of specifically
made videos demonstrating advocacy skills can be particularly helpful to offer a
model of practical skills
that students are striving to attain, such as
cross-examination. By combining video with annotation or discussion exercises
are actively engaged in learning by being prompted to critique, apply
their own learning, or reflect on their observations. The next
section explores
how the combination of two modes of learning - interwoven online and classroom
activities to form blended learning
- can assist to foster active learning and
increase student engagement in advocacy and dispute resolution.
IV BLENDED LEARNING
Blended learning in the broadest sense combines two or more learning
More specifically it is
known as the combination of online teaching and learning with face-to-face
classroom experience.
it is more than this. It includes co-dependency between modes and scaffolding
across activities rendering the design more
than a combination, but an effective
A key benefit of blended learning is its ability to support an active
learning environment with the use of
technology.
As a component of
blended learning, an online discussion environment allows greater time for
reflection during the discussion process.
As Charles Graham notes, when engaged
in an online interaction, ‘learners have time to more carefully consider
and provide
evidence for their claims and provide deeper, more thoughtful
reflections’.
undertaken by Kylie Burns et al, active learning was shown to be effective in
engaging students in high level thinking
around law and legal
In their study, 25
students responded positively to the use of technology where there remains
active interaction with lecturers and
clear assessment criteria. However, Burns
et al note that this positive response is more likely to be linked to improved
satisfaction than to improved learning
Charles Dziuban et al studied the concept of blended learning and its
relationship with the teaching and learning
environment.
In their study, the
authors concluded that information technology, as a main driver of information,
remains essential to our education
The authors further
concluded that technology should be adopted into education not only to enhance
learning and support active learning
but also to assist educators. Limitations
to blended learning are related to the learning objectives affiliated with each
First, it is important to assess whether the course is suited for
blended learning and, further, the pedagogical implications must
be contemplated
and risks must be pre-assessed. Face-to-face environments may be the best for
spontaneous interaction; however, where
‘control of pace’ is
beneficial to the learning goal, an online learning experience will offer a
better environment.
If the pedagogical implications of blended learning are not
thought through, the approach risks incorporating the worst aspects of
the learning modes utilised, leading to the opposite of the intended
Second, the learning
objectives must be clear and the skills must be identified to select the best
Hence, it is important
that when using blended learning, educators not only focus on benefits but also
contemplate limitations to
attempt to minimise these prior to and during the
implementation of the model. Further, educators should adjust the model and
ways of improvement based on the experiences of using blended learning.
Even though blended learning can provide a more active learning environment,
law lecturers using blended learning increasingly report
that students attend
class underprepared.
to this issue has been the development of an inverted model of blended learning,
frequently referred to as a flipped classroom
approach, which addresses the
overburdened curriculum and student. This is achieved by
reducing the load of new materials covered within class time and (b) by
encouraging student engagement via exploring new concepts
and interacting with
each other and their teachers, to overall develop a stronger relationship
between the pre-class, in-class and
post-class learning
opportunities.
In fact, Burns et
al, who employed flipped learning, reported that students came to class with a
better understanding of the material,
with the academics having more time in
class to work on practical skills and provide guidance and feedback, resulting
in an overall
improvement of class
performance.
terminology such as flipped classroom becomes redundant when the key thrust of
the learning design focuses on the purposeful
alignment of online learning and
preparatory activities to on-campus learning experiences. Law lecturers would
arguably benefit from
more examples of blended learning designs and the insights
gained in the use of this approach to learning. Next, we outline the value
video-based discussion in a blended learning format.
V VIDEO-BASED DISCUSSION
Online video provides students with the affordances of repeat access to
information.
This can be
contrasted with traditional forms of face-to-face learning where students have
no direct control or repeat access to
information gained through in-class
attendance and video viewing. Having video records available for as-required
access means not
having to rely on memory to recall specific content such as
demonstrated practices.
In isolation, video has been identified as an acquisition
which can be viewed
relatively passively apart from basic student controls of start, stop, and
Depending on the
pedagogical purpose, this may be enough. However, when the pedagogical purpose
requires the development of complex
discipline-specific practices, simply
viewing a demonstration video may not support development of a deep
understanding of legal
skills represented in the video. The speed of the
audio-visual content and/or slick editing can render video as providing
overload experiences or alternatively entertainment fixation, unless
students are carefully guided toward considered analysis, such
strategic use of video controls or the video being chunked into smaller
Video has great
potential to contribute to student learning via opportunities ‘to
experience visual portrayals and discussions
of issues centered around...
[concepts such as] advocacy’; skills which may ‘go largely unseen
unless the student is
already working... in specific areas of the
representations can address the
of practice, but recordings need
to be used in a way that helps students to also address the
Various industries and university disciplines use videos to demonstrate
profession-relevant skills. For example, medical schools that
use video to
illustrate concepts and practices for interviewing patients in community
settings found that students improved their
knowledge of interviewing and their
self-awareness within this
Beyond watching the
videos, the medical students post their observations onto an online discussion
board, supported by a moderator
who challenges assertions, probes students for
deeper reflections, and rounds the discussion with a summary. In another
in-service teachers view video of their own or others’ mathematic
teaching practices to then respond to various set questions
in an online survey
approach—involving isolated text responses rather than group
discussion—led to recommending (a) using a facilitator
to scaffold the
analysis, and (b) trialling collaborative rather than individual approaches to
allow in-depth group analysis of practices
Video annotation or discussion via a tandem thread, for example as part of
the learning designs of the two case examples in this paper,
provides the
opportunity for students to engage with video material in an active rather than
passive mode via discourse.
video can be developed by the student, industry, or by the teacher/s of a
Learning from video can
be heightened by collaborative group discussion and student reflection by
allowing the student to engage
in critical discussion with their
For example, when using
annotation after each student group has commented, teachers or industry
representatives can mark their annotations
and provide
Such an approach to
the use of video requires careful planning and communication with students to
optimise student learning. Video
annotation, or tandem electronic discussion,
enhances student learning by providing the opportunity for reflection and group
regarding visual, digital
representations.
Video-based
discussion can help students master employment skills (such as legal practice
skills) and promote critical
reflection.
When developing
video for discussion it may be useful to frame the design in the practice of a
particular industry such as
VI EVOLUTION OF A LEARNING DESIGN
This stage of our own practice represents a key reflection point in the
evolution of designing blended learning with video-based discussion
discipline at RMIT. A subject in the Juris Doctor, Evidence, was one case in a
multiple case study in 2011 that examined
active video-based learning utilising
a video annotation tool (MAT) for professional learning-based
curriculum.
The cases involved
nine classes of students and their teachers from various disciplines and across
vocational education and undergraduate
courses, and one postgraduate course,
Evidence, which is one of the law discipline courses under focus in this
There were several key lessons learnt from the multiple case
four of which are
summarised in row A of Figure 1 below. First, the curriculum design utilising
video-based discussion must be carefully
developed to fit with the subject. The
learning should be authentic to the discipline and the activities purposefully
designed for
the students to be motivated to achieve as intended. The online
learning through the use of media should reference other learning
activities and
flow seamlessly for optimum results. Additionally, teachers need to plan
carefully when blending a learning design
ensuring that they link intended
learning outcomes with the
technology.
The course design
generally should include assessment to motivate students to make the appropriate
time commitment.
important to ensure learning objectives and the assessment of the annotation of
video or electronic discussion are constructively
One assessment option
is to require students to draft a reflective report about the annotation or
discussion forum.
Second, not only does the pedagogical design need to be purposeful, but
teachers need to carefully plan how they will communicate
the activity purpose
to the students, to increase their understanding and motivation to engage. It is
crucial to articulate a narrative
of purpose for annotating video to encourage
student engagement.
need to understand why they are using the video medium and how subsequent online
discussion will assist learning. Teachers
should also practice with the
technology to ensure that it is effective and easy to use for students.
Third, the cost of time and effort can form a barrier to both teachers and
students. If the technology takes too long to learn or
to use, the teachers may
not make best use of the inherent affordances and/or students may resort to
using surface approaches to
learning or even reject the activity. In the
multiple case study, teachers highlighted the cost of their own time in using a
learning approach in trialling new technological approaches to
There are also costs
of professional development and technological
There is usually a
significant production cost to developing a video; however, the use of mobile
devices with video capability can
limit that cost.
Fourth, one of the key findings of the multiple case study was the potential
of using the affordances of the video annotation tool
to foster purposeful
video-based discussion across diverse contexts that adopt authentic learning
designs. The adoption of video
annotation/discussion that promotes peer debate
and learning has significant potential that is worth
Lastly, it is
important when using these kinds of learning designs that students need to be
given timelines to complete the group
work, video annotations, and reflections
as the learning design requires a considerable time
commitment.
Figure 1. Evolution of active online video-based discussion from lessons
learnt from the initial multiple case study (A), to current
Since the multiple case study of 2011, the use of video-based discussion for
active learning in law at RMIT University has evolved
from the effects of
continual scholarly reflection, additional funding, and a change in video-based
discussion technology. These
changes are reflected in the case examples detailed
in the next section, such as how technology-enhanced practices continue into
current practice and are represented in summary in row B of Figure 1. First, the
potential of online video-based discussion has been
carried over into other
practices without reliance on a bespoke tool. The decommissioning of the
annotation tool (MAT) meant that
promising and proven practices needed to change
to a more sustainable format.
Second, while video remains the key representational and demonstration
medium, there is now an expanded range of cases due to additional
mechanisms and collaborations with industry bodies. The experience of the
initial 2011 advocacy video for the Evidence course
has been applied to further
video examples. In 2013 the negotiation/mediation video and learning design was
developed for the NDR
and implemented in
In 2017, funding
allowed for a new video to be made for the Evidence course, implemented in 2018,
that extended the focus from general
advocacy to the specific skill of
cross-examination and the development of legal writing
Third, the technology to enable student discussion on the finer points of the
practical legal skills demonstrated in the videos changed
from a bespoke video
annotation tool to the routine affordances of a learning management system
(LMS). While the annotation tool
effectively enabled pin-point peer discussion,
the readily available affordances of an LMS contribute to a reliable learning
environment
in which to conduct video-based discussion, utilising basic video
upload functions and discussion forum threads. The remaining missing
the ability for students to anchor discussion to pin-point video segments at
various granulations (from seconds to minutes
of footage), was largely mitigated
by teacher segmentation of videos into key chunks of demonstration content.
We next outline two examples of the use of this blended learning approach,
before presenting a blended learning roadmap drawn from
these examples.
VII CASE EXAMPLES OF BLENDED LEARNING USING VIDEO-BASED
DISCUSSION IN TEACHING NEGOTIATION/MEDIATION AND ADVOCACY
The case examples provided in this section explain the implementation of
video-based discussion in the blended learning design of
two postgraduate law
. Each blended learning design considers
the semester-wide pedagogy involving seamless and purposeful learning across
both online
and classroom spaces. Each course has a particular legal skill set
that students develop through video demonstration with industry
practitioner
input, plus student peer discussion on the skills to draw out the underpinning
knowledge explicitly or implicitly on
display in the videos. Detailed
descriptions are provided on the two courses below, which extends the summary
provided in the introduction
(see Table 1).
Negotiation and Dispute Resolution | Mediation
The key skills that have been identified in teaching this course are
negotiation and mediation skills with an emphasis on underpinning
communication
skills. The design aims to prepare students for a written journal assessment
that requires students to critically reflect
on their own performance in
role-plays as well as those of their peers. The course is delivered across three
on-campus weekend intensives.
Prior to attending the first intensive, students are asked to study the
underpinning theory of conflict, negotiation, and mediation
topics online
through the LMS. Students engage with readings and a negotiation/mediation video
that is broken up into various parts
and hosted on the learning management
The aims are for students to familiarise themselves with the
readings and videos and to integrate theory and practice.
Communication skills such as active listening, the ability to ask open-ended
questions, and reframing are relevant for development
of negotiation and
mediation skills. For this course, these skills are best learnt through
role-play and the learning design prepares
students for the demonstration of
these skills. The negotiation/mediation video was segmented into shorter videos
linked to separate
discussion board threads (see Figure 2 below) to support
video-based discussion. The aim was to provide the students with an opportunity
to watch the video and to identify and learn the articulated negotiation and
mediation skills via the active learning of peer discussion.
The video developed for NDR demonstrates a legal dispute with two parties and
a mediator. This video was developed in a joint project
with the Alternative
Dispute Resolution Committee of the Victorian Bar, and actors in the video were
barristers who were mediation
trainers. By demonstrating a business partnership
dispute, the video provided an authentic legal scenario for the students to
The conflict depicted in the video relates to dissatisfaction with a
partnership arrangement. During the video the mediator, who is
a barrister and
mediation trainer, demonstrates the various stages of a mediation, including
introductions, opening statements, setting
the agenda, private sessions,
negotiations, and agreement writing. The mediator also demonstrates various
negotiation/mediation communication
skills including asking open and closed
questions, establishing rapport, summarising and reframing statements and
assisting parties
to negotiate a settlement. For example, in the video the
mediator shows active listening regarding the partnership dispute by his
body language, strategic nodding to indicate that he is hearing the parties, and
frequent eye contact. The mediator also asks
open prompting questions that helps
the parties to expand on their concerns about challenges in the partnership and
on occasion reframes
the concerns raised to take any ‘blaming’
language out of the assertion.
Figure 2. Example of Video and Discussion Board
In the discussion that ensues from watching the video material, students
debate key ideas in the online discussion board. Students
discuss each video
segment in a tandem threaded discussion, linking the mediator’s practices
that they are viewing with legal
theory. Questions are set by the lecturers to
guide students and help them to deeply focus on the important aspects of the
The lecturer also monitors the discussions while asking questions to
prompt in depth discussion and critical thought. This is the
key to preparing
students for negotiation and mediation in the face-to-face environment. The
blending of the activity means that
when students attend class for the intensive
weekend they already possess familiarity with the negotiation/mediation process
are prepared to demonstrate negotiation and mediation skills in the
role-plays. Hence the online activities prepare students for
the on-campus
learning experiences.
Next the students reflect on their online discussions. They consider which
two discussion board posts best demonstrates their own
understanding of the
theory, its practical application, and critical engagement with peers, and then
submit these posts for assessment.
The actions of reflecting on their learning
online and choosing their areas of strength provides a meta-assessment of what
Ultimately, students are required to write a journal for assessment
critically reflecting on their role-play experiences and critiquing
skills and performance as well as those of their
In this journal, students
culminate their integration of theory with practice, with reference to
negotiation and mediation,
this course. To assist them with their reflection students are provided with a
detailed marking guide after each role-play to
performance as well as the performance of their peers. Reflective writing is
discussed during the
face-to-face classes to scaffold this kind of assessment
and links are made with the reflections in the discussion boards conducted
Evidence | Advocacy Skills
As discussed earlier, advocacy is a critical skill that law students must be
equipped with as part of their legal education. Advocacy
involves teaching
written and oral communication skills, as well as court-specific skills such as
cross-examination. In the course
Evidence, which is delivered over a semester,
the video-based discussion task features in two parts: video discussion board
file note to counsel. The watching and commenting on the video and writing
of the file note occurs in the online environment. The
online experiences are
combined with face-to-face weekly classes.
Students commence their study of evidence principles by first learning about
the nature of the adversarial system of justice. While
the Evidence course is
predominantly practice-orientated, students nevertheless engage with doctrinal
analysis of legislation and
case law underpinning the legal system. For example,
students must engage with and understand the legal rules about introducing types
of evidence (such as opinion or hearsay evidence), before they can apply their
learning in practice.
To facilitate the learning of the nature of the adversarial system, it is
imperative to identify the relevant skills that students
ought to acquire from a
practice-orientated subject such as Evidence. Students learn advocacy skills,
cross-examination skills, and
persuasive argument as these are all articulation
skills a lawyer must possess for court advocacy.
During the course, students view a video of a lawyer cross-examining a
witness. The scenario depicted in the video forms a demonstration
starting prompt for the video-based discussion task. Students are provided with
three documents to accompany the video. The
first explains the background
scenario leading to a criminal indictment, the second contains a witness
statement to be used in court
proceedings, while the third document is a
transcript of the video. The video itself depicts a scene where the
defendant’s
lawyer cross-examines the prosecution’s witness (see
Figure 3). The purpose of the task is to provide students with a practical
demonstration of selected areas of Evidence law, with students viewing a video
of a mock cross-examination in preparation for further
learning engagement.
The Evidence video centres on a scenario where the accused is charged with
murder and a key witness has provided testimony to the
police. The video depicts
the accused’s defence barrister cross-examining the prosecution’s
key witness in the stand.
During the video the defence barrister asks the
witness numerous leading questions, such as: ‘It was in these
circumstances
you say you identified Mr Wolfe as one of the men who had got out
of the Ford Falcon?’ The defence barrister also demonstrates
admissibility
of various forms of evidence including prior inconsistent statements,
identification evidence, and privilege. Further,
the video demonstrates the
application of the rule in
which provides that
that when a witness is giving evidence and counsel intends to call evidence that
contradicts the witness’
testimony, counsel must put the substance of the
contradictory evidence to the witness to afford them an opportunity to explain,
accept, or deny the contradictory evidence. In the video the defence barrister
provides the witness with a copy of his police statement
and proceeds to
question the witness on the inconsistency between the written statement and the
oral testimony. Students are required
to identify the barrister’s conduct
to discuss the impact that failure to comply with the rule would have on
admissibility
of the evidence. In addition, the video shows oral communication
skills, persuasive argument through questioning, and active listening
the witness’ testimony, which are all integral skills of court advocacy.
After viewing the video students are required to answer five questions, as
set by the lecturers and as relating to the video, on a
discussion forum.
Students are directed to various parts of the video and prompted to discuss
whether certain evidence ought to be
admissible, or to demonstrate an
understanding of the consequences of failure by counsel to comply with court
rules. The discussion
forum provides an opportunity for students to apply the
knowledge they have gained from engaging with legal theory and watching the
video to engage in meaningful debate with their peers.
After engaging in dialogue with their peers on the online discussion board
(similarly to NDR) students reflect on their learning in
the discussion forum
through the process of selecting their preferred online discussion contributions
to submit for assessment purposes.
Finally, students actively apply the knowledge they have gained by generating
authentic legal artefacts. After reviewing a new written
hypothetical scenario
and instructions, students are required to prepare a file note to a barrister
that critically analyses the
legal issues arising out of the scenario. They are
also required to draft a set of questions intended to be put to the witness in
cross-examination on the legal issues identified. The design requires students
to develop legal writing skills to prepare these questions.
Example of Cross-Examination Video
VIII BLENDED LEARNING ROADMAP
This article presented two case examples of blended learning utilising
video-based discussion. From these, a single roadmap is extrapolated,
to assist other university teachers who may choose to use this curriculum design
model for their own legal teaching. We
have drawn out the common features of the
two case examples of NDR for negotiation/mediation skills, and Evidence for
advocacy skills,
to draw out six key steps in a student’s journey through
the respective courses (see Figure 4). Each step is annotated with
a summary of
what this entails for the NDR and Evidence case examples.
This roadmap utilises the pedagogical benefits discussed in earlier sections
of this paper. It employs digital technology in the form
of online video and
peer discussion technology, as well as access to readings and other theoretical
documentation. These resources
enable engagement with theory to both learn and
eventually articulate required legal skills (negotiation/mediation and
which are also demonstrated via authentic legal demonstrations in
video. However, this is not a passive learning experience. Students
participate
in online peer dialogue to actively discuss and debate the skills represented in
the video demonstrations, in reference
to the theory. This provides for deeper
learning opportunities and preparation for on-campus learning experiences (eg
thus forming purposefully aligned blended learning courses.
Assessment tasks support the blend by tasking students to studiously
their video-based discussions in order to evaluate their best work to submit for
assessment purposes. Further assessment
tasks in the respective courses involve
generating written artefacts to further demonstrate legal skill application (eg
reflection journal on role-played legal skills, a file note, and
cross-examination questions).
Figure 4. Legal skill building: A roadmap for blended learning curriculum
incorporating video-based discussion.
IV CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS
An integral aspect of law studies is the need to equip law students with
skills necessary for legal practice, such as mediation and
advocacy. In this
paper the authors have explored the use of blended learning utilising
video-based discussion as a means of teaching
law students these crucial legal
skills. The blended learning designs involve a combination of both traditional
face-to-face modes
of learning and online learning using video and technology.
Video-based discussion can promote active blended learning by creating
opportunity for students to not only view a video of a legal skill, but also to
apply it through online discussion in preparation
for face-to-face learning
activities. This type of learning design facilitates a more interactive method
of learning when compared
with traditional forms of teaching as students are
actively engaged with media and are also encouraged to engage with their peers.
A roadmap extrapolated from our two examples is offered with the intention of
transferability or adaptability to other university
legal courses.
To further examine the evolution of blended learning practices utilising
video-based discussion in the law discipline at RMIT University,
research project has commenced. The methodological approach involves a multiple
case study with a longitudinal focus. The
two classes of NDR and Evidence
discussed in this paper form the cases of the new study. Additionally, the
original case involving
Evidence in the 2011 multiple case study will be drawn
upon to illustrate and/or challenge ‘how certain conditions and their
underlying processes change over
Professor at Graduate School
of Business and Law, RMIT University.
Law Lecturer at Graduate
School of Business and Law, RMIT University.
Law Lecturer at Graduate
School of Business and Law, RMIT University.
Casual Academic at Graduate
School of Business and Law, RMIT University.
Law Society of New South
The Future of Law and Innovation in the Profession
(Report, 2017)
FLIP Report 2017’
Moonee Valley Legal Service,
‘About Fine Fixer’,
(Web Page, 11 March 2019)
<https://finefixer.org.au/about-finefixer/
Jake Goldenfein and Andrea
Leiter, ‘Legal Engineering on the Blockchain: ‘Smart
Contracts’ as Legal Conduct’
(2018) 29(2)
Law and Critique
Laurence Boulle and Rachael
Australian Dispute Resolution Law and Practice
(LexisNexis
Butterworths, 2017) ch 1.
Tania Sourdin, ‘Judge v
Robot: Artificial Intelligence and Judicial Decision-Making’ (2018) 41(4)
University of New South Wales Law Review
Riikka Koulu,
Technology and Dispute Resolution: The Privatisation of Coercion
& Francis, 2018).
FLIP Report 2017
New Media Consortium and
EDUCAUSE Learning Initiative,
NMC Horizon Report: 2018 Higher Education
(Report, 2018) 35
<https://library.educause.edu/~/media/files/library/2018/8/2018horizonreport.pdf
Lillian Corbin and Lisa
Bugden, ‘Online Teaching: The Importance of Pedagogy, Place and Presence
in Legal Education’
Legal Education Review
Kwok-Wing Lai,
‘Digital Technology and the Culture of Teaching and Learning in Higher
Education’ (2011) 27(8)
Australasian Journal of Educational
1263, 1264.
Bobette Wolski, ‘Why,
How, and What to Practice: Integrating Skills Teaching and Learning in the
Undergraduate Law Curriculum’
(2002) 52(1-2)
Journal of Legal
Negin Mirriahi et al,
‘Identifying Engagement Patterns with Video Annotation Activities: A Case
Study in Professional Development’
(2018) 34(1)
Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology
Meg Colasante, ‘Using
Video Annotation to Reflect On and Evaluate Physical Education Pre-Service
Teaching Practice’ (2011)
Australasian Journal of Educational
Po-Sheng Chui et al,
‘A Video Annotation Learning Approach to Improve the Effects of Video
Learning’ (2018) 55(4)
Education and Teaching International
Narelle Lemon et al,
‘Video Annotation for Collaborative Connections to Learning: Case Studies
from an Australian Higher Education
Context' In Laura Wankel et al (eds),
Improving Student Engagement and Retention through Multimedia Technologies:
Including Video Annotation, Multimedia Apps, Videoconferencing,
and Transmedia
Storytelling Volume
6, Part F Cutting-Edge Technologies in Higher
Education series
. (Emerald Group Publishing Limited, United Kingdom, 2013)
181, 185; Negin Mirriahi et al, ‘Effects of Instructional Conditions
Experience on Student Reflection: A Video Annotation Study’ (2018) 37(6)
Higher Education Research & Development
Kathy Douglas, Meg
Colasante and Amanda Kimpton, ‘Exploiting Emerging Video Annotation
Technology and Industry Engagement to
Authentically Prepare Students for the
Complex World of Work’ in T Thomas et al (eds),
Research and
Development in Higher Education: Learning for Life and Work in a Complex World
(Higher Education Research and Development Society of Australasia, 2015) vol
38, 1; Anthony Herrington and Jan Herrington ‘What
is an Authentic
Learning Environment?’ in Anthony Herrington and Jan Herrington (eds),
Authentic Learning Environments in Higher Education
(Idea Group, 2006).
Michael Moore,
‘Foreword’ in Curtis Bonk and Charles Graham (eds),
The Handbook
of Blended Learning: Global Perspectives, Local Designs
Publishing, 2006).
We use the term
‘roadmap’ to connote a series of suggested steps for an approach to
learning and technology. Our roadmap
adapts and builds on a roadmap of the first
author’s in a “how to” guide for teaching (Web Page, 30 June
<https://emedia.rmit.edu.au/learningpatterns/content/blended-learning>.
See for another roadmap example: Monash University,
Education Technology
(Web Page, 12 March 2019)
<https://www.monash.edu/learning-teaching/innovation/tech-roadmap
Judy Gutman, Tom Fisher and
Erika Martens, ‘Why Teach Alternative Dispute Resolution to Law Students?
Part One: Past and Current
Practices and Some Unanswered Questions’
Legal Education Review
Kathy Douglas, ‘The
Teaching of ADR in Australian Law Schools: Promoting Non-Adversarial Practice in
(2011) 22(1)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
Law Admissions Consultative
Model Admission Rules 2015
(at 11 March 2019)
<https://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/files/web-pdf/LACC%20docs/212390818_8_LACC_Model_Admission_Rules_2015.pdf>.
Edwin Greenebaum, ‘On
Teaching Mediation’ (1999) 2 (Fall)
Journal of Dispute Resolution
Suzanne J Schmitz,
‘Giving Meaning to the Second Generation of ADR Education:
Attorneys’ Duty to Learn about ADR and What
They Must Learn’ (1999)
Journal of Dispute Resolution
Leonard Riskin,
‘Mediation and Lawyers’
(1982) 43(1)
Ohio State Law Journal
Leonard Riskin and John
Westbrook, ‘Integrating Dispute Resolution Into Standard First Year
Courses: The Missouri Plan’
(1989) 39(4)
Journal of Legal Education
Tom Fisher, Judy Gutman and
Erika Martens, ‘Why Teach Alternative Dispute Resolution to Law Students?
Part 2: An Empirical Survey’
(2007) 17(1)
Legal Education Review
Paul Ramsden,
to Teach in Higher Education
(Taylor & Francis, 2
Melissa Conley Tyler and
Naomi Cukier, ‘Nine Lessons for Teaching Negotiation Skills’
Legal Education Review
; Greenebaum, (n 23); Michael Moffitt,
‘Lights, Camera, Begin Final Exam: Testing What We Teach in Negotiation
(2004) 54(1)
Journal of Legal Education
Nadja Alexander and
Michelle LeBaron, ‘Death of the Role-Play’ in Christopher Honeyman,
James Coben and Giuseppe De Palo
Rethinking Negotiation Teaching:
Innovations for Context and Culture
(DRI Press, 2009) 179.
Noam Ebner and Kimberlee
Kovach, ‘Simulation 2.0: The Resurrection’ in Christopher Honeyman
and James Coben (eds),
Venturing Beyond the Classroom
(DRI Press, 2010)
James Coben, Christopher
Honeyman and Sharon Press, ‘Straight Off the Deep End in Adventure
Learning’ in Christopher Honeyman
and James Coben (eds),
Beyond the Classroom
(DRI Press, 2010) 109.
David Matz and Noam Ebner,
‘Using Role-Play in Online Negotiation Teaching’ in Christopher
Honeyman and James Coben (eds),
Venturing Beyond the Classroom
Press, 2010) 293.
Judy Gutman and Matthew
Riddle, ‘ADR in Legal Education: Learning by Doing’
(2012) 23(3)
Australasian Dispute Resolution Journal
; Kathy Douglas, Josephine
Lang and Meg Colasante, ‘The Challenges of Blended Learning Using a Media
Annotation Tool’
(2014) 11(2)
Journal of University Teaching and
Learning Practice
Jacqueline Horan and
Michelle Taylor-Sands, ‘Bringing the Court and Mediation Room Into the
(2008) 18(1-2)
Legal Education Review
Andrew Palmer, ‘A
Proof-Oriented Model of Evidence Teaching’
[2002] LegEdRev 7
(2002) 13(2)
Legal Education
Anthony Hopkins,
‘Teaching Evidence Law within the Framework of a Trial: Relating Theory to
Practice as Students Take to Their
Feet and Take Responsibility for the Trial
Narrative’ (2009) 2(1-2)
Journal of the Australasian Law Teachers
Association
Ibid, 182-4.
John Sonsteng et al,
‘Teaching the Art of Effective Advocacy in the 21
Paradigm Shift’ (2018) 44(1)
Mitchell Hamline Law Review
Joel Butler and Rachel
Mansted, ‘The Student as Apprentice: Bridging the Gap Between Education,
Skills and Practice’
Journal of the Australasian Law Teachers
Association
Penelope Carruthers et al,
‘Enhancing Student Learning and Engagement in the Juris Doctor through the
Rich Tapestry of Legal
Story-Telling’ (2017) 1
Journal of the
Australasian Law Teachers Association
Moore (n 18).
Charles Graham,
‘Blended Learning Systems: Definition, Current Trends, and Future
Directions’, in Curtis Bonk and Charles
Graham (eds),
The Handbook of
Blended Learning: Global Perspectives, Local Designs
(Pfeiffer, 2006).
Francine Glazer,
‘Introduction’ in Francine Glazer (ed),
Blended Learning: Across
the Disciplines, Across the Academy
(Stylus Publishing, 2012).
Kylie Burns et al,
‘Active Learning in Law by Flipping the Classroom:An Enquiry Into
Effectiveness and Engagement’
(2017) 27(1)
Legal Education Review
Graham (n 43) 18.
Burns et al (n 45) 167.
Charles Dziuban et al,
‘Blended Learning: The New Normal and Emerging Technologies’ (2018)
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education
Graham (n 43).
Moore (n 18) xxvi.
Melissa Castan and Ross
Hyams, ‘Blended Learning in the Law Classroom: Design, Implementation and
Evaluation of an Intervention
in the First Year Curriculum Design’
Legal Education Review
Burns et al (n 45) 167.
Grainne Conole and Karen
Fill, ‘A Learning Design Toolkit to Create Pedagogically Effective
Learning Activities (2005) 8
Journal of Interactive Media in Education
Peter J Rich and Tonya Trip, ‘Ten Essential Questions Educators Should Ask
When Using Video Annotation Tools’ (2011)
Kim Koh, ‘The Use of
Video Technology in Pre-Service Teacher Education and In-Service Teacher
Professional Development’,
in Swee Fong Ng (ed.),
Cases of Mathematics
Professional Development
in East Asian Countries: Using Video to Support
Grounded Analysis
(SpringerVerlag, Singapore, 2015) 229.
Diana Laurillard,
Teaching as a Design Science: Building Pedagogical Patterns for Learning and
(Routledge, 2012).
Dongsong Zhang et al,
‘Instructional Video in E-learning: Assessing the Impact of Interactive
Video on Learning Effectiveness’
(2006) 43(1)
Information &
Salvatore Alaimo and
Shinyoung Park, ‘Use of Video in Philanthropic and Nonprofit Studies
Programs’ (2018) 8(2)
Journal of Nonprofit Education and Leadership
John M Wiecha et al,
‘Collaborative e-Learning Using Streaming Video and Asynchronous
Discussion Boards to Teach the Cognitive
Foundation of Medical Interviewing: A
Case Study’ (2003) 5(2)
Journal of Medical Internet Research
Marc Kleinknecht and
Jürgen Schneider, ‘What Do Teachers Think and Feel When Analyzing
Videos of Themselves and Other
Teachers Teaching?’ (2013) 33
and Teacher Education
Colasante (n14) 66.
Meg Colasante and Kathy
Douglas, ‘Prepare, Participate, Connect: Active Learning with Video
Annotation’ (2016) 32(4)
Australasian Journal of Educational
Alan D Greenberg and Jan
The Impact of Broadcast and Streaming Video in Education; What the
Research Says and How Educators and Decision Makers Can Begin to
Prepare for the
(Commissioned CISCO to Wainhouse Research Report, March 2012).
Colasante (n 14) 66.
Negin Mirriahi et al (n
Meg Colasante, ‘Using
a Video Annotation Tool for Authentic Learning: A Case Study’ in Siew-Mee
Barton, John Hedbery
and Katsuaki Suzuki (eds),
Proceedings of Global Learn
Asia Pacific
(Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education
For the mediation industry
we developed a learning model that provides guidance regarding developing an
authentic video for peer
discussion: Kathy Douglas, Tina Popa and Christina
Platz, ‘Teaching Mediation Using Video and Peer Discussion: An Engaged
Learning Model’
(2019) 29(1)
Australasian Dispute Resolution
This research was funded by
a $46,000 university Learning and Teaching Investment Fund Grant.
Douglas, Lang and Colasante (n 34).
Meg Colasante and Josephine
Lang, ‘Can a Media Annotation Tool Enhance Online Engagement With
Learning? A Multi-Case Work-In-Progress
Report’ in Jose Cordeiro, Markus
Helfert and Maria J Martins (eds),
Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference of Computer Supported Education
(Science and Technology
Publications, 2012) vol 2, 455.
Judith McNamara and Kelley
Burton, ‘Assessment of Online Discussion Forums for Law Students’
(2009) 6(2)
Journal of University Teaching and Learning Practice
Douglas, Lang and Colasante
The project was funded by a
$20,000 University Global Learning by Design Learning and Teaching Grant..
This project was funded as
part of a $40,000 College Digital Uplift Learning and Teaching Grant.
Michael G Moore,
Handbook of Distance Education
, (Routledge, 2
Katalin J Kabat, ‘Time, Space, and Dialogue in a Distance-learning Class
Discussion Board’ (2014) 11(2)
E-Learning and Digital Media
Judith McNamara and Rachael
Field, ‘Designing Reflective Assessment for Workplace Learning in Legal
Education’ (Conference
Paper, ATN Evaluation and Assessment Conference,
29-30 November 2007).
(1893) 6 R 67.
Robert K Yin,
Research: Design and Methods (Applied Social Research Methods)
Publications, 5
ed, 2014) 53.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (29.5 MB)
PDF format (1.26 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter