URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2019/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Babie, Paul --- "Property In The Empirical World" [2019] UNSWLawJlF 7; (2019) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 7
PROPERTY IN THE EMPIRICAL WORLD
PROPERTY IN THE EMPIRICAL WORLD
Property Theory: Legal and Political
Perspectives
(James Penner and Michael Otsuka (eds), Cambridge University
Press, 2018, ISBN 978-11-08500-04-3)
Property theory seeks to answer two related questions: first, what is
property and, second, assuming its invocation by a polity, can
it be justified?
Put simply, the former involves a consideration of the normative content of the
concept of property – this
inquiry usually coalesces around Wesley Newcomb
Hohfeld’s ‘jural
opposites’,
Honoré’s eleven standard incidents of
Margaret Jane Radin’s ‘liberal triad’ of use, exclusivity, and
alienability,
all of which is
summarised by the ‘Hohfeld-Honoré bundle of rights
question focuses on the range of theories said to justify the concept which have
been proffered over time.
James Penner and Michael Otsuka’s
Property Theory: Legal and
Political Perspectives
– the latest contribution to the vast and
growing body of property theory scholarship – brings together some of the
contemporary scholars currently working on the related themes of content
and justification.
The chapters can
be divided into two groups: the first considers content or, as Penner and Otsuka
put it, ‘the legal theoretical
side of the ledger ... bring[ing] pressure
to bear on several popular ideas which have tended to shape the discourse in
this area’;
the second,
justification – the political implications of a state’s adoption of
a system of property.
parts, justice considerations loom large. Anyone who today seeks to understand
either what property is or how it can be justified
must engage with these
theorists and, for that reason, each chapter repays our close and careful
attention. In this review, however,
having briefly recounted the arguments made
by the contributors, I turn to an important but unstated implication of their
need to bridge the divide between theorising about property and the
way in which property itself actually operates and is understood
by those who
use it in the empirical world. For quite apart from adding to an already
voluminous literature on property theory, what
really matters is how property
exists in the empirical world.
The first part of the book comprises five chapters, the first two of which
examine the way in which the content of property might
further just outcomes for
individuals. Rejecting the traditional public-private divide as relevant to
understanding the nature of
property, Lisa Austin argues that because property
comprises a legal relationship between persons – which means that it is
both private
public – it is capable of achieving an allocation
of goods and resources that produces
distributive
corrective justice.
Larissa Katz extends this concern for justice, arguing ‘that
Hohfeld’s account of jural relations does more than just
establish a
neutral technology for moral and political action: it sets out the ways that
people might relate in law, given Hohfeld’s
conception of persons for the
purposes of law’.
the atypical property form found in the trust as a focus, Katz argues that in
Hohfeld one finds a means of understanding property
as moral. Katz’s
project seeks ‘to reframe the disagreement between moralist and formalist
as a disagreement about what
... legal forms are and the extent to which [such]
forms are themselves sources for thinking morally about problems in our shared
lives. Everyone agrees that juridical ideas run out at some point; the rest is
If property is moral, if it can achieve both distributive and corrective
justice in the allocation of scarce things, the question
arises: what is
essential, as a matter of normative content, to allow one to conclude that
property in fact exists? Answering the
question requires engagement with the
long-standing ‘essentialism’ debate, which concerns the standard
incidents of ownership
first identified by
if any, of those incidents is essential to the existence of property?
final three chapters of the first part tackle this question, asking in turn
whether, even if one can find the ‘essential’ attribute or
incident of ownership, that really matters, or whether it is,
in fact, the
‘thingness’ of property, in contrast to the abstract bundle of
rights, that really matters.
This is a deeply significant contribution to an old debate: is property things,
rights, or both?
The second part of the book interrogates the political implications of
adopting property as an allocative tool, each chapter suggesting
that Lockean
thought retains much of significance by way of justification: Nicholas Sage
examines original acquisition of a resource
as a means of justifying property in
Michael Otsuka and James
Penner the ‘enough and as good’
and Norman Ho the
parallels between Confucian and Lockean approaches to
Perhaps of greatest interest are the opposite sides taken up by Otsuka and
Penner over Locke’s ‘enough and as good’
proviso when applied
to land. Otsuka and Penner consider whether the initial distribution of land or
its allocation through the operation
of market forces results in a just outcome
for the members of a society. Otsuka argues that the ‘enough and as
proviso can continue to ground an egalitarian claim to the spatial
regions above and below land, as well as to natural resources
found within it,
in both post-industrial money-based economies as well as in primitive agrarian
barter economies.
For Otsuka,
‘every individual is entitled to a right to access the material resources
of the earth to an extent which is calculated
by dividing [those] material
resources ... by the number of individuals living at any one
Penner, however,
argues that ‘the distribution of ... land, even in conditions of scarcity,
is irrelevant to the question of
distributive justice ... Where the real action
lies is in a just distribution of the fruits of a division of labour, which,
the developed Lockean theory of just contractual exchange, does not allow
first acquirers of titles in land to exploit the
This is a bold
move, and one that forces us to shift our focus from the acquisition of a
resource to contractual exchange in respect
of it – for it is there that
injustice and unfairness most commonly
The contributions to this volume clearly offer bold and refreshing treatments
of the old questions surrounding content and justification.
Still, while
property theorists – including the contributors to this volume –
continue to debate the content of and the
justifications for property, few seek
to consider how their theories might in fact explain what property means to
real, flesh and
blood people. Put another way, theory presents concepts and
posits hypotheses about what property might be – as the contributors
this book show, concepts and hypotheses about morality, justice, and egalitarian
distributions of goods and resources –
but it does not tell us a great
deal about what it really
for the non-theorist and the non-lawyer. In
short, how do laypeople understand what property means when going about their
If, as Katz has rightly
claimed, what matters most is the power to set agendas about the use of a
resource, whatever it happens to
then it matters just as much
what people think they can and cannot do with a thing for which they set that
agenda. Such decisions
bear consequences not only for those making them, but for
others, too – usually for the economy, the environment, or both.
theory risks losing relevance the more it disregards these ‘lay
understandings’ of property.
Yet, in raising this point, far from suggesting a rejection of property
theory (or this book) as irrelevant, my intention is rather
to emphasise that
turning our attention to what real people think about property is an important
question that ought to be a central
concern of property theorists. In fact, this
book provides the perfect entrée to do just that. Asking what real people
Sovereignty’,
almost 100 years ago: property, Cohen argued,
power over things and
over others, and it is hard to justify. If that is so, we need to move beyond
debates about those two aspects
of property and think more clearly and more
carefully about how we might encourage people, in exercising the significant
power conferred
by property, to take account of the things and the others
affected by their decisions. It is only in focusing attention on what people
with property that it becomes possible to make any inroads into the consequences
– whatever they may be – of decisions
taken in furtherance of the
power that property confers.
people think about property? We know that ‘bundle of
rights’ theorising allows ever greater levels of abstraction, so
ensure property’s utility in allocating items of social wealth which may
have little if any obvious tangible existence.
Such abstractions began with
Jeremy Bentham’s aphorism that ‘property and law are born together,
and die together. Before
laws were made there was no property; take away laws,
and property ceases’
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon’s ‘Property is
abstractions of the nature and content of property reach a zenith in the work of
Kevin Gray and Thomas C Grey. The former wrote
Proudhon got it all wrong. Property is not theft – it is fraud. Few
other legal notions operate such gross or systematic deception.
Before long I
will have sold you a piece of thin air and you will have called it property. But
the ultimate fact about property is
that it does not really exist: it is mere
illusion. It is a vacant concept – oddly enough rather like thin
But this is nothing like what the non-specialist thinks about property;
Thomas C Grey writes that
... the conception of property held by the specialist (the lawyer or
economist) is quite different from that held by the ordinary
person. Most people
... conceive of property as
. ... By contrast, the theory of property rights held by the
modern specialist tends both to dissolve the notion of ownership and
eliminate any necessary connection between property rights and
While theorists and judges have little difficulty viewing property in
abstract terms,
it is not so
clear that non-theorists and non-lawyers see it the same way. Yet, can we even
be sure that Grey is right? The truth
is, we do not really know. Why? Because
few have asked the questions that would elicit the empirical data that would
provide the
answers. Such research might reveal that the layperson understands
property as abstract rights which come with
obligations;
but it might just
as easily show that property is viewed more as things rather than
Whatever theory may say about it, we cannot know what the layperson thinks
suggesting this mean that we ought to abandon property theory? Absolutely not.
Indeed, one of the foremost empirical sociologists,
Herbert Blumer, wrote
[t]he aim of theory in empirical science is to develop analytical schemes of
the empirical world with which the given science is concerned.
This is done by
conceiving the world abstractly, that is, in terms of classes of objects and of
relations between such classes. Theoretical
schemes are essentially proposals as
to the nature of such classes and of their relations where this nature is
problematic or unknown.
Such proposals become guides to investigation to see
whether they or their implications are true. Thus, theory exercises compelling
influence on research – setting problems, staking out objects and leading
inquiry into asserted relations. In turn, findings
of fact test theories, and in
suggesting new problems invite the formulation of new proposals. Theory, inquiry
and empirical fact
are interwoven in a texture of operation with theory guiding
inquiry, inquiry seeking and isolating facts, and facts affecting theory.
fruitfulness of their interplay is the means by which an empirical science
What we need is empirical research to test the concepts and classes of
relations proposed by property theory as they exist in the
empirical world.
Devising ways to test those theories which in turn constitute theories which
will require further refinement and
modification once tested. And identifying
the absence of such theories and of empirical research which tests them is, in
from identifying a shortcoming of this book. Rather, it is to suggest
an opportunity, for Penner and Otsuka’s important book,
contributions from the most important property theorists of our time, represents
an excellent place for such empirical
research to start, for it opens a dialogue
– a ‘fruitful interplay’ – between abstract theory and
the empirical
world of agendas set by real people for goods and resources. This
book allows the formulation of hypotheses about how the real-world
property understand the nature of the choice available to them in the empirical
world. And it can therefore form the basis
upon which to develop an empirical
science as a counterpart to property theory.
* Adelaide Law School Professor of the Theory and Law of Property, The
University of Adelaide.
Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld, ‘Some
Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial Reasoning’
Yale Law Journal
Anthony M Honoré,
‘Ownership’
in Anthony G Guest (ed),
Oxford Essays in
Jurisprudence: A Collaborative Work
(Oxford University Press, 1961)
Margaret Jane Radin, ‘The Liberal
Conception of Property: Cross Currents in the Jurisprudence of
(1988) 88(8)
Columbia Law Review
J E Penner, ‘The “Bundle of
Rights” Picture of Property’
(1996) 43(3)
UCLA Law Review
J W Harris,
Property and Justice
(Oxford University Press, 1996).
Two of the contributors have had a
profound impact on recent property theorising: J E Penner has written the
definitive account
the concept of property in law (
The Idea of
Property in Law
(Oxford University Press, 1997))
of the bundle of
rights metaphor (see n 4); Larissa Katz’s ‘agenda-setting’, as
a means of describing the power
of ownership encapsulated in property, has
gained international critical acclaim (‘Exclusion and Exclusivity in
Property Law’
(2008) 58(3)
University of Toronto Law Journal
This is not, of course, to detract from other leaders in the field, including,
but by no means limited to Gregory S Alexander, Kevin
Gray, Thomas C Grey,
Michael A Heller, Thomas W Merrill, Stephen R Munzer, Eduardo M Peñalver,
Margaret Jane Radin, Carol
M Rose, Joseph William Singer, Henry E Smith, Laura
Underkuffler and Jeremy Waldron.
James Penner and Michael Otsuka,
‘Preface’ in James Penner and Michael Otsuka (eds),
Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018)
Lisa M Austin, ‘The Public Nature
of Private Property’ in James Penner and Michael Otsuka (eds),
Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018)
Larissa Katz, ‘Legal Forms in
Property Law Theory’ in James Penner and Michael Otsuka (eds),
Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018)
The classic exposition is Thomas W
Merrill, ‘Property and the Right to Exclude’
(1998) 77(4)
Nebraska Law Review
James Y Stern, ‘What Is the
Right to Exclude and Why Does It Matter?’ in James Penner and Michael
Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 38; Christopher M Newman, ‘Using
Things, Defining Property’ in James Penner and Michael
Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University
Press, 2018) 69; Johan Olsthoorn, ‘Two Ways of Theorizing
“Collective Ownership of the Earth”’
in James Penner and
Michael Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 187.
Nicholas Sage, ‘Is Original
Acquisition Problematic?’ in James Penner and Michael Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University
Press, 2018) 99.
Michael Otsuka, ‘Appropriating
Lockean Appropriation on Behalf of Equality’ in James Penner and Michael
Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 121; James Penner, ‘Rights, Distributed
and Undistributed: On the Distributive Justice Implications
of Lockean Property
Rights, Especially in Land’ in James Penner and Michael Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University
Press, 2018) 138.
Norman P Ho, ‘Lockean Property
Theory in Confucian Thought: Property in the Thought of Wang Fuzhi
(1619–1692) and Huang
Zongxi (1610–1695)’ in James Penner and
Michael Otsuka (eds),
Property Theory: Legal and Political Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 2018) 161.
Otsuka (n 15) 121.
Penner (n 15) 138.
See especially Paul T Babie, Peter D
Burdon and Francesca da Rimini, ‘The Idea of Property: An Introductory
Empirical Assessment’
(2018) 40(3)
Houston Journal of International
; Paul T Babie et al, ‘The Idea of Property: A Comparative
Review of Recent Empirical Research Methods’
(2019) 26(2)
Journal of Global Legal Studies
See Katz, ‘Exclusion and
Exclusivity in Property Law’ (n 6).
Morris R Cohen, ‘Property and
Sovereignty’
(1927) 13(1)
Cornell Law Quarterly
Jeremy Bentham,
The Theory of
Legislation
, tr Richard Hildreth (Oceana Publications Inc, 1975) 69.
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon,
Qu’est-ce que la Propriété? Ou Recherche sur le Principe
du Droit et du Gouvernement
(Brocard, 1
Kevin Gray,
‘Property in Thin Air’
(1991) 50(2)
Cambridge Law Journal
Thomas C Grey, ‘The
Disintegration of Property’ in J Roland Pennock and John W Chapman (eds),
Property: Nomos XXII: Yearbook of the American Society for Political and
Legal Philosophy
(NYU Press, 1980) 69 (emphasis in original).
Yanner v Eaton
[1999] HCA 53
201 CLR 351.
And on this trend generally, see Michael A Heller, ‘The Three
Faces of Private Property’
(2000) 79(2)
Oregon Law Review
See Bethany R Berger, ‘What
Owners Want and Governments Do: Evidence from the Oregon Experiment’
(2009) 78(3)
Fordham Law Review
; Jonathan Remy Nash and Stephanie M
Stern, ‘Property Frames’
(2010) 87(3)
Washington University Law
See Krithika Ashok, Paul T Babie and
John V Orth, ‘Balancing Justice Needs and Private Property in
Constitutional Takings
Provisions: A Comparative Assessment of India, Australia,
and the United States’
(2019) 42(2)
Fordham International Law
Herbert Blumer,
Interactionism: Perspective and Method
(Prentice-Hall Inc, 1969)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (71.4 KB)
PDF format (162 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter