URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2021/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:14:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Leonard, Peter --- "Workplace surveillance and privacy" [2021] ANZCompuLawJl 16; (2021) 93 Computers & Law 60
Workplace surveillance and privacy 1
Workplace surveillance and
Peter Leonard
30 June 2020
What is privacy and surveillance? The problem statement
Reasonable and proportionate surveillance in a workplace can benefit
employers in many ways, including:
• improving safety and security of property and personnel,
• providing evidence that the employer is providing a safe system of
• increasing efficiency and performance of the business,
• enabling employee performance management,
• assisting in reducing adverse consequences of fatigue.
However, implementation of workplace surveillance often creates tension
between an employer and employees.
Determining what is reasonable and proportionate in workplace surveillance,
while taking into account human dignity, autonomy and
expectations of privacy,
is challenging.
The challenge increases when employees are observed and monitored outside a
traditional workplace and through non-obvious means, such
as where an employer
monitors the use of employer provided resources by employees working outside the
traditional workplace, and
24x7x365 monitoring or use of Bring Your Own
) smartphones and other employer funded devices. Many employers have
scrambled to enable remote working under COVID-19 restrictions
without first
evaluating whether associated monitoring was reasonable and proportionate. Upon
re-opening of workplaces, some employers
are implementing new technologies to
monitor workplace activities in order to address COVID-19 related health and
safety concerns.
Some employers do not think about the legality of workplace
surveillance at all, let alone whether particular surveillance activities
reasonable and proportionate.
Compliance with law and with good ethical principles is patchy, at best.
Without seeking to justify non-compliance, it should be noted that
understanding of Australian law governing employee surveillance
is limited,
among lawyers and employers. Despite growing awareness of data privacy law, the
laws governing business use of surveillance
technologies remains under analysed
and is often misunderstood.
It does not help that the relevant Australian laws are, to put it boldly, an
incoherent mess.
This paper will explain why that statement is not an exaggeration.
Let’s start by making sure that we know what we are going to talk
may be described in a general way as the interests a person
has in controlling what others know about them, in being left alone and
free from interference or intrusion: the ‘right to be let
different to
surveillance
Surveillance
, in its broad dictionary meaning of
watching over
is an everyday practice in which human beings engage routinely, often
unthinkingly. In statutes, surveillance generally has a more
specific usage,
referring to some focused and purposive attention to objects, data, or persons.
In this sense, surveillance is context-specific
and is ‘always hinged to
some specific purposes’.
Surveillance may be overt or covert, or a combination of both. Surveillance
may be described as ‘overt’ where the subject
of surveillance is
aware that surveillance is occurring, or the surveillance device is not
concealed – for example, CCTV cameras
in a bank. Surveillance may be
described as ‘covert’ where the subject of surveillance is not aware
that surveillance
is occurring, or the surveillance device is concealed –
for example, a listening device planted in a person’s car.
Data privacy laws and surveillance laws are intended to provide us with a
choice over how we interact with others and what others
get to know about us,
even as we go about our activities in public or semi-public locations such as
workplaces. Protection of privacy
is not dependent on classification of physical
spaces as public or private. We do not leave our legitimate expectations of
behind when we walk out the front door of our home, or into our
workplace. Of course, our reasonable expectations of privacy have
to flex, to
adapt to what it is reasonable for us to expect in the particular environment in
which we find ourselves. In a COVID-19
world, our reasonable expectations of
not put their
health at unacceptable risk, and our expectation as employees that
our employers will take all reasonable steps to ensure our health
and safety at
work. Even in a stressed COVID-19 world where personal health rightly becomes a
critical concern, the law should be
able to accommodate this flexing without, to
mix metaphors, throwing out the valued baby of a right to be left alone with the
of everyday necessity of walking down the street and going about our
Most data privacy laws are intended to empower individuals by informing them
how data about them may be being collected and used,
and thereby enable them to
exercise a choice. This is the ‘notice and choice’, or ‘notice
and consent’, framework
for data privacy regulation.
Critiques of this framework for data privacy regulation focus upon the
‘illusion of consent’, as described by Paul Ohm
and other privacy
scholars, or its more recent restatement by Dan Solove and others as ‘the
In brief, these
criticisms revolve around the problem of expecting affected individuals to
properly understand and make a choice
which affects the individual’s privacy, and particularly when there is
practical ability for each of us to say
that, but it might be OK if you did it this way other way...[insert here]
Consider the following scenarios:
• If a particular pathway between my bus stop and the office bristles
with CCTV and there are no other reasonably convenient
alternative routes, do I
exercise a choice to walk down that street and then become the
subject of CCTV surveillance?
• If my employer introduces iris scanning at the entrance to the
washrooms to determine whether I and others are spending too
long on our comfort
breaks (and, if my workplace is in NSW and Victoria, my employer gives me the
required 14 days’ prior notice),
have a choice? Where
is the regulatory control over my employer to ensure that my employer assesses
whether this surveillance is
a reasonable infringement upon my freedom to go
employer to implement surveillance in the least invasive way that is
reasonably practicable?
Some critiques of “notice and choice” suggest that this framework
needs to be supplemented, or replaced, by an additional
requirement of
demonstrated organisational accountability
of the entity that is
collecting, handling or disclosing personal information about the affected
individual, or instituting surveillance
of a human, identifiable or
In my iris scanning example, where is the control (whether in workplace
relations law, surveillance law, human rights law, or anywhere
else), so that my
• describes to an affected individual (viz. me) the purpose and extent
of a proposed surveillance that affects my ability to
go about my daily life
free from constant surveillance,
• ensures that this proposed surveillance is necessary and
proportionate to achieve a reasonable outcome, with reasonableness
consideration of the degree and extent of impact upon legitimate expectations of
health and safety of other individuals),
and the interests of my employer in profitably conducting business by operating
productive workplace.
After all, my capacity as an employee to object about what my employer is
doing is significantly constrained– particularly if
unemployment rates are
on the rise and I have kids and a mortgage.
Is my iris scanning example fanciful?
Jeremy Lee v Superior Wood Pty Ltd
[2019] FWCFB 2946
Bench of the Australian Fair Work Commission (
) determined that a
direction given to an employee to provide his fingerprint – his biometric
data – was not a lawful
and reasonable direction from the employer, and
consequently the employee’s refusal to comply with the new company policy
not a valid reason for his
Read carefully, this
decision turned on whether the employer implemented biometric identification
requirement only after following
the legally prescribed process. The FWC’s
determination (legally correctly) did not require a consideration of whether the
biometric identification requirement was itself reasonable.
It is of course fashionable in Australia to blame the government for just
is a thesis that needs
to be written about whether this is an Australian national characteristic born
of Australia’s convict
heritage and the near starvation of the infant
colony). In this case the zeitgeist is right:
• No Australian Parliament has enacted a baseline human rights statute
against which data privacy impacting acts and practices
of Australian entities
must be considered.
• Australian data privacy and surveillance statutes generally do not
tie particular statutory requirements back to any stated
right of privacy,
standard of reasonableness or fairness, or any test as to the necessity or
proportionality of the relevant, privacy
affecting, act or
We could fill this gap by workplace specific laws.
But what is so different about a workplace?
There are many places that I venture where I do not get to exercise a real
choice: a railway concourse, a pedestrian tunnel, the food
court downstairs from
my office, and so on.
Is this problem hard to fix?
Contrast, for example, the Personal Information Protection and Electronic
Documents Act of Canada (
), which relevantly provides as follows:
Appropriate purposes
5(3) An organization may collect, use or disclose personal information only
for purposes that a reasonable person would consider are
appropriate in the
circumstances
Valid consent
6.1 For the purposes of clause 4.3 [PIPEDA Fair Information Principle 3
– Consent”] of Schedule 1, the consent of an individual
valid if it is reasonable to expect that an individual to whom the
organization’s activities are directed would understand
the nature,
purpose and consequences of the collection, use or disclosure of the personal
information to which they are consenting.
In applying subsection 5(3), Canadian courts have generally taken into
consideration whether the collection, use or disclosure of
personal information
is directed to a bona fide business interest, and whether the loss of privacy is
proportional to any benefit
The following factors have been stated to be relevant in determination of
whether an organization’s purpose complies with subsection
• the degree of sensitivity of the personal information at issue;
• whether the organization’s purpose represents a legitimate need
/ bona fide business
• interest;
• whether the collection, use and disclosure would be effective in
meeting the organization’s need;
• whether there are less invasive means of achieving the same ends at
comparable cost and with comparable benefits; and
• whether the loss of privacy is proportional to the
Could we adapt this standard and build it into Australian surveillance
statutes? After all, the purported right of choice to be the
surveillance is problematic, unless:
• coupled with incentives to or constraints upon entities collecting,
using or disclosing personal information, and
• those incentives or constraints operate to ensure outcomes which are
not reasonable having regard to the extent and impact
of the activities of the
regulated entities upon data privacy rights of affected individuals.
There are relatively few provisions in data privacy laws today:
• that create
no-go zones
(i.e. prohibitions on CCTV in
changerooms and toilets) as to collection or use of workplace related data, or
• that hard code controls and safeguards as to what an employer can ask
of an employee by way of consent to workplace monitoring
or surveillance, even
where these activities significantly impact an employee’s reasonable
expectations of privacy.
Walk right in
workplace surveillance
Because notice and consent largely govern workplace surveillance, the
baseline below which workplace surveillance is
acceptable is largely
left to workplace bargaining, as partially constrained by general employment law
Fair Work Act 2009
That noted, there may be other restrictions on the use of surveillance
devices in the workplace which impact employers: conditions
in enterprise
agreements, employment contracts, workplace policies or subcontractor agreements
which prohibit the use of those devices
All enterprise agreements have dispute resolution clauses that enable
disputes to be arbitrated by the
The implementation or
expansion of workplace surveillance has regularly led to disputes between
employers and employees that have
been arbitrated. Experience to date is that
the FWC will generally accept that the use of workplace surveillance is
justifiable if
there has been compliance with relevant State or Territory laws
and the surveillance is demonstrated to be for a legitimate purpose,
ensure compliance with work health and safety obligations.
However, without no-go zones, or hard-coded upfront controls, and with the
ability of many employers to exert influence over employees
‘consent’, some employers (deliberately or inadvertently) cross the
blurred line between
Which leads to the three key questions of workplace privacy:
• What is a workplace?
• What should be an employee’s
reasonable expectations of
within a workplace?
• What are the workplace privacy boundaries that reasonable employers
should observe?
Our changing workplace
• The range and depth of workplace data has exploded. Means of
collection of data about our workplace activities have
proliferated.
Those means are
increasingly automated and remote from the employee unobserved and potentially
• There are many good reasons for collection and analysis by employers
of workplace data about activities of employees. For
some business activities,
monitoring is becoming commonplace for quality control or assurance, for risk
management (i.e. of driver
) or as a regulatory
requirement (e.g. rules on traders in securities and new regulatory requirements
such as the EU’s ‘Markets
in Financial Instruments Directive
) requires that anyone involved in giving financial
service and/or advice that leads to, or may lead to, a transaction, must record
their conversation – including mobile – and securely store these
• Our workplaces have merged with our homes. For many of us, our
workplace is now agile, a virtual place we construct anywhere,
anytime, from
bits and pieces carried in a backpack and using an internet connection. And in
lockdown, our workplace is anywhere
at home where we can get away from other
noisy occupants.
• Many laptops, smartphones and online resources (like Microsoft365
cloud services) that we use are made available or paid for
by the employer, but
also permitted to be used for personal, social and family activities. Some
employees would prefer their employers
not to know about some of those
activities, and some of those activities are frankly none of their
employer’s business, even
if the employer pays for the device or service.
• Cyberthreats and data exfiltrations have rightly led to employer
concerns over the management of confidential and commercially
information on devices on which we work and online resources that we access and
• Humans are fallible. Work related data is as accessible as the
weakest vulnerability point in the work data ecosystem allows
it to be found.
And sometimes that weakest point is the CEO’s iPad.
• An employee who is rogue or careless with data is creating large
financial and reputational exposures for employers, through
data breach
liability (i.e. Morrisons
Supermarkets
) or damage from
other data exfiltrations (i.e. the Panama Papers, Paradise Papers (Glenmore, the
ATO and Operation Wickenby) and
• The careless employee who is careless or dumb in posting silly or
actionable things on social media may also create financial
and reputational
exposures for employers (i.e. Jason Cleary and his admirers).
There are four main types of privacy protected by laws in some jurisdictions:
the person,
bodily privacy
—the interest in
freedom from interference with an individual’s physical person and bodily
integrity, including from direct
and indirect physical intrusions. It may also
include psychological intrusion.
personal space,
territorial privacy
interest in limiting intrusion into personal spaces, including in the home,
workplace and in public. This concerns a person’s
sense of personal safety
and dignity as well as their property rights.
personal communications,
communications and
surveillance privacy
—the interest in freedom from interference with
personal communications, including interception, recording, monitoring or
surveillance.
personal information,
data privacy
interest in controlling access to, use and disclosure of information about the
person, including images and information
‘derived from analysis’ of
other data.
Australian statutes generally only protect
communications and surveillance
data privacy
, and then only in limited circumstances.
Surveillance
, in the broad sense of watching over, is an everyday
practice in which human beings engage routinely, often unthinkingly.
Different forms of surveillance capture different types of
Listening or audio surveillance
—listening to or
recording sounds, usually conversations. This may be done with the assistance of
aids to enhance human hearing,
such as directional microphones, voice recorders
or ‘bugs’. It may also include intercepting communications, such as
phone conversations or voice communications over the internet.
Optical or visual surveillance
—watching a person or
place. It may be undertaken with the assistance of aids to enhance human vision,
such as telescopes or
infra-red binoculars. It may also include the use of
devices that can record or stream images, such as cameras, video recorders or
Data surveillance
—the systematic use of personal data
systems in the investigation or monitoring of the actions or communications of
one or more
persons. It may include surveillance of a person’s electronic
records, including those relating to credit cards or loyalty
cards, email
communications or computer usage and internet activities using tools such as
cookies, keystroke monitoring or spyware.
Tracking or location surveillance
—the observation or
recording of a target’s location. Location data may capture the location
of a person or object at
a point in time or monitor a person’s movements
in real-time. It may also involve predictive tracking or retrospective tracking,
based on the data trail of a person’s movements. Examples of location and
tracking devices include global positioning system
(GPS) and satellite
technology tracking, radio frequency identification (
), and automatic
number plate recognition (
Biometric surveillance
—the collection or recording of
biological samples and physical or behavioural characteristics, usually for the
purpose of identifying
an individual. This may include fingerprints, cheek
swabs, iris scans and blood. It may also include alertness monitors installed
trucks, smart caps monitoring driver fatigue, and so on.
That noted, Australian statutes addressing
surveillance
generally do
surveillance
And as well, many Australian statutes addressing
data protection
statutes, but do not actually define what
is, or how rules about collection, use and disclosure of personal
information about individuals actually address privacy.
As already noted above, a fundamental problem of workplace privacy in
Australia is that Australian data protection statutes and surveillance
statutes generally follow a notice and choice framework: that is, prohibiting
collection, use or disclosure of personal information
particular forms of surveillance, unless prior notice is given to the affected
person. Sometimes that right
of choice is reinforced by a right to consent, or
withhold consent, but often provision of reasonably prominent notice discharges
the statutory obligation. Many surveillance activities can occur without an
individual being asked for consent, and without any practical
ability to refuse
consent. And so we see more and more CCTV cameras in semi-public places, with
notices saying you may be being observed,
but without any ability to turn the
camera off.
Most Australian surveillance statutes permit use of a surveillance device,
however privacy invasive the particular use may be, where
that use is with the
prior consent of the person surveilled. And as we have noted, that is the heart
of the problem: for there to
be a real choice, an ability to withhold consent,
there needs to be a practical ability to choose to say no.
The employment relationship is a strange beast. Modern workplace lawyers like
to make a distinction between a
contract of service
contract of
, a contract of servitude being what servants and slaves like
Maximus Decimus Meridius
back in the bad old days before the reign of Bob
. If your employer can
decide when and how you are observed and monitored, and now the employer has the
practical ability to do that
wherever and whenever the employee purports to work
(through monitoring of use workplace supplied devices and services), have you
been digitally teleported back into a contract of servitude?
Where is the legal protection to ensure that workplace surveillance is fair,
reasonably necessary and proportionate to the need for
your employer to provide
a safe work environment?
(and State and Territory information privacy
Many employers are not aware of how regulation of data privacy and how
regulation of use of surveillance and tracking devices interests
and impacts
what employers can do, how and when.
Many more Australian businesses are regulated by the
) than think that they are.
applies to:
• any entity within a corporate group that turns over more than AU$3
million in global gross group revenue per annum, and
• various other entities, including organisations providing services
pursuant to federal government contracts and so on.
There is a relatively narrow employee records exemption under the
section 7B(3)
, an act done, or practice engaged in, by an APP entity
that is or was an employer of an individual
, is exempt if the act or
practice is directly related to:
(a) a current or former employment relationship between the employer and the
individual; and
(b) an employee record held by the organisation and relating to the
individual.
employee record
is defined under
section 6(1)
mean a record of personal information relating to the employment of the
This exemption does not cover contractors and subcontractors when they handle
the personal information of the employees of another
organisation,
notwithstanding their contractual arrangements.
Examples include health information about an employee, as well as personal
information relating to:
• the engagement, training, disciplining, resignation or termination of
employment of an employee
• the terms and conditions of employment of an employee
• the employee's personal and emergency contact details, performance or
conduct, hours of employment or salary or wages
• the employee's membership of a professional or trade association or
trade union membership
• the employee's recreation, long service, sick, maternity, paternity
or other leave
• the employee's taxation, banking or superannuation
Many employers and lawyers think that this exemption is much broader than it
actually is.
For example, it clearly does not give a green light for workplace
surveillance, and it arguably does not include collections that
are not yet
The above noted, the view of the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner is clear:
(Privacy Act) doesn’t specifically cover
surveillance in the workplace.
However, an employer who conducts surveillance or monitors their staff must
follow any relevant Australian, state or territory laws.
This includes laws
applying to the monitoring and recording of telephone conversations.
Generally, state laws cover the installation and use of CCTV, and some states
also have specific workplace surveillance laws.
It may be reasonable for an employer to monitor some activities to ensure
staff are doing their work and using resources appropriately.
If your employer
monitors staff use of email, internet and other computer resources, and
they’ve told you about the monitoring,
this would generally be allowed.
If an employer keeps a record of their monitoring then the Australian Privacy
Principles may apply. For example, a CCTV video recording
or a computer record
of emails that doesn’t directly relate to your
employment.
Telecommunications privacy
Telecommunications Interception and Access Act 1979
prohibits live interception of the interception of content of
communications and access to stored communications (such as emails,
voicemails) on certain communications infrastructure.
The TIA Act sets out certain exceptions to these prohibitions to permit
eligible Australian law enforcement and security agencies
• obtain warrants to intercept communications;
• obtain warrants to access stored communications;
• authorise the disclosure of telecommunications data.
Agencies can only obtain warrants or give authorisations for national
security or law enforcement purposes set out in the TIA Act.
State and Territory surveillance and tracking devices laws
There are State and Territory surveillance and tracking devices laws in all
States and Territories. These laws are outdated, inconsistent,
poorly understood
(including by lawyers), and in some cases, simply poorly
For example:
• It is unclear whether a multi-purpose device like a mobile phone or a
courier despatching system is in fact a regulated surveillance
tracking device when geolocation information is captured and used.
• In some statutes it is unclear whether an act or practice which is
not directly within the offence provision but is within
the description of
matters requiring notice and consent as stated by the statute is in fact
• The position in relation to employer monitoring of calls, emails and
instant messages sent from third party senders to employees
significantly: some State statutes appear to require two party (sender and
recipient) consent, others (Victoria, Queensland
and the ACT) allow one party to
consent (sometimes referred to as a ‘participant monitoring
exception’).
The statutes take a variety of forms, but they generally require prior
consent of an affected individual to uses of surveillance devices
or tracking
devices to monitor their activities, and provide criminal offences for
conventions.
There is considerable ambiguity in the individual statutes about the level of
specificity, extent and clarity of information required
to establish that a
consent is ‘informed’. Where vague and general information is
offered, particularly in relation to
the identity of third parties who may get
access to the information, consent may not be properly ‘informed’.
many surveillance notices and other disclosures, like many privacy
policies, are vague.
Consent may also be sought for a wide range of collections, uses or
disclosures which are not essential to the provision of a particular
service. In
many circumstances, the subject has little practical choice but to consent.
The most comprehensive laws governing workplace surveillance are in New South
Wales and the Australian Capital Territory, where workplace
specific controls
clearly aim to balance the need for security and safety in the workplace with an
employee’s right to privacy.
In Victoria, the regulation of workplace surveillance is embedded in the
Surveillance Devices Act 1999
(Vic). The Act prohibits the use of
surveillance devices in the workplace in toilets, washrooms, change rooms and
lactation rooms.
South Australia, Tasmania, Western Australia, the Northern Territory and
Queensland do not have specific workplace surveillance laws
in place. Workplace
surveillance is there covered by general privacy and surveillance laws.
Queensland has a current law reform reference as to the need for specific
workplace surveillance laws.
Victoria has a long standing law reform reference which seems to have slipped
down the agenda.
“Workplace” surveillance statutes have a built-in problem:
although they permit certain forms of (prior notified) surveillance
employee is ‘at work’, whether in a recognised workplace or at home
or on the move, in flexible work environments
nowadays, how does an employer
know when an employee is
In summary, surveillance and tracking devices laws are an inconsistent and
sometimes incoherent patchwork,
at a time when the use of surveillance and tracking in workplaces and elsewhere
is rapidly proliferating. Workplace surveillance
laws are part of this
NSW and ACT workplace surveillance legislation
NSW and the ACT have specific workplace surveillance statutes: the
Workplace Surveillance Act 2005
The NSW and ACT statutes include qualified
prohibitions
surveillance”
covert surveillance records and require notice to be given to employees at least
14 days prior to surveillance commencing
which includes details of:
• the type of surveillance to be carried out;
• how the surveillance will be carried out;
• when the surveillance will commence;
• whether the surveillance will be continuous or intermittent; and
• whether the surveillance will be for a specified limited period or
In the ACT it is also necessary to include in the notice:
• who the regular or ordinary subject of the surveillance will be;
• the purpose for which the employer may use and disclose the
surveillance; and
• that the worker may consult with the employer about the conduct of
the surveillance.
NSW and the ACT also have specific provisions in place in relation to the
need for notices on vehicles that are the subject of tracking,
monitoring policies, notices identifying that cameras are operating in the
workplace and the visibility of the cameras in
the workplace.
Workplace Surveillance Act 2005
surveillance
(not a defined term) of an
by any of the following means:
camera surveillance
, which is surveillance by means of a camera
that monitors or records visual images of activities on premises or in any other
computer surveillance
, which is surveillance by means of software
or other equipment that monitors or records the information input or output, or
use, of a computer (including, but not limited to, the sending and receipt
of emails and the accessing of Internet websites),
tracking surveillance
, which is surveillance by means of an
electronic device the primary purpose of which is to monitor or record
geographical location
or movement (such as a Global Positioning System tracking
The NSW definition of
surveillance
includes a note:
“This Act does not apply to surveillance by means of a listening device.
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
surveillance that is regulated by this Act will also be regulated by the
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
if the camera is used to record a private
conversation.”
provides an express “prohibition on surveillance using work
surveillance device while employee not at work”:
(1) An employer must not carry out, or cause to be carried out, surveillance
of an employee of the employer using a work surveillance
device when the
employee is not at work for the employer unless the surveillance is computer
surveillance of the use by the employee
of equipment or resources provided by or
at the expense of the employer.
Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units.
work surveillance device
is a device used for surveillance of
the employee when at work for the employer.
(3) This section does not apply to the carrying out, or causing to be carried
out, of surveillance by an employer that is a law enforcement
Workplace Privacy Act 2011
(ACT) addresses
surveillance
(not a defined term) of a worker
a workplace
being “a place where work is, has been, or is to be, carried out by or
for someone conducting a business or undertaking”,
by any of the following
data surveillance device
(a) [which] means a device or program capable of being used to record or
monitor the input of information into or the output of information
computer; but
(b) does not include an optical surveillance device.
optical surveillance device
(a) [which] means a device capable of being used to record visually or
observe an activity; but
(b) does not include spectacles, contact lenses or a similar device used by a
person with impaired sight to overcome that impairment.
provision in the ACT is quite different from that in
Surveillance of workers not at work
(1) An employer commits an offence if the employer conducts surveillance of a
worker if the worker is not in a workplace.
Maximum penalty: 50 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if—
(a) the employer conducts surveillance of a worker’s use of equipment
or resources provided by the employer using a data surveillance
(b) the employer conducts surveillance using a tracking device that includes
a tracking function that cannot be deactivated; or
(c) the employer is a law enforcement agency.
Note The employer has an evidential burden in relation to the matters
mentioned in s (2) (see Criminal Code, s 58).
(3) For subsection (2) (a), equipment or resources are taken to be provided
by an employer if the employer has met the cost of the
equipment or
Disclosure and use of surveillance records is specifically regulated in each
of NSW and the ACT. To disclose surveillance records
in NSW and the ACT one of
the following conditions must be met:
• there must be a legitimate purpose related to the employment of the
employees or the business activities or functions of the
• disclosure is to a member or officer of a law enforcement agency and
is for use in connection with the detection, investigation
or prosecution of an
• use or disclosure is for a purpose directly or indirectly related to
the taking of criminal or civil proceedings
• use or disclosure is reasonably believed to be necessary to avert an
imminent threat of serious violence to persons or substantial
Other statutes regulating the use of surveillance
Other statutes regulating the use of surveillance devices in each Australian
Surveillance Devices Act 2004
Invasion of Privacy Act 1971
Listening Devices Act 1992
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
Surveillance
Devices Regulation 2014
Surveillance Devices Act 2007
Surveillance Devices
Regulations 2008
Surveillance Devices Act 2016
Surveillance Devices
Regulations 2017
Listening Devices Act 1991
Listening Devices
Regulations 2014
Surveillance Devices Act 1999
Surveillance
Devices Regulations 2016
Surveillance Devices Act 1998
Surveillance Devices
Regulations 1999
These laws provide criminal offences for the unauthorised use of up to four
categories of device (variously defined in the statutes):
1. listening devices
(some laws only cover these) – all
2. optical surveillance devices
– but not in Qld or Tasmania or
3. tracking devices
– but not in Qld or Tasmania or the
4. data surveillance devices
– but not in WA or Qld or Tasmania
The statutes prohibit installation or operation of surveillance devices
except in certain circumstances, generally if there is authorisation
in the form
of a warrant or consent for the purposes of law enforcement or criminal
investigation.
They also prohibit communicating or publishing certain information, including
information derived from the surveillance device, and
also information about the
use of the device which may reveal confidential operations and methods of law
enforcement and security
services using such devices.
I’m not going to bore you by repeating myself. Workplace surveillance
laws in Australia are a mess and not fit for purpose.
Employers and employees
deserve better. This should not be hard to fix, if there is political will: see
section 1 of this paper.
Leonard (Data Synergies) 2020 This paper was delivered in the ANU Ninian Stephen
Cyber Law Program of the Cyber
Institute of the Australian National University
https://www.menziesfoundation.org.au/what-we-do/law-program#
Peter Leonard is a data,
content and technology business consultant and lawyer advising data-driven
business and government agencies.
Peter is principal of Data Synergies and a
Professor of Practice at UNSW Business School (IT Systems and Management, and
and Taxation Law). Peter chairs the IoTAA’s Data Access, Use and
Committee and the Australian Computer Society’s Artificial Intelligence
and Ethics Technical Committee. He
serves on a number of corporate and advisory
boards. Peter was a founding partner of Gilbert + Tobin, now a large Australian
firm. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and not
those of any of those other bodies and organisations.
See further Cohen, Julie,
‘What is Privacy For’
Harvard Law Review
Nissenbaum, Helen,
of Social Life
, Stanford, CA, Stanford Law Books, 2010.
See further Queensland Law
Reform Commission, Review of Queensland’s laws relating to civil
surveillance and the protection
of privacy in the context of current and
emerging technologies: Consultation Paper, December 2018.
Ohm, Paul, ‘Broken
Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising Failure of
Anonymization’,
UCLA Law Review
; Ohm, Paul,
“Changing the Rules: General Principles for Data Use and Analysis, in
Lane, Julia I.,
, New York: Cambridge University Press (2014), 96-111 Solove,
Daniel J, “Privacy Self-Management and the Consent Dilemma”
Harvard Law Review
As summarised by Christopher
Docksey ‘Keynote on Accountability At the 41st Conference of Data
Protection and Privacy Commissioners’
(Key Note Address, Tirana, Albania,
24 October 2019); Marty Abrams, ‘Demonstrable Accountability and People
Beneficial Data
(Blog Post, 24 March 2020), Marc Groman
and Peter Cullen, ‘Take the Long View: Demonstrable Accountability’
(Blog Post,
13 April 2020); and Lynne Goldstein, “Bermuda Report on
Information Accountability: Prepared by the Information Accountability
Foundation for the Office of the Privacy Commissioner for Bermuda”, 28
March 2020, all available at
https://informationaccountability.org
See also Centre for
Information Policy Leadership (
), Organizational Accountability
– Past, Present and Future, 30 October 2019,
https://www.informationpolicycentre.com/uploads/5/7/1/0/57104281/cipl_white_paper_organisational_accountability_
%E2%80%93_past_present_and_future__30_october_2019_.pdf
The reason for dismissal must
be valid in the context of the employee’s capacity or conduct.
Consideration of valid reason
must have regard for the practical sphere of the
relationship between an employer and an employee, balancing the rights,
privileges,
duties and obligations conferred and imposed on each to ensure a
fair outcome:
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
[1995] IRCA 333
(1995) 62 IR 371
However, it should be noted
that where there is genuine doubt as to whether the statutory language
authorises a particular act or
practice, “as a statement of general
principle, legislation such as the
should, as far as the statutory
language permits, be construed so as to give effect to Australia’s
international obligations
(see, for example,
NBGM v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural Affairs
[2006] HCA 54
per Callinan,
Crennan JJ and
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs v QAAH of 2004
[2006] HCA 53
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner of Canada, ‘Guidance on Inappropriate Data Practices:
Interpretation and Application of
Subsection 5(3)’ (Guidance Note,, May
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/collecting-personal-information/consent/gd_53_201805/
“Evaluating an organization’s purposes under 5(3)”; A.T. v.
Globe24h.com,
2017 FC 114
A.T. v. Globe24h.com,
; Ibid; see also
Turner v. Telus Communications Inc.
, 39, affirmed
2007 FCA 21
If you guessed it, well
done! Sung by The Rooftop Singers in the chart topping 1962 version. But did you
know the song was written
by early country musician Gus Cannon and originally
recorded by Cannon's Jug Stompers in 1929 and released as a 78 rpm record?
Fair Work Ombudsman, Best
Practice Guide: Workplace Privacy
https://www.fairwork.gov.au/how-we-will
Fair Work Ombudsman, Best
Practice Guide: Effective Dispute Resolution
https://www.fairwork.gov.au/how-we-will
See further Peter Leonard,
‘Data Ownership and the Regulation of Data Driven Businesses’,
Scitech Lawyer (American Bar
Association), 16/2, Winter 2020.
For example
http://www.smartcaptech.com/
nd case studies a
http://www.smartcaptech.com/case-study/
https://www.nhvr.gov.au/news/2018/12/14/new-smartcap-fatigue-technology-trial-kicks-off-to-improve-heavy-vehicle
safety-around-port-of
By section 5 of the NSW
Workplace Surveillance Act 2005
No 475, the meaning of “at
work” is “an employee is at work for an employer when the employee
is: (a) at a workplace
of the employer (or a related corporation of the
employer) whether or not the employee is actually performing work at the time,
(b) at any other place while performing work for the employer (or a related
corporation of the employer)”.
WM Morrison Supermarkets
plc (Appellant) v Various Claimants (Respondents)
[2020] UKSC 12
[2018] EWCA Civ 2339)
; compare Information and Privacy Commission (NSW),
NSW Informational Privacy Rights: Legislative Scope and Interpretation
– Employer, Employee, and Agent Responsibilities –
A Special Report
under Section 61C
(Report,2017); Anna Johnston, ‘Salinger Privacy, Training is Key to
Avoiding Liability for Rogue Employees, (
, 1 October 2019),
https://www.salingerprivacy.com.au/2019/10/01/training-is-key/
Director General, Department of Education and Training v MT
DGL v Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health District
NSWCATAD 296.
See further Peter Leonard,
‘Surviving as Data Driven Lawyers in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution’ (Research Paper, February
http://marburychambers.com.au/wp-content/uploads/Peter-Leonard-Surviving-as-data-driven-lawyers-in-the-Fourth
Industrial-Revolution-230319.pdf
Queensland Law Reform
Commission, ‘Review of Queensland’s Laws Relating to Civil
Surveillance and the Protection of Privacy
in the Context of Current and
Emerging Technologies’ (Consultation Paper, December 2018).
Well done, Millennials, that
was Russell Crowe in
which was released (just into this
Millennium) in 2020. And for those who got it wrong, Mel Gibson was initially
considered for the
role, but turned down because he was too old.
No footnote required: even
‘bums’ that weren’t born then should get this reference.
However, just in case: “
Any boss who sacks anyone for not turning up
today is a bum
”. The late and great Mr Hawke later quipped about this
I'm very proud of it in one way [and] very disappointed that all
the other, many brilliant things I've said are never mentioned
https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-for-organisations/employee-records-exemption/
Jeremy Lee v Superior
Wood Pty Ltd
[2019] FWCFB 2946
www.fwc.gov.au/documents/decisionssigned/html/2019fwcfb2946.htm
http://www.peteraclarke.com.au/2019/07/01/jeremy-lee-v-superior-wood-pty-ltd-breach-of-the-privacy-act-biometric
data-unfair-dismissal/
https://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/your-privacy-rights/employment/workplace-surveillance/
QF & Others and Spotless Group Limited (Privacy)
[2019] AICmr
, the employer gave employees' details to the Australian Workers Union and
paid their membership fees, without their consent. The
OAIC found that
disclosure of employees' information to a union by the employer had insufficient
connection with the employment relationship
to fall within the exemption.
“To fall within the exemption under s 7B(3), the act or practice must be
directly related to
the employment relationship, and not merely an act or
practice having an indirect, consequential or remote effect on that
relationship”:
para 49. The employer was ordered to pay $60,000
compensation (including aggravated damages) to fourteen employees and a former
See further Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era
(Discussion Paper No 80, 2014) Chapter 13 (Surveillance Devices); Peter Leonard,
Surveillance of workplace communications: What Are
the Rules?’ (August
; Daniel Stewart, Review of ACT Civil
Surveillance Regulation, June 2016, at
https://justice.act.gov.au/sites/default/files/resources/uploads/JACS/PDF/Daniel_Stewart_-
_Review_of_ACT_Civil_Surveillance_Regulation_-_Report_22_June_2016.PD
Queensland Law Reform Commission, Review of Queensland’s laws Relating to
Civil Surveillance and the Protection of Privacy
in the Context of Current and
Emerging Technologies: Consultation Paper, December 2018, a
https://www.qlrc.qld.gov.au/current-reviews
Terms of Reference for
Queensland's Laws Relating to Workplace Surveillance, 24 July 2018; Joanna
Betteridge, Maddocks, Privacy and
Surveillance in the Workplace (Victoria),
February 2003; Victorian Law Reform Commission, Workplace Privacy: Final
https://www.lawreform.vic.gov.au/projects/workplace-privacy/workplace-privacy-final-report
Workplace Privacy
https://www.lawreform.vic.gov.au/all-projects/workplace-privacy
See further Australian Law
Reform Commission,
Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era
25), ‘13. Surveillance Devices’ particularly at [13.3]
https://www.legislation.nsw.gov.au/#/view/act/2005/47/part1/sec3
https://www.legislation.act.gov.au/a/2011-4
In ACT, Division 4.3 and
section 39; in NSW, sections 21 and 22.
In NSW, “surveillance
of an employee while at work for an employer carried out or caused to be carried
out by the employer
and not carried out in compliance with the requirements of
Part 2”; in the ACT, “covert surveillance” (a) means
surveillance of a worker in a workplace conducted by an employer without
notifying the worker under part 3 (Notified surveillance);
but (b) does not
include prohibited surveillance [see Part 5 of the Act.].”
“Employee” has
the same meaning as in the
Industrial Relations Act 1996
Definition of
“surveillance” in
“Worker” means
an individual who carries out work in relation to a business or undertaking,
whether for reward or otherwise,
under an arrangement with the person conducting
the business or undertaking. Examples—worker 1 employee; 2 independent
contractor;
3 outworker; 4 person doing a work experience placement and 5
“Workplace”
means a place where work is, has been, or is to be, carried out by or for
someone conducting a business or
undertaking:
section 10.
The statutes are usefully
compared in Daniel Stewart, Review of ACT Civil Surveillance Regulation, June
2016, at, Appendix 2; Queensland
Law Reform Commission, Review of
Queensland’s laws relating to civil surveillance and the protection of
of current and emerging technologies: Consultation Paper,
December 2018, at Appendix B, p133; and David Vaile, Monika Zalnieriute
Lyria Bennett Moses, The privacy and data protection regulatory framework for
C-ITS and AV systems Report for the National Transport
Commission, Appendix E
from page 98.
Only listening devices are
covered in the
Listening Devices Act 1992
(ACT). All devices are covered
Crimes (Surveillance
Devices) Act 2010
(ACT), but as in
Surveillance Devices Act
(Cth), unauthorised use is not prohibited
NSW, the NT, SA and Victoria
have laws specifically relevant to vehicles, namely a prohibition on tracking
devices in vehicles
Only listening devices are
covered in the
Listening Devices Act 1992
(ACT). All devices are covered
Crimes (Surveillance Devices) Act 2010
(ACT), but as in
Surveillance Devices Act
(Cth), unauthorised use is not
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
PDF format (1.26 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter