URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Haider, Mostafa --- "Performing Community in an International Law Classroom" [2025] WALawTRw 7; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 91
PERFORMING COMMUNITY IN AN
INTERNATIONAL LAW CLASSROOM
MOSTAFA HAIDER
This article explores the challenges of teaching community in an
international law classroom. It does this in the context of a core
component of a Public International Law unit, namely reflective participation in
classroom discussion, that the author
teaches at Curtin Law School. The article
highlights the importance of students’ engagement in class discussion and
a performance analysis to the structure of in-class discussion. It
locates community as an open, malleable and contested theme in
international
legal scholarship. While the article engages with selected readings on community
from a Public International Law unit,
it argues that students and teachers
experience community anew every time they perform it in a classroom. It
reformulates community
as a political sublime by recourse to a performative lens
to class participation and reflects on the hope that this reformulation
generates for international law students of today and global policymakers of
I INTRODUCTION
In keeping with the theme of the 2024
Australian Teachers of Law
(‘WATOL’) conference, this article
explores the thinking about and practice of community in my own teaching. This
asks: How does the idea of community fare in my Public International Law
class that I have been teaching now for some years? It considers
the many facets
of community in international law and in the teaching of it. It particularly
looks at the remaking of community through
the mundane discussion of it in a
Public International Law (hereafter ‘international law’) classroom.
Community is, like most ideas and themes in international law, open to
diverse interpretations.
openness is often due to international law’s entanglement with global
Much of what
students and teachers of international law do, by way of teaching and research,
is at once legal and political and often
the distinction is not
It is hard to engage in
international law topics including community without encountering those that are
considered political.
The article does not, however, attempt to disentangle law from politics to
make sense of community. Instead, the article approaches
community as a
performative sublime in the context of my international law classroom
discussion. It argues that classroom discussion
often renders community a
political sublime which is experienced anew every time students and I perform
it. It does this by drawing
inspiration from contemporary critique of expertise
that combines performance analysis with aesthetic theory. The article suggests
that as students and teachers perform community in the classroom, they are more
likely to embrace a more context-specific, progressive
and egalitarian posture
of community than an abstract textual interpretation of and attachment to it.
The article has four substantive parts. First, Part II lays out the settings
of an international law class that inculcates an open
and reflective debate of
international law topics among students. Part III briefly looks at the concept
of international community
and the inherently contested nature of this concept.
Part IV looks at what is at stake in the discussion of community in my
international
law class, which I frame as community in struggle drawing on Fleur
Johns’ work. Part V reconstructs community as a performative
the face of the enormous challenges of grasping the struggles and intricacies
associated with community. Finally, by way
of conclusion, the article reflects
further on the hopes of remaking community in an international law classroom and
beyond. But
before all else, we must understand the basics of the unit and
assessment, which will set the scene for the later discussion.
II THE STRUCTURE OF CLASS DISCUSSION IN PUBLIC
INTERNATIONAL LAW
I teach Public International Law as a five-week intensive trimester unit at
Curtin Law School. This means that all lectures and tutorials
are conducted
within the first five weeks of teaching. The unit is part of the elective
offerings and student numbers typically range
between 10 and 20. As a relatively
small unit, I have been entrusted with unit coordination as well as all lectures
and tutorials
of this unit for the past seven years. Currently it has three
assessments: reflective participation (assessment 1), presentation
selected theme of international law (assessment 2) and a research paper on an
international law topic (assessment 3).
Assessment 1 has two interrelated parts. Part 1 of assessment 1
comprises individual participation by students in class discussion.
Part 2 of assessment 1 comprises a very short written paper based on
students’ reflections on participation and discussion
in tutorial class.
The basics of part 1 are that students are required to read a few prescribed
readings and then discuss them in
class. The readings are predominantly
scholarly articles and book chapters. The discussion of the prescribed reading
in the classroom
is centred around three general questions, which are as
1. What have you made of the article/book chapter? Explain, in your own
words, the key takeaway from each of the readings.
2. Are there any ideas/reasoning/arguments/examples from each of the readings
that strike you as particularly interesting? Explain,
by reference to the
reading, why, in your view, the idea/reasoning/example is interesting.
3. Do you think that the paper is well written and well substantiated?
Explain whether or not the author has provided strong evidence
to support their
assertions and/or argument(s).
Students are expected to structure their reading of the prescribed
article/book chapter by recourse to the three questions above which
evidently open and wide. Reading an article/book chapter means having a
conversation with the author of the piece. This exercise
requires students to
continue that conversation with their peers and tutor in class. The three
questions, in short, serve as a basis
for opening up the conversations with each
other in class. The idea is that an open and inquisitive reading and engagement
to sharpen students’ independent thinking and analysis, which
will be helpful for both assessments 2 and 3, that is, the presentation
research paper.
Recent scholarship has characterised class participation as among the
‘enablers of student academic
performance’.
That is, that student-centred approaches to learning are key to participation,
although there is some critique of centring students
too much in the process of
This article
is not, however, about the pedagogical value of class participation. Suffice to
say, class participation as a mode of
knowledge production has increasingly been
in vogue in recent years.
I have a different pedagogical intuition for the assessment 1 part 1 class
discussion. Inspired by an innovative study on law, expertise
performativity,
imagine the classroom more as a theatre and the class discussion as a
I am both an actor and
spectator in the classroom drama even though formally I play the role of a
moderator and marker. Class performances
reenact some basic ideas and structures
in international law. Thus, a dramatic performance lens better serves the
purpose of the
assessment 1 class
discussion.
It is within this creative and dramatic setting that students and I broach
the idea of community. International lawyers use community
in both singular and
plural sense. In its singular manifestation, international lawyers often refer
to the ‘international community’
and in its plural manifestation,
communities of various modes and interpretations are at play in international
law. Despite being
a ubiquitous concept in international law, the unit does not
have a separate topic entitled ‘community’. Instead, community
remains an overarching theme in international law. The next two parts look at
what thinking of community is at work in international
law in general and in my
teaching of it in particular.
III ‘INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY’
International law textbooks frequently use the term ‘international
community’ without specifying what exactly they mean
is the case with commentators, including my international law class students, as
they often use the term without necessarily
clarifying what they mean by
‘international community’. Beyond textbooks, international lawyers
have written a lot on
the topic of ‘international community’ and
debate community in a variety of
will, however, limit my discussion here mainly to the prescribed tutorial
readings for the unit.
As with many ideas in international law, the idea of ‘international
community’ is a contested and controversial one. International
Martti Koskenniemi states that the concept of ‘international
community’ is not without controversy as international
lawyers with
opposing agenda invoke ‘international community’ to advance their
legal arguments.
opposing postulations of ‘international community’ are often
manifested in the selective invocation of human rights
violations and protection
by states and other actors with differing agendas.
Some arguments identify ‘international community’ with the United
Nations (‘UN’) system of an international
community of states, where
most states are a member and are formally assumed to be
The UN is tasked to serve the common interests of all
But neither the UN nor statehood necessarily guarantee the kind of protection
that one would assume by virtue of being a member state
of the UN. The UN can do
very little when people become stateless or are denied
In short, the UN, itself a political settlement after the Second World War, and
its affiliate judicial and other organs, often operates
more as a moral rather
than a legal authority.
The reading list in the Public International Law unit is dynamic and gets
restructured roughly every three years. Nonetheless, weekly
readings I have
included in the unit are somewhat critical of the idea of an international
community. The invocation of a moral authority
via international community often
serves to embolden the claims of international civil society, itself a contested
theme in social
science and
But there are other
ways to envision community in international law, to which we turn now.
IV COMMUNITY IN INTERNATIONAL LAW
While ‘international community’ remains a contested theme in
international law, it is often invoked in situations of conflicts
and crises.
Most recently, Fleur Johns, in the 9
TMC Asser Lecture, offered a
rethinking of community in international law based on some recent International
Court of Justice decisions
(‘ICJ’), most notably
The Gambia v
At the heart of Johns’
inquiry into community is a shift from the universalising conceptions of common
interest to a more specific
meaning of connection and common interest that are
particular to a given dispute. Johns suggests that community frequently comes
be a focal point when there is a struggle
As in Johns’ paper, the
history of anti-colonial struggles was the main connecting thread for The Gambia
and South Africa to
institute cases on behalf of the Rohingyas and Palestinians.
In other words, the struggling communities of Rohingyas in Myanmar or
Palestinians in Gaza were connected with physically and culturally disconnected
communities of The Gambia and South Africa by these
recent ICJ cases. Johns sees
an experimental reconfiguration of ‘international community’ by the
ICJ arising out of these
particular claims across struggling communities in the
past and present
While Johns reinterprets ICJ’s remaking of ‘international
community’ via a specific set of disputes tied with a
specific set of
struggles, I put greater emphasis on the struggles of diverse communities
seeking redress in international law. Put
differently, it is this sense of
communities in struggle that is at stake in both my teaching and scholarship in
international law.
This focus on community in struggle is demonstrated in my
choices of readings assigned to students. The prescribed tutorial readings
on, among other, feminists, Indigenous people and the third world people –
all of whom have had their own sets of struggles,
often manifested in the shadow
of international law and politics.
As alluded to in the previous part, I sidestep the intellectual quandary of
the best ways to reinterpret ‘international community’.
perhaps less fraught to imagine community in the temporal and contextual
settings of a particular struggle. For example, as
we annually gather around
WATOL, we too struggle to put together the past, present and future of legal
education in Western Australia.
Even the local jurisdictions evoke community in
this precise sense of struggle and
vulnerability
However important or exciting it might seem to explore communities in
struggle, it is also impossible to really grasp the overwhelmingly
aspirations of these communities, alleged legal violations of which sometimes
feature in the form of international legal
disputes before international courts
such as the ICJ. To tackle this fear and fragility of our grasps, I suggest that
we approach
the idea of community as a performative sublime. The next part
explains what I mean by community as a performative sublime.
V COMMUNITY AS A PERFORMATIVE SUBLIME
Let me briefly explain what I mean by community as a performative
The idea of community,
as the foregoing discussion suggests, is often heavily contested. What counts as
an ‘international
community’ or an Australian community is easy to
tackle if we consider them from a legal positivist perspective. An
‘international
community’ from a legal positivist standpoint can be
seen as the community of nation states serving common interests of global
and security. Similarly, an Australian community can be seen as a community of
citizens defined by their common allegiance
to Australia.
As easy as it might seem, that is not how communities in struggle view their
membership in the legal architecture of things. People
without a membership of a
legally recognised state, such as Palestinians and Rohingyas or people who have
been denied their right
to live in their ways of living despite having formal
membership within a given community, such as First Nations Peoples in Australia,
may not to feel like they belong to their assigned national and
‘international community’. In short, formal granting
of membership
to a community does not necessarily end the struggles of a group of members of a
given community.
Under conditions of these struggles, I suggest that we pay attention to the
interplay between knowledge (or lack of it) and action.
Students not only
prepare for the readings but also perform in the classroom and hence they do
both thinking while preparing and
performing while participating in the class
discussion. This interplay of knowledge and action gets particularly interesting
my students and I imagine and act upon a sense of community in struggle in
the classroom. As students of international law debate
international law topics
in the classroom, they often find it almost impossible to imagine a neatly
defined international or national
community in the face of the deconstruction of
community by differently situated groups of that community. Hence, students
to engage with these struggles of a real and imagined community and almost
always enact a provisional community by both accommodating
and rejecting this or
that claim of the communities in struggle. An ‘international
community’ or for that matter any
other community, in other words, is a
community that is enacted anew every time students and teachers try to imagine
it, shifting
the conception from one domain to another as the topic under
discussion demands.
This dynamic of knowledge and action are what make and unmake a community.
Based on our sense of connections and commonalities, participants
classroom imagine the experiences of Palestinians or the Rohingyas or the First
Nations Peoples. It is these dynamics that
enable us to claim or reject a part
of us in the neighbouring community, professional community, national community,
regional community
and so on. But there is also an element of
incomprehensibility for us to imagine the rights and freedoms of a community
that we may
not belong to and yet a community is made not only by its own
members but also by outsiders. It is this sheer incomprehensibility
imagination and action or ‘the fragilities of our grasp of
or the sublimity of
enacting communities in struggle that I get to experience in the classroom
discussion.
At the core of this methodological gesture is to take student performance as
seriously as their thinking
important aspect of the performativity of the community is that it merges
audience with actor. As students think and act
in the classroom as a listener
and speaker, they continuously shift their roles. They also importantly bring up
their own sets of
convictions and emotions, often a fusion of the personal and
political. In reflecting on the idea of community, students and myself
cast as both knowledgeable actors and ignorant audience/spectators.
Recognising that class participants, including myself, do not really know how
to comprehend a community in struggle that is not our
own does not actually shut
the door for rethinking the struggles of that community. Rather it opens up
possibilities to redirect
our attention to better connect with communities in
struggle and with their calls for basic freedoms and equality. In short, a
despite our limitations is what makes community a political sublime.
approach this political sublime via class participation, community comes to be a
performative sublime.
In a theatrical performance of classroom, I get glimpses of some opinions and
expressions, approval and disapproval, worries and reflections.
thinking with the authors of weekly readings and arguing for and against the
author joins the imagined communities in struggle,
but they also begin to
imagine a community that is not quite what the weekly readings and their authors
construct. Looking at community
through the spectacle of class participation and
performance opens all kinds of interpretive
possibilities
It becomes possible not only
to create and recreate but also cancel out communities in struggle.
Interestingly, as much as speaking
in the classroom enacts some versions of
communities, so do silences, approval, stare and so forth. By recourse to a
performance
analysis, it is possible to make more than one meaning out of many
small bits of performances. In short, a performance lens helps
make us more
attentive and open to, rather than dismissive of, diverse ways of looking at a
community and its struggles.
Encountering classroom discussion of community in the mode of performative
sublime has taught me two particularly important lessons.
First, class performance in the above mode creates a scope of
‘rethinking’ representation and perhaps fostering democracy
Even though students
get to engage with particular struggles of communities via their performances in
classroom, it is not going
to be an overstatement that some of these students
are going to be making choices in their professional lives that will have an
on the continuing struggles of various communities. These students’
thoughts and actions will not only be influenced by their
own personal and
political positions but also by their surroundings and importantly, by the
discussions that they have had early
on in their lives.
Second, by performing community in classroom, everyone gets to revisit their
own sense of hierarchy that often informs our own place
and position in a given
society. I am glad that many students quickly recognise their own privileges in
their local, national, regional
and international settings. They also gradually
recognise that rights are not automatically conferred upon a struggling
These have to be fought for, and often the voices that are at the
forefront of these fights may present to some as too provocative
and perhaps
controversial to work to achieve their goals.
VI CONCLUSION
A performative lens to my classroom discussion gives me hope that my students
will help make a better community than the one that
they currently live in.
After all, my own professional community, that is, the community of teachers, is
also a community of hope
While the spirit of
community is the coming together of people of disparate interests, the task
becomes challenging when the small
community of the classroom tries to imagine
and enact a community not their own. But there is an interesting side to this
as well. It teaches us the power of ideas and imagination and of how
openness to ideas can generate a sense of hope, even if momentarily,
As discussed in Part IV, Johns sees egalitarian possibilities of
community-making out of the ICJ’s recent engagements. I too
possibilities by introducing students to communities and perspectives that they
might have not otherwise explored before.
Weekly readings in which students are
required to participate are an attempt to connect with voices that are otherwise
marginal or
poorly understood in the mainstream legal and political scene. We
cannot foster a sense of community – local, national or international
– unless and until we are actively listening to and engaging with
communities that are often sidestepped as being political
and/or marginal.
Mostafa Haider is a Lecturer at
Curtin Law School, Curtin University.
See Parts III and IV for
discussions on this.
See Fleur Johns,
Unruly Law: Non-legality in International Law
(Cambridge University
Press, 2013) 1.
For analysis of how
international law draws distinctions, see David Kennedy,
Of War and Law
(Princeton University Press, 2006).
The questions are reproduced
verbatim from the assessment 1 instructions for students.
Márquez et al, ‘Class Participation and Feedback as Enablers of
Student Academic Performance’ (2023) 13(2)
Michael F Mascolo,
‘Beyond Student-Centered and Teacher-Centered Pedagogy: Teaching and
Learning as Guided Participation’
(2009) 1(1)
Pedagogy and the
Human Sciences
See Deval Desai
Expert Ignorance: The Law and Politics of Rule of Law Reform
University Press, 2023) and the discussion in Part V.
There seems to be an
increasing appetite in the higher education system to see classroom as a
theatre. See, eg, Patrick Sexton, ‘Bringing
Theatre into the
Classroom’ (News, 16 March 2021)
<https://www.gse.upenn.edu/news/educators-playbook/bringing-theater-classroom>.
not about classroom, for an interesting take on this dramatic performance lens,
see Danish Sheikh,
Love and Reparation: A Theatrical Response to the Section
377 Litigation in India
(Seagull Books, July 2021).
Emily Crawford, Alison Pert and Ben Saul (eds),
Public International
(Cambridge University Press, 2023); Donald Rothwell et al
International Law: Cases and Materials with Australian
Perspectives
(Cambridge University Press, 3
ed, 2018). My
research about textbooks is not exhaustive. But generally speaking,
‘international community’ remains more
a ubiquitous rather than a
well-defined concept in textbooks.
writings on ‘international community’ mostly appear in the form of
scholarly journal articles. For some representative
works, see Georges Abi-Saab,
‘Whither the International Community?’ (1998) 9(2)
Journal of International Law
248; Dino Kritsiotis, ‘Imagining the
International Community’
(2002) 13(4)
European Journal of
International Law
Martti Koskenniemi,
‘International Law in the World of Ideas’ in James Crawford and
Martti Koskeineimi (eds),
The Cambridge Companion to International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2015) 47, 57–8.
For the limits of the UN on rethinking community, see Pemmaraju Sreenivasa
Rao, 'The Concept of “International Community”
in International
Law and the Developing Countries' in Ulrich Fastenrath et al
From Bilateralism to Community Interest: Essays in Honour of
Bruno Simma
(Oxford University Press, online ed, 2011) 326.
See the preamble to the UN Charter:
<https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter/full-text>.
eg, David Kennedy,
The Dark Side of Virtues, Reassessing International
Humanitarianism
(Princeton University Press, 2004).
Gayatri Chakravorti Spivak, ‘Scattered Speculations on the
Subaltern and the Popular’ (2005) 8(4)
Postcolonial Studies
Fleur Johns,
Connection in a Divided World: Rethinking
Community in International Law
Annual TMC Asser Lecture,
Asser Press, 2024)
For an example of
international legal arguments as a terrain for struggle, see David Kennedy,
World of Struggle
(Princeton University Press, 2016).
Johns (n 17) 44
See, eg, Department of Communities, Government of Western
Australia (Web page, 29 January 2025)
<https://www
wa.gov.au/organisation/department-of-communities>.
I develop this idea of
community as a performative sublime drawing on Deval Desai,
Expert Ignorance:
The Law and Politics of Rule of Law Reform
(Cambridge University Press,
2023). Connecting the Kantian concept of sublime with that of performance
analysis, Desai constructs
the rule of law expertise as a performative sublime.
Although Desai suggests greater utility of performative sublime for expert
of institution building, I found his innovative framework equally
useful in imagining community in struggle.
Michael Shapiro,
The Political Sublime
University Press, 2018) 4.
This methodological gesture is different to ‘active
learning’ designed to enhance student learning outcome: Paul Baepler
A Guide to Teaching in the Active Learning Classroom: History,
Research, and Practice
(Routledge, 1
For methodologies of law as
performance in legal research, see Sean Mulcahy, ‘Methodologies of Law as
Performance’ (2022)
Law and Humanities
This is a more mundane interpretive take of communities in
international law than the textual interpretation of
See, eg, Michael
Waibel, 'Interpretive Communities in International Law' in Andrea
Bianchi, Daniel Peat, and Matthew Windsor (eds),
Interpretation in
International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2015) 147.
The sense of democracy that I have in mind comes from a close
reading of Jacques Rancière,
On the Shores of Politics,
Heron (Verso Books, 2021)
bell hooks,
Teaching Community: A Pedagogy of Hope
(Routledge, 2004)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (102 KB)
PDF format (464 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter