URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JlLawInfoSci/2017/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:11:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hargreaves, Stuart; Tsui, Lokman --- "IP Addresses as Personal Data Under Hong Kong's Privacy Law: An Introduction to the Access My Info HK Project" [2017] JlLawInfoSci 4; (2017) 25(1) Journal of Law, Information and Science 68
Introduction
1 IP addresses and privacy
2 IP addresses under European law
3 IP addresses under Hong Kong law
4 An attempt to bring clarity – the AMI:HK project
IP Addresses as Personal Data Under Hong Kong’s
IP addresses have significant implications for personal privacy: if
connected to a particular subscriber, they can reveal a vast range
behaviour. The question of whether IP addresses are ‘personal data’
under a data protection regime is therefore
critical, as such a classification
greatly limits the usage to which those addresses can be put absent user
This paper critically reviews the approaches taken to the question of
whether IP addresses ought to be classified in this way in Hong
Kong and in the
European Union (‘EU’). Jurisprudence related to the EU
Protection Directive
and the forthcoming
General Data Protection
both treat IP addresses as ‘personal information’.
This results in robust protection for IP addresses under European law.
Kong, however, the jurisprudence is limited to two lower court decisions that
are inconsistent with one another, and neither
show a deep appreciation for the
importance IP addresses may have in revealing the behaviour and activities of
Hong Kong residents
online. The Privacy Commissioner for Personal Data has
likewise not shown an interest in challenging the approach taken by the courts
thus far regarding this issue.
Noting this relative lack of attention, this paper introduces the Access
My Info: Hong Kong (‘AMI:HK’) project. AMI:HK
is a platform for
users to make data access requests to telecommunications service providers in
Hong Kong. The project should reveal
if there is consistency in the Hong Kong
providers’ approach to their access obligations under the
Data (Privacy) Ordinance,
in particular the question of whether they treat IP
addresses as personal data within the meaning of the law.
Introduction
Every networked device is assigned an Internet Protocol (‘IP’)
address that identifies it and that allows for communication
networked devices. An Internet Service Provider (‘ISP’) has the
ability to connect a home broadband subscriber
to a particular IP address, and
the same is true of a mobile communications provider that delivers internet
connectivity to a smartphone.
If third parties can obtain this connection, then the implications for
personal privacy are profound, since theoretically IP addresses
can be used to
log all kinds of online behaviour, whether it is participating in political or
religious activism online, sharing
family recipes, accessing pornography,
infringing copyright by sharing music, or teenagers seeking information about
human sexuality.
A study conducted by the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of
Canada, for instance, found that an IP address allowed them to determine
the individual assigned that address had visited websites related to:
community; web governance; identity management; privacy
issues; legal advice
related to insurance law and personal injury litigation; a specific religious
group; fitness; online photo sharing;
the revision history of a Wikipedia entry;
and specific entertainers which, in turn, exposed a variety of
A search for information related to the IP address of one Wikipedia
contributor
revealed that they
edited hundreds of pages on Wikipedia about television shows, both North
American and international ... [showing an] interest in TV
shows [that] was
extensive and specific; edited dozens of pages on Wikipedia related to history
topics; participated in a discussion
board about a television channel; and
visited a site devoted to sexual preferences following an online search for a
specific type
Consequently, European privacy law treats IP addresses as ‘personal
data’ within the meaning of its data protection regimes,
meaning they
cannot be transmitted by ISPs to third parties absent circumstances such as the
consent of the data subject or a court
Though Hong Kong’s privacy regime, the
Personal Data (Privacy)
modelled on the European Union’s
Data Protection
treatment of IP
addresses under it is not well developed. There is limited judicial commentary
on the issue and no clarity as to whether
Hong Kong ISPs consider the IP
addresses of their subscribers to be ‘personal data’ and thus
protected by Hong Kong’s
This paper outlines the importance of IP addresses to personal privacy,
compares the way in which they are treated under European
and Hong Kong law, and
then introduces the Access My Info: Hong Kong (‘AMI:HK’)
AMI:HK is a joint
initiative of members of the Chinese University of Hong Kong’s School of
Journalism & Communication, InMediaHK,
Keyboard Frontline, Open Effect, and
the Citizen Lab (developers of the original AMI
in Canada). It includes an
easy-to-use website that assists Hong Kong residents in making data access
requests to their telecommunications
providers. A key goal of the project is to
learn whether Hong Kong ISPs and mobile phone service providers treat IP
addresses as
personal data within the meaning of the
, and to help
justify regulatory reform where necessary.
1 IP addresses and privacy
Simply put, IP addresses are unique identifiers assigned to every networked
device connected to the internet. An IP address may be
either static or dynamic.
A static IP address is usually assigned by a network administrator to a specific
device and, as the name
suggests, does not change. An office computer may, for
example, be assigned a static IP address that does not change, regardless
is using the machine. In contrast, a dynamic IP address
sometimes at pre-set intervals and sometimes in response to network events.
Dynamic IP addresses are commonly used by ISPs to provide internet services
to home users. An ISP, for instance, might control a block
of IP addresses from
which it then assigns temporary addresses to users, rather than assigning each
subscriber a permanent static
address. This would allow an ISP to minimise the
overall number of IP addresses they must maintain. A home broadband user’s
IP address might be different from one day to the next, or one month to the
next, depending on how often their ISP rotates the addresses.
It might also
change every time they restart their modem or router.
However, the fact that the IP addresses of home broadband users change over
time offers no meaningful privacy protection. An ISP knows
exactly who was
assigned any given IP address at any given moment. In other words, PCCW (an ISP
that provides home broadband services)
knows that IP address 10.7.44.214 was
assigned to broadband subscriber Cynthia Chung from 6:34 am 9 January 2016 to
9:12 pm 11 January
means that PCCW knows that any website
that was accessed by IP address 10.7.44.214 in that timeframe was almost
certainly accessed
by Cynthia or someone in her household.
This implicates significant privacy issues: message boards log the IP
addresses of the authors of every single comment, search engines
know the IP
address behind each query, online newspapers know which IP addresses clicked on
which links, and every pornography website
knows the IP addresses of its most
common visitors. If approached by a third party seeking the identity of the
individual who posted
a politically sensitive comment from IP address
10.7.44.214 on the ‘Golden Forum’ message board at 8:03 pm on 10
2016, PCCW has the technical means to provide that information and
thereby unmask Cynthia’s political beliefs. In short, if
website logs of
the IP addresses of visitors can be connected to the IP address subscriber
information logs held by ISPs, then anonymity
on the web is virtually impossible
to maintain (assuming a user takes no steps to intentionally mask their IP
address by use of a
Virtual Private Network (‘VPN’)). Only if PCCW
considers their IP address logs to be ‘personal information’
Hong Kong’s privacy law regulate when they can provide assistance to a
third party seeking to make such a connection.
2 IP addresses under European law
As a result, the importance of IP addresses to individual privacy is now well
recognised in European law. As far back as 2007 the
Article 29 Working Party
argued that
unless an ISP is in a position to distinguish with absolute certainty that
the data corresponds to users that cannot be identified,
it will have to treat
all IP information as personal data, to be on the safe
In a subsequent paper, the Article 29 Working Party confirmed that this basic
approach ought to also be followed by search
The relevant jurisprudence coming out of the Court of Justice of the European
Union (‘ECJ’) has been consistent with this
approach. In
Extended SA v Société belge des auteurs, compositeurs et
éditeurs SCRL (SABAM)
SABAM, a collective of copyright owners and publishers, sought an order
requiring Scarlet, an ISP, to prevent individuals from using
its system to send
or receive musical works within SABAM’s portfolio through the use of a
systematic filter that would analyse
the content of all data shared by
subscribers. The ECJ found that such a mandatory filter failed to strike a fair
balance ‘between
the right to intellectual property, on the one hand, and
the freedom to conduct business, the right to protection of personal data
the freedom to receive or impart information, on the
In reaching this
conclusion, the Court argued that all parties had accepted that IP addresses are
‘protected personal data
because they allow users to be precisely
identified’.
The addresses in
Scarlet Extended
allowed users to be identified, of
course, because they were held by an ISP that could directly connect them to
their subscriber
data. However, what if the data controller were not an ISP, but
rather a website operator? Should a website’s logs of the IP
addresses of
its visitors still be classed as personal data, even though the website acting
alone does not have the mechanism to
directly connect them to an identifiable
individual?
Patrick Breyer v Bundesrepublik Deutschland
the ECJ answered this
in the affirmative.
brought an action seeking to prevent websites run by the federal German
government from storing IP addresses of visitors. As
the IP addresses were
dynamic, the only way the website operators could identify individuals would be
to approach the relevant ISP
and ask it to connect them to a subscriber. The
Court found that even dynamic IP addresses of visitors to websites were properly
classed as personal data when held by website operators with the
to obtain information from a third party (such as an ISP), that would
then allow them to connect the address to a given
individual.
Since the law did
allow that ‘in the event of cyber-attacks ... [a competent authority
could] take the steps necessary to obtain
that information from the ISP and to
bring criminal
proceedings’,
threshold was met.
The approach taken in
Patrick Breyer
also seems consistent with
recital 26 of the EU
Data Protection Directive
, which states that when
answering the question of identifiability, ‘account should be taken of all
the means likely reasonably
to be used either by the controller or by any other
person to identify the said
This implies that
it is not necessary under the
Data Protection Directive
that the data
controller be able to
immediately
identify the individual through her IP
address in order that the information be treated as ‘personal data’;
rather, there
simply must be a reasonable chance of them doing so given the
means at their disposal.
This reflects a relatively expansive interpretation given to personal data in
the EU, an interpretation that will be further solidified
with the replacement
Data Protection Directive
in May 2018 with the
General Data
Protection Regulation
Recital 30 of the
explicitly uses IP addresses as an example of an
online identifier that ‘may be used to create profiles of natural persons
and identify them’.
it remains to be seen how the ECJ will interpret the
, given the
jurisprudence under the
and the direct inclusion of IP
addresses into the recital, it is difficult to imagine the Court suddenly
embracing a more restrictive
approach to the treatment of IP addresses as
personal data.
3 IP addresses under Hong Kong law
In Hong Kong, the legal protection of privacy is obtained in several ways.
quasi-constitution that grew out of the agreement between the United Kingdom and
China regarding the restoration of Chinese sovereignty
provides for the
physical, territorial and communications privacy of residents of Hong Kong
vis-à-vis the state. Article 28
‘arbitrary or unlawful search of the body’, article 29 prohibits
‘arbitrary or unlawful search of, or
intrusion into [the home]’, and
article 30 protects the ‘freedom and privacy of communication’.
Though judicial interpretation of these provisions by the courts has been
relatively narrow in scope,
article 39 of the
also requires the incorporation of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
into domestic
legislation. This incorporation is achieved through the
Hong Kong Bill of
Rights Ordinance,
where article 14 ensures the ‘protection of privacy, family, home,
correspondence, honour, and
reputation’.
Of course, both the
relate to the
relationship between the individual and the state, and so it falls to the
to generally govern the privacy rights of individuals in Hong Kong
in other circumstances. The
is a comprehensive data protection
regime, and (coming into effect in 1995) was the first of its kind in Asia. Like
other comprehensive
traces its conceptual roots to the ‘fair information principles’ of
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Guidelines on the
Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal
which form the
substantive core of the law: the six ‘Data Protection Principles’
DPP3, the data use principle, requires that personal data collected about a
data subject cannot be used for a new purpose without
the explicit consent of
the data subject, subject to certain
exemptions.
Generally, this has
been taken to mean that data cannot be transferred by a data controller to a
third party without such consent
(or where there is a relevant exemption).
However, for IP addresses to benefit from this protection, they must first reach
the threshold
of being ‘personal data’, defined under the
as ‘data relating directly or indirectly to a living
individual, from which it is practicable for the identity of the individual
be directly or indirectly
ascertained’.
also defines ‘practicable’ as meaning ‘reasonably
practicable’,
to be answered by taking into account ‘all relevant data controlled by the
It is also worth noting that General Condition 6 of the Services-Based
Operator Licence, which all ISPs and mobile internet providers
are required to
obtain by the Telecommunications Authority under the
Telecommunications
obliges licensees
to not disclose the ‘information’ of customers without their consent
or unless it is needed for the
prevention or detection of
‘information’ is not defined in either the Licence or the
Telecommunications Ordinance
, and so for the purposes of this paper we
continue to query the meaning of ‘personal data’ under the
as it relates to IP
In comparison to European law, the question of whether IP addresses reach the
legal standard of being ‘personal data’
under Hong Kong law is far
from settled; judicial consideration is both less conclusive and less coherent.
Cinepoly Records v Hong Kong Broadband
was the earliest
case to touch upon this issue. A group of plaintiff music companies sought
Norwich Pharmacal
against the defendant internet service provider for the names, Hong Kong
identity card numbers, and other information relating
to 22 subscribers whom the
plaintiff believed were infringing its copyright through peer-to-peer
‘torrent’ software.
Cinepoly already had the IP addresses of the
subscribers, and argued that since Hong Kong Broadband Network
had assigned the subscribers those addresses, HKBN could
also use them to provide Cinepoly with the other information (name, identity
card number, address, etc) that they required to proceed with their main action.
Norwich Pharmacal
relief was required because that information was
arguably ‘personal data’ under the
, and therefore could
not be handed over by HKBN to Cinepoly absent the consent of the 22 subscribers
(which obviously they would
not provide) or a court order.
Poon Dep J granted the relief, finding that the necessary elements were met.
The applicant was able to establish that serious tortious
or wrongful activities
had been occurring (heavy copyright infringement), the applicant had a bona fide
belief that the alleged wrongdoers
were infringing its rights, and that HKBN was
facilitating this infringement.
In deciding to exercise the Court’s discretion to make the order,
Poon Dep J noted that section 58 of the
provides an exemption to
DPP3 (the use limitation principle that would otherwise prevent an ISP from
handing over personal information
without consent) where the new use of the data
is for the prevention or detection of crime or unlawful or seriously improper
if it can be shown that applying DPP3 in such circumstances would
prejudice the ability to remedy that conduct. Poon Dep J concluded
prejudice would in fact occur if the
Norwich Pharmacal
order were not
granted, and therefore ordered HKBN to provide Cinepoly with the subscriber
information.
However, at no point did Poon Dep J argue or conclude that the IP addresses
were personal data within the meaning of the
Rather, the IP addresses were simply the mechanism by which the personal data
(name, ID card number, billing address, etc) of the
subscribers could be
obtained. In dicta, however, Poon Dep J nonetheless acknowledged that the use of
IP addresses was connected
to individual privacy:
Some online copyright infringers may well think that they will never be
caught because of the cloak of anonymity created by the P2P
programs. They are
wrong. And from now on, they should think twice. ... The court can and will,
upon a successful application, pull
back the cloak and expose their true
However, Poon Dep J also went on to argue that for the Court to order a
connection of their IP addresses to their subscribers’
identity would not
be ‘an intrusion into their privacy, [because the] protection of privacy
is never and cannot be used as
a shield to enable them to commit civil wrongs
with impunity’.
evinces some muddled thinking. On the one hand, Poon Dep J appears to accept
that IP addresses can be used to eliminate the anonymity
of internet users in
Hong Kong if an ISP connects them to a particular user, a decision that
necessarily reduces the privacy of the
individual whose identity is disclosed.
This makes sense. However, Poon Dep J then goes on to argue that this is not an
of privacy because privacy cannot be a shield to commit wrongdoing.
Respectfully, this is an illogical approach to the very fair
‘balancing’ question of when privacy ought to be justifiably
in order to protect other rights. A more sensible approach would be to simply
acknowledge that privacy is not an absolute
right, and there are circumstances
in which it is legitimate for the state to order an intrusion into that privacy;
and court orders are examples where individual privacy loses out
to other interests. Indeed, this is explicitly provided for by the
The issuance of a search warrant does not, however, imply that there is no
relevant privacy interest; rather it means that, on balance,
a judicial officer
has deemed it necessary and justifiable to pierce that interest.
Now, it is fair to argue that the Court did not feel the need to treat IP
addresses as ‘personal data’ in
because it was not
necessary on the facts of the case. Recall that the applicants
the IP address information and sought to use it to obtain other
personal data. But this seems inconsistent with the recognition by
that the IP addresses were ultimately the key to unlocking the online activities
of the alleged copyright infringers. Inclusion
of IP addresses within the
category of ‘personal data’ would not have altered a result based on
section 58.
The second significant case in the Hong Kong courts touching on this issue
related to the conviction of a mainland-based journalist
in 2006 by the Changsa
Intermediate People’s Court for transferring state secrets to foreign
entities. He had used a Yahoo!
email account to send notes on secret files from
his office computer and his conviction was obtained in part thanks to the
of related personal data by Yahoo! Holdings (Hong Kong) Ltd
(‘YHHK’) to the relevant authorities in
This data included user
registration details associated with the email account in question, associated
IP addresses, login metadata
and certain email content. The appellant lodged a
complaint with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner for Personal Data
arguing that this was a breach of DPP3. The PCPD concluded
in its Report that IP addresses were not personal data within the meaning
law, because they are ‘information about an inanimate computer, not an
individual. ... [A]n IP address cannot alone
reveal the exact location of the
computer concerned or the identity of the computer
The PCPD also determined that YHHK was not a ‘data user’ within
the meaning of the law, since although it was the legal
owner of the Beijing
subsidiary and thus may have had control of the information
it had no control
of the information in question because it was
compelled to disclose it under the
Criminal Procedure Law of the
People’s Republic of
Furthermore, there
was no contravention of DPP3 in the PCPD’s view thanks to terms of service
and privacy policies that stated
that YHHK might share certain information in
response to court orders and legal
As a result, the
Commissioner concluded, the disclosure was a ‘use’ for a purpose
consistent with the original purpose
of collection and therefore there was no
violation of DPP3.
Unsatisfied with this outcome, the appellant brought the case,
Administrative Appeals Board (‘AAB’) as was his right under the
. He argued, inter alia, that the correct approach to the question of
whether IP addresses constituted personal data was not about
whether they
themselves were data per se, but whether they were when combined with other
relevant data.
The PCPD argued
in response that personal data itself had to have ‘biological
significance’ in relation to the individual.
The AAB split the difference between these two positions, concluding that
‘IP information ... even when coupled with other information
does not constitute personal data within the meaning of the
particular set of facts, the AAB concluded, there was no evidence that the user
information related to the IP address revealed
the applicant’s identity
(that information was an anonymous Yahoo! email address, the business address
where the computer sending
the email was located, and the time and date the
message was sent).
therefore concluded that
of the information (not just the IP
addresses) transmitted by YHHK to the state authorities in China was
‘personal data’
within the meaning of the
Though not necessary given their conclusion that there was no ‘personal
data’ at issue, the AAB went on to consider whether
DPP3 had been
breached, in case they were wrong on their conclusion about the nature of the
data. They disagreed with the PCPD’s
Report in part, finding that YHHK
a data user within the meaning of the
, because it had
control over the information in question as a matter of course. The fact that it
was compelled by a government entity
to transfer the information did not strip
the company of that status
The AAB agreed with the PCPD, however, that the appellant had given his
consent to the transfer of his information in the contemplated
circumstances
thanks to the terms of service and privacy policy associated with his email
account. It disagreed with the PCPD that
conceptually the transfer was therefore
a use ‘consistent with’ the purpose of the original collection.
Instead, it was
better understood simply as consent to that particular purpose:
compliance with a legal process.
Reliance on consent to the terms of service rather than the section 58
exemption was necessary, concluded the AAB, since the requested
transfer was an
out-of-jurisdiction legal process.
Returning to the critical question of the nature of IP addresses, the AAB in
appeared to reject the treatment of IP addresses in
. The AAB suggested that because the user information sought by
the applicants in
was ‘reliably personal’ (names, ID
card numbers, and addresses), then in that context IP addresses
constitute personal data when coupled with that information. However, the
AAB’s application of this principle to the facts before
seems unsatisfying. As noted, the AAB found that the IP address
information transferred by YHHK could not identify an individual
without being
coupled with more information, and thus did not satisfy the definition of
personal data under the
. Yet the identity of the appellant was
relatively easily determined once the Security Bureau had the locational
information associated
with that IP address, since it was trivial for them to
determine who had access to the computer in question at the relevant time.
seems little justification for holding that the existence of an additional step
(even one out of the hands of the data user)
that must occur before the
‘biographical’ level of personal data is revealed somehow strips
away the ability of IP address
data to be ‘personal data’.
Regrettably, the PCPD has not indicated any disagreement with the conclusion of
, citing it in 2010 in its own document explaining the
proper interpretation of the
In any event, what we are left with is that the legal status of IP addresses
as ‘personal’ data within the meaning of
is unclear.
The jurisprudence provides us with only two somewhat conflicting court
decisions, neither of which is from an appellate
level court.
It was with this legal background that the Access My Info: Hong Kong
(‘AMI:HK’) project was launched in 2016 in the hopes
understanding generally how data users in the telecommunications sector
interpret their obligations regarding a data subject’s
‘personal data’ under the
, and specifically whether they
consider IP addresses to fall within that concept.
4 An attempt to bring clarity – the AMI:HK
DPP6 contains a series of ‘access rights’, allowing data subjects
to ascertain if a data user holds their personal data,
a right to access it
within a reasonable time, at a reasonable cost, in a reasonable manner and in an
intelligible form, and to correct
the data if it is
inaccurate.
Sections 18–21
provide further detail on the operation of this principle
(including exemptions, timeframes, circumstances under which requests for
may legitimately be refused, etc), and the PCPD has published a set of
(non-binding) ‘best practice’ procedural
guidelines for data users
subject to an access request.
However, the general way in which the right is framed still leaves great scope
for how DPP6 is interpreted in practice. This, combined
with the aforementioned
uncertainty surrounding the status of IP addresses under Hong Kong law, is a
driving force behind the AMI:HK
The project provides an easy-to-use web portal allowing Hong Kong residents
to submit data access requests in either English or Chinese
to eight different
mobile phone and internet service providers. It is written in simple language,
with an easy to use interface,
requiring a minimal number of steps. AMI:HK does
not act as agent of the data subject, but rather assists them in generating a
that they can then submit via email, or print and submit through the
post. At the time of writing, the site had been used to generate
1603 requests.
AMI:HK does not log any user data on the server side; the process is handled
on the client side. Participants can request call logs,
geolocation data, IP
address logs, subscriber info, etc, but cannot make a blanket request for
‘all personal data’, since
under both the
and the relevant
Guidance Note data users can reject requests that are ‘too
requires that data access requests be made using a
prescribed form,
the automated
nature of AMI:HK means this form is not used. However, the relevant Guidance
Note ‘strongly advises’ data
users against denying access requests
for such technical reasons;
PCPD also indicated in discussion with project members that they expect
recipients of access requests to comply with any request
that adheres to the
spirit of the form, even if the form itself is not used.
Early responses to access requests made through AMI:HK suggest there is no
standardisation amongst telecommunications service providers
• fees for processing data access requests
• the classification of ‘personal data’
• how to deal with data access requests
• retention periods.
The results also reveal that though providers are aware of and adhere to the
’s guidelines regarding response timelines, the overall process
remains extremely lengthy. Most significantly for our purposes,
up to the time
of writing not a single telecommunications provider presented with a data access
request through AMI:HK has provided
the IP addresses assigned to the subscriber
as part of its response.
While a subsequent paper will provide a full analysis of the results of the
project once completed and provide a detailed set of policy
recommendations in
response, these preliminary results reveal a certain amount of inconsistency
amongst Hong Kong’s telecommunications
providers regarding their approach
to the procedural requirements of DPP6. However, there is no reason to suppose
at this stage that
any of the eight telecommunications organisations subject to
requests through AMI:HK view IP addresses as personal data within the
. If this proves accurate as the project continues and IP
addresses are not viewed as personal data, then this suggests a need for
PCPD to address a clear gap in Hong Kong’s privacy framework, given the
importance of IP addresses to the personal privacy
of Hong Kong’s
We are rapidly entering a world of the ‘internet of things’, in
which we wear fitness trackers that store our sensitive
health information in
the cloud, drive internet-enabled cars that maintain logs of our driving habits
and destinations, and fill
our houses with ‘smart’ devices equipped
with cameras and microphones. Together, they can paint an incredibly detailed
portrait of our daily lives. They are also subject to the same kind of legal
requests identified herein. As this project continues
to evolve, it may
therefore expand beyond internet and telecommunications service providers to
include content providers and internet-enabled
hardware manufacturers of all
kinds. Given the current results, however, it is reasonable to assume that such
an expanded project
would reveal essentially the same as we have uncovered so
far. The governing law is the same and there is little reason to assume
content providers voluntarily adopt more stringent privacy protections than ISPs
and telecommunications providers. What is required,
then, is to give proper
recognition to IP addresses as a critical piece of the personal data of Hong
Kongers. This means reform that
goes beyond issuance of a Guidance Note by the
PCPD; the protection must become a clear and enforceable part of the
itself. The
offers a model for how this could be done and, in our
view, the Hong Kong government would be wise to give serious consideration
similar changes. The
has undergone only one significant amendment
since its introduction (a series of reforms in 2012 related primarily to direct
marketing),
and it is critical that Hong Kong not be saddled with an outdated
data protection regime as the rest of the world moves forward.
Assistant Professor, Assistant
Dean (Undergraduate Studies), LLB Programme Director, Faculty of Law, the
Chinese University of Hong
Assistant Professor, School
of Journalism & Communication, the Chinese University of Hong Kong.
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner of Canada,
What an IP address can reveal about you
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/research/explore-privacy-research/2013/ip_201305/
Wikipedia logs the IP
addresses of all contributors.
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner of Canada, above n 1.
Personal Data (Privacy)
(Hong Kong), cap 486 (‘
Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data
[1995] OJ L 281/31 (‘
Data Protection
Welcome to Access My
, Access My Info Hong Kong <
https://accessmyinfo.hk
Welcome to Access My
, Access My Info Canada <
https://accessmyinfo.org
Article 29 Working Party,
‘Opinion 4/2007 on the concept of personal data, 01248/07/EN WP 136’
(Opinion 4/2007, European
Union, 20 June 2007).
Article 29 Working Party,
‘Opinion 1/2008 on data protection issues related to search engines,
00737/EN WP 148’ (Opinion
1/2008, European Union, 4 April 2008).
(C-70/10) [2011] ECR
I–11959 (24 November 2011) (‘
Scarlet Extended’
Patrick Breyer v
Bundesrepublik Deutschland
(Court of Justice of the European Communities
(Second Chamber), C-582/14, 16 October 2016).
Data Protection
[1995] OJ L 281/31, recital 26.
Regulation (EU) 2016/679
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the
free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data
Regulation)
[2016] OJ L 119/1.
Ibid recital 30.
Basic Law of the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China
Joint Declaration of the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Government of the People’s
Republic of China on the Question of Hong
, opened for signature 19 December 1984,
[1985] UKTS 26
(entered into
force 29 May 1985) (‘
Joint Sino-British Declaration’
Party v Secretary for Justice
[2007] 2 HKLRD 807, 819 where Hartmann J
argued that ‘Art 30 of the Basic Law does not seek to protect privacy
simpliciter’.
International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 19 December
(entered into force 23 March 1976) (‘
Hong Kong Bill of Rights
(Hong Kong), cap 383 (‘
This language mirrors art
See Stuart Hargreaves,
‘Data Protection Regimes’ in Christopher Anglim (ed)
Rights in the Digital Age
(Grey House Publishing, 2016).
Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development,
OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy
and Transborder Flows of Personal Data
(23 September 1980)
http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecdguidelinesontheprotectionofprivacyandtransborderflowsofpersonaldata.htm
OECD Guidelines’
(Hong Kong),
cap 486, s 4;
(Hong Kong), cap 486, sch 1. The six DPPs are the data
collection principle, the accuracy and retention principle, the data use
the data security principle, the openness principle, and the data
access and correction principle.
(Hong Kong),
cap 486, Part 8.
(Hong Kong),
cap 486, s 2(1).
Also referred to as
‘the totality test’: Office of the Privacy Commissioner for Personal
Data Protection Principles in the Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance
– from the Privacy Commissioner’s perspective (2
(2010) 2.19
<https://www.pcpd.org.hk/tc_chi/publications/files/Perspective_2nd.pdf>.
Telecommunications
(Hong Kong), cap 106, s 7; See Hong Kong Communications Authority,
Guidelines for the Application of Services-Based Operator (‘SBO’)
(5 March 2013)
http://www.coms-auth.hk/filemanager/statement/tc/upload/127/gn32013e.pdf
See Hong Kong
Communications Authority,
Telecommunications Ordinance (Chapter 106)
Services-Based Operator Licence
(19 May 2016)
http://www.coms-auth.hk/filemanager/common/licensing/SBO_form_conditions_e.pdf
The government relied on an
earlier version of this licence to deflect a query from a LegCo member as to
whether IP addresses constitute
personal data under the
Constitutional & Mainland Affairs Bureau, ‘LCQ17: IP addresses as
personal data’
Constitutional & Mainland Affairs Bureau
Release, 3 May 2006)
http://www.info.gov.hk/gia/general/200605/03/P200605030211.htm
[2006] 1 HKLRD 255
Such relief, if granted,
can compel an innocent third party who has facilitated the perpetration or
continuation of wrongdoing by
the alleged wrongdoer to comply with a request
from an applicant to disclose information that will assist the applicant in
case against the alleged wrongdoer: See
Norwich Pharmacal Co & Ors
v Commissioners of Customs and Excise
[1973] UKHL 6
[1974] AC 133
A Co v C Co
[2002] 3 HKLRD 111.
, [18]–[19], [24]–[33]. Later the same year, Chan Dep J
applied an identical approach and came to the same conclusion
in another action
Norwich Pharmacal
relief by a group of 10 plaintiff music companies
against four ISPs regarding 49 individual subscribers suspected of copyright
infringement:
Cinepoly v Hong Kong Broadband Network
[2006] HKCU 1500.
, [41]–[57].
Though the applicant was
based in the mainland and used a Yahoo! account registered through a
Beijing-based Yahoo! subsidiary, YHHK
was the legal entity that owned that
subsidiary and was therefore responsible for it.
Roderick B Woo, ‘The
Disclosure of Email Subscriber’s Personal Data by Email Service Provider
to PRC Law Enforcement Agency’
(Report No R07-3619, Office of the Privacy
Commissioner for Personal Data, Hong Kong, 14 March 2007) [8.10]
<https://www.pcpd.org.hk/english/enforcement/commissioners_findings/investigation_reports/files/Yahoo_e.pdf>.
Ibid [8.22].
National People’s
Congress, 1 July 1979; Ibid [8.25]–[8.26].
Woo, above n 42,
[8.38]–[8.40].
Ibid [8.41].
Shi Tao v Privacy
Commissioner for Personal Data
[2008] 1 HKC 287
Ibid [63]–[67].
Office of the Privacy
Commissioner for Personal Data, above n 31.
(Hong Kong),
cap 486, sch 1(6).
Personal Data, Hong Kong,
Guidance Note: Proper Handling of Data Access
Request and Charging of Data Access Request Fee by Data Users
(June 2016)
<https://www.pcpd.org.hk/english/publications/files/DAR_e.pdf>.
(Hong Kong),
cap 486, s 20(3)(b).
Personal Data, Hong Kong, above n 55.
(Hong Kong),
cap 486, s 20(3).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (282 KB)
PDF format (362 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter