URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MarStudies/2008/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:16:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vince, Joanna --- "Ten years of implementing Australia's Oceans. Policy: From an integrated approach to an environmental policy focus" [2008] MarStudies 9; (2008) 159 Maritime Studies 1
Ten years of implementing Australia’s Oceans Policy: From an integrated approachto an environmental policy focus
Introduction
A recap of the first five years of Oceans Policy implementation
Review of the Oceans Policy
Continuation of policy implementation
Institutional restructuring
Legislation versus policy
An environmental focus for implementation
Current directions and conclusion
Ten years of implementing
Australia’s Oceans Policy
: From an integrated
to an environmental policy focus
Joanna Vince
The release of Australia’s Oceans Policy in 1998 was recognised in
Australia and internationally as a milestone in marine resource
management. The
policy outlined a new, national approach for ecosystem-based ocean management.
It also sought to integrate sectoral
and jurisdictional interests through the
establishment of new institutions and the adoption of new implementation methods
Regional Marine Plans). In 2003, the present writer’s review in
Maritime Studies
reflected on five years of policy implementation and the
struggle to achieve full integration. This paper follows on from that review
analyses how, after ten years of implementation, the original focus of the
policy implementation process has changed, reflecting
an unfortunate lack of
integration and institutional restructuring.
Introduction
The year 2008 marks ten years since the release of
Australia’s
Oceans Policy
(‘Oceans Policy’), an oceans governance framework
that embraces ecosystem-based and integrated approaches to policy
implementation.
The Oceans Policy was viewed as a milestone in marine resource
management because it was a ‘world
national policy that
demonstrated a commitment to the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention (LOSC) and the
United Nations Conference on
the Environment and Development’s (UNCED)
Parties to LOSC have
sovereign rights for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conserving and
managing the natural resources, whether living or non-living,
of the waters
superjacent to the sea-bed and of the sea-bed and its
within their Exclusive Economic Zones
They are also obligated to
protect and preserve the marine environment within their
Agenda 21 establishes three
key principles aimed at sustainable development – ‘integrated’
(Chapter 17), ‘precautionary’
(Principle 15 Rio Declaration) and
‘anticipatory’ actions. Chapter 17 deals with all aspects of marine
and coastal environmental
management through 137 recommendations including that
coastal States
commit themselves to integrated management and sustainable development of
coastal areas and the marine environment under their national
Australian Conservation Foundation estimated that Australia has over one hundred
statutes, regulations and policies that address
aspects of the management of its
coasts and oceans.
Australia’s oceans regime has been fraught with jurisdictional and
sectoral conflict since federation.
Initially, the Australian Government’s aim was to develop a policy that
would integrate sectoral interests (such as fishing,
oil extraction and
petroleum mining) with each other and with the jurisdictional interests and
responsibilities of the Australian
Government and state/territory governments.
By the time the Oceans Policy was released in December 1998, it was clear that
was a Commonwealth government initiative. Although different state-based and
private sectors were involved in the development of the
policy, full sectoral
integration had yet to be
This paper examines the implementation of this ‘new’ policy. It
examines the first official policy review (known as the
‘TFG review’
(below)) that resulted in institutional restructuring. It begins with a recap of
the first five years of
implementation and then continues where the present
writer’s 2003 review
The paper then briefly
examines the debate to give legislative backing to the Oceans Policy, such as in
an Oceans Act. It then discusses
the environmental focus of Bioregional Marine
Plans. It concludes with an overview of recent directions for oceans management
A recap of the first five years of Oceans Policy
implementation
The years preceding the release of the Oceans Policy reflected an optimistic
period of policy development. In December 1995, Prime
Minister Keating announced
the development of an ‘integrated oceans strategy’, however, little
progress was achieved
as the federal election dominated the political agenda. In
March 1996, the then newly elected Howard government announced that it
continue the development of an oceans policy with the intention of it being an
‘environmental protection
The Oceans Policy
was intended to set up a framework for full integration across sectors and
and other non-governmental and industry
stakeholder involvement was encouraged during this period. The states
‘reacted positively’
to consultation
at the time, although
they were ‘concerned with the [Oceans Policy’s] institutional
arrangements, financial commitments
obligations.’
Stakeholders
(such as various interest groups, academics, Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islanders) were represented in the Ministerial
Advisory Group on Oceans Policy
(MAGOP) (established in 1997) and non-governmental organisations
were asked by the
Australian Government to assist with the consultation process. It was unusual
for the Australian Government to
turn to NGOs during policy consultation and
this indicated that a ‘bottom-up’ approach to implementation rather
a ‘top-down’ approach was being
considered.
The bottom-up
approach included stakeholder consultations that were a key element in policy
development. Nevertheless, the bottom-up
approach was not without its critics
and was later recognised as one reason why the implementation of the Oceans
Policy was delayed.
The development of the Oceans Policy aimed to ensure its release during 1998,
the International Year of the Ocean. By September of
that year, the Australian
Government was committed to developing the policy and the states were excluded
from this part of the process,
despite their involvement during early policy
development. Sectoral interests continued to be represented through the relevant
Government agencies and MAGOP. The policy decisions during the period
up to the release of the Oceans Policy documents demonstrate
the demise of
Government’s change from a bottom-up
approach to a centralist approach to
policy implementation from the ‘top-down’.
The Australian Government released the Oceans Policy on 23 December 1998 in
two volumes:
Australia’s Oceans Policy
Specific Sectoral
The policy reveals
Regional Marine Plans (RMPs) are the core method of implementing [the Oceans
Policy] and all Australian Government agencies are bound
the States were left out of the final development stages of the policy, the then
federal environment minister, Senator Robert
Hill, stated in the Foreword to the
Oceans Policy that
implementing a national oceans policy will need better coordination between the
national, state and territory governments in integrating
planning and management
to ensure that jurisdictional boundaries do not hinder effective
management.
two documents outlined 390 commitments and a range of initiatives and
The most innovative and challenging elements of the Oceans Policy were the
new institutional arrangements established to implement
the policy through RMPs.
Senator Hill emphasised the ‘whole of government approach’ to
implementing the policy.
institutions included the National Oceans Ministerial Board, National Oceans
Office (NOO), Regional Marine Plan Steering
Committees and the National Oceans
Advisory Group (NOAG).
was given primary responsibility for development of the RMPs and was envisaged
‘to be housed in Environment
but was later
designated as an Executive Agency under the
Public Service Act
that came into effect in early December
This meant that the
Director of the NOO reported directly to the then Minister for Environment and
Heritage, and, through the Minister,
to the National Oceans Ministerial
Intergovernmental dimensions of the Oceans Policy process were initially
managed through the Australian and New Zealand Conservation
Council (ANZECC).
ANZECC was replaced in 2001 by the Natural Resource Management Ministerial
Council (NRMMC). The NRMMC’s functions
include developing
policies and strategies for national approaches to the conservation, sustainable
use and management of Australia’s land, water,
vegetation and biological
and monitoring and evaluating ‘outcomes of these
policies, strategies and programs and the health of the nation’s natural
resources’.
The 2003 review examined the development of the first RMP to be implemented
in the South East region of Australia. It was argued in
that review that the
development of the South East Regional Marine Plan took much longer than
anticipated. A year following the release
of the Oceans Policy, only three out
of the five key institutions were established; the implementation of the RMP had
only been drafted
and not finalised; and the commitment to hold the National
Oceans Forum in December 1999 was reorganised for April
The development of the South East Regional Marine Planning (SERMP) process
comprised four phases. These were: the scoping or definition
of the plan;
determining the economic, social, environmental and cultural characteristics of
the region via assessments; developing
potential options; and analysing those
options in order to implement the
A South East States
Consultative Working Group was established during the assessment
although no formal state
agreements resulted from this development. The formation of this working
increased informal state communication…in an ‘open
environment’ and it has been interesting for those involved
what works and what
Review of the Oceans Policy
In August 2002, a formal review of the Oceans Policy was commissioned. This
was two years before the finalisation of the first RMP.
TFG International (a
consultancy firm) completed this review. The TFG Review addressed three themes:
progress with the implementation
of the policy, including progress with regional
marine planning; value for money of expended funding; and effectiveness of
institutional/governance
arrangements in supporting and implementing the
The TFG Review stated that
nothing that has happened since the policy was launched has diminished the
importance of the policy. It still represents a major
Government priority and a
world leading
relation to progressing key aspects of the Oceans Policy, the review found that
of 157 key initiatives in the Oceans Policy 136
(or 87 per cent) were
‘completed’, ‘proceeding’ or a ‘continuing
The TFG Review concluded, similar to some commentators at the
that that ‘the
initial implementation schedule for regional marine planning was very
ambitious.’
It identified
a number of factors that hindered quicker delivery of the regional marine
planning process. These included the:
• decision to establish the NOO as a small Executive Agency located in
• complicated nature of regional marine planning;
• lack of a detailed implementation framework in the policy when it was
• required procurement model for securing information (social, economic
and marine science);
• extent of stakeholder consultation required; and
• need to re-engage States and Territories after the policy was
launched by the Commonwealth
Government.
The TFG Review identified that there was uncertainty about the delivery of
the policy and how the implementation process would work,
and ‘whether it
will add value.’
the ‘major impediments’ affecting implementation. These included the
lack of jurisdictional integration and
lack of agreement over the policy by the
states and Northern Territory. It also stressed that
State/Commonwealth co-operation is essential for an effective oceans policy
– anything less than a national approach will significantly
term effectiveness. Indeed, this is widely acknowledged as being the biggest
impediment to achieving the broad objectives
Review considered ways to improve coordination between the Australian Government
and the governments of the states and the
Northern Territory. It suggested three
models: full national policy (Australian Government, State and Territory
agreement); integrated
oceans management; and officer level approach (that was
the approach at the time). However, it noted that ‘complex interactions
and interrelationships between legislation is one of the major impediments to
implementation.’
of a legislative base to the Oceans Policy was also explored in the review and
it concluded that the policy approach ‘reflects
both the complicated
interactions and interrelationships between existing legislation and the
sensible focus on pursuing a co-operative
approach to developing a framework for
integrated marine
There was significant focus on the NOO and its role in the review. It found
[t]he same people who were trying to implement the policy were also doing the
work to set the office up ... and slowed the progress
on the main task. However
it is an unavoidable consequence of the decision to establish an executive
TFG Review warned that
careful consideration needs to be given to structurally locating it as a
separate and distinct office within an existing Department.
This could provide
it with the stronger management and policy resources that it needs as well as
reducing the administrative overheads
associated with an Executive
review suggested that
some permanent presence in Canberra is highly desirable to provide more
effective interaction with Departments, Ministers and their
offices and to
improve stakeholder engagement
but it acknowledged the
difficulties of doing this. It went on to claim that
due regard needs to be given to the implications of fragmenting what is already
a small group. One option may be to have the Office
located in Canberra, with a
small presence in each region while regional marine plans are being developed
implementation process was proceeding slowly at this time, the TFG Review was
timely. It identified key strengths and weaknesses
of the implementation process
and provided a new direction for the Oceans Policy. This new direction included
refocusing the SERMP’s
overall direction towards ‘process’
before the final SERMP was released and overhauling the institutional
structures.
Continuation of policy implementation
In October 2002, following the TFG Review, the first formal agreement was
signed between Queensland, Northern Territory and the Australian
dealing with the Northern RMP.
In February 2003 NOO held a workshop in Canberra that was attended by all board
agencies. The completion of the SERMP and its future
directions were discussed
at this meeting. The draft SERMP was released in July 2003 and following the
recommendations from the review,
it became an ‘action plan’, focused
on process, for implementing the Oceans Policy in the southeast marine region.
in 2003, a group of Australian environmental NGOs released a report,
Oceans Eleven
recommended that ecosystem-based management should remain the basis of Oceans
Policy implementation and that an Oceans
Act should be
It also claimed that
the policy implementation process had
The SERMP was completed in May 2004. Stakeholders had differing views on what
they expected from the final plan. They recognised that
there were challenges in
developing a ‘world’s first’ plan, and translating the
commitments announced in the Oceans
Policy into practice. However, some
‘disappointment’ was expressed with plan, in particular by NGOs on
the basis that
it did not provide strong commitments in key
This response from
environmental groups reflected the differing expectations of
stakeholders.
implementation of the SERMP has been recognised as ‘a process of trial and
error for the
Commonwealth’
it has also
evolved over time. The change of focus of the SERMP from ‘plan’ to
in an ecosystem-based framework for the making of management and policy
decisions at the regional level. It was also a response
to concerns expressed by
Australian Government agencies over progress in developing the
The implementation of the
SERMP has proven to be more complex than first anticipated. However, changes to
regional marine planning
in 2005 (see below) have provided new directions for
the South East region.
Institutional restructuring
The Australian Government reviewed the institutional framework for the
implementation of the Oceans Policy, as suggested by the TFG
Report in 2002.
Three key changes occurred in the period 2003 to 2007, beginning with the
establishment of the Oceans Board of Management
and the Science Advisory Group.
The Oceans Board of Management
comprises representatives from seven Australian Government departments and
agencies relevant to Australia’s marine jurisdiction.
It was formed to
provide high-level, whole-of-government advice on operational aspects of
Australia’s Oceans Policy and its
central programme of regional marine
planning. The Oceans Policy Science Advisory Group, comprising representatives
of Australian Government marine science and related agencies, as
well as State research institutions and non-government marine science
was also formed. It is tasked with promoting coordination and information
sharing between Government marine science agencies
and across the broader
Australian marine science
The Science Advisory Group is located in Canberra, rather than
within or near the NOO in Hobart, also as suggested in the 2002 Review.
this placed it closer to other government agencies in Canberra, the NOO was
being divided on a geographical basis. This led
to the second key institutional
change which occurred in 2004, when the NOO lost its executive agency status and
was located within
the Marine Division of the then Department of Environment and
Heritage. The National Oceans Ministerial Board was also dissolved.
However, the
cross sectoral approach to policy implementation has continued through the
Oceans Board of Management. The third change,
in 2007, occurred when the
Department of Environment and Heritage was renamed and restructured as the
Department of the Environment
and Water Resources (DEWR) (since then renamed,
see following). The Marine Biodiversity Division within DEWR included four new
‘branches’:
the National Oceans Office Branch; Marine Conservation
Branch; Marine Environment Branch; and Natural Resources Policy Branch. The
Minister for the Environment has the responsibility for the Division (which
includes the NOO Branch) and reports to cabinet on its
The changes to NOO reflected how the federal Howard government came to view
the Oceans Policy. The ‘oceans’ were initially
addressed as a
singular policy issue. The NOO provided a central point for accessing all things
dealing with ‘oceans’
and reflected the importance of this policy
area. By taking away its executive agency status, and making the NOO a branch
the environment department, ‘oceans’ issues were then located
in the broad context of environmental policy. During this
time, the argument for
oceans legislation was increasing to secure the ‘oceans’ as a key
policy issue (below).
Legislation versus policy
The Commonwealth’s decision to develop an oceans policy, rather than
legislation, has been viewed as a ‘safe
so that new
methods could be tested during implementation. In more recent years, advocates
have argued that legislative grounding
may be needed to give stability to the
Oceans Policy. Environmental NGOs are prominent among such advocates (for
example, through
Oceans Eleven
paper). However, other stakeholders
have also developed an interest in this direction such as the National
Environmental Law Association
(NELA) (below).
The Australian Government largely ignored the need for the development of an
Oceans Act, but acknowledged that some legislative grounding
was required for
the implementation of the Oceans Policy. In October 2005, following the
restructuring of the NOO, Senator Ian Campbell,
the then Environment Minister,
announced that RMPs will be established under section 176 of the
Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Act
1999 (Cth) (EPBC Act). This has provided a
legislative basis and consistency in the implementation of Marine Bioregional
Plans (MBPs).
MBPs have replaced RMPs and there are key differences between the
two plans. First, RMPs focused on environmental and economic aspects
region and on regional objectives. MBPs, on the other hand, focus mainly on
environment issues and outline the ‘key
conservation issues and priorities
in each marine
Second, there are now fewer regions identified through MBPs and it is
interesting to note that the Antarctic zone is no longer identified
The original Oceans Policy documents described RMPs as being ‘based on
large marine ecosystems.’
The Oceans Policy stated that RMPs would
propose allocations of ocean resources, delivered principally through
existing responsible sectoral management arrangements, using
multiple use
principles to generate income and employment and to optimise long-term benefits
holistic approach to implementing the Oceans Policy, from both environmental and
economic aspects, proved difficult to accomplish.
By linking the marine plans to
the EPBC Act, the environmental focus became a key priority for the marine
plans. Nevertheless, the
Act still considers economic and other broad social
issues. According to sub-section 176(4):
A bioregional plan may include provisions about all or any of the
(a) the components of biodiversity, their distribution and conservation
(b) important economic and social values;
(ba) heritage values of places;
(c) objectives relating to biodiversity and other values;
(d) priorities, strategies and actions to achieve the objectives;
(e) mechanisms for community involvement in implementing the plan;
(f) measures for monitoring and reviewing the plan.
Under section 176 of the EPBC Act, the Minister for the Environment, Heritage
and the Arts must conduct public consultations on draft
MBPs and may cooperate
with States and Territories if the plan goes beyond Australian Government
territory. Marine bioregional plans
also provide the platform for the National
Representative System of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). The SERMP and its system
has been reviewed and adjusted to conform to a MBP. DEWR stressed that
the previous work on the SERMP is still valid and
all the objectives contained within the Plan remain relevant and most of the
actions have either been implemented or continue to
be implemented [through
Howard government allocated $37.7 million over four years in the 2006-7 budget
to create MBPs for the whole of
DEWR noted that the bioregional planning under the EPBC Act
gives new impetus for the implementation of
Australia’s Oceans
by streamlining the planning process and providing greater guidance
priorities.
Current debate centres on the development of an Australian
Oceans Act (as is the case in Canada where there is an Oceans
). The use of section 176 of
the EPBC Act has only partially addressed criticism of the lack a legislative
base to the ocean policy.
In March 2006, the Australian Conservation Foundation
(ACF) and NELA released a report entitled
Out of the Blue: An Act for
Australia’s Oceans
The ACF and NELA hoped that this document would ‘kick start’ a
discussion on Australian oceans governance. The ACF and
NELA argued that the
EPBC Act can complement an Oceans Act. The report provides a number of
recommendations: the development of an
Australian Oceans Authority; the signing
of an Intergovernmental Agreement on Australia’s Oceans by the Australian
Government,
state and territory governments through the Council of Australian
Governments; and increased indigenous community
involvement.
Despite these
efforts, the former Howard government regarded ‘the linking of the Oceans
Policy to the EPBC Act as providing
a sufficient legislative
An Oceans Act,
whether complementing the EPBC Act or addressing all oceans issues (as in the
case of the Oceans Policy) would increase
parliamentary debate and scrutiny over
decisions regarding Australia’s oceans. Debate on oceans issues may even
result in a
new community consultation process, and support the current Rudd
government’s view of a more ‘participatory democracy’
demonstrated through the
Australia 2020
Summit in April
An environmental focus for implementation
In 2003, five years after the release of the Oceans Policy, the present
writer concluded that ‘it cannot be claimed that there
is full integration
across sectors and jurisdictions’ and that ‘the most significant
goal for ocean institutions, key
stakeholders and interest groups involved in
policy implementation will be the continual support of integration across
sectors and
makers and commentators were optimistic that the RMP process, given time, would
result in more integration. In 2006, it was
The SERMP process provides two valuable lessons for the implementation of other
RMPs in Australia…First, the aim to reach full
integration within a
relatively short period of time whilst implementing a new RMP (without an agreed
framework) is difficult, if
not impossible to accomplish. Commonwealth agencies
need to acknowledge that the restraints of Federalism may prevent full
integration
across sectors and jurisdictions from ever occurring. Second,
partial integration in the SERMP has not resulted in policy failure,
has increased cohesion, community consultation, stakeholder participation, and
communication between sectors and
increased ‘cohesion’ and ‘communication’ was a
significant achievement in Australia’s oceans management
given the decades
of jurisdictional conflict.
However, ten years since its release, the Oceans Policy’s focus on
integration is no longer a major priority for policy makers.
In the process of
implementation of any new policy, ‘new issues, new requirements new
considerations emerge as the process
Ecosystem-based
management through bioregional marine planning has increased in importance, also
reflecting that the policy has gone
‘full circle’ with its
environmental focus. For instance, the original policy documents stated that the
NOO was to be
located in Environment Australia, then, Senator Hill’s push
for the NOO to have executive agency status (outside the department)
early years of implementation reinforced that the Oceans Policy was
‘neither solely an environmental protection
policy nor solely an economic
development policy’.
was great concern that different sectors and stakeholders would not take part in
the development and implementation of RMPs
under the Oceans Policy if the lead
agency was based in the environment department and had an environmental focus.
Arguably, this
was the catalyst for increased ‘cohesion’ and
‘communication’ during the early years of policy implementation.
Yet, the NOO returned to the environment department and Senator
Campbell’s efforts to establish a legislative component for
bioregional
marine planning under the EPBC Act
reflected that the Australian Government was again interested in an
‘environmental’ direction for the implementation of
the policy.
Browne and Wildavsky explain that
[i]mplementation is no longer solely about getting what you once wanted but,
instead, it is about what you have since learned to
prefer until, of course, you
change your mind
raise the question whether the ‘cohesion’ and
‘communication’ across sectors and jurisdictions is
as strong as it
Current directions and conclusion
During the 2007 federal election campaign, political parties announced their
positions on various policy issues. The Australian Greens
Party (a minor party)
was the only party to specifically mention a direction for the Oceans Policy
The Australian Greens will introduce an Oceans Act that coordinates
sustainability of ocean uses through a statutory National Oceans
reporting to the parliament, and enforcing eco-system based regional management
The two major parties, the Australian Labor Party and the
Liberal Party (as part of the Coalition) did not address Oceans Policy
implementation.
The marine component of the Australian Labor Party focused on a
Great Barrier Reef ‘Rescue
, while the Coalition
Government’s election plan focused on fisheries ‘Strengthening and
Protecting Australia’s
This reinforced that ‘oceans’ as a singular policy issue was no
longer a priority for either major party as it was during
the 1996 federal
election. On 24 November 2007, a new Federal Labor government was elected and
nine years of Oceans Policy implementation
under the Coalition ended. It is
interesting to note that the new government immediately changed the name of the
environment department
to the Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and
The oceans policy development process demonstrates and reinforces what policy
analysts already knew, that ‘new’ policies
are complex and timely.
This is indicative of, and an advantage for, implementing ‘new’
policies. However, Pressman and
Wildavsky, who wrote their infamous book on
policy implementation, claim ‘the advantages of being new are exactly
that: being
new. They dissipate quickly over
surprising then that the Australian Government made the most of emphasising its
‘new’, ‘world first’
policy, and that
when Australian policy makers began developing a new policy and using untried
implementation methods they were aware of ‘getting
it right’. They
were conscious that other States would be learning from the [Oceans Policy]
Consequently,
the Oceans Policy and its institutions and implementation methods have become a
source of policy learning and transfer
for other countries establishing their
oceans policies, such as Canada and New
The year 2008 marks a
new era for oceans management in Australia and the Oceans Policy will no longer
be regarded as a ‘new’
policy. Pressman and Wildavsky put it
youth has gone and middle age has come, hopefully more powerful, certainly more
experienced, inevitably less
innovative.
policy decisions up until the release of the Oceans Policy demonstrate the
demise of jurisdictional integration, which in the
ten years of implementation
has never been resolved. The years under the Howard government have demonstrated
a commitment to Oceans
Policy implementation through innovative methods, namely
new institutions delivering ecosystem based management through RMPS. While
now doubtful that jurisdictional integration is a priority for policy makers,
the new emphasis on bioregional marine planning
and its legislative grounding
appears to be a stable way forward for the continual implementation of the
Oceans Policy – although
mainly from an environmental perspective.
Cohesion between sectors, stakeholders, and jurisdictions, despite the
environmental focus,
will be an important factor for the continuation of the
policy. From this point forth, policy makers, stakeholders and commentators
the opportunity to build on what has already been established by the Oceans
Policy process and to re-establish ocean and marine
issues as a priority for the
current and future governments. Pushing the debate for an Oceans Act may be the
key to putting ‘oceans’
back on the government’s agenda.
Dr Joanna Vince is a Lecturer
in the School of Government at the University of Tasmania. Email:
Joanna.Vince@utas.edu.au
See Vince, J.Z. 2003.
‘Australia’s Oceans Policy: Five Years of Integration Across Sectors
and Jurisdictions?’
Maritime Studies
. 133: 1-13; Vince J.Z. 2006.
‘The South East Regional Marine Plan: Implementing Australia’s
Oceans Policy.’
Marine Policy
. 30: 420-430.
United Nations, ‘Article
Convention on the Law of the Sea
, done in Montego Bay,
Jamaica, 10 December 1982, in force 16 November
1994, 1833, UNTS 396.
United Nations, ‘Article
Convention on the Law of the Sea
, done in Montego Bay,
Jamaica, 10 December 1982, in force 16 November
1994, 1833, UNTS 396.
See United Nations. 1992.
‘Chapter 17’.
Agenda 21: Programme of Action for Sustainable
Development and the UNCED Proceedings.
New York: Oceana; Johnston, D. 1996.
‘UNCLOS and UNCED: a collision of mind-sets?’, in Kriwoken, L.,
Haward, M., VanderZwaag,
D. and Davis, B. eds.,
Oceans Law and Policy in the
Post-UNCED Era:
Australian and Canadian Perspectives,
London: Kluwer
Law International, 15.
Australian Conservation
Foundation (ACF) and the National Environmental Law Association (NELA). 2006.
Out of the Blue: A Discussion Paper for an Australian Oceans Act
Melbourne, ACF. See Rose, G. and Smyth, C. 2006. ‘Harmonising Australian
environmental law: an oceans Act for Australia’s
National Environmental Law Review
See Vince, J.Z. 2004.
Development of Australia’s Oceans Policy: Change and Stability in a Policy
y. Unpublished PhD thesis, Hobart, University of Tasmania; Haward,
M. 1991. ‘The Offshore’, in B. Galligan, O. Hughes
and C. Walsh,
Inter-Governmental Relations and Public Policy
. Sydney, Allen and
Unwin; Haward, M. 2003. ‘The Ocean and Marine Realm’ in Dovers, S.
and Wild River, S. (eds)
Managing Australia’s Environment
Federation Press, pp 35-52.
Vince, 2003, supra note 1.
Ibid, at 2.
See Commonwealth of
Australia, 1997.
Australia’s Oceans, New Horizons, Oceans Policy
Consultation Paper
. Canberra, AGPS; Commonwealth of Australia, 1998.
Australia’s Oceans Policy – An Issues Paper
, Canberra,
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
The Marine and Coastal
Community Network (MCCN) and the Australian Committee for the World Conservation
Union (ACIUCN) assisted with
public consultation during 1997. See Vince, supra
note 1, at 3 and ACIUCN (Australian Committee for IUCN). 1998.
Australia’s Oceans: Development of an Oceans Policy for Australia
Outcomes of a National Workshop
. 15-17 May 1997, ACIUCN Occasional Paper
Number 7, March 1998: 3.
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
TFG International 2002.
Review of the Implementation of Oceans Policy
, Hobart, TFG International,
Commonwealth of Australia,
Australia’s Oceans Policy: Caring, Understanding and Using
. Canberra, AGPS; Commonwealth of Australia, 1998b.
Australia’s Oceans Policy: Specific Sectoral Measures
. Canberra,
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
Commonwealth of Australia,
1998, supra note 15, at 3.
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
Commonwealth of Australia,
1998, supra note 15, at 16.
‘Environment
Australia’ was the Australian Government’s environmental department
during this time.
Primary Industries
Ministerial Council. 2007. ‘About NRMMC’,
http://www.mincos.gov.au/about_nrmmc
last modified 23 October
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
National Oceans Office.
Annual Report
. Hobart: AGPS.
Sullivan, S. 2004.
‘Beyond Our Coasts – Australia’s Oceans Policy’, paper
presented at the
Coast to Coast Conference
, Hobart, 19-23 April 2004.
Vince, 2006, supra note 1,
TFG International 2002
Review of the Implementation of Oceans Policy
, Hobart, TFG International,
See, eg, Wescott, G. 2000.
‘The Development and Initial Implementation of Australia’s
‘Integrated and Comprehensive’
Oceans Policy.’
Coastal Management.
43: 853-878.
TFG International. 2002.
Review of the Implementation of Oceans Policy
, Hobart, TFG International,
Ibid, at 3.
Ibid, at 8.
Ibid, at 10.
Ibid, at 17.
Ibid, at 18.
Ibid, at 19.
See Vince, 2003, supra note
1, at 9; Vince, 2006, supra note 1.
Smyth, C., Prideaux, M.,
Davey, K. and Grady, M. 2003.
Oceans Eleven
, Melbourne, ACF.
See Vince, 2003, supra note
1, at 9; Vince, 2006, supra note 1, at 425.
Smyth et al, 2003, supra
note 40, at 6.
ACF and NELA. 2004.
South-East Regional Marine Plan
Media Release 18 August
See Vince, 2006, supra note
Vince, 2006, supra note 1,
Foster, E., Haward M. and
Coffen-Smout, S. 2005. ‘Implementing Integrated Oceans Management:
Australia’s South East Regional
Marine Plan (SERMP) and Canada’s
Eastern Scotian Shelf Integrated Management Initiative (ESSIM).’
. 29: 391-405; Vince, 2006, supra note 1, at 420-430.
See Haward, M. and Vince,
J.Z. (forthcoming).
Oceans Governance in the Twenty-First Century: Managing
the Blue Planet
. United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Department of the
Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts. 2008. ‘Australia’s Oceans
http://www.environment.gov.au/coasts/oceans-policy/
(viewed 10 January 2008).
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
Department of the
Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts 2008. ‘Previous regional marine
planning process – the South
East Regional Marine Plan’,
http://www.environment.gov.au/coasts/mbp/south-east/
previous-process.html
(viewed October 2007).
Commonwealth of Australia,
1998, supra note 15, at 11.
Ibid, at 12.
Department of the
Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts, 2008, supra note 50.
Department of Environment
and Water Resources. 2007. ‘New environment-related spending 2006-07
Budget and key recent initiatives’,
http://www.
environment.gov.au/about/publications/budget/2006/ebo/chapter2.html
12 June 2007).
Department of the
Environment and Water Resources. 2007. ‘
Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Act
http://www.environment.gov.au/epbc/index.html
(viewed 12 June 2007).
See ACF and NELA. 2006.
Out of the Blue: A Discussion Paper for an Australian Oceans Act
Melbourne, ACF; Vince J. Z. 2008. ‘Policy Transfer in Oceans Governance:
Learning Lessons From Australia’s Oceans Policy
22: 159-181; Foster et al, 2005, supra note 46, at 391-405.
ACF and NELA, 2006, supra
Haward, M. and Vince, J.Z.
2006. ‘Australian Ocean Governance – Initiatives, Challenges and
Opportunities’,
Australasian Political Studies Association
, Newcastle, 25-27 September 2006, at 9.
See Australian Government
http://www.australia2020.gov.au/
Vince, 2003, supra note 1,
Vince, 2006, supra note 1,
See Haward and Vince,
(forthcoming), supra note 47.
McLaughlin, M. 1987.
‘Learning from Experience: Lessons from Policy Implementation’.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis
. 9(2): 174.
Commonwealth of Australia,
1998, supra note 15, at 3.
Browne, A. and Wildavsky, A.
1984. ‘What Should Evaluation Mean to Implementation’ and
‘Implementation as Mutual
Adaptation’ in Pressman, J. and Wildavsky,
Implementation,
3d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press,
The Greens. 2007.
‘Australian Greens Policy: Marine and Coastal Areas’,
http://www.greens.org.au/about/
(viewed March 2007).
Australian Labor Party.
Labor’s Reef Rescue Plan: Election 2007 Policy Document
October 2007.
The Coalition Government.
Election 2007 Policy: Strengthening and Protecting Australia’s
Fishing Industry
http://www.liberal.org.au/about/
documents/Fisheries.pdf
(viewed 14 November 2007).
Pressman, J. and Wildavsky,
Implementation,
3d ed. Berkeley: University of California Press,
Vince, 2008, supra note 56,
See Vince, J.Z. 2005.
‘Policy Transfer in Ocean Governance: Australia, Canada and New
Proceedings of the Australasian Political Studies Association
, Dunedin, New Zealand, Tasmania, September; Vince, 2008, supra
Pressman and Wildavsky,
1973, supra note 70, at 130.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter