URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Sim, Janice --- "When Parents Kill Children: Understanding Filicide by Thea Brown, Danielle Tyson and Paula Fernandez Arias (Eds.)" [2018] CICrimJust 13; (2018) 30(1) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 71
When Parents Kill Children: Understanding Filicide
by Thea Brown,
Danielle Tyson and Paula Fernandez Arias (eds.), Palgrave
millan, 2018, 267 pages (ISBN
978-3-319-63096-0)
Introduction
When Parents Kill Children: Understanding Filicide
international data on filicide from Australia, the United Kingdom
(‘UK’), the Republic of Ireland, Canada, South
Africa, Chile, South
America and Japan. Three core themes emerge from the diverse contributions in
the first two parts of the book:
the undercurrents of male violence in
societies; familial socioeconomic conditions; and the prevalence and devastating
mental illness.
The undercurrents of male violence in societies
The theme emerging from the data across the countries canvassed by the book
is that male violence underlies most filicides. Fathers
kill children within the
context of intimate partner violence, domestic violence (Brown et al., p.
155; Manriquez & Arias, p. 40; Dawson, p. 19; David & Jaffe, p.
187), fatal child abuse (Dobash & Dobash, p. 82), marital
separation or
relationship breakdown (Dobash & Dobash, p. 91; Dawson, p. 21; Brown et al.,
p. 153; Johnson & Sachmann, p.
131), and mental illness (Brown et al., p.
154; Manriquez & Arias, p. 40). Yet there are exceptions to the overwhelming
of male violence in filicides. For example, Yasumi (p. 70) points out
that in Japan in the period 1994–2013 mothers (39.2%)
and fathers (38.6%)
were equally responsible in fatal child abuse cases (491 out of a total of 1574
filicide cases), and that of
241 multiple filicide cases, mothers (64.7%) more
than fathers (24.5%) were the perpetrators.
The undercurrents of male violence are prominent in countries with violent
histories. Manriquez and Arias report that majority of
filicides in Chile occur
in the context of ‘patriarchal terrorism’ (p. 39). Matthews and
Abrahams draw on South Africa
as an example in which violence against children
occurs against the backdrop of its history of apartheid. Generations of children
grow up in the absence of at least one biological parent (usually the father),
their childhood shaped by external influences (such
as gang culture) and wider
social and financial pressures (such as punitive parenting) (p. 49). The context
of violence in South
Africa is represented by its high rates of infanticide and
neonaticide (p. 56).
Domestic violence and parental separations as precursors to filicide are also
consistent across countries. Parental estrangements
perpetuate feelings of male
entitlement to power and violence (p. 21), particularly in situations where the
male perpetrator (the
father) feels threated that his domination of (p. 21), and
belief in his power over, his wife and children (Sim 2009) are eroding.
theme of male violence reveals the vulnerability of children caught in the
patriarchal roots of violence, of which they do not
ask to be part.
Familial socioeconomic conditions
Familial socioeconomic conditions as part of the complex set of family
circumstances in filicide cases are discussed not only in relation
Africa, but also to Japan (p. 73) and Canada (p. 186). While Pritchard et al.
(pp. 108, 113) recognise that socioeconomic
circumstances can compound mental
illnesses, which lead to filicide as well as fatal child abuse and neglect, the
link between these
two factors requires further research. For immigrant families
in Canada, David and Jaffe point out that migration, acculturative
coupled with domestic violence, cultural conflict and language barriers leave
families more vulnerable because of their marginalised
status and challenges to
their access to services (pp. 184–7). The consequence, as pointed out
by Yasumi (p. 74), in societies
like Japan, where suicide rates are tied to
socioeconomic adversity, is a significant and corresponding effect on filicides
and filicide-suicides.
Findings of the potential for adverse socioeconomic conditions to impact on
family violence underscore the need to support disadvantaged
families to seek
services including education, housing and professional and medical support (Sim
Mental illness
The prevalence of mental illness in many societies, including Chile,
Australia, the UK and the United States, cannot be underestimated.
As Brown et
(2018) summarise, research in Australia and elsewhere (Pritchard et
al., p. 107) has shown the link between poor mental health and
perpetrators of
filicide (usually mothers) (p. 154). Parental illness can have a devastating
impact on children growing up, which
makes early intervention and long-term
support crucial (Pritchard et al.,
p. 116). The intricate and subtle
correlation between mental health and socioeconomic conditions means that
prevention and intervention
measures must incorporate holistic and integrative
approaches that engage and support families (Sim 2012, p. 472) in order to
children from foreseeable risks of endangerment. The need for support
is not unique to families where parents live with mental illness.
Arizona indicates that children with special care needs are at higher risk of
filicide (p. 175) and, as such, require
as much engagement and support (if not
more) as families with mental illness.
Intervention and prevention
The third part of the book distinguishes this book from its predecessors in
filicide literature by going beyond the traditional focus
on characteristics and
situational circumstances of the filicidal event (Brown et al. 2018, p. xiv).
This section is unique in the
way it examines issues related to the
‘before’ (prevention and intervention) and ‘after’
(trauma) of filicide.
The book highlights the dire need to consider the
importance of interactivity of external service services (such as health
police and social professionals) with the family (Sim 2015, p. 90) in
terms of risk assessment, prevention and intervention measures.
In Chapter 11, Cavanagh succinctly acknowledges that there are opportunities
to identify risks of child endangerment or the ‘signs
of danger’ (p.
202). Although parents sometimes disguise the injuries inflicted on the children
to circumvent risk identification
(Sim 2015), parents often share their thoughts
with professionals, family and friends (Johnson 2005). It is thus paramount for
and medical professionals to ‘look beyond’ the parental
version of events (Sim 2015, p. 86). A greater level of engagement
reduces social isolation (Sim 2012). It also allows medical and social
professionals to build holistic approaches based
on a layered understanding of
the family situation, to make intervention decisions based on an objective
assessment constructed on
evidence, instead of solely relying on the
parent’s account (Lock & Fraser
2013; Sim 2015).
Cavanagh pointed out in the Australian Luke Batty case that child protection
services ‘closed the case based on the mother saying
the father loved his
son’ (p. 211). This representation is similar to that of the parents in
the cases of Daniel Pelka and
Peter Connelly in the UK, where the image of the
loving or ‘caring’ parent presented to the police, medical and
workers concealed ongoing abuses (Sim 2015, p. 85). Such dysfunctional
representations allow for serious risks to the child to be
downplayed or
reconstructed by the perpetrator and professionals in favour of accepting other
explanations for the injuries (Sim
2015, p. 86). The fact that child protection
services in the Luke Batty case did not speak to the father indicates that an
assessment was not undertaken.
Chapters 12 and 13 examine the perspectives of family members affected by the
filicide, which is often overlooked in filicide literature.
These moving
accounts drive home the message that the criminal justice system, paradoxically,
adds to the pain of traumatic bereavement
(p. 255). In the Irish context, Butler
(p. 233), who speaks from her personal experience, presents a powerful and
compelling argument
for legislative change to Ireland’s current mental
health approach to one that should incorporate the views, safety, wellbeing
impact of family members.
This book offers myriad perspectives: the number of countries canvassed and
different methodological approaches used reveal some culture
specific underlying
causes and allow for comparisons between research findings. However, researchers
should be careful not to homogenise
the Australian data (Cavanagh, p. 210).
Contrary to the Victorian study (Brown et al. 2014), data in New South Wales
found that,
prior to 2006, the majority of children who were killed as a result
of abuse, neglect, murder or other suspicious circumstances were
known to state
agencies at the time of death (Sim 2009, p. 244, 2012).
Conceptualising and placing familial interactions within larger socioeconomic
and cultural contexts offer a broad overview of the
contexts in which filicide
occurs. The book’s focus on affirming empirical foundations with
quantitative methods could, in
addition, examine social work perspectives to
build a more nuanced understanding of interventions. Further research can build
what the book has done by looking at building interactions between the family
and external services to suggest strategies for prevention.
Having said this,
the book’s exposition of international data makes this collection unique
and indispensable to academics,
researchers, practitioners and policy-makers in
the areas of child protection, homicide (or filicide) studies, law, criminology,
social welfare, mental health, critical and social theories.
Johnson, C 2005,
Come with daddy: child murder-suicide after family
, University of Western Australia Press, Crawley.
Lock, R & Fraser, N 2013, ‘Coventry safeguarding children board
serious case review re Daniel Pelka: overview report’,
Coventry LSCB.
Sim, J 2009, ‘Loving fathers? Implications of state
intervention’,
University of Tasmania Law Review
vol. 28, no. 2,
pp. 242–64.
Sim, J 2012, ‘Bridging the gap: thinking beyond the state in child
protection’,
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
no. 3, pp. 469–75.
Sim, J 2015, ‘Invisible children, dying to save others: a discussion of
three fatal abuse cases and the prevention of future
Issues in Criminal Justice
, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 79–94.
Lecturer and Griffith University Law Futures Centre Associate
Member, Griffith University School of Criminology and Criminal Justice,
Coast Campus, Parklands Drive, Southport Qld
25, Australia. Email:
j.sim@griffith.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (20.4 KB)
PDF format (223 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter