URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Banks, Robin; Hartley, Chris --- "Reform road home needs more than good intentions" [2009] ALRCRefJl 32; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 18
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 18–19 of the original
Reform road home needs more than good intentions
By Robin Banks* and Chris Hartley*
In 10 years, Australia has seen an extraordinary shift in focus on
the need to deal not simply with the provision of shelter, but to address those
underlying complexities.
In that time, there has been a spotlight shone on the impact of the law and
legal system as both a causative factor in respect of
a serious and enduring barrier for people seeking to move out of homelessness
into more stable and healthy
lives. While much has changed in terms of public
awareness of homelessness, there remain many enduring myths: myths that have the
potential to skew the focus of responses to homelessness and, consequently,
impair our capacity to reduce overall homelessness.
Many people in the community would picture a typical homeless person as a
middle-aged man of Anglo-Celtic origin, sleeping rough in
one of our inner
cities. When thinking about services for homeless people, most people would
think of men’s hostels and shelters
in the inner urban centres run by the
major charities and not-for-profit organisations.
Yet the data on homelessness tells a very different story. In 2001, the
national Census recorded that there were 99,900 homeless people
of whom almost
half were under the age of 25 (46%), and a slightly smaller proportion were
women (42%). Of the total population of
sleepers. Most others, while transient, were finding some form of temporary
shelter, be it
with friends or family, or in supported accommodation
By 2006, the total number of homeless people recorded in the Census had
increased to 105,000.
More recently
released data indicates that a significant proportion of homeless people are not
living in major urban centres, but
rather can be found living in rural
The same 10-year period has seen a growing focus on the legal needs of
to those needs. While
there are services run by local lawyers (including the Reverend Tim Costello in
St Kilda) that have provided
legal assistance to homeless people for many years,
the first large scale attempt to respond to the legal needs of homeless people
came with the establishment of the Homeless Persons’ Legal Clinic (HPLC)
by the Public Interest Law Clearing House (PILCH)
in Victoria in 2001. This
service coordinated the delivery of legal services on a pro bono basis by
private law firms at clinics
run at crisis accommodation centres and welfare
agencies around Melbourne. Since then, similar services were established in 2002
by Queensland PILCH (QPILCH) and in 2004 by PIAC in partnership with PILCH
A key challenge for all of these services is reaching beyond those members of
the homeless community who fit the ‘popular’
perception to the more
hidden homeless communities of women, young people, and people in regional
areas. Another challenge is to
understand the legal issues that are affecting
these communities systemically and to seek to bring about reform to laws and
in the hope that we can begin to seriously reduce the number of people
becoming homeless and remaining so.
On the first count, in Victoria, the HPLC has established two clinics in
Bendigo and one women-specific clinic in St Kilda. Across
the border, a number
of regional outreach services have been developed by Legal Aid NSW, which
initially got involved in HPLS through
a clinic in outer Sydney. There is also a
specific HPLS clinic operating for women in inner Sydney and work is currently
on responding to the needs of Aboriginal people who are homeless, rough
sleepers and others who have limited contact with the service.
The HPLC in South
Australia is currently investigating the use of video teleconferencing to link
remote areas to law firms based in Adelaide. It
is clear that legal services are developing and evolving to respond to emerging
previously unmet needs and in response to improved understanding of the
The other critical element of the work of the legal services has been the
identification of systemic legal problems and the development
of law and policy
reform proposals to deal with them. Each of the services has worked on a range
of law reform issues, some specifically
state-based, others resulting from
national laws and programs. Some of the key challenges faced are to achieve
reforms to the systems
in the major human services bureaucracies that can and do
impact on the day-to-day lives of homeless people. These include the rules
procedures in Centrelink and housing departments, and the processing of fines
(particularly on-the-spot fines). In the area of
law reform, significant work
has been done to highlight the situation of homeless people in the electoral
systems, in the regulation
of boarding and rooming houses, public order offences
and discrimination issues.
It is important that homeless people themselves are involved in the
identification and reform of these systemic issues. Unfortunately
there has been
an enduring myth that those that have experienced homelessness are unable or
unwilling to engage in law reform and
public policy work. However, not only is
such involvement an important element of the human rights of homeless
it is also likely to result
in public policy decisions that are better targeted and more effective in
responding to issues surrounding
HPLS in NSW and the HPLCs in Victoria, Queensland and SA are leading the way
in ensuring decision makers hear the voices of homeless
people. A clear focus of
HPLS is to gain the input of homeless people to its policy work in a creative
and engaging way. A recent
example of this focus was the human rights
consultation workshops that HPLS and PIAC held in homeless shelters throughout
in response to the Australian Government’s National Human Rights
Consultation. These events were jointly conducted with Milk
Crate Theatre, a
group that produces theatre for the homeless and disadvantaged community. At
each workshop, the actors from Milk
Crate Theatre performed three stories that
were inspired by the real life stories of people from the homeless community.
these stories reflected and explored a number of different human rights
issues and how they currently play out in Australia.
After the performance, homeless people in attendance were encouraged to
provide their stories and ideas about how their human rights
are (or are not)
protected in Australia and how these protections could be improved. In total,
approximately 130 homeless people
attended these consultation events. Their
answers, ideas and suggestions were used to inform HPLS’ submission to the
Human Rights Consultation. The submissions from the HPLCs in Victoria,
Queensland and SA were similarly developed through extensive
consultations with
those who had experienced homelessness.
dedicated consumer bodies that are equipped to advise government
agencies on the
best ways of engaging with homeless people. One such group, Street Care, was
established by HPLS with funding support
from the City of Sydney in February
2009. Street Care, made up entirely of currently and formerly homeless people,
is not a short-cut
for government to hear from homeless people, but rather a
mechanism to provide advice on how best to do so. Since its establishment
Care has been involved in a number of projects including assisting HPLS to set
up and run the human rights workshops. Members
of Street Care have also spoken
at a number of events including at the Homelessness NSW Annual Conference, the
City of Sydney and
Mission Australia’s ‘Housing When?’
Conference and the Newcastle City Council’s Homelessness Forum.
Street Care has been established to ensure that decision makers hear not only
the Street Care members’ voices but also those
of other members of
Sydney’s homeless community. To facilitate this, in May 2009 members of
Street Care came up with the idea
of conducting a ‘Street Survey’ of
those currently experiencing homelessness. The survey contains specific
such as whether compulsory Centrepay payments (a direct bill-paying
service for people receiving payments from Centrelink) are a
good thing, as well
as enabling participants to provide feedback on other systemic issues in the
area of homelessness that requires
reform. So far more than 40 people
experiencing homelessness have responded to Street Care’s Street Survey.
The answers provided
thus far clearly express the need for greater investment in
crisis accommodation and training for police and other enforcement agencies
come in contact with homeless people. The responses provided to the Street Care
Street Survey will be used to inform the policy
and advocacy work of Street Care
and HPLS over the next few months.
It is vital that legal and other services set up in response to homelessness
are providing services that respond to unmet need. In
order to better understand
the needs of homeless people in the areas of service delivery and law reform it
is essential that we,
as advocates, become the change we would like to see. When
acting as advocates for the legal and human rights of homeless people,
must ensure that they are respecting the rights of homeless people to be
actively involved in decision-making processes
that affect them. To fail to do
so means that we are no longer speaking with, or on behalf of, homeless people;
we are speaking over
the top of them.
* Robin Banks is the Chief Executive Officer of the Public Interest
Advocacy Centre (PIAC).
* Chris Hartley is the Policy Officer for the Homeless Persons’
Legal Service (HPLS), which is a joint initiative of PIAC and
Interest Law Clearing House (NSW). HPLS provides support to Street Care, a
consumer representative group that advises
on effective consultation with
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2050.0—Australian Census Analytic Program: Counting the Homeless,
(2003) <www.abs.gov.au/ AUSSTATS> at 16 September 2009.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
2050.0—Australian Census Analytic Program: Counting the Homeless,
(2008) <www.abs.gov.au/ AUSSTATS> at 16 September 2009.
The active involvement of affected people
in decision-making processes is a human right that is protected under Article 25
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(the ICCPR).
Australia is a State Party to the ICCPR.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (180 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter