URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2022/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Arnold, Bruce Baer --- "Surveillance Machines in Ivory Towers? Surveillance Capitalism, Dignity and Learning Management Systems" [2022] CanLawRw 5; (2022) 19(1) Canberra Law Review 70
Surveillance Machines in Ivory Towers? Surveillance
Capitalism, Dignity and Learning Management Systems
Bruce Baer Arnold*
Universities in the Global North are embracing digital platforms as the basis
for the delivery of content, assessment of proficiencies
and cost reduction.
Those platforms are surveillance machines, a manifestation of surveillance
capitalism. They abstract students
and academics alike, embodying a politics in
which people are addressed as digital artefacts – instances of when, what
how they have interacted online rather than being respected as people who
are more than a data point on an educational social graph.
Digital panopticism
in online teaching, where students might only have a virtual presence and
teachers may be precarious, conflates
seeing with understanding. It rewards a
bureaucratic rationality that rewards conformity rather than creativity on the
part of teachers
and students, contrary to supposed improvements in the
‘student experience’ that construe students as clients in a market
for credentialism. Although data may be neutral and might even be accurate, its
interpretation has biases and political impacts.
Academic achievement may be
understood as deviations from norms or through algorithms about ‘students
at risk’. Automated
analysis of performance targets fosters casualisation
of the academy alongside buying-in of course material from enterprises that
shifted from publishing textbooks to licensing courseware. The academic
surveillance machine foreshadows a legal practice in
which decision-making is
automated, employee productivity is assessed through artificial intelligence and
justice is driven by data
profiles rather than respect for dignity.
Introduction
This article explores contemporary legal education as a matter of digital
analytics, in other words pervasive automated observation
and appraisal of both
learners and educators. It argues that digital
panopticism
in online law teaching,
where students might only have a virtual presence and teachers may be
precarious,
conflates seeing with
understanding, Fordist data collection with wisdom.
The panopticism embodies an imperative, fostered by solutions vendors and by
a ‘big data’ governmentality in society at
large as part of what
Shoshana Zuboff dubbed Surveillance Capitalism, to minimise costs by tacitly and
automatically collecting data
opportunity.
It fosters a
disciplinarity in which academics, alongside students, internalise an
‘analytics mindset’
which reinforces a ‘metrics
That disciplinarity
erodes both the autonomy and dignity of academics in favour of managers, an echo
of both 1920’s Fordism
in factories, contemporary robotisation of labour
within Amazon and other
corporations,
and marketing of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) services that assess white collar productivity on
the basis of screen time and keystrokes
or under the rubric of ‘emotion
recognition systems’ scan online activity for indications that employees
are discontented,
suicidal or likely to ‘go
Those managers
– a ‘new class’ – have embraced a neoliberal hegemony,
construing the university’s mission
and surveillance activity through a
market lens and a misplaced enthusiasm for technological
affordances.
The panopticism sits awkwardly with questions of choice, a core facet of both
dignity and language about
neoliberalism.
Unlike engagement
with global social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, TikTok or
Instagram the surveilled in what are variously
characterised as learning
management systems (LMS), content management systems (CMS) or digital learning
platforms – students
and academics alike – do not have a choice
refusal to engage with the platform constitutes a decision to not seek the
academic qualification or, if remaining enrolled, to forgo
the mark/grade for
the specific unit delivered via the platform. As a matter of ‘exit’
it is unavailing, given that use
of LMS is hegemonic: most universities are
using the platforms in most
Student voice is
typically absent – few students appear to be aware of how platforms
operate – or is misdirected, for
example as expressions of discontent over
matters outside the control of an academic (such as on-campus parking fees,
cleaning or
security) or instances of anonymous upwards bullying (often with a
gendered bias) noted below. Many students do not engage with
‘satisfaction’
surveys they regard as lacking
Alongside social media platforms the operators of LMS rarely disclose to the
surveilled –
• what data is collected,
• how it is stored,
• who sights ‘raw’ and enhanced data,
• how it is interpreted,
• what decisions are made on the basis of that interpretation, as
distinct from marks assigned to individual students for specific
items and affirmed by moderators.
In practice many people are likely to be unaware that there
box rather than merely what happens inside the box and what comes out of the
The imperative for digital panopticism is typically legitimated through
reference to enhancement of the ‘student experience’,
with students
being construed as consumers in a market for legal education and as abstractions
– data profiles – rather
individuals.
It interacts with
appraisal of legal academics on the basis of digital ‘teaching
scores’ that are potentially misunderstood
and misused by
It also interacts with
a governmentality on the basis of publication indices construed as objective
indicators of merit, a ‘truth
in numbers’ that erodes dignity by
regarding scholars as units of production for a global
marketplace.
The article begins by considering digital learning platforms as a
manifestation of biopolitics
a misplaced ‘wisdom of the managerial crowd’ for digital solutions.
Those platforms are increasingly prevalent as
universities across the globe
respond to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, whether autonomously or in partnership
with entities such
as 2U whose raison d’etre is exemplary return on
investment by offering ‘online program management’
services that extend from
student recruitment through to curriculum design and assessment in ways that
refashion traditional understandings
university.
The article considers a tyranny of digital metrics in relation to the legal
academy’s generation and critique of knowledge,
in other words
institutions that deserve a privileged position. The article concludes by
looking beyond specific criticisms of metrics
to offer a critique from the
perspective of theorists such as Nussbaum, Lanier and Gewirth who are concerned
with flourishing rather
than life as a matter of markets and digital
affordances.
It suggests some
responses by students, academics and regulators.
The following pages provide one Australian perspective, drawing on practice
in public and private institutions, but are applicable
to the legal academy in
the United Kingdom, New Zealand, United States, Canada and elsewhere.
Seeing like a university
Contemporary universities have been characterised as exemplifying a hegemonic
neoliberalism – a soft biopolitics – that
understands public/private
institutions in terms of markets, consumers and
competition.
It is hegemonic
because global, apparent in both the public and private sectors, and so
prevalent as to be largely unremarked. What
is unrecognised or regarded as
inevitable is unlikely to be successfully contested.
Although there are differences in the autonomy of institutions, the
relationship between professional training and each academic curriculum,
broader legal frameworks regarding human rights such as privacy, overall we can
construe law faculties and their parent universities
as information machines.
They collect, process and act upon data regarding students and staff. As such
they are counterparts of many
public/ private sector entities, with universities
increasingly embracing a private/private sector managerialism that encompasses
use of external service providers, restructuring of work practices through use
of digital technologies and reference to ‘clients’
‘customers’ as determinants of both an institution’s financial
viability and legitimacy.
That market orientation involves standardisation of what is taught and how it
is taught, with reliance on what are characterised as
learning management
systems (LMS), content management systems (CMS) or digital learning platforms.
The ‘platforms’ characterisation
adopts language used by
entrepreneurs and consumer protection regulators in identifying social media and
other digital platforms
such as Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn and YouTube where
consumers interact with each other as part of an ‘attention
in which the
platform operators track those interactions and thus profile users in ways that
may not be apparent to or desired by
Those processes are a manifestation of surveillance
capitalism,
a radical extension
of the profiling by marketers and credit referencing bodies evident since at
least the 1850s.
They are also an extension of the more traditional exercise of authority by
governments engaged in ‘seeing like a
– a matter of
abstraction in identification and deployment of human and other resources on a
grand scale with inadequate regard
for the diversity inherent in human dignity.
Concerns regarding dignity are noted below.
Australian universities voice a rhetoric of autonomy, grounded in claims of
community benefit that transcend partisan politics and
parochial interests.
Their existence is a matter of state sanction (many are specifically established
by statute) and supervision
(for example compliance with qualification
frameworks supervised by the Tertiary Education Quality & Standards
They assist the national
government to see as a state, in other words to understand human needs and
interactions on a population
scale, through the digital provision of statistical
data about student demographics that include age, gender, nationality, place
residence and previous/intended qualifications.
Some of that data is aggregated. Some is individual-specific, facilitated for
example in Australia by a Unique Student Identifier
that is independent of the
particular institution or qualification and thus underpins efforts by
policymakers to make sense of education
as a dynamic, complex but single market
across an individual’s lifespan and accordingly embracing tertiary,
vocational and
secondary education.
Universities also seek to see in their own right, mapping cohorts and
individuals through individual-specific identifiers, often referred
to a student
numbers, that only used by the particular institution and any partners. Those
identifiers enable the institution to
both see the student’s presence on
its digital platform and associate that presence with other sources of data.
Digital learning platforms are mechanisms for panopticism, observation that
is pervasive and that disciplines observed individuals
– abstracted as
data subjects, manifestations of particular
That observation is
typically non-reciprocal. The platforms are administratively convenient.
However, like other technologies, they
are not value
and should be actively
critiqued within a dignitarian framework of human rights rather than reinforcing
a biopolitics that is soft
because it does not feature physical force valorised
by theorists such as
They enable law faculties (and the universities of which faculties are a
part) to see like a state, including building and parsing
rich stores of data
nationality, age and prior qualifications.
As universities come to rely on OPM
providers those for-profit entities also engage in panopticism regarding law
students and law
teaching, potentially in a more sophisticated and more
challenging way than the partner institutions. Some challenges are discussed
Academic panopticism is not restricted to universities: surveillance
capitalism as a matter of faith is being promoted in primary
and secondary
education, with for example proposals from technology enthusiasts for AI-based
‘virtual teaching assistants’
that in ‘orchestrating and
organising social activity in the classroom’ will record conversations,
interactions, and
emotional data.
One US study thus comments
In future classrooms, it could be common for AI agents to collect and use
data associated with affective state through sensors such
as pupil size, heart
rate, and similar physiological data. Indeed, work on affect detection is well
developed although challenging
in terms of privacy and
It would be unsurprising if an Australian institution, concerned about claims
regarding student mental health, embraced such agents
‘orchestrate’ wellness and incidentally further the career prospects
of ‘learning engineers’, ‘education
architects’ and
other administrators whose ontology of teaching is somewhat at odds with past
notions of ‘authentic teaching’
and learning.
Platforming and Panopticism
In many countries legal education, centred on building capability for
activity as a solicitor or advocate or administrator, has taken
two forms over
the past seventy years. One form has been provision of doctrine and skills
building in law schools within public/private
universities, consistent with
embrace by the professions of tertiary qualifications as both a quality
assurance mechanism and a basis
for assertion of professional
It has complemented
the other, more traditional form: practice-oriented training by legal
practitioners through for example pupillage
to a barrister.
The first has often been a matter of ‘chalk and talk’, in other
words face to face lectures in which an academic expounds
principles to a
student audience, tutorials in which there is a socratic dialogue with/between
students to deepen understanding of
what was presented in the lectures, and
assessment on the basis of written exercises such as invigilated exams. Exams
have traditionally
been justified as mechanisms for ensuring integrity, testing
understanding through problem-solving and tacitly building self-reliance
experience in a stressful environment analogous to an appearance in court or
negotiation with an adversary.
That model is disrupted or simply reoriented by digital platforms that have
been adopted by universities across the globe, with increasing
uptake as a
response to COVID-19 as institutions shifted to a partly or fully online content
delivery and assessment model because
of concerns regarding the
Those platforms might
be developed
within an institution, involve integration of a
range of off the shelf ‘learning tools’ and integrity mechanisms
as plagiarism checkers) provided by non-profit/commercial entities, or
involve a partnership between the institution and online program
business as discussed below.
Key features of the platforms are typically online provision of lecture
content on a synchronous or asynchronous basis (usually involving
the PowerPoint
tool that is ubiquitous for corporate presentations in the public and private
sectors), online tutorials in ‘virtual
rooms’ and online submission
of text/video assessment items that are automatically checked using plagiarism
software that compares
the particular submission with published material and
other assessment items.
universities have sought to strengthen integrity by using specialist assessment
invigilation service providers such as Proctorio
that involve the provider
undertaking a video scrutiny of both the student and the location in which the
student is undertaking an
for example that person’s bedroom, an invasiveness that raises ethics
that are not obviated
by reference to use of supposedly neutral and racially-blind AI. In future
platforms are likely to move beyond
automated quiz marking and feedback to
automated essay marking, with algorithms replacing human involvement but
embodying norms that
are discussed
Platforms, irrespective of whether they are social media services such as
Twitter and Facebook or enable law teaching, involve systemic
observation by the
platform operator of those people who are using the
In considering digital
learning platforms, otherwise known as learning management systems or online
program management systems, it
is useful to recognise that the observed and
therefore managed users are both students and academics, with the latter
including people
who might be highly skilled and certified on the basis of their
own academic achievement but have a precarious employment status.
The language used to characterise the systems is revealing: they are indeed
concerned with management of people. Seeing on a large
scale, through
abstraction that elides individual variation and dignity, and through
integration with (or benchmarking against) other
data sources is a feature of
contemporary ‘truth in numbers’ managerialism. It is not restricted
to universities. Historically
it is not remote from the authoritarian
observational states critiqued by James Scott,
with radical centralised
decision-making about lives, infrastructure and ecosystems by authorities remote
from those affected by
their decisions and indifferent to the human impacts
epitomised by the apocryphal ‘the death of one man is a tragedy, the death
of a million is a mere
statistic’.
Platforms vary in sophistication and globally there is uncertainty about the
extent to which law faculties (and more broadly universities)
have embraced the
‘featuritis’ that may or may not be used by specific institutions
and understood by managers who do
not use the
In principle students might ‘live’ on the platform, the academic
version of a walled garden, and accordingly be open to
pervasive surveillance.
Their virtual presence potentially encompasses the downloading or viewing of
pre-recorded or synchronous
lectures (on occasion in the binge mode evident in
consumption of television series), drafting and submission of assessment items
on an individual or group basis, chat with academics and peers, reading and
contribution to discussion fora, viewing of text or video
course material such
as articles and chapters. It might also encompass identification and viewing of
publications through an interface
between a specific course/unit on the platform
and an associated library database that provides access to content held by that
or to content accessed via the library’s subscription to
commercial publisher databases.
In many law faculties COVID-19 appears to have resulted in a normalisation of
reliance on digital platforms, an inflection point in
which ‘talk’
occurs in virtual classrooms and ‘chalk’ has moved to a laptop,
mobile phone or other networked
device. Talk to academics by managers (some of
whom in relying on digital statistics are disquietingly but comfortably remote
the realities of teaching)
has also normalised rhetoric regard ‘wellness’ that is at odds with
the experience of many junior academics and support
Platforms might be embraced by students and teachers alike as necessary on
public health grounds or as convenient, with for example
interaction outside
traditional time frames and accordingly promoted as ‘student
They might be regarded by students and academics as alienating, whether
because face to face interaction was richer or because administration
particular platform requires a reductive
standardisation.
Managers might regard them as beneficial and
inevitable,
presenting an
opportunity for restructuring of course
and even tacitly for a
change in the university workforce. Those managers, who typically do not teach
(and are not teaching during
COVID), might more subtly regard implementation and
enhancement of platforms as a justification of their
and source of
institutional pride, analogous to rulers of developmental states understanding
the establishment of pervasive official
data collection mechanisms as a badge of
modernity. Awareness and endorsement of platforms as observation machines thus
In considering digital platforms in legal education as an enabler of a
particular biopolitics there is another perspective. Platforms
function as
dynamic sets of data points – representations of moment by moment
attributes, actions, capabilities – that
generate data profiles and
objectify people in ways that are erosive of
but are unresisted
because normative.
Norms, Observation, Identities
Foucault claimed, at odds with the biopolitics of Schmitt and
that modern politics
no longer a matter of bringing death into play in the field of sovereignty,
but of distributing the living in the domain of value
and utility. Such a power
has to qualify, measure, appraise, and hierarchize, rather than display itself
in its murderous splendor;
it does not have to draw the line that separates the
enemy of the sovereign from his loyal subjects. It effects distributions around
Learning platforms build and reinforce norms in ways that may not be
recognised and not necessarily beneficial. One way, predating
digital networks,
is that law teaching involves social sorting. People who perform gain admission;
continued performance is rewarded
with graduation or with opportunities for
further employment as an academic. In that process particular traits such as
and attention to detail may be fostered. Conversely values such as a
commitment to social justice might be discouraged, reinforcing
both a class
system (including for example co-option of talented members of
minorities)
and a way of
thinking about law.
As with traditional teaching, that performance may be as much a function of
social capital (including family or peer expectations
and support) as it is of
intellect and diligence. Abstraction of students and academics, exemplified for
example by use of student
numbers rather than names or faces and by automated
marking, might be perceived as providing equality for everyone on the platform,
a neutrality that mitigates potential biases in legal education. That equality
however is likely to be formal rather than substantive.
One issue with norms regarding learning platforms is that they may not be
consistent with the needs and capability of individual law
students. Some
institutions for example in making inferences from the frequency with which
students visit the platform and the duration
of time on that platform have
concluded that infrequent and short-term engagement is definitively an indicator
of weak performance
that requires intervention by a tutor or lecturer to support
someone who is ‘at
In some instances
the intervention has been mechanistic, with students receiving an automated
alert about the need for greater engagement.
Engagement statistics might however be misleading, given that students have a
range of learning styles and operate in different environments
such as working
full time rather than accessing content during standard hours. Some for example
may have a highly structured approach,
downloading content at the beginning of
each teaching period rather than on a ‘drip feed’ basis. That
approach is facilitated
by a teaching style in which academics ‘front
load’ course material and clearly articulate expectations, so that in
weeks the emphasis is on exegesis and discussion rather than
introduction of new content.
Platform architects who influence, and in some instances determine decisions
by faculty executives, might however impose different
norms regarding how law is
taught using the platforms.
strength of traditional law teaching has been variation, with academics as
individuals within a non-Fordist culture using different
teaching styles to
impart knowledge and build skills. That variation is consistent with differing
student learning styles and with
differing professional needs: many legal
practitioners work collaboratively rather than in isolation, all practitioners
require skills
in persuasion but not all are advocates in a courtroom or
tribunal, a law degree might be of social and personal benefit in roles
than that of a practitioner.
One tendency in the design and maintenance of learning platforms is to
inhibit variation by emphasising standardisation in how content
is delivered and
how performance is assessed. That norm might accordingly result in reliance on a
template approach that extends
beyond the appearance of content, for example
requires each academic to provide students with quizzes in a specified format in
weekly or fortnightly progression.
Such standardisation enables administration of the overall platform and
disciplining of academics, discussed below, but exclusion
of teaching outside
the norm results in a sameness that does not necessarily engage students. It
also potentially reinforces social
divides, with elite institutions offering
customised teaching and their poorer peers – that in the past have relied
on courseware
from vendors such as Cengage and Pearson – providing
offerings that are weakly indistinguishable from other universities and
course to another. A McDonaldisation of teaching is administratively convenient
(and potentially reassuring to managers
and governance bodies, especially if
benchmarked against similar standardisation at a peer institution). However it
reinforces social
divides and the status of law faculties as vendors of teaching
as a commodity.
A preceding comment noted the scope for students, in particular students who
are time poor or lacking diligence and initiative, to
‘live’ on a
platform rather than exploring outside the walled garden. Assessing academics on
the basis of student satisfaction
metrics may result in a norm where students
expect to receive everything they need via that platform, analogous to the
traditional
‘if it is not in the exam it does not matter’ and the
new ‘if it is not on Wikipedia it does not
potentially results in assessment that is biased towards a lower-ranked cohort
rather than those students who are exceptional
and to retention rather than
achievement metrics, given that academics and faculties might be evaluated on
the percentage of students
who progress through a course to graduation rather
than on a bellcurve regarding distribution of grades. Automated tracking of
proficiency
in ‘marking to the curve’ (and by extension to
assessment design in order to meet metrics-based understanding of student
capability) reinforces evaluation of individual academics against a production
norm, in other words an abstraction relative to statistics
relating to the
performance of their peers.
Seeing like a consumer?
Legal education – alongside legal practice – involves dialogue,
an engagement with authority in which students, academics
and practitioners draw
on lived experience and literature (practice-based, historical and theoretical)
to identify and critique principles,
precedent and practice. That dialogue might
liberate students and academics alike from preconceptions, for example that law
is necessarily
a representation of
(in other words a
traditional biopolitics based on punishment or elimination of those whose
behaviour was contrary to norms founded
on religious texts) or that female
working class students are less capable. It also fosters professionalism,
including habituation
to norms about courtesy and cogency in asking and
responding to questions.
Those norms are fundamental for legal practitioner interaction with peers,
courts, clients and others. They are however a potentially
awkward fit with
student feedback regarding teaching, in particular feedback through learning
management systems and in institutions
that have embraced a neoliberal
understanding of students as ‘clients’, consumers who are
axiomatically ‘right’
and in an exercise of magical thinking somehow
aware of what practitioners
The awkwardness reflects four facets of the anonymous feedback mechanisms
embedded in several platforms. The first is that there is
a potential dissonance
between institutional rhetoric for students about the status of those students
as customers and academic expectations
regarding professional communication and
the development of resilience for a life (and a post-university market) in which
get prizes.
The second is that anonymity fosters the disinhibition that has been noted in
studies of online anonymous/pseudonymous communication,
with students performing
a culture of complaint that on occasion amounts to upwards
Institutions have
typically sought to reduce oppressive behaviour, gendered or racist expression
and bullying by academics in face
to face or virtual
There has been less
recognition of bullying by ‘customers’ directed at those delivering
content and appraising
capability.
As a corollary, the third facet is that feedback may be guides through
prompts that skew answers, for example a yes or no to the question
‘is this unit’ (or your teacher) giving you ‘everything you
need’ or ‘what you need professional
practice’. Qualitative
rather than quantitative feedback mechanisms may also encourage students to
comment on the quality of
content delivery/assessment at a stage when they have
unrealistic expectations about what the legal profession requires or about
effort that they need for high marks in the more challenging subjects. First
year law students who are not employed as paralegals
rarely have much sense of
the realities of legal practice but may be unaware of their ignorance or their
gender bias.
The final facet is that irrespective of the subjectivity of the feedback it
may be misinterpreted by managers, particularly if a small
number of strongly
negative comments is misread as representative of a class as a whole. That
misreading might not be offset by recurrent
online surveys, typically undertaken
by students on a voluntary basis but on occasion recognised as resulting in
survey fatigue that
leads to student disengagement.
If, paraphrasing Foucault, data is power we can identify two consequences of
such online feedback activity. Given student resistance
to engagement with
metrics generation that they construe as misplaced or onerous some institutions
are responding by assessing academics
on the percentage of students in each
class who provide feedback. Higher rates of feedback might be attributable to
encouragement
by a respected teacher or by inducements such as free pizza and
cookies in face to face sessions or online badges, dismissed by later
students in particular as an infantilisation of their cohort. A more pernicious
consequence, to which precarious academics
might be particularly
susceptible,
is an effort to
‘game the system’ by teaching and assessing at a level that elicits
positive student responses.
Peers might however dread the numbers and there appears to be no comprehensive
cross-institutional study about the impact of rule
by numbers on the wellbeing
of those employees in Australian law schools, particularly precarious academics.
That impact is obfuscated by promotional language used by managers, with one
Australian university for example referring to its “award-winning”
data collection tool as “one of the institution’s arsenal of new
tools supporting progressive, adaptive learning”
that “uses learning
analytics to provide both students and staff with relevant, real-time data and
Towards a rights critique
Lemke, in discussing the ‘regime of truth’ (aka power), asks
In what vocabulary are processes of life described, measures, evaluated and
criticised? What cognitive and intellectual instruments
and technological
procedures stand ready to produce
Preceding paragraphs contended that law faculties and more broadly
universities in embracing digital platforms are increasingly relying
‘truth in numbers’ derived from pervasive observation and graphing
of performance by students and academics. The
use of platforms for the delivery
of content, strengthening of capability and assessment of proficiencies is not
inherently pernicious.
remote from the biopolitics espoused by legal theorist Schmitt, in which the
‘enemy’ was to be excluded from learning,
teaching or life itself.
Given ostensible blindness to some attributes it is also remote to the
exclusionism evident in the ethno-religious
quotas used by elite United States
law schools last century.
Financial pressures on universities, concerns about contagion through endemic
COVID and the hegemonic status of neoliberal managerialism
as the only way to
successfully administer a university means that digital platforms are here to
stay. Few institutions, particularly
those with a large and financially
disadvantaged student body, are likely to reject them. As indicated above, many
universities are
likely to enter into relationships with for-profit platform
providers whose business model is founded on rigorous standardisation
more rigorous use of precarious academics who are simply units of production.
That embrace is in part a matter of normativity. Managers are, to adopt
Deresiewicz’s mordant characterisation, ‘excellent
emulate their peers and do not disrupt the
Few strategic plans or
vision documents from governance body are notably distinctive. In part it is
simply a matter of pragmatism,
a promise of revenue and student recruitment in a
cost-transfer relationship: fewer inhouse academics and support staff costs as
the price for rewarding platform providers such as 2U and their private equity
Institutions are similarly unlikely to disregard global, national and
sectoral performance metrics such as the Times Higher Education
Quacquarelli Symonds given that those indices may be tied to funding and to
student enrolment, irrespective of
credibility.
Panopticism may be administratively convenient and a norm that privileges
particular stakeholders but is not inevitable. Couldry and
Powell argue that
emerging cultures of data collection deserve to be examined in a way that
foregrounds the agency and reflexivity of individual actors
as well as the
variable ways in which power and participation are constructed and
A rights critique, drawing on work by theorists such as Nussbaum, might offer
an alternative understanding of platforms as tools rather
than outcomes,
emphasising legal education as a matter of personal and social development that
fosters individual/collective flourishing
and that necessitates looking beyond
metrics to engage with human frailties, diversities and
aspirations.
That education might avoid mechanistic platform-based quizzes, reductive
rubrics and a drift to automated marking. It might instead
emphasise close
engagement between students and academics in ways that emphasise dignity, a
learning for citizenship. Such engagement
is not utopian, although requiring
activism on the part of students and a shift on the part of academics away from
the retreat into
theory and virtue
signalling.
It requires investment in infrastructure, in staff and in support for
disadvantaged students. It is possible however given that, from
perspective questioned above, law faculties typically generate more revenue than
they cost and that systemic problems
such as the Global Financial Crisis or
inadequate responses to COVID indicate a need to reorient the
Against the panoptic sort
Foucault, in an unconscious echo of Max Weber's iron
construed understandings
as inherently repressive. In embracing Nussbaum's more positive view of
knowledge as a potential basis for
agency by people who are the subjects of
understandings we might recognise that data subjects – students and
academics –
have some scope to refashion
panopticism.
Gaining knowledge
teaching and research on principle-
and fact-based critique as a basis for
justice through law reform.
This article began by commenting that the biopolitics of legal education is
rarely articulated (and even more rarely understood) through
explicit reference
to the use of learning management systems or dominant publishing indices such as
Scimago, h-index and i10-index.
Few academics in the course of teaching appear
to explain what data is collected and how that data is or might be used. Many
and students may be sceptical about the subjectivity of qualitative
surveys about performance. Some may note inconsistent panopticism:
academics are
observed by managers but have less scope to observe those managers – few
institutions engage in ‘360 Degree’
reviews that incorporate
by buying in services from
outside their institution.
A lack of understanding of the realities of panopticism reinforces the norm
of acceptance by ‘consumers’ of surveillance
capitalism in life
outside legal education, with people taking as a given that they will be
surveilled, that they have little scope
as individuals to mitigate their status
as data subjects and that governments are indifferent to – if not
complicit in –
pervasive data collection/analysis in the private sector.
One response is accordingly that law academics in their teaching should
expressly identify learning platform data collection processes/uses and relate
that panopticism to what students experience in dealing
with Facebook, Twitter,
Linked-In and online retail
If students are understood as customers in a market for legal education,
where axiomatically the customer is right and has agency,
they might go further
and require restraints on potential abuse of data by universities and OPMs,
irrespective of any intervention
by consumer protection agencies and privacy
regulators.
Such activism is
consistent with Nussbaum’s understanding of education as facilitation of
autonomy, self-awareness and embrace
responsibility.
It might be centred on an express commitment by institutions to not collect
data absent a compelling need to do so, something that
in the first instance
would reduce survey fatigue. It might involve nuanced approach to the appraisal
of performance by law academics
and students. It might most directly involve the
abandonment of integrity mechanisms that involve videoing students in their
or other private spaces during examinations on the basis that they are
suspects who have agreed to waive rights in order to undertake
It might involve universities looking beyond the weak requirements for
disclosure under the
(Cth) and state/territory privacy
statutes by proactively disclosing what data is collected, who accesses that
data and how the data
is used. It might involve using a procurement framework in
which institutions choose not to engage with service providers that threaten
or that experience large
scale data breaches encompassing identifiers such as usernames, unencrypted
passwords, legal names and full
residential
Academics also have a role to play. In August 2021 the national tertiary
education union approached Australia’s Fair Work Commission
employment regulator – to stop publication of course evaluation data at
the University of NSW and the potential
for that data to be misused to create
league tables of academics. Law faculties provide teaching and independent
research; they may
feature stars (and domestic dramas) but are not a reality
television show.
Universities are part of a global surveillance economy. They are embedded in
power structures and collective understandings about
rights, roles,
responsibilities and agency. They might however set an example. In Australia and
other jurisdictions that provide
weak human rights protection the law faculties
for example might step beyond minimal requirements by embracing the principles
the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation regarding
everyone’s rights to be informed, to rectification,
to erasure, to
restrict processing, to data portability, to object, and access. That is one way
of signalling to the community that
law teaching is not simply a servant of the
market and that faculty autonomy is one basis for resisting the drift to a
justice system
where outcomes are determined by automated decision-making on the
basis of data profiles.
* Dr Bruce Baer Arnold is an Associate Professor and CELTS Fellow at Canberra
Law School, University of Canberra. Statements in this
article do not
necessarily reflect the views of the University.
Oscar Gandy Jr,
The Panoptic Sort: A Political Economy of
Personal Information
(Westview, 1993).
John Cross and Edie Goldenberg,
Off-Track Profs: Nontenured Teachers in Higher Education
(MIT Press,
2009); Christian Mauri,
The Social Structures of Global Academia
(Routledge, 2019); and Guy Standing,
The Precariat
(Bloomsbury,
Shoshana Zuboff,
Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of
(Public Affairs, 2019). See also Julie E Cohen,
Between Truth and
Power: The Legal Constructions of Informational Capitalism
University Press, 2019); and Peter Drahos and John Braithwaite,
Information
Feudalism: Who Owns the Knowledge Economy?
(Earthscan, 2002).
Jason Pooley, ‘Metrics
Mania: The Case Against Academia.edu’ (2018)
Chronicle of Higher
https://doi.org/10.17613/M64P08.
James Wilsdon, Liz Allen,
Eleonora Belfiore, Philip Campbell, Stephen Curry, Steven Hill, Richard Jones,
Roger Kain, Simon Kerridge,
Mike Thelwall, Jane Tinkler, Ian Viney, Paul
Wouters, Jude Hill and Ben Johnson,
The Metric Tide. Report of the
independent review of the role of metrics in research assessment and
(Sage, 2015).
Jake Alimahomed-Wilson and
Ellen Reese, ‘Surveilling Amazon’s warehouse workers: racism,
retaliation, and worker resistance
amid the pandemic’ (2021) 1(1-2)
Work in the Global Economy
55; Alessandro Delfanti, ‘Machinic
dispossession and augmented despotism: Digital work in an Amazon
warehouse’ (2021)
New Media & Society
39; and Carl
Benedikt Frey,
The Technology Trap
(Princeton University Press,
From a rights perspective about
‘bossware’ see Annette Bernhardt, Lisa Kresge and Reem Suleiman,
Data and Algorithms At Work: Case for Worker Technology Rights
Berkeley Labor Center, 2021); Malcolm Campbell-Verduyn, ‘The Pandemic
Techno-Solutionist Dilemma’ (2021) 2(1)
Global Perspectives
Toija Cinque, ‘Quantified me: Curatorial lives and the pixelated spectre
of self’ in Toija Cinque and Jordan Beth
Wilson (eds)
Materializing
Digital Futures: Touch, Movement, Sound and Vision
(Bloomsbury, 2022) 87;
and Aizhan Tursunbayeva, Claudia Pagliari, Stefano Di Lauro and Gilda Antonelli,
‘The ethics of people
analytics: risks, opportunities and
recommendations’ (2021) 51(3)
Personnel Review
Andrew McGettigan,
University Gamble: Money, Markets and the Future of Higher Education
Press, 2013); Ronald Barnett, ‘The Marketised University: Defending the
Indefensible’ in Mike Molesworth, Richard
Scullion and Elizabeth Nixon
The Marketisation of Higher Education and the Student as Consumer
(Routledge, 2011) 39; Nigel Palmer, ‘The Modern University and its
Transaction with Students’ in Margaret Thornton (ed),
Through a Glass
Darkly: The Social Sciences Look at the Neoliberal University
(Australian
National University Press, 2015) 121; Roger Brown and Helen Carasso,
Everything for sale? The Marketisation of UK Higher Education
(Routledge,
2013); and Gaye Tuchman,
Wannabe U: Inside the Corporate University
(University of Chicago Press, 2009).
Margaret Thornton and Lucinda
Shannon, ‘Selling the Dream: Law School Branding and the Illusion of
Choice’ in Margaret
Thornton (ed),
Through a Glass Darkly: The Social
Sciences Look at the Neoliberal University
(Australian National University
Press, 2015) 157.
Albert O Hirschman,
voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, organizations, and states
(Harvard University Press, 1970).
Anniken Hoel and Tove Irene
Dahl, ‘Why Bother? Student Motivation to Participate in Student
Evaluations of Teaching’
(2019) 44(3)
Assessment & Evaluation in
Higher Education
Mike Molesworth, Richard
Scullion and Elizabeth Nixon (eds),
The Marketisation of Higher Education and
the Student as Consumer
(Routledge, 2011).
Aneta Hayes and Jie Cheng,
‘Datafication of epistemic equality: advancing understandings of teaching
excellence beyond benchmarked
performativity’ (2020) 25(4)
Teaching in
Higher Education
493; and Juliana Raffaghelli and Bonnie Stewart,
‘Centering complexity in ‘educators’ data literacy’ to
future practices in faculty development: a systematic review of the
literature’ (2020) 25(4)
Teaching in Higher Education
Gary Becker,
Capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference to
(University of Chicago Press, 2009); Jamie Peck,
Constructions
of Neoliberal Reason
, Oxford University Press, 2010). See also Kyle Bunds,
‘“Please Let It Stop”: Fear, Anxiety, and Uncertainty on
Neoliberal Tenure Track’ (2021)
Qualitative Inquiry
1; and Megan
Lee, Rosanne Coutts, Jann Fielden, Marie Hutchinson, Richard Lakeman, Bernice
Mathisen, Dima Nasrawi and Nichole Phillips,
‘Occupational Stress in
University Academics in Australia and New Zealand’
(2021) 44(1)
of Higher Education Policy and Management
Nikolas Rose,
Politics of Life Itself
(Princeton University Press, 2007); Michel Foucault,
The Birth of Biopolitics (Lectures at the Collège de France
(Picador, 2010); Claire Blencowe,
Biopolitical Experience:
Foucault, Power and Positive Critique
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2012); and Julie
Cohen, ‘The biopolitical public domain: The legal construction of the
surveillance economy’
(2018) 31(2)
Philosophy & Technology
Within Australia the
University of Sydney has a relationship with 2U; OES has a relationship with
Swinburne, Monash, Western Sydney
and QUT; and Keypath has relationships with
UNSW, UTS, Deakin, Canberra, RMIT and others.
Ben Williamson,
‘Making markets through digital platforms: Pearson, edu-business, and the
(e) valuation of higher education’
(2021) 62(1)
Critical Studies in
50; Suzanne Mettler,
Degrees of Inequality
(Basic Books,
2014); and Stephanie Hall, ‘Getting Online Higher Education Right’
in Huili Han, James H Williams and Shasha
Tackling Online
Education: Implications of Responses to COVID-19 in Higher Education
(Cambridge Scholars, 2021) 77.
Martha Nussbaum,
Cultivating Humanity: A Classical Defense of Reform in Liberal Education
(Harvard University Press, 1997) and
Creating Capabilities: The Human
Development Approach
(Harvard University Press, 2011); and Alan Gewirth,
Self-Fulfillment
(Princeton University Press, 1998). See more broadly
Richard C Levin,
The Worth of the University
(Yale University Press,
2013); Jarod Lanier,
Who Owns The Future
(Simon & Schuster, 2013);
and Anthony T Kronman,
Education’s End: Why our Colleges and
Universities having given up on the meaning of life
(Yale University Press,
Margaret Thornton,
Privatising the Public University: The Case of Law
(Routledge, 2012);
Andrew Whelan, ‘Academic critique of neoliberal academia’ (2015)
Sites: a journal of social anthropology and cultural studies
Simon Marginson and Mark Considine,
The Enterprise University
University Press, 2000); and chapters in Margaret Thornton (ed),
Glass Darkly: The Social Sciences Look at the Neoliberal University
(Australian National University Press, 2015).
Vincent Hendricks and Mads
Vestergaard,
Reality Lost
(Springer, 2019).
Jun Yu and Nick Couldry,
‘Education as a domain of natural data extraction: analysing corporate
discourse about educational
tracking’ (2021) 25(1)
Information,
Communication & Society
Zuboff (n 3); and David
Lyon, ‘Surveillance capitalism, surveillance culture and data
politics’ in Didier Bigo, Engin
Isin, and Evelyn Ruppert (eds),
(Routledge, 2019) 64.
James Scott,
Seeing Like
A State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed
(Yale University Press, 1999).
Kanishka Jayasuriya,
‘Transforming the Public University: Market Citizenship and Higher
Education Regulatory Projects’
in Margaret Thornton (ed),
Glass Darkly: The Social Sciences Look at the Neoliberal University
(Australian National University Press, 2015) 89. See also Nigel Palmer,
‘The Modern University and its Transaction with Students’
the same volume; and Stella Jones Devitt and Catherine Samiei, ‘From
Accrington Stanley to academia? The use of league
tables and student surveys to
determine ‘quality’ in higher education’ in Mike Molesworth,
Richard Scullion and
Elizabeth Nixon (eds),
The Marketisation of Higher
Education and the Student as Consumer
(Routledge, 2011) 86.
Roxana Marachi and Lawrence
Quill, ‘The case of Canvas: Longitudinal datafication through learning
management systems’
(2020) 25(4)
Teaching in Higher Education
Melvin Kranzberg,
‘Technology and History: "Kranzberg's Laws”’ (1986) 27(3)
Technology and Culture
544; and Lizzie O’Shea,
, Verso, 2019).
Carl Schmitt,
The Concept
of the Political
(University of Chicago Press, 1997) 27.
Jeremy Roschelle, James
Lester and Judi Fusco,
AI and the Future of Learning: Expert Panel Report
(Center for Integrative Research in Computing and Learning Sciences, 2020)
Richard Abel, ‘Legal
pedagogy and its discontents’
(2020) 16(1)
International Journal of Law
Neil Selwyn,
‘What’s the Problem with Learning Analytics? (2019) 6(3)
of Learning Analytics
Competition regulators such
as the Australian competition and Consumer Commission have been permissive of
expansion by Turnitin,
the dominant text matching service, as part of ongoing
consolidation within the sector that for example saw Urkund acquire Plagscan
form Ouriginal and Turnitin subsequently acquire Ouriginal. Among the literature
Ralston, ‘Ghosting Inside
the Machine: Student Cheating, Online Education, and the Omertà of
Institutional Liars’
in Alison MacKenzie, Jennifer Rose and Ibrar Bhatt
The Epistemology of Deceit in a Postdigital Era
(Springer, 2021)
251; James M Lang,
Cheating Lessons
(Harvard University Press, 2013); and
Lindsey Barrett, ‘Rejecting Test Surveillance in Higher Education’
Michigan State Law Review
Sarah Silverman, Autumm
Caines, Christopher Casey, Belen Garcia de Hurtado, Jessica Riviere, Alfonso
Sintjago and Carla Vecchiola,
‘What Happens When You Close the Door on
Remote Proctoring? Moving Toward Authentic Assessments with a People-Centered
(2021) 39(3)
To Improve the Academy: A Journal of Educational
Development
(2021); and Drew Harwell, ‘Cheating-detection companies
made millions during the pandemic. Now students are fighting back’
Washington Post
12 November (2020). See also Phillip Dawson,
Assessment Security in a Digital World: Preventing E-Cheating and Supporting
Academic Integrity in Higher Education
(Routledge, 2020).
Simon Coghlan, Tim Miller
and Jeannie Paterson, ‘Good Proctor or “Big Brother”? Ethics
of Online Exam Supervision
Technologies’ (2021) 34
Philosophy &
Neil Selwyn,
Robots Replace Teachers
(Polity, 2019); and Hall (n 17).
Joel Reidenberg and Florian
Schaub, ‘Achieving big data privacy in education’ (2018) 16(3)
Theory and Research in Education
James Scott,
Seeing Like
A State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed
(Yale University Press, 1999).
Andreas Exenberger,
‘One Death is a Tragedy, One Million is a Statistic’ in Christopher
Hamilton et al (eds),
Facing Tragedies
(Lit, 2009) 163.
Bob Bender, Learner
Engagement and Success in CMS’ in Colleen Carmean and Ali Jafari (eds),
Course Management Systems for Learning: Beyond Accidental Pedagogy
2005) 107, 109; and Marko Teräs, Juha Suoranta, Hanna Teräs, and Mark
Curcher, ‘Post-Covid-19 Education and
Education Technology
‘Solutionism’: a Seller’s Market’ (2020) 2(3)
Postdigital Science and Education
Benjamin Ginsburg,
Fall of the University: The Rise of the All Administrative University and Why It
(Oxford University Press, 2011); and Gaye Tuchman,
Inside the Corporate University
(University of Chicago Press, 2009).
Among critiques see Brendon
Murphy, ‘Against wellbeing: The problem of resources, metrics and care of
(2021) 46(2)
Alternative Law Journal
Barbara Ehrenreich,
Smile or Die: How Positive Thinking Fooled America and
(Granta, 2010). The legal academy awaits its Jessica Mitford.
Raffaghelli and Stewart (n
13); and Stephanie Hall, ‘Getting Online Higher Education Right’ in
Huili Han, James H Williams
and Shasha Cui (eds),
Tackling Online Education:
Implications of Responses to COVID-19 in Higher Education Globally
(Cambridge Scholars, 2021) 77.
Antonette Shibania, Simon
Knight, and Simon Buckingham Shum, ‘Educator perspectives on learning
analytics in classroom practice’
The Internet and Higher
100730; Marko Teräs, Juha Suoranta, Hanna Teräs and Mark
Curcher, ‘Post-Covid-19 Education and Education Technology
‘Solutionism’: a Seller’s Market’ (2020) 2
Postdigital Science and Education
Alfred Essa, ‘Is Data
Dark? Lessons from Borges’s “Funes the Memorius”’ (2019)
Journal of Learning Analytics
Michael Brown, ‘Seeing
students at scale: how faculty in large lecture courses act upon learning
analytics dashboard data’
(2020) 25(4)
Teaching in Higher Education
Kaiwen Sun, Abraham H.
Mhaidli, Sonakshi Watel, Christopher A Brooks, and Florian Schaub,
‘It’s My Data! Tensions Among
Stakeholders of a Learning Analytics
Dashboard’ CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland (2019).
Bonnie Stewart and Erica
Lyons, ‘When the classroom becomes datafied’ (2021) 29(2)
Journal of Educational Technology
Martha Nussbaum,
‘Objectification’ (1995) 24(4)
Philosophy & Public
Carl Schmitt,
The Concept
of the Political
(University of Chicago Press, 1997); Giorgio Agamben,
Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life
(Stanford University Press,
1998); and Claire Blencowe, ‘Foucault’s and Arendt’s
‘insider view’ of
biopolitics: a critique of Agamben’ (2010)
History of the Human Sciences
Michel Foucault,
History of Sexuality. Vol 1
(Vintage, 1980) 144.
Daniel Markovits,
Meritocracy Trap
(Penguin, 2019).
Robert Granfield,
elite lawyers: Visions of law at Harvard and beyond
(Routledge, 1992);
Elizabeth Mertz,
The language of law school: learning to "think like a
(Oxford University Press, 2007); and Stephen Wizner, ‘Is
Learning to "Think Like a Lawyer" Enough?’
(1998) 17(1)
Policy Review
See also Ben Sheehy, Juan Diaz-Granados and Tomas
Fitzgerald, ‘What To Teach When Teaching Law: The Categories, Rights,
And Test (‘CRDT’) Framework’ in this issue of
Canberra Law Review
Kaiwen Sun, Abraham H.
Mhaidli, Sonakshi Watel, Christopher A Brooks and Florian Schaub,
‘It’s My Data! Tensions Among
Stakeholders of a Learning Analytics
Dashboard’ CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland (2019).
Ben Williamson,
‘Digital education governance: data visualization, predictive analytics,
and ‘real-time’ policy
instruments’ (2016) 31(2)
Education Policy
123; and Ben Williamson, Sian Bayne and Suellen Shay,
‘The datafication of teaching in Higher Education: critical issues and
perspectives’ (2020) 25(4)
Teaching in Higher Education
Dennis Hayes,
McDonaldization: visions of higher education
(Routledge, 2017).
Thomas Leitch,
U: Knowledge, Authority and Liberal Education in the Digital Age
Hopkins University Press, 2011).
Law, Liberty,
and Morality
(Stanford University Press, 1963).
Richard Hil,
Students Short
(Allen & Unwin, 2015) 54.
Beatrice Tucker,
‘Student evaluation surveys: anonymous comments that offend or are
unprofessional’ (2014) 68
Higher Education
347; Richard Lakeman,
Rosanne Coutts, Marie Hutchinson, Megan Lee, Debbie Massey, Dima Nasrawi, and
Jann Fielden, ‘Appearance,
insults, allegations, blame and threats: an
analysis of anonymous non-constructive student evaluation of teaching in
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education
1; and Katharine Gelber, Katie Brennan, David Duriesmith, and Ellyse Fenton,
‘Gendered mundanities: gender bias in student
evaluations of teaching in
political science’ (2022)
Australian Journal of Political Science
Loraleigh Keashly,
‘Workplace bullying, mobbing and harassment in academe: Faculty
experience’ in Premilla D'Cruz, Ernesto
Noronha, Loraleigh Keashly and
Stacy Tye-Williams (eds),
Special topics and particular occupations,
professions and sectors
(Springer, 2021) 221.
Iain Coyne, ‘What
universities can learn from workplace bullying research’ in Helen Cowie
and Carrie Anne Myers (eds),
Bullying Among University Students:
Cross‐national Perspectives
(Routledge, 2016) 203; Beatrice Tucker,
‘Disruptive Trends in Student Experience Evaluations and Implications for
Staff Wellbeing’ in Mahsood Shah, John T Richardson, Anja Pabel
and Beverley Oliver (eds),
Assessing and Enhancing Student Experience in
Higher Education
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2021) 261; Gelber et al (n 58); and
James Williams and Gill Cappuccini‐Ansfield, ‘Fitness for purpose?
National and institutional approaches to publicising the student voice’
(2007) 13(2)
Quality in Higher Education
Henry Hornstein,
‘Student evaluations of teaching are an inadequate assessment tool for
evaluating faculty performance’
(2017) 4(1)
Cogent Education
1304016; and Joanna Jones, Ruth Gaffney-Rhys and Edward Jones, ‘Handle
with Care! an Exploration of the Potential Risks Associated
with the Publication
and Summative Usage of Student Evaluation of Teaching (SET) Results’
(2014) 38(1)
Journal of Further and Higher Education
Megan Lee, Rosanne Coutts,
Jann Fielden, Marie Hutchinson, Richard Lakeman, Bernice Mathisen, Dima Nasrawi
and Nichole Phillips,
‘Occupational Stress in University Academics in
Australia and New Zealand’
(2021) 44(1)
Journal of Higher Education
Policy and Management
Mark Shevlin, Philip
Banyard, Mark Davies and Mark Griffiths, ‘The Validity of Student
Evaluation of Teaching in Higher Education:
Love Me, Love my Lectures?”
(2020) 25(4)
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education
Wolfgang Stroebe, ‘Student Evaluations of Teaching Encourages Poor
Teaching and Contributes to Grade Inflation: A Theoretical
and Empirical
Analysis’ (2020) 42(4)
Basic and Applied Social Psychology
Zombor Berezvai, Gergely Dániel Lukáts and Roland Molontay,
‘Can Professors Buy Better Evaluation with Lenient
Grading? The Effect of
Grade Inflation on Student Evaluation of Teaching’ (2021) 46(5)
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education
793; and Bob Uttl,
Carmela A White, and Daniela Wong Gonzalez, ‘Meta-Analysis of
Faculty’s Teaching Effectiveness: Student
Evaluation of Teaching Ratings
and Student Learning Are Not Related’ (2017) 54
Studies in Educational
Suzanne Lazaroo,
‘UC’s InterFace app scores top marks’ (28 September 2018)
https://www.canberra.edu.au/about-uc/media/newsroom/2018/september/ucs-interface-app-scores-top-marks.
Thomas Lemke,
Bio-politics: An Advanced Introduction
(New York University Press, 2011)
Daniel Goldsworthy,
‘The Future of Legal Education in the 21st Century’
[2020] AdelLawRw 8
(2020) 41(1)
Adelaide Law Review
; and Michael Kwet and Paul Prinsloo, ‘The
‘smart’ classroom: a new frontier in the age of the smart
university’
(2020) 25(4)
Teaching in Higher Education
Harold Wechsler,
Qualified Student: A History of Selective College Admission in America
(Wiley, 1977); and Jerome Karabel,
The Chosen: The Hidden History of
Admission and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale and Princeton
(Houghton Mifflin,
William Deresiewicz,
Excellent sheep: The miseducation of the American elite and the way to a
meaningful life
(Simon and Schuster, 2015).
Suzanne Mettler,
of Inequality
(Basic Books, 2014).
Brian Pusser and Simon
Marginson, ‘University rankings in critical perspective’ (2013)
The Journal of Higher Education
544; and more broadly Ellen
Hazelkorn and Georgiana Mihut (eds),
Research Handbook on University
Rankings: Theory, Methodology, Influence and Impact
(Edward Elgar,
Nick Couldry and Alison
Powell, ‘Big Data from the Bottom up’ (2014) 1(2)
1. See also Stefania Milan and Lonneke Van der Velden, ‘The
Alternative Epistemologies of Data Activism’ (2016) 2(2)
Culture & Society
Martha Nussbaum,
Cultivating Humanity: A Classical Defense of Reform in Liberal Education
(Harvard University Press, 1997); ‘Hannah Forsyth, ‘Disinterested
Scholars or Interested Parties? The Public’s
Investment in Self-Interested
Universities’ in Margaret Thornton (ed),
Through a Glass Darkly: The
Social Sciences Look at the Neoliberal University
(Australian National
University Press, 2015) 19; Richard C Levin,
The Worth of the University
(Yale University Press, 2013); and Anthony T Kronman,
Education’s End:
Why our Colleges and Universities having given up on the meaning of life
(Yale University Press, 2007).
François Cusset,
French Theory: How Foucault, Derrida and Co. Transformed the Intellectual
Life of the United States
(University of Minnesota Press, 2008); Anthony T
Education’s End: Why our Colleges and Universities having
given up on the meaning of life
(Yale University Press, 2007) 137; and the
polemical Robert Boyers,
The Tyranny of Virtue: Identity, the Academy, and
the Hunt for Political Heresies
(Scribner, 2019).
Philip Mirowski,
Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism Survived the Financial
(Verso, 2013).
Terry Maley, ‘Max
Weber and the iron cage of technology’ (2004) 24(1)
Bulletin of
Science, Technology & Society
69. See also Christian Parenti,
Soft Cage: Surveillance in America from Slavery to the War on Terror
Books, 2003).
Dubravka Cecez-Kecmanovic,
‘The resistible rise of the digital surveillance economy: A call for
action’ (2019) 34(1)
Journal of Information Technology
Ullrich, ‘In Itself But Not Yet For Itself – Organising The New
Academic Precariat’ in Walter Baier,
Eric Canepa and Haris Golemis (eds),
The radical left in Europe: rediscovering hope
(Merlin Press, 2019) 155;
and Sarah Silverman, Autumm Caines, Christopher Casey, Belen Garcia de Hurtado,
Jessica Riviere, Alfonso
Sintjago and Carla Vecchiola, ‘What Happens When
You Close the Door on Remote Proctoring? Moving Toward Authentic Assessments
with a People-Centered Approach’ (2021) 39(3)
To Improve the Academy: A
Journal of Educational Development
Zuboff (n 3).
Shaanan Cohney, Ross
Teixeira, Anne Kohlbrenner, Arvind Narayanan, Mihir Kshirsagar, Yan
Shvartzshnaider and Madelyn Sanfilippo,
‘Virtual Classrooms and Real
2012.05867 (2020)
Martha Nussbaum,
Capabilities: The Human Development Approach
(Harvard University Press,
Kara Grant, ‘College
Students Are Learning Hard Lessons About Anti-Cheating Software’
https://www.voiceofsandiego.org/topics/education/college-students-are-learning-hard-lessons-about-anti-cheating-software/
(2020); Drew Harwell, ‘Cheating-detection companies made millions during
the pandemic. Now students are fighting back’
The Washington Post
12 November (2020). See more broadly David G Balash, Dongkun Kim, Darika
Shaibekova, Rahel A Fainchtein, Micah Sherr and Adam J Aviv,
the Examiners: Students' Privacy and Security Perceptions of Online Proctoring
Services’ in
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security
, (Usenix, 2021); Simon Coghlan, Tim Miller, and Jeannie
Paterson, ‘Good proctor or “big brother”? Ethics of online
exam supervision technologies’ (2021) 34(4)
Philosophy &
1581; and Jade Vu Henry and Martin Oliver, ‘Who Will Watch
the Watchmen? The Ethico-political Arrangements of Algorithmic Proctoring
Academic Integrity’ (2021) 4
Postdigital Science and Education
US civil society advocate
Public Citizen
(https://pubcit.typepad.com/clpblog/2020/03/can-proctoru-be-trusted-with-students-personal-data.html)
notes ProctorU’s response to criticism by University of California Santa
Barbara faculty members: a letter to the University
and state and federal
prosecutors that refers to defamation, copyright, trade mark, the of undermining
‘emergency efforts to
mitigate civil disruption’ and other matters.
The July 2020 ProctorU data
breach for example involved 444,000 users, including the University of Sydney,
University of NSW, University
of Queensland, University of Melbourne, University
of Western Australia, University of Adelaide, Swinburne University, James Cook
University, and Curtin University.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (264 KB)
PDF format (432 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter