URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zaman, Rebecca; Kucharova, Ella --- "2009 Kirby Cup: Animal welfare legislation in Austraila: the federal regulatory framework" [2009] ALRCRefJl 45; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 59
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 59–62 of the original
2009 Kirby Cup
Congratulations to Rebecca Zaman and Ella Kucharova from the University of
New South Wales, winners of the 2009 Kirby Cup.
The Kirby Cup Law Reform Competition is a unique opportunity for Australian
law students to gain recognition for their vision for
law reform. The Kirby Cup
is organised and sponsored by the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC), in
collaboration with the Australian
Law Students Association (ALSA).
To enter, teams of two students must provide a written submission on a topic
of law reform set by the ALRC. Based on written entries,
up to three teams are
invited to participate in an oral advocacy round.
The topic the 2009 entrants were asked to consider drew on the theme
presented in
91 ‘Animals’:
What are the key issues that arise from the present federal regulatory framework
for animal welfare? In considering appropriate law
reform recommendations,
assess whether Codes of Practice for animal welfare provide a reliable &
satisfactory mechanism for regulating
animal welfare; or whether a national
Animal Welfare Act or harmonisation of state/territory legislation would be more
appropriate.
This year’s final oral advocacy round was held
in conjunction with the 30th annual ALSA conference, co-hosted by Griffith
and the Queensland University of Technology, in Brisbane in July.
Three teams presented their proposal to an expert judging panel
consisting of
Justice Berna Collier (Federal Court and part-time ALRC Commissioner), Professor
Rosalind Croucher (ALRC Commissioner
and Professor, Macquarie University), Mr
Steven White (Griffith University) and Mr Jonathan Dobinson (ALRC Research
Manager). Ms
Zaman and Ms Kucharova were declared the winners, based on a
combination of their written submissions and the oral advocacy round.
Thank you to all entrants for participating in the competition, and special
congratulations to finalists:
• James Dawson and Michael Jones (Australian National University);
• Fiona Graney and Laura Costello (University of Sydney).
The following article is an edited extract of the written submission entered
by Ms Zaman and Ms Kucharova.
Animal welfare legislation in Australia
The federal regulatory framework
By Rebecca Zaman and Ella Kucharova
Animal welfare has become a concern that cuts across all social sectors of
the Australian community. The issue is also receiving increasing
international
recognition, with 27 European Union states having voted in favour of the
provisional draft
Universal Declaration
on Animal Welfare 2007
(UDAW). The draft UDAW calls on signatories to
‘[recognise] that animals are living, sentient beings and therefore
deserve due consideration and
although the importance of animal welfare is socially recognised, and
Australians generally treat
animals very well, there exists a
significant discrepancy between Australian attitudes towards animal welfare and
the way the vast
majority of animals are actually being treated in
The existing law
There is no accepted head of power under which the Commonwealth may legislate
with respect to animal welfare. Thus, the states and
territories each have their
own laws on this subject.
typical model of animal welfare law enforcement imposes a negative duty on
owners to refrain from inflicting cruelty on animals
(we note, however, that
some recent laws, such as s 17 of the
Animal Care and
Protection Act
(Qld), impose a positive duty on a person to require them to take
reasonable steps to meet an animal’s
Although as a criminal
offence these laws can be enforced by police, the burden of enforcing the law in
relation to companion animals
falls largely to the
But these laws do not protect farm animals at all. The treatment of farm
animals is ‘exempted from the overarching cruelty and
duty of care
standards included in animal welfare
legislation’.
Instead, farm
animals are supposed to be treated in compliance with Codes of Practice, which
vary between states and territories
but are based broadly on the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)’s Model Codes of
for the Welfare of Animals (Model
The Codes are detailed and wide-ranging, and they are ‘revised on a
regular basis’ to take account of changing
However, some of them
‘would not meet a general cruelty
For example,
the intensive farming of pigs has led to an industrial standard of confining
pregnant sows in cramped stalls, which
inflicts physical and psychological
stress on the animal.
the state and territory legislation, it is a defence to charges of animal
cruelty or breach of duty to show that the treatment
was in compliance with a
Model Code.
Clearly, the issue
of how the Code is determined and whether the development process adequately
considers the impact on animals is
a pressing one.
Proposed reform
We consider the status quo to be an inadequate means of protecting animal
welfare. We dismiss as unrealistic any suggestion of an
Animal Bill of Rights.
We also dismiss suggestions that animals can be adequately protected through
common law remedies.
We propose a reform that recognises the importance of protecting animal
welfare and considers how best to balance human and economic
interests with
animal welfare, that furthermore considers how to develop institutions that can
achieve that balance, and finally
that incorporates an appropriate means of
enforcement. For the purpose of this section, we assume the validity of a
Welfare Act
under the external affairs or state
referral power. However, if the constitutionality of a federal Act were in
doubt, a similar scheme
could be implemented using uniform legislation and state
institutions.
The cornerstone of our reforms is the implementation of a mandatory
regulatory scheme for animal welfare that links adequate protection
agricultural licensing. A principal
Animal Welfare Act
would provide that
any person, natural or body corporate, using animals for commercial purposes
must hold a licence. It will also
state that, under the Act, regulations may be
made setting out Codes of Conduct and providing for breaches of the Code.
to the Act, to obtain a licence, a person must comply with the
regulations and Codes of Conduct. The Codes of Conduct for various
animals would
appear as schedules to the Act. A person suspected of failing to comply with the
Codes may be issued with a ‘notice
to show cause’ why their licence
should not be revoked. Decision makers would also have the authority to cancel,
suspend, vary
or impose conditions on licences. As an administrative decision,
this would be reviewable by a relevant body such as the Administrative
Tribunal under a federal Act, or Administrative Decisions Tribunals under a
state or territory Act.
Greater procedural fairness in development of proportionate Model
Our proposal recognises that the content of the Model Codes and their ability
to reconcile animal welfare with the interests of the
broader community is
critical. The composition and conduct of the body creating these Codes is thus
extremely significant.
One approach is to urge government to establish a department, distinct from
agriculture and fisheries, with a special minister for
This is viable given
the significant and overlapping role of animals in issues of bio-security,
quarantine, food safety and environmental
protection. Such a department would
provide a unified and streamlined approach to issues involving animals. It would
be politically
accountable and, of necessity, attuned to the interests of its
portfolio. A Committee within this department would be obliged to
seek and hear
submissions from all relevant stakeholders and create a proportionate animal
welfare policy. An alternative approach
would be to create an independent
statutory authority—an Australian Commission for Animals—that was
tasked with these
same duties and enforcement of the licensing scheme.
A third approach, and that taken in the United Kingdom, is to establish an
independent advisory council to investigate, advocate and
report on behalf of
This approach is
weaker, as there is no enforcement mechanism involved, but it does emphasise the
importance of having an independent
body reviewing animal welfare. Therefore, at
minimum, an independent animal welfare body should be established in Australia,
the power to investigate, report and educate the community about animal
Better enforcement
By making compliance with Codes of Conduct a necessary requirement for using
animals for commercial purposes, these regulatory norms
would be better enforced
as compliance would become a precondition for doing business.
Additionally, our proposed licensing scheme would exist harmoniously
alongside the criminal offence of cruelty to animals. As it stands,
provisions in all Australian jurisdictions provide that it is an exemption to
cruelty to animal charges to be acting in accordance
with industry Codes. This
would remain under our system.
Our proposed
Animal Welfare Act
would also impose a disclosure regime
on corporations who use animals for commercial purposes. As a ‘soft’
reform, the
threat of negative publicity and the benefits of being seen to
engage in corporate social responsibility may encourage profit-cutting
of better treatment of animals.
Requiring disclosure would also aid in other methods of ‘soft’
reform such as education and ‘trustmarks’.
These approaches attempt
to influence consumer behaviour and provide economic incentives for companies to
act in a particular manner.
Trustmarks, such as the ‘certified
organic’ logo, allow consumers to choose to support companies that produce
products. A similar logo marking high ethical conduct could be created
for companies that treat their animals humanely.
The regulation of animal welfare in Australia requires the intricate
balancing of interests. As living, sentient beings, animals have
a legitimate
interest in avoiding pain and suffering. On the other hand, the Australian
economy, farmers and consumers require industry
practices that allow for the
production of efficient and competitive animal products. In a system that
unjustifiably prefers human
interests over animal welfare, reform is needed. Our
proposed licensing system would reform the way in which the substance of the
Codes of Conduct is developed, and would also provide an appropriate, consistent
and effective means of enforcement.
See <www.alrc.gov.au/kirbycup> for
an unabridged version of the winning submission.
World Society for the Protection of
Universal Declaration on Animal Welfare
<www.udaw.org/gov/> at 16 September
S White, ‘Regulation of Animal
Welfare in Australia and the Emergent Commonwealth: Entrenching the Traditional
Approach of
the States and Territories or Laying the Ground for Reform?’
Animal Welfare Act 2002
Animal Care and Protection Act 2001
Animal Welfare Act 1993
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1985
Animal Welfare
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1979
S White, ‘Regulation of Animal
Welfare in Australia and the Emergent Commonwealth: Entrenching the Traditional
Approach of
the States and Territories or Laying the Ground for Reform?’
See, eg, NSW Department of Primary
National Model Codes of Practice for Animal Welfare
<www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/agriculture/livestock/animal-welfare/codes> on 16
September 2009.
S White, ‘Regulation of Animal
Welfare in Australia and the Emergent Commonwealth: Entrenching the Traditional
Approach of
the States and Territories or Laying the Ground for Reform?’
From Paddocks to
Prisons—Pigs in New South Wales
, Australia: Current Practices, Future
Directions (2005), 14-19.
S White, ‘Regulation of Animal
Welfare in Australia and the Emergent Commonwealth: Entrenching the Traditional
Approach of
the States and Territories or Laying the Ground for Reform?’
R Pollard, ‘Animals,
Guardianship and the Local Courts: Towards a Practical Model for Advocacy’
(2007/2008)
See the Farm Animal Welfare Council,
<www.fawc.org.uk> at 16 September 2009.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter