URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2019/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kooy, Ruth --- "Unfair Terms In Standard Form Commercial Leases: A Case Study" [2019] WAStuLawRw 9; (2019) 3 Western Australian Student Law Review 101
I INTRODUCTION
A The UCT Legislation and Commercial Tenancies
B The Lease
II EXCLUSION OF LIABILITY
V RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REFORM
VI CONCLUSION
UNFAIR TERMS IN STANDARD FORM COMMERCIAL LEASES: A CASE
Unfair Contract Terms—Small Business—Consumer
Law—Commercial Lease Agreement—Standard Form Contracts
In 2016, the Australian Consumer Law was amended to introduce protections to
small businesses against unfair terms in standard form
contracts. This includes
commercial lease agreements, where standard form contracts are often used to the
advantage of a landlord
with stronger bargaining power. Despite the risk of
unfair terms now ultimately being declared void, landlords continue to maintain
and rely upon such terms in their dealings with tenants. This article contends
that this is particularly unfavourable to small businesses
that may have limited
resources to seek advice regarding the terms of their lease, let alone dispute
such terms. The article considers
a standard form commercial lease as a case
example to explore whether some of its terms may be void under the new
legislation. It
focuses on terms that arise most commonly in such leases, being
terms regarding exclusion of liability, rent reduction and default.
I INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, courts have refused to intervene in contracts that are
substantively unfair yet otherwise validly
This is due to the
principle of ‘freedom of contract’, the concept that parties are and
should be free to contract on
whatever terms they wish. However, the principle
wrongly assumes that contracting parties always have equal bargaining
Lease agreements offered to
tenants on a ‘take-it-or-leave-it basis’, with little room for
negotiation, are often used
to the advantage of landlords with stronger
bargaining power.
This is evident
particularly in relation to standard form commercial leases of spaces within
large shopping centres or plazas. The
weaker party, in need of premises for
conducting their business, is for various
more or less subjected to
the terms of the landlord and often equipped with only a superficial
understanding of the potential consequences
In recognition of the
vulnerability of small businesses in such circumstances, the
Legislation Amendment (Small Business and Unfair Contract Terms) Act
(Cth) (‘UCT Legislation’) introduced certain protections to the
Australian Consumer Law
November 2016. Subsequently, the States and Territories agreed to pass mirroring
legislation to ensure a nationally consistent
consumer protection
It is argued, however, that
landlords can maintain and rely upon unfair terms in their dealings with
tenants, despite the risk of
those terms now ultimately being declared void by a
This is particularly
unfavourable to small businesses that may have limited resources to dispute
certain terms. The article will illustrate
this issue by analysing
terms in a chosen standard form commercial lease
arguably void under the UCT Legislation.
It will focus on terms
considered to most commonly arise in such leases, being terms regarding
exclusion of liability, rent reduction
and default.
A The UCT Legislation and Commercial
To be entitled to the protection of the UCT Legislation, a small business
must satisfy a court that their lease is both a ‘small
‘standard form
Any term of that
lease will then be void to the extent that it is
In the context of a tenant challenging their lease, a term will be
‘unfair’ if: (a) it would cause ‘a significant
imbalance’ in the rights and obligations of the tenant and landlord; (b)
the term is ‘not reasonably necessary’
to protect the
landlord’s legitimate interests; and (c) the term would cause detriment to
the tenant if it were relied
In determining whether a
term is unfair, the court is required to give consideration to the transparency
of the term and the contract
B The Lease
This case study describes and considers a standard form Lease offered by a
landlord who owns and manages multiple shopping complexes
and can therefore be
reasonably assumed to have considerable market share and experience. The tenant
is a small business retail shop
occupying premises within one of the
landlord’s shopping complexes.
II EXCLUSION OF LIABILITY
Under the Lease, the tenant is unable to ‘claim any compensation or
abatement of rent’ for any inconvenience or damage
caused by the exercise
of the landlord’s powers.
These powers include the power to, among other
(1) make changes to the
building as the landlord
(2) create an easement
over the tenant’s premises for certain
and (3) close or use
the common parts to the exclusion of the tenant ‘from time to
The term appears to create a significant imbalance in the parties’
rights by requiring the tenant to assume all risk in relation
to circumstances
the tenant does not control, and in which the landlord is in a stronger position
to mitigate the risk.
has no corresponding rights by which the tenant may terminate the Lease or
request a rent reduction if the landlord causes
disruption to the tenant’s
premises or the business, regardless of the extent or duration. The only right
of the tenant is
an abatement of rent when the premises are destroyed and unfit
for occupation or use.
significant imbalance is further illustrated by comparing the effect of the term
in the Lease with the effect it would have without
Without the term, the tenant
would be entitled to compensation if the landlord acted negligently when using
its powers.
It may be within the landlord’s legitimate interests to limit its
liability when exercising its powers for the benefit or safety
of all premises,
despite resulting inconvenience to a tenant. For example, there may be
situations in which the landlord wishes to
renovate or restore the exterior of
the building to enhance its visibility or attractiveness, and thereby benefit
the shopping complex
as a whole. Making permanent changes to the exterior of a
building could no doubt result in inconvenience or damage to a tenant.
example, on one end of the scale, it could result in unwelcome noise, dust or
mess that affects the tenant’s business.
On the other, the building may be
changed in a way that severely limits customer access or visibility of the
tenant’s business.
Despite this, it is likely to be in the
landlord’s long-term interests to renovate or make other changes to the
exterior from
time to time. Given the large number of premises the landlord is
responsible for managing, it may be within the landlord’s
interests to
restrict their liability to some extent in such situations. A limited liability
clause therefore has the benefit of
allowing the landlord the freedom to make
beneficial or necessary alterations without being subjected to claims from every
However, this term in the Lease is broad in that it is not limited to
situations in which the landlord exercises their power for the
benefit or safety
of all premises. The landlord may cause inconvenience or damage merely for
reasons relating to the landlord’s
own profit, which are not legitimate
interests in this context.
Further, the term means that the landlord is absolved of all liability even when
the landlord is at fault or is negligent. Nor is
there any limit on the extent,
duration, or frequency of such inconvenience or damage. A requirement that the
landlord take ‘all
reasonable steps to minimise disruption’ exists
only in relation to one of the landlord’s
There is no requirement
of notice to the tenant. For these reasons, the clause arguably goes beyond what
is reasonably necessary
to protect the landlord’s legitimate interests.
The term is overly broad, allowing the landlord to cause virtually any level
detriment to a tenant’s business and for any reason without compensating
the tenant, and protecting the landlord in circumstances
where the landlord is
solely at fault or negligent.
The Lease provides that the tenant is ‘not by any act, deed, failure,
or omission, to impair, reduce, or diminish, directly
or indirectly, the
Yet a five per cent
annual rent increase on each rent review date is also
The term arguably creates a significant imbalance as it prevents the tenant
from requesting a rent reduction regardless of any factor
arising from or
external to the Lease. While the landlord similarly does not have the right to
increase the rent based on such factors,
the landlord does otherwise have the
right to impose additional costs on the tenant under the Lease. Additional costs
may be imposed
through a number of clauses such as: (a) in respect of outgoings,
where the landlord is entitled to ‘any other expenditure
reasonably and
properly incurred... in respect of the
(b) in relation
to insurance, where the landlord may request higher sums from the tenant in
respect of any claim arising for any
reason and require the tenant to insure
against any other risks the landlord ‘may from time to time
determine’ (and,
arguably, therefore unilaterally vary the
(c) in respect of
insurance from outgoings, where the landlord may at any time, exclude insurance
premiums from outgoings;
in relation to rates and taxes, where the landlord may at any time exclude rates
and taxes from outgoings.
Further, again, the tenant is limited in their options if suffering
inconvenience or damage caused by the landlord. This term ensures
tenant has no recourse by way of a rent reduction in these
circumstances.
Given the large number of tenants the landlord is dealing with at any one
time, it may be that a clause limiting negotiations surrounding
rent reduction
is within the landlord’s legitimate interests. Such a clause limits the
potentially significant costs and time
involved in negotiating rent prices with
each tenant. Despite this, the clause may go beyond what is reasonably
necessary, as it
does not allow for a rent reduction in any circumstance. There
are a number of factors that may warrant negotiations surrounding
reduction. These include, as discussed above, additional costs being imposed on
the tenant under the Lease or inconvenience
or damage being caused by the
landlord to the tenant’s premises. Additionally, given the large market
share of the landlord
in comparison to the tenant, it may be reasonable to
expect the landlord has adequate resources to negotiate a rent reduction with
tenants in certain limited circumstances such as those discussed. The clause
therefore potentially goes beyond what is reasonably
necessary to protect the
legitimate interests of the landlord.
Under the Lease, the landlord may terminate the Lease if rent or outgoings
are unpaid for seven days, without notice to the tenant
or demand for
Additionally, clause
5.43 of the Lease allows for termination or any claim of damages by the landlord
without any proof of default,
continuance of default or notice.
The clauses give rise to a significant imbalance by providing the landlord
with a broad power to terminate the Lease or claim damages
without any prior
warning to the tenant or providing the tenant with an opportunity to rectify the
default, regardless of how trivial
or unrelated to the loss suffered by the
Further, the tenant
has no corresponding right to terminate or claim damages for
In the one instance in
which the tenant is able to terminate under the Lease (if the premises is
‘so destroyed ... as to be
unfit for occupation and use and as to require
rebuilding’),
is required to give notice to the
Further, the power of
the landlord to recover damages without proof of any default by the tenant
potentially allows the landlord
to do so based on mere suspicions regarding a
tenant’s default. Adding further to the imbalance is a potential lack of
transparency.
Clause 5.43 of the
Lease, while also relating to default, appears four pages later in the Lease,
rather than immediately following
the default clause. The clause is somewhat
hidden amongst other unrelated provisions, and may therefore make it more
difficult for
the tenant to fully comprehend the limitation of their rights in
relation to default under the Lease. This raises concerns regarding
transparency of the term, and potentially adds to the unfairness of the term.
A clause allowing the landlord to terminate without notice or continuance of
default may be argued as being reasonably necessary for
a landlord managing such
a large number of premises. Such a clause would prevent the landlord from
expending resources to send multiple
default notices or pursue and monitor every
defaulting tenant. Whether this would involve the use of fewer resources than
termination notices, pursuing tenants for the amounts owing under the
Lease and finding a new tenant for the premises may, however,
be arguable. A
clause allowing for termination or claim of damages without proof of a default
may also be reasonably necessary in
this context. This would limit the resources
the landlord is required to expend in providing adequate proof of a default to
defaulting tenant.
On the other hand, the clause arguably goes beyond what is reasonably
necessary to protect the landlord’s legitimate interests.
allows the landlord to enforce a termination or receive damages at the first
instance of a tenant’s default. This
is irrespective of whether the
landlord has in fact suffered any resulting loss or expenses from the initial
default. This exceeds
what is reasonably necessary as the tenant, upon notice or
demand, may be able to remedy the default before any significant loss
results. This is evident particularly in relation to non-payment, as the
landlord also has a right to compensation on demand
for unpaid moneys after
seven days.
For this reason, it
may be argued that the sending of a default notice prior to termination is more
likely to be in the landlord’s
legitimate interests. This may be even more
so when considering the argument made above regarding the resources required to
a lease. Additionally, a landlord with a large market share is likely
to have adequate resources to send default notices prior to
termination of a
lease. This further reinforces the conclusion that the clause goes beyond what
is reasonably necessary.
V RECOMMENDATIONS FOR REFORM
It has long been recognised that commercial tenants need protection in
respect of unfair lease terms and other harsh and opportunistic
landlords, particularly when it comes to leases situated in large shopping
While the new UCT
Legislation helps to provide greater protection for tenants against unfair lease
terms to an extent, its practical
utility is clearly limited. Each of the terms
discussed goes beyond what is reasonably necessary to protect the interests of
landlord and therefore appear likely to be declared void if they were to be
challenged in court. However, achievement of this outcome
requires the resources
to pursue litigation, which small business tenants are unlikely to have.
Arguably, therefore, the unfair terms
can be maintained in the lease without any
likely consequence for the landlord. Further, even if litigation is pursued by a
the worst potential outcome for the landlord is that the term is
declared void (and so cannot be enforced by the landlord in relation
lease subject to the
litigation),
with an order made
to pay the costs of the litigation for both parties. Yet the landlord cannot be
subjected to any additional penalty.
The Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (‘ACCC’) also recently identified both these
issues—the fact
that unfair terms are not prohibited and the lack of
availability of pecuniary penalty—as the two biggest limitations to the
current UCT regime.
One potential solution is to make unfair terms
rather than
merely capable of being declared void. This would mean that unfair terms would
be prohibited from being included in a
standard form contract at all. In the
context of commercial leases, penalties and infringement notices could then
apply whenever
unfair terms are included in the landlord’s standard form
contract. Arguably, landlords would then be better dissuaded from
potentially unfair terms. Further, landlords could be held accountable for prior
conduct, and therefore would not have
the option of simply changing an unfair
term in the lease whenever contacted by the
Clearly, this puts an additional burden on landlords, who would be required
to seek legal advice on the fairness of the terms in their
standard form
contracts prior to entering into them, or otherwise risk a penalty. For this
reason, it is recommended that this solution
is accompanied by an effort to
further clarify the concept of unfair terms in small business contracts, in
general and in the specific
context of commercial leases. So far, there has only
been one judgment handed down on the UCT Legislation as it applies to small
businesses.
It is recommended
that the ACCC take a more aggressive approach in the area of UCTs in which a
greater number of test cases are taken
to court to generate a body of common law
precedent. This would then aid in providing greater clarity for tenants and
landlords regarding
their rights and obligations under the UCT Legislation.
VI CONCLUSION
This article has considered a standard form commercial Lease as a case
example to explore whether some of its terms may be void under
Legislation. It was found that there are strong grounds for arguing that each of
the terms, regarding exclusion of liability,
rent reduction and default, are
‘unfair’. One issue that becomes evident is that the UCT Legislation
does not prevent
a landlord from maintaining unfair terms in a lease. Given that
small businesses are likely to have either a vague understanding
as to which
terms in their leases may be deemed unfair, or have limited resources to seek
advice in relation to this, it is questionable
as to what extent the UCT
Legislation does actually provide protection for small businesses in practice.
It was recommended that
the inclusion of unfair terms in standard form contracts
should be prohibited in order to provide a greater incentive for landlords
ensure their lease terms are fair. It was also recommended that the ACCC adopt a
more proactive approach in regard to enforcement
of the UCT Legislation to
provide greater clarity for tenants and landlords on their rights and
obligations. Implementing these recommendations
will go a long way toward
correcting the current imbalance of power between retail landlords and
Accepting Submissions
www.wastudentlawreview.com
Brought to you by Law Students from:
University of Notre Dame Australia
University of Western Australia
Edith Cowan University
Murdoch University
Curtin University
Ruth Kooy is a final year law
student at Curtin University.
Jeannie Paterson, ‘The
Australian Unfair Contract Terms Law: The Rise of Substantive Unfairness as a
Ground for Review of Standard
Form Consumer Contracts’
[2009] MelbULawRw 32
(2009) 33(1)
Melbourne University Law Review
Alexandra Sims, ‘Unfair
Contract Terms: A New Dawn in Australia and New Zealand?’
[2013] MonashULawRw 24
(2013) 39(3)
Monash University Law Review
Friedrich Kessler,
‘Contracts of Adhesion—Some Thoughts About Freedom of
(1945) 43(1)
Columbia Law Review
, 632; Brendan
Edgeworth et al,
Sackville & Neave: Australian Property Law
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 9
ed, 2013) 692.
Kessler, above n 3, 632.
Prospective retail tenants are unable to ‘shop around’ for different
or better contract terms
as often the terms used by competitor landlords will be
either the same or very similar. Further, particularly in relation to larger,
more desirable shopping centres, there are generally multiple prospective
tenants competing over limited space. It is therefore the
landlord that has the
pick of a larger pool of tenants that are in need of a viable space to conduct
their business. Adding to this
imbalance is the fact that small business owners
are likely to forgo obtaining legal advice on the terms of the lease in order to
cut costs. See, eg, Eileen Webb, ‘Considering Unfairness in Retail
Leases—A Bridge Too Far or Justifiable Extension?’
(2010) 19(1)
Australian Property Law Journal
The Australian Consumer Law
(‘ACL’) is contained in Sch 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act
Council of Australian
Governments, Intergovernmental Agreement for the Australian Consumer Law (2009)
ACL s 23(1).
The lease the subject of this
article cannot be identified with further specificity for confidentiality
ACL s 23(4). A contract is a
small business contract if one party to the contract, at the time it was entered
into, is a business
that employs less than 20 people and the upfront price
payable is under $300,000, or, alternatively, under $1,000,000 if the contract
is longer than 12 months.
A contract is
presumed to be a standard form contract if so alleged, unless it is proved
otherwise. In determining whether a contract
is standard form, the court must
consider the factors set out in
the difference in bargaining power
between the parties; whether one party prepared the contract before discussing
the transaction;
whether one party was required to either accept or reject the
terms of the contract; whether an opportunity to negotiate the terms
to the other party; and whether any terms within the contract take into account
particular characteristics of the other
party or transaction.
Ibid s 23(1)–(2).
Ibid s 24(1).
Ibid s 24(2).
Lease [3.44].
Ibid [1.1], defining the
‘Lessor’s powers’ as ‘all rights and powers in
favour’ of the Landlord contained
or implied in the Lease.
Ibid [5.34].
Ibid [5.25].
Ibid [5.26].
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v JJ Richards & Sons Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1224
Lease [5.6].
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v CLA Trading Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 377
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v JJ Richards & Sons Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1224
Lease [5.34].
Ibid [3.50].
Ibid [5.48].
Ibid [1.1].
Ibid [3.40(a)(ii)],
Ibid [5.14].
Ibid [5.13].
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v JJ Richards & Sons Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1224
Lease [5.2(a)].
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v CLA Trading Pty Ltd
[2016] FCA 377
Lease [5.9].
Ibid, providing that the
tenant is required to give notice within six months of the premises being
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Chrisco Hampers Australia Limited
[2015] FCA 1204
Lease [3.4].
See The House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology,
Parliament of Australia,
Finding a Balance
Towards Fair Trading
In Australia
Reid Report
’) ch 2 [1.4]. See also
Elisabeth Ahlinder, ‘Business Tenant Protection—For Whom? For What?
How? Security of Tenure
within UK, Swedish and Australian Law’
Australian Property Law Journal
, 159; Neil Crosby, Sandi
Murdoch and Eileen Webb, ‘Landlords and Tenants Behaving Badly? The
Application of Unconscionable
and Unfair Conduct to Commercial Leases in
Australia and the United Kingdom’
(2007) 33(1)
University of Western
Australia Law Review
Brooks v Burns Philp Trustee
[1969] HCA 4
(1969) 121 CLR 432.
Rod Sims, ‘Major
Changes Needed to Get Rid of Unfair Contract Terms’ (Speech delivered at
COSBOA National Small Business
Summit, Sydney, 31 August 2018)
http://www.accc.gov.au/speech/major-changes-needed-to-get-rid-of-unfair-contract-terms
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v JJ Richards & Sons Pty Ltd
[2017] FCA 1224.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (10.6 MB)
PDF format (185 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter