URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRS/2010/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Freeland, Steven --- "The Agreement That Wasn't - The Copenhagen Climate Change Conference and Beyond" [2010] ALRS 9
The Agreement That Wasn’t – The Copenhagen
Climate Change Conference and Beyond
Professor Steven Freeland, Law School, University of Western
Introduction
Between 7 and 19 December 2009, the 15
of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
was held in Copenhagen, Denmark (COP15).
In the lead up to COP15, there was
great anticipation as to what would be achieved at the meeting by the broad
global community and,
indeed, what
to be achieved, in order to
properly address the threats posed by changes to the world’s climate.
COP15 was seen by commentators as the final culmination to many years of
negotiations, starting in 1992 with the conclusion of the
UNFCCC at the Rio
Earth Summit, through 1997 and the finalization of the Kyoto Protocol to the
UNFCCC (Kyoto Protocol), and incorporating
the 2007 Bali Action Plan, which
mandated Parties to the UNFCCC to reach agreement by the end of COP15 on a range
of key areas, including
the quantification of binding emissions reduction
targets for the second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol, commencing in
The stakes were high and the world was watching. Many hoped that the
Copenhagen Conference would ‘seal a deal’. As the
months and weeks
leading up to COP15 passed by, there was almost unprecedented media coverage of
all aspects of the climate change
debate. It was (quite understandably)
impossible to listen to any news program without a reference to climate change
and the range
of opinions relating to the proposed actions that were required to
address it. In Australia, the Rudd Government had positioned itself
‘Friend of the Chair’ of COP15 and, increasingly desperately, sought
agreement with the opposition parties, in order
to secure passage of its ETS
legislation prior to COP15. In the end, however, those efforts failed (as they
did in other countries,
including the United States) and, as collateral damage,
the leadership of the Liberal Party changed.
Similar discussions were taking place in many other countries of the world,
as developed countries, developing countries, the least
developed countries and
island developing States all grappled with their respective policies and
strategies to take to Copenhagen.
What was clear, however, was that, as the
anticipation leading to Copenhagen grew, so did the expectations by many parts
society that the world’s nations would, at last, reach a binding
agreement that comprehensively met the issues facing them
head on. Even before
the first delegates arrived in the Danish capital, some had dubbed the
Conference ‘Hopenhagen’,
believing that COP15 would be a turning
point in the battle against the adverse impacts of climate change.
Indeed, in the week before the commencement of COP15, a colleague in
Copenhagen sent me a wonderfully written eight page ‘mock
International Herald Tribune
, prepared by Greenpeace and post-dated 19
December 2009, which lead with the front page article ‘Heads of state
agree historic
climate-saving deal’. In the light of events as they
actually transpired, both during and after COP15, that ‘publication’
makes for fascinating and poignant reading.
No doubt also, the election of the new Obama administration in the United
States, which (at least outwardly) appeared to far more
readily embrace the need
for tangible action to address the impacts of climate change than its
predecessor, added to expectations
that COP15 would represent a major turning
point towards a global and cooperative approach.
However, as one after another of the various pre-COP15 negotiations ended
without significant progress, certain (mainly industrialised)
countries began to
issue warnings that perhaps only a ‘politically binding’ (as opposed
to legally binding) agreement
would be achievable in Copenhagen. Others, took an
even more pessimistic view, with some commentators suggesting that
rotten awaits us in the Kingdom of Denmark’ (with due
apologies to Shakespeare).
The Implications of
Reaching an Agreement at COP15
Much has been written about the tangible effects of climate change. Although
a significant part of the debate has centred around whether
the change in the
Earth’s temperature is (at least partially) due to the actions of
humankind, or is a totally natural phenomena
– with the large majority of
experts subscribing to the former view – there is almost universal
agreement that the climate
is changing, and that this has significant negative
implements for many States and populations. This relates not only to the
in destructive weather events, the reduction of arable land, the rising
level of the oceans, the spread of disease and the uncertainties
agriculture; it also has vast economic costs, both in terms of adapting to such
impacts and also dealing with the adverse consequences
that they bring.
Indeed, these predicted consequences, which have already been borne out by
recent events, have been a regular feature in the debate
thus far and, in and of
themselves, already provide more than sufficient justification for the need to
agree on concrete and appropriate
actions on a global basis.
However, it has only been relatively recently that the debate has been
broadened – primarily by the developing countries –
to incorporate
the devastating effects of climate change on the human rights of many people.
Reports by both the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and other
agencies within the United Nations have clearly shown how rising sea levels,
changing weather
patterns and other climate-related impacts significantly
threaten fundamental rights such as the right to life, the right to food,
right to water, the right to health, the right to adequate housing and the
self-determination rights of indigenous peoples. While
there may be some
arguments around the edges of this debate as to the precise extent of these
impacts, no-one can dispute with any
credibility that this is already taking
Even more significantly, it is widely agreed that climate change is itself a
threat to international peace and security, the maintenance
of which represents
one of the underlying purposes of the United Nations itself. The United Nations
High Commission for Human Rights
has estimated that the combined effects of
climate change and other economic, social and political problems, could lead to
a heightened
risk of conflict in 46 countries, particularly in the areas prone
to the adverse impacts of climate change in sub-Saharan Africa,
Asia and Latin
America. Many military leaders have argued that the environmental impacts of
climate change constitutes a ‘threat
multiplier’ in fragile parts of
the world, exacerbating conditions that lead to failed states, which then
represent fertile
breeding grounds for extremism and terrorism.
Indeed, climate change related impacts and the increased incidence of drought
in Sudan were significant factors leading to the genocide
that is currently
taking place in Darfur and the instability in Somalia.
In addition, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has recently
concluded that climate change has led to the dislocation
of people ‘by
provoking conflicts over increasingly scarce resources, such as water’
and, due to its impact on the environment,
was a trigger of extreme poverty and
conflict. The spectre of large numbers of ‘environmental refugees’
looms large in
several parts of the world, adding significantly to the
possibility of further instability and conflict. Long before COP15, Australia
and New Zealand had already been involved in high-level discussions and
negotiations in this regard with the Government of Tuvalu,
which had, in 2001,
warned the world that prompt and effective action to address the effects of
climate change ‘may be the
only means to safeguard the survival of an
entire living society’. Similar view have been strongly and repeatedly
by countries like the Maldives and number of other small island
developing States.
In all of these senses, environmental degradation arising from climate change
can be both a cause and a consequence of misery, death
and destruction, armed
conflict and regional and international instability. Its devastating effects on
many millions of people is,
by and large, accepted, despite the efforts of the
so-called ‘climate change sceptics’. It was therefore widely
as of crucial importance by both the scientific community, as well as
broader elements of civil society, that COP15 would see very
positive outcomes
for the environment and, ultimately, for humanity.
It was necessary to incorporate all of these considerations into the
forefront of the negotiations to shape the ‘post-Kyoto’
Indeed, many considered that the consequences of not acting in a comprehensive
and appropriate way in Copenhagen would have
been too dire to contemplate.
COP15 – What we could have got - the (Anticipated) Possible
Prior to the Conference, it was widely thought that there were,
realistically, only a discreet number of possible outcomes to the
discussions in
Copenhagen. Naturally, the final legal form of what was agreed (if anything)
would have a profound impact on future
action relating to climate change and its
effects. Moreover, COP15 itself was to be the largest, most complex and
(arguably) most
significant international negotiation ever conducted, and its
‘success’ or otherwise would, to many, ultimately reflect
the viability of utilising a ‘whole world’ approach – through
the United Nations process - to address issues
of global concern.
Prior to the Conference, various possibilities for an outcome to COP15 were
canvassed by commentators. These would not necessarily
be mutually exclusive,
and included the following:
No outcome at all
Despite the optimism of some, there was always the possibility that those
attending COP15 would failure to reach a consensus (or other)
agreement, or even
to take a formal Decision regarding a set of principles or proposed actions. In
this event, and perhaps as a ‘face-saving’
exercise, the States at
COP15 might have agreed to continue the Copenhagen discussions in mid-2010 (a
meeting that would then have
been referred to as COP15
), a political
technique that been utilised on previous occasions when the main COP Meeting
failed to deliver.
A Decision (or set of Decisions)
The COP could agree by consensus in plenary session at the conclusion of the
Conference to make various Decisions relating to (future)
action and proposals.
These would not necessarily relate to any particular document, but would rather
reflect its resolve to proceed
in a particular way. This would be the weakest of
any agreed outcome, although it would at least reflect an approach going forward
that the Conference as a whole had accepted. In addition, such Decisions could
supplement other possible outcomes from the Conference.
A Political ‘Agreement to Agree’
An approach favoured prior to COP15 by the United States, this would involve
a non-legally binding document pursuant to which each
State could decide its own
emissions reductions goals and be free to implement such targets solely by way
of its respective national
laws. Of course, even though this approach might
ultimately involve the establishment of quantified emissions reduction targets,
without a compliance mechanism at the international level, these would not be
readily enforceable and, in any event, there would
not necessarily be a
uniformity of approach (or involvement) by the industrialised countries in the
process of setting national targets.
Having said this, it should not be forgotten that, to a large degree, the
quantified targets for the first commitment period (2008-2012)
under the Kyoto Protocol have themselves not been complied with. Indeed,
now widely regarded by scientists that, even if the greenhouse gas emission
reductions currently specified under the Kyoto
Protocol were achieved, this
would not be sufficient to solve the problems associated with global
A New Legally Binding Agreement to replace the Kyoto Protocol
Given the shortcomings of the Kyoto Protocol, it was possible that the States
at COP15 would ‘work to a clean slate’.
Whilst no doubt referring
to, and perhaps relying upon many of the principles enunciated in the Kyoto
Protocol, this approach would
involve the finalization of a comprehensive new
agreement – the ‘Copenhagen Protocol’ (to the UNFCCC) - to
the Kyoto Protocol. The Copenhagen Protocol would include not only many
of the issues canvassed in the Kyoto Protocol, but also additional
relating to, for example, adaptation to the effects of climate change and
(binding) action / targets for developing countries,
in addition to the
industrialised countries. These targets might still reflect the environmental
principle of ‘common but differentiated
responsibility’ –
imposing the largest commitments on those States with the capability to
implement them – but
the Copenhagen protocol would differ from the Kyoto
Protocol in that it would also bind non-industrialised States to take action
comply with quantified emissions reduction targets.
An ‘New Improved’ Kyoto Protocol
Another approach would be to retain the Kyoto Protocol, but to provide
additional measures within that existing framework, including
emissions reductions targets for industrialised States for the second commitment
period, as well as broader enforcement
mechanisms and concrete action directed
towards issues of adaptation to, and the mitigation of the effects of climate
addition, a second protocol (the Copenhagen Protocol) would be
concluded in relation to the obligations of non-industrialised countries.
may not necessarily involve the specification of quantified emissions reductions
targets, although the obligations that it
established would be more rigorous
than those set out in the (existing) Kyoto Protocol.
COP15 – What we actually got - The ‘Copenhagen
After two often fractious and divisive weeks of discussion, negotiation,
position taking, grand-standing and walk-outs, finally culminating
high-level session attended by 115 Heads of State, the final result of COP15
was, ironically, none of the above. Instead, it
was a ‘hybrid’
document, largely driven by a small number of high-polluting States. Rumours had
been circulating towards
the end of COP15 that an informal grouping – led
by the United States and the so-called BASIC States (Brazil, India, South
and China) – had prepared a document that they proposed be adopted by
consensus by the Conference as a COP Decision.
As a part of this grouping, China clearly demonstrated the very significant
geopolitical power that it now wields, flexing its muscles
quite stridently
during discussions with many countries, including the United States itself. It
is therefore somewhat disconcerting
that, barely one month after COP15 ended,
the Chinese Government has admitted to an ‘open attitude’ towards
the climate
change debate The significant sphere of influence now held by China
will no doubt be a portent of things to come, both in the climate
change debate
as well as in other areas.
The negotiation of this agreement among a small number of States was not
formally advised to most of the COP15 Parties and, indeed,
many delegations only
first learnt about the existence of this document on the internet or through the
media. Eventually, the three
page, 12 paragraph, Copenhagen Accord (attached as
an appendix to this paper) was presented to plenary. It is not entirely apparent
exactly what the legal nature of this document is, given that it does not fall
within the range of outcomes that had been canvassed
prior to COP15. By way of
contrast, the draft ‘Agreement’ that the COP15 had, up until that
time, been negotiating ran
to several hundred pages.
When the Copenhagen Accord was presented to the Conference for adoption in
the final few hours of COP15, it was categorically rejected
by a (admittedly
small) number of States, which included Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, Tuvalu,
Venezuela and Sudan, which referred to
it as a ‘suicide note for
Africa’. Had a formal Decision been made to adopt it, the operational
aspects of the Copenhagen
Accord could have been implemented through the UNFCCC
institutional structures. However, due to the opposition of these countries,
requisite consensus for a Decision was not possible and, instead, the plenary
could only resolve to ‘take note’ of
the document.
Yet the Copenhagen Accord does not itself establish any
‘free-standing’ operational mechanisms that would allow it to
implemented independently from the UNFCCC regime. The wording of the Copenhagen
Accord had been carefully drafted on the assumption
adopted by the COP15, and by the time it became evident that this would not be
the case, it was too late to amend its terms (President
Obama, for example, was
already on his way back to the United States, having spent a total of 13 hours
in Copenhagen).
As a consequence, the Copenhagen Accord has been described by one commentator
as ‘neither fish nor fowl’, meaning that,
from a strictly legal as
well as practical viewpoint, it does not fall within any of the structures that
would allow it to be implemented,
despite the fact that the drafters have
expressly declared it to be ‘operational immediately’.
Even putting this (rather fundamental) preliminary issue to one side, it is
evident that there are many weaknesses and uncertainties
to be found in the
actual terms of the Copenhagen Accord. Whilst it is beyond the scope of this
brief commentary to provide a detailed
analysis of its provisions, serious
questions arise as to the process leading to the finalization of the document.
Many States criticized
the lack of transparency leading to the presentation of
the Copenhagen Accord to the community of nations. There are fears that this
set a precedent for future discussions on issues of global concern; indeed, some
have gone so far as to assert that the COP15
experience signals the death of the
United Nations process of broad multilateral discussion and consensus building.
Whilst, of course, there are flaws with that traditional approach, to
diminish the role of the United Nations on such matters of global
concern, and
instead to abrogate those responsibilities to a handful of States would, I
believe, represent a dangerous precedent
that might be difficult to control.
Moreover, this approach would compromise other emerging developments in
international law and
relations, such as the ‘Responsibility to
Protect’ (R2P) concept, where broad and consistent action by the
international
community as a whole and directed towards particular threats to
populations may be necessary.
Significantly, the Copenhagen Accord does not commit industrialised countries
to any legally binding emissions reduction targets.
In this regard, it is
considerably weaker than the Kyoto Protocol; yet it leaves unresolved the
crucial issue of the future of the
Kyoto Protocol itself, which is, for the
moment at least still the only legally binding global agreement that specifies
such targets.
Nor does the Copenhagen Accord specify any longer term global
emissions reduction goals, although it does make reference to holding
increase in global temperature to ‘below 2 degrees Celsius’.
Rather the Copenhagen Accord advocates what has been referred to as a
‘bottom-up’ approach – where industrialised
States (and
developing countries if they so wish) submit by 31 January 2010 (a deadline that
was subsequently abandoned by the United
Nations) their proposed pledges simply
for information purposes, and not directly calculated according to any
particular objective
or scientific criteria. This falls far short of the
coordinated, cooperative and specifically focussed emissions reduction regime
that the scientists, civil society and those States most vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change had been calling for.
There are other weaknesses in the document relating to mitigation actions by
developing countries and the establishment of more rigorous
mechanisms for what
is known as measurement, reporting and verification (MRV). On the more positive
side, the Copenhagen Accord does
provide for the mobilization of up to US$30
billion for adaptation and mitigation purposes for the period 2010-2012, with a
of US$100 billion per year by 2020 ‘to address the
needs of developing countries’. Whilst these commitments must be viewed
the context of the non-binding nature of the Copenhagen Accord – and
history is filled with examples of unfulfilled developed
country pledges of
funding for developing countries – this aspect of the document does
represent an important basis for future
discussion and possibly a legally
binding agreement.
Where to from here?
There is no doubt that COP15 was a very important event. It was probably the
largest international gathering ever to take place, and
credit must go to the
Danish authorities who, under very trying circumstances, did an admirable job in
most aspects. Clearly there
were always going to be significant logistical
problems arising from the accreditation by the United Nations of approximately
people for a conference centre that had an absolute capacity of 15,000
(and a more comfortable capacity of about 6,000). However,
the Conference thrust
the issue of climate change, and its impacts, into the forefront of discussion
in all parts of the globe. All
countries stand liable to be affected by these
adverse consequences and all thus have a responsibility to take positive action,
the limitations of their capacity, to mitigate to the greatest extent
feasible, the emission of greenhouse gases.
In this regard, it is disheartening that the Rudd Government, returning from
Copenhagen rather bruised and battered, has pledged that
Australia will do
‘no more and no less’ than other countries. This approach simply
does not take account of the fact
that Australia is, on a per capita basis, one
of the highest (if not
highest) carbon polluters in the world.
The historical significance of the Copenhagen Conference may not become clear
for some time. Some have rather cynically re-labelled
‘FLOP15’. Obviously, there is an enormous amount of work to be done
before the world’s population can be
satisfied that all reasonable and
appropriate steps are being taken to address what the Copenhagen Accord itself
refers to as ‘one
of the greatest challenges of our time’. There are
aspects of the document that represent very important foundations upon which
build upon. But, more than ever, the uncertainties of the process in Copenhagen
and the unsatisfactory nature of the final result,
have demonstrated the need to
finalise a strong legally binding agreement as soon as possible, and certainly
no later than by the
conclusion of COP16 in Cancun, Mexico in December of this
In the meantime, debate will continue as to the best way forward. The
unfortunate errors in a major IPCC Report and other incidents
(most notably the
email incidents at University of East Anglia Climatic Research Unit) have given
added fuel to those who describe
themselves as ‘climate
disbelievers’. No doubt also the cold and snowy conditions at Copenhagen
during COP15, and the
very severe wintry conditions currently affecting both
North America and Europe, add to the cynicism of those who want to believe
the Earth’s temperature is not increasing (indeed, as I finish writing
this commentary on the first day of the European
Spring, I can look out of my
window here in Copenhagen and still see snow showers).
However, as Al Gore wrote in a recent Opinion Piece in the
, such phenomenon can be explained by scientists as a natural
consequence of warmer global temperatures that increase the rate of
evaporation
from the oceans and thus put far more moisture into the atmosphere. As he put
it: ‘just as it’s important
not to miss the forest for the trees,
neither should we miss the climate for the snowstorm’.
This is an important sentiment that the world needs to reflect upon.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (87.8 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter