URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2022/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Potter, Wellett --- "Cryptokitties, Art Tokens and Bored Apes in the Metaverse: How Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) Challenge Australian Copyright Law during an Age of Disruption" [2022] ANZCompuLawJl 3; (2022) 94 Computers & Law, Article 3
I INTRODUCTION
A What is an NFT?
B Record-Breaking NFTs
C What Makes NFTs Valuable?
II WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO OWN AN NFT? WHAT ARE
BUYERS PAYING FOR?
A The Minting of NFTs
III AUSTRALIAN COPYRIGHT SUBSISTENCE, IMPLICATIONS & CHALLENGES
A Subsistence in Associated Assets
B Subsistence in Tokens
C Licensing of Tokens & the BAYC Case Study
D Infringement
1 Token and Associated Assets
2 Liability of NFT Platforms
E Are Tokens Considered to be Property In
Their Own Right?
IV NFT CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTURE
A The Tension Between Tangible Ownership and the
Licensing of Digital Goods
B Digital Kudos and the Emergence of a New Type of
Meta-Property Right
V CONCLUSION
CRYPTOKITTIES
, ART TOKENS AND
BORED APES IN THE METAVERSE:
HOW NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS (NFTS) CHALLENGE AUSTRALIAN COPYRIGHT LAW DURING
AN AGE OF DISRUPTION
The post-COVID-19 era is an age of disruption, which presents significant
social, cultural and technological challenges and opportunities
for society at
large. There has been substantial wealth generation fuelled from digital
currencies, which has led to interest and
sales of Non-Fungible Tokens
(‘NFTs’) and their associated assets. This article will examine the
growth and hype about
artistic NFTs in the context of recent years. It will then
examine the application of current Australian copyright laws to such NFTs
their assets to determine subsistence and infringement of these works. The
notion of what it means to ‘own’ an NFT
will be examined. When
applying traditional proprietary notions of ownership to NFTs, it will be seen
that they have the capacity
to challenge established norms which have evolved in
a material, pre-technological world. Finally, this article will ponder the
as to whether a new type of virtual ownership right is emerging for
NFTs and their associated
I INTRODUCTION
The post-COVID-19 era is an age of disruption, which presents significant
social, cultural and technological challenges for society
at large. On one hand,
while there has been supply-chain interruptions, food shortages and inflation in
many countries, on the other,
there has been substantial opportunities,
increased digitalisation
significant wealth generation fuelled by digital economies. One of the
implications of this has been the growth, interest and
(‘drops’) of Non-Fungible Tokens (hereafter ‘NFTs’).
NFTs have been in existence for over a decade,
but during the last year their
popularity and notoriety has exploded. In 2021, global NFT sales topped $24.9
billion, a massive increase
from $94.9 million in
Interestingly, 85% of all NFT
transactions have been performed by 10% of traders, which indicates that a small
minority are engaging
in a large number of
As of December 2022 in Australia, there are no specific regulations which
have been developed for NFTs. Nor has there been any intellectual
(‘IP’) litigation involving NFTs. Depending on its use, an NFT might
fall under intellectual property, consumer
and securities law. An NFT might also
qualify under the general definition of a ‘financial product’,
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) and be subject to the
regulatory framework of the
Australian Securities & Investment
This article seeks to examine how NFTs and their associated assets challenge
Australian copyright law and notions of proprietary ownership
in the post-COVID
era. To achieve this, firstly, this section will examine the growth and hype
years. There will be discussion about what
an NFT is and exploration of some of the most expensive and notable drops
throughout 2021.
This will lead into analysis in Section II about what it means
to own an NFT, which will explore the process of token creation and
Section III will then examine the application of current Australian copyright
laws to NFTs to determine how copyright may protect
them. This article will then
focus upon the copyright protection of NFTs attached to digital art as a case
study, using the example
Bored Ape Yacht Club
’). Then, the notion of NFT copyright infringement will
be discussed. The issue as to whether tokens are considered property
own right will also be considered. As there has not been any copyright
litigation involving an NFT in Australia at the time
of writing, recent cases
from China, the US and UK will be used to analyse these issues.
Finally, section IV will argue that from a legal perspective, NFTs challenge
traditional notions of property, which originated in
the pre-technological,
material world, involving the fundamental concepts of ownership, control and
what it means to possess an item.
It will be pondered whether a new type of
virtual ownership right – a meta-property right – for digital assets
evolving in the NFT marketplace.
Although the term ‘NFT’ is often used, there generally remains
confusion about what it is and how it is used. When a good
‘fungible’, it means that it is ‘easy to exchange or trade for
something else of the same type and
An example of a
digital fungible product is bitcoin – like can be exchanged for like.
However, by their very nature, NFTs are
fungible, meaning that no two
NFTs have the same properties – each is unique and it is this uniqueness
that gives them value
(emphasis added). It is very important to note that an NFT
which is attached to an asset, rather than the asset itself
(emphasis added). An NFT is defined as ‘a unique unit of data (=
one existing of its type) that links to a particular piece of digital art,
music, video, etc. and that can be bought and
An analogy can be
drawn to an auction ledger, which outlines the details of what has been
auctioned, as distinct to the item which
has been sold.
Another way to describe an NFT is a type of digital deed or token on a
blockchain platform, which is linked to a unique item. The
blockchain acts as a
(sometimes referred to as the underlying
asset), by verifying its ownership and
history. Each new transaction represents a new block on the chain. Blockchain
registration
results in NFT ownership being recorded in a decentralised and
transparent way. Another benefit is that registration can assist the
receive a resale royalty payment if the NFT is later resold – this
instruction is coded into the contract so that
it happens automatically upon
The information which is
recorded on the blockchain includes who created the asset, who linked it to the
blockchain and its purchase
history. This important and nuanced distinction
between the NFT (i.e., the token/data on the blockchain) and the digital asset
which it is linked is one which is not often well understood. For the
purposes of this article, where relevant, the terms ‘NFT/token’
‘asset/associated asset’ will be used to delineate these items.
NFTs originated from the need in digital environments to be able to replicate
the properties belonging to physical items, which include
uniqueness, scarcity,
being rivalrous and proving ownership. This began as a method for visual and
digital artists to be able to
prove digital ownership of their work on the
blockchain and to be able to control their work’s
Tokens have the capacity to
enable scarcity for any associated
For example, a token can
make the ownership of digital art exclusive, and verify the ownership of such
assets, which were issues
that had previously been problematic. As the
blockchain comprises of many computers working on complex algorithms to validate
a transaction
and all records are kept public, this means that it is very
difficult to conduct fraud. The unique identity of the NFT on the blockchain
cannot be replicated or replaced and this assists in proving/tracing ownership.
The NFT concept has rapidly expanded to various types
of items across many
industries, including the gaming industry, where it is now commonplace for
in-game purchases to be NFTs. Popular
NFT games include ‘The
Sandbox’, ‘Cryptokitties’, and ‘Axie
Broadly, there are two categories of NFTs: those which are associated with
digital, intangible works and those which are associated
with tangible works. In
the first category, many types of digital assets may be attached to NFTs –
for example, any type of
image/artwork, a video, an audio file, online
real-estate, memes, gaming avatars/assets, or even a tweet. When a digital asset
the subject of an NFT, it is important to note that what is usually stored on
the blockchain is a link to it, rather than the asset
itself (it is unusual to
store the asset on the blockchain). Specific examples of digital NFTs include
Cryptokitties
which were created in 2017 by Dapper Labs,
Cryptopunks,
which were launched in 2017 by Larva Labs and the
which was created in 2021 by Yuga Labs.
The other category of NFTs are associated with tangible assets. They work
through linking the asset with the NFT via a QR code or
link. In this way, these
NFTs have similar properties to a certificate of title for real property. When a
purchase is made, no physical
object changes hands, but the NFT guarantees the
authenticity of the original asset and denotes ownership. It is possible for
NFTs to be associated with many types of assets. Examples include tokens
for tangible artwork, sound recordings, ticketing for events
and certificates of
title for real estate
possibilities are almost limitless.
Record-Breaking
In the past year, NFTs have gained media attention due to record-breaking
sales. In December of 2021, PAK’s NFT attached to
an artwork titled
‘The Merge’ sold for a record $91.8 million USD, which comprised of
28,983 collectors purchasing 312,686
NFTs to this
The way that this drop
worked was that over three days, purchasers could buy any number of tokens that
they wished – this is
known as an ‘open edition’ drop, where
there is no limit on tokens.
tokens began at a price of $75 USD and increased at six-hour intervals by $25
Purchasers received their
token to access the art once the drop
Another token attached to artwork which sold in March of 2021 was a digital
collage artwork (a digital JPEG file), titled ‘Everydays
– the First
5000 Days’ by Artist Beeple (Mike
Winkleman).
This sold at
for $69 million
It comprised of a collage
of artworks, which Beeple had been producing each day for fourteen
Similarly, another sale
of distinction in November of 2021 was a token for virtual land in the online
game ‘The Sandbox’,
which was purchased by investor Republic Realm
for $4.3 million.
However, there appears to be volatility in the NFT marketplace and
speculation is that growth has started to slow as of December
An example is Twitter
founder Jack Dorsey’s first tweet, which was linked to an NFT and sold for
$2.9 million in 2021.
was published on 21 March 2006 and stated ‘just setting up my
Dorsey’s tweet NFT value dropped 99% in a
which demonstrates that an
NFT’s value is driven by market demand. Community engagement with tokens
plays a critical role with
There are cycles that expand and contract through time, with expensive NFTs
pitched to a niche market. This parallels the situation
with tangible
collector’s assets, such as fine art.
Makes NFTs Valuable?
There are various economic and socio-cultural factors which prompt people to
attribute value to NFTs. Such factors pertain to the
digital file linked to the
NFT and include utility, aesthetics/appeal to their owner, the uniqueness and
scarcity, the fame of the
creator/owner and the potential liquidity status of
the asset itself. The purchase of NFTs as an investment has been attractive to
wealthy individuals such as celebrities and singers, with examples including
singer Justin Bieber owing a $625,130 USD portfolio
and comedian Dave Chappelle
a $262,000 USD portfolio.
Part of the socio-cultural attraction of NFT ownership was explained by
celebrity Paris Hilton, when interviewed in January of 2022
with Jimmy Fallon. Both parties had purchased separate digital cartoon
ape NFTs from the popular
, with Ms Hilton purchasing her ape for
approximately $300,000 USD.
showing the audience a hard-copy digital print of her NFT
) which was depicted wearing a hat and
sunglasses, Ms Hilton explained what attracted her to purchase it.
‘That’s my ape
– it’s really cool... the hat, the
shades... I was going through a lot of them, I was like, I want something that
me of me, but this one, it does. We made, like, another version of it
where he takes the hat off and blonde hair comes out... [an]
Mr Fallon went on to further articulate his attraction to his token,
‘We’re part of the community. This is my ape. It
reminded me of me a
little bit because I wear striped shirts, I’ve worn these heart sunglasses
because my daughters, just as
a joke, they have them and just as a joke - I put
them on, so I’ve done this and I love yacht-rock and being breezy. And I
like the blue.’
be gleaned from this conversation is that these purchasers have bought their NFT
apes for several reasons which will briefly
be explored.
Firstly, each of the tokens attached to digital ape images are an economic
investment, due to their value, uniqueness and scarcity.
Also, the fact that
each token has been purchased by a celebrity will likely improve their liquidity
status in the future, should
they be sold. Secondly, these assets belong to a
popular NFT collection, so they are a type of digital collector’s item
are highly sought-after. Thirdly, the aesthetics of each individual ape
has appealed to their purchasers, with each personally identifying
This is similar to the reasons that attract people to buy tangible
collector’s goods, such as baseball cards or
vintage Smurf figurines.
As mentioned earlier in this article, as a token is an intangible good
– a record on a digital ledger - this begs the question
as to what a buyer
is actually paying for when they make a purchase. What does it mean to own a
token when the asset exists in an
intangible, digital environment or in the
metaverse? The following section will unpack these issues in greater detail.
DOES IT MEAN TO OWN AN NFT? WHAT ARE
BUYERS PAYING
Minting of NFTs
In order to understand what it means to own a token, it is necessary to
understand a general overview of the minting process. The
first step is that a
creator must have created some type of asset (for example, an artwork, literary
work, etc) which they wish to
A creator can upload the
details about this asset to an NFT platform, and execute a smart contract. This
involves deciding upon the
conditions of the contract, coding this and uploading
this data to the appropriate NFT platform. Doing this has given some creators
greater freedom in setting their own cost and cutting out middle entities, which
has been particularly exciting for the digital art
The smart contract is
usually programmed to self-execute if particular conditions of sale are
which are based in contract
It is also possible to
program smart contracts to create new events or execute further contracts or
tokens, or to embed cryptocurrencies
or further digital assets (although this
happens infrequently).
Depending on the complexity and timing of the transaction, a compulsory
registration fee is charged. This is known as a ‘gas
fee’ and is
often very expensive due to the carbon emission cost. This has meant that in the
past, the token market has generally
been geared towards the wealthy. This
‘gas fee’ is usually paid to the network validators and it covers
the cost of the
blockchain services, including energy costs, validation and
securing fees.
There has been controversy associated with the amount of power and therefore
carbon emissions that it takes to mint a token. The reason
for this is that the
underlying process of maintaining certain blockchains known as ‘proof of
work’ is deliberately energy
An example is
Ethereum blockchain, where miners must solve an algorithm to add a new block of
verified transactions. This is deliberately
a high-energy and therefore
expensive task, so as to dissuade fraudulent activity. An average NFT on the
blockchain has been found
to have a carbon footprint which is higher than an EU
resident’s monthly electricity
However, in recent times,
some blockchain, such as Solana, are offering the opportunity to be carbon
neutral and this results in
lower ‘gas fees’.
When a creator mints a token, after paying the ‘gas fee’, they
are assigned a ‘public key’. This is used to
verify that they minted
(or authored) the digital item – it is a type of certificate of
authenticity. The ‘public key’
is recorded in the token’s
metadata and on the blockchain, which gives it transparency. Minting on the
decentralised blockchain
also means that this data cannot be altered or deleted.
The ‘public key’ has the additional utility of allowing a creator
earn resale royalties, every time that their token is later resold to a new
owner, which is a particularly attractive option to
This has provided a
solution to a long-standing problem of resale royalties, particularly for
digital artists. It also fulfils one
of the aims of copyright – to
incentivise authors to continue producing their
Because NFTs are secured on the blockchain, they are minted and traded using
various forms of cryptocurrency, including Solana, Flow,
Ethereum and Wax. Upon
buying a token, a new owner is assigned a ‘private key’, which is
stored in a digital wallet.
This ‘private key’ provides security and
verifies original ownership, proving that the new owner’s digital token
the original.
When a purchaser
meets the conditions outlined in the smart contract (usually through purchasing
the token with cryptocurrency) the
smart contract is automatically
It will distribute
the NFT to the purchaser and record the transaction on the
blockchain.
A smart contract contains terms of sale – it provides a license, which
outlines the permitted use of the associated digital
file. When the purchaser
executes the contract, the terms are typically grounded in pre-existing IP
rights and can considerably vary.
For example, a purchaser is usually not
granted commercial rights to the digital file attached to the token. Instead,
the IP rights
to the associated asset are likely retained by the copyright
owner, who may be the creator. In a similar situation to other creative
which are the subject of IP rights, it is only the copyright owner who has the
right to exercise those rights, including the
right of reproduction.
Alternatively, in a rarer number of situations, a token purchaser may be
granted partial or full commercial rights to their associated
asset, such as the
right to exploit derivative works. The licensing of the
is one such
example which will be examined as a case study. The next section will unpack
these issues by starting with a discussion
linked digital assets under Australian law.
III AUSTRALIAN
When considering copyright subsistence in NFTs under Australian law, there
are several issues to unpack. Again, it is important to
delineate between
Subsistence
in Associated Assets
When considering whether copyright subsists in an associated asset, there are
a number of subsistence criteria that must be met and
if they are satisfied,
then copyright automatically vests. Firstly, it is necessary to consider how the
associated asset would be
classified as subject matter under the
(Cth) (hereafter ‘
’). Under the Act,
works are divided into
works are those
which are historically more creative endeavours and fall within the scope of the
Berne Convention
incorporates literary, dramatic, musical and artistic
works include
more modern works, including sound
recordings,
television/sound
and published
editions of works.
associated asset fell under one of these categories, then it may qualify for
protection, as long as the other subsistence criteria
Although the scope of subject matter that may be protected through copyright
is broad, there are some associated assets which would
likely fall outside of
included perfume or customisable
Such subject matter
falls outside of copyright, but may be covered under other IP protection. Brands
are increasingly using NFTs
as another form of innovative revenue, with
companies such as
Dolce & Gabbana
entering the metaverse and/or selling collectable items as tokens.
For copyright to subsist under Australian law, it is important that an author
is identifiable, they must have a territorial connection
and they must
demonstrate sufficient originality in the creation of the
These issues will be
unpacked in greater detail in the next section. As long as the associated asset
falls within the scope of copyright
subject matter and all of the subsistence
criteria are met, copyright would vest separately in the asset. Of note is that
the author of the associated asset is also the token creator, this means
that authorship would vest in two different people for two
different works
– (1) for the creation of the associated asset; and (2) for the creation
of the token. This fact is often not
well understood by the public at large.
Another issue is whether the token creator has the right to mint a token from
an associated asset. Sometimes this can be straightforward,
particularly if the
associated asset is created or owned by the same person who mints the NFT.
However, this issue can become complex
if a copyright-protected work has already
been licensed for particular uses, or where some rights have already been
transferred,
but a license has been retained for a particular use/s. It is
debatable as to whether the minting of an NFT of an associated work
covered under pre-existing licenses - terms would need to be closely
interpreted.
Subsistence
As a token primarily comprises of text on the blockchain and can be reduced
to zeros and ones in its most basic form, its subject
matter may qualify as a
literary work under
However, the arrangement of
the data underlying the token may be found to lack sufficient arrangement to
qualify for copyright protection
– this would require evaluation on a
case-by-case basis.
The other subsistence criteria denotes that a literary work must be an
original work of human
authorship,
which is reduced to
a tangible form by an author (i.e., the token creator or author). This reduction
to tangible form is the process
of being made; of being
When a token creator
mints their token, they are engaging in a process of reduction to tangible form,
through the arrangement of
the code for the smart contract.
Also, the token creator must have a territorial link to Australia - at the
time the token is made, as the author, they must be a qualified
or the first publication
(i.e., executing the smart contract/placing the token on the blockchain) must
occur in Australia.
Act, a qualified person is an Australian citizen or
If a token became the subject of a judicial subsistence enquiry, it is likely
that the process of the input of the creator (author)
in expressing the data in
a tangible form would be rigorously
There would be a focus
upon whether the process contained sufficient original authorial
‘independent intellectual effort’
through the expression of the
arrangement of the token’s
This is because copyright
will only protect the
of data, but not the data itself (i.e.,
the idea/expression dichotomy).
It is possible that some tokens may fail to meet this criterion due to a lack of
established independent intellectual effort in the
expression of the arrangement
The future use of artificial intelligence (‘AI’) in token
creation must also be considered. Unlike the UK’s copyright
legislation,
for any type of computer-generated work, the Act does not make provision for the
author to be considered the person
by whom the arrangements necessary for the
creation are undertaken.
the past ten years, there has been Australian jurisprudence which suggests that,
if applied to NFTs which are created through
AI processes, the expression of
token data may be found to be too far removed from the actions of a
person/people who arranged those
processes, due to a lack of human
‘independent intellectual
situation, the result is that subsistence will fail for lack of establishing
sufficient human authorship. As AI continues
to advance at an astounding
this is likely to be a
relevant future issue. If the Act remains the same regarding authorship of
computer generated works, then
this matter requires judicial evaluation and is
heavily fact dependant.
Under copyright, when the subsistence criteria are sufficiently met, as the
author of the work, the token creator is conferred a bundle
of rights. These
include the right to (1) reproduce the token in material
(2) publish the
(3) communicate the token
to the public;
and (4) make an
adaptation of the token,
is defined as ‘an arrangement or
transcription.’
Hypothetically, if any of these rights are infringed, then copyright litigation
may commence. However, in executing the smart contract,
the token creator
decides which of these rights to retain and which to transfer to the purchaser.
The next section will discuss licensing
in further detail and will use the
as a case study.
of Tokens & the BAYC Case Study
As previously mentioned, the terms of token licenses vary. Most involve a
centralised collaboration model, where there is no transfer
of commercial rights
for the associated asset. The result is that a purchaser is not permitted to
commercially exploit the associated
asset or a derivative
They can prove ownership
of their token on the blockchain, but there are no intellectual or property
rights for the associated asset.
Under such conditions, in essence, what a token purchaser is buying is the
right to be recorded on the blockchain as the official
token owner, the right to
access/use the associated asset non-commercially and the right to sell the token
in the future. Interestingly,
this directly contrasts with the way that NFT
sales are marketed, which often suggest that tokens are personal property sold
digital asset. The use of language in marketing often indicates that token
ownership equates to full proprietary and/or IP ownership
of the associated
The issue of token
marketing will be discussed in the next section.
On the other end of the licensing spectrum, few token smart contracts use a
decentralised collaboration license, which allow full
commercial IP rights to
derivative works of the associated asset. Such terms are unusual. It means that
the token purchaser can commercially
exploit derivative works based on the
associated asset. The
is an example. The license grants the
purchaser an unlimited worldwide license to use, copy and display
the art for the purpose of creating derivative works, without requiring
permission from Yuga Labs.
commercial success of such a business model seems promising. Firstly, the
initial sale of the
has exceeded $1 billion in a year and secondly,
several ape owners have engaged in lucrative commercial projects involving
include a partnership between music producer Timbaland for a
metaverse band, the use of the
to promote NBA basketball shoes, and
a contract with Universal Music’s 10.22PM label to form a four-ape
decentralised collaborative licenses become popular for future NFT sales remains
to be seen.
Whenever any commercial exploitation is involved, terms will always be
closely scrutinised. A current example is from the US, involving
Miramax and
Quentin Tarantino. In January of 2022, Tarantino sold an NFT linked to a digital
image of his original hand-written script
of movie ‘Pulp Fiction’
for 1.1 million USD.
Tarantino owned the rights to the original screenplay and Miramax owned the
rights to the screenplay, Tarantino was sued
by Miramax for copyright and
trademark infringement, breach of contract and unfair
competition.
Miramax argued that Tarantino did not have the right to mint NFTs, because
they were captured under the term ‘emerging technology’
and had been
assigned to them under the screenplay contract. Tarantino argued that the tokens
were not captured under those terms
and therefore it was within his rights to
mint the tokens from his hand-written screenplay. On 8 September 2022, the
parties settled
is uncertain what would have been ruled about the classification of NFTs had the
case proceeded to trial. This case demonstrates
that license disputes pertaining
to terms of IP linked to NFTs will likely be fiercely litigated in the
Infringement
and Associated Assets
As of December 2022, there has not been Australian litigation about the
Currently, it seems
unclear as to whether token infringement will become a prevalent future issue.
It must be remembered that infringement
can only be found if copyright subsists
in a work to begin with. When considering subsistence in a token, as has been
it may be found that this fails, due to insufficient originality
and/or authorship of the data.
A more pertinent issue is infringement of an associated asset when minting an
NFT. Taking an artistic work as an example, it is hypothetically
possible that a
digital artist could have an artwork downloaded by an unauthorised person and
minted on an NFT platform without their
consent. This highlights a difficult
issue – proof of authorship/ownership of the associated asset. How do NFT
platforms know
whether the associated asset is truly authored or owned by the
person identified as the author or owner during the minting process?
are concerned about the fact that their IP can be minted into NFTs by
unauthorised people. DC and Marvel have issued warnings
that NFT platforms
should not mint tokens from their
An asset which has been reproduced and communicated to the public without
permission through minting on an NFT platform could amount
to copyright
infringement, because these actions would infringe upon an artist/owner’s
In this situation, the
artist/owner could litigate for infringement. If an artist’s moral rights
were also somehow infringed,
then this could also be litigated.
as an example, the terms of licence include the right
for an ape owner to engage in secondary uses and to create derivative works
they wish. It is, however, hypothetically possible for anyone to run a Google
ape on the internet and make a copy
of a cartoon ape via screenshot, or via downloading the image to their computer
as a JPEG file.
This JPEG file could also be disseminated online via social
media. Perpetrating these acts would technically infringe upon a
owner’s copyright. However, it appears as though such infringing acts are
often tolerated by token owners, as long as no commercial
aspect is involved.
This hypothetical example also highlights how easy the medium of the internet
makes it to infringe copyright.
It also raises the issue of the potential
liability of the role of NFT platforms.
of NFT Platforms
As an NFT platform is the means through which a token is displayed,
published, communicated, disseminated and sold, a relevant issue
is whether the
platform could be jointly liable if the rights to an associated asset is
infringed by a third party user.
On 23 March 2022, China’s first NFT platform infringement case was
heard in the Hangzhou Internet Court (a specialised court
for internet
litigation).
The associated
asset was an artistic work - a cartoon from the popular ‘Fat Tiger’
series. It depicted a tiger receiving
a vaccination, which had been linked to an
NFT and sold on a platform by a third
The court found that the
NFT platform had contributorily infringed the plaintiff’s rights to the
cartoon through dissemination.
It was ruled that the defendant had to destroy the NFT by sending it to an
inaccessible address (it is not possible to remove NFTs
from the blockchain) and
damages of RMB 4,000 (USD $600) were
The court emphasised
the importance of NFT platforms implementing policies to check ownership of IP
works on their platforms.
In Australia, the current situation regarding online content platforms
suggests that they could be held liable for NFTs which infringe
NFTs which are linked to infringed associated assets. The 2017 case of
Pokèmon Company International Inc v Redbubble
’) considered the liability of Redbubble, an
online marketplace, in relation to copyright infringement of an artistic work,
as well as violation of Australian Consumer Law. Although this case did not
pertain to NFTs, the underlying principles would likely
be applicable in an NFT
Redbubble allowed third parties to upload images to their website, which
could then be printed onto products (such as mugs, clothing
etc) when ordered by
An unauthorised
original artistic image of Pikachu belonging to the Pokèmon Company was
uploaded to the Redbubble site and
infringement.
The Federal Court examined Redbubble’s actions in attempting to
mitigate copyright infringement.
This included user agreements declaring that the user owned or had permission to
upload the works, a system of notification of infringing
content, a take-down
procedure and a content-monitoring
After examining these
methods, the Federal Court found that this was insufficient to mitigate
Redbubble’s liability. The court
stated ‘In each case the originator
was the artist [user] who had placed the image on the Redbubble website.
Redbubble, however,
was responsible for determining that content through its
processes, protocols and arrangements with the
After analysis, the Federal Court found that Redbubble could have taken other
steps to have prevented the infringement from occurring,
but chose not
Redbubble were found to have
committed three forms of infringement, including (1) direct infringement through
communication of the
infringing works to the
(2) knowingly exhibiting
infringing works publicly to engage in
and (3) indirectly
infringing through the authorisation of the reproduction of the copyright
material to manufacture and sell infringing
The Federal Court rejected the awarding of an injunction and nominal damages
were set at $1.
This reflected
the court’s finding that the
Company had not
sufficiently demonstrated that they had truly suffered loss, while taking into
consideration the methods Redbubble
used to mitigate infringement. In 2018, an
appeal and cross appeal was filed, but this has been stayed until after a July
2022 decision
was handed down from a trademark infringement case involving
The court’s analysis and ruling in
suggest that
it will be difficult for NFT platforms to argue ignorance of potential
infringement by users. In Australia, there are
no safe harbours for commercial
online content platforms for when their users infringe. As seen in
, having users agree to terms of service, including an
agreement not to upload infringing material and/or providing indemnity to the
NFT platform for infringement or illegal activity, will not necessarily allow
online platforms to escape
suggests it is important for NFT platforms to be able to
prove to the court what measures they implement to mitigate copyright
infringement.
The next section will consider whether tokens are considered
property in their own right.
Tokens Considered to be Property In
Their Own Right?
Having explored the implications of infringement, another issue to ponder is
whether a token may be considered to be property in its
own right. As of
December 2022, there has been no Australian cases directly on-point. However, on
10 March 2022, the High Court of
England and Wales passed judgement regarding
two stolen NFTs.
The proceedings
were for a restraining order to prevent the dissipation of the tokens and for a
Bankers Trust Disclosure Order.
The Bankers Trust Disclosure Order was against Ozone Networks Inc, a
peer-to-peer NFT marketplace based in the US, for information
which would help
to identify the unknown
perpetrators.
The two tokens
were owned by the claimant, Laviniah Osbourne (‘LO’), a British
citizen, and were stolen by unknown
The background was that on 24 September 2021, in exchange for work, LO had
been gifted some tokens which she stored in her crypto
Two of these tokens
represented artworks from the ‘Boss Beauties’ collection, depicting
career women from a range of
backgrounds.
LO’s consent or knowledge, on 17 January 2022, unknown persons illegally
accessed LO’s wallet and stole these
tokens, transferring them to two
other Ozone accounts.
February 2022, LO discovered they were missing, traced them to the new accounts
and commenced legal proceedings to freeze the
accounts and to prevent any
further transactions of these
The English High Court found that the claim was a good cause of action,
despite being lodged against unknown persons – clearly,
the tokens had
been defrauded from LO’s
Because the order
was directed at unknown persons, an issue that was material to this claim was
the location of the tokens at the
time they were
The court described
an NFT as ‘a stream of electrons resulting in a credit item to a crypto
It was found
that the physical manifestation of a token would likely be where their servers
were located.
However, in
this instance it would have been impossible to litigate on that
Instead it was found
appropriate to follow other recent UK decisions involving crypto currency fraud,
where the location (and therefore
location of the server, but of the location of the owner’s domicile, which
was Britain.
Then, the High
Court turned attention to the Bankers Trust Disclosure Order against Ozone,
analysed the requisite tests and found
this appropriate to
When considering whether the tokens constituted property, his Honour Pelling
J stated, ‘I am satisfied on the basis of the submissions
made on behalf
of the claimant that there is at least a realistically arguable case that such
tokens are to be treated as property
as a matter of English
The injunction
against unknown person/s was
acknowledgement that if it was not, there was a ‘very real risk that these
assets will be transferred through multiple
different accounts at great speed,
and in a way that will make it practically either very difficult, or possibly
even impossible,
for the claimant to trace and retrieve her
Therefore the English High Court acknowledged that such tokens might be
treated as legal property – a chose in action. This
means that tokens are
capable of being owned in their own right and have associated proprietary
remedies, which allow their owner
to enforce their rights. If a similar
situation were to occur in Australia, the outcome may be the same.
Now that the treatment of tokens as legal property has been analysed, the
next section will explore the tension between tangible ownership
rights and the
licensing of digital goods. It will be seen that the digital environment
presents interesting tensions when traditional
proprietary ownership is
considered in the context of intangible, licensed tokens.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE FUTURE
Tension Between Tangible Ownership and the
Licensing of Digital
Historically, the notion of tangible property ownership spans centuries and
is a foundation of capitalistic societies. Looking at
artistic works and real
estate as examples, it can be seen that the associated rights provide the
owners/proprietors with a monopoly
over their work through control. An
owner’s monopoly rights include the right to use the work, to transfer or
destroy it, or
to exclude others from using it.
Monopoly rights stem from the idea that the owner ought to be incentivised
for investing in/creating that property, by receiving benefits
from exploiting
their rights. These rights have their origins in a non-technological era through
Lockean justification,
an owner exercises control over their work through exclusive possession and the
right to sell that item, make a copy of it,
destroy it etc. Because of the
nature of tangible property, this involves a physical asset, which is
controllable due to its exclusivity.
When the asset is acquired and possessed, others are prevented from
exercising control over that asset. A one-to-one relationship
exists between the
owner and the item, although there may be different categories of co-ownership
involved. An analogy here can be
made to a famous work of modern art, which
hangs in a gallery – there is only one, authentic original, the monopoly
is exercised through possession. Ownership of the original is clearly
delineated through physical possession. If reproductions of
the art are made,
despite looking like the artwork, they are not the original. Nor may the owner
who buys a reproduction claim ownership
of the original, authentic work.
When considering a tangible good, there are two different forms of property
rights that might be controlled: (1) the property rights
in the tangible item
itself (i.e., the form of physical possession and control that can be exerted
over the item) and (2) the IP
rights that exist if the item is a work which
falls under copyright. Taking the modern art example, (1) the property rights
in the art itself as it hangs in the gallery. The art is possessed by a
gallery and they exercise physical possession and control
over it. (2) Secondly,
there is a separate bundle of IP rights which vest in the owner of the work.
Depending on the conditions of
sale, this might be the gallery, or the artist.
The artist would also possess moral rights attached to the art, which remain a
personhood right for as long as copyright subsists and which cannot be
sold. These rights are for attribution of
authorship;
against false
attribution
and for integrity
of authorship.
However, for any intangible, digital items which tokens are attached to, the
tangible property rights of ownership do not exist in
these works to begin with.
Digital items cannot be possessed or appropriated in the same way as tangible
items are, because by their
very nature, they are intangible. Such items exist
in an online environment and in their most basic format, they can be reduced to
zeros and ones – to data, or information. Under Australian law, a tangible
property right simply cannot vest in information.
This means that the only rights that intangible items are likely to possess
are IP rights, as has been explored in Section III. Whether
such items exist as
a digital artwork connected to a token, or as a piece of virtual property in the
metaverse, it is fascinating
that many people who purchase such items feel a
sense of tangible possessory ownership over the item. This feeling of possession
and ownership is akin to physically possessing a tangible good in the physical
world. However, the reality is that this type of digital
ownership can never
truly be the same as physical ownership, due to the differences in medium. A
person simply cannot possess an
intangible work in an identical way to a
tangible work due to its very nature. Although there is constant innovation in
technology,
it is currently impossible for digital items to replicate exactly
the same property rights as tangible goods.
Kudos and the Emergence of a New Type of
Meta-Property Right
The expectations of token purchasers and the reality of what they purchase
are very different. The reality is that, under some smart
contracts, when a
purchaser believes that they ‘own’ an NFT, they do not
‘own’ or possess the item at
Instead, there are
restrictive conditions, which, at the most, allow access to and personal use of
the digital asset associated with
the token. In most situations, the purchaser
will not be granted any commercial IP rights to the associated asset –
such rights
are likely to be retained by the copyright owner.
Of note here is that the marketing and branding of NFTs, often use words
which denote physical ownership akin to a chose in action,
rather than admitting
that limited rights are instead licensed. However, many token creators market
their tokens as personal property,
when in reality, tokens are licensed (and
would be litigated) under IP laws. When tokens are sold, what is often
deliberately not
emphasised is the fact that the digital items associated with
the token cannot ever be truly possessed in the same way as a physical
Instead, this myth of NFT ownership is perpetuated as being identical to
physical possession, when in reality, often what a
purchaser is granted are
limited rights of access and personal use. The price that purchasers are willing
to pay is usually for the
opportunity to proclaim to the world at large that
they ‘own’ the token, as affirmed by the blockchain, which gives
access to the associated file. This is a type of kudos – a type of
‘digital kudos’– and the price that some
have been willing to
pay for this has been staggering. What should also be noted is that when a
person’s identity is usually
logged on the blockchain, it is not by their
identifiable name, but by a string of unique numbers or letters, known as the
so it is not usually easy to identify a
The reason for the perpetuation of this proprietary ownership myth of tokens
is that sales can be highly profitable. Purchasers are
more likely to buy a
token if they can claim that they ‘own’ it, similar to owning and
possessing a rare vintage Smurf
or fine artwork, rather than conceding that all
they have paid for is a license, often for limited, non-commercial rights.
V CONCLUSION
Having explored what constitutes creation, ownership and infringement of an
NFT, this begs the question as to whether new forms of
ownership will eventually
be developed, particularly as humanity increasingly transitions into virtual
environments such as the metaverse.
The digital environment is already a place
of entertainment, socialisation, work and commerce.
NFT usage is representative of the shift in global economies from the
tangible to the intangible.
When global NFT productivity began in earnest, it was speculated that this would
promote a substantial shift in the application of
To-date, this has
not occurred. Instead, what has happened is that tokens have become another
method to promote the commercialisation
of digital items through pre-existing IP
However, the fact
that the business of NFTs has boomed around the world appears to suggest that
there has been a subtle shift in
purchasers’ thinking. There appears to
have been an acceptance of the differences in the concept of ownership regarding
items and the differences in property rights that digital ownership
entails, as compared to tangible items.
Instead of needing to display a monopoly right over a work through physical
possession and control, many NFT purchasers appear satisfied
with claiming
prized ownership on the blockchain by paying for what amounts to limited
non-commercial rights under license. The fact
is, that in many situations, token
owners do not physically possess and control the digital item attached to their
token in the same
way as they could a tangible good. As global NFT sales
continue to soar and the metaverse expands, it appears as though this virtual
ownership right – what could be termed a type of meta-property right
– is being heavily utilised and accepted in the
marketing of NFT and
digital asset sales.
Concurrently, what is fascinating is that there appears to be a shift in
collective consciousness about the notion of copying digital
items such as
tokens. Acts which technically infringe upon a token owner’s copyright are
being tolerated, as long as no commercial
aspect is involved. Activities such as
reproduction and dissemination, that were once viewed as a major threat to
innovation are
often viewed as concepts that are acceptable as part of the
creative activities of
This collective
shift in thinking has resulted in some NFTs adopting Creative Common licences,
therefore by-passing copyright
altogether.
Although it is
beyond the scope of this article, the development of tokens through Creative
Commons will be an issue to watch with
interest in the future, as will other
licensing initiatives that promote collaboration, such as ‘can’t be
Recent academic commentary has suggested that in marketing tokens, there
ought to be a characterisation of tokens as choses in action
(as occurred in the
UK) rather than relying upon intellectual property and terms of
This would result
in the NFT purchaser being permitted a full bundle of property rights - to
‘use, benefit from, capture the
rise in value from, and otherwise benefit
from the social value of being the owner of the
However, this
prospect will likely generate extensive debate by those whose interests are at
In Australia, it will be interesting to observe whether, in the future,
licensing will continue to primarily be used to determine
the rights relating to
ownership and use of tokens and their associated assets, or whether a new type
of legal framework or regulatory
regime will emerge. As the technology
underlying tokens continues to develop, there is tremendous potential for new
uses and innovation.
As this article has explored, NFTs have the capacity to
challenge and shift traditional notions of ownership and the limits of this
trend are currently unknown. As to whether and how copyright responds remains to
Lecturer, University of New
England, Armidale, Australia. This article was developed from a presentation
given online at the
Asian Pacific Copyright Association 2022 Conference
(National University of Singapore) 14 November 2022. The author can be contacted
at wpotter2@une.edu.au.
See generally, Daren Tang,
‘The Future of Intellectual Property and WIPO in a Time of Crisis and
Opportunity’ (2022) 32
Australian Intellectual Property Journal
Elizabeth Howcroft,
NFT Sales Hit $25 Billion in 2021, But Growth Shows Signs of Slowing
Page, 12 January 2022)
<https://www.reuters.com/markets/europe/nft-sales-hit-25-billion-2021-growth-shows-signs-slowing-2022-01-10/>.
Note: data was taken from market tracker DappRadar.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary and Thesaurus, Fungible
(Web Page, 19 October 2022)
<https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/fungible>.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary and Thesaurus, Non-Fungible
(Web Page, 19 October 2022)
<https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/non-fungible-token>.
Logan Kugler,
‘Non-Fungible Tokens and the Future of Art’ (2021) 64(9)
Communications of the ACM
19, 20. Also see generally, Michael D Murray,
‘NFTs Rescue Resale Royalties? The Wonderfully Complicated Ability of NFT
Contracts to Allow Resale Royalty Rights’ (July 15, 2022). Available
at SSRN: <https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164029> or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4164029
See generally, Jessica Bookout,
et al, 'A Brief Introduction to Digital Art & Blockchain' (2019) 37(3)
Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal
Joshua A T Fairfield,
‘Tokenized: The Law of Non-Fungible Tokens and Unique Digital
Property’ (2022) 97(4)
Indiana Law Journal
1261, 1262.
Kent Barton, ‘New
Frontiers, Enter the Metaverse: Challenges and Opportunities in NFTs’
(Shapeshift Report, 29 May 2021)
PAK’s NFT Artwork ‘The Merge’ Sells for $91.8
Million – PENTA
(Web Page, 7 December 2021)
<https://www.barrons.com/articles/paks-nft-artwork-the-merge-sells-for-91-8-million-01638918205>.
Jacob Kastrenakes,
Sold a NFT for $69 Million – The Verge
(Web Page, 12 March 2021)
<https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/11/22325054/beeple-christies-nft-sale-cost-everydays-69-million>.
Elizabeth Howcroft,
Reuters: NFT Sales Hit $25 Billion in 2021, But Growth Shows Signs of
(Web Page, 12 January 2022)
<https://www.reuters.com/markets/europe/nft-sales-hit-25-billion-2021-growth-shows-signs-slowing-2022-01-10/>.
Alex Wilhelm and Anna Heim,
Are We Entering a NFT Downturn – TechCrunch
(Web Page, 11 March
<https://techcrunch.com/2022/03/10/are-we-entering-an-nft-downturn/>.
Jeff Kauflin,
Dorsey’s First-Tweet NFT Plummeted 99% In Value in a Year, Forbes
Page, 14 April 2022)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffkauflin/2022/04/14/why-jack-dorseys-first-tweet-nft-plummeted-99-in-value-in-a-year/?sh=525d80ef65cb>.
Jack Dorsey,
Just setting
up my twttr - Twitter
(Web Page, 21 March 2006)
<https://twitter.com/jack/
status/20>.
Kauflin (n 19).
Logan Kugler,
‘Non-Fungible Tokens and the Future of Art’ (2021) 64(9)
Communications of the ACM
NFT’s most popular with celebrities like Madonna and Paris Hilton –
Proactive Investor UK
(Web Page, 24 June 2022)
<https://www.proactiveinvestors.co.uk/companies/news/985805/bored-ape-nft-s-most-popular-with-celebrities-like-madonna-and-paris-hilton-985805.html>.
Nate Kostar,
Paris Hilton
Announces BAYC #1294 Purchase on the Tonight Show – Rarity Sniper News
(Web Page, January 2022)
<https://raritysniper.com/news/paris-hilton-announces-bayc-1294-purchase-on-the-tonight-show/>.
The Tonight Show With Jimmy
Fallon, ‘Paris Hilton Surprises Tonight Show Audience Members By Giving
Them Their Own NFTs’
(YouTube, 25 January 2022) 00:04:25-00:04:55
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5zi12wrh5So&t=386s>.
Ibid 00:04:55-00:05:22.
Rebecca Carroll,
‘NFTs: The Latest Technology Challenging Copyright Law's Relevance within
a Decentralized System’ (2022)
Fordham Intellectual Property,
Media & Entertainment Law Journal
Shaan Ray, ‘NFTs and
Smart Contracts – LinkedIn’ (Web Page, 19 May 2021)
<https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/nft-smart-contracts-shaan-ray-mba>.
Fairfield, (n 8) 1290.
Ray (n 29).
Justine Calma,
Climate Controversy Swirling Around NFTs – the Verge
(Web Page, 16
March 2021)
<https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/15/22328203/nft-cryptoart-ethereum-blockchain-climate-change>.
Ethereum Inc,
Non-Fungible Tokens (NFT)
(Web page, 25 October 2022)
<https://ethereum.org/en/nft/>.
John Locke,
Treatise on Government
Statute of Anne 1710
(UK) 8 Anne, c
19; Hettinger, ‘Justifying Intellectual Property’ (1989) 18(1)
Philosophy & Public Affairs
Ethereum Inc (n 34).
Ray (n 29).
Berne Convention for the
Protection of
and Artistic Works
, opened for signature 9
1886, 943 UNTS, 178
’. The UK signed
on behalf of its dominions (including Australia) on 5 December 1887.
formally entered into force in Australia on 1 March 1978 and the US
on 1 March 1989.
Ibid ss 85 and 89.
Ibid ss 86 and 90.
Ibid ss 87 and 91.
Ibid ss 88 and 92.
Chris Williams,
Bought RTFKT. Now Its NFTs Are Trading at a Premium
(Web Page, 15 December
<https://cryptobriefing.com/nike-bought-nft-now-its-nfts-are-trading-premium/>.
ss 32(1)(a),
IceTV Pty Limited v Nine
Network Australia Pty Limited
(2009) 239 CLR 458
[47]–[48] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ) (‘
Sands & McDougall Pty
Ltd v Robinson
[1917] HCA 14
(1917) 23 CLR 49
, 55 (Issacs J);
Desktop Marketing
(2002) 119 FCR 491 532 [160(2)] (Lindgren J), 593 [409] (Sackville J)
Desktop Marketing
[33]–[34] (French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
Telstra Corporation
Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2010] FCAFC 149
(2010) 194 FCR 142
, 172 [100]
(Perram J) (‘
Telstra Appeal
Ibid s 32(1)(a).
Ibid s 32(2)(c).
Ibid s 32(4).
Neal F Burstyn,
‘Creative Sparks: Works of Nature, Selection, and the Human Author’
(2015) 39(2)
Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts
281, 299-303.
478–9 [47]–[48] (Gummow, Hayne and Heydon JJ).
Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights
signature 15 April
1994, 1869 UNTS 299
(entered into force 1 January 1995) art 9
’); Omri Rachum-Twaig, ‘A Genre Theory
of Copyright’ (2016) 33(1)
Santa Clara High Technology Law Journal
Patents Act 1988
(UK) (ch 48) s 9(3).
[33], 479 [48] and 494–5 [99] (French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
Telstra Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 44
264 ALR 617
, 685 [344] (Gordon J);
Dynamic Supplies Pty Limited v Tonnex
International Pty Limited
[2011] FCA 362
(2011) 91 IPR 488
, 500 [49] (Yates J);
Data Pty Ltd v Prozone Sports Australia Pty Ltd Sports Data Pty Ltd v Prozone
Sports Australia Pty
[2014] FCA 595
(2014) 107 IPR 1
, 13 [74], 14 [76] (Wigney J).
Courtney White and Rita
Matulionyte, ‘Artificial Intelligence: Painting the Bigger Picture for
Australian Intellectual Property
224, 224-228.
31(1)(a)(i).
31(1)(a)(ii).
Ibid s 31(1)(a)(iv).
Ibid s 31(1)(a)(vi).
Fairfield (n 8) 1298.
Farah Mukaddam,
Intellectual Property Rights – Norton Rose Fulbright
October 2021)
<https://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/en/knowledge/publications/1a1abb9f/nfts-and-intellectual-property-rights>.
Edward Lee,
The Bored Ape
Business Model: De-centralized Collaboration via Blockchain and NFTs
16 November 2021)
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3963881>.
Pulp Fiction
NFT Lawsuit (Miramax V. Tarantino, Et Al.): A Preview Of Coming
Attractions
(Web Page, 25 July 2022)
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/legalentertainment/2022/07/25/pulp-fiction-nft-lawsuit-miramax-v-tarantino-et-al-a-preview-of-coming-attractions/?sh=9921fc6ca24d>.
Miramax LLC v Quentin
Tarantino and Visiona Romantica Inc
(United States District Court, Central
District of California, Case No. 2:21-cv-08979).
Ibid, Notice of
Settlement.
Sunny Kumar, Georgina Rigg
and Kira Green,
The NFT Collection: The Rise of NFTs – Copyright
Strikes Back? (Part 3) – K & L Gates
(Web Page, 7 July 2022)
<https://www.natlawreview.com/article/nft-collection-rise-nfts-copyright-strikes-back-part-3>.
Adarsh Vjayakumaran,
‘NFTs and Copyright Quandary’ (2021) 12(5)
Intellectual Property, Information Technology and Electronic Commerce Law
402, 410 [34].
Shenzhen Qicedie Cultural
Creativity Company Ltd v Hangzhou Yuanyuzhou Technology Company Limited
(2022) Zhe 0192 Minchu No. 1008. Translation provided by TaylorWessing.
[2017] FCA 1541
(2017) 351 ALR 676 (Pagone
Ibid 679 [5].
Ibid 691-693 [32]-[35].
Ibid 679 [6].
Ibid 682-3 [15], 710-714
Ibid 701 [48].
Ibid 714 [67].
Ibid 699-702 [45](a)-[49],
contravening s 36 of the Act.
Ibid 699 [45](b), 702-704
[50]-[54] contravening s 132AG of the Act.
Ibid 699 [45](c), 704-709
Ibid 719, Orders.
Hells Angels Motorcycle
Corp (Australia) Pty Ltd v Redbubble Ltd (No 5)
[2022] FCA 837 (Greenwood
Lavinia Deborah Osbourne
v Persons Unknown, Ozone
[2022] EWHC 1021 (Comm)
(Pelling J).
Ibid [3]-[4].
Ibid [8]-[10].
Ibid [12]-[13].
Ibid [15], following
Ion Science Limited v Persons Unknown & Others (Unreported)
(Comm) [15] (Butcher J).
Ibid [32]-[55].
Justin Hughes, ‘The
Philosophy of Intellectual Property’ (1988 –
Law Journal
Ibid pt IX div 3.
Ibid pt IX div 4.
Capitol Records v
, 910 F 3d 649, 659-660 (2
Cir, 2018).
Andrew Guadamuz,
‘The Treachery of Images: Non-Fungible Tokens and Copyright’ (2021)
Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice
Tang (n 2) 205.
See generally, Ifeanyi E
Okonkwo, ‘NFT, Copyright and Intellectual Property
Commercialization’ (2021) 29
International Journal of Law and
Information Technology
Edward Lee, ‘NFTs
As Decentralized Intellectual Property’ (Forthcoming) 2023
of Illinois Law Review
Ibid 46. Also see
generally, Molly Marias, ‘I Want My NFT!: How a NFT Creative Commons
Parallel Would Promote NFT Viability
and Decrease Transaction Costs in NFT
Sales’ (Forthcoming) 12(1)
NYU Journal of Intellectual Property &
Entertainment Law.
Lee (n 121) 47.
Fairfield (n 8)
Lawrence J Trautman,
‘Virtual Art and Non-Fungible Tokens’ (2022) 50(2)
Hofstra Law
361, 424-425.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (394 KB)
PDF format (404 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter