URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2020/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:59:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Devlyn, Amelia --- "Time For A Turn-Around? A Review Of The Ground Turnover Principle Underlying The Mining Act 1978 (Wa)" [2020] WAStuLawRw 4; (2020) 4 Western Australian Student Law Review 62
I INTRODUCTION
MINING ACT 1978
(WA) PROVISIONS
III THE GROUND TURNOVER PRINCIPLE
IV CASE LAW
V ENFORCEMENT
VI CONCLUSION
TIME FOR A TURN-AROUND? A REVIEW OF THE GROUND TURNOVER
PRINCIPLE UNDERLYING THE
MINING ACT 1978
AMELIA DEVLYN
MINING LAW––PRINCIPLE OF GROUND
MINING ACT 1978
(WA)––SECTIONS 45(2),
69, AND 85A––PROHIBITION ON TENEMENT APPLICATIONS BY PRIOR TENEMENT
HOLDERS AND RELATED
A key aim of the
Mining Act 1978
(WA) is the principle of ground turnover;
that is, that land with potential for minerals be made available for mining and
exploration
and actively worked. This article explores whether
are effective in promoting the objective of ground turnover by
reference to decisions of the Warden’s Court and the Supreme
Western Australia, the potential consequences for applicants who breach the
prohibitions in
, and the circumstances in which those
prohibitions will not be strictly enforced. It concludes that, while the
courts have recognised
that the ground turnover principle is an important
purpose underlying the Act and, in particular,
sections have not been strictly enforced. Rather, legislative amendment is
required to ensure consistency and clarity for
prospective tenement applicants
and better serve ground turnover as an important objective of the Act
I INTRODUCTION
An important principle of the
Mining Act 1978
Act’) is ground turnover; that is, land with the potential for minerals
should be available for mining and
exploration. This objective ensures that
‘areas are available to be adequately explored for potential
resources’.
However, the
extent to which this objective is promoted by,
Act is unclear. These sections prohibit certain persons, who have an interest in
a prior tenement or are related to a prior
tenement holder, from making an
application for a subsequent exploration or prospecting licence upon surrender
or forfeiture. A number
of Western Australia Warden’s Court and Supreme
Court decisions have shed light on the interpretation and effect of these
and the turnover principle. Notable cases include:
Ex parte Devant
Pty Ltd v Minister for Mines
Telferscot Nominees Pty Ltd v Chameleon Mining NL
Resources Ltd v Richmond
Mining Pty Ltd v Eaglefield Holdings Pty Ltd
Yarri Mining v
This article will examine how Western Australian courts have applied the
ground turnover principle and whether, in enforcing
principle of ground turnover has been achieved.
will discuss
of the Act, followed by a review of the ground turnover principle in
will explore the various case authorities listed above, their
impact on the ground turnover principle, and the consequences of breaches
those sections.
will then discuss the enforcement of
and whether those provisions have been effective in promoting ground
turnover. As will be seen, while
prescribe categories of
‘related’ persons who are prohibited from making successive
exploration or prospecting licence
applications, there is some ambiguity as to
applications by persons who are not prohibited by those sections, but which
appear on their face to be ‘related’; thereby circumventing
the Act’s turnover objective.
II MINING ACT 1978
(WA) PROVISIONS
Sections 45(2)
of the Act mirror one another and relate to
prospecting licences, exploration licences, and mining leases, respectively.
of the Act:
When a prospecting licence is surrendered, forfeited or expires the land the
subject of the prospecting licence or any part thereof
shall not be marked out
or applied for as a prospecting licence or an exploration licence —
(a) by or on behalf of the person who was the holder of the prospecting
licence immediately prior to the date of the surrender, forfeiture
or expiry; or
(b) by or on behalf of any person who had an interest in the prospecting
licence immediately prior to that date; or
(c) by or on behalf of any person who is related to a person referred to in
paragraph (a) or (b),
within a period of 3 months from and including that date.
Sections 69
of the Act, pertaining to exploration licences and mining
leases respectively, contain similar wording to the effect of
These provisions not only
prohibit previous tenement holders from making successive applications for a
prospecting or exploration
licence, but also persons who had an interest in the
prior tenement and ‘related’ persons, as defined by
(4) For the purposes of this Act a person is related to —
(a) an individual, if the person is —
(i) a spouse or de facto partner; or
(ii) a parent, grandparent or great-grandparent; or
(iii) a child, grandchild or great-grandchild; or
(iv) a sibling,
of the individual, whether the relationship is a step relationship or a
relationship established by, or traced through marriage or
relationship, a written law or a natural relationship; and
(b) a body corporate, if the person is a related entity (as defined in
section 9 of the Corporations Act) in relation to the body
In respect of a body corporate, a ‘related entity’ is defined in
Corporations Act 2001
(a) a promoter of the body;
(b) a relative of such a promoter;
(c) a relative of a spouse of such a promoter;
(d) a director or member of the body or of a related body
(e) a relative of such a director or member;
(f) a relative of a spouse of such a director or member;
(g) a body corporate that is related to the first‑mentioned
(h) a beneficiary under a trust of which the first‑mentioned body
is or has at any time been a trustee;
(i) a relative of such a beneficiary;
(j) a relative of a spouse of such a beneficiary;
(k) a body corporate one of whose directors is also a director of the
first‑mentioned body;
(l) a trustee of a trust under which a person is a beneficiary, where
the person is a related entity of the first‑mentioned
body because of any
other application or applications of this definition.
It is clear that the purpose of ss 45(2), 69, and 85A is to ensure that land
be made available to new tenement applicants for exploration
activities. Although these sections do prescribe certain categories of persons
who are prohibited from making successive
tenement applications as they are
deemed ‘related’ to the prior tenement holder, there is some
ambiguity as to applications
by persons beyond those prescribed by the Act but
which may still amount to being ‘related’. This, in turn, calls into
question whether the principle of ground turnover is being promoted effectively
by the enforcement of ss 45(2), 69, and 85A.
III THE GROUND TURNOVER PRINCIPLE
Ground turnover is the principle that all land is open and available for
mining, in order to encourage mining and prospecting in Western
Promoting the ground
turnover principle is the underlying purpose of not only ss 45(2), 69, and 85A
but of the Act as whole. As
mentioned above, these sections prevent a prior
holder, prior interested party or applicable related party from tying up the
ground on successive
applications,
and encourages
‘the entry of new
In the 1996
decision of
Supreme Court of Western Australia recognised that s 45(2) is directed to
ensuring that persons other than the former holder
of a prospecting licence have
an opportunity to prospect the
Later, in the 2013
decision of
Eaglefield Holdings Pty Ltd v Denton Trading Pty Ltd
Tavener of the Warden’s Court held that ground turnover is the
‘underlying principle’ of the Act and
‘highlights the need to
review the particular actions of the applicant and consider how those actions
impacted upon the promotion
Tavener further held that the scope and primary purpose of the Act is ‘to
ensure as far as practicable that land
which has either known potential for
mining or is worthy of exploration will be made available for mining or
exploration’.
Clearly the
Warden’s Court and Supreme Court over the last 20 years consider that
ground turnover is an important principle
to which the Act is directed to
ensuring, and recognise that it underlies sections such as ss 45(2), 69, and
85A. However, the extent
to which the objective of ground turnover is, in
practice, promoted by the courts is unclear, as a number of cases relating to
sections do not seem to promote this objective in recommending the grant
of tenement applications.
IV CASE LAW
saw the Western Australian Supreme Court explore the definition
and application of the ground turnover objective behinds 45(2) of
the Act. This
case has been positively considered in later decisions of the Warden’s
Court as authority for the ground turnover
objective of the
Mr Chitty, the director and
majority shareholder of Devant Pty Ltd, surrendered a number of prospecting
licences. Some 30 minutes
after the surrender of those prospecting licences,
Devant Pty Ltd lodged applications for prospecting licences over the same
The Minister refused the applications of Devant Pty Ltd, who appealed to
the Supreme Court of Western Australia. The Minister refused
the applications on
the grounds that the surrender and application formed a collusive action that
was intended to circumvent the
ground turnover principle underlying s 45(2)
of the Act.
Kennedy J held that s 45(2) is directed to ensuring that persons other than
the former holder of a prospecting licence have an opportunity
to prospect the
land. His Honour also remarked that the purpose of the s 45(2) is ‘to
avoid locking up prospecting areas in
the same hands for extended periods and
thereby to encourage prospecting in the
Steytler J also
recognised that an underlying principle of the Act is ‘to provide for
ground turnover by having short terms
for licences so that ground is explored
and either converted to mining lease or surrendered’, and held that s
45(2) supports
this principle ‘by providing that a prospecting licence
should not be marked out or applied for by or on behalf of any person
the holder of or had an interest in the prospecting licence immediately before
that date’.
In this case,
his Honour held that the short period of time between surrender and the new
application was such that the two actions
may have been done in a collusive
manner to circumvent the ground turnover
Accordingly, the
Court upheld the Minister’s decision to refuse the prospecting licence
applications, on the basis that the
surrender and subsequent application for
prospecting licences formed a collusive action by Mr Chitty and Devant Pty Ltd
to undermine
the turnover principle behind s 45(2) of the Act and breach the
prohibition under that section.
This decision remains a key precedent for the ground turnover principle
enshrined in the Act as the first decision of the Supreme
Court to properly
consider the issue of ground turnover and the surrounding policy considerations
that may arise in refusing the
grant of an exploration or prospecting licence.
laid the foundations for future consideration of this issue and,
as mentioned above, has subsequently been relied upon by the Warden’s
Court and the Supreme Court as authority for the ground turnover principle. It
is an example of one of the major consequences flowing
from a breach of the
prohibitions contained in ss 45(2), 69, and 85A of the Act and circumventing the
ground turnover principle;
that is, the refusal of a licence application. In the
Supreme Court’s view, it was ‘entirely reasonable for the Minister
to have concluded that there is a public interest in ensuring that the policy
which underlies s 45 of the Act is not circumvented’,
and subsequently
upheld the Minister’s decision and refused the applications of Devant Pty
Ltd for a prospecting licence.
Telferscot Nominees
The Warden’s Court in
considered the
definition of ‘interest’ and the enforcement of s 45(2) of the Act.
This decision has not been judicially
considered in any later decisions of the
Warden’s Court or the Supreme Court. Chameleon Mining NL
(‘Chameleon’)
lodged an objection to the application for a
prospecting licence by Telferscot Nominees Pty Ltd (‘Telferscot’),
the grounds
for objection being that the applicant was holding the application
on trust for the previous holder of the land, in breach of s
Chameleon argued that
Telferscot had an interest in the tenements prior to surrender, as Telferscot
reached an agreement with the
previous tenement holder, William Robert Richmond
(‘Richmond’), that the surrenders would take place at a prearranged
time to enable Telferscot to have
Richmond also assisted
in marking out the land for Telferscot’s application as an
Stipendiary Magistrate Richardson considered the interpretation of the term
‘interest’ contained in s 45(2) of the Act
and the intention of the
section, and held that Telferscot had no interest in the tenement prior to
surrender. Section 45(2) was
said to prohibit the former tenement older from
marking out and applying for grounds as an applicant in his or her own right,
‘does not mean that a former holder cannot mark out and/or apply for
the tenement as an agent for another person or
The reference to
‘interest’ in s 45(2) refers to an interest in the prospecting
licence itself, and not to any personal
rights in contract of a tenement holder
or other persons.
Further, the applications were made in the name of Telferscot, not Richmond,
and thus, Telferscot was deemed to have made their applications
Telferscot was held to
have no interest in the tenements prior to the surrender for the purposes of s
and the solicitor-client
relationship between Telferscot and Richmond was held not to provide a basis for
the applications to be
As such, the
Warden’s Court concluded that Telferscot had
breached s 45(2)
of the Act.
The Warden’s Court in
Telferscot Nominees
has provided certainty
as to the meaning of ‘interest’ for the purposes of s 45(2) and the
extent of the ground turnover
principle underlying ss 45(2), 69, and 85A of the
Act. Until such time as this case is judicially considered, it remains an
for the proposition that there is no prohibition in the Act for a
prior tenement holder to act as an agent in marking out the tenement
exploration or prospecting licence application following the surrender of a
tenement. Further, the Warden’s Court has
held that a solicitor-client
relationship is
a basis for setting aside prospective tenement
applications pursuant to s 45(2) (and likewise ss 69 and 85A) and, as such, does
amount to a contravention of the ground turnover
However, in the
author’s view, such a relationship with the prior tenement holder and
knowledge of the surrender of the tenement
fails to promote the ground turnover
Korab Resources
The Warden’s Court in
Korab Resources
considered the ground
turnover principle behind s 69 of the Act and whether circumstances in which an
applicant is exclusively warned
of an upcoming surrender evades this
This case was
positively considered in
Eaglefield Holdings
as an example of an
application for an exploration licence where there was an allegation of
collusion, but in which it was found that
the ground turnover requirement was
not circumvented.
Korab Resources Pty Ltd (‘Korab’) applied for the grant of an
exploration licence over land previously held by ABM Resources
Operations Pty
Ltd (‘ABM’); however, William Robert Richmond
(‘Richmond’) objected to the grant of the
Korab was notified of
the upcoming surrender of the tenement by ABM. Richmond alleged this gave Korab
exclusive knowledge of the
pending surrender and an exclusive opportunity to
lodge an application for an exploration
Richmond argued that
there had been a collusive scheme between Korab and ABM, which deprived the
public the opportunity to make an
application for the surrendered land, and was
contrary to the ground turnover policy principle intended by ss 45(2), 69(1),
of the Act.
Korab submitted that prior knowledge of the impending surrender did not
constitute reasonable grounds for the Minister to refuse the
application.
Magistrate Calder
agreed with Korab’s submissions and held that the ground turnover
principle was not circumvented in this
case, as Korab was an independent
applicant and was in no way related to or had an interest in
Section 69 (or any other part of the Act) does not prohibit a tenement holder
from informing anyone, or any number of persons of the
holder's intention, to
surrender a tenement.
to Magistrate Calder:
There is nothing in the legislation that expressly or impliedly prohibits an
applicant for grant of a tenement from making such an
application having been
told by the surrendering holder or any other person or class of persons of the
pending surrender and of the
precise time and date that the surrender will be
It was held that ‘[t]he notifying of an intention to surrender to one
party exclusively does not, per se, defeat the ground
principle’,
informing an exclusive person of the surrender of a tenement does
amount to collusion of the kind that is intended to be prevented by s 69 and its
mirror provisions.
On the above
grounds, Magistrate Calder concluded by recommending that the Minister grant the
exploration licence to Korab.
The major consequence of the Warden’s Court’s decision in
is that prior notification of surrender does
circumvent the ground turnover principle in circumstances where the
prior tenement holder and the applicant are independent and not
‘related’ as defined by the
According to the
Warden’s Court, s 69 (and, in the same vein, ss 45(2) and 85A) does not
prohibit the making of an agreement
and the provision of consideration for
information concerning a pending
While it was noted in
that the applicant had knowledge of the
filing of the surrenders, the Court determined that the collusive relationship
between Devant
Pty Ltd and its director was such that it was intended to
circumvent the ground turnover
It was not necessary
for the Court in
to determine whether or not that prior knowledge
of Devant Pty Ltd was, of itself, a matter that enlivened the power of the
under s 111A to terminate or refuse the application.
However, in
Korab Resources
, the Warden’s Court went further and
held that such knowledge, in the absence of a collusive relationship, does not
the ground turnover
Although prior
knowledge of the surrender of a tenement known to an independent applicant is
not prescribed in s 69 the Act as being
prohibited it, in my view, still
circumvents the ground turnover principle in that it prevents other potential
applicants, not known
to the prior tenement holder, from having the opportunity
to explore the land.
Yarri Mining v Eaglefield
The Court of Appeal in
Yarri Mining v Eaglefield
discussed the
interpretation of s 69 of the Act pertaining to exploration licences and the
consequences of a breach of this
It has subsequently
been applied by the Supreme Court in
Vincent Nominees Pty Ltd v Western
Australian Planning
considered by the High Court of Australia in
Forrest & Forrest Pty Ltd v
Wilson & Ors
context of the Court of Appeal’s remarks as to statutory construction.
However, there has been no further judicial consideration
of the Court of
Appeal’s remarks as to the ground turnover objective of the Act underlying
ss 45(2), 69, and 85A.
The second respondent, Narnoo, surrendered its exploration licence, the land
of which was subject of certain graticular
The first respondent,
Eaglefield Holdings Pty Ltd (‘Eaglefield’), on behalf of Narnoo,
lodged two exploration licence
applications a month after Narnoo’s
surrender, which included overlapping land subject to Narnoo’s previous
The Minister granted
Eaglefield the two exploration licences in 2003, and Eaglefield later
transferred the licences to Narnoo in
2008. Yarri Mining Pty Ltd made an
application for exploration licences over the land in 2008 and objected to the
licences held by
Yarri Mining Pty Ltd appealed the decision of the trial judge. The Court of
Appeal held that an application for an exploration licence
made in contravention
of s 69(1) does not invalidate the application and subsequent grant of an
exploration licence.
Section 57(1)
of the Act provides that the Minister has the discretion to
grant an exploration licence.
The Court of Appeal was ‘satisfied that although an application is a
precondition to the existence of the power in
, that condition is
satisfied by the lodgement of an application in contravention of s
McLure P, Owen and
Buss JJA agreeing, gave the following reasons for such an interpretation:
1. such a construction avoids the potential for financial prejudice to third
parties and uncertainty for persons dealing with registered
2. the grant of a licence would otherwise be invalid regardless of the
seriousness of the contravention of s
3. the purpose of s 69 of the Act is to give persons other than the former
holder the opportunity to apply for a prospecting or exploration
licence within
the three-month period. There may be no interest in the area until many years
later (as seen in the facts of this
4. a breach of s 69(1) would make the former holder liable for a penalty
of the Act.
Despite the fact that the application made by Eaglefield was made in
contravention of s 69, the Court of Appeal held that Eaglefield’s
cannot now be impeached by reason of this previous breach of the provision of
The failure to comply with s 69 was held to fall within the scope of
(which provides the Minister with the discretion to grant or refuse an
exploration licence irrespective of whether the applicant
has applied with the
Act) and the first limb of
(which ‘prevents impeachment or
defeasance on account of any informality or
irregularity’
) of the Act.
As such, the application was deemed a valid grant of an exploration licence by
the Minister.
It was held that
of the Act, the Minister has the discretion to grant a licence
upon application, regardless of whether the application has contravened
Yarri Mining Pty Ltd sought
to appeal the decision to the High Court, however special leave was
This decision marks the highest authority in the State to-date with regard to
the ground turnover principle underlying ss 45(2), 69,
and 85A of the Act.
However, the Court of Appeal held that an applicant may undermine the principle
of ground turnover and breach
s 69, but still be granted an exploration
licence and a penalty instead be
It is the author’s
view that this finding is inconsistent with the purpose of ground turnover
underlying s 69, which is further
considered below.
Although the Court of Appeal’s findings as to the purpose of s 69 have
not been judicially considered since the decision of
Yarri Mining v
, it is now clear that an alternative consequence of a breach of
ss 45(2), 69, and 85A is liability for a penalty under
However, it seems the more
common consequence that continues to flow from a breach of ss 45(2), 69, and 85A
of the Act is the refusal
of a tenement application, and it seems courts are
reluctant to enforce
a penalty and the refusal of an application for
a breach of ss 45(2), 69, and
For example, in the 2015 decision of the Warden’s Court in
Pty Ltd v Nearology Pty Ltd
Ozminex Pty Ltd applied for an
exploration licence within two days of the expiration of an exploration licence
previously held by
Echo Resources
However, both companies had
the same director.
Zempilas held that the applicant breached s 69 and remarked that the
applicant’s contravention ‘goes against
the intent of the section
which is to prevent those closely connected with an existing exploration to
benefit from that
association’.
recommending that the application be refused, Magistrate Zempilas also held that
Ozminex obtained an advantage in making its application
within two days of the
expiry of the previous licence, and that there was a real advantage for Ozminex
if even partially successful
with the application over a rival
V ENFORCEMENT
Cases such as
are examples of instances
where tenement applications have been refused in circumstances where the prior
tenement holder and the subsequent
tenement applicant are related by reason of
being a related entity, and the courts have recognised that the applicant would
a real advantage over rival applicants if the application was
In these cases, the
applicant was clearly related to the prior tenement holder as prescribed by the
Act. The courts in these instances
recognised that the principle of ground
turnover underlies ss 45(2) and 69 and, in enforcing those sections, promoted
that principle.
However, it appears that, in certain circumstances, the courts
will not strictly enforce ss 45(2), 69, and 85A of the Act; resulting
failure to uphold the Act’s turnover objective.
For example, in
Korab Resources
, it was held that the prohibition of
these sections would not be enforced where a party is exclusively informed or
given prior notice
of an impending
There is no
prohibition in any sections of the Act to this effect, and such an act of notice
has not been held to defeat the ground
Mining v Rowland
, Stipendiary Magistrate Wilson held ‘[t]hat the
Applicant is friends with a person who had a previous interest in the tenement
or his lawyer does not of itself amount to proof of some relationship with the
person to whom the provisions of
This was held
despite the fact that the applicant was a close friend of the former lessee and
had assisted the former lessee by
checking the marking out and completing the
required Form 20.
Telferscot Nominees
, acting as an agent or being involved in a
solicitor-client relationship also does not amount to an interest in a prior
for the purposes of the sections, and does not provide a basis for
applications to be set aside.
The Supreme Court in
Yarri Mining v Eaglefield
went further, determining
that ‘[n]on-compliance with the Act does not invalidate an application for
an exploration licence’.
The Minister still has the discretion to
a licence irrespective of
whether the application has complied with the requirements of the Act, and such
a grant cannot be later
impeached on account of any previous irregularity in the
application;
even if the ground
turnover principle has been circumvented.
In the author’s view, cases like
Korab Resources
Mining v Rowland
Telferscot Nominees
have circumvented the
ground turnover principle underlying
of the Act. They, as
Magistrate Zempilas held in
, go against the intent of the
sections to prevent those closely connected with an existing exploration to
benefit from that association,
and do not encourage entry by new
Relationships like that
between a solicitor and their client, agency, close friends, and parties to a
commercial transaction who
are notified of the upcoming surrender of a tenement
are arguably closely connected to existing exploration, and do not allow other
interested applicants the opportunity to explore the land for potential
Although they may not be
‘related’ in the traditional sense of a spouse or director as
defined in the Act, in allowing
such applications, the courts are failing to
promote the ground turnover principle underlying
In any event, even if a technical breach of
is not established, but is contrary to the ground turnover principle of the Act,
the Minister (and, in turn, the Mining
Warden) also has the discretion to
an application for a prospecting or exploration licence over such
land on the grounds of public interest pursuant to
Although this discretion
exists so as to ensure, even if no breach is committed, the ground turnover
principle is upheld,
need to be improved so as to better
promote the ground turnover principle in the first instance.
From the case authorities discussed above, it is clear that there are
loopholes to the application of said sections and the ground
In order to be more
effective in promoting ground turnover,
should be amended
so as to provide for situations like that of solicitor-client, agency, or the
trading of information as to an impending
surrender that currently evade the
prohibitions of the Act.
mentioned above, these situations may not be ‘related’ as the term
is currently understood, but applicants in such
cases are able to avoid the
prohibitions under
of the Act and circumvent the principle
of ground turnover.
these provisions will provide greater clarity and avoid providing an unfair
advantage over other tenement applicants.
VI CONCLUSION
The ground turnover principle is the underlying purpose of
of the Act, and an important objective of the Act as a whole. It is apparent
from the case law that courts will recommend that an
application for an
exploration or prospecting licence is invalid where it is seemingly obvious that
the parties are ‘related’
as that term is
However, there are a
number of circumstances in which the prohibition will not be strictly enforced,
and it is still possible for
applicants to evade their
In order to be more
effective in promoting the objective of ground turnover,
should be amended so as to provide for the situations (like a solicitor-client
relationship, agency, or the trading of information
as to an impending
surrender) that currently evade the prohibitions of the Act, and to ensure the
provisions are strictly enforced.
LLB (Dist), Murdoch
University, Murdoch.
Department of Mines and
Doing Business in WA Resources Sector
, Government of Western
http://www.dmp.wa.gov.au/Investors/Doing-business-in-WA-1498.aspx
Eaglefield Holdings Pty Ltd v Denton Trading Pty Ltd
[2013] WAMW 22
(Unreported, Supreme Court of
Western Australia, Kennedy, Pidgeon and Steytler JJ, 18 December 1996)
(2005) 42 SR (WA) 132
Telferscot Nominees
[2007] WAMW 16
Korab Resources
(2010) 41 WAR 134
Yarri Mining v Eaglefield
Mining Act 1978
. However, it is important to note that a prior tenement
prevented from applying for a mining lease following the
surrender or forfeiture of an exploration or prospecting licence. This is
encouraged, as tenement holders should either apply for a mining lease or give
up the land to a new interested party in order to
ensure the ground turnover
principle is complied with: Michael Hunt, Tim Kavenagh and James Hunt,
on Mining Law
of Western Australia
ed, 2015, The
Federation Press) 67, 88.
Mining Act 1978
(Steytler J).
Audax Resources Pty
Ltd v Rosane Pty Ltd
[2005] WAMW 8
Michael Hunt,
‘Comment on the Policy Objectives of Mining Legislation and the Queensland
AMPLA Yearbook
[2013] WAMW 22
Eaglefield Holdings
Ibid [8], citing
Resources NL v French
(1995) 12 WAR 50.
Korab Resources
Telferscot Nominees
Roberts v Sunkar
[2000] WAMW 5.
11–12 (Steytler J), cited in
(n 9) [51].
(Steytler J).
Telferscot Nominees
Korab Resources
Eaglefield Holdings
(n 13) [12]–[13].
Korab Resources
Ibid [3], [16].
Ibid, citing
Korab Resources
Ibid [41]–[42].
Korab Resources
Yarri Mining v
[2012] WASC 28
(2012) 187 LGERA 303
[2017] HCA 30
(2017) 262 CLR 510
I note the Warden’s
Ozminex Pty Ltd v Nearology Pty Ltd
[2015] WAMW 7
Yarri Mining v Eaglefield
, but only for the proposition that
non-compliance with the Act does not invalidate an application for an
exploration licence: [22].
As discussed further below, the applicant’s
application was refused in any event due to a breach of
Yarri Mining v
Hunt, Kavenagh and Hunt (n
Mining Act 1978
Yarri Mining v
(n 5) [61].
Ibid [61], citing
Resources v Melville
[1988] HCA 5
(1988) 164 CLR 234
Crocker Consolidated Pty Ltd
[1988] WAR 187.
Yarri Mining Pty Ltd
v Eaglefield Holdings Pty Ltd
[2011] HCATrans 089 (Bell
and Hayne JJ).
Yarri Mining v
(n 5) [59]–[61].
[2015] WAMW 7
2) 13 (Steytler J).
Korab Resources
Murchsion Mining v
[2002] WAMW 16
Hunt, Kavenagh and Hunt (n
(n 69) [22],
Yarri Mining v Eaglefield
Yarri Mining v
(n 5) [17], [19];
Mining Act 1978
ss 59(6)(b)
Boddington Nominees Pty Ltd v Howe
(Warden’s Court, 11 June
Eaglefield Holdings
Yarri Mining v
(n 5) [59]–[61].
Telferscot Nominees
Korab Resources
Murchsion Mining v Rowland
(n 77) [12].
Korab Resources
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (283 KB)
PDF format (513 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter