URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntTBLawRw/2004/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:05:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zaccarria, Elena --- "The Effects of Changed Circumstances in International Commercial Trade" [2004] IntTBLawRw 6; (2004) 9 International Trade and Business Law Review 135
The Effects of Changed Circumstances in International Commercial Trade
Introduction
The effects of hardship on the contract
The need to keep the contract alive
The inadequacy of the solutions offered by domestic legal systems Different approaches
The doctrine of frustration
Commercial impracticability
Eccessiva onerosità sopravvenuta and Article 1467 of the Italian Civil Code
International commercial trade in situations of hardship
The hardship clause and the adaptation of the contract
The limits of the hardship clause
The approach of arbitrators in situations of hardship
The CISG and the UNIDROIT Principles
Article 79 of the United Nations Conventions on Contracts for the International Sales of Goods
Definition and effects of hardship in the UNIDROIT Principles
Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles: holy grail or wholly useless?
Conclusions
Bibliography
Table of Cases
The Effects of Changed Circumstances in International
Commercial Trade
Elena Christine Zaccaria
Introduction
When parties reach an agreement, they commit themselves to a certain line of
future behaviour and to the performance of a particular
obligation. This
commitment has its origin in the belief that if promissors were allowed to
escape their contractual obligations
whenever any circumstance arose that
altered the economic equilibrium of the agreement, certainty of law would
collapse and the ‘decline
of faith in contract’
inevitable.
Thus, it can well be understood why the principle of sanctity of a contract,
pacta sunt servanda
, that makes the contract binding and establishes
the allocation of risk once and for all is recognised by international
practitioners
as one of the fundamental rules of contract law.
present in common law, civil law and Islamic law systems and thus assumes the
transnational
principle to be included in the context of
lex mercatoria
However, a rigorous application of the
pacta sunt servanda
can lead to harmful effects on the viability of a contract. Indeed, in long-term
contracts, circumstances may arise which
make performance of the contract
excessively onerous for one of the parties, fundamentally altering the economic
equilibrium and
resulting in an unfair advantage for the other party. This
situation of gross disparity is better known as
The risk of hardship is virtually inevitable in the field of international
trade, as the economic and political context is subject
to continual flux and
rapid change. A great number of factors may intervene, such as an alteration in
the political situation of
a nation, an unexpected price rise in raw
or a sudden depreciation of currency. Naturally, the
longer the contract lasts, the greater the risk that circumstances may change.
As international contracts generally last a long time this risk is ever present.
Therefore, in the event of any unpredicted circumstances arising, rather than
maintaining the contract in its original terms and adhering
to a rigorous
application of the
pacta sunt servanda
principle, the parties are likely
to be more concerned with restoring the contractual equilibrium so as to
safeguard their mutual
interests and ensure that their commercial relationship
remains lasting and productive.
Nonetheless, national legal systems are reluctant to respond to this need; so
much so that hardship did not find expression in the
United Nations Convention
on Contracts for the International Sales of Goods (better known as CISG or the
Vienna Convention).
The Unidroit Principles, on the other hand, although not of a binding nature,
do deal with hardship under Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3.
These principles establish
not only rules shared by most existing legal systems, but also rules more suited
to the requirements of
international commercial trade.
The aim of this paper is to examine this complex scenario and the limited
tools available to international practitioners for the purposes
of dealing with
situations of hardship. There will also be an attempt to determine what benefits
the Unidroit Principles could confer
in the long term, contributing to overcome
the difficulties without jeopardising the stability and safety of international
agreements.
The effects of hardship on the
The need to keep the contract alive
The vast increase in economic activity and the growing global market have had
strong repercussions on contracts. Indeed, while international
trade was once
essentially based on the import and export of goods, it now includes the
exchange of services, the transfer of technology
and the creation of joint
ventures to set up economic operations.
This situation has made contractual relationships ever more complex and
difficult to manage. As these complex contracts are intended
to last, permanent
cooperation between the parties is essential. A new contractual spirit has been
described, giving rise to what
Professor Macneil has defined as
The contracts are designed by providing for
negotiation between the parties to cope with the new situations that may come
the course of the performance of the contract.
Therefore, it is in the interests of both parties to keep the contract alive
even when unforeseen circumstances have altered the economic
equilibrium, ie in
situations of hardship. This can be achieved through forms of adaptation to
prevent premature termination of a
contract on which the parties have already
spent considerable time and money, and which was intended to be advantageous for
There are a number of different reasons, of both a political and economic
nature, justifying this desire to maintain the agreement.
One example of this
desire is the so-called
contract commonly used
in the crude oil or natural gas sectors. These contracts provide for the
different phases such as prospecting,
extracting, carrying, processing and
distributing, necessary for the exploitation of specific resources. As each
contract links up
with the other, it can easily be seen that a total or partial
failure of one party to perform any one of these contracts because
supervening unforeseen circumstances will have serious repercussions on all the
other linked contracts.
It should be borne in mind that negotiations to reach a new agreement would
be very long and costly, especially in contracts that
provide for specific
resources where a contractual partner would be hard to replace. Long-term
collaboration can create a cordial,
trusting relationship as well as reciprocal
exchanges of know-how that would again be very difficult to rebuild with a new
contractor.
For these reasons, when a situation of hardship arises, rather than
maintaining the contract in its original terms or choosing a premature
termination of the contract, it is desirable for international practitioners to
continue their commercial relationship, re-establishing
the contractual
equilibrium between the parties.
The inadequacy of the solutions offered by
domestic legal systems Different approaches
The solutions provided by domestic law for situations of hardship are
inadequate since they not only differ from one nation to another,
parties to operate in a sort of ‘juridical Babel’,
have proved to be little suited to the new needs of commercial trade.
Common law systems, for the most part, do not generally give relief to a
party nor provide for a revision of the terms of the contract
when performance
has become extremely costly, arguing that a party might have made provision for
such an event in the contract.
On the other hand, some civil law
countries such as Germany and Italy, which were subjected to wartime economic
instability, found
it necessary to introduce into their legal systems concepts
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage
Onerosità Sopravvenuta
which, although now applied in a very restricted
manner, provide for the adaptation or termination of the contract in situations
which the economic equilibrium between the parties has radically
This does not mean that there is a clear and radical distinction between
common law and civil law systems, nor that the systems of
civil law provide
better or more adequate solutions than that of common law countries. The reality
is quite diverse and complex as
even countries belonging to the same legal
system have acquired very different legal attitudes, mainly deriving from each
individual tradition and judicial culture.
Moreover, even those countries that have proven to be more sensitive to
situations of hardship demonstrate remarkably wide differences
of approach.
The following sections will analyse the approaches of the American,
Australian, English, and Italian legal systems to situations of
circumstances highlighting their differences and their limits.
The doctrine of frustration
pacta sunt servanda
principle is applied with great firmness by
the English legal system. This inflexibility is normally justified by citing
Paradine v Jane
when the King’s Bench held that a
party committed to a contractual obligation is bound to perform it even when
objectively
unable to do so. This was later mitigated, at the end of the 19th
century, when English law began to elaborate the concept of frustration.
in the case of
Taylor v Caldwell
it was established that
when performance of a contract depends on the continued existence of a given
person or thing, then an implied
condition is present, the absence of which will
be considered by both parties as an excuse for non-performance.
However, apart from such situations where it is impossible to honour the
contract, it is interesting to analyse how English law has
dealt with the
hypothesis whereby performance of the obligation, although possible, would be
commercially sterile.
In the so-called Coronation cases,
flats had been let to allow
royalists to watch the royal procession pass from a vantage position on the
balconies during the coronation
ceremony of King Edward VII. When the ceremony
was postponed because of the King’s illness, the contract was recognised
have been frustrated because the underlying assumptions and aims of the
contracting parties on which the contract had been based
no longer applied,
leading to a situation of
frustration of purpose
. The judges ruled that
the agreement had been reached for the sole purpose, known to both parties, of
watching the coronation ceremony.
Indeed, the price paid to rent each of the
flats was exceedingly high, precisely because of the specific use to which it
In more recent developments of the doctrine of frustration, the criterion
applied is that of a
radical change of circumstances
. Lord Radcliffe gave
a fitting definition of such a situation in the case of
Davis Contractors Ltd
v Fareham Urban District Council
Frustration occurs when the law recognises that without default of either party
a contractual obligation has become incapable of
being performed because the
circumstances in which the performance is called for would render it a thing
radically different from
that which was undertaken by the contract.
In other words, the changed circumstances must be such as
to alter the substance of the contract, causing it to take on the character
new contract quite unlike the one agreed by the parties.
This also seems to be the interpretation followed by Australian law. In the
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South
the Supreme Federal Court followed the same line of
reasoning as Lord Radcliffe. In this case, a construction company (Codelfa) had
undertaken to build a tunnel for the New South Wales State Railway. The contract
had been drawn up in such a way as to emphasise
that time was of the essence in
the performance of the contract. However, the noise created by the construction
works was such that
the nearby inhabitants had obtained a court injunction to
prevent Codelfa from working during certain hours of the day. The contract
thus recognised to have been frustrated, because the injunction had precluded
its performance within the time and working schedule
specified. Again, a
radically different situation from the one agreed upon had come into
However, even by applying the criterion of a ‘radical change of
circumstances’, it is still difficult to reconcile the
doctrine of
frustration with situations of hardship. In the case of
Viscount Simon in
British Movietonews Ltd v London and District Cinemas Ltd
was ruled that an exceptional increase or drop in price, sudden devaluation of
the currency, unexpected obstacle to performance
or other impediment, has no
effect on the agreement made between the parties. Indeed, in this case, the
contract was considered to
be frustrated not because performance had become
excessively onerous but because new circumstances had made performance an
‘different thing’ from that which was originally agreed
This line of reasoning was confirmed in the so called Suez Canal cases that
were filed after the sudden closure of the Suez Canal
caused by the Arab-Israeli
In these cases, although shipping costs underwent a dramatic
increase as the ships had to circumnavigate the southern tip of Africa,
judges rejected the plea of frustration, ruling that the event had not rendered
performance radically different from what
had been agreed upon. The only case in
which the plea of frustration was granted was that of the
Franco Tunisienne d’Armement v Sidermar SpA
In this case
the judge was oriented by a clause in the contract which made express reference
to passage through the Suez Canal.
From the above, it is clear that the very rigid position adopted by English
law makes it essential to forecast all those conditions
which could give rise to
controversy and to include details and specifications of the courses of action.
However, even in cases when
all the elements required to invoke the doctrine of
frustration are present, the question arises as to what effects this will have
on the contract. The English system offers only a fixed alternative maintenance
of the contract in its original form, obliging one
of the parties to bear the
greater sacrifice caused by changed circumstances or else a premature
termination of the contract.
Indeed, under English law, the court
has no power to adapt the contract to changed circumstances.
principle is based on a decision made by the House of Lords
1952, according to which the function of the court is not to make a contract for
the parties, but to interpret the contract made
The inability of judges to adapt the contract is considered by Professor
Schmitthoff as a ‘serious defect of English law’,
this rule is in direct contrast with any modern system of trade law.
Other leading scholars have pronounced similar opinions. For example,
Professor Treitel
and Professor Atiyah
argue that,
from a practical point of view, ending the contractual relationship does not
seem any more satisfactory than allowing
it to continue unaltered, and that a
compromise is often the best solution. Thus, it seems clear that while part of
the English literature
has recognised to some extent that it may be useful to
try to save the contract rather than terminate it, English law continues to
adopt a very rigid stance.
Commercial impracticability
There is greater flexibility in the North-American system than in the English
one when dealing with situations of changed circumstances.
recognising the termination of the contract in the presence of an objective
impediment to its performance, the North-American
approach adopts a more liberal
view both of the concept of hardship and of the means for obtaining
renegotiation of the contract
in such a condition.
The American
doctrine of commercial impracticability
proposed in 1916 in the case of
Mineral Park Land Company v PA
The defendant had reached an agreement to haul gravel
and earth from the claimant’s land to the site of construction of a
However, at a certain stage, work had to be stopped because the rest of
the earth and gravel was underwater and could only be removed
at a far greater
cost (10 times) than the sum agreed upon in the contract. The judges ruled in
favour of the defendant, judging that
‘a thing is impossible in legal
contemplation when it is not practicable, and a thing is impracticable when it
can only be
done at an excessive and unreasonable cost’.
In 1932 this principle was stated in s 454 of the Restatement (First) of the
Law on Contracts, which refers to a situation entailing
strict impossibility but impracticability because of extreme and unreasonable
difficulty, expense, injury
or loss involved’.
This concept
was later also included in s 281 of the Restatement (Second) of the Law on
Contracts (1981), according to which the
doctrine of impracticability can be
invoked in a situation involving any abnormal price rise that creates extreme or
unreasonable
difficulty.
Confirming the interest in regulating situations where a supervening event
has made performance economically untenable, s 2–615
of the Uniform
Commercial Code (UCC) summarised the notion of commercial impracticability,
stating that ‘… delay in delivery
or non-delivery in whole or in
part by a seller
… is not a breach of his duty under a
contract of sale, if performance as agreed has been made impracticable by the
of a contingency the non-occurrence of which was a basic assumption
on which the contract was made …’. In other words,
the application
of s 2–615 of the UCC relies on the following requirements:
(i) occurrence of an unforeseen event which made performance of the contract
impracticable;
(ii) the non-occurrence of the event was a basic assumption upon which the
parties had based their agreement; and
(iii)the impracticability had resulted without the fault of the party seeking to
be excused.
Clearly, the nature of an unforeseen
event is very difficult to define and therefore much is left to the discretion
of the judges.
For instance, in the cases following the US’s
entry into the Second World War after the attack on Pearl Harbour, the judges
rejected pleas for termination of contracts, deciding that the event was
foreseeable, despite the fact that the Japanese attack had
taken the American
armed forces entirely by surprise.
In some of the Suez Canal cases,
too, closing of the canal was judged to be foreseeable, even if this move had
not been planned by
the Egyptian government but was decided on the basis of the
developments of the war.
In Professor Perillo’s view, the
judges’ decisions in these cases were strongly conditioned by
consideration of the drastic
consequences that would have ensued if the pleas
had been supported, since thousands of contracts would then have been bound to
dissolved. Indeed, Professor Perillo feels that ‘it is no accident that
the court is more willing to find an excuse where the
supervening event has
drastic consequences only for one contract or a small number of contracts than
where the supervening event
affects an enormous number of
transactions’.
Furthermore, there is also a tendency among American courts to consider that
when no express provisions have been made for a particular
event, the party most
affected has implicitly accepted the risk involved.
Even when the
parties have prudently included in the contract a clause which deals with
changed circumstances, if this is inadequate
to deal with the consequences of
the event (which have turned out to be more serious than envisaged), American
judges prefer to observe
pacta sunt servanda
principle and deny
application of
impracticability
to the case in question.
Indeed, the very fact that there has been agreement between the parties to
include a clause in the contract gives the judge greater
leeway to base his
ruling on the allocation of the contractual risk. That is why contracting
parties are tending to
more and more elaborate, sophisticated
clauses to endeavour to cover all the possible contingencies, although a certain
risk will still inevitably be present with regard to future events.
In a few limited cases, such as that of the
Transatlantic Financing
Corporation v United States of America
it was held that
‘foreseeability or even recognition of a risk does not necessarily prove
its allocation’,
since parties are not always able to provide
for all known contingencies, sometimes through lack of agreement but often
simply because
they are too busy.
In the official comment to s 2–615 of the UCC,
clear that a mere price rise is not sufficient to invoke
impracticability
. The rise must be shown to be
extreme and
unreasonable
, and in some cases the supervening circumstance must be such as
fundamentally to change the nature of the performance agreed upon.
Despite the
intention to provide an answer to situations of hardship (revealed both in the
Restatement and in the UCC) the American
courts tend to interpret the concept of
impracticability
in a very narrow sense.
This can be justified to some extent by the fact that, since the Second World
War, the US has enjoyed greater economic stability than
such nations as Italy
and Germany, which had to adopt a more flexible attitude, as will be discussed
However, the American approach is certainly more flexible than the English
approach, not only as regards situations of hardship but
also in providing
judges with the possibility of directing the controversy towards an
‘equitable adaptation’ or renegotiation
of the contract. Although
the American legal system normally tends towards termination of the contract, in
situations where the original
agreement can be shown to have become
impracticable
, in a few cases American judges seem to have been able to
intervene personally, directing the revision of the terms of the contract.
A significant statement is made in the official comment to s 2–615 of
the UCC, which refers expressly to adaptation:
in situations in which neither sense nor justice is served by either answer when
is posed in flat terms of ‘excuse’ or ‘no
excuse’, adjustment under the various provisions
of this Article is
necessary, especially the sections on good faith, on insecurity and
and on the reading of all provisions in the light of their purposes, and
general policy of this Act to use equitable principles in the furtherance
of commercial
standards and good faith.
cases in point clearly illustrate this approach. The first
of the Atlas Corporation, which had agreed to supply uranium to the Ioxa
Electric Light and Power Corporation for a period
of four years. Shortly after
the conclusion of the contract, a series of economic factors
brought about a drastic increase in the costs for uranium production, casting
uranium producers into grave difficulties. Atlas
registered a plea for equitable
adjustment of the price, on the basis of s 2–615 of the UCC. The court
denied the existence
of grounds for impracticability, as the claimant had not
established an adequate standard for revising and altering the price. However,
although the judges rejected application of s 2–615, they did not exclude
that a price adjustment could be made
ope iudicis
In the case of
Florida Power & Light Co v Westinghouse Electric
although the judge denied exemption from responsibility
according to s 2–615 of the UCC, he stated his willingness to take
the transactions that would follow. In this case, he viewed the controversy as
‘business problems, to be settled as
business problems by
businessmen’.
Finally, in the case of
Aluminium Company of America (ALCOA) v Essex Group
Judge Teitelbaum showed his intention of taking a greater
part in the settlement. According to the contract concluded in 1967, ALCOA
agreed to transform a certain quantity of raw materials into aluminium, for a
period of 16 years. The price per pound was established
by applying a complex
index-linked formula. After 1973, the problems for uranium producers described
above caused the price to rise
above the index. ALCOA proved during the hearings
that it had already suffered a loss of $12,000,000 and that unless the price was
adjusted, the total loss for the remaining contractual period would have
amounted to $75,000,000. The judge ruled that termination
of the contract was
not an answer and personally worked out a new mechanism for calculating the
price, thus starting the trend towards
what has been called ‘forms of
surgical reconstruction of the contract’.
In the decision,
the judge showed that it is necessary first of all to allow the parties to
renegotiate the terms of a contract and
only if they are unable to come to an
agreement must the court undertake adaptation by legal settlement. According to
Judge Teitelbaum,
this solution should encourage parties to solve the many
problems that may occur during long-term contracts without the intervention
third party. Indeed, a solution reached after renegotiation by means of a
friendly agreement between the parties would be more
acceptable than any
decision imposed by the court: ‘only a rule which permits a judicial
action of the kind the court has taken
in this case will provide a desirable
practical incentive for businessmen to negotiate their own resolution to
problems which arise
in the life of long term contracts’.
Part of the American literature was highly critical of this decision,
considering it to have introduced worrying implications. Professor
Dawson, for
example, describes the
decision as ‘grotesque’, as
‘a lonely monument on a bleak landscape’ and as ‘the
frustrated venture
of a single trial judge whose fancy was unusually
Indeed, according to these scholars, the main risk is that ‘if the
other courts adopt the
test, contracts – especially long-term
ones – will become markedly less secure. And there will be little basis
parties might ascertain in advance which contracts are vulnerable to
reformation or avoidance’.
This fear was shared by later
courts which chose not to take Judge Teitelbaum’s position, making the
Alcoa judgment an isolated
In order to circumvent the impasse and encourage parties to reach a new
agreement, scholars have occasionally suggested that changed
circumstances may
place a party under an obligation to revise the contract.
of this duty is the principle of good faith, stated in s 1–203 of the UCC
and also mentioned in Comment 6 of s 2–615.
According to this line of
reasoning, refusal to modify the contract in cases of changed circumstances
would be in contrast with the
duty to perform the contract in good faith.
However, courts have not been receptive to this suggestion. In
Bermingham’s view:
the courts to date have refused to read official comment 6 to impose a duty to
negotiate good faith modifications under drastically
changed circumstances. The
result is that the parties are left with the rigid ‘excuse’ or
‘no excuse’ alternatives
which, it has been suggested, the UCC was
intended to mitigate.
LC Williams Oil Co Inc
v Exxon Corporation
the court rejected the argument
‘that Exxon was under a good faith obligation to modify the existing
contract terms when William’s
circumstances changed’.
To conclude, although American law has proved to be more flexible than
English law, it seems clear that common law systems apply a
certain rigour to
the question of hardship and of its effects on contracts.
Eccessiva onerosità sopravvenuta and Article
1467 of the Italian Civil Code
Unlike English and American law, the Italian Civil Code explicitly provides
for situations of hardship.
Already by 1942 the inflexibility of the
pacta sunt servanda
had been mitigated by the introduction into the Civil Code of exemption to
perform a contract in cases of
eccessiva onerosità sopravvenuta
in cases in which, although possible, the performance of the contract would
require strong financial sacrifice from one of the
parties. Indeed, according to
article 1467 of the Italian Civil Code ‘… if extraordinary and
unforeseeable events make
the performance of one of the parties excessively
onerous, the party who owes such performance can demand dissolution of the
Such a consequence cannot be demanded if
the supervening hardship is part of the normal area of risk of the
Furthermore, ‘the party against whom dissolution is
demanded can avoid it by offering to modify equitably the conditions of
contract’ (
reductio ad equitatem
or return to equity).
Many legal systems
have based the
doctrine of excessive
on Article 1467 of the Italian Civil Code so as to create a system
based on better compliance with the changing needs of the economy.
However, the
innovative character of the Italian provision on hardship does not exclude the
existence of difficulties when applying
Article 1467 of the Italian Civil Code.
Problems may occur when trying to interpret what is meant by the
area of risk
of the contract. The most recent approach seems to have
abandoned the attempt to define this concept once and for all, as the
depends on the type of agreement made by the parties.
Indeed, each type of contract, together with its clauses, expresses a
particular allocation of the risks agreed on between the parties.
In addition,
the market sector involved may affect the level of acceptable risk. Trading in
some raw materials, for instance, or
charterparty, are sectors which feature
rapid fluctuations, even over short periods, of up to 200% or more. Thus, in
such sectors,
abrupt alterations must be considered the norm and not grounds for
excessive hardship, whereas similar fluctuations in other sectors
undoubtedly be grounds for dissolution of the contract.
As to its effects, Article 1467 of the Italian Civil Code provides for a
premature termination of the contract if the disadvantaged
party should advance
this request in court. This effect does not operate automatically as the judge
must establish whether performance
of the contract is truly
excessively
However, the party who would benefit from the situation of hardship is
granted the power to avoid termination of the contract by offering
an equitable
renegotiation (
reductio ad equitatem
), such as supplementing the price,
for instance. This offer cannot be advanced by the disadvantaged party (even if
it is in his/her
interest to ensure continuation of the contractual
relationship), as it is a request expressly reserved to ‘the party against
whom dissolution is demanded’.
It should be borne in mind that a
reductio ad equitatem
meant to reestablish the contractual equilibrium between the parties but only to
eliminate the disproportion exceeding that
of the normal area of risk inherent
in the contract. Thus, if the offer is accepted, the disadvantaged party will in
any case suffer
the negative consequences of the changed circumstances, within
the limits of
normal tolerability
This line was confirmed
in 1992 by the Italian Court of Cassation which stated that: ‘[A]n offer
of adaptation can be considered
equitable if it brings the contract to a
situation that had it existed at the time of the conclusion of the contract, the
disadvantaged
party would not have had the right to ask for
termination.’
Furthermore, the offer must be presented in clear and precise terms, as the
judge has to limit his/her assessment to whether it is
a consonant offer, but in
many cases cannot change it.
However, the Italian Court of
Cassation recently allowed the judge’s intervention in the adaptation
process by stating that
if the offer is inadequate, the judge may determine an
equitable revision of the contract.
According to the court, this
decision ensures a better safeguard of the disadvantaged party, while respecting
the principle that
only the party who would benefit from the changed
circumstances can propose a
reductio ad equitatem
There have been attempts among the literature
to allow the
disadvantaged party to preserve continuation of the contractual relationship.
Indeed, the interest in keeping the contract
alive has led part of the
literature to suggest that a situation of
excessive onerosity
places both
parties under a duty to adapt the contract to the changed circumstances. Once
again, the basis of this duty is the principle
of good faith, stated in Articles
1366 and 1375 of the Italian Civil Code.
However, no court has
followed this line of reasoning, as it is feared that the concept of good faith
is too vague and thus leaves
too much space to the discretion of the judge.
This fear could easily be overcome by taking into consideration the German
concept of the
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlag
‘disappearance of the basis of the transaction’).
According to this theory, when the circumstances have radically changed,
the foundation of the transaction has been destroyed and
the parties are no
longer bound to their original contractual commitments. Indeed, under these new
circumstances, performance of
the contract in its original terms would
constitute bad faith. Thus, the judge has the power to adapt the contract to the
circumstances and may consider a premature termination only in the event
that there is no reason to keep the contract alive. The
basis of the doctrine of
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage
originated from paragraph 242
which requires that the contract must be performed in good
With the recent reform of the German Civil Code, this doctrine was codified
in paragraph 313 Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB).
codification confirms the importance given to good faith in cases of changed
circumstances, althought the concept of the Wegfall
der Geschäftsgrundlage
is now only accepted by German courts in a very restricted manner, compared to
those early of strong
inflation after both World Wars.
International commercial trade in situations of
The hardship clause and the adaptation of the
The inadequate solutions of domestic law have resulted in the principle of
freedom of contract being invoked and in the insertion
of an appropriate clause
known as the hardship clause, which enables contracting parties to pursue their
agreement by means of continual
adaptation of the contract to changing
circumstances.
The formulation of this clause varies from one contract to another because it
is essential to adapt it to the particular sector and
the type of performance
specified. However, there are some general features that characterise these
clauses and the aims they embody.
First of all, insertion of this clause is an
explicit demonstration that the contracting parties are willing to undertake
of the contract, if unpredicted circumstances make performance of the
contract excessively onerous for either one of the parties.
Analysis of the hardship clause demonstrates that it is subdivided into two
parts: in the first part, the contracting parties specify
the circumstances
governing the operation of the clause and, in the second part, they indicate
what effects such circumstances will
have on the agreement.
In the first part, dealing with the events, the clause refers to changes in
circumstances that must necessarily have occurred after
the conclusion of the
contract, and which must have been unforeseeable at the time the contract was
Indeed, it is not easy to identify this characteristic since in the abstract
all events are equally foreseeable or unforeseeable.
According to Professor
Fontaine, the fact that a hardship clause has been inserted in the contract
implies that the parties are aware
of the risk of future events overthrowing the
equitable balance of interests.
In practice, however, contracting
parties cannot predict if or when any event could occur and what degree of
influence it could have
on the balance and it is for this very reason that they
choose to insert such a clause. In view of the risk that this criterion of
unpredictability might restrict the application of the clause, in some cases the
contracting parties simply require the events to
be ‘against the will of
the parties’ or ‘beyond the sphere of control’ of the
disadvantaged party.
An analysis of the circumstances is often indicated only in general terms, so
as to widen its application to include as many cases
as possible. Formulae such
as the following are commonly observed: ‘in the case of a serious
occurrence of a political, economic
or financial nature’, or ‘if the
economic or monetary situation were to change’, or else ‘if
significant
variations in the situation or evident changes in the economic
conditions arise’.
There are also some very vague expressions
used, such as ‘all those circumstances that might endanger the good
outcome of the
contract’ or ‘for any
revenue accruing ... for this transaction is insufficient to meet the
Nevertheless, these latter are relatively rare
because their excessive range of application could too easily allow one of the
to take extreme advantage.
In practice, much more specific clauses are also frequently included, which
list all the events that could arise in a given business
For example, the following hypothesis ‘if the production of steel
deriving from haematite sources should reach 20% of the total
production of
steelworks x’ or ‘in the case of new import or export laws’,
or ‘if ordinary crude oil delivered
to its destination should increase by
more than 6 francs per ton with respect to the original price’.
However, it is more common to find clauses in which circumstances are
described in general terms with specific hypotheses indicated
only as examples.
This aims to avoid both disagreements between the parties as to what
circumstances should be included in the list
and the risk of overlooking any
specific event.
The hardship clause, in any event, applies only to circumstances that
overthrow the balance of the contract. The criteria used to
establish this event
are variously formulated and can be based on objective or subjective parameters.
In the first case, to describe
hardship suffered by one of the parties and hence
the tilting of the balance, such expressions as ‘the breakdown of the
equilibrium of the contract, that could not be foreseen by the parties
when the contract was concluded’ or ‘substantial
disproportionate prejudice’, ‘substantial economic hardship’,
‘obvious hardship’ are used.
In the second case,
instead, subjective clauses can replace the above objective ones, such as
which deal with the minimum degree of
unbalance of the contract.
The most delicate part of this phase is the question of how to assess whether
hardship is present. The clause often contains an obligation
on the part of the
disadvantaged party to notify the other party of the existence of a hardship
condition. The failure to notify
may, dependent on the requisite time
requirement, result in the expiration of the right to invoke the clause.
It triggers a consultation mechanism between the parties to ascertain the
existence of such a condition. This is not always easy as
the criteria used in
the clause are often imprecise. There is also a risk that when the disadvantaged
party invokes the clause the
other party, who would benefit from the altered
situation, will try to evade renegotiation.
As a result, if the
parties fail to reach an agreement about the effective existence of a hardship
situation, the clause itself provides
for intervention by a third party, or
arbitrator, to decide the question. If the third party considers the conditions
of the clause
to be fulfilled, the parties are obliged to renegotiate the
contract whereas if the judgment is negative the contract will continue
course unaltered.
The most interesting aspect of the hardship clause – as it is
innovative in comparison with national provisions – lies
in the second
part of the clause, dealing with the legal consequences deriving from
ascertainment of a hardship situation. Experience
has shown that in some cases
the effects of such situations are not permanent and this has induced the
parties to provide for temporary
suspension of performance of the contract.
However, if after a certain period of time the situation still has not
stabilised, the
parties will then have to decide whether to terminate or to
renegotiate the contract.
Apart from the latter hypothesis, revision of the contract may be the basis,
as Professor Frignani says, the ‘clou’
of the whole
Adaptation of the contract is first left to an
agreement between the parties who must try to find an acceptable solution for
both and, above all, try to restore the original balance. Such formulae as
the following are often used: ‘the disadvantaged
party has the right to
ask the other party to participate in a joint examination of the position, to
determine whether revision of
the contractual terms is necessary and if so, what
revision is suitable in the circumstances’.
The criteria guiding adaptation contained in the clauses are variously
formulated and can be subjective, objective or mixed. Objective
include: ‘adjusting the price to a certain level’, or
‘reinstating the parties in an equilibrium comparable
to that existing at
the moment of the conclusion of the contract’.
criteria rely on general principles, such as equity, good faith, loyalty and
correctness and aim to favour adequate remedies
and to facilitate adaptation of
the contract.
Finally, mixed criteria include a combination of
subjective and objective criteria. The notion of equity or other such criteria
aroused some perplexity and, indeed, perturbs some experts, who maintain
that such references make the clause dangerously imprecise,
as they deal with
muted, vague concepts and could therefore generate uncertainty. This objection
has been countered by the argument
that these are in any case criteria that are
normally used in commercial practice and that they avoid too precise a list of
criteria that could be insufficient to meet the future case. In any
event, in unforeseeable changed circumstances, the contract cannot
adequate indications so it will be necessary for the parties to renegotiate the
contract on what could be described as good
faith criteria.
this context, equity is the most meaningful criterion, as it is linked to the
idea of justice.
At this stage, it is necessary to consider what will happen if the parties,
despite negotiations, are unable to come to an agreement.
It should be borne in
mind that the parties are obliged to negotiate but not necessarily to reach an
The obligation is fulfilled if they have met and
conducted such negotiations in good faith, whereas there is failure to observe
obligation if one of the parties refuses to renegotiate or does not conduct
such negotiations in good faith, honouring the duty to
co-operate.
The contracting parties may, however, fail to reach an agreement despite
honouring the above obligation, without this failure being
imputed to the fault
of one of the parties. In this case the obligation to renegotiate has not been
breached and the agreement will
continue to stand in its original form, unless
the parties have provided for the effects of such a failure.
This is confirmed by the Award No 2478
concerning a contract
for supply of crude oil, in which the parties had stipulated the obligation to
renegotiate if the rates of
exchange were to change. As oil prices increased,
one of the parties claimed that this rise should be assimilated within the
of a change in the monetary balance and that there was therefore an
obligation to renegotiate the agreement. When this failed, the
disadvantaged
party demanded to be discharged from the obligation to perform the contract. The
arbitrators, instead, concluded that
a price rise was not equivalent to a change
in the currency balance and that this circumstance did not therefore give rise
obligation to renegotiate. Moreover, they stressed that the obligation
would in any case have been only that of negotiating in good
faith and that
failure to reach an agreement would not have resulted in termination of the
contract unless explicitly stated in the
If the wish to deal with situations determining an altered economic balance
induces the parties to introduce a specific hardship clause,
the latter will be
totally useless unless the consequences of failure to reach an agreement are
also established. This was confirmed
by Professor Schmitthoff when he stated
that ‘a hardship clause without sanctions is hardly worth the paper on
which it is
In fact, it is not always easy to
demonstrate bad faith on the part of one of the contractors,
in any case, persistent disagreement even after loyal renegotiation is a real
possibility.
In most cases, for this reason, the parties prefer to stipulate what effects
failure to reach an agreement may have on the contract.
Sometimes, however,
parties provide for termination of the contract or for suspension for a given
period of time.
Mostly, however, the decision is delegated to a
judge or arbitrator with expertise in the specific field, or to a third party
named in the contract, who may be designated as an
‘arbitrator’, an ‘expert’, a ‘conciliator’,
a ‘referee’ or an ‘intervener’. This third party has the
task of ascertaining the existence of the requirements
for revision of the
contract and in the affirmative case, of proceeding to undertake this
adaptation.
All these effects have been described by Professor
Schmitthoff as ‘sanctions’, to highlight their function not only of
offering alternative solutions, but also of encouraging the contracting parties
to solve the hardship problem among themselves, by
means of a friendly
agreement. This remedy would in any case be preferable to the extreme remedy of
bringing the contract to a premature
end, or even of accepting the more or less
imposed decision of a judge or arbitrator, that will certainly not facilitate
future co-operation
between the contracting parties: ‘no court or
arbitrator in the world, at least in international business transactions, can
render an award that could serve as the legal basis for a complex future
cooperation against the will of one of the parties.’
However, as mentioned above, there are many cases where, in spite of the
parties’ efforts, an amicable agreement cannot be reached
and thus the
intervention of a third person may be necessary. In this event, it should be
borne in mind that the third person, no
matter whether this figure is defined as
arbitrator, expert or conciliator is called on to carry out an entirely new
function in
comparison with the classical function of settling disputes
stricto sensu
. In some cases, this new function may simply be that of
filling in supervening gaps; in others, of ascertaining the existence of
situation of hardship. However, in others still, it will extend to cover
complete renegotiation of the agreement, intervening in
the revision process to
restore the original balance of the agreement in the face of supervening
circumstances.
In reference to these
new functions
one can raise the question on
whether the third person who adapts the contract can be defined as
. The terminology used in contractual practice is of no help,
as it does not always cast light on this point, since the third party
variously referred to as an
, expert, conciliator, referee or
intervener. The literature has often argued that in the strict sense of the term
adaptation is not
arbitration: ‘an arbitrator is supposed to solve legal
disputes, ie disputes over existing rights and duties. The person who
contract terms, merely rearranges the contractual relationship on behalf of the
Indeed, there are many legal systems where it is stated that neither courts
nor arbitrators have any power to adapt a contract. An
example that immediately
comes to mind is the English approach, already analysed above. In short,
according to English law ‘the
function of the court is not to make a
contract for the parties, but to interpret the contract made by
This limitation was later extended to arbitrators,
creating serious drawbacks in situations where the parties are unable amicably
to establish a new equilibrium acceptable to both. In fact, even if the parties
intend to continue their contractual relationship,
the arbitrator, being in a
similar position as a judge, has no power to adapt the contract and mediate
between the opposing interests,
as a kind of ‘peacemaker’.
Professor Schmitthoff argued in 1980 that this inability of the judge or
arbitrator to adapt the contract is a ‘serious defect
law’ and that a solution must be found, as this rule is in direct contrast
with any modern system of commercial
More than 20 years have
passed since this statement was made but no changes have yet been introduced
into English law.
However, the general situation is not so clear as it would appear to be on
the surface. In fact, under other legal systems, the German,
the Dutch and the
Japanese, for example, judges and arbitrators are empowered to adapt a contract
to unforeseen circumstances.
Thus, it is very difficult to
identify a single solution in order to establish the degree of power the parties
possess to allow an
arbitrator to adjust the terms of the contract.
The difficulty in reconciling the third person indicated in hardship clauses
with any similar figure in national legal systems has
prompted the International
Chamber of Commerce (ICC) to draw up specific rules regulating contractual
relationships. The purpose
of these rules is to enable the parties to call upon
a third person, who is not an arbitrator, to adapt the contract. According to
these rules the parties can demand the Standing Committee for the Regulation of
Contractual Relations
to appoint a third person, who will either
formulate a recommendation or take a decision depending on the choice made by
the parties.
If the parties simply request an opinion, then the only legal
requirement is that the parties weigh it up in all good faith. If,
instead, the
parties recognise the power of a third person to take a binding decision, then
the resulting decision will automatically
become part of the contract, which is
considered to be an expression of the will of the contracting parties. In any
case, the ICC
has expressly stated that if the parties believe that they can
safely choose arbitration without any risk of the decision not being
accepted by
the legal system where adaptation will take place; the parties still have the
option to refer to the standard arbitration
clause and to the ICC rules of
arbitration.
Although innovative, this initiative has not been successful, as the Standing
Committee has not once been called upon to act.
In spite of its
lack of success, the Standing Committee for the Regulation of Contractual
Relations was nevertheless mentioned in
another document published by the ICC in
1985. This document was drafted to provide all the possible remedies to a
hardship situation
and it laid out what were then suitable guidelines for the
drawing up of a hardship clause to be drafted into the contract.
The first part of the document defined the situation, which could lead to
negotiation between those parties who aimed to revise the
contract. If no
agreement could be reached, the second part of the ICC clause proposed options
which needed to be put into effect
within a time-limit of 90 days from the
request for revision made by the disadvantaged party and which the parties were
able to develop,
adapting them to their own specific needs. This document
suggested as a first option that the contract be left to stand in its original
terms. A second option was that of recourse to an arbitrator or judge to obtain
suitable adaptation of the contract. Otherwise as
a third and forth ‘
third and final’? Forth/fourth confusion???
option alternative, the
parties could refer to the Standing Committee for the Regulation of Contractual
in order to obtain the appointment of a third person,
who according to the parties’ will, is entitled to express an opinion
give a binding decision. The choice of any of these options was conditioned by
each specific case but also by the willingness
of the contracting parties to
submit to the adaptation of their agreement by a third party.
More recently, the ICC revised this document and in January 2003 published a
new hardship clause which greatly differs from the previous
Indeed, the 2003 clause no longer offers four
AQ only three options in
above para???
alternative options but provides one only formulation with
clear alternative
consequences, namely negotiation or termination. In cases of excessive
onerosity the new clause places upon the parties a duty to
negotiate alternative
contractual terms and if no agreement can be reached within a reasonable time,
the party invoking the clause
can terminate the contract. In this new document
the drafters decided to make no reference to the intervention of courts or
arbitrators
as it was felt that the ICC clause should encourage the parties to
find solution amongst themselves or through the general dispute
clause in the contract.
During the seminar that officially presented this clause to international
practitioners,
Professor Debattista explained the reason for this
decision. His opinion was that:
... a special dispute resolution provision for hardship cases co-existing with a
general dispute resolution clause might cause unnecessary
and undesirable
confusion. Thus, [where no agreement is reached], either because the performing
party fails to offer alternative
terms or because the non performing party fails
unreasonably to accept them, then the likelihood is that a claim will be made,
for termination brought by the party invoking the clause or for breach of
contract brought by the other party. That claim would go
to arbitration or
litigation under the general dispute resolution terms in the contract, for
example, by reference to any of the
dispute resolution services provided by the
The limits of the hardship clause
The possibility that the hardship clause may constitute an attempt ‘to
delocalise the contract’ has been underlined in
the literature.
Indeed, the inclusion of this clause can be seen as an intention to avoid,
on this matter, the application of the relative national
law that should be
applicable, according to the rules of international private law.
The choice to free the contract from national constraints requires the
parties to set out the precise contractual agreement in very
exhaustive terms. Nevertheless, some difficulties will persist with regard to
hardship clauses, as the parties are not
always able to assess what may happen
during performance of a long-term contract and, in any case, may not have the
patience or time
to evaluate all the eventualities while drawing up the
Indeed, one problem that lawyers have to grapple with during negotiation is
the drafting of a hardship clause that can be considered
satisfactory
. This is, in part, due to the pressure which a lawyer is
normally subjected to during such negotiations. In fact, on reaching an
agreement, the parties’ main interest is to settle the economic aspects of
the contract and leave the legal provisions, which
may be considered by the
parties as an unpleasant but unavoidable part of the negotiation, to be
hurriedly discussed at the end of
the negotiating process.
The fact that non-lawyers tend to underestimate the importance of hardship
clauses, ie what such clauses mean in terms of money,
confirm Professor Böckstiegel’s comment on lawyers and their part in
stipulating contracts: ‘in the beginning
(during contract negotiations)
there are two few lawyers involved, and at the end (in case of dispute) too
This statement must be interpreted in the sense that
‘in the beginning, legal considerations are often not given adequate
and, at the end, they are given too much importance, thus sometimes
stopping the parties from settling the dispute amicably’.
Certainly, the wording used in a contract is usually the main obstacle
when attempting to reach an amicable solution if a hardship
Moreover, during the stipulation of the contract it is
often very difficult to draw up a hardship clause that will satisfy both parties
and therefore the result is usually the fruit of a compromise reached after
interminable negotiations, which in any case tends to
place the stronger party
in a more privileged position.
After having mentioned some of the many difficulties encountered by both
contracting parties and lawyers, the situation remains that
however much
attention may be given to writing up a contract or whatever clauses may be
inserted, ‘the absolutely perfect clause
suited to all circumstances and
acceptable to all parties from the views of their very differing interests does
not exist’.
Nevertheless, it can be said that a careful,
correct negotiation process can solve some difficulties, while others will
continue to arise in view of the uncertainty surrounding forecasts of
the future.
The approach of arbitrators in situations of
At this stage, a brief analysis should be made of the approach of arbitrators
when the parties have failed to include a hardship clause
in the contract or, if
included, it is too limited to be able to deal with the consequences of a
particular event. In these cases,
arbitrators tend to reject the plea for
adaptation of the contract, on the basis of presumed professional expertise. In
is held that failure to include a hardship clause indicates the
parties’ intention to accept the risks implicit in changing
circumstances.
Many cases have been judged in this manner.
In ICC Award No
1512, the arbitrator stated that as a general rule, one should be particularly
reluctant to grant relief in situations
of hardship, especially when the intent
of the parties has been clearly expressed. Moreover, ‘caution is
especially called
for in international transactions where it is generally much
less likely that the parties have been unaware of the risk of a remote
contingency or unable to formulate it precisely’.
recently, it was ruled in ICC Award No 8873,
that the obligation
to adapt the contract through the intervention of a third party applies only to
exceptional circumstances, and
cannot be enforced unless by inclusion in the
contract of a clause minutely detailing the circumstances that could justify a
situation and the entailing consequences.
The arbitral position is even stricter when the parties have included in the
contract a clause which turns out to be inadequate for
the supervening
circumstances. In these cases the general attitude of arbitrators is to
interpret the hardship clause very strictly.
Therefore, a clause mentioning
specific changes must be interpreted as meaning that no other changes should be
taken into account.
In the already mentioned Award No 2478,
involving a contract for supply of crude oil, the parties had inserted a
hardship clause on currency exchange rates. When an increase
in oil prices
occurred, the arbitrators stated that a price rise was not equivalent to a
change in the currency balance. Therefore,
there was no obligation to negotiate
because the circumstances that had occurred were not included in the hardship
clause. Similarly,
in ICC Award No 5953,
the parties had included
a clause which allowed the revision of the purchase price every six months.
Despite the existence of such
a clause the arbitrator excluded interim
adaptations because of changed circumstances.
At this point it seems that in a situation of changed circumstances
arbitrators tend only to consider what was expressly stated in
the contract,
assuming that the parties have implicitly accepted the risk of any supervening
event not expressly mentioned. One can
argue that this line of reasoning could
be in contrast with common practice. According to some experts,
the frequent use of hardship clauses in long-term contracts has created a
custom that leads to the belief that such a clause is implied
in the contract
even if not expressly mentioned by the parties. However, the lack of uniformity
in negotiating hardship clauses,
makes it difficult to accept this position.
There is such a variety of clauses which differ from each other, according to
the circumstances
involved, to the different sectors in which the parties
operate and to the type of contract concerned that it could be difficult
a customary principle on them.
In addition, even if the position of arbitrators does not seem to recognise
the principle of adaptation to changed circumstances,
it does not seem to be
totally against such a solution or in favour of too rigid an application of the
pacta sunt servanda
principle. In some cases interpretative tools such as
the non-aleatory character of long-term contracts, the need to preserve an
balance among the reciprocal performance requirements, equity and good
faith have acted in favour of adaptation of the contract.
Of course, it would be easier to obtain such a solution if the arbitrator was
vested with the power of
amiable compositeur
, who is entitled to avoid
the strict provisions of the contract and decide on the grounds of equity. Thus,
in this case, only an
arbitrator can grant relief or modify the terms of the
contract whenever he or she feels it fair to restore the balance between the
parties, having been altered by a change in circumstances. This is confirmed in
the case involving the
Société européenne d’études
et d’entreprises
and the former Yugoslav Government,
which the arbitrators, acting as
amiables compositeurs
, despite the lack
of explicit adaptation clauses, granted relief because of the depreciation of
the Yugoslav dinar. The arbitrators
held that the contract stipulated between
the parties was not at all aleatory because, at the moment the agreement was
reached, the
intention of the parties was clearly to stipulate economically
equivalent prestations. Thus, as a consequence of this statement,
it was held
…as regards an international contract concluded without speculative
intention, it ought
to be admitted, as it has been judged, that the
devaluation guarantee was meant by the
parties, save express Convention;
furthermore it would be contrary to good faith, that
the Government of a
State, who has ordered and received services would refuse to pay
value and should intend to derive a profit from the considerable
devaluation
of the payment currency.
However, similar
decisions can be found also in cases in which arbitrators did not act as
amiables compositeurs
. For example, in ICC Award No 2291,
it was held on the basis of the
lex mercatoria
that the reciprocal
performances are founded on a profit balance and that any subversion of this
balance should lead to revision of
the contract. Thus, ‘in most
international contracts, the price is established on the basis of the
circumstances existing when
the agreement was reached and it will be revised
according to the different events that occurred during the performance of the
Under certain conditions, the principle of good faith could be applied to
prevent a party from claiming performance as originally
agreed when such a claim
would be abusive in the light of the new circumstances that have occurred. This
was the solution of the
ICC in the Award No 3267, dedicated under the Swiss
Similarly, in ICC Award No 4761,
it was decided
that insistence on performance of the contractual obligations regardless of
changed circumstances is contrary to the
principle of good faith, if the
economic basis has substantially altered. In this case the arbitrators referred
to Article 657, comma
4 of the Libyan Civil Code (the law applicable to the case
in question) and ruled that the refusal by one of the parties to undertake
negotiations to revise the contract, despite having admitted that the price
needed to be changed, was contrary to the principle of
good faith.
This legal approach certainly requires further consideration, but seems up to
now to have been backed up only by sporadic, isolated
decisions. However, this
attitude demonstrates the arbitral tendency to evaluate each situation according
to the circumstances of
the case and also on the basis of the interpretative
tools outlined above. This is clearly confirmed in the ICC Award No 1512, in
which it was stated that international practitioners would apply the
of changed circumstances
as an excuse for non-performance ‘where
compelling reasons justify it, having regard not only to the fundamental
character of
the changes, but also to the particular type of the contract
involved, to the requirements of fairness and equity and to all circumstances
The CISG and the UNIDROIT Principles
Article 79 of the United Nations Conventions on
Contracts for the International Sales of Goods
The difficulty of evaluating hardship situations is confirmed by analysis of
Article 79 of the United Nations Convention on Contracts
for the International
Sales of Goods (CISG) which aims to establish uniform provisions, exclusively
addressing the issue of international
contracts for the sale of goods.
Since the CISG was intended to be a binding instrument, the negotiations
among the participating states were inevitably very arduous.
The need to find
common ground among the different legal traditions has resulted not only in
exclusion from the uniform provisions
of some aspects of the
but also in offering rules expressed in ambiguous terms,
reflecting the general desire to reach a compromise and to leave matters
less undecided.
Foremost among the latter is Article 79, which
deals with changed circumstances and is one of the most controversial points of
Convention, being the result of a very difficult and long negotiation.
According to the first sub-paragraph of this Article:
a party is not liable for a failure to perform any of his obligations if he
proves that the failure was due to an impediment beyond
his control and that he
could not reasonably be expected to have taken the impediment into account at
the time of the conclusion
of the contract or to have avoided or overcome it or
its consequences.
It seems clear that the intention when drawing
up the Convention was to avoid any mention of existing concepts in the various
legal systems, such as
force majeure
imprévision
Unmöglichkeit
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage
frustration or impracticability. The draftsmen’s purpose was to express a
single, independent rule that could be shared by
the various nations taking part
in the Convention. This explains the use of ‘elastic words’
, the latter term being the one
used in the heading of s IV that includes this article.
Although the Convention aims to provide uniform provisions regarding
international contracts for selling goods, it is apparent that
the attempt to
find a solution to the question of unpredicted changed circumstances was hedged
with difficulty. The difference among
the various legal systems on this issue
made negotiations extremely long and laborious. Unfortunately, the result was
so vague and ambiguous a ‘formula’ that ample space is
left for discussion and different interpretations.
Therefore, the
aim of the Convention, stated in Article 7(1) CISG to be that of promoting
uniform application at international level,
certainly cannot be said to have
been achieved.
One of the more controversial points is whether hardship should be included
among the causes of exemption referred to in Article 79
of the CISG. According
to prevalent opinion, it should not, since this provision was intended to cover
only situations in which performance
has became impossible or unreasonably
difficult. Indeed a careful analysis of the negotiations that culminated in
Article 79 of the
CISG shows that the participants intended to follow a rigorous
selection method and exclude any hypothesis of hardship.
From the beginning of the preliminary sessions, lively discussion had arisen
on the terminology to be used in Article 79 of the CISG
considered that the use of the generic term ‘circumstances’ might
make it easy for the party claiming hardship
to evade responsibility.
The discussion resulted, after various proposals had been presented by the
delegates of the participating nations, in the use of the
‘impediment’ and thus excluding any connection to changed
circumstances and hardship.
Furthermore, while the third sub-paragraph of this Article, dealing with
temporary impediment,
was being drawn up, a proposal was presented
by the delegation from Norway. They proposed to integrate the text with an
clause whereby the non-performing party would be exempted on a
permanent basis if, after resolution of the impediment, the circumstances
changed that insistence on performance would be manifestly unreasonable. Despite
support from other delegations, including
the English,
and Italian representatives, the proposal was rejected for fear, as expressed by
the French delegate, that the theory of
imprévision
frustration of purpose
might gain a footing in the Convention.
This demonstrates that the ultimate intention of those drawing up the
Convention was to regulate the question of the causes of exemption
precise fashion, deliberately restricting as far as possible the field of
application of Article 79 of the CISG.
Indeed, the aim was to
exclude the possibility of international practitioners to apply Article 7(2)
CISG, claiming that there were
in the uniform law and hence of
having recourse to the law applicable by virtue of the rules of private
international law. Such a
solution would be a severe threat to the uniformity of
the law, as the various nations adopt different stances on the question.
However, the Convention does not make it clear what is meant by ‘an
impediment beyond [the parties’] control’, thus
leading some authors
to interpret Article 79 of the CISG in a number of ways.
Indeed, Professor Schlechtriem considers that there must be a limit to the
sacrifice required, beyond which, performance of the contract
disadvantaged party could not be expected to be carried out, in view of the
substantial economic unbalance that has developed.
In extreme cases, in which an
unreasonable
increase in costs of performance has occurred, the
disadvantaged party should be entitled to ask to be released from the
obligations
incurred by the contract or to ask for its renegotiation to adapt to
the changed circumstances. This conclusion is based on the principle
faith, whose observance in international trade is stressed as being important in
Article 7(1) of the Convention.
Such an interpretation of Article 79 of the CISG seems to go beyond the
draftsmen’s intentions, considering that another question
concerning this
Convention is whether Article 7(1) CISG introduces a general principle of good
faith. It is quite clear that in interpreting
Article 79 of the CISG Professor
Schlechtriem is strongly influenced by the German concept of
Wegfall der
Geschafsgrundlage
and by the principle of
Treu und Glauben
, stated in
Article 242 of the BGB.
Professor Tallon considers the latter solution to be unacceptable, as the
principle of good faith cannot be used to interpret an express
decision of the
Convention. In his view, Article 79 of the CISG constituted an
‘intermediate solution’ that would engender
both correctness and
confidence in contractual relationships.
The attitude adopted by Professor Bonell is different to that of Professor
Tallon, as he considers a restricted interpretation of
Article 79 of the CISG to
be unjustified. The use of the term ‘impediment’, in his opinion,
does not imply that there
was any intention to limit the number of possible
causes of exemption merely to those where it is absolutely impossible to perform
the contract. The fact that the ‘impediment’ must be such that the
debtor ‘could not
be expected … to have avoided or
overcome it or its consequences’ shows that, at least in principle, the
possibility should
be entertained that performance has become so onerous that it
unreasonable
to enforce it.
The delicate issue of the ill-defined borders between objectively impossible
situations and hardship cases does not seem to have been
fully elucidated even
in recent case law, for example in a 1993 decision of the Tribunale di
The case concerned the sale of a certain quantity of
ferrochrome by an Italian company to a Swedish company. The selling company
pleaded termination of the contract for excessive supervening hardship, caused
by a marked increase in the price of ferrochrome
on the international market. As
an international contract for selling goods was involved, the court had first to
face the problem
of application of the Vienna Convention.
decision, which has been much criticised by the doctrine, was to exclude any
possible reference to the uniform law, but nevertheless
the court attempted to
establish what solution would have been adopted if the CISG had been applied. In
fact, the Tribunale di Monza
ruled that Article 79 of the CISG does not regulate
the question of hardship but only that of releasing parties from obligations
that have become impossible owing to an unforeseen change in circumstances. The
latter hypothesis is equivalent to
force majeure
, dealt with in Article
1463 of the Italian Codice Civile. The reasoning behind this decision has given
rise to considerable controversy,
showing once more how divided opinions are on
this issue.
Further lack of certainty and clarity is recognised when trying to identify
the effects of pleas for exemption, as set out in the
convention. No express
declaration has been made regarding what should happen to the contract after the
impediment has occurred.
However, the fifth sub-paragraph of Article 79 of the
CISG establishes that no provision in this Article prevents one or the other
party from adopting any other remedy apart from the payment of damages. This
means that in cases of nonperformance for causes that
are not attributable to
the debtor, the creditor would only lose the right to ask for damages, but would
be free to choose between
termination of the contract and the request for
pursuance of the agreement unchanged. It seems clear, however, that if it is
to carry out the obligation, this cannot be required of the debtor.
The problem arises instead in those cases where performance has not become
absolutely impossible but only beyond the bounds of reasonableness,
Article 79(1) of the CISG.
It seems absurd to expect the contract
to continue to be considered valid for an indefinite period. That is why some
authors have
suggested subordinating the problem to regulation by the national
law, to be applied according to the norms of international private
Finally, in cases of hardship, those who support the application of
Article 79 of the CISG consider there to be no doubt that the
effects can only
be those provided for. Hence, it would be impossible to request revision of the
contract to adapt it to the changed
circumstances except in the case of
inclusion of a hardship clause.
However, part of the literature
believes that an adaptation of the contract to changed circumstances may be
possible by applying
the principle of good faith stated in Article 7(1) of the
In conclusion, this section has attempted to show that Article 79 of the CISG
is not clear and leaves ample space for contrasting
interpretations, being the
result of a compromise among those nations taking part in the negotiations. This
cannot be considered
satisfactory, as it may allow international practitioners
to interpret the provision according to the direction of their own legal
thus going against the criterion of uniformity that was the underlying aim of
the Convention stated in Article 7(1) of the
It is easy to understand, however, why those who drew up the Convention
encountered such difficulty in dealing with so controversial
an issue as
unforeseen changes in circumstances, and the great effort made to impose some
uniformity and find an adequate solution
cannot but be appreciated. Perhaps the
binding nature of the Convention could not allow for any more definite wording
than the one
agreed upon at the time.
Definition and effects of hardship in the UNIDROIT
It is in this complex scenario that the Principles of International
Commercial Contracts were published by Unidroit (International
Institute for the
Unification of Private Law)
in 1994, with the aim of solving some
of the problems discussed above by means of an approach based also on the
American Restatement
but which was entirely new in the context of international
The Unidroit Principles seek to establish rules that are common to most of
the existing legal systems and also offer the best solutions
to the specific
needs of international trade. Thus, faced with particularly complex problems
reflecting irreconcilable differences,
instead of accepting compromises revealed
by omissions and ambiguous wording (like those in the Vienna Convention), the
better rules
was adopted, featuring innovative solutions
better suited to the requirements of the international market. This was possible
the Principles are not binding in nature; therefore they will be applied
in practice by reason of their persuasive value only.
Clearly, it is not yet possible to regard the Unidroit Principles
as the expression of modern
lex mercatoria
. Each single Article needs
to be analysed to verify its correspondence to general principles or usages of
trade, but despite the
fact that for the moment, some Articles express opinions
shared only by a minority, the solutions offered are considered better suited
specific trade needs than any previous agreements.
Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3, for example, were drafted so as to encourage
correct trade relationships, protecting the party from situation
of hardship.
The sixth chapter, which deals with the
performance
of the contract,
starts the section on hardship by stressing the principle whereby each party is
bound to perform its obligations
even if these have become excessively
However, although sacrosanct, this obligation is not
absolute. The principle cannot be applied in situations where circumstances
substantially altered the balance of the contractual agreement. This emphasises
the exceptional nature of hardship, defined
as a provision ‘to
correct’ the
pacta sunt servanda
According to Article 6.2.2, hardship must be invoked only ‘where the
occurrence of events fundamentally alters the equilibrium
A first possibility is a substantial increase in
the cost of performance for one of the parties.
hypothesis is that of a marked reduction in the value of the performance a party
receives, including such cases as when
circumstances have made this performance
unsuitable for the purpose for which it was intended.
Clearly, in both cases there is reference to a performance that is still
possible but whose economic advantage has suffered a reversal
substantial alteration in circumstances. However, the Article does not specify
the extent of the unbalance between the parties.
The experts are unanimous in
declaring that this refers to an extremely serious disparity between the
original and the new conditions,
described by legal scholars as a
‘fundamental’
or ‘really serious’
For hardship situation to be present, Article 6.2.2 of the Unidroit
Principles specifies further requirements:
(i) the event must be ‘beyond the control of the disadvantaged
(ii) it must occur or become known to the disadvantaged party after the
conclusion of he contract
and could not reasonably have been taken
into account at that time;
(iii)the event that has caused the contractual unbalance must not be among
the risks tacitly accepted by the disadvantaged party,
which include not only
those expressly accepted but all those inherent in the nature of the
All these conditions clearly demonstrate
the generic nature of the hardship notion.
No description is given
of the events that could give rise to an unbalance, nor precise definition of
what is meant by ‘fundamental’
alteration of the equilibrium. The
reason for this is that the drafters of the UNIDROIT Principles aimed to ratify
a basic principle
to serve as a reference in situations of severe economic
unbalance, without limiting the application context to a few specific cases.
Indeed, there is no reason why the Article should not provide the contracting
parties with support in drawing up their hardship clause,
by means of adaptation
of the provisions to the particular elements pertaining to their own
As to the effects of a hardship situation on the contract, Article 6.2.3 of
the UNIDROIT Principles provides a valuable contribution
to international
practitioners since it not only includes conditions with are normally inserted
in hardship clauses but it also considers
issues that frequently give rise to
problems in contractual practice.
The opening sub-paragraph of the Article first recognises that the
disadvantaged party is entitled to request renegotiation of the
Unlike hardship clauses, which often fail to specify
this issue, the Principles provide that such a request is made to the other
party ‘without undue delay’ and indicates ‘the grounds on
which it is made’.
However, if no agreement can be reached the disadvantaged party has no right
to suspend performance of the contract. This drastic
step can be taken only in
extraordinary circumstances, confirming the exceptional nature of hardship
situations and the intention
to prevent possible abuse of the right to apply for
renegotiation.
Indeed, the request for renegotiation by the disadvantaged party and the
conduct of both parties during the renegotiation process
are subject to the
principle of good faith and to the duty to co-operate, which are respectively
stated in Articles 1.7
of the UNIDROIT
Principles. This means, first, that the disadvantaged party is required to
evaluate honestly whether a hardship situation
has truly arisen and not to
invoke the clause purely for tactical reasons. Secondly, both parties are
obliged to assume a constructive
attitude during renegotiation, avoiding any
attempt to obstruct the process and reciprocally supplying one another with all
information
required to reach an equitable solution.
If the parties are unable to reach an agreement within a reasonable time, the
third sub-paragraph of Article 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT
Principles rules that
either party may resort to the court or to an arbitrator who, after verifying
the existence of a hardship situation,
will decide whether it is
to terminate the contract or to adapt it in order to restore the original
Some doubt arises as to what the criterion of
reasonableness
should characterise the third party’s decision, refers to. In other words,
should this decision be confined to the choice
between termination and
adaptation of the contract or could the third party even adopt some other
solution. The official comment
suggests that other choices could be made,
indicating as other alternatives the possibility of inviting the parties to
renew their
negotiations and try once more to come to an agreement, or else of
leaving the contract in its original terms. However, if the aim
finding a solution to a hardship situation, the latter solution is obviously
unsatisfactory. Indeed, if the original terms
of the contract are to be left
unaltered, the party not adversely affected by the changed circumstances would
be encouraged not to
reach an agreement during the renegotiation process; thus
the whole purpose of the Unidroit provisions would fail.
This purpose is also reinforced by Article 6.3 of the Principles of European
Contract Law that has marked affinities with Articles
6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the
UNIDROIT Principles.
However, unlike the Unidroit Principles, Article 6.3 attributes to the
contracting parties a true obligation to renegotiate and provides
for the Award
of damages if the other party refuses to renegotiate or does not conduct this
phase in all good faith. This provision
is of fundamental importance as it
provides a real incentive for the contracting parties to reach an amicable
agreement, which is
surely a preferable solution to any decision imposed by a
third party.
As in the Unidroit Principles, under Article 6.3, failure to reach an
agreement results,
extrema ratio
, in the intervention by a judge who must
decide whether to terminate the contract or modify it. In the latter case, the
these Principles argues that there is a limit to the judge’s
power of adaptation, whereby some clauses can be modified but
not to the extent
of rewriting the whole contract.
This means that the adaptation
must not consist of the imposition of a new contract but merely of some form of
restoration of the
original balance. If this is not possible, the only solution
is for the judge to terminate the contract.
Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles:
holy grail or wholly useless?
Although only a short time has elapsed since the UNIDROIT Principles were
published, many arbitral awards have already made express
reference to them.
Indeed, it is noteworthy that one of the first decisions in which reference to
the Principles was made concerns
hardship and the rules stated in Articles 6.2.2
6.2.3. This was a case decided by the arbitral court of Berlin in 1992 and it
concerned a contract for the supply of machinery to
a financial company based in
the German Democratic Republic from a company based in Eastern Europe.
With the unification of Germany and the consequent opening of markets to
the West, the machinery lost its value for the German importer,
who invoked
for a substantial change in circumstances in comparison with the
original contractual conditions. The arbitral court of Berlin decided
of the German importer and, to support its decision, expressly referred to
Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles.
According to the arbitral
court the principle whereby a substantial alteration in the contractual balance
can lead to termination
or adaptation of the contract is gaining progressively
greater acceptance in international commercial trade. A similar approach was
adopted in ICC Award No 8486, which concerned a contract for the sale of goods
by a Dutch company to a Turkish company.
In deciding whether the
buyer could be relieved from his obligation to pay the price on the grounds of
exchange rate fluctuations
in his country, the arbitral tribunal stressed the
exceptional nature of hardship which requires a
substantial
alteration in
the original contractual balance, not a mere increase in the cost of performance
as in the instant case. To support
the ruling the arbitral tribunal referred not
only to Article 6.258 of the new Dutch Civil Code (the law governing the
but also to Article 6.2.1 of the UNIDROIT Principles. This is even
more important when one considers that the new Dutch Civil Code
was inspired by
the Principles. In both the above cases, the arbitrators referred to the
UNIDROIT Principles to demonstrate that
the solution offered by the national law
governing the contract was in conformity with the international standard. Of
course, Articles
6.2.2 and 6.2.3 can also be applied if the parties have made
express reference to the UNIDROIT Principles as the law governing the
However, there have not yet been any awards in which this has been the case.
An important issue to be considered is the possibility of invoking Articles
6.2.2 and 6.2.3 as expressions of
lex mercatoria
. In this way, the
disadvantaged party could ask for renegotiation regardless of whether a suitable
hardship clause had been included
in the contract or whether the UNIDROIT
Principles have been chosen by the parties as the law governing the contract.
At present, this seems to be somewhat difficult to enforce. Indeed, as
mentioned above, the UNIDROIT Principles establish not only
rules that are
accepted in most legal systems but also
better rules
, more suited to the
needs of international trade.
Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles need be seen in this
light, as the draftsmen seem to have wished to improve current
introducing general rules which safeguard the disadvantaged party against
unforeseen circumstances and which could overthrow
the contractual balance, even
in the absence of a hardship clause. Clearly, as they are not binding, unless
there is express reference
to the Principles in the contract, Articles 6.2.2 and
6.2.3 can be applied only as general principles recognised in international
trade or as an expression of
lex mercatoria
Such a conclusion does not seem justified, or at any rate seems premature, in
the light of two recent arbitral awards.
The first was a contract
between a French company and a Spanish company to build a road in
When the political situation deteriorated in Algeria and
the French company suffered delay and considerable difficulty in performing
contract, the French company invoked Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 as general
principles applicable to international trade, since
no specific hardship clause
had been included in the contract. The arbitrator rejected this plea, arguing
that the obligation to
restore the contractual balance is an exceptional
principle, accepted in international practice only when the parties have
in the contract an express clause which establishes in detail what
situations constitute hardship. Hence the arbitrator excluded
the possibility of
taking into account Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles as an
expression of common practice in
international trade and considered them, on the
contrary, to be rules that do not at present correspond to international
and can therefore be applied only if there is express reference to this
effect in the contract in question.
The other recent award
provided confirmation of this view, as
the court stated that although the UNIDROIT Principles are a set of rules that
are theoretically
suited as a basis for future
lex mercatoria
not at present any possibility of referring to their provisions (and
specifically of Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3) as the equivalent
of current trade
usage in international practice.
Criticism of these Articles by legal experts has not been lacking. Although
Professor Bortolotti appreciates the valuable contribution
afforded by the
UNIDROIT Principles to the construction of a ‘transnational legal
system’, he fears that if the disadvantaged
party is allowed the right to
obtain adaptation of the contract, this may encourage all sorts of pretexts to
change the agreement
after it has been signed and therefore jeopardise the
parties’ faith in the contract. Indeed, Professor Bortolotti argues that
if the UNIDROIT Principles were to be adopted, Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 should
be expressly excluded in favour of a hardship clause,
which should detail as
precisely as possible the basis for recognition of such a condition and its
consequences.
The true problem, according to Professor Bortolotti,
is that these
better rules
introduced in the UNIDROIT Principles do not
correspond to the criteria of correct contractual practice that the business
world believes
should regulate international trade, as they leave too much space
for uncertainty and possible abuse. From this point of view, he
feels that it is
a pity that the draftsmen of the Principles did not resist the temptation to
introduce such
better rules
, instead of restating those which correspond
to the standards prevailing in international trade.
Conclusions
This paper has attempted to demonstrate that an unforeseen change in
circumstances is an inevitable risk in international trade, and
that there is a
need to restore the balance of the original contract and so ensure the
continuation of business relationships to
the mutual advantage of both parties.
In spite of this need, trade practice has shown how inadequate the tools
presently available to international practitioners are to
deal with such
circumstances. The use of a hardship clause is not entirely satisfactory, as it
requires the parties to provide ‘certain
and well-defined solutions for
uncertain and undefined situations’.
Indeed, it is certainly
not possible for the parties to foresee every single contingency that could
arise in the future and, in any
case, their desire to conclude the agreement and
the business
often causes them to underestimate the importance of
giving due care and attention to drafting a suitable clause in order to avoid
conflict when a situation of hardship arises.
Moreover, there is a general tendency on the part of judges and
arbitrators
to reject the plea for adaptation of the contract when
no hardship clause has been inserted or even when it has been inserted, but
not adequate to deal with the consequences of a given event. On the other hand,
on the basis of factors such as the non-aleatory
nature of long-term contracts,
equity and good faith, there have also been cases
decision has been in favour of an adaptation of the contract despite the absence
of a hardship clause. This orientation
shows that there is also an arbitral
tendency to judge each case on its own merits and identify the best solution
according to the
interpretative elements discussed above.
only sporadic decisions have upheld this approach, it does indicate the real
possibility that in practice there may be a
shift towards a more liberal
interpretation in the future.
In this scenario, Articles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the UNIDROIT principles may
constitute a useful tool and could contribute to provide
guidelines for
operators in the field of international trade. Indeed, although it is still
premature to consider Articles 6.2.2 and
6.2.3 of the Unidroit Principles as an
expression of
lex mercatoria
, it is not just to describe them as pure
utopia either, or as excessively innovative rules that might jeopardise the
safety of international
trade agreements.
There seems to be no reason why the UNIDROIT Principles should have been
limited to a mere statement of rules common to most existing
legal systems. The
fact that the solution adopted was that of offering a non-binding tool that
could be applied in practice only
if considered persuasive was presumably judged
to be the best way to try to bring the legal approach closer to the new needs of
international
In conclusion, the work undertaken by the draftsmen of the UNIDROIT
Principles in a field such as hardship where there is still strong
controversy
can be considered an important move forward from a rigid application of the
pacta sunt servanda
and a first success in an area where the CISG
Bibliography
DE Allan and ME Hiscock, Law of Contract in Australia (2nd edn, North Ryde:
G Alpa, ‘Prime note di raffronto tra i Principi dell’Unidroit e
il sistema contrattuale Italiano’ (1996) I
Contratto e Impresa/Europa
PS Atiyah, An Introduction to the Law of Contract (5th edn, London: Clarendon
Press, 1995)
KP Berger, ‘The relationship between the UNIDROIT Principles of
international commercial contracts and the new
lex mercatoria
Uniform Law Review
KP Berger, The Creeping Codification of the
Lex Mercatoria
Hague: Kluwer Law International, ,1999)
JP Bermingham, ‘Extending good faith: does the UCC impose a duty of
good faith negotiation under changed circumstances?’,
(1987), 61(2)
John’s Law Review
P Bernardini, ‘Hardship e force majeure’, in J Bonell and F
Bonelli (eds), Contratti Commerciali Internazionali e Principi
UNIDROIT, (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1997)
KH Bockstiegel, ‘Hardship, force majeure and special risks clauses in
international contracts’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation
and Renegotiation of
Contracts in International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic
Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer Law International,
MJ Bonell (ed), A New Approach to International Commercial Contract. The
Unidroit Principles of International Commercial Contracts
International Congress of Comparative Law, Bristol, 26 July – 1 August
1998 (The Hague: Kluwer Law International,
MJ Bonell, An International Restatement of Contract Law, (2nd edn,
Transnational Publications Inc, Irvington, New York, 1997)
MJ Bonell, ‘I Principi Unidroit dei contratti internazionali: un
approccio nuovo alla disciplina dei contratti internazionali’,
Bonell and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti Commerciali Internazionali e Principi
Unidroit (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997)
MJ Bonell, ‘I Principi Unidroit dei contratti commerciali
internazionali: origini, natura e finalità’ (1995),
Diritto del
Commercio Internazionale
MJ Bonell, Un Codice Internazionale del Diritto dei Contratti, (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1995)
MJ Bonell, ‘La prima decisione Italiana in tema di Convenzione di
Vienna sulla vendita internazionale’, (1994),
Giurisprudenza Italiana
MJ Bonell, ‘Force majeure e hardship nel diritto uniforme della vendita
internazionale, (1990),
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
F Bonelli, ‘Risoluzione per eccessiva onerosità
sopravvenuta’ (1988)
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
F Bortolotti, ‘The UNIDROIT Principles and the arbitral
tribunals’ (2000) 1
Uniform Law Review
F Bortolotti, Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali – Manuale di Diritto
Commerciale Internazionale (Padua: Cedam, 1997)
F Bortolotti, ‘La nuova
lex mercatoria
: costruzione dottrinaria
o strumento operativo?’, (1996),
Contratto e Impresa
RM Buxbaum, ‘Modification and adaptation of contracts: American legal
development’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and Renegotiation
of Contracts in
International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic Law 3
(Antwerp: Kluwer Law International, 1985)
L Cabella Pisu, ‘L’impossibilità sopravvenuta come limite
della responsabilità contrattuale nel diritto Nord-Americano’,
(1990), II,
Contratto e Impresa
JD Calamari and JM Perillo, The Law of Contracts (4th edn, St Paul Minn,
A Carlsen, Can the Hardship Provisions in the Unidroit Principles be Applied
when the cisg is the Governing Law? (1998) Pace Law Institute
of International
Law http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/carlsen.html
F Criscuolo, Equità e buona fede come fonti di integrazione del
contratto: potere di adeguamento delle prestastioni contrattuali
dell’arbitro (o del giudice) di equità’ (1999) 1
PJM Declercq, ‘Modern analysis of the legal effect of force majeure
clauses in situations of commercial impracticability’,
Journal of Law and Commerce
W Den Haerynck, ‘Drafting hardship clauses in international
contracts’, in Campbell (ed), Structuring International Contracts
Hague: Kluwer Law International,1996)
S Di Paola, ‘Tribunale di Monza, 14 January 1993’ (1994) I,
Foro Italiano
U Draetta, Il Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali – La Patologia dei
Contratti (Padua: Cedam, 1988)
EA Farnsworth and W Young, Cases and Materials on Contracts (5th edn, New
York: The Foundation Press Inc, 1995)
EA Farnsworth, Contracts (2nd edn, Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1990)
F Ferrari, ‘I principi per i contratti commerciali internazionali
dell’UNIDROIT ed il loro ambito di applicazione’
Contratto e Impresa
M Fontaine, ‘Les dispositions relatives au hardship et à la force
majeure’, in MJ Bonell and F Bonelli, Contratti
Commerciali Internazionali
e Principi UNIDROIT (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997)
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm
A Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta and C
Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie
dei Contratti
e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992)
A Frignani, ‘Hardship clause’ (1991) IV, ses civ,
A Frignani, ‘La hardship clause nei contratti internazionali e le
tecniche di allocazione dei rischi negli ordinamenti di civil
law e di common
law’ (1979)
Rivista di Diritto Civile
E Gabrielli, ‘La risoluzione del contratto per eccessiva
onerosità’ (1995)
Contratto e Impresa
P Gallo, ‘Eccessiva onerosità sopravvenuta e problemi di gestione
del contratto in diritto comparato’ (1991) VII,
P Gallo, Sopravvenienza Contrattuale e Problemi di Gestione del Contratto
(Milan: Giuffrè, 1992)
F Gassoni, Manuale di Diritto Privato (7th edn, Naples: Edizioni Scientifiche
Italiane, 1998)
A Giampieri, ‘Rischio contrattuale in common law’ (1996) II,
Contratto e Impresa
P Gillies and G Moens, International Trade and Business: Law, Policy and
Ethics (Sydney: Cavendish Publishing Australia Pty Ltd, 1998)
Curran V Grosswald, ‘The interpretative challenge to uniformity’
Journal of Law and Commerce
JO Honnold, Uniform Law for International Sales Under the 1980 United Nations
Convention (3rd edn, The Hague: Kluwer Law International,
N Horn, ‘The concept of adaptation and renegotiation in the law of
transnational commercial contracts’, in N Horn (ed),
Adaptation and
Renegotiation of Contracts in International Trade and Finance: Studies in
Transnational Economic Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer
Law International, 1985)
N Horn, ‘Standard clauses on contracts adaptation in international
commerce’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and Renegotiation
of Contracts in
International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic Law 3
(Antwerp: Kluwer Law International, 1985)
N Horn, ‘Procedures of contract adaptation and renegotiation in
international commerce’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and
Renegotiation of
Contracts in International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic
Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer Law International,
International Chamber of Commerce, Adaptation of Contracts, (Doc No 326,
1978). [Cited as ICC Doc 326]
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), Force Majeure and Hardship, Doc No
421, 1985. [Cited as ICC Doc 421]
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), Force Majeure Clause 2003 –
Hardship Clause 2003, doc No 650, 2003
O Lando and H Beale (eds), Principles of European Contracts Law – Part
I and II, (The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2000)
F Macario, Adeguamento e rinegoziazione nei contratti a lungo termine
(Naples: Jovene Editore, 1996)
F Macario, ‘Eccessiva onerosità, riconduzione ad equità e
potere del giudice’ (1990) I,
Foro Italiano
IR Macneil, ‘Contracts: adjustment of long-term economic relations
under classical, neoclassical and relational contract law’,
Northwestern University Law Review
D Maskow, ‘Hardship and force majeure’ (1992) 40
The American
Journal of Comparative Law
B Nicholas, ‘Impracticability and impossibility in the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
Goods’, in NM
Galston and Smit (eds), International Sales: the United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods (New York: Matthew Bender, 1984)
B Oppetit, ‘L’adaptation des contrats internationaux aux
changements de circonstance: la clause de hardship’, (1974)
de Droit International
R Pardolesi, ‘Aluminum Co of America v Essex Group Inc’, (1981),
Foro Italiano
R Pardolesi, ‘Florida Power & Light Co v Westinghouse Elec’,
Foro Italiano
JM Perillo, ‘Hardship and its Impact on Contractual Obligations: a
Comparative Analysis’ (1996) Saggi, Conferenze e Seminari
di Studi e Ricerche di Diritto Comparato e Straniero, Roma
DM Philippe, Changement de Circonstances et Bouleversement de
l’Economie Contractuelle (Bruxelles: Établissements Emile
PA Piliounis, The Remedies of Specific Performance, Price Reduction and
Additional Time (Nachfrist) under the CISG: Are these worthwhile
additions to English Sales Law?(1998) Pace Law School Institute of International
Commercial Law http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/piliounis.html
AH Puelinckx, ‘Frustration, hardship, force majeure, imprévision,
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage, Unmöglichkeit,
circumstances’ (1986) 3(2)
Journal of International Arbitration
J Rimke, Force Majeure and Hardship: Application in international trade
practice – with specific regard to the cisg and the
Unidroit Principles of
International Commercial Contracts? (1998) Pace Law School Institute of
International Commercial Law http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/rimke.html
V Roppo, ‘Impossibilità sopravvenuta, eccessiva onerosità
della prestastione e ‘frustration of contract’
Trimestrale di Diritto Processuale e Civile
C Rossello, ‘Sopravveniense impreviste ed adattamento del contratto nel
diritto inglese e statunitense’ (1988),
Diritto del Commercio
Internazionale
R Sacco and G De Nova, Il Contratto (2nd edn, Turin: Utet, 1993) IM Sattar,
‘The UNIDROIT Principles of international commercial
contracts and the
Vienna Sales Convention: competing or completing
lex mercatoria
International Trade and Business Law Annual
P Schlechtriem, (ed) Commentary on the UN Convention on the International
Sales of Goods (cisg) (G Thomas (trans)) (London: Oxford
University Press, 1998)
P Schlechtriem, Good Faith in German Law and in International Uniform Laws,
http://soi.cnr.it/~crdcs/frames24.html
AQ website doesn’t work - please
CM Schmitthoff, ‘Hardship and intervener clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
CM Schmitthoff, The Export Trade – The Law and Practice of
International Trade (4th edn, London: Stevens & Son Limited,
JG Starke, NC Seddon and MP Ellinghaus, Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of
Contract (6th edn, Sydney: Butterworths, 1992)
D Tallon, CM Bianca, MJ Bonell
, Commentary on the International
Sales Law – The 1980 Vienna Sales Convention (Milan: Giuffrè, 1987)
P van Ommeslaghe, Les clauses de force majeure et d’imprévision
dans les contrats internationaux’ (1980)
Rev Droit Intern Droit Comp
H van Houtte, ‘The UNIDROIT Principles of international commercials
contracts’ (1996)
International Trade and Business Law Annual
H van Houtte ‘Changed circumstances and “pacta sunt
servanda” in Institute of International Business Law and Practice,
Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration (Paris:
International Chamber of Commerce, 1993)
Table of Cases
Aluminium Company of America v Essex Group Inc
499 F Supp 53
1980) Arbitral Award 2 July 1956 Clunet 1959,1074 Arbitral Award 15 March 1963
ILR 1967, 136 Arbitral Award No 2478 of 1975
in Clunet 1975, 925 Arbitral Award
12 April 1977
Yearbook Commercial Arbitration
, 1981, 89 Arbitral Award No
8486 of 1996,
Yearbook Commercial Arbitration
, 1999, 162
Movietonews Ltd v London and District Cinemas Ltd
[1952] AC 166
Cass 29 June
1981 n 4249
, 1981, I, 2133 Cass 18 July 1989 n 3347 in
, 1990, I, 565 Cass 11 January 1992 n 247, in
, 1993, I, 1,
2018 Cass 20 April 1994 n 3775, in
, 1995, 1, 1296
[1904] 1 KB 493
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South Wales
(1982) 149 CLR 33
Court of Arbitration of Berlin Award of 1992, cited by D
Maskow, ‘Hardship and force majeure’, (1992), 40,
The American
Journal of Comparative Law
Davis Contractors Ltd v Fareham Urban District Council
[1956] UKHL 3
[1956] AC 696
Eastern Air Lines v McDonnell Douglas Corp
[1976] USCA5 643
532 F 2d 957
(5th Cir, 1976)
Eastern Air Lines v Gulf Oil Corp
415 F Supp 429
(SD Fla 1979)
Spolka Akcyjna v Fairbairn Lawson Combe Barbour Ltd
[1942] UKHL 4
[1943] AC 32
Power & Light Co v Westinghouse Elec
485 US 1021
[1761] EngR 56
; (1761) 2 Burr 1199;
ICC Award No 1512 of 1971
, 1974, at 905 ICC Award No 1990 of 1972
ICC Award No 2291 of 1975
1976, 989 ICC Award No 4761 of 1987
Jarvin/Derains
Collection of the ICC Awards
519 ICC Award No 5953 of 1989
1990, 1056 ICC Award No 8873 of
Bulletin de la Cour Internationale d’Arbitrage de la
10(2), 1999, 81
ICC Award No 9029 of 1998
Bulletin de la Cour Internationale
d’Arbitrage de la
10(2), 1999, 91
Iowa Electric Light & Power Co v Atlas Corp
Krell v Henry
[1903] 2 KB 740
LC Williams Oil Co Inc v Exxon Corporation
625 F Supp 477
Maritime National Fish Ltd v Ocean Trawlers Ltd
[1935] UKPC 1
[1935] AC 524
Mineral Park Land Company v PA Howard
172 Cal 289
Missouri Public Service Company v Peabody Coal Company
, 583 SW 2d 721
Northern Illinois Gas Co v Energy Cooperative Inc
, 38 UCC Rep Serv
1222 (Ill App Ct 1984)
Paradine v Jane
(1647) Aleyn 26;
Pelly the Younger v Governor and Company of the Royal Exchange Assurance
(in 97 English Reports 342)
Publiker Industries Inc v Union Carbide Corp
17 UCC Rep 989 (Dist Ct
ED Pa 1975)
Société Romay AG v SARL Behr France
, Cour d’appel de
Colmar of 12 June 2001,
http://cisg3.law.pace.edu/cases/010612f1.html
Société Franco Tunisienne D’Armement v Sidermar SpA
[1961] 2 QB 278
Taylor v Caldwell
[1863] EngR 526
; 3 B & S 826;
Transatlantic Financing Corporation v United States of America
[1966] USCADC 243
Tribunale di Monza, 14 January 1993 in
, 1994, 1, 916
US v Wegematic Corporation
[1966] USCA2 283
360 F 2d 674
(2nd Cir, 1966)
Law degree (summa cum laude), University of Bari, Italy (2001); LLM
University of Quensland, TC Beirne School of Law, Australia
(2003). Currently
Elena Christine Zaccaria is a PhD candidate in Comparative and European Union
Law at the University of Macerata,
A Frignani, ‘La hardship clause nei contratti internazionali e le
tecniche di allocazione dei rischi negli ordinamenti di
civil law e di common
law’ (1979)
Rivista di Diritto Civile
681; see also A Frignani,
‘hardship clause’ (1991) IV, sez civ,
Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta and C Vaccà
(eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato.
Patologie dei Contratti e Rimedi
(Milan: Egea, 1992) 325; G Alpa, ‘Prime note di raffronto tra i Principi
dell’Unidroit
e il sistema contrattuale Italiano’ (1996) I
Contratto e Impresa/Europa
A Giampieri, ‘Rischio contrattuale in common law’ (1996) II,
Contratto e Impresa
591. A certain margin of risk to be set against the
advantages that the parties aim to gain is inevitable but this belongs to the
‘normal’ area of uncertainty implicit in any form of agreement.
N Horn, ‘The concept of adaptation and renegotiation in the law of
transnational commercial contracts’, in N Horn (ed),
Adaptation and
Renegotiation of Contracts in International Trade and Finance: Studies in
Transnational Economic Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer
Law International, 1985) 6; D
Maskow, ‘hardship and force majeure’ (1992) 40
The American
Journal of Comparative Law
658, 657–69; H van Houtte. ‘Changed
circumstances and “pacta sunt servanda”’, in Institute of
International
Business Law and Practice, Transnational Rules in International
Commercial Arbitration (Paris: International Chamber of Commerce,
The pacta sunt servanda
principle has also been included in the
‘general provisions’ of the UNIDROIT Principles of International
Commercial Contracts.
Indeed Article 1.3 states ‘A contract validly
entered into is binding upon the parties. It can only be modified or terminated
in accordance with its terms or by agreement or as otherwise provided in these
Principles’.
Arbitrators have frequently confirmed the ‘sanctity’ of the
contract. See
Sapphire v National Iranian Oil Company
Arbitral Award, 15
March 1963,
1967, 136, 181. Where for example, it was expressly
stated ‘It is a fundamental principle of law, which is constantly being
proclaimed by international courts, that contractual undertakings must be
respected The rule
pacta sunt servanda
is the basis of every contractual
relationship.’ See also
Liamco v Libya
Arbitral Award, 12 April
1977, Yearbook Commercial Arbitration, 1981, 89 at 101 where arbitrators held:
‘The principle of the
sanctity of contracts … has always constituted
an integral part of most legal systems. These include those systems that are
based on Roman law, the Napoleonic Code and other European Civil Codes, as well
as Anglo-Saxon common law and Islamic jurisprudence.’
For example, the worrying effects of the uncontrolled rise in crude oil
prices that periodically unbalances the world economy.
A Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta and C
Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie
dei Contratti
e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992) 329.
IR Macneil, ‘Contracts: adjustment of long-term economic relations
under classical, neoclassical and relational contract law’,
Northwestern University Law Review
A Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta and C
Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie
dei Contratti
e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992) 327.
R Sacco and G De Nova, Il Contratto (2nd edn, Turin: Utet, 1993) 686.
According to Professor
Sacco ‘termination kills the contract, instead
renegotiations should be able to cure it’.
F Bortolotti, Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali: Manuale di Diritto
Commerciale Internazionale (Padua: Cedam, 1997) 3.
MJ Bonell, ‘I Principi UNIDROIT dei contratti commerciali
internazionali: origini, natura e finalità’ (1995),
Diritto del
Commercio Internazionale
JM Perillo, ‘hardship and its impact on contractual obligations: a
comparative analysis’ (1996) Saggi, Conferenze e
Seminari – Centro
di Studi e Ricerche di Diritto Comparato e Straniero, Roma 9.
See paragraph 313 of Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB) and Article 1467
Codice Civile. Among the civil law countries also Algeria,
Argentina, Brazil,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Greece, Hungary, Mexico, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland and the
Netherlands provide for situations
of hardship. However, French contract law and
Belgian law only provide relief for situations in which the performance of the
has become impossible (
force majeure
AH Puelinckx, ‘Frustration, hardship, force majeure,
imprévision, Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage, Unmöglichkeit,
changed circumstances’ (1986) 3 (2)
International Arbitration
, 47–66, 47.
Paradine v Jane
(1647) Aleyn 26;
Taylor v Caldwell
[1863] EngR 526
; 3 B & S 826;
122 ER 309.
. The court, changing its traditional opinion, stated:
‘[T]he principle seems … to be that, incontracts in which the
performance
depends on the continued existence of a given person or thing, a
condition is implied that the impossibility of performance arising
perishing of the person or thing shall excuse the performance.’ For an
analysis, see AH, Puelinckx, ‘Frustration,
hardship, force majeure,
imprévision, Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage, Unmöglichkeit,
changed circumstances’
(1986) 3 (2)
Journal of International
Arbitration
, 47–66, 48; PS Atiyah, An Introduction to the Law of
Contract (5th edn, London: Clarendon Press, 1995) 231; DM Philippe, Changement
de Circonstances et Bouleversement de l’EconomieContractuelle (Bruxelles:
Établissements Emile Bruylant, 1986) 338; V
‘Impossibilità sopravvenuta, eccessiva onerosità della
prestazione e “frustration of contract”’
Trimestrale di Diritto Processuale e Civile
1255; P Gallo, ‘Eccessiva
onerosità sopravvenuta e problemi di gestione del contratto in diritto
comparato’ (1991)
VII, sez civ,
A Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’ in U Draetta and C
Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie
dei Contratti
e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992) 334; JM Perillo, ‘Hardship and its impact on
contractual obligations: a comparative
analysis’ (1996) Saggi, Conferenze
e Seminari – Centro di Studi e Ricerche di Diritto Comparato e Straniero,
Krell v Henry
[1903] 2 KB 740.
PS Atiyah, An Introduction to the Law of Contract (5th edn, London:
Clarendon Press, 1995)
Davis Contractors Ltd v Fareham Urban District Council
[1956] UKHL 3
Davis Contractors Ltd v Fareham Urban District Council
A Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta and C
Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento,
Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie dei Contratti e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992)
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of New South Wales
(1982) 149 CLR 337.
JG Starke, NC Seddon and MP Ellinghaus, Cheshire and Fifoot’s Law of
Contract (6th edn,
Sydney: Butterworths, 1992) 760-768; DE Allan and ME Hiscock, Law of Contract
in Australia (2nd edn, North Ryde: CCH, 1992) 529–30.
British Movietonews Ltd v London and District Cinemas Ltd
CM Schmitthoff, The Export Trade – The Law and Practice of
International Trade (4th edn, London: Stevens & Son Limited,
1962) 100; P
Gallo, ‘Eccessiva onerosità sopravvenuta e problemi di gestione del
contratto in diritto comparato’
(1991) VII, sez civ,
257; C Rossello, ‘sopravvenienze impreviste ed adattamento del contratto
nel diritto inglese e statunitense’ (1988),
Diritto del Commercio
Internazionale
V Roppo, ‘Impossibilità Sopravvenuta, Eccessiva Onerosità
Della Prestazione e “Frustration of Contract”’
Rivista Trimestrale di Diritto Processuale e Civile
Société Franco Tunisienne d’Armement v Sidermar SpA
[1961] 2 QB 278.
The consequences of frustration have been emphasised by Lord Simon LC in
Maritime National Fish Ltd. v Ocean Trawlers Ltd
[1935] UKPC 1
[1935] AC 524:
‘When frustration in the legal sense occurs … it kills the contract
itself and discharges both parties automatically.’
Thus, the contract is
avoided as from the date when the frustration occurs: ‘the liability of
those parties in respect of the
future performance of the contract is
discharged, and all that remains to be done is to provide for an adjustment of
their mutual
rights and liabilities which arose under the contract prior to the
time of discharge’. See CM Schmitthoff, The Export Trade
and Practice of International Trade (4th edn, London: Stevens & Son Limited,
1962) 105. In its original form,
this rule had penalising economic consequences
in some cases: see
Chandler v Webster
[1904] 1 KB 493.
For an analysis,
see AH Puelinckx, ‘Frustration, hardship, force majeure, imprévision,
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage,
Unmöglichkeit, changed
circumstances’ (1986) 3(2)
Journal of International Arbitration
47–66, 51; JD Calamari and JM Perillo,
The Law of Contracts
edn, St Paul Minn, 1998), 535; DM Philippe,
Changement de Circonstances et
Bouleversement de l’Economie Contractuelle
(Bruxelles:
Établissements Emile Bruylant,, 1986) 389. This rigid interpretation was
revised in the case of
Fibrosa Spolka Akcyjna v Fairbain Lawson Combe Barbour
[1942] UKHL 4
[1943] AC 32
and later by the Law Reform (Frustrated Contracts) Act
1943. For an analysis, see AH Puelinckx, ‘Frustration, hardship, force
majeure, imprévision, Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage,
Unmöglichkeit, changed circumstances’ (1986) 3(2)
International Arbitration
, 47–66, 51–52; DM Philippe,
Changement de Circonstances et Bouleversement de l’Economie
Contractuelle
(Bruxelles: Établissements Emile Bruylant, 1986) 389; CM
Schmitthoff, The Export Trade – The Law and Practice of International
Trade (4th edn, London: Stevens & Son Limited, 1962) 105–06; L Cabella
Pisu, ‘L’impossibilità sopravvenuta
come limite della
responsabilità contrattuale nel diritto Nord-Americano’, (1990), II,
Contratto e Impresa
CM Schmitthoff, ‘Hardship and intervener clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
82–91, 82: ‘The English courts have
no power to adapt a long-term contract to an uncontemplated fundamental change,
if the parties so desire.’ See also P van Ommeslaghe, ‘Les
clauses de force majeure et d’imprévision dans
les contrats
internationaux’ (1980)
Rev Droit Intern Droit Comp
Den Haerynck, ‘Drafting hardship clauses in international
contracts’, in Campbell (ed), Structuring International
Contracts (The
Hague: Kluwer Law International, 1996) 233; Puelinckx, ‘Frustration,
hardship, force majeure, imprévision,
Wegfall der Geschäftsgrundlage,
Unmöglichkeit, changed circumstances’ (1986) 3(2)
International Arbitration
, 47–66, 51.
British Movietonews Ltd v London and District Cinemas Ltd
C M Schmitthoff, ‘Hardship and intervener clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
P Gallo, ‘Eccessiva Onerosità Sopravvenuta e Problemi di
Gestione del Contratto in DirittoComparato’ (1991) VII,
, 258 cites Treitel.
PS Atiyah, An Introduction to the Law of Contract (5th edn, London:
Clarendon Press, 1995) 244.
Mineral Park Land Company v PA Howard
172 Cal 289
(1916). For an
analysis of this case, see Curran V Grosswald, ‘The interpretative
challenge to uniformity’ (1995) 15
Journal of Law and Commerce
Mineral Park Land Company v PA
172 Cal 289
Restatement (First) of Contracts s 454 (1932).
Although s 2–615 refers to the seller, it applies also to the buyer.
EA Farnsworth,
(2nd edn, Boston: Little, Brown and
Company, 1990) 707; JD Calamari and JM Perillo
The Law of Contracts
edn, St Paul Minn, 1998) 511; Curran V Grosswald, ‘The interpretative
challenge to uniformity’ (1995) 15
Journal of Law and Commerce
RM Buxbaum, ‘Modification and adaptation of contracts: American legal
development’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and
Renegotiation of Contracts in
International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic Law 3
(Antwerp: Kluwer Law International,
EA Farnsworth, Contracts (2nd edn, Boston: Little, Brown and Company,
1990) 716–17; F Macario, Adeguamento e rinegoziazione
nei contratti a
lungo termine (Naples: Jovene Editore, 1996) 248; JD Calamari and JM Perillo,
The Law of Contracts (4th edn, St Paul
Minn, 1998) 526.
JM Perillo, ‘Hardship and its impact on contractual obligations: a
comparative analysis’ (1996) Saggi, Conferenze e
Seminari – Centro
di Studi e Ricerche di Diritto Comparato e Straniero,
Eastern Air Lines v McDonnell Douglas Corp
[1976] USCA5 643
532 F 2d 957
Cir, 1976) in which the court stated: ‘because the purpose of a contract
is to place the reasonable risk of performance
on the promisor, he is presumed,
in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have agreed to bear any loss
occasioned by any event
which was foreseeable at the time of contracting.’
See eg Publiker Industries Inc v Union Carbide Corp. 17 UCC Rep 989 (Dist
Ct ED Pa 1975).
Transatlantic Financing Corporation v United States of America
[1966] USCADC 243
(DDC 1966).
UCC s 2 – 615, Comment 4.
See eg US v Wegematic Corporation
[1966] USCA2 283
360 F 2d 674
(2nd Cir, 1966); Eastern
Air Lines v Gulf Oil Corp415 F Supp 429 (SD Fla 1979); Missouri Public Service
Company v Peabody Coal Company
583 SW 2d 721 (Mo Ct App 1979); Northern Illinois
Gas Co v Energy Co-operative Inc 38 UCC Rep Serv 1222 (Ill App Ct 1984).
JM Perillo, ‘Hardship and its impact on contractual obligations: a
comparative analysis’ (1996) Saggi, Conferenze e
Seminari – Centro
di Studi e Ricerche di Diritto Comparato e Straniero, Roma 12.
UCC s 2 – 615, Comment 6.
Iowa Electric Light & Power Co v Atlas Corp
The crude oil embargo by the Arab countries and OPEC cartel; new,
unforeseen federal regulations to control and protect the environment;
shortage of uranium.
Florida Power & Light Co v Westinghouse Electric Corp
(1988). For an analysis, see R Pardolesi, ‘Aluminium Co of America v
Essex Group Inc’, (1981),
Foro italiano
Aluminium Company of America
(ALCOA) v Essex Group Inc
(WD Pa 1980). For an analysis, see R Pardolesi, ‘Aluminium Co of
America v Essex Group Inc’, (1981),
Foro italiano
Adeguamento e rinegoziazione nei contratti a lungo termine
(Naples: Jovene Editore, 1996) 252.
Aluminium Company of America (ALCOA) v Essex Group Inc
(WD Pa 1980), 92.
Adeguamento e rinegoziazione nei contratti a lungo termine
(Naples: Jovene Editore, 1996) 252 (footnote 37) cites Dawson.
Adeguamento e rinegoziazione nei contratti a lungo termine
(Naples Jovene Editore, 1996) 252 (footnote 37) cites Sirianni.
JP Bermingham, ‘Extending good faith: does the UCC impose a duty of
good faith negotiation under changed circumstances?’,
(1987), 61(2)
John’s Law Review
LC Williams Oil Co Inc v Exxon Corporation
625 F Supp 477
, 481. For a brief analysis, see EA Farnsworth and W Young,
Case and Materials on Contracts (5th edn, New York: The Foundation Press
Article 1467(1) Italian Civil Code.
Article 1467(2) Italian Civil Code.
Article 1467(3) Italian Civil Code.
See eg the systems of Greece, Egypt, Hungary, Ethiopia, Portugal and
E Gabrielli, ‘La risoluzione del contratto per eccessiva
onerosità’ (1995)
Contratto e Impresa
R Sacco and G De Nova, Il Contratto (2nd edn, Turin: Utet, 1993) 679.
F Bonelli, ‘Risoluzione per eccessiva onerosità
sopravvenuta’ (1988)
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
This means that premature termination of the contract depends both on the
choice of the disadvantaged party and on the judge’s
Article 1467(3) Italian Civil Code.
F Macario, Adeguamento e rinegoziazione nei contratti a lungo termine
(Naples: Jovene Editore, 1996) 267; F Gazzoni, Manuale di
Diritto Privato (7th
edn, Naples: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane, 1998) 964; R Sacco and G De Nova,
Il Contratto (2nd edn, Turin:
Utet, 1993) 684; P Gallo, ‘Eccessiva
onerosità sopravvenuta e problemi di gestione del contratto in diritto
(1991) VII, sez civ,
Cass 11 January 1992 n 247,
Giurisprudenza italiana
, 1993, I, 1,
Cass 29 June 1981 n 4249
Foro italiano
, 1981, I, 2133.
Cass 18 July 1989 n 3347
Foro italiano
, 1990, I, 565.
See F Macario, ‘Eccessiva onerosità, riconduzione ad
equità e potere del giudice’ (1990) I,
Foro Italiano
Macario, Adeguamento e rinegoziazione nei contratti a lungo termine (Naples:
Jovene Editore, 1996) 284.
R Sacco and G De Nova, Il Contratto (2nd edn, Turin: Utet, 1993)
685–86; P Gallo, ‘Eccessiva onerosità sopravvenuta
di gestione del contratto in diritto comparato’ (1991) VII, sez civ,
244; Criscuolo, 71–79.
According to Article 1366 of the Italian Civil Code ‘the contract
shall be interpreted according to good faith’. Furthermore,
Article 1375
states: ‘ the contract shall be performed according to good faith.’
A Frignani, ‘Le clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta and C
Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie
dei Contratti
e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992) 338–40; Draetta, 91–92, DM Philippe,
Changement de Circonstances et Bouleversement
de l’EconomieContractuelle
(Bruxelles: Établissements Emile Bruylant, 1986), 215–331; P Gallo,
Sopravvenienza Contrattuale
e Problemi di Gestione del Contratto (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1992) 93–103.
Paragraph s 242 Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB).
Paragragh 313 Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB).
A distinction must be drawn between the
clause and that of
force majeure
, when an unexpected, irrevocable event beyond the control
of the disadvantaged party makes performance of the contract absolutely
impossible. Instead, a hardship situation arises when a sudden change of
circumstances irreversibly alters the economic balance of
the contract and thus
makes the performance by one of the parties excessively onerous or
non-economically viable, even if it is still
objectively possible. In principle,
this distinction seems clear enough but in practice the two concepts tend to
overlap. In fact,
it is common practice in international trade agreements to
give a much wider reading to the notion of
force majeure
classically have been adopted. In many cases, such clauses include not only
events that would make performance of the contract
impossible but also
circumstances that would hinder its normal execution and thus make it
‘practically impossible’, in
other words not objectively but
subjectively, economically impossible or ‘exorbitant’ from an
industrial or commercial
standpoint, U Draetta, Il Diritto dei Contratti
Internazionali – La Patologia dei Contratti (Padua: Cedam, 1988) 43 and
fn 14. Clearly, from this viewpoint, the
force majeure
becomes very difficult to distinguish from the hardship clause. Confirming the
comparable nature of the practical application
of the two concepts, it is a fact
that in the latter hypothesis,
force majeure
acts not only as a factor
that exempts the disadvantaged party from performance of the contract (a typical
effect of this clause)
but even as a factor that determines an adaptation of the
contract. This progressive convergence applies both to the nature of the
and their effects on the international contract, and thus makes any true
demarcation between the two types of clauses extremely
fine. For this reason,
some experts regard it as preferable, for the sake of greater simplicity and
efficacy, to include only a single
clause in the contract that aims to deal with
any problems concerning fundamental changes in circumstances. For an analysis of
distinction, see eg U Draetta, Il Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali
– La Patologia dei Contratti (Padua: Cedam, 1988) 85–87;
Declercq, ‘Modern analysis of the legal effect of
force majeure
clauses in situations of commercial impracticability, (1995) 15
and Commerce 246; J Rimke,
Force majeure
and hardship:
Application in international trade practice – with specific regard to the
CISG and the UNIDROIT Principles of
International Commercial Contracts? (1998)
Pace Law School Institute of International Commercial Law
http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/
rimke.html.
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976) Dir Prat Comm
, 259. 90 A Frignani, ‘La hardship
clause nei contratti internazionali e le tecniche di allocazione dei
rischi negli ordinamenti di civil law e di common law’ (1979)
Rivista di Diritto Civile
702; M, Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de
hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm Int
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976) Dir Prat Comm
The use of ‘specific’ hardship clauses makes it sometimes
difficult to distinguish these clauses from the so-called
‘indexation
clauses’ (clauses about floating currency rates, price revisions,
devaluation etc), which provide for automatic
changes in price according to
fluctuations in various reference indexes, and thus protect the parties from
well-defined events such
as inflation, currency devaluation and unfavourable
trends in exchange rates. Unlike these clauses, the
clause does
not determine automatic adaptation but requires the parties to commit themselves
to the renegotiation of the contractual
conditions and/or to the intervention of
a third party to solve the problem, and therefore always leaves some margin of
to the ultimate fate of the contract. Moreover, while indexation
clauses become operative in well-defined circumstances such as those
above, and do not apply except in such specific cases, the hardship clause is a
general purpose tool that can cope with a
vast range of situations that the
parties could not have foreseen. Unfortunately, in practice the demarcation line
is not always
very clear, as in some cases even hardship clauses include a list
of specific events that could have to do with such circumstances
as currency
devaluation or a sudden rise in costs. This has caused some experts to enquire
whether such specifications are in fact
compatible with the requirement that the
event be unforeseeable which, as analysed below, is an essential characteristic
of the hardship
clause. For an analysis see M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de
hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm Int
253; B Oppetit,
‘L’adaptation des contrats internationaux aux changements de
circonstance: la clause de hardship’,
Journal de Droit
International
(Clunet) 794–814, 797; W Den Haerynck. ‘Drafting
hardship clauses in international contracts”, in Campbell (ed),
Structuring International Contracts (The Hague: Kluwer Law International,1996)
234; U Draetta, Il Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali
– La Patologia dei
Contratti (Padua: Cedam, 1988), 84.
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm
KH Bockstiegel, ‘Hardship,
force majeure
and special risks
clauses in international contracts’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and
Renegotiation of Contracts in International
Trade and Finance: Studies in
Transnational Economic Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer Law International, 1985) 166; M
Fontaine, ‘Les
clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm Int
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm
Expressions as ‘unfairness or substantial and disproportionate
prejudice to the interest of either’ or ‘undue
hardship or
inequity’ can be frequently found in international contracts. See M
Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’,
Dir Prat Comm Int
In a contract for the supply of crude oil the hardship clause stated:
‘The party who considers that the conditions set forth
13–2 are met, shall give notice thereof to the other party by registered
letter, return receipt requested, which
will specify the date and nature of the
event or events which caused the change alleged by it, an evaluation of the
hardship which
is or will be suffered and the proposal made by it to remedy that
change. Any notice given more than 12 months after the date of
occurrence of the
event(s) which caused the change alleged by the party giving the notice shall be
of no effect’; B Oppetit,
‘L’adaptation des contrats
internationaux aux changements de circonstance: la clause de hardship’,
Journal de Droit International (Clunet)
794–814, 814.
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm
266; A Frignani, ‘La hardship clause nei contratti internazionali
e le tecniche di allocazione dei rischi negli ordinamenti
di civil law e di
common law’ (1979)
Rivista di Diritto Civile
In the hardship clause of a contract for the supply of natural gas, the
parties established: ‘If the seller(s) and the buyer(s)
have not agreed on
a mutually acceptable solution within 60 days after the notice requesting a
meeting under the provisions of this
section 13–9, either party may
request the matter to be submitted to arbitration in accordance with section
an analysis, see B Oppetit, ‘L’adaptation des
contrats internationaux aux changements de circonstance: la clause de
Journal de Droit International (Clunet)
794–814, 812–13.
‘Clou’ is a French expression for ‘highlight’ or
‘chief attraction’.
A Frignani, ‘La hardship clause nei contratti internazionali e le
tecniche di allocazione dei
rischi negli ordinamenti di civil law e di common law’
Rivista di Diritto Civile
M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976)
A Frignani, ‘La hardship clause nei contratti internazionali e le
tecniche di allocazione dei rischi negli ordinamenti di
civil law e di common
law’ (1979)
Rivista di Diritto Civile
705; M Fontaine, ‘Les
clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm Int
, 270; CM Schmitthoff, ‘Hardship and intervener
clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
U Draetta, Il Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali – La Patologia
dei Contratti (Padua: Cedam, 1988), 106; N Horn, ‘Standard
contracts adaptation in international commerce’, in N Horn (ed),
Adaptation and Renegotiation of Contracts in International
Trade and Finance:
Studies in Transnational Economic Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer Law International,
1985), 138.
Arbitral Award No 2478, 1975 in
, 1975, 925.
CM Schmitthoff, ‘Hardship and intervener clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
N Horn, ‘Standard clauses on contracts adaptation in international
commerce’, in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and Renegotiation
of Contracts in
International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic Law 3
(Antwerp: Kluwer Law International, 1985)
B Oppetit, ‘L’adaptation des contrats internationaux aux
changements de circonstance: la clause de hardship”,
de Droit International (Clunet)
794–814, 807; CM Schmitthoff,
‘Hardship and intervener clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
In this case expressions such as the following are normally used:
‘If an agreement is not reached within a reasonable time,
each party can
claim the termination of the contract’; M Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de
hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm Int
The wording used in commercial practice normally varies according to the
the supply of natural
gas, already mentioned above, it was held: ‘If the Seller(s) and the
Buyer(s) have not agreed on a mutually
acceptable solution…the arbitrators
shall determine whether the aforesaid occurrence has happened, and if so what
adjustments,
if any, in the said price or in other terms and conditions should
be made…having due regard for the interest of the other party,
revised prices or other conditions so determined by said arbitrators shall take
effect on the date when notice of arbitration
was first given’; see B
Oppetit, ‘L’adaptation des contrats internationaux aux changements
de circonstance: la
clause de hardship’, (1974) 101
Journal de Droit
International (Clunet)
794–814, 812. In other circumstances parties
can decide to use different expressions, such as: ‘ the matter may be
to by the other party for the determination by an expert; see M
Fontaine, ‘Les clauses de hardship’, (1976)
Dir Prat Comm Int
N Horn, ‘Procedures of contract adaptation and renegotiation in
international commerce’ in N Horn (ed), Adaptation and
Renegotiation of
Contracts in International Trade and Finance: Studies in Transnational Economic
Law 3 (Antwerp: Kluwer Law International,
H van Houtte. ‘Changed circumstances and “pacta sunt
servanda” in Institute of International Business Law and
Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration’ (Paris:
International Chamber of Commerce, 1993) 122.
British Movietonews Ltd v London and District Cinemas Ltd
According to English law an arbitrator cannot act as
compositeur
or be appointed to
ex aequo et bono
CM Schmitthoff, ‘Hardship and intervener clauses’ (1980)
Journal of Business Law
H van Houtte. ‘Changed circumstances and “pacta sunt
servanda” in Institute of
International Business Law and Practice, Transnational Rules in International
Commercial Arbitration’ (Paris: International
Chamber of Commerce, 1993)
The Standing Committee was introduced by the ICC, in accordance with
‘The Rules for the Regulation of Contractual Relations’,
published in ICC Doc 326.
http://www.iccbo.org.
ICC Doc 421. One must consider that in the opening part of the document
it was established that the hardship clause, unlike that
, was not meant to be a standard clause. Therefore, being presented
by the ICC only as a ‘drafting suggestion’, it cannot
incorporated into the contract by mere reference.
ICCC Doc 326
Obviously, in these cases the remedy may be unwelcome, especially to the
party not injured by the changed circumstances, and the
parties may be unwilling
to subscribe
to the risk of having to submit to a ruling to
their disadvantage. However, it is equally true that such a solution allows
contracting
parties to undertake long-term commitments with greater confidence,
in a political and economic world subject to continual change.
In January 2003 new
force majeure
and hardship clauses were
adopted by the ICC and published in doc 650. Both clauses apply to any contract
which incorporates them
either expressly or by reference.
force majeure
and hardship held in Paris on 8 April
Paper presented by Professor Debattista, draftsman-in chief of the new
ICC clauses during the seminar on
force majeure
and hardship held in
Paris in April 2003.
A Frignani, ‘La hardship clause nei contratti internazionali e le
tecniche di allocazione dei rischi negli ordinamenti di
civil law e di common
law’ (1979)
Rivista di Diritto Civile
KP Berger, ‘The relationship between the UNIDROIT Principles of
international commercial contracts and the new
lex mercatoria
Uniform Law Review
See eg ICC Award No. 1990 of 1972
1974, 901; ICC Award No
1512 of 1971
, 1974, 905, reprinted in Jarvin and Derains,
Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards
ICC Award No 1512 of 1971, Jarvin and Derains,
Collection of ICC
Arbitral Awards
ICC Award No 8873 of 1997,
Bulletin de la Cour International
d’Arbitrage de la ICC
, 10(2), 1999, 81; in support of this statement,
see also ICC Award No 9029 of 1998,
Bulletin de la Cour International
d’Arbitrage de la ICC
, 10(2), 1999, 91. It should be born in mind that
in both cases the disadvantaged party invoked Articles 6.2.2/6.2.3 of the
Principles as the
expression of
lex mercatoria
Arbitral Award No 2478 of 1975
ICC Award No 5953 of 1989
1990, 1056.
See eg U Draetta,
Il Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali – La
Patologia dei Contratti
Cedam, 1988), 115.
H van Houtte. ‘Changed circumstances and “pacta sunt
servanda” in Institute of International Business Law and
Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration’ (Paris:
International Chamber of Commerce, 1993) 109.
Arbitral Award 2 July of 1956
1959, 1074.
ICC Award No 2291 of 1975
1976, 989; see also ICC Award No
1512 of 1971
. 143 ICC Award No 2291 of 1975
, 1976, 989. 144 ICC Award No
3267 of 1984
Yearbook Commercial Arbitration
, 1987, 87. 145 ICC Award No
4761 of 1987 Jarvin and Derains,
Collection of ICC Awards
(1986–90), 519.
ICC Award No 1512 (1971),
Yearbook. Commercial Arbitration
The Convention is applicable to all the signatory states which numbered a
total of 58 in 2002.
According to Article 4, the CISG governs only the formation of the
contract of sale and therights and obligations of the seller
and the buyer
arising from such a contract. Questions which are not expressly settled in the
Convention are to be settled in conformity
with the general principles or, as a
last resort, by referring to the domestic law applicable by virtue of the rules
of private international
law – Article 7(2).
MJ Bonell, An International Restatement of Contract Law, 2nd edn,
Transnational Publications Inc, Irvington, New York, 1997) 63;
PA Piliounis, The
Remedies of Specific Performance, Price Reduction and Additional Time
(Nachfrist) under the CISG: Are these worthwhile
changes or additions to English
Sales Law? (1998) Pace Law School Institute of International Commercial Law
http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/piliounis.html.
B Nicholas, ‘Impracticability and impossibility in the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
NM Galston and Smit (eds), International Sales: the United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods (New York: Matthew Bender, 1984)
B Nicholas, ‘Impracticability and impossibility in the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of
NM Galston and Smit (eds), International Sales: the United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods (New York: Matthew Bender, 1984) s
5.01/5–1; P Gillies and G Moens, International Trade and Business: Law,
and Ethics (Sydney: Cavendish Publishing Australia Pty Ltd, 1998) 38.
According to Article 7(1) of the CISG In the interpretation of the
Convention regard is to be had to its international character
and to the need to
promote uniformity in its application and the observance of good faith in
international trade”. See eg MJ
Bonell, ‘I Principi UNIDROIT dei
contratti internazionali: un approccio nuovo alla disciplina dei contratti
internazionali’,
in MJ Bonell and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti Commerciali
Internazionali e Principi UNIDROIT (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997), 65–95.
According to Professor Tallon, the Convention appears to refer to a very
restrictive concept: ‘more flexible … than
that of traditional
force majeure
but stricter than frustration and impracticability’,
D Tallon, CM Bianca, MJ Bonell
, Commentary on the International
Sales Law – The 1980 Vienna Sales Convention (Milan: Giuffrè, 1987)
592. See also P Gillies
and G Moens, International Trade and Business: Law,
Policy and Ethics (Sydney: Cavendish Publishing Australia Pty Ltd., 1998) 37.
This discussion arose as the term circumstances had been used in Article
74 of the Uniform Law for International Sales (ULIS) adopted
by the 1964 Hague
Conference. Indeed, Article 79 of the CISG has often been considered as a
revision of Article 74 of the Uniform
of Law of the International Sale of Goods
adopted by the 1964 Hague Conference; see U Draetta, Il Diritto dei Contratti
Internazionali
– La Patologia dei Contratti (Padua: Cedam, 1988) 47; P
Schlechtriem, Commentary on the UN Convention on the International
Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London: Oxford University Press, 1998) 603.
During the preparation of ULIS, a discussion started on a choice between
two words: ‘obstacle’ and ‘circumstances’.
‘Civil Law’ group, led by the Federal Republic of Germany, was
against the use of the word ‘obstacle’,
arguing that this term, if
introduced, would reduce the chances of applying Article 74. At the insistence
of this group, the ‘obstacle’
concept was eliminated and the term
‘circumstances’ was introduced. Thus, Article 74(1) ULIS states as
follows: ‘Where
one of the parties has not performed one of his
obligations, he shall not be liable for such non-performance if he can prove
it was due to circumstances which according to the intention of the parties
at the time of the conclusion of the contract, he was
not bound to take into
account or to avoid or to overcome’; ‘in the absence of any
expression of the intention of the
parties, regard shall be had to what
reasonable persons in the same situation would have intended’. With this
wording, grounds
for an excuse were not limited to physical or legal
impossibility, or to circumstances where performance had been radically changed,
but might extend to situations in which performance had become unexpectedly
onerous. See JO Honnold, Uniform Law for International
Sales Under the 1980
United Nations Convention (3rd edn, The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 1999)
477–78; MJ Bonell, ‘Force
majeure e hardship nel diritto uniforme
della vendita internazionale, (1990),
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
For an analysis of the different alternatives presented during the
drafting of this Article, see Stoll in P Schlechtriem, Commentary
Convention on the International Sales of Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London:
Oxford University Press, 1998) 601–03.
According to Article 79(3) of the CISG ‘the exemption provided by
this article has effect for the period during which the
Up to 2004 Great Britain is not among the signatory states.
P Schlechtriem, Commentary on the UN Convention on the International
Sales of Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London: Oxford University
Press, 1998) 603;
MJ Bonell, “‘Force majeure e hardship nel diritto uniforme della
vendita internazionale, (1990),
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
B Nicholas, ‘Impracticability and impossibility in the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods’, in NM
Galston and Smit (eds), International Sales: the United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods (New York: Matthew Bender, 1984) s
5.03/5–17; J Rimke, Force majeure and hardship: Application in
international
trade practice – with specific regard to the CISG and the
UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts? (1998)
School Institute of International Commercial Law
http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/ rimke.html.
One must recall that the CISG only refers to international contracts for
sale of goods which are by virtue of their very nature
short-term contracts.
Therefore the CISG was not a suitable tool to deal with situations of changed
circumstances; A Frignani, ‘Le
clausole di hardship’, in U Draetta
and C Vaccà (eds), Inadempimento, Adattamento, Arbitrato. Patologie dei
e Rimedi (Milan: Egea, 1992) 350.
D Tallon, CM Bianca, MJ Bonell
, Commentary on the
International Sales Law – The 1980 Vienna Sales Convention (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1987) 594; Stoll in P Schlechtriem,
Commentary on the UN
Convention on the International Sales of Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London:
Oxford University Press, 1998) 617–18;
A Carlsen, Can the hardship
Provisions in the UNIDROIT Principles be Applied when the CISG is the Governing
Law? (1998) Pace Law
Institute of International Law
http://cisgw3.law.pace.edu/cisg/biblio/carlsen.html.
Stoll in P Schlechtriem, Commentary on the UN Convention on the
International Sales of Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London: Oxford
Press, 1998) 618; P Schlechtriem, Good Faith in German Law and in International
Uniform Laws, http://soi.cnr.it/~crdcs/
frames24.html.
AQ website address
doesn’t work - please supply???
Stoll in P Schlechtriem, Commentary on the UN Convention on the
International Sales of Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London: Oxford
Press, 1998), 618.
If the notion of good faith were to be regarded as the legal basis of the
imprévision
, harmony would be jeopardised and the aim of
the Convention, as stated in Article 7(1), would not be attained. See D Tallon,
, Commentary on the International Sales Law
– The 1980 Vienna Sales Convention (Milan: Giuffrè, 1987) 594.
MJ Bonell, ‘Force majeure e hardship nel diritto uniforme della
vendita internazionale’, (1990),
Diritto del Commercio
Internazionale
, 570; P Bernardini, ‘Hardship e force majeure’,
in J Bonell and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti Commerciali Internazionali
UNIDROIT, (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997) 204–05.
Tribunale di Monza, 14 January 1993 in
Foro italiano
1994, I, 146.
For an analysis see MJ Bonell, ‘La prima decisione Italiana in tema di
Convenzione di Vienna sulla vendita internazionale’,
Giurisprudenza italiana
146–54; S di Paola, ‘Tribunale di
Monza, 14 January 1993’ (1994) I,
Foro italiano
916–23. See
also Société Romay AG v SARL Behr France, Cour d’appel de Colmar
of 12 June 2001, http://cisg3.law.pace.edu/cases/010612f1.html.
MJ Bonell, ‘La prima decisione Italiana in tema di Convenzione di
Vienna sulla vendita internazionale’, (1994),
Giurisprudenza italiana
In drafting Article 79 the Federal Republic of Germany proposed to
exclude expressly the possibility of claiming the performance
of the contract in
such a situation. The request was not granted for the fear that it would release
the promissor from the duty to
do everything possible to overcome the
supervening impediment.
MJ Bonell, ‘Force majeure e hardship nel diritto uniforme della
vendita internazionale’, (1990),
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
565; B Nicholas, ‘Impracticability and impossibility in the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale
of Goods’, in
NM Galston and Smit (eds), International Sales: the United Nations Convention on
Contracts for the International
Sale of Goods (New York: Matthew Bender, 1984) s
5.03/5–21; D Tallon, CM Bianca, MJ Bonell
, Commentary on the
International Sales Law – The 1980 Vienna Sales Convention (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1987) 575.
MJ Bonell, ‘Force majeure e hardship nel diritto uniforme della
vendita internazionale’, (1990),
Diritto del Commercio Internazionale
Stoll in P Schlechtriem, Commentary on the UN Convention on the
International Sales of Goods (G Thomas (trans)) (London: Oxford
Press, 1998) 618; P Schlechtriem, Good Faith in German Law and in International
Uniform Laws, http://soi.cnr.it/~crolcs/crdcs/
frames24.html.
AQ again this
website doesn’t work - please supply???
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law
of International Commercial Contracts
, (Rome; 1994).
On this point, see MJ Bonell, ‘I Principi UNIDROIT dei Contratti
Internazionali: un Approccio Nuovo alla Disciplina dei Contratti
Internazionali’, in MJ Bonell and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti Commerciali
Internazionali e Principi UNIDROIT (Milan: Giuffrè,
1997) 11–19. The
author emphasises how both the UNIDROIT Principles and the American Restatement
of Law have similar aims.
MJ Bonell (ed), A New Approach to International Commercial Contract. The
UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts
International Congress of Comparative Law, Bristol, 26 July – 1 August
1998 (The Hague: Kluwer Law International,
1999) 4–5; IM, Sattar,
‘The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts and the
Vienna Sales Convention:
competing or completing
lex mercatoria
International Trade and Business Law Annual
19; F Ferrari,
‘I Principi per i contratti commerciali internazionali dell’UNIDROIT
ed il loro ambito di applicazione’
Contratto e Impresa
309. For a critical analysis of the UNIDROIT Principles, see F Bortolotti,
‘The UNIDROIT Principles and the arbitral tribunals’
Uniform Law Review
; ‘The UNIDROIT Principles and the arbitral
Uniform Law Review
Article 6.2.1 UNIDROIT Principles.
G Alpa, ‘Prime note di raffronto tra i Principi dell’UNIDROIT
e il sistema contrattuale Italiano’ (1996) I
Contratto e
/Europa, 331.
Article 6.2.2 UNIDROIT Principles.
For example, a substantial increase in the cost of performance can be due
to a dramatic rise in the price of the raw materials necessary
production of the goods or the rendering of the services. For an analysis, see
the Commentary to the UNIDROIT Principles
For example, the effect of a prohibition to build on a land site acquired
for building purposes or the effect of an export embargo
on goods acquired with
a view to the subsequent export. See M Fontaine, ‘Les dispositions
relatives au hardship et à la
force majeure’, in MJ Bonell and F,
Bonelli, Contratti Commerciali Internazionali e Principi UNIDROIT (Milan:
H van Houtte. ‘Changed circumstances and “pacta sunt
servanda” in Institute of International Business Law and
Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration (Paris:
International Chamber of Commerce, 1993) 15; P Bernardini,
‘Hardship e
force majeure
’, in J Bonell and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti
Commerciali Internazionali e Principi
UNIDROIT, (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997) 202.
MJ Bonell, Un Codice Internazionale del Diritto dei Contratti, (Milan:
Giuffrè, 1995) 92.
H van Houtte. ‘Changed circumstances and “pacta sunt
servanda” in Institute of International Business Law and
Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration’ (Paris:
International Chamber of Commerce, 1993) 16.
This means that hardship cannot be
invoked if the changed circumstances are included among the ‘normal’
economic risks
tacitly accepted by any party when reaching an agreement. It is
difficult to identify the precise limit beyond which the economic
unbalance must
be considered to have exceeded the ‘normal’ area of risk. In the
Principles, there is an official comment
whereby if the performance can be
precisely evaluated in monetary terms, an alteration of 50% or more of the cost
or value of performance
is very likely to be considered a
‘substantial’ alteration. Thus, the Principles have endeavoured to
maintain an objective
approach, relying on a precise measurement whereas a
personal opinion has no value, as the parties are not legally required to
the presence of certain conditions in their agreement. Official
Commentary of the UNIDROIT Principles, 160. No arbitral award is
known of where
arbitrators have granted relief merely because the costs of performance have
increased by 50% compared to what has
been agreed in the contract.
Art. 6.2.2 (c) UNIDROIT Principles. 184 Art. 6.2.2 (a) UNIDROIT
Principles. 185 Art. 6.2.2 (b) UNIDROIT Principles.
Art. 6.2.2 (d) UNIDROIT Principles.
W Den Haerynck, ‘Drafting hardship clauses in international
contracts’, in Campbell (ed), Structuring International
Contracts (The
Hague: Kluwer Law International, 1996) 237; P Bernardini, ‘Hardship e
force majeure
’, in J Bonell and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti
Commerciali Internazionali e Principi UNIDROIT, (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997) 202.
P Bernardini, ‘Hardship e
force majeure
’, in J Bonell
and F Bonelli (eds), Contratti Commerciali Internazionali e Principi UNIDROIT,
(Milan: Giuffrè, 1997) 202.
Article 6.2.3 (1): ‘In case of hardship the disadvantaged party is
entitled to request renegotiations. The request shall be
made without undue
delay and shall indicate the grounds
on which it is based’.
Official Commentary of the UNIDROIT Principles, 166–67.
Article 1.7 (1) UNIDROIT Principles: ‘Each party must act in
accordance with good faith and
fair dealing in international trade’.
Article 5.3 UNIDROIT Principles: ‘Each party shall co-operate with
the other party when such co-operation may reasonably be
expected for the
performance of that party’s obligations’.
O Lando and H Beale (eds), Principles of European Contracts Law –
Parts I and II, (The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2000)
Court of Arbitration of Berlin Award of 1992, cited by D Maskow,
‘Hardship and
force majeure
’ (1992) 40
The American
Journal of Comparative Law
657–69. For an analysis see also Official
Commentary of the UNIDROIT Principles, 160; MJ Bonell, An International
Restatement
of Contract Law, (2nd edn, Transnational Publications Inc,
Irvington, New York, 1997) 240; MJ Bonell, ‘I Principi UNIDROIT
contratti internazionali: un approccio nuovo alla disciplina dei contratti
internazionali’, in MJ Bonell and F Bonelli
(eds), Contratti Commerciali
Internazionali e Principi UNIDROIT (Milan: Giuffrè, 1997) 15; Berger
(1999), 183.
Arbitral Award No 8486 of 1996, Yearbook Commercial Arbitration, 1999,
162. For an analysis, see MJ Bonell, An International Restatement
of Contract
Law, (2nd edn, Transnational Publications Inc., Irvington, New York, 1997) 243.
F Bortolotti, ‘The UNIDROIT Principles and the arbitral
Uniform Law Review
–52; see also F
Bortolotti, Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali - Manuale di Diritto
Commerciale Internazionale (Padua: Cedam,
1997) 28; F Bortolotti, Diritto dei
Contratti Internazionali - Manuale di Diritto Commerciale Internazionale (Padua:
Cedam, 1997);
F Bortolotti ‘La nuova
lex mercatoria
: costruzione
dottrinaria o strumento operativo?’, (1996),
Contratto e Impresa
ICC Award No 8873 of 1997,
Bulletin de la Cour Internationale
d’Arbitrage de la CCI
, 10(2), 1999,
. 199 ICC Award No 9029 of 1998 (1999), 10(2)
Bulletin de la Cour
Internationale d’Arbitrage de la CCI
F Bortolotti, Diritto dei Contratti Internazionali – Manuale di
Diritto Commerciale Internazionale (Padua: Cedam, 1997) 108–09.
F Bortolotti, ‘The UNIDROIT Principles and the arbitral
Uniform Law Review
W Den Haerynck, ‘Drafting hardship clauses in international
contracts’, in Campbell (ed), Structuring International
Contracts (The
Hague: Kluwer Law International, 1996) 242.
ICC Award No 1990 of 1972
1974, 901; ICC Award No 1512 of
, 1974, 905, reprinted in Jarvin and Derains,
Collection of
ICC Arbitral Awards
Arbitral Award 2 July of 1956
1959, 1074; ICC Award No 2291
1976, 989; ICC Award No 1512 of 1971
905; ICC Award No 3267 of 1984 Yearbook Commercial Arbitration, 1987, 87; ICC
Award No 4761 of 1987 Jarvin and Derains, Collection
of ICC Awards
(1986–90), 519.
See ICC Award No 1512 of 1971,
, 1974, 905, reprinted in
Jarvin and Derains,
Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (353 KB)
PDF format (262 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter