URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UTSLRS/2018/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:51:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Dehm, Sara --- "Accusing Europe: Articulations of Migrant Justice and a Popular International Law" [2018] UTSLRS 8; Andrew Byrnes and Gabrielle Simm (eds) Peoples Tribunals and International Law (Cambridge University Press, 2018) 157-181
This is a draft version of a chapter, subject to minor amendments, that
was published in Andrew Brynes and Gabrielle Simm (eds),
International Law
and Peoples’ Tribunals
(Cambridge University Press, 2018).
Accusing ‘Europe’: Articulations of Migrant
Justice and a Popular International Law
“We accuse Europe of continual violations of human rights and the
systematic mistreatment of refugees, migrants and asylum seekers!”
Introduction
chapter examines a recent civil society initiative, Tribunal 12, as an
internationalised articulation of migrant
Tribunal 12 was held in
Stockholm in May 2012, and sought to put ‘Europe’ on trial for the
systematic violations of the
rights and dignity of refugees, asylum seekers and
migrants. By adopting a legal and aesthetical framework, the initiative aimed
draw attention to the increased global securitisation of borders,
criminalisation of unauthorised migrants and systemic exploitation
undocumented people in Europe. It also intended to generate support for migrant
struggles within Europe by highlighting the morally
unjust and harmful effects
of European border practices. Although the Tribunal differed significantly from
earlier international
peoples’ tribunals in that it did not hear any
witness testimonies from migrants themselves, I nonetheless locate Tribunal
within a legacy of peoples’ tribunals and their entanglement with
international law and institutions.
Peoples’ tribunals have been generally recognised for their ability to
demand or provide a form of accountability for collectively-experienced
committed by state or non-state actors, harms that generally fail to receive any
adequate institutional redress.
this chapter, I examine how Tribunal 12 extended this politics of accountability
to address some of the fundamental norms that
structure the international
domain. My reading of Tribunal 12 emphasises how it named and interrogated the
harms arising from the
contemporary institution and policing of European
borders, but also the harms from the notion of fixed borders themselves. In
so, I argue that the Tribunal questioned forms of political community,
identity and belonging based upon a security–territory–people
which continue to be fundamental organising principles for determining modes of
inclusion and exclusion in the international
legal order.
This chapter explores how Tribunal 12 appealed to international law as a
language of popular justice, but also saw it as inextricably
limited through its
legitimation of state sovereignty, territorial control and borders. The
Tribunal’s use of international
law exemplified an attempt to hold
established institutions to account while also seeking to create a different
form of justice and
political community to that merely envisioned and authorised
through international law and institutions.
This chapter proceeds in three parts. First, I explore the marginalised
position of migrants within the international legal order
through the use of
Hannah Arendt’s writings on statelessness. Second, I offer a reading of
Tribunal 12 that frames the Tribunal’s
political and ethical claims as a
juridical project that constitutes a different basis for international
community, belonging and
accountability. In particular, I unpack Judith
Butler’s thinking around the ‘performative contradiction’ of
and an ethics of cohabitation to elaborate the productive claims that
peoples’ tribunals can make in and of the international
(legal) order.
Finally, I suggest that the importance of peoples’ tribunals within
international law is their enactment of
a popular form of international law that
seeks to unsettle and transform the existing norms and institutions of
international law,
rather than simply attempting to democratise or widen the
sphere of participation within established structures. In doing so, Tribunal
advanced a politics of accountability that challenged the framework and
mechanics of international law, rather than merely critiquing
its normative
content or practical operations.
2. Migrant Justice and Technologies of Inclusion in the International
Writing in the aftermath of the Second World War, political theorist Hannah
Arendt was concerned with the production of citizenship
antipathy, statelessness — as both a legal and political condition. To
become stateless, Arendt remarked, is
to be defined as and placed in the
position of the ‘outlaw’. As an outlaw, a person is not only outside
law’s protection
and must ‘transgress’ it in order to survive,
but their very presence in a territory is criminalised and subject to police
action. This means that the stateless lack any form of legal or political
protections. The production of statelessness in the twentieth
century — as
a predicament of the consolidation and universalisation of nation-states —
is also the production of a state
of rightlessness. As Arendt wrote, the:
calamity of the rightless is not that they are deprived of life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness, or of equality before the
law and freedom of opinion
— formulas which were designed to solve problems within given communities
— but that they
no longer belong to any community whatsoever. Their plight
is not that they are not equal before the law, but that no law exists
In this passage, Arendt’s key claim is that the condition of
statelessness entails not simply a loss of particular rights, but
rather a more
fundamental exclusion, namely the exclusion from the right to belong to and
participate in a political community and
the ‘loss of a community willing
and able to guarantee any rights
whatsoever’.
This exclusion,
for Arendt, starkly demonstrates the fallibility of human rights in their
contemporary institutional, political and
legal forms. Because of their
historical consolidation as rights available to citizens of nation-states, human
rights are not inalienable
and they tend to fail those who need them the most.
This meant, for Arendt, that the attainment of human rights is not prior to
included within a political community, which in its modern iteration is
expressed as a community of citizens. Rather, it is the right
to belong to a
political community that is of fundamental importance and is constitutive of, in
Arendt’s famous pronouncement,
‘the right to have
In a world organised
around nation-states, the loss of this right, for Arendt, amounts to the
‘expulsion from humanity altogether’
and well as the loss of a
‘place in the world which makes opinions significant and actions
effective’.
While Arendt used the language of ‘total domination’ and absolute
political exclusion to describe those people designated
as rightless, her
analysis can nonetheless help to reveal the difficulties that those deemed
excluded from a
— legally, politically, and in the extreme
case, physically — experience when making political claims. Importantly,
intervention does not simply collapse the rights of Man into the
right to citizenship. It rather recognises that attaining particular
rights is dependent upon the dynamic ‘right to exist first as a political
subject’, that is, to be recognised
as a political subject within an
instituted community.
The reinvigoration of international law and institutions in the second half
of the twentieth century has not diminished the centrality
of Arendt’s
claims. While Arendt urged the creation of a ‘law above nations’ to
counter the production of the condition
of rightlessness, the continuing
centrality of nation-states as the central subjects of contemporary
international law means that
the realisation of human rights remains dependent
upon a state willing and able to recognise or enforce them. The contemporary
thus persists, as Arendt had earlier diagnosed, as a ‘world
organised into
nation-states’,
even if there
has been a proliferation of new international norms and regimes and growing
recognition afforded to other actors, participants
or subjects of international
law at the turn of the 21
century. Patrick Hayden, in interpreting
Arendt’s thought for present forms of exclusion and containment, notes
that the power
of Arendt’s contribution is how she highlighted that:
statelessness is not an aberrant or accidental phenomenon occurring despite
the best efforts of states to prevent it, but a ‘normalized’
systemic condition produced by an international order predicated upon the power
to exclude as the essence of statist
Similarly, Butler suggests that Arendt’s work is powerful for its
‘prescience in predicting the recurrence of statelessness
persistence of territorial violence’, for its insistence on the
inevitability of statelessness in a world of
Statelessness then
reveals the deep ‘structural deficiencies of the international
system’ and must be seen as a problem
rather than
geographical
It is this political configuration of space then that produces people as
stateless as an ‘anomaly’ within the international
order and is
incapable, Arendt despaired, of guaranteeing the stateless a ‘place in the
Statelessness, for Arendt, necessarily refers to both de jure statelessness
(those deemed without nationality by a given state) as
well as de facto
statelessness (those individuals inside a territory threatened by
denaturalisation and/or
deportation).
Worldwide, the
UNHCR estimates that approximately 10 million people were affected by
statelessness in 2012, 700,000 of whom live
This number is much
higher when Arendt’s de facto stateless are considered: a European
Commission-funded ‘Clandestino’
project suggested that there were
between 1.9 to 3.8 million undocumented migrants in Europe in 2008, although
earlier statistics
suggested this number is greater, between 5 to 8 million
The numerous and
dispersed struggles of undocumented people in Europe have been well-recorded by
non-governmental organisations as
well as articulated by migrants
themselves.
These struggles have
at times been over access or entitlement to specific state-funded resources such
as health, education and housing
or about conditions arising from precarious
employment and structural exploitation in labour markets. At other times,
struggles have
involved objecting to the dehumanising, harsh and punitive state
measures allegedly in place to deter and police unauthorised migrants.
On a more fundamental level, migrant struggles express demands for political
inclusion and issue a challenge to what migration scholar
Nicholas De Genova has
called the ‘production of deportability’ for non-citizens. For De
Genova, the production of deportability
involves official practices that create
the ‘possibility of deportation’, rather than referring to the act
of deportation
ensures that migrants — regardless of their status as documented or
undocumented, temporarily legalised or
illegalised
— live with
the constant threat of future police action and removal. Such measures function
as a disciplinary technology of
social control and exclusion as well as a means
of perpetuating the treatment of migrants as a vulnerable and deportable
Rather than absolute exclusion per se, regulatory regimes require and
expect migrants to be present within European physical and
legal spaces.
However, the production of conditions of deportability ensure that migrants are
always subjected to forms of ‘differential
inclusion’, functioning
as an apparatus for organising global uneven distribution of labour and
Within international law, migrant struggles for justice have been made and
primarily received within a framework of the individual-
particular nation-state or the individual-
as a subject of
humanity bearing particular rights and duties. Migrants are able either to
appeal to their home states to offer them
certain protections owed to them as
citizens while living abroad, or to look to their state of residence for certain
protections
based upon recognised universal norms or established
In both approaches,
migrants remain reliant upon states being willing and able to enforce migrant
rights claims in order for such
rights to be meaningfully recognised. As such,
particular states can be accused of not protecting their citizens abroad or of
the rights of particular groups of migrants within their territory.
However, the conditions of possibility for the international
order — the
fundamental norms of sovereignty that structure the exclusionary political
configurations of citizenship and the
horizons of deportability — remain
beyond accusation within the dominant framework offered by international
3. Reading Tribunal 12
This section reads Tribunal 12 as a project that put this international
framework on trial. This section explores four elements of
Tribunal 12: first,
how the Tribunal located its political intervention; secondly, how the Tribunal
addressed and constructed ‘Europe’;
thirdly, how the Tribunal
grounded its claim to represent ‘people’ the international domain
and to generate a different
mode of international sociability; and finally, how
the Tribunal included the voices and stories of migrants in its sessions. These
elements could be broadly thought of as questions of status, authorisation,
constitution and procedure, all questions that are linked
to a juridical way of
I use this juridical approach to read what was essentially a political act
performed through a mediated legal form and language.
a. Locating Tribunal 12
As a civil society initiative, Tribunal 12 aimed to ‘awaken the
conscience of Europe’ and to challenge the dominant trajectory
migration politics and policies of European states and supranational
institutions. As a one-day event, Tribunal 12 engaged a variety
of audiences,
both within and beyond Sweden. The Tribunal sessions were held at the Stockholm
Kulturhuset, and attended by a small
number of people — approximately 300
— throughout the day. By far the greater level of engagement with the
was mediated through technology: approximately 7,000 people watched the
online live streaming of Tribunal sessions. In addition,
over 20 public
screenings were simultaneously held in cities across Europe, ranging from public
parks attended by over 1000 people
to smaller gatherings in local libraries. A
recording of the Tribunal sessions were also replayed on Swedish television
Consequentially, by far the greater level of audience engagement with
Tribunal 12 occurred across physical distances. This distance
meant that the
audience was dispersed and fragmented, making it difficult to generate a sense
of a cohesive community or movement.
But it also allowed individuals or groups
to determine the form and degree of their engagement, providing a resource for
groups to organise their own programs and focus their discussions on
local circumstances and national policies in order to complement
the broader
European-wide focus of the Tribunal sessions.
The Tribunal was a carefully planned staging, consisting of a team of
prosecutors who elaborated on the charges against ‘Europe’,
presenting witness testimony, academic experts detailing the practices and
policies of European states and their effects,
and a seven-member international
jury that issued the final verdict. The day was structured around four thematic
sessions: Border
control, Asylum process, Undocumented migrants, and Detention
and Deportation. In each session, the prosecution first introduced
particular practices of European states, institutions and corporations. After
this, evidence was presented by academic ‘experts’,
and testimony of
migrants was read out in order to demonstrate the subjective experiences and
effects of exclusionary border practices.
For example, in the Border Control session, the jury heard about the 16,136
migrant deaths at European borders since
They heard the story of
Bahram, a 16-year old Afghani asylum seeker who was smuggled to Bulgaria only to
be beaten, starved, interrogated
and strip searched in police custody before
being forcibly moved to and detained in a migrant border camp for four months.
his application for asylum was rejected, resulting in his presence in
Europe becoming illegalised and subject to deportation. The
question that was
repeatedly put at the Tribunal was who was responsible for this violence and
these accounts of harm? Was it the
product of, or a deviation from,
international norms and processes?
The final session consisted of a jury deliberation: here, each jury member
provided a personal reflection on the materials they had
heard that day. Jury
member and Swedish author Henning Mankell, for example, declared that Europe had
become ‘a monster, a
beast’. Fellow jury member Somali writer
Nuruddin Farah called on Europeans to ‘know their own history’ as,
his words, ‘the life [that] they have is owed to the fact that their
people were able to go elsewhere [during periods of war,
famine, persecution or
hardship] ... sometimes going to countries where [their peace was enabled or
secured] through the [dispossession
or] massacres of indigenous people’.
The jury also formulated a short collective verdict, in which they explicitly
European governments for violating fundamental norms ... [such
as] the equal moral worth of all human beings ... which go beyond
laws’ as well as ‘violating existing laws on how governments should
handle asylum seekers, detention and irregular
migration’. They called for
the ‘removal of restrictive immigration practices’ both within and
beyond European
territory, condemned the political economy of borders, and drew
attention to contemporary migrant struggles for justice that present
alternative
horizons or foundation for community.
Through its constitution and articulated purpose, Tribunal 12 explicitly
situated itself within a longer legacy of peoples’
tribunals, most notably
that of the Bertrand Russell Tribunal in 1967 that had also taken place, in
part, in Stockholm.
also keen to find its own form. Most notably, unlike earlier tribunals,
Tribunal 12 deliberately adopted a ‘dramaturgical’
organising its sessions and materials. In this sense, its political emphasis was
more on a performative staging, than on
facilitating a forensic trial or
providing an avenue of redress for particular
This distinguishes it
sharply from earlier tribunals, and is the product of the particular history and
motivation for the Tribunal.
The Tribunal was the culmination of a five-year cultural project, Shahrazad,
that brought together non-European exiled and diaspora
writers to tell their
stories through literary events and collaborations. As an ‘offshoot’
of the International Cities
of Refuge Network, a network that aims to provide
safe haven to persecuted writers, the Shahrazad project was organised primarily
around the ideas of freedom of expression and
The project’s
purpose was to foster spaces for inter-cultural dialogue based upon human rights
where European and non-European
writers could share their writings and stories
of common experiences and aspirations. It also aimed to ‘provide Europe
new, more open and sustainable narratives about itself’, narratives
that both challenged and affirmed European traditions and
ideals. In this sense,
the project’s purpose can partly be seen as redemptive: attempting to
‘revitalise some of [Europe’s]
capital values: freedom, democracy
and solidarity’ though bringing stories from outside Europe
The Tribunal 12 project developed out of and in connection with the Shahrazad
project, with these literary concerns providing a core
framework for the
Tribunal even though it was organised as an independent project. Thus, rather
than arising out of migrant struggles
themselves, Tribunal 12 saw itself acting
in support of and in solidarity with such struggles. Although migrants and
migrant organisations
played a key role in devising and planning the Tribunal,
for example, through the project’s Organising and Reference Committees,
they were largely absent from the official tribunal proceedings, an element that
I will discuss later.
State-centric narratives of the international legal order continue to
structure how peoples’ or citizens’ tribunals have
been perceived in
relation to international law. While the reception of and publicity around such
tribunals has varied according
to the time, actors and issue, official, academic
or popular representations can generally be divided into two distinct camps. On
the one hand, critics have dismissed peoples’ tribunals outright as
ideological ‘fiascos’ or ‘kangaroo
In this view,
peoples’ tribunals have no judicial merit or enforcement powers and merely
mimic or mock the legal form.
the other hand, advocates of peoples’ tribunals have celebrated them for
publicly ‘putting wrongs on the
wrongs that are
often state perpetrated or sanctioned, and that would otherwise go without
recognition or redress. The tribunals
are thus narrated as deriving their
legitimacy from that fact that they promote a form of ‘unofficial
accountability’,
civil society stepping in to ‘fill a gap’ in official institutional
measures or where state institutions fail to
respond. Here, the tribunals are
celebrated for their
: in expressing resistance to hegemonic
practices, creating an archive or factual documentation, or being a public
witnessing of moral
and legal harms. Christine Chinkin, for example, in her work
on the Tokyo Women’s Tribunal, puts forward six grounds that legitimate
peoples’ tribunals, including their use of extensive powerful oral
testimony, expert evidence and official reports of recognised
civil society
bodies to bolster their
As Richard Falk notes
in his work on the World Tribunal on Iraq, the motivation for peoples’
tribunals ‘do[es] not arise
from an uncertainty about issues of legality
and morality but from a conviction that the official institutions of the state,
the United Nations, have failed to act to protect a vulnerable
Extending this politics of accountability, this chapter highlights how
Tribunal 12 put contemporary state and supranational migration
practices on trial, in order to focus on both breaches of established
international norms as well as of more generally-conceived
moral principles such
as the ‘equal worth’ of all humans. This meant that there was a
productive slippage between, on
the one hand, challenging the denial of
particular rights to migrants and, on the other hand, more generally critiquing
the morality
of institutional attempts to exclude migrants from the normative
political community of ‘Europe’. In terms of accountability,
Tribunal responded to harms arising not only from the inadequacy of existing
norms and international institutions, but also articulated
a critique of the
very structure of the international itself, imagined as a ‘community of
nations’ in which the individual
is dominantly incorporated as a
‘citizen’, even if it is as a citizen of another state. At times,
then, the Tribunal
recognised the need to unsettle and reconfigure the
international domain and its modes of belonging in order to advance the
justice-seeking
claims of migrants within Europe.
b. Addressing ‘Europe’
Although adopting a tribunal format, Tribunal 12 represented itself primarily
as a political, rather than legal,
Politically, its task
centred on issuing a vocal and public challenge to Europe’s treatment of
asylum seekers and migrants.
In staging this challenge, ‘Europe’ was
framed as neither a natural nor self-evident entity. Rather, its framing
constituted
a political gesture, oscillating between the general and the
particular; between a historically-constructed ideal of ‘Europe’
its concrete contemporary manifestations; between identifying specific
institutional actors and signifying an all-encompassing
social collective. This
vacillation symbolised a refusal to conclusively define ‘Europe’,
and was the product of and
productive for a particular way of thinking about
institutional politics, political communities, and ethical responsibility. But,
as we shall see, it also risked, at times, repeating or prioritising a
construction of ‘Europe’ articulated by states
and supranational
institutions.
A primary function of an address is to name and identify the subject of the
address, that is, the subject of responsibility and accountability
accusation. This means that an address also in turn constructs and frames the
object of the address.
multi-relational act, singling out the accused from a community of other
possible addressees as well as in relation to the
harmful acts, while
simultaneously defining or delimiting the sphere of that responsibility and
conduct. In legal proceedings, the
subject of responsibility needs to be named
with precision, as otherwise its specific conduct cannot be examined or a
order cannot be enforced. The Tribunal’s address to
‘Europe’ rather negated this demand: while it named
as the specific subject of accountability, the precise
identity or construction of ‘Europe’ was left deliberately ambiguous
and open. In the accusation, ‘Europe’ functioned as a sign that at
times would refer to the official institutional matrix
that regulates legal
citizenship, visa enforcement and the asylum process; at other times,
‘Europe’ designated a community
of people, a collective project,
both in its material and ideation forms. As one Tribunal organiser put it:
We wanted ‘Europe’ not to be defined. It was very deliberate. We
are not accusing only the EU, or European governments,
or specific officers. But
we are accusing everyone, on all levels, because it’s a very complex
problem, the responsibilities
are on different levels and we didn’t want
that to be explicitly stated [in the accusation], because then we could exclude
the others from the responsibilities. In the end, Europe is also talking about
ourselves, everyone, that’s watching and not
watching. ... We’re
accusing ourselves and all citizens of
In framing the accused in this way, the Tribunal created a critical
malleability to the identity of the accused that left the precise
contours of
the accused’s identity open for elaboration and repeated interrogation in
each session. For example, when discussing
the particular failures of law to
protect migrants or the stark abuses of legal processes in the asylum process
session, ‘Europe’
as a subject of responsibility included the
practices of actors that ranged from national governments and their divergent
legislative
frameworks to the European Union harmonisation mechanisms such as
the Schengen system and Dublin Regulation
Actors ranged from
intergovernmental organisations such as Frontex (the EU border control agency)
to private profit-driven corporations
such as SERCO that manage immigration
detention and deportation within certain European
At other times, ‘Europe’ appeared as a more figural construction,
the product of its historical constitution as a political
entity in both its
material and idealised forms. As one expert witness put it, contemporary
‘Europe’ and ideas of ‘Europeanness’
social welfare could not be cut off from their global histories: the
foundation of European prestige and prosperity, for hundreds of year was
precisely colonial empire ... European colonialism as monumental
crime against
humanity and established a global social and political order of white racial
The ‘fortification’ and expansion of European borders, through
practices restricting and policing migration, then becomes
a way of creating new
global divisions on the basis of race, a twentieth-first century
‘redrawing’ of W E B Du Bois’
This politics informed why no defence to the European border regime was
invited or presented, as the Tribunal did not want to exhaustively
responsible by inviting a particular defendant (and not others). Such an
invitation would have acted to limit the field
of responsibility as well as
confine the harms to a particular time and place. Rather, in keeping
‘Europe’ open and deliberately
ambiguous, the Tribunal encouraged
the jury and audience to reflect upon the norms, institutions and people that
carry responsibility
for the maintenance of exclusionary and violent border
practices. Thus, participants were asked to take responsibility for how they
understood ‘Europe’ and framed the accusation.
As the above quote from a Tribunal organiser explains, the sign of
‘Europe’ could and should include what he described
‘ourselves’. Here, the accusation encompassed European citizens who
are, in a certain sense, the ‘beneficiaries’
of state systems
reliant upon established borders and the differential privileges stemming from
the institution of citizenship, and
who are morally culpable for not speaking
out about the harm done in the name of a collective Europe. The
part of the audience was called on to take responsibility
for the ongoing marginalisation and exclusion of migrants in their proximity
communities. In this way, the ‘we’ that accused ‘Europe’
was not entirely absolved of responsibility,
its claim to a coherent identity
being unsettled and contaminated by traces of both the accuser and the accused.
The Tribunal, in
this sense, became a project of speaking to and as
‘Europe’: both critiquing specific institutional practices of
as well as demanding self-reflection by ‘Europe’s’
subjects. Considered in this light, the staging of the Tribunal
fed into broader
attempts to transform the conversations about ‘European’ identity,
entitlements and belonging.
Yet the Tribunal’s construction of ‘Europe’ risked
repeating a certain exclusion of migrants from the recognised
of Europe. It risked taking established political ideas and
legal constructions of Europe and European ‘citizenship’ as
basis of its construction of Europe, rather than asserting that migrants are
already part of the actually existing political
and economic communities found
within the territorial space of ‘Europe’. This is by no means to
suggest that migrants
should be included within the ‘subject of
responsibility’. Rather, it attends to how prioritising legal relations as
a way of understanding ‘Europe’ sits ambivalently alongside other
attempts to broaden what ‘Europe’ entails
or to think about European
belonging beyond the realms of formal citizenship. After all, as several
participants emphasised throughout
the proceedings, migrants are ‘already
Europeans’ and participate on a daily basis in the political struggles and
that make up ‘Europe’.
c. ‘We accuse...’: Performing Communities of Ethical
Cohabitation
A third element of the Tribunal’s constitution was how it sought to
authorise itself through articulating a collective ‘we’.
Tribunal deployed a technology of judgment to performatively bring a particular
‘we’ into being.
Rather than grounding itself in a sovereign, bounded ‘we’, the
‘we’ of the Tribunal was much more decentered,
temporary, and
fleeting: there was no ‘we’ prior to its articulation at the
Tribunal, and there was necessarily no fixed
‘we’ behind the
utterance nor a permanent institution to give it
The Tribunal’s
‘we’ is best understood as split between functioning as a
descriptive and a performative (that is,
a statement that inaugurates or brings
a particular state into being).
As a descriptive, it described those present at, engaging with or supportive of
the Tribunal 12 sessions and verdict. As a performative,
it created a
paradigmatic ‘we’, producing and materially enacting a form of
community that both negotiates and disavows
national units as the primary
markers of belonging or the primary mode authorising access to or action within
the international domain.
The ‘we’ behind the Tribunal’s accusation of Europe made a
claim to and of the international domain that can be
described as a
makes a claim to speak the (or a)
law. In this sense, the assertion of a
‘we’ was also a claim to rightly occupy and people the international
domain, and
thus a right to structure and shape the forms of belonging and modes
of sociability of the ‘international’. But crucially,
it was not a
right asserted by virtue of legal citizenship, nor was it a simple demand for
inclusion within an already-textured space.
It was rather an attempt to make and
think of the international domain in a way that moves beyond an international
based on the nation-state
Butler’s work on the politics of contesting universals enables an
understanding of the performative claim that Tribunal 12 made.
Butler suggests
that universals can be mobilised in such a way as to give rise to a
‘performative contradiction’. The
performative contradiction arises,
for example, when a claim is made to belong to or be covered by an established
universal when
those making the claim ‘are without entitlement’ to
This collective claiming exposes ‘the contradictory character of previous
conventional formulations of the universal’.
It is not a claim based on
‘a priori recourse to a truer criterion of
universality’,
but rather seeks to rework and fashion the particular content given to the
universal anew. Butler uses the example of undocumented
people in Los Angeles
singing the United States’ anthem in Spanish as an act of protest and a
way of making a claim to belong
to the particular
For Butler, this
performative act of singing enacted a radical politics of equality and
critically articulated an unauthorised plurality
to the nation.
Butler argues that such creative interventions require a reworking of
dominant languages, institutional forms or power relations:
they challenge the
modalities of inclusion and belonging offered by ‘conventional and
exclusionary norms of universality’
(such as ideas of the legal
‘citizenship’ or the ‘international
community’).
then inaugurates a distinct gap between the exercise and realisation of a
particular norm, such that the gap can be made
visible and mobilised. In
Butler’s words, such claims prompt a ‘set of antagonistic
speculations on what the proper venue
for the claim of universality ought to be.
Who may speak [in the name of the universal, here the
‘international’]? And
how ought it be
And, further, how
might or should such claims be received? Framed in this way, Tribunal 12’s
‘we’ drew on pre-existing
ideas of an ‘international
community’ and on norms recognised within international law, but did so in
a way so as to
reshape them. In positing and enacting a different form of
international sociability, in Butler’s words, it ‘starts to
what [it] asks for’.
The question of who the ‘we’ represented and who was included in
the ‘we’ was raised at various moments throughout
the Tribunal. One
expert participant suggests that the ‘we’ should be formulated in a
way that unsettled the foundational
categories offered by law and challenged the
citizen/migrant dichotomy as a legitimate basis for political belonging:
Migrants are already new Europeans, but the question is what Europe is at
stake in engaging migrants ... We can imagine ourselves
as a clean and good
conscience of the powers that be, or we can imagine ourselves as participating
in the struggles with those migrants
in the remaking of a new kind of world
order in which Europe is a crucial
In this perspective, the Tribunal project needed to fit into part of a
broader ‘remaking’ or rearticulation of Europe,
giving rise to a new
form of international sociability. This form of political community could be
paralleled to what Butler has called
political communities grounded in an
‘ethics of co-habitation’. For Butler, such communities entail
negotiating political
relations of ‘unwilled proximity and unchosen
cohabitation’, committed to building bonds and institutions for making
‘all lives livable and equally
They necessitate ‘an obligation to live with those who already
exist’ in all their
heterogeneity.
This does not
mean doing away with foundations or universal claims to a ‘we’, nor
does it mean a refusal to oppose the
aggression and hostility of those who
occupy or colonise lands, but rather it means recognising that ‘we remain
struggle to affirm the ultimate value of that unchosen social
world’ and to ‘find political and economic forms that minimize
precarity and establish economic and political
In the Tribunal’s sessions, for example, participants emphasised the
need for rights arising from the fact of residence or the
fact of mobility as a
way of countering the stark policing of the legally-constructed categories of
‘migrant’ and ‘citizen’.
These rights exceed those
rights offered within the framework of international law, and thus assert new
political demands and claims
to justice and inclusion, based upon
migrants’ current activities and physical presence within Europe. Such an
articulation
of rights resonates with Étienne Balibar’s call to
move towards grounding ‘communities of fate’ founded
upon principles
of equality and liberty derived through practices of translation and
negotiation, rather than ‘communities
of destiny’ founded upon
principles of bounded and unified sovereign communities, constituted through
practices of
inclusion–exclusion.
thus offers us a mode of sociability around contingency, solidarity,
cohabitation and openness, rather than a bounded, determined
or fixed community.
The Tribunal’s ‘we’ then can be seen as grounding a collective
that is ‘constantly in
whose foundations and boundaries are always open to contestation and
reorganisation.
d. Bearing Witness?
A fourth element of the Tribunal’s constitution was how it incorporated
the testimony of migrants themselves as those affected
by European border
practices. Tribunal 12 adopted a ‘dramaturgical’ framework in order
to put forward a structural narrative
of the European border regime, rather than
providing a forum for people to give testimony in person. This was in stark
contrast to
earlier peoples’ tribunals and demonstrates the varying
objectives of peoples’ tribunals. This artistic approach was
taken partly
because of practical difficulties around the Tribunal’s location but it
was also a broader political statement
people subjected to certain forms of state violence, whether through being held
in immigration
detention, living with precarious legal status or having been
deported from a particular territory.
A key reason for adopting an aesthetic mode for presenting migrant testimony
was because some of those people affected by the European
border regime would
have had difficulties acting as witnesses in Sweden and may have faced serious
consequences as a result of their
testimony. Many migrants were unable to be
present at the Tribunal, particularly if they remained in detention centres or
had already
been deported from Europe. For undocumented migrants within Sweden,
the act of giving testimony would have required them to publicly
reveal their
status, an act that may have subjected them to a heightened risk of deportation.
Because of the difficulties surrounding the transnational criminalisation of
unauthorised migration, Tribunal 12 organisers felt that
any migrant testimony
presented to the Tribunal would have been unduly restricted through the very
state and transnational practices
that the Tribunal was putting on trial. That
is, it may have been only migrants with a particular legal status, or at a
stage in the asylum process, who would have been willing and able to
provide testimony. In this way, European impositions of sovereignty
practices might have disproportionately shaped the very voices being heard at
the Tribunal as well as dictated those that
were excluded. As one tribunal
organiser stated, the desire for inclusivity meant that the organisers looked
for another medium for
including migrant voices:
we wanted to have testimonies from all over Europe and not only from Sweden.
And then we would have had problems because many people
can’t travel
freely. I don’t know if that’s obvious in the Tribunal. In many ways
it’s also a statement that
these people can’t be on stage because
they’re threatened and they are trying to get away from authorities and so
Instead, the Tribunal opted to collate testimony prior to the event, speaking
to migrants and recording their stories at a less public
time and place across a
number of European countries. Migrants could also offer their stories through
migrant advocacy and activist
networks. This meant that the Tribunal was able to
capture and present a range of testimony that might otherwise have been
The range of testimony focused both on the emotional effects of
European border practices, and how migrants put forward their claims
survived and created lives under difficult circumstances. However, this medium
meant that testimony was presented in neat and
predetermined form. The audience
did not have to negotiate the intimate relations of listeners to difficult
stories and the ethical
demands that such relations entail. A central question
for the organisers was: to what degree would the reading of testimony be seen
a gesture of erasure or perpetuating a symbolic violence of speaking on behalf
of migrant?
Ultimately, this question was mediated through another ethical question for
the Tribunal: namely, the power and pitfalls of (in)visibility
unauthorised migrants in Europe. Given that many of the harms on trial were
ongoing, adopting of an artistic mode for presenting
testimony meant that
migrants, in particular those without legal authorisation to be in Sweden, would
not face any consequences as
a result of testifying to the Tribunal. Unlike
other migrant activist campaigns that generate their strength from a collective
ongoing public solidarity and create more permanent support networks for
dealing with state arrests or deportation
the Tribunal felt that
it was unable to provide such support to coincide with the Tribunal event. It
could also not guarantee the
absence of state presence at the Tribunal, thus
mitigating any attempts to create a safe space within which people could
Another reading of the use of the aesthetic form for conveying migrant
testimony could be to frame the Tribunal’s conduct as
a refusal to engage
the particular representational mode deployed within state practice. In the area
of migration law, law demands
that migrants tell their story in a particular way
that meets imposed understandings of credibility and plausibleness. As Jennifer
Beard and Gregor Noll write, there is a ‘deeper sovereign
relationship’ between authority, truth and
In addition to defining
criteria to be met to satisfy refugee status, international law ‘demands
that an applicant for refugee
status carry the truth or credibility of that
status within her as a subject of legal
interpretation’.
reading the testimonies, the experiences of migrants were presented as
‘fact’, rather than as a narrative that needed
to be evaluated by or
should evoke sympathy from a community of
Responsibility was
placed less on the migrants to tell their stories in a mode amenable to legal
adjudication, but rather projected
onto the community of listeners to listen and
act in solidarity with these struggles. Such acts of listening alone cannot undo
structural inequalities arising from, as Arendt writes, a ‘world
organised into nation-states’. Nevertheless, they can
create a heightened
sense of awareness of how the institution of citizenship is implicated in the
construction of particular political
communities, the forms of exclusions it
entails, and how citizens must act alongside migrants to undo certain systemic
3. International Civil Society and a Popular International Law
Struggles for migrant justice take many forms, encompassing a diversity of
tactics and articulations. Caroline Moulin and Peter Nyers
have expressed their
dissatisfaction with the idea of a ‘global civil society’ for its
inability to capture the diversity
of approaches as well as political subjects
that act in internationalised spaces. For Moulin and Nyers, the normative
underpinning the concept of a ‘global civil society’ is
that of being comprised of ‘groups of citizens’ who
are linked to
established and respected entities such as international NGOs, and who celebrate
liberal values of ‘rational
dialogue, consensus, persuasion, individual
autonomy, personal responsibility, mutual obligation, and
tolerance’.
Arguing that such a framework fails to account for the political practices and
subjectivities of migrants themselves, Moulin and
Nyers extend Partha
Chatterjee’s influential theorising of ‘political society’ to
the international domain ‘as
a way of thinking about global political life
from the perspective of those who are usually denied the status of political
Chatterjee,
writing in the context of democratic politics in postcolonial India, offers a
conceptual framework for distinguishing
between ‘civil society’ and
‘political society’, where the former is ‘restricted to a
small section
of culturally equipped citizens’ whereas the latter makes up
the ‘majority of the
For Chatterjee, civil society has the language, resources and sense of
entitlement to make their voices heard and express their claims
to the state as
‘rights-bearing citizens’; members of political society, rather,
negotiate their relationships with authority
through their very presence and the
fact that they are governed in particular
This means that civil
society initiatives tend to affirm the language of the ‘nation-state
founded on popular sovereignty and
granting equal rights to citizens’
while political society acts involve mobilising a practical politics around the
governmental
administration of welfare and services to specific
populations.
In taking up and
extending Chatterjee’s concepts to internationalised spaces, Moulin and
Nyers do not seek to use these concepts
as a ‘blueprint’ for
classifying different acts, but rather as a way of transforming our
understanding of the political
so as to attend to the multiple transformative
acts, demands and effects of what they call ‘international political
This schema is useful also in understanding the political claims and possible
transformative effects of peoples’ tribunals and
the social movements
within which they are located. Although Tribunal 12’s politics of
‘respectability’ is best
understood within a concept of
‘international civil society’, what is interesting about the
initiative is that it attempted
to take seriously the need to move beyond an
appeal to legal or political citizenship as the basis for articulating its
of solidarity. The Tribunal illuminated how recourse to the language of
formal citizenship or appeals to reform established institutions
will be largely
inadequate, as the regime of citizenship does not necessary institute a
relationship between those doing the acts
of governing and those being governed
nor guarantee any substantive rights to the governed.
Jury member Saskia Sassen, in her personal verdict, stressed the need to move
beyond a migrant/citizen binary, suggesting that the
internationalisation of the
citizenship regime may be at the heart of the problem generating the uneven
relations between the governors
This aligns with the
work of Craig Borowiak, who argues that the material fact of ‘being
governed’ should constitute
a moral claim of inclusion within the
in order to hold the institutions and people to account that govern
them. For Borowiak, the ‘governed should have opportunities
to sanction
and demand answers for the powers that govern
4. Conclusion
Tribunal 12, through its staging and verdict, suggests a form of law that
demands a more just order based on actual presence in political
spaces rather
than formal legal entitlements. It is a ‘popular’ form of
international law that claims the authority to
speak in the name of the
‘people’, constituting a jurisdiction beyond the international
institutional architecture structured
around states. Such a
‘popular’ law uses existing legal principles in order to mobilise
such norms otherwise than how
they are intended or usually applied within
dominant institutional arrangements. My point in naming the Tribunal and other
tribunals as a ‘popular’ form of international law is
not to deny or redeem international law from its coercive, technical
institutional registers, or to negate the fact that any claim to act in the name
of the ‘international’ will always
be interjected into ‘an
extant order within which sovereignty is operative’, that is
‘entering into a meeting place
where the conditions of sociality are
severely constrained’.
Rather, perhaps it will allow us to think through the mechanisms and
technologies that regulate entry into the international as well
as international
law’s contested orientations, and thus its political
possibilities.
Methodologically, this means taking seriously the possibility of thinking
ethically about the narratives that we tell of international
It entails a political
commitment to think about the ‘critical instability’ or
‘restlessness’ at the heart
of international law alongside its
normative force,
in order to
attend to the spaces — however fleeting, contradictory and insurrectional
— that could shape our understanding
of the international domain
differently.
While there is certainly nothing inherently progressive or democratic about
insurrectional politics, there is something critical about
denaturalising
boundaries of predefined publics in order to make them, in Craig
Borowiak’s words, the ‘perennial objects
of democratic
accounting’.
insistent accounting aims to render fragile existing institutional structures
‘susceptible to
reconfiguration’.
this does not necessarily entail the dissolution of citizenship or ideas of the
per se, it radically abandons the idea of the
finite, bounded community whose ‘authority is
For Borowiak, this
means recognising that ‘citizens alone would [not] have the authority to
decide who else should be included
and how accountability relations should be
comprised’.
Instead, the
very structures of the international legal order need to be located within the
‘field of contestation and
answerability’.
Certain elements of the Tribunal project are evidently open to critique. We
can question who has access to the sites, language and
funding of the
initiative. We can problematise its mimicking of the legal institution’s
split between expert evidence and witness
testimony (whereby the
Tribunal’s structure primarily names the contribution of Western
individuals as ‘expertise’
with the contribution of non-Western
migrants relegated to the register of ‘experience’). We can question
the Tribunal’s
mode of including migrant voices. Is this an act of
speaking for? Is this a denial or capture of individual and grounded experiences
in order to make them paradigmatic of a particular ‘other’? Does it
replicate the reification of state discourses of
migrant ‘flows’?
While these are all important avenues for critique, in this chapter I suspend
this critical register to hold on to, where possible,
the politics of the
Tribunal’s enunciations and its claim to speak in the name of a
cosmopolitan ‘we’ in its address
to ‘Europe’. This act
offers us a form of ‘popular’ international law that decentres the
nation-state as
the dominant vehicle for a jurisdictional claim in the
international domain.
permits us to envision ‘the international domain’ as a site of
contestation, whereby its subjects, content and limits
are never fully
determined, but rather figured out through many processes of constituting the
international legal order. In its claim
to speak the law, Tribunal 12
highlighted and adjudicated both specific violations of international norms as
well as harms arising
from the very structures and constitution of the
international domain itself. Like other peoples’ tribunals that came
it, this act can be read as a demand for social change that uses the
existing norms offered by international law while also serving
to imagine and
enact the international otherwise.
For further information on
Tribunal 12, see the Tribunal 12 website (now available at
https://web.archive.org/web/20130318105617/http://tribunal12.org/
which contains information about the Tribunal organisers and participants, video
recordings of all Tribunal sessions, and the final
Tribunal 12 Report written by
the International Jury.
adopt the terminology of ‘peoples’ tribunals’ rather than that
of ‘citizens’ tribunals’ because
of Tribunal 12’s
concern to break down the citizen/migrant distinction (discussed in Part 4 of
this chapter). I note though
that the concept of citizenship can be
disaggregated into various components (legal, political, economic, cultural etc)
and constituted
as a performative and relational practice such that migrants can
been seen to engage in ‘acts of citizenship’ when performing
everyday activities or staging political protests that make greater demand for
recognition, equality and inclusion within
a political community: see Engin Isin
and Greg Nielsen (eds.),
Acts of Citizenship
(London: Zed Books, 2008).
Despite this, Tribunal 12’s concern appears to be better encompassed
though the notion of constituting
a ‘people’, rather than enacting
‘citizenship’.
Hannah Arendt,
Origins of Totalitarianism
(New York: The World Publishing
Company, 1958) 295-6.
Kim Rygiel,
Globalising
Citizenship
(Vancouver: UBC Press, 2010)96.
Arendt, above n
Patrick Hayden, ‘From
exclusion to containment: Arendt, sovereign power and statelessness’
Societies without Borders
Judith Butler,
‘“I merely belong to them”’,
London Review of
(10 May 2007).
Hayden, ‘From exclusion to containment’, 254, 257; citing Peter
Rethinking Refugees: Beyond States of Emergency
Routledge, 2006).
, 286, 293-296.
279; Hayden,
Global Report
2012 – Addressing Statelessness
Clandestino
Final Report
(2009) 109,
http://cordis.europa.eu/documents/documentlibrary/126625701EN6.pdf
see also Council of Europe,
Position on the Rights of Migrants in an
Irregular Situation
(24 June 2010),
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1640817
The term ‘undocumented’ has been adopted by some migrant struggles
(particularly in the US) and it is generally accepted
within a lot of migration
studies literature. However, as Brigid Anderson noted at Tribunal 12, the irony
is that often so-called
‘undocumented’ migrants are in fact
‘over-documented’, but they have the ‘wrong’ documents.
this sense, the term ‘unauthorised’ migrant can more accurate to
reflect their relationship to state
For NGO reports, see
eg Platform for International Cooperation on Undocumented Migrants,
PICUM’s Main Concerns about the Fundamental Rights of Undocumented
People in Europe
(2010). For migrant statements, see eg statement issued by
the International Migrants Alliance and Migrante Europe:
www.apmigrants.org/home/item/59-ima-statement-and-critique-of-the-5th-gfmd
Nicolas De Genova,
‘Migrant “illegality” and deportability in everyday
life’ (2002) 31
Annual Review of Anthropology
419–447 at 439;
Nicolas De Genova and Nathalie Peutz (eds),
The Deportation Regime:
Sovereignty, Space and the Freedom of Movement
(London: Duke University
Press, 2010).
an analysis of how law illegalises people, see Catherine Dauvergne,
People Illegal: What Globalization Means for Migration and Law
(Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press,
We, the People of Europe? Reflections on Transnational
Citizenship
(Princeton: James Swenson trans, Princeton University Press,
See, eg, Brian
Opeskin et al (eds),
Foundations of
International Migration Law
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012). While the fragmentation of
international law has seen the proliferation of mechanism
for the articulation,
regulation and enforcement of migrants rights within the different regimes that
constitute the international
legal order — including, for example,
migrants as ‘civilians’ under international humanitarian law; as
of human trafficking under international criminal law; as
‘workers’ subject to international labour standards; as
suppliers’ under international trade law; or as
‘refugees’ under international refugee law — these
‘status-based’
regimes still function largely around an idea of the
individual-as-human
Gregor Noll, ‘Why human rights fail to protect undocumented
European Journal of Migration and Law
See generally
Shaunnaugh Dorsett and Shaun McVeigh,
(Abington: Routledge,
Leanne Weber,
‘Death at the Global Frontier’,
OpenDemocracy
The Tribunal 12
website explicitly states that the project is ‘inspired by the
International War Crimes Tribunal that was formed
by Bertrand Russell and
Jean-Paul Sartre in 1967’.
The Tribunal website
emphasises that ‘artistic expression [is] an integral part of the
‘About Shahrazad’,
Shahrazad – Stories for Life
www.shahrazadeu.org/en/content/about-shahrazad
The Shahrazad project also
commenced with a small tribunal event, known as the Stavanger or Hospitality
Tribunal, held in May 2008.
NGO Monitor, ‘The Russell Tribunal on Palestine: A Legal Farce and Total
Failure’ (10 November
For a discussion of
such critiques, see Christine Chinkin, ‘Peoples’ tribunals:
Legitimate or rough justice’ (2006)
Windsor Yearbook on Access to
201–220. Attempts have been made though to reclaim such terms,
with for example, Arundhati Roy defiantly declaring in her concluding
the World Tribunal on Iraq, that ‘this court is a kangaroo court’:
Arundhati Roy, ‘Opening Speech of
the Spokesperson of the Jury of
Conscience’ in Müge Gürsoy Sökmen (ed),
World Tribunal
on Iraq: Making the Case against War
(Northampton: Olive Branch Press, 2008)
Christine Chinkin,
‘Editorial comments: Women’s International Tribunal on Japanese
Military Sexual Slavery’
American Journal of International
Fleming Terrell, ‘Unofficial accountability’
Journal of Women and the Law
Chinkin, ‘Editorial
comments’, 335.
Richard Falk, ‘World speaks on Iraq’
Practitioner
For example, a key
Tribunal 12 organiser described the Tribunal as having ‘moral’
rather than ‘judicial value’,
suggesting that the Tribunal’s
main contribution was not legal but rather its elaboration of a ‘full
picture of the problems,
and examples of how the systematic violence and
practices are used’ so that the Tribunal findings and verdicts could be
by activists in pushing for systemic change. Interview with Tribunal 12
organiser (November 2012, on file with
On Europe as a
historically-contested social construct, see Balibar, above n
(narrating Europe’s
‘hyper-real’ qualities) and Roberto Dainotto,
(London: Duke University Press, 2010), on how theoretical
understandings of the location of ‘Europe’ have shifted over
Dainotto seeks to deconstruct the idea of ‘Europe’ such that it no
longer makes sense to speak its
On the power of an
‘address’, see Louis Althusser,
Essays on Ideology
Verso, 1971) 44–48.
Interview with Tribunal 12 organiser (November 2012, on file with
Schengen Acquis Convention
[2000] OJ L
Council Regulation (EC) 343/2003
of 18 February 2003
Regulation’).
Gregory Feldman,
The Migration Apparatus: Security, Labor and Policymaking in
the European Union
(Stanford: Stanford University Press,
Nicholas De
Genova’s address to Tribunal 12 (Session 4: Detention and
Deportation).
Genova’s address to Tribunal 12 in which he references W E B Du Bois,
The Souls of Black Folk
(Chicago: AC McClurg, 1903).
On technologies of law, see
Dorsett and McVeigh, above n
One tribunal
organiser expressed disappointment that there were no follow-up events for the
Tribunal, no way of further galvanising
the networks created through the project
as a way for further solidifying, shaping and mobilising this ‘we’.
with Tribunal 12 organiser (November 2012, on file with
J L Austin,
to Do Things with Words
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962); Judith Butler,
Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative
(London: Routledge,
See generally
Butler’s remarks in Judith Butler and Gavatri Chakravorty Spivak,
Sings the Nation-State?
(London: Seagull Books, 2007)
‘Restaging the universal: Hegemony and the limits of formalism’, in
Judith Butler et al,
Contingency, Hegemony, Universality: Contemporary
Dialogues on the Left
(London: Verso, 2000)
Butler and Spivak, above
Butler writes:
‘It does suggest, however, that conventional and exclusionary norms of
universality can, through perverse reiterations,
produce unconventional
formulations of universality that expose the limited and exclusionary features
of the former one at the same
time that they mobilize a new set of
demands.’: Butler, above n
Nicholas De Genova’s
address to Tribunal 12 (Session 4: Detention and
Deportation).
Judith Butler,
‘Precarious Life, Vulnerability and an Ethics of Cohabitation’
Journal of Speculative Philosophy
Balibar, above n
Butler, above n
Interview with Tribunal 12
organiser (November 2012, on file with author).
See, eg, the recent public
campaigns of undocumented people in the US, including the ’No Borders, No
Fear’ UndocuBus
speaking tour, as well as migrant public sit-ins outside
of official institutions.
The use of actors made Tribunal 12 different from two earlier peoples’
tribunals dealing with aspects of migration. For example,
the focus of the
International Migrants Tribunal (Manila, December 2012) was on the harms arising
from official labour migration
to the global North, and the main charge against
countries of the global North was that of human ‘slavery’. Here, the
Tribunal heard testimony from return migrants, who were citizens of the
Philippines, or migrant activists (from Mexico, Indonesia,
Italy among other
places) who had the ability to access legal visas for travelling to the
Philippines for the Tribunal hearing. No
testimony was heard from unauthorised
migrants or undocumented people (
www.apmigrants.org/home/item/83-final-verdict-of-the-international-migrants-tribunal
Similarly, the Permanent Peoples’ Tribunal Session on the Right of Asylum
(Berlin, December 1994) heard testimony from various
witness (including
nationals from Columbia, Peru and Iran). Interestingly, one of these testimonies
was given by a representative
instead of in person. A third example is that of
the Independent Asylum Commission in the UK, which produced three reports in
and conducted numerous public hearings and semi-public ‘focus
groups’ across the UK as a way of gathering testimony
as well as invited
written and video submissions from asylum seekers. The Commission also
encouraged the use of pseudonyms to protect
migrant identities (e
www.independentasylumcommission.org.uk
Jennifer Beard and Gregor
Noll, ‘Parrhesia and credibility: The sovereign of refugee status
determination’
Social & Legal Studies
also Anthea Vogl, ‘Telling stories from start to finish: Exploring the
demand for narrative in refugee testimony’
Griffith Law
law’s demand for a particular coherent and plausible narrative in refugee
determination cases, see Trish Luker, ‘Decision
making conditioned by
radical uncertainty: Credibility assessment at the Australian Refugee Review
International Journal of Refugee Law
Moulin and Peter Nyers, ‘“We live in a country of the UNHCR”:
Refugee protests and global political society’
International
Political Sociology
Partha Chatterjee,
Politics of the Governed
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004)
Chatterjee notes that those who make up his ‘political society’
often need to ‘transgress the strict lines
of legality in struggling to
live and work’.
Nyers, above n
Saskia Sassen’s
remarks at Tribunal 12 (Session 5:
Craig Borowiak,
Accountability and Democracy: The Pitfalls and Promise of Popular Control
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011)
Sundhya Pahuja and Shaun
McVeigh, ‘Rival jurisdictions: The promise and loss of sovereignty’,
in Charles Barbour and
George Pavlich (eds),
After Sovereignty: On the
Question of Political Beginnings
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2010)
This idea of a
‘popular international law’ can be contrasted with accounts
asserting the ‘democratisation of international
law’ through the
inclusion of civil society in international law-making processes. In such
narratives, civil society designates
a relatively knowable and fixed field of
actors that is included within established institutional process as legal and
citizens. They may shape, interpret or inform the content of
international law and the spaces for contestation, but not necessarily
claim to belonging to or being constitutive of international law per
Feminist international
lawyers, for example, have long articulated this need. For instance, Anne Orford
writes that ‘reading
and writing about international law involves the
reproduction of power relations’ such that subverting dominant narratives
could ‘contribute to the communal project of making it possible to imagine
and create other ways of being’: Anne Orford,
‘Positivism and the
power of international law’
Melbourne Journal of
International Law
–529 at 528.
Sundhya Pahuja,
Decolonising International Law: Development, Economic Growth and the Politics
of Universality
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011)
Borowiak, above n
Borowiak rightly notes that ‘there is nothing inherently democratic or
just about the category of
insurgency’.
Etymologically, the
word ‘popular’, derived from
, denotes a sense of
something ’belonging to the people’: a sense of it being the proper
domain, possession and quality
of the people.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (435 KB)
PDF format (164 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter