URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AUJlLegHist/2005/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:33:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maher, Laurence W --- "Half Light Between War and Peace: Herbert Vere Evatt, The Rule of International Law, and the Corfu Channel Case" [2005] AUJlLegHist 3; (2005) 9(1) Australian Journal of Legal History 47
Half Light Between War And Peace: Herbert Vere Evatt, The Rule Of International Law, And The Corfu Channel Case
I Introduction
II The Aftermath Of World War
III A Failure Of Diplomacy
IV The Un Security Council Disappoints
V First Case For A New Court
VI Evatt – Liked By A Few: Loathed By Most
VII An Unsolicited And Unwelcome Offer
VIII Irritability In Whitehall: What To Do – Accept Or Reject?
IX Justice Delayed: The Decisions In The Corfu Channel Case
In His Memoirs Of Meetings With Stalin, The Albanian Dictator, Enver Hodja, Recorded The Following Comment About A Meeting In April
X H V Evatt And The Rule Of International Law
Half Light Between War and Peace: Herbert Vere
Evatt, The Rule of International Law, and The Corfu Channel Case
LAURENCE W MAHER
The Court can only regard the alleged right of intervention [of the
United Kingdom] as the manifestation of a policy of force, such
as has, in the
past, given rise to most serious abuses and such as cannot, whatever be the
present defects in international organization
find a place in international law.
Intervention is perhaps still less admissible in the particular form it would
take here: for,
from the nature of things, it would be reserved for the most
powerful States, and might easily lead to perverting the administration
international justice itself.
I INTRODUCTION
On 15 May 1946, Albanian shore batteries fired without warning on two British
, as they passed southward
through Albanian territorial waters in the North Corfu Strait. The two British
warships, which were in
a channel swept through a former German minefield in
October 1944, were not damaged and had held their fire during the Albanian
The British Government immediately protested to the Albanian Government,
but a major dispute developed and deteriorated sharply in
late October 1946 when
two other British warships were mined in the North Corfu Strait with heavy loss
This long-forgotten episode in the early days of the Cold War prompted active
Australian participation in the consideration by the
Security Council of the
United Nations (UN) of the ensuing controversy, the institution by the United
Kingdom of the first proceeding
in the International Court of Justice (ICJ)
which had been established by the UN Charter, and an approach by the Australian
Prime Minister, Minister for External Affairs, and Attorney-General,
Herbert Vere Evatt, KC,
to the UK Government
offering to appear as counsel for the UK in its pending ICJ case. Although it
came to nothing, Evatt’s
unsolicited and embarrassing offer to assist the
UK in seeking justice in the Corfu Channel case was the subject of anxious
consideration
by the Foreign Office, the Dominions Office, and British
ministers. The offer to appear as counsel was entirely in keeping with the
distinctive Evatt persona, with his fierce determination to affect the course of
world events decisively in the immediate and
turbulent aftermath of the
bloodbath that was the Second World War, and with Evatt’s unwavering
commitment to the just and
peaceful settlement of international disputes.
Throughout the Corfu Channel dispute, Evatt sought to further the cause of
justice under international law as a permanent institutionalised
alternative to
the use of force in international disputes. The UN, including its independent
judicial organ, the ICJ, was to be the
institution. Evatt had been instrumental
in the establishment of the UN and a commitment to making the UN work
effectively was to
be a cornerstone of Australian foreign policy in the
immediate postwar years. Evatt’s approach to the UK Government concerning
the Corfu Channel case was characteristic of his general attitude to the
discharge of his responsibilities as Minister for External
Affairs. A dominant
feature of Evatt’s approach to international dispute resolution was his
insistence on, first, the equal
application of fixed substantive legal rules and
standards, and, secondly, on compliance with procedural fairness which
courts and tribunals routinely applied under the rubric, natural
justice. This article offers an account of an episode in which
was at the forefront of his conduct of Australian foreign policy.
II THE AFTERMATH OF WORLD WAR
At the cessation of hostilities in Europe in May 1945, only a very small
percentage of the hundreds of thousands of mines laid in
the Mediterranean and
in the seas of north west Europe had been swept. In the case of the Corfu
Channel, the existence of a safe
route had been announced by the Allied Command
in November 1944 and in January and February 1945 the channel had been
check-swept
by the Royal Navy with negative results.
By an agreement made in November 1945 between the USSR, the USA, the UK, and
France, the formidable task of removing the remaining
mines in a co-ordinated
way was committed to the International Central Mine Clearance Board. A
Mediterranean Zone Board with representatives
from the region as well as the
four powers' representatives was assigned the task of clearing the Mediterranean
Zone. In keeping
with its stated objectives, the main Board promulgated detailed
information about mines and mine clearance to world shipping interests
the Mediterranean Zone countries including Albania. The information included
maps showing the areas of Albanian territorial
waters which had already been
swept by British mine-sweepers.
Until May 1946, shipping of all kinds regularly used the North Corfu Channel
without hindrance from either of the two territorial
powers concerned –
Albania and Greece. No objection had been raised by Albania or any other country
to the active presence
of British mine-sweepers in late 1944 and early 1945 in
the North Corfu Channel, Valona Bay, and the Durazzo Approaches. It was true
that Albania had not been invited to send observers to the Zone Board, but this
was only because she possessed no mine-sweeping
The principality of Albania had been carved out of the remnant Ottoman Empire
at the instigation of Austria and Italy at the London
Conference of Ambassadors
in December 1912 following the First Balkan War. Albania was not then ready for
nationhood and by the late
1920s it had become a kind of protectorate under the
regime of the Italian dictator, Benito Mussolini. On 7 April 1939, Italy invaded
and occupied Albania. The supremely egotistical and opportunistic Mussolini
plunged Italy into the Second World War on the AXIS side
on 10 June 1940. On 26
October 1940, an Italian invasion force crossed the frontier between Albania and
Greece. To Mussolini’s
surprise and Hitler’s dismay, a much smaller
and much less well-equipped Greek army drove the Italian invaders back into
On 6 April 1941, a huge German army invaded Greece from Bulgaria and
Yugoslavia. By the end of May 1941, Germany and its AXIS allies,
Bulgaria, had conquered and occupied Greece including Crete. Italy sued for
peace in 1943. In November 1944, a communist
regime seized power in Albania and
it soon became one of the most rigid members of the Soviet bloc (and, following
the Sino-Soviet
split in the 1960s, the Beijing camp).
Britain had recognised the new Albanian regime in November 1945, but
diplomatic relations between the two nations were
Greco-Albanian relations had been
strained since the creation of Albania in part because of Greek complaints about
the treatment
of Greeks in, and Greece’s territorial claim to, that part
of southern Albania which to the Greeks was Northern
The installation of a communist
government in Albania was to make matters worse when, after the end of the AXIS
occupation of Greece
in November 1944, Greece took a sharp swing to the
repressive right and descended into the so-called ‘third round’ of
civil war in late 1946. Moreover, Greece had renewed its territorial claim over
Northern Epirus (unsuccessfully, as matters turned
out) in the negotiations
leading to the treaties that dealt with the consequences of the Second World
The mariners who had been using the reopened Corfu Channel after the end of
the Second World War in May 1945 relied generally on the
rule of international
law (or, if not an accepted rule of law, then at least a rule of usage of long
standing) which recognised that
in peace and war there is for both warships and
merchant vessels a right of innocent passage through straits forming highways of
international maritime traffic. However, the British Government entertained a
doubt as to whether the right of innocent passage carried
with it a right to
carry out mine sweeping operations within territorial waters without the
agreement of the territorial power.
III A FAILURE OF DIPLOMACY
In earlier times, the unprovoked attack on the
would have been met, predictably and legitimately, by
proportionate retaliatory force. However, the British Government decided not
resort to the traditional response and, instead, denounced the attack as a
deliberate and outrageous breach of international law
and maritime custom, and
demanded an immediate and public apology and an assurance that the persons
responsible would be punished.
The Albanian
Government's reply made false claims about the behaviour of the two British
warships, assumed that foreign warships
had no right to pass through an
international strait part of which was included in territorial waters, and added
that the ships would
not have been fired upon if they had been recognised as
British ships. Further notes were exchanged by the two governments between
and August 1946. Albania asserted that foreign warships had no right of passage
through her territorial waters without her authorization.
In a note delivered on
2 August 1946, the British Government stated that it did not recognise any right
on the part of a territorial
power to demand the fulfilment of conditions before
entry was permitted into a recognised international channel. Britain could not
therefore agree to give prior notification of passage through the Corfu Channel
and warned that if in the future British ships were
fired on in the channel,
fire would be returned.
On 22 October 1946, a Royal Navy squadron comprising the cruisers,
HMS Leander
, and two destroyers,
HMS Saumarez
, was sent northward through the strait from Corfu
expressly in order to test the Albanian attitude, that is to say, to see whether
the ships would be allowed to pass without
interference.
The crews were at action
stations with express instructions to return fire if attacked, but the
ships’ guns were in their normal
position trained fore and aft and were
not loaded. During the trial passage, the British ships were proceeding slowly
swept portion of the strait close to the Albanian coast.
was leading, closely followed by
. About two
miles astern on the same course was
, closely followed by
. Outside the Bay of Saranda,
struck a mine and was
heavily damaged.
was ordered to give her assistance and take her
in tow. Whilst towing the damaged ship,
struck a mine and was also
heavily damaged. Despite the fact that his vessel’s bows were blown off
and high cross winds meant
that there was a danger that both vessels would be
wrecked, the commander of the
was able to make Corfu with the
still in tow after twelve hours of hard
The explosions killed 44 officers
and men. Another 42 sailors were injured. On this occasion, the Albanian shore
batteries did not
open fire, but an Albanian Navy vessel appeared in the
vicinity flying the Albanian ensign and a white
On 26 October, the British Government informed the Albanian Government that,
in view of the serious accidents to the British warships,
the Corfu Channel
would shortly be swept. Three days later, Albania protested to the Secretary
General of the United Nations, Trygve
against what it called the
violation of its territorial waters and provocative incursions by British
warships. On 31 October, the
Albanian Government also replied directly to the
British protest note of 27 October by protesting against the entry of British
into Albanian territorial waters and stating that there was no
objection to minesweeping provided territorial waters were not entered
inside or outside the strait. This attitude was entirely unacceptable to Britain
because of the fact that part of the channel
was located wholly within Albanian
territorial waters. So far as London was concerned, the Albanian position as set
out in its note
could only be construed as meaning that Albania was refusing to
agree that the Corfu Channel should be rendered safe for navigation.
provocatively, the Albanian note also stated that the Albanian Government could
take no responsibility for the consequences
if the minesweeping took place and
would regard it as a violation of Albanian sovereignty. This was treated by the
British Government
as an attempt to obstruct the clearance of a serious menace
to international navigation.
On 10 November, the British Government informed the Albanian Government that
the channel would be swept two days later and that the
proposed minesweeping
operation had been unanimously approved by the Central Mine Clearance Board on 1
November 1946. This approval
had been granted at the request of the UK, but was
expressly subject to Albania consenting to the foreshadowed operation. The
note defined the exact area to be swept, stated that none of the British
ships would be stationed in Albanian territorial waters,
and that the operation
would be carried out in the same way as the original sweeping in 1944 and 1945
to which the Albanian Government
had raised no objection. On the eve of the
sweeping operation, the Albanian Government addressed a further note to the
British Government
stating that while the Albanian Government did not in
principle object to the Royal Navy undertaking the sweeping of the channel,
proposed a mixed commission should be established by the UN to determine the
area involved. The British Government’s attitude
to that Albanian proposal
was that it was disingenuous and a delaying tactic since the swept channel had
existed for two years and
all the information published about it had already
been supplied to Albania. The Albanians also sent a second complaint to UN
General Lie protesting in strong terms against the British
Government's action in presenting Albania with a
fait accompli
Albanians went so far as to deny the existence of the Central Mine Clearance
Board in spite of the fact that a request that
Albania should be represented on
it had been put forward by the Yugoslav Government doubtless with the knowledge
of the Albanian
Government.
Albania made it
clear that any sweeping undertaken without its consent inside Albanian
territorial waters where foreign warships
had no reason to sail could only be
considered a deliberate violation of Albanian territory and sovereignty.
The minesweeping operation was carried out on 12 and 13 November 1946 under
the direction of the Allied Commander-in-Chief Mediterranean.
At the invitation
of the Mediterranean Zone Board, a French naval officer was in attendance as an
observer. The minesweeping occurred
within Albanian territorial waters and
within the limits of the previously swept channel. And it occurred under the
cover of an aircraft
carrier, cruisers and other warships. Twenty-two moored
which left no doubt that they had been deliberately laid as a minefield and were
not isolated floating mines.
The minefield
extended for three miles along the channel. Two of the mines were taken to Malta
for expert examination. This revealed
that the mines (each containing 600 pounds
of explosive) were of German manufacture, that they were free from rust and
marine growth,
that they had been recently painted, and that they still had
grease on their mooring cables.
conclusions were that there was no doubt whatever that the mines were laid only
a very short time before the date on which
suffered damage and casualties. Mine fragments recovered from the
confirmed the origin of the mines.
In the six months since the attack on the
Albanian authorities had maintained a close watch on all ships using the North
Corfu Channel. From the British standpoint, it
was certain that no mine field
could have been laid in the channel within a few hundred yards of the Albanian
shore batteries without
the connivance, or at least the knowledge, of the
Albanian authorities.
The UK accepted that it had acted without the Albanian consent which was a
condition of the Central Mine Clearance Board approval
and that the minesweeping
operation was not done in the exercise of the right of innocent or ordinary
passage. Moreover, the UK accepted
that, in principle, international law did not
allow a State to assemble a large number of warships in the territorial waters
State and to carry out minesweeping in those waters. However, the UK
position was that it was responding to a situation of extreme
urgency and that
it was entitled to carry out the minesweeping without anybody’s consent.
More specifically, it claimed a lawful
entitlement to effect the minesweeping
operation (a) under the four-power mine clearing agreement of 22 November 1945,
the exercise of the right of a potential claimant for compensation to
corpora delicti
as soon as possible for fear they should be
taken away without leaving any traces.
On 9 December 1946, the British Government sent a very detailed note to the
Albanian Government narrating the relevant events that
had occurred since late
The note demanded an apology for the
unprovoked attacks of 15 May 1946 and 22 October 1946, an assurance that there
would be no repetition
of the Albanians' unlawful action, and reparation for the
deaths, injuries, and damage caused by those attacks. The Albanians were
informed that if no satisfactory reply was received within 14 days, the matter
would be brought before the UN Security Council.
In its response received on 21 December, Albania expressed regret for the
incident which occurred on 21 October, but denied responsibility
for the laying
of mines. The Albanians said that the mine laying must have been the work of
those who did not wish to see friendly
relations re-established between the
United Kingdom and Albania. The Albanian Government insinuatingly drew attention
to the fact
that Greek and other foreign vessels had several times entered
southern territorial waters of Albania despite Albanian protests.
IV THE UN SECURITY COUNCIL DISAPPOINTS
The United Kingdom, one of the five permanent members of the Security
Council, viewed the Albanian stance as totally unsatisfactory
and, on 13 January
1947, as foreshadowed, referred the incident to the Security Council under art
35 of the UN Charter. Article 35(1),
which forms part of Chapter VI of the
Charter, ‘Pacific Settlement of Disputes’, provides that ‘Any
member of the
United Nations may bring any dispute, or any situation of the
nature referred to in article 34, to the attention of the Security
the General Assembly’. Article 34 authorises the Security Council to:
investigate any dispute, or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to determine
the continuance of the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The UK characterised the complaint against the Albanian Government as
a serious threat to, and breach of, international peace and security,
showing criminal disregard of the safety of innocent seamen
of any nationality
lawfully using an international highway.
Australia, one of the founding members of the UN, had been elected to one of
the non-permanent seats on the Security Council in 1946
for a two-year
The principal Australian
representatives in the Australian Mission to the UN were Paul
and Lieutenant-Colonel William R
At Evatt’s direction, the Australian delegation to the UN was
instructed on 16 January 1947 to press for the fullest documentation
facts by both parties to the Corfu Channel dispute together with a statement
from the Central Mine Clearance Board. Evatt
wanted all the documents produced
to be referred to a Security Council sub-committee for a report on the position
revealed by the
evidence both as regards the facts and the legal (liability)
position. The case did not, in Evatt’s estimate, require a view
scene of the accident by a commission of investigation. If the UK established an
unequivocal case to the satisfaction of the
Security Council, every effort was
to be made by the Australian delegation, in the interests of the prestige of the
UN, to see that
effective action was taken under the UN
On 18 February 1947, the UK Ambassador to the UN, Sir Alexander
presented the UK case against
Albania to the Security Council.
to Cadogan, the detailed direct evidence which he laid out showed that the mine
field had been deliberately, recently and
secretly laid contrary to arts 2-5 of
the Hague Convention No 8 of 1907 which forbade the laying of un-notified
minefields,
and that, in any event, what
had occurred was a crime against humanity. It was, said Cadogan, pure chance
that warships were the
victims of the mine laying and an accident might equally
well have happened to merchant shipping. There was also indirect evidence
Albanian responsibility, namely, the fact that Albania made extreme claims to
exercise control over the passage of shipping, and,
secondly, various instances
showing that all passing traffic even at night was under closest scrutiny and
had even been subjected
to gunfire.
Cadogan indicated that the UK was proposing that the Security Council should
resolve that an un-notified mine field had been laid
in the Corfu Strait by the
Albanian Government or with its connivance resulting in serious injury to
British ships and loss of life
and injury to the crews, and, secondly, that the
UK and Albania should settle the dispute between them on the basis of such a
Council finding and in the event of failure to settle either party
might apply to the Security Council for further consideration
of the dispute.
The Albanian representative replied at length on 19
On 19 February, the Australian delegation was instructed that Evatt was
‘entirely sympathetic to the UK reaction [as voiced
by Cadogan] and [that
Evatt had] little doubt that a
investigation of the facts
would support [a] finding
’ that an un-notified minefield was laid in
the Corfu Channel by the Albanian Government or with its connivance (italics
1 ... The issue is so important that, before such a finding is made it
is as minimum essential that a sub-committee be appointed
to enquire into the
facts and to report to Security Council, or alternatively Security Council
should itself decide facts on all
the evidence.
Of course, if Albania had
admitted truth of facts (which however they deny
...) investigation would be
unnecessary: otherwise it is an essential preliminary to Security Council
2 You should tell Cadogan and US representatives immediately of our
general views, and, at not too early a stage and if timely, propose
Council, making it quite clear proposal is made because we regard charges as
amounting in substance to mass murder and that
if facts are substantiated
exemplary punishment should be meted out to those responsible.
3 If Sub Committee plan is unacceptable,
judicial arbitration
would be satisfactory and in some respects preferable. (italics
On 24 February, Hasluck moved in the Security Council to set up a
sub-committee of inquiry.
Because of the
conflicting testimony about the origin of the minefield, it was doubtful whether
the Council in full session could
expeditiously determine the facts and it was
therefore necessary to establish the sub-committee to enable the Council without
without acrimony and by orderly procedure to arrive at an early decision.
The Soviet Union opposed the Australian proposal outright
and declared that the
UK had made baseless and unjust accusations, that art 35 did not cover such a
case, and that the UK had not
complied with the
On 27 February, with the Soviet Union, Poland and Syria abstaining, the
Security Council adopted the Australian proposal by eight
votes and set 10 March
1947 as the date for the sub-committee to report. Australia, Columbia (whose
representative acted as sub-committee
chairman), and (at the Soviet
Union’s insistence) Poland were appointed to the sub-committee on the
nomination of Syria. Cadogan
did not participate in the vote on the composition
of the sub-committee because Albania did not have a
On 11 March, the Australian UN delegation reported to Canberra on the latest
meetings of the sub-committee. The delegation advised
that prospects were that
it could obtain a report endorsed by Columbia and Australia if not by Poland
isolating for the Council's
decision the three main British allegations namely,
that damage occurred, that it was caused by an undeclared minefield, and that
the minefield was either laid by Albania or with Albanian connivance and
analysing the evidence on each point thus concentrating
the Council’s
attention on the essentials and avoiding side issues raised by the Soviet Union.
The final paragraph of the cable
was as follows:
3 We have been closely in touch with the United Kingdom Delegation
throughout and such a report leaving way open for submission of
their resolution
would be acceptable to them. Probable outcome is that Soviet will veto United
Kingdom resolution and proposal will
then be made probably by Columbia to refer
whole case to Court. Poland which originally favoured reference to Court in
private discussion
of case now urges that only way is to tell parties to
negotiate under Article 33.
For Evatt the Security Council’s fact-finding responsibilities
necessarily called for quasi-judicial compliance with the then
British domestic requirements of natural
Procedure was not a matter of mere
ritualistic adherence to form. It was inextricably part of the
of a civilised system of justice. Moreover, nothing should be done which would
detract from
the appearance of justice
. But the delegation had not been
given detailed instructions as to how it was to go about its task on the
sub-committee. This is
hardly surprising. The task had been left in their hands.
Moreover, they had been told, in effect, to liaise with Cadogan. But in
message sent on 18 March and which had probably been drafted or settled by
Evatt, the delegation was given the following strict
instruction as to how it
was to conduct itself:
It is difficult to understand your para 3. A most important feature of
the Australian policy of fact-finding committees is their complete
objectivity
and impartiality. It would therefore be unwise to maintain contact during an
investigation with one of the parties to
the dispute not represented on the
committee. Such action might easily lead to great embarrassment and call into
question the good
faith of our work on the Security
This stricture would, arguably, have been entirely appropriate in the context
of domestic judicial or quasi-judicial decision-making.
But could it have any
sensible application in the context of the operations of the newly created
international instrumentality charged
under art 24(1) of the UN Charter with
‘primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
and having five
members? Given that unique
context, could the Security Council, as Evatt argued in the House of
Representatives on 8 November 1946,
exercise a quasi-judicial authority with all
that conveyed for Australian lawyers?
In a report received in Canberra on 19 March, the delegation provided a
summary of the Security Council sub-committee’s
• no opinion was given on the accuracy of the Albanian allegations;
• there was no conflicting evidence for the British claim that damage
and loss of life had been suffered by the British ships;
• no agreement could be reached whether the minefield which was located
in the minesweeping operation conducted on 13 November
1946 existed on 22
October 1946;
• the sub-committee had submitted that the first question for the
Security Council to face was whether or not, having regard
to the nature and
extent of the available evidence, the Council felt it was able to pronounce on
the question whether or not the
minefield which was located in the minesweeping
operation conducted on 13 November 1946 existed on 22 October 1946, and whether
not this minefield was laid by the Albanians or with the connivance of the
Albanian Government.
An officer in the Department of External Affairs - perhaps the head of the UN
Division, K C O Shann – wrote on the cable opposite
this last paragraph
the acerbic yet arguably justified comment: ‘This was what the C’te
was to find out.’
It seems clear enough that, in keeping in touch with the UK delegation,
Hasluck and his colleagues had done what Evatt had expressly
or impliedly
instructed them to do. It is little wonder then that the delegation resented
being reproved by Evatt for engaging in
what the hyper-sensitive Minister
adjudged were impermissible informal dealings with one of the parties to the
dispute. In this respect,
Evatt the lawyer was altogether ignoring the unique
context of Security Council decision-making. In its report of 19 March the
defended itself in the following terms:
We assure you that Australian participation in the work of the committee
has been objective and impartial throughout. The Polish participation
work of this committee was, perhaps, the dirtiest and most unscrupulous display
we have yet encountered in the United Nations,
assiduous attempts being made to
change the character of the committee’s work, to distort the evidence, to
transform our work
into a partisan demonstration against United Kingdom and to
confuse the case by introducing various side issues. In resisting this
single handed as the Columbian President was disappointingly silent until the
final meeting when he eventually supported
us in insisting on impartial report
and exclusion of the Polish conclusions. Our line throughout was to maintain the
character of
the committee as discharging functions comparable with those of the
League of Nations Rapporteur, namely an examination and analysis
of the case and
a clear presentation of the points at issue. While the report is not as good as
we should have liked, it is the best
we could obtain, inasmuch as Columbian
hesitated to join us in a majority report and it has the negative virtue of not
any improper material. Our reference in paragraph 3 of [cable no]
Security 299 was intended to inform you that, in accordance with
instructions, we had kept in touch with United Kingdom delegation informing them
of proceedings of committee. We did not take
sides during the committee’s
The same person in the Department of External Affairs noted against the
delegation’s explanation of its dealings with the UK
delegation that
‘This should not have been done’ and ‘not after the
C’tee started’ and, against the
delegation’s protestation of
not taking sides the rather baffling observation, ‘By the look of the
evidence this should
have been done’.
There is a glimpse of Hasluck’s frustration in the dedication to his
very detailed book analysing the operations of the Security
of Security
(1948) which was published after Hasluck had left the Department
of External Affairs. Hasluck dedicated the book to ‘Those
with Whom I have
Argued’ and stated that in his friendly association in argument with men
and women in United Nations circles
‘my faith in argument has been
reinforced and I want the argument to spread and keep on spreading’. Evatt
and Hasluck
shared the strong opinion that the Security Council rested on
principle, not power. But the two men were otherwise at odds temperamentally
intellectually. Evatt gets only passing mention in Hasluck’s book and
there is every reason to believe that Hasluck saw
little in Evatt’s
characteristically quirky control of Australia’s participation in the
Security Council’s treatment
of the Corfu Channel incident that advanced
the cause of argument in the sense in which Hasluck embraced
There can be little doubt that Evatt was unhappy with what the sub-committee
had produced and with how the Australian representative(s)
had behaved, and that
he was determined to administer further chastisement. In a ‘MOST
IMMEDIATE’ cable settled by Evatt
and sent to the UN delegation on 20
March, the delegation was informed that the ‘situation as reported by you
seems very unsatisfactory’.
The circumstantial evidence appeared to
justify a finding that the mines were laid with Albanian connivance, but the
sub-committee
had made no recommendation on this point. It had apparently lost
control of its procedure due to the action of the Polish representative
committee secretariat. British lives had been lost and, although the UK action
might have been over hasty and even ill-advised,
the delegation was to do
nothing which could be regarded as embarrassing to the UK. The delegation was to
fall in behind whatever
approach the UK took in the Security Council. If the UK
wanted the matter referred to the ICJ, the delegation was to support such
proposal strongly. If the UK was firmly against referral to the court, Australia
was not to support a reference unless a clear
majority was in favour. The
delegation was to act in close consultation with Cadogan and to take a suitable
opportunity of criticising
any unwarranted interference by the secretariat and
the introduction by any country of irrelevant propaganda. The enquiry ‘had
been unsatisfactory and it was regrettable that, even if [the] Australian
delegate could not get support from Columbia, he did not
take a strong line in a
minority report’.
On 21 March, the delegation sent a detailed report to Canberra on the resumed
Security Council debate the previous day. Apparently
still stung by
Evatt’s assertion that the delegation had somehow behaved improperly or
unwisely, Hasluck reminded Canberra
that the delegation’s strongest line
during the Committee's work was to maintain complete objectivity and
impartiality of the
Committee even though that meant limiting the scope of the
Committee’s report. In Canberra – probably Shann, again –
sarcastically wrote in the margin, ‘by consulting the UK no doubt!’
V FIRST CASE FOR A NEW COURT
The Security Council debate continued on 21 and 25 March. On the latter date,
after three months of elaborate investigation and extensive
debate, the Soviet
Union vetoed the proposed Security Council resolution condemning
Poland had been promoting an
alternative resolution which was overtaken by the UK’s resolution that the
dispute be referred
to the ICJ.
resumed on 3 April 1947 (by which time Hodgson had replaced Hasluck) and
continued six days later.
Echoing Evatt’s statement in the Parliament five months before and
couched very much in the language of lawyers, Australia’s
position was
that the Security Council was acting in a
quasi-judicial role
reach a decision
as reasonable men on the basis of all the available
(author’s emphasis). Since, on that basis, the Security
Council had actually found against Albania the matter could not be
(although nullified by the Soviet veto) because the case was of concern beyond
the UK and the USSR as a crime against humanity.
The Soviet delegate, Andrei
Gromyko, assailed Hodgson for what he labelled his ‘veto phobia
Then, on 9 April 1947, with the Soviets and Poland abstaining, the Security
Council, by eight votes to nil, recommended under art
36(3) that the dispute
should be submitted to the ICJ.
Kingdom filed its application in the ICJ on 13 May 1947 accusing Albania of
having laid or allowed a third State to lay
the mines after mine-clearing
operations had been carried out by the Allied naval
authorities.
It is scarcely surprising that Evatt and the Australian Government had
exhibited a close interest in the ICJ since it was a critical
feature of the new
international arrangements which Evatt had helped create. Moreover, in 1946, the
then Solicitor General of the
Commonwealth, Kenneth Hamilton
had been an unsuccessful candidate
for election to the new court.
Writing in 1948, Hasluck offered the view that, in a general way, the
Security Council’s handling of the Corfu Channel incident
had achieved the
first of the purposes of the UN:
To maintain international peace and security and to that end ... to bring
of justice and
international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or
situations which might lead to a breach of
But violence had been done to the second purpose:
To develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the
principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples and
to take other
appropriate measures to strengthen universal
VI EVATT – LIKED BY A FEW: LOATHED BY MOST
Evatt had become Minister for External Affairs on 7 October 1941 when the
leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, John Curtin, formed
his first wartime
government. From the beginning of his tenure as Minister for External Affairs,
Evatt changed the course and tone
of Australian
Evatt’s tenacious pursuit
of Australian foreign policy was manifested in Australia's role in the
formulation of the UN Charter
at San Francisco in April-June
His most recent biographers have
observed that Evatt achieved international fame for his work on the UN and that
it can fairly be
said that he was one of the new organization’s
architects.
Evatt was a very demanding and difficult individual. He had a formidable
intellect which in his formative years produced stellar academic
achievements.
He was both an outstanding legal scholar and an outstanding practising lawyer.
He has been described as ambitious,
petulant, driven, querulous, and
mistrustful; and as very jealous, unscrupulous, and frantically disordered and
confused in his work
methods; and as a bully, as lacking depth of knowledge of
international affairs, occasionally childish, and suspicious of anyone
age of four. And, there was much more. As a politician, he was erratic and
ruthless, a pragmatist and an opportunist. Yet,
simultaneously, throughout his
career, he was a tireless fighter for freedom and justice, for the
under-privileged, and generally
for the orderly and rational advancement of the
human condition. His career was surely at its peak in the 1940s. It was this
made his slow and pitiful decline in the mid-1950s such a
Evatt was not liked. He alienated people. But it needs to be said that in the
immediate postwar context this only made an existing
external situation worse.
Even if Evatt had possessed an equable personality, the climate of emerging
polarization of Cold War global
politics was such that any small state or group
of small states was forced to deal with the realities of big power bossiness and
mutual hostility. It is little wonder then that Evatt excited particular
hostility by the big powers. The US Ambassador in Canberra
in early 1949, Myron
M Cowen, was perhaps typical of the big power anti-Evatt school. Cowen, who had
been in Canberra only a few
months, felt able to report confidently to the State
Department that Evatt was ‘a completely unscrupulous and untrustworthy
egomaniac’.
Perhaps the most striking
illustration of the extent of irritation and downright hostility caused by Evatt
in the worsening early
days of the Cold War was that, from time to time, he was
simultaneously denounced by, and as agent or dupe of, the Soviet
International fame came to Evatt in part through his direct personal
exertions at the San Francisco conference and in part by his
active role in the
early operations of the new organization. Evatt's efforts in the postwar
geopolitical transformation covered all
the major issues of the time including
the Paris Peace Conference (1946), the struggle for Indonesian independence
(1945-1949), and
in the long process which preceded the signing of the Japanese
Peace Treaty
He was instrumental in
Australia's election to the Security Council (1946-1948), the Economic and
Social Council (1947), the ad hoc
Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP)
(1947), the Security Council Commission of Investigation Concerning Greek
Frontier Incidents
(1946-1947) and its successor the United Nations Special
Committee on the Balkans (UNSCOB) (1947-1949), and the Temporary Commission
Korea (UNTCOK) (1947). Evatt was the inaugural chairman of the UN Atomic Energy
Commission. Narrowly defeated in his bid for election
as President of the UN
General Assembly in 1947, his candidacy was successful the following year. He
has been accused of being unprincipled
in securing US support for his second
candidacy by backing the US position on the partition of
The end of the Second World War had led seamlessly to the emergence of the
Cold War. In late 1945 and early 1946, the allied combatants
associates began to divide along an east-west axis. The Cold War was to be the
dominating geopolitical condition of the
post-war era until the collapse of the
Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc in 1989-1991. A dramatic turning point occurred
Congress on 12 March 1947 when President Harry S Truman announced his
administration’s legislative proposal for provision of
$400 million for
urgent US military and economic assistance to Greece and Turkey. The President
said that a ‘fateful hour’
had arrived. Nations ‘must choose
between alternate ways of life’. One way of life was based upon the will
of the majority
and was distinguished by free institutions. The second was based
on the will of the minority forcibly imposed on the majority, and
falter in our leadership, we may endanger the peace of the world’. Under
what immediately became known as the
‘Truman Doctrine’, the
President told the assembled legislators that it would be the policy of the US
‘to support
free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed
minorities or by outside pressures’. Although the President did
to it by name, it was clear that the Soviet Union was the source of the danger
– the other way of life. On 5 June
1947, in an address at Harvard
University, the US Secretary of State, (General) George C Marshall, announced
his eponymous plan for
the reconstruction of western Europe in which enormous
undertaking the Soviet Union was destined to play no
realpolitik
of the immediate postwar years, Australia’s
power and influence in the international community were marginal. Evatt was,
completely undeterred by what he perceived as the domineering
exclusiveness and bullying of big-power politics. He thrust himself
forward as a
self-appointed leader of the smaller nations in the emerging post-colonial
world. He was determined to remind the world
of the unmatched extent of
Australia’s recent ‘total’ war
As pleaded by Evatt,
Australia’s claim to a decisive role was self-evident. It derived from
Australia’s status as a successful
participant in the victory against the
AXIS powers, from Australian pursuit of regional security arrangement with the
United States
of America, and from its status as a Pacific power. Evatt told the
UN General Assembly on 18 September 1947 that it was meeting ‘at
in world history which can be described as the half light between war and
Evatt stressed that the spirit of the San Francisco Charter ‘above all,
sought to substitute justice and morality for physical
power as the determinant
in international relationships’. The ‘Australian Government
[regarded] support for the United
Nations as a cardinal principle of its foreign
policy’. Evatt was also affronted by ‘the frustration, futility, and
injustice caused by applying an individual veto in cases where the
majority of the [Security] Council is attempting to exercise
conciliatory
in a dispute between
In his brand of statecraft,
it was Evatt the lawyer who was usually at the forefront of the action. Evatt
had an abiding commitment
to the basic constitutive elements of what was called
(rather pretentiously) British justice. His unshakeable belief in the
invincibility
of rational and impartial decision-making as fundamental to the
attainment of justice for nations no less than for individuals is
to be seen in
all his work.
Writing in 1956, Geoffrey Sawer said that Evatt ‘hoped for and believed
in the UN’ whereas his conservative successors
as Minister for External
Affairs, P C Spender (1949-1951) and R G Casey (1951-1960), had only hoped for
Writing in 1984, Meredith Burgmann
stressed Evatt’s ‘passion for juridical purity and thorough
investigation’.
Evatt repeatedly pressed the inter-related claims for –
• systematic and objective fact-finding based on proven evidence
(allowing for inference, but excluding supposition) including,
appropriate, the utilisation of on-the-spot investigation – what the trial
lawyers call a ‘view’;
• formal due process of the kind that lawyers in the
Anglo-American-Australian tradition saw as a constitutive characteristic
courts and quasi-judicial agencies;
• the use of power (especially the Security Council veto)
for proper purposes. The Security Council was only to take military action to
suppress aggression;
• the use of conciliation and mediation in preference to imposed
adjudication and, especially, as an alternative to the imposition
Security Council veto;
• the application of even-handedness and impartiality and judging every
case on its individual merits free of extraneous and
irrelevant considerations;
• the desirability in appropriate cases of last resort of referring
questions to the ICJ for binding determination. There was
to be maximum
employment of the ICJ in determining the legal aspects of international
disputes; and,
• As with the need to protect the dignity of the courts and
administrative agencies in the domestic setting, it was of central
importance to
maintain public confidence in the integrity of the UN and its agencies; and,
especially, the integrity and effectiveness
of the Security Council.
Evatt displayed a natural tendency to see the UN in terms of the domestic
Australian legal institutions with which he was familiar.
So, for example,
• he contrasted the ‘mandatory’ jurisdiction of the
Security Council with the ‘permissive’ jurisdiction
of the General
Assembly and he analysed the role Council in terms of ‘right’,
‘power’ and
• he had a tendency to make important functional distinctions that
might not necessarily be so obvious or a matter of concern
to non-lawyers. When
the General Assembly established UNSCOB in November 1947, he adopted the view
that the Committee members were
‘representative not so much of their
Governments as of the General Assembly, the Committee being in a sense a
for the members of the United Nations not represented on
(italics supplied). And a body
which was charged only with the task of fact-finding was not entitled to attempt
to allocate blame
or responsibility;
• he treated the UN Charter as if it were a legislative instrument
amenable with necessary adaptations to the orthodox scheme
of canons of
interpretation of domestic Acts and
Regulations;
• he argued for the specification of rational principles and clear
standards as the only basis for the exercise of the power
to admit new members
Evatt had the lawyer’s keen eye for detail and form especially, as his
work at San Francisco amply demonstrated, in the quest
for meticulous drafting.
Given his tendency to take control of situations, Evatt was especially prone to
taking a close interest
in the framing of instructions for Australian diplomats.
Contrary to what many of his harshest critics said, this was not always
Evatt distrusted all his advisers. The quest for precision was an end in itself.
His very distinctive handwriting, somewhat
spidery and sometimes bordering on
the illegible, can be seen in the drafts of many cables and other surviving
archival documents.
Even where drafts have not survived, there is in the final
experience in drawing pleadings and affidavits and preparing memoranda, and of
the skilled barrister determined to set out a case
– on both the facts and
the law – persuasively and in logical sequence.
For non-lawyers, Evatt’s relentless pursuit of precision and a
pronounced tendency to argue everything at length could no doubt
be maddening on
occasion. It was certainly the case that one recurrent complaint of
Evatt’s critics was that he was excessively
legalistic.
By way of illustration, Sawer
detected in Australia’s technical procedural treatment of the
Soviet-inspired complaint against
Greece in 1946 the influence of Evatt’s
training in the (then) exceptionally strict pleading system governing the
civil litigation in New South
For example, his observation in the
cable sent to the Australian UN delegation on 19 February 1947 –
Of course, if Albania had admitted truth of facts (which however they
...)’ – is reminiscent of the work of a pleader making a
conditional allegation. For Evatt, the UN Charter, a document
which he had been
instrumental in creating, was to be accorded the utmost respect. If the world
was to have any chance of living
in peace, nation states had to conduct
themselves according to the dictates of the Charter. If a determination to
operate at all
times according to the letter and spirit of the Charter and to
avoid ‘exhibitions of abuse and counter
was to attract the facile
label ‘excessive legalism’, then, so be it.
Moreover, the UN Charter was a constitution and to be effective there had to
be a judicial organ to interpret and apply it just as
the High Court of
Australia interpreted and applied the Australian
Constitution
The old Permanent Court of
International Justice set up under the League of Nations had not been a success.
Neither the US nor the
USSR had been a party to the PCIJ statute. The new ICJ
would be different. So far as Evatt was concerned, the time had arrived when
broad step forward could be taken in the direction of enlarging the new World
Court’s effective area of jurisdiction by restricting
the power of
reservation and by making acceptance of the automatic jurisdiction of the court
in legal disputes a condition of membership
of the UN. Moreover, an effective
judicial authority would act as a brake on the vast executive authority of the
Security Council.
VII AN UNSOLICITED AND UNWELCOME OFFER
At the meeting of the UN General Assembly at Lake Success on Long Island, New
York in November 1947, Evatt suggested to Hector
the UK Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, that he would be willing to appear as counsel on behalf of the
UK in its pending ICJ
case against Albania.
McNeil passed Evatt’s suggestion on to the UK Attorney-General, Sir
Hartley Shawcross, KC.
At first, Shawcross described the Evatt
remarkable proposal’. This was an understandable assessment. Evatt could
be pushy and brusque; he was widely
regarded as an unabashed publicity-seeker
and ego-maniac. In terms of Foreign Office and Dominions Office refinement, he
was a rough
colonial type who wore ill-fitting clothes and spoke with a flat or
monotonous Australian accent. For the Whitehall bureaucrats,
it was really none
of his business interfering in the conduct of another nation’s
international affairs. Moreover, there was,
perhaps, something unseemly in one
of His Majesty’s counsel learned in the law appearing to tout for work
(albeit work for
which no fee would be marked).
Yet, given the unique Evatt persona, the offer of assistance was, in another
sense, quite unremarkable. Evatt had commenced practice
at the New South Bar in
1918. He was, as Geoffrey Bolton has so crisply observed, ‘prodigiously
energetic’. He was thus
no mere pointy head. He was an active sportsman
(cricket, rugby league, hockey and baseball) and volunteered for service in the
War only to be rejected because of
astigmatism.
In the 1920s, the precocious
Evatt soon made his mark as an ‘all rounder’ – as a trial
lawyer presenting the facts,
and as an appellate advocate mastering the
intricacies of legal argument. All the time Evatt was working towards making his
in the Australian Labor Party. In 1930, at the age of 36, he was appointed
to the High Court of Australia. It was an appointment
that was highly
controversial inside and outside the Labor Party. His ten years on the Court had
been years of high cumulative achievement
both as a judge and as a public
intellectual. Evatt’s return to the bear pit of advocacy as First Law
Officer of the Commonwealth
in the late 1940s was but one remarkable aspect of a
unique public career. In 1948/1949, Evatt would lead for the Commonwealth in
Bank Nationalisation case
for the 39 days that the case took to be heard
by the High Court,
and a record (if not
breathtaking) 36 days between 14 May and 1 June 1949 before the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council.
In the High Court, Evatt was back at the bar table appearing before a bench
made up almost entirely of his judicial brethren from
the 1930s. That fact alone
would have deterred most advocates who had left the bench to resume practising
law – but that in
itself was highly unusual, and frowned upon
professionally. He somehow managed the Privy Council appeal in the
Nationalisation case
when he was President of the UN General Assembly. It
was a tense time. The Cold War had entered a very threatening phase. The Berlin
blockade and airlift were under way. The East-West polarisation seemed to be
moving inexorably towards armed confrontation. Evatt
would bring all these
strands together in what is the leading contender for the greatest
of twentieth century Australian advocacy – his twin triumphs in
Communist Party Dissolution Act
case (1950-1951) and the defeat of
the Referendum on the
Constitution
Alteration (Powers to Deal with Communists
and Communism) 1951.
There is every reason to believe that Evatt had in mind for many months the
possibility of appearing in the pending Corfu Channel
case. Apart from his
general commitment to securing an effective role for the ICJ in the postwar
international order, Evatt had followed
the Security Council consideration of
the Corfu Channel dispute closely and had been disappointed (if not annoyed or
angered) by
the Council's failure to resolve the dispute in a spirit of
quasi-judicial impartiality that he considered was mandated by the UN
Evatt had become more dissatisfied with what he saw as the big power misuse of
the UN. The partisan politicking and the
ever-present threat of the permanent
members’ use of the Security Council veto was for Evatt manifestly
contrary to the proper
exercise of the Security Council’s functions. In
his Oliver Wendell Holmes Lectures at Harvard in late October 1947, Evatt
extolled the role of the ICJ and complained that the court had been denied
almost totally the opportunity of working.
By late 1947, the UK’s case in the ICJ was at an advanced stage. Six
months had passed since it had been filed. Albania had
raised a preliminary
objection to jurisdiction. Evatt was nothing if not an opportunist and even by
late 1947 or early 1948 it was
not too late for him to become involved in the
case in a leading role. His approach to McNeil can be understood as the action
a man supremely confident of his role and capacities. Appearing as counsel
would enable the former accomplished trial lawyer to show
off his skills in
marshalling and presenting the evidence in what, given the Albanian denials of
complicity in the laying of mines
and of knowledge of the existence of the
mines, was shaping up as, in part, the equivalent of a complex and demanding
witness action
in which it would be necessary for the UK to rely on
circumstantial and expert evidence and inference. It would also enable Evatt
former appellate lawyer and appellate judge to demonstrate that grave
international disputes could and should be resolved peacefully
according to
accepted and evolving norms of civilised international behaviour. At a critical
turning point in world history, Evatt
would demonstrate to the new court (and,
indeed, to the world) the superiority of the rule of law to the rule of brute
thus stamp his mark indelibly on a newly evolving and civilising
international jurisprudence.
VIII IRRITABILITY IN WHITEHALL: WHAT TO DO –
ACCEPT OR REJECT?
Faced with the problem of deciding what to do about the overture which Evatt
had made to McNeil, on 18 November 1947 Shawcross asked
the Legal Adviser to the
Foreign Office, W E Beckett, to consider the proposal. Given the status of his
position, Beckett could only
have viewed the prospect of the acceptance of
Evatt’s proposal as inevitably leading to a demotion for the Legal
day later, he provided the UK Attorney with following negative
I think the problem here is to find the most tactful reasons for refusing
this remarkable and, I think, rather embarrassing offer.
Of course, the UK, when
choosing Counsel to argue an important case before the Hague Court, can employ
Counsel from any country in
the world. Large countries like the UK have hitherto
always felt that they can find the necessary legal talent inside their own
People in England, indeed the whole world, would be startled and
puzzled at the inclusion in the team of an Australian lawyer who
Australia's Foreign Minister. Nobody would suppose that Dr Evatt had been
included in the team merely because he was a better
lawyer than anyone who could
be found in the UK. People would be seeking to find a political significance for
his appearance there.
If Dr Evatt was not Foreign Minister, and was merely an
Australian King's Counsel, it might be a bit different and might be interpreted
as a move towards the establishment of a sort of Hague Court Bar of lawyers
particularly qualified to conduct cases before that Court.
But Dr Evatt is
Foreign Minister, and, moreover, Australia played a useful and prominent part in
the discussion of this matter in
the Security Council.
Of course, I do not
need to say how embarrassing a member of the team Dr Evatt would in fact be
You would have to lead him, and I do not anticipate that, in the oral hearings,
there will be much, if any, need for anybody to
follow you. We shall probably
find that nearly everything that can be said has been said in the written
But Dr Evatt is not going to go to the Hague unless he is going to
take a leading part and, moreover, he will be a very difficult
person for you to
. He might wish to take a line rather different from that we have
already taken in the written pleadings, etc etc. I suggest that
express enormous appreciation of the offer, say that, in principle, we think it
quite a good thing that countries, when
they go to the Hague, should, when
appropriate, include amongst their Counsel lawyers from another country and
that, as between members
of the Commonwealth, on occasions this might be
specially indicated. But you think that it would be a mistake for Dr Evatt to
in this case just because he is the Foreign Minister of Australia and the
world could hardly be got to believe that his appearance
amongst our Counsel was
merely because he was the best pleader in the world but would be sure to try and
draw from it all sorts of
unfounded political
inferences.
(italics added)
Of course, I do not need to say how embarrassing a member of the
team Dr Evatt would in fact be
.’ Beckett was no fan of Evatt. Indeed,
there was, it seems, some doubt in the minds of British diplomats as to whether
had actually been serious when he made the suggestion to McNeil. Doubtless
for Beckett and his Whitehall colleagues, Evatt’s
overture was the kind of
informal passing remark that a person with a big ego and a tendency to
occasional impulsive behaviour might
well make. Shawcross sent Beckett’s
advice to McNeil with the following query: ‘What do you think about this
point – is it necessary for us to do anything?’
There was a strained relationship between Australia and the UK in the early
postwar years. Part of this can be traced to the way Evatt
conducted Australian
foreign policy, but the fact was that, in a way that has not really been
emulated since, Australia – through
the instrumentality of Evatt –
sought to pursue a genuinely independent foreign
Yet, there was much in common
between the two labor governments in terms of their respective parties’
origins and their fundamental
domestic political philosophies and commitments.
Perhaps motivated by some sense of fraternal obligation, McNeil was not prepared
to accept Beckett’s advice preferring instead to have Shawcross look at
the matter more closely. He wrote the following comment
on Beckett’s
I don’t like to discuss it just like this. It is a delicate
decision but what political inferences could be drawn that would
be embarrassing
to us? I doubt, moreover, if he would be too difficult. Would you consider doing
a short minute for submission to
our [Secretary of State] and then to P J
Noel-Baker?
Shawcross acceded to McNeil’s request. For reasons that may now only be
speculated about, Shawcross appears to have devoted
substantial time and effort
to the task of considering and formulating a suitable response to Evatt’s
overture. In a minute
dated 11 December 1947, addressed to his ministerial
colleague, McNeil, Shawcross acknowledged that Beckett had identified
substantial practical difficulties’. But the Shawcross
political tone was different to Beckett’s starchy and antagonistic
bureaucratic tone.
Like McNeil, Shawcross exhibited some muted liking for Evatt’s offer.
He considered that Evatt ‘would hardly wish to be
a silent assistant at
the trial, although if there were an opportunity for him to speak, I do not have
much fear that he would wish
to depart from the line taken in our
Pleadings’. Unlike Beckett, Shawcross was not convinced that there were
serious political
implications involved in having a foreign minister of one of
the Dominions appearing as counsel in the case. He made it clear that
have no objection to Evatt appearing and that he would certainly be glad to do
anything at all which would strengthen the
relationship between Britain and
Australia. Shawcross went on to record that he would be very willing that Evatt
should play the
leading part in the case if that would promote better relations
between the two nations. But Shawcross did not think it was practicable
Evatt do so since it was the UK that was party to the proceeding and it was the
first law officer of the UK that must appear.
In this, Shawcross was surely on
firm ground.
Shawcross recorded that he had spoken to members of the Australian Delegation
and understood that Evatt had put
the proposal forward quite seriously and was still thinking about it. Shawcross
went on to record:
‘I am afraid, therefore, that we cannot let it drop,
and probably the Foreign Secretary [Ernest
] will think it desirable himself to
write to Dr Evatt, dealing with the matter one way or another’. Shawcross
brought all his
considerable diplomatic talents to bear on devising a suitable
positive response:
I wish I could be more helpful in suggesting which way he should reply.
My inclination is to write to Dr Evatt and to say that we
would be delighted to
have his assistance as a member of the team at the Hague, but that in all
probability there will only be occasion
to make one short speech, and that it is
felt that this must be made by the Chief Law Officer of the United Kingdom
Government as
the complainant in the case. In these circumstances, it might be
said, possibly Dr Evatt would not wish to be a member of the team,
notwithstanding the fact that it is unlikely he could play any very active part
in the actual proceedings, he did wish to
be present as a member of the team at
the Hague, his assistance would be
Beckett’s diplomatic colleagues were not at all attracted to the Evatt
offer. It is likely that their negative reaction was
to some extent based on
personal dislike of Evatt. On 15 December 1947, G E B Shannon of the Dominions
Office, in a minute to Sir
Eric Machtig, the permanent under-secretary of the
Dominions Office, deplored Evatt’s offer. He isolated two matters for
first, was the British Government to accept Evatt's offer or not?
Secondly, if the offer was not accepted, what reason was to be
It seems to me that the offer should not be accepted – not because
Dr Evatt might be ‘difficult’, nor because there
is any objection to
employing Australian or other Dominion Counsel to plead a United Kingdom case,
but because the case is ‘United
– not ‘United Kingdom and Australia
Moreover there is no special Australian interest in the case. It was RN ships
that were sunk, and the Australian Government
have not taken part in the
diplomatic correspondence preceding the reference to the International Court.
take part in the discussion in the Security Council, but
only as a member of the Security Council, not as an interested party. In
circumstances Dr Evatt’s appearance as one of the UK counsel would only
lend colour to the Soviet accusations that Australia
is merely a UK
‘stooge’ and not truly
independent.
Shannon’s view was that if it was decided not to accept, it was best
not to say anything to Evatt on paper, since he had not
put his offer on paper.
Not surprisingly, Machtig agreed with his colleague Shannon.
Somewhat in the manner of a hot potato being passed from hand to hand,
Evatt’s suggestion was then given to another of McNeil’s
ministerial
colleagues, Patrick Gordon-Walker,
consideration. Like McNeil, Gordon-Walker was disinclined to reject
Evatt’s approach out of hand:
I doubt whether people in the UK would resent Evatt – They
don’t know him well and might like the idea of the Commonwealth
each other out. The ‘stooge’ argument might be put to Evatt himself
as it would [
indecipherable
] Australia, if true. I can see some
attractions in the idea.
On Christmas Eve 1947, Shawcross sent his ministerial colleague, Noel-Baker,
a draft of a letter which he proposed be sent by McNeil
to Evatt. The draft,
which Shawcross had prepared after he had spoken to Bevin and Beckett, was a
masterly tactful statement insofar
as it declined Evatt’s offer. Its
purpose was, as McNeil told Shawcross in February 1948, ‘to head [Evatt]
the Corfu Channel case.
was at an advanced stage which made it easier for the UK to keep Evatt out of
In the proposed letter, McNeil would tell Evatt that Shawcross had asked to
say particularly how much he appreciated Evatt's suggestion
that he would
consider appearing as a junior to Shawcross: in other words, thanks – but
no thanks. The letter could have ended
at that point, but in his draft Shawcross
introduced an alternative, a sugaring of the pill, but a generous response
nonetheless:
Whilst, however, it seems impracticable to enlist your assistance in the
Corfu case, there is another matter which will shortly come
International Court which we like to commend to you as being worthy of your
personal intervention. I refer, of course,
to the request for an advisory
opinion on the considerations which may properly affect votes on the election of
new members to the
United Nations. This raises an important issue of principle
and I imagine that it is very likely that some and possibly all of the
States may wish to appear before the Court and argue the matter. It will
therefore be most important, both politically and from
the point of view of the
Court proceedings, that the case should be adequately argued on the other side.
We would very much like
you to take the lead in appearing before the Court and
arguing the matter, and if you thought fit so to do, we would, I think, support
your intervention without appearing ourselves. Perhaps you will consider this
possibility.
Under art 4 of Ch II of the UN Charter, membership in the UN was open to all
peace-loving states which accepted the obligations contained
in the Charter and
in the judgment of the organization were willing and able to carry out those
obligations. The admission of any
such state to membership was to be effected by
a decision of the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security
Under art 18 of Ch II, a decision of the General Assembly on the
question of the admission of a new member was to be made by a two-thirds
majority of the members present and voting.
Shawcross must have been told that Evatt had been very vocal about the issue
of the election of new members of the UN. According to
Evatt, the Security
Council had been abusing its processes. It had been using its powers for
improper purposes. In his address to
the UN General Assembly on 18 September
1947, Evatt had said that perhaps the most striking use of the veto power for a
purpose entirely
unrelated either to enforcement measures, or even to the vital
interests of any permanent members, was in relation to the admission
members. Each applicant state had to be considered carefully to see whether
there was compliance with the conditions laid
down in the Charter. The
likelihood is that Evatt had in the back of his mind the Irish constituency in
the ALP when he criticised
as unjustifiable the Soviet Union's vetoing of
Eire’s application in 1946.
As matters are now shaping, it is not impossible that nations which not
long ago were our bitter enemies will be admitted to the United
Nations before
peaceful neutrals who were sympathetic to the Allied cause. Was Eire kept out
because it was alleged that she was
not a democracy? Such an allegation would be
palpably false, because Eire has a democratic constitution and government, and
the devotion
of Irishmen to individual freedom is well known. Eire is clearly a
‘peace-loving nation’ and should be admitted to the
United Nations.
There can be little doubt that the vast majority of the organization would
accept this view. In this case the right
to exercise an individual veto has been
used to obstruct the overwhelming will of the
Evatt went on to argue that the Security Council had virtually usurped the
powers of the General Assembly in arrogating to itself
the right to decide
whether or not a nation should be admitted to the UN. The Council should confine
itself to making recommendations
on matters clearly within its functions, such
as the ability of an applicant to discharge its security obligations under the
and should leave the final decision about admission for the Assembly
where there was no veto.
After McNeil and Beckett made some minor changes to the Shawcross draft
letter, it was approved by Gordon-Walker. In mid-January 1948,
McNeil signed the
letter to Evatt which was sent to him by despatch via the UK High Commission in
Canberra reaching Evatt in early
The Dominions Office file does not record Beckett’s view on the
Shawcross suggestion
or whether the British officials had any clear idea
as to what Evatt’s response would or might be. For anyone prepared to
on the outcome, it was probably a better than even money proposition that,
subject to his other commitments, Evatt would accept the
suggestion that he
appear as leading counsel in the ICJ case concerning UN membership. However,
Evatt passed up the opportunity.
On 18 February 1948, McNeil wrote to Shawcross and set out Evatt’s
Evatt’s letter – a model
of courtesy and common sense – makes it plain enough that he was alive to
the fundamental
concern which his original offer to McNeil had raised for the UK
Government:
Many thanks for your letter re Corfu. I do not wish, under any
circumstances to take any course which could embarrass either Shawcross
United Kingdom Government.
As I told you, my chief interest in the case is that it is
extraordinarily important from the point of view of international good
and the question of circumstantial evidence – arising in a very
interesting form.
Thank you for your reference to the Belgian matter, which does raise an
important question of principle.
This is a hurried note to thank you for your courtesy in taking the
matter so earnestly and seriously.
Betraying more than just a hint of smugness and self-congratulation, Shannon
asserted that by his reply ‘Dr Evatt has
suggestion that he sh[oul]d be UK counsel in the Corfu case’ and that
Evatt had thereby implied that he ‘never
meant to be taken seriously
(which was the CRO view all along)’ (italics supplied). Whatever other
complaints could justifiably
be laid at Evatt’s door, Shannon’s
mention of an implication seems far fetched and
IX JUSTICE DELAYED: THE DECISIONS IN THE CORFU CHANNEL
The hearing by the ICJ of the Albanian preliminary jurisdictional objection
in the Corfu Channel case took place at The Hague on 26,
27 and 28 February and
1, 2 and 5 March 1948.
On 25 March 1948,
the ICJ delivered judgment rejecting Albania's preliminary objection. The Court
held that a communication dated
2 July 1947 addressed to the court by the
Albanian Government constituted a voluntary acceptance of the court’s
Immediately after the dismissal of the preliminary objection, and in an
exceptional display of co-operation, the British and Albanian
governments
announced that they had agreed to submit the following two questions to the
1 Is Albania responsible under international law for the explosions which
occurred on the 22nd October 1946 in Albanian waters and
for the damage and loss
of human life which resulted from them and is there any duty to pay
compensation?
2 Has the United Kingdom under international law violated the sovereignty
of the Albanian People’s Republic by reason of the
acts of the Royal Navy
in Albanian waters on the 22nd October and on the 12th and 13th November 1946
and is there duty to give satisfaction?
Written pleadings on the merits were completed in September 1948. The hearing
of oral arguments on the merits commenced on 9 November
1948 and concluded on 17
December 1948. The UK called its seven witnesses between 22 November and 4
December; Albania called its
five witnesses between 4 and 14 December. There was
further (reply and rejoinder) oral argument between 17 and 22 January 1949.
On 9 April 1949, the ICJ delivered judgment on the merits upholding the UK
claim. On the first question, the court determined by eleven
votes against five
that Albania was responsible for the explosions that occurred and for the
ensuing damage to the British warships
and the loss of life. The court held that
the evidence established that the damage could not have been caused by floating
magnetic ground mines or magnetic moored mines. The Albanian suggestion
that the minefield discovered on 13 November 1946 may have
22 October 1946 was unsupported by any evidence and was too
improbable to be accepted. The Court held that the charge that Albania
of or connived at
the laying of the mines was a charge of such exceptional
gravity against a State that it requiring a high degree of certainty that
not been reached. Nevertheless, the Court’s answer to the first question
attributing legal responsibility to Albania was
justified by the evidence of
Albania’s admitted constant vigilance over the North Corfu Channel after
May 1946, of the Albanian
order to fire on the
of Albania’s repeated demands that permission for passage was required, of
Albania’s failure to protest in its notifications
to the UN Secretary
General about the laying of a minefield, of its failure to notify the presence
of mines in its waters at the
latest after the sweep carried out on 13 November
1946, and of its failure to investigate the events of 22 October 1946. In
their geographical configuration were such that the Bay of Saranda and
the channel used by shipping through the Strait were easily
watched, the
minelaying operation required a certain minimum lapse of time, and visibility
and sound tests were conducted which had
led experts to the conclusion that it
was indisputable that if a normal look-out was kept at specified locations the
minelaying operations
must have been noticed by
coastguards.
On the second question, the Court observed that the intention of the UK on 22
October 1946 must have been not only to test Albania’s
attitude, but at
the same time to demonstrate such force that she would abstain from firing again
on passing ships. It held, by fourteen
votes against two, that having regard to
all the circumstances it was unable to characterise these measures as a
violation of Albanian
sovereignty because on that day the Royal Navy vessels
were exercising the right of innocent passage which the Court declared existed
in international straits. However, the court unanimously held that the same
justification did not apply to the mine-sweeping operation
carried out on 12-13
November 1946 which it held was a violation of Albanian sovereignty. The Court
rejected the arguments that the
United Kingdom had rights of intervention and
self help and went on to hold that its declaration that the UK had violated
sovereignty was ‘in itself appropriate
satisfaction’.
By a judgment pronounced on 15 December 1949, the ICJ fixed the amount of
compensation due from Albania to the UK at
The fact that Albania
defied the court's order was scarcely a surprise given the prevailing
deteriorating state of east-west relations.
By the end of the decade, things had
become a whole lot worse than they were when the Corfu Channel incidents had
occurred. The USSR
had extended its hegemony in eastern Europe. Admittedly, the
Soviets had ignominiously called off the Berlin Airlift in May 1949.
September, came the announcement that the Soviets had detonated an atomic
device. Then, in October the last vestiges of Chaing
Kai-Shek’s Koumintang
regime had been chased from the Chinese mainland and the People’s Republic
of China had been proclaimed.
Article 94(2) of the Charter provides that if any party to a case fails to
perform the obligations incumbent upon it under a judgment
rendered by the ICJ,
the other may have recourse to the Security Council which may, if it deems
necessary, make recommendations or
decide upon measures to be taken to give
effect to the judgment.
The UK did not go back to the Security Council. Instead, it made an
unsuccessful collateral attempt to enforce its judgment by resorting
to the ICJ.
A quantity of monetary gold removed by the Germans from Rome in 1943 was later
recovered in Germany and found to belong
to Albania. The January 1946 Paris
agreement on German reparations provided that looted monetary gold found in
Germany or in third
countries should be pooled for distribution among countries
entitled to receive a share of it. The UK claimed the gold in partial
satisfaction of the ICJ judgment in its favour. Italy claimed the gold in
partial satisfaction for the damage which it alleged it
had suffered as a result
of an Albanian law of 13 January 1945 confiscating Italian assets, or under the
Italian Peace Treaty.
In a statement issued in Washington, DC on 25 April 1951, the French, UK and
US Governments, who were responsible for implementation
of the reparations
agreement, decided that the gold should be delivered to the UK in partial
satisfaction of the ICJ judgment in
the Corfu Channel case unless within 90 days
of the communication of an arbitrator’s opinion to the three nations,
Albania applied to the ICJ requesting it to adjudicate on their
respective rights. The arbitrator decided on 20 February 1953 that
belonged to Albania. Albania, which had not accepted the jurisdiction of the
ICJ, took no action, but Italy filed an application.
However, Italy later raised
a preliminary jurisdictional question.
On 15 June 1954, the ICJ unanimously decided that, without the consent of
Albania, it could not deal with a dispute between Albania
and Italy and that it
was therefore unable to adjudicate on the submission that the three governments
should deliver to Italy any
share of the gold that might be due to Albania under
the Paris Agreement in partial satisfaction of the damage caused to Italy by
1945 Albanian law.
In his memoirs of meetings with Stalin, the
Albanian dictator, Enver Hodja, recorded the following comment about a meeting
I also informed Comrade Stalin of the verdict of the Court at the Hague.
‘As I have told you earlier’, I said among other
things, "this court
investigated the so-called Corfu Channel incident, and manipulated as it was by
the Anglo-American imperialists,
in the end unjustly condemned us and ordered us
to pay the British tin (sic [an?]) indemnity. We did not accept this arbitrary
but the British seized our gold which the German Nazis had plundered
from the former National Bank of Albania. When the gold plundered
occupied countries and carried away to Germany by the Nazis was discovered, at
its Brussels meetings in 1948, the Tripartite
Commission charged with its
distribution allotted Albania a part of what belonged to it. Now the British
have seized a part of our
gold, have frozen it and do not allow us to withdraw
it according to the decision taken in
And there, more or less, the matter of the Corfu Channel incident rested
– for four decades. It seemed clear enough that the
existence of the Cold
War was an insurmountable barrier to Albanian compliance with the ICJ
compensation order (and, consequently,
to Albania’s recovery of its looted
gold). As late as March 1990, the policy of Her Majesty’s Government
remained that
be able to agree to the Tripartite Gold Commission’s releasing gold
to Albania only when Albania has paid the compensation awarded
to Britain by the
[ICJ] in the Corfu channel case. This delay will not, however, penalize the
survivors and the families of those
killed on board HM ships
. All concerned were fully compensated at the time under the
regulations then in force.
However, the Cold War was ending. Discussions between the UK and Albania took
place in December 1990 leading to the resumption of
diplomatic relations. The
People’s Socialist Republic of Albania came to an end in 1991. Then, on 8
May 1992, the parties to
the Corfu Channel case announced that they had settled
their differences. In a joint announcement, ‘Both sides expressed their
regret at the Corfu Channel Incident of 22 October
It might be suggested that
any surviving crew members of
HMS Saumarez
families of the dead and injured would have found the expression of
undifferentiated diplomatic ‘regret’ puzzling
if not annoying. The
UK agreed to approve the delivery of 1,574 kgms of gold previously identified
for allocation to Albania. In
return, Albania agreed to pay the UK $US2 million
in full and final settlement of the UK financial claims. Delivery of the gold
to be conditional on the consent of France and the USA. Upon the settlement
of outstanding claims it had, the US removed its hold
over the gold in 1995.
France gave its consent in February 1996. On 29 October 1996, 50 years and one
week after the mining of
HMS Saumarez
Secretary-General of the Tripartite Gold Commission met in London with
representatives of the Albanian Government to conclude
the transfer of the
Commission gold, to Albania. At the same time, the Albanian Government settled
the British claim for compensation
for the Corfu Channel
X H V EVATT AND THE RULE OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
Evatt’s approach to the Security Council investigation and his
expression of willingness to appear as counsel for the UK displayed
characteristic blend of idealism, naïveté, grit, and impatience.
Evatt wanted Australia to participate in the UN to
the fullest possible extent
and to act as a model international citizen. At least in 1945-1947, Evatt was
disinclined to allow the
worsening Cold War environment to dictate
Australia’s stand. He repeatedly made his/Australia’s position
clear. States
and their representatives ought to be fair-minded and reasonable.
They ought to be willing to co-operate in resolving disputes peacefully
seeking the relevant facts in an orderly and dispassionate manner. They ought
not frustrate the proper working of the UN and
its agencies for partisan
reasons. Evatt claimed that he had ‘tried to avoid wishful
However, the fact was
that big power politics and Cold War
realpolitik
were the dominating
considerations in the working of the UN almost from the outset.
In taking Hasluck to task for contacting Cadogan’s delegation during
the Sub Committee investigation of the UK complaint about
Albania, Evatt
displayed exquisite sensitivity and misconceived the investigating
Committee’s task. For the purpose of the
domestic rules of procedural
fairness (then called natural justice), context was (as it remains)
all-important. The substantive content
of procedural fairness was inherently
flexible depending on the specific context. It was dictated by the circumstances
of the given
case and, in part at least, qualified by a common sense rule of
necessity. By analogy, in the international context of early 1947,
difficult to grasp how the Australian delegation’s contact with the UK
delegation could in any meaningful sense
give rise to an appearance of lack of
objectivity or lack of impartiality or, worse still, a suspicion of actual bias
on the part
of Australia.
Under art 24(1) of the Charter, the member nations conferred on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and
security and the Council acted on behalf of the member States. Evatt’s use
of the term ‘the parties
to the dispute’ is apt to mislead. It is
true that Art 27(3) of the Charter provided that in decisions under Chapter VI
Settlement of Disputes’) ‘a party to a dispute shall
abstain from voting’ on a Security Council decision. Otherwise,
regulated the Council’s procedure.
The fact that the UK was ‘not represented on the committee’ seems
hardly to the point. It was the Security Council’s
committee and the UK
was one of the permanent members of the Council. The Sub Committee’s
limited, albeit very important, task
was to investigate and report back to the
Council. It was not required to determine anything in the sense of a
adjudication. The fact-finding task was central to the proper
discharge of the Security Council’s function, but it was a step
way and, as a matter of practicalities, that contextual consideration governed
the flexible nature of the obligation of
fairness cast on the Sub
Committee’s members.
There was an element of inconsistency in Evatt’s rather strict approach
to the functioning of the Security Council. He was at
pains to stress the fact
that the General Assembly was not some grand world parliament. Yet, if it was
necessary to make that point,
surely there was a need to recognise the
uniqueness of the Security Council at least to the extent of not burdening it
with limitations
which might be justified when applied to some domestic
quasi-judicial organ, but were unrealistic in the partisan context of the
It would, however, be unfair to Evatt to dismiss his displays of juridical
high-mindedness in the sphere of international conflict
resolution as hopelessly
misplaced. Evatt’s excessive legalism had a very appealing practical
dimension which continues to
be of utility. Geoffrey Sawer observed more than 40
years ago that Evatt’s passion for protecting the propriety and integrity
of the UN’s fact-finding processes was calculated to produce delay and
thus lessen the likelihood of extended violence. (It
has to be said in passing
that it would not necessarily be so in every case.) Moreover, judicial
intervention was central to the
restoration of order in disorderly societies. If
anything, argued Sawer, Evatt did not bring his legalism (excessive or
to bear soon enough:
Perhaps the reference to the Court might have been advocated at an
earlier stage, since it was so obvious that in the political inquiries
Communist powers would support the Albanians
whatever the facts
sifting of the facts by a Security Council inquiry committee may have been
necessary in order to isolate the justiciable
issue, and in the result this was
the sole case dealt with by the Security Council during the period under review
which illustrated
the possibilities of effective United Nations action to settle
potentially dangerous disputes. (italics
Evatt mostly passed out of the international limelight following the decisive
defeat of the Chifley Government at the election conducted
in December 1949.
Australian foreign policy went off in another direction. In the four decades
since Evatt's death there has been
recurrent international armed conflict. The
UN has had a long and mixed history of peace-keeping activity. The decision on
Corfu Channel case
has continued to have an impact on
the evolution of international law. The excerpt from the majority judgment which
is set out at
the commencement of this piece has been frequently cited and may
be subjected to further scrutiny as the claims for a right of unilateral
pre-emptive intervention threaten to diminish the concept of sovereignty and the
role of the UN. Were the H V Evatt of the period
1945-1949 to return to life
now, it is likely that he would be horrified by the side-lining of the UN in the
years following his
death in 1965, by the long history of flagrant misuse of the
Security Council veto, and by the inability of the ICJ to have a more
role in the implementation of Chapter VI of the UN Charter. Evatt’s
persistence in battling David-like to curb the
harm caused by the Goliath of big
power rivalry and bullying continues to provide an important lesson, perhaps
more so than at any
other time in the history of the UN. It seems highly likely
that Evatt would have welcomed the establishment of the International
Court and would have had something constructive to say – with
characteristic brusqueness – about the vexed question
of enforcement of
Security Council resolutions. Allowing for all of Evatt’s manifold
failings, his behind-the-scenes exertions
in trying to effect a peaceful
settlement of the Corfu Channel dispute is another illustration of his enduring
contribution to the
rule of law. There is, of course, no way of knowing whether
an appearance by him as counsel before the bar of the ICJ in the Corfu
case half a century ago would have led to a more successful or effective
decision. What seems likely is that, given the Evatt
persona and the intensity
of the feelings aroused by his friends and foes alike, his role in the case
would have made a distinctive
mark in the quest for the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.
LLB (Melb), LLM (ANU) of the Victorian
Bar. George Winterton very kindly read and commented on an earlier version of
this article.
The author expresses his appreciation for the very helpful
comments and suggestions of the Journal’s two anonymous referees.
opinions expressed (and any errors remaining) in the article are those of the
author alone.
(Corfu Channel case (Merits) (
Kingdom v Albania
) (9 April 1949) ICJ Reports, 4.
(1894-1965): See A Dalziel,
(1967); K Tennant,
Evatt: Politics and Justice
Evatt: A Life
(1993); K Buckley, B Dale and W Reynolds,
(1994); G C Bolton, ‘Herbert Vere Evatt’ 14
Dictionary of Biography
108; G J Evans, ‘H V Evatt: Australia’s
First Internationalist’ (1995 Daniel Mannix Memorial Lecture, Melbourne,
31 August 1995) http://www.dfat.gov.au/archive/speeches_old/minfor/
gemanix.html; D Day (ed),
Brave New World: Dr H V Evatt and Australian
Foreign Policy 1941-1949
The facts are stated in the ICJ decision
on the merits:
Corfu Channel case
, ICJ Reports, 1949, 4. The
author’s description of the background events and the diplomatic traffic
also borrows extensively
from the cables in the file of the Department of
External Affairs: National Archives of Australia, A1838/274, Item 854/10/10,
Council Political and Security Questions: Incident In Corfu
Channel’ (hereinafter ‘NAA’).
See eg, M Glenny,
The Balkans:
Nationalism, War and the Great Powers, 1804-1999
(1999) 417-423; M Mazower,
The Balkans
(2000) 97-99;
Parl Deb (Commons)
vol 421, 15 April
1946, cols 368-369.
G M Alexander,
The Prelude to the
Truman Doctrine: British Policy in Greece 1944-1947
(1982) 115.
C M Woodhouse,
The Struggle for Greece
(1979) 158, 181.
NAA, Cable D1000, Secretary of State for
the Dominions to Canberra, 5 November 1946. F Ngantcha,
The Right of Innocent
Passage and the Evolution of the International Law of the Sea: The Current
Navigation in Coastal Waters of Third
(1990) 122-124; B B Jia,
The Regime of Straits in International
(1998) 36-47. One of the major advances in international law in the
post-Second World War era was the completion of multilateral
conventions on the
law of the sea including the Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous
Zone (1958) and the Law of the Sea
Convention (1982); see I Brownlie,
Principles of Public International Law
(5th ed, 1998) Ch IX.
Diplomatic relations between the two
nations were suspended following the incident on 15 May 1946:
Parl Debates
) vol 424, 1 July 1946, cols 1763-1765.
The description of the naval events
also relies on J Mervyn Jones, ‘The
Corfu Channel
Merits’ (1949) 26
Brit YB Int L
447; J L Brierly,
(6th ed, 1963) 421-422. For what might be termed a popular account
of the Corfu Channel episode, see E Leggett,
The Corfu Incident
see also J L Brierly,
The Spectator
, 18 April 1947; E Luard,
of the United Nations, Vol 1 The Years of Western Domination, 1945-1955
(1982) 209-212; H Kelsen,
The Law of the United Nations: A Critical Analysis
of its Fundamental Problems
(1950); J Stone,
Legal Controls of
International Conflict
(1954) 52, 206, 217, 269-270.
Jones, above n 9, 447.
Britain later contended that the white
flag could be taken to mean that the Albanians knew that they had committed a
hostile warlike
act and wished a truce. The British crews had heard the firing
of machine guns from the shore. The
was out of commission for many
months: Jones, above n 9, 448. The
was a total loss: H A Munro,
‘The Case of the Corfu Minefield’
(1896-1968). T Lie,
In The Cause of
Peace: Seven Years With the United Nations
(1954) 432; J Barros,
Lie and the Cold War: The UN Secretary-General Pursues Peace, 1946-1953
Yugoslavia and Albania had signed a
Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance on 9 July 1946 (1946-1947) UNTS No
Jones, above n 9, 448.
Munro, above n 11. As presented to the
ICJ, the UK case was that two Yugoslav war vessels, the
, carrying contact mines of the relevant German type sailed
southward from the port of Sibenik on or about 18 October 1946 and proceeded
the Corfu Channel and with the knowledge and the connivance of the Albanian
Government laid mines in the Channel just before 22
October. It has been
contended that whilst it was Yugoslavia that provided the mines and the
technicians, it was most unlikely that
the Soviet Union was involved: ICJ
Reports, 1949, 15-16; Woodhouse, above, n 6.
NAA, Cable D485, 9 December 1946.
Corfu Channel case (Merits)
Reports, 1949, 33-34.
The text of the Note can be found in
) vol 431, 11 December 1946, cols 1167-1175.
NAA, Memorandum to the Minister, 14
January 1947. A record of the proceedings is contained in United Nations,
Journal of the Security Council
and in International Court of Justice,
Pleadings, Oral Arguments, Documents: 1949 The Corfu Channel Case
Annex 23 to UK Memorial, 174 (hereinafter ‘
Albania was not then a member of the UN: see below n 93. Under art 32 of the UN
Charter, any state not a member of the UN,
if it is a party to a dispute under
consideration by the Security Council, ‘shall be invited to participate,
without vote,
in the discussion relating to the dispute’ and the Security
Council is authorized to lay down such conditions as it deems just
participation of the non-member state.
After a succession of ballots,
Australia and Canada were vying for the last place. Canada very generously
yielded to Australia:
Diplomatic Witness: Australian Foreign
Affairs, 1941-1947
(1980) 249. N J O Makin was the Australian member (and
sometime President) of the Security Council.
(1905-1993); Hasluck makes only a
short passing reference to the Corfu Channel dispute in his diplomatic memoir,
Diplomatic Witness
, above n 20, Ch 25; R Porter,
Paul Hasluck: A
Political Biography
(1993) ch 3. See also P Hasluck,
Workshop of
(1948), Dedication. The Corfu Channel incident is mentioned at
pages 33, 48, 68, 82, 101-102, 104, and 148-149.
(1892-1958); 9
Dictionary of Biography
321; P G Edwards,
Prime Ministers and Diplomats:
The Making of Australian Foreign Policy 1901-1949
(1983) 104-109.
NAA, Cable 26, 16 January 1947.
(1884-1968); Cadogan had been
Permanent Under Secretary of the Foreign Office in the years 1938-1946:
Dictionary of National Biography 1961-1970
(1981) 164-166; D Dilks (ed),
The Diaries of Sir Alexander Cadogan 1938-1945
For the full text of Cadogan’s
presentation, see
, above n 19, 208.
Convention Relative to the Laying of
Automatic Submarine Contact Mines, 18 October 1907 (1907) 205 CTS 331. The text
is also available
at http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon. The unnotified mining of
Nicaraguan waters was one of the central complaints in
Case Concerning
Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v
United States of America)
(Merits) ICJ Reports, 1986, 14.
NAA, Cable UN161, 18 February
For the full text of the presentation,
, above n 19, 221.
NAA, Cable 97, 19 February 1947.
, above n 19, 243.
Cadogan said he was not entirely convinced the Australian proposal was useful or
necessary but that he would not
, above n 19,
NAA, Cable UN184, 25 February
Resolution 19 (1947); NAA, Cable
UN204, 27 February 1947; S D Bailey,
The Procedure of the UN Security
(1975) 281. Cadogan abstained from the vote on the sub-committee
composition because Albania did not have a vote. There is a useful
description
of the Security Council process in the Corfu Channel dispute in T J Kahng,
Politics and the Security Council: An Inquiry into the Handling of Legal
Questions Involved in International Disputes and Situations
NAA, Cable UN252, 11 March 1947.
), 8 November 1946, 95.
NAA, Cable 163, 18 March 1947.
, above n 34.
For the text of the sub-committee's
report, see
, above n 19, 312.
NAA, Cable UN280, 18 March 1947.
Hasluck, above n 21.
NAA, Cable 172, 20 March 1947.
NAA, Cable UN 295, 21 March 1947; see
, above n 19, 287.
, above n 19, 369.
Again, the UK did not participate.
Resolution 22 (1947); NAA, Cable UN
379, 9 April 1947;
, above n 19, 392;
The Sydney Morning
, 11 April 1947; Gromyko does not mention the Corfu Channel incident
in his memoir, A A Gromyko,
Australia, Belgium, China, Columbia,
France and the United States voted in favour of the resolution. Syria abstained,
(again) did not participate:
, above n 19, 393; Munro
above n 11. As a party to the dispute, Britain did not vote. NAA, Cable UN379, 9
April 1947; Brierly,
The Law of Nations
, above n 9, 422.
A Eyffinger,
The International
Court of Justice 1946-1996
(1996); Munro, above n 10. Munro observed that it
was ‘a mark of the advances made in at least some directions that the
and loss of life last October were not followed at once by anarchic
reprisals, bombardments of the Albanian coast, and demands for
indemnities’ 363. See also the technical discussion by Sir Gerald
Fitzmaurice,
The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice
(2 Vols, 1986) Vol 1, 27-31; 126-131.
(1898-1972);
and 366; 13
Australian Dictionary of Biography
Hasluck, above n 21, 82.
In the post-war years, Evatt made the
following ministerial statements on external affairs: 13 March 1946,
House of Reps
) 187-206, 23 March 1946,
) 622-631; 8 November 1946,
House of Reps
89-104; 15 November 1946,
House of Reps
) 334-347; 26
February 1947,
House of Reps
) 159-190; 6 June 1947,
House of Reps
) 3677-3701; 11 March 1948,
House of Reps
) 558; 8 April 1948,
House of Reps
739-752; 9 February 1949,
House of Reps
) 75-92, 469-481;
21 June 1949,
House of Reps
) 1212-1226; Edwards, above n
Australia in World
(1946); H V Evatt,
United Nations
(1948); T L H MacCormack,
‘Evatt at San Francisco’ (1992) 13
Aust YB Int L
Simpson, ‘The Great Powers, Sovereign Equality and the Making of the
United Nations Charter’ (2000) 21
Aust YB Int L
Buckley, Dale and Reynolds, above n 2,
302. On 17, 23 and 24 October 1947, Evatt delivered the Oliver Wendell Holmes
Lectures at
Harvard University in which he dealt with the formation, operation
and future of the UN. Evatt (1948), above n 52.
See the author’s
‘Downunder McCarthyism: The Struggle Against Australian Communism
1945-1960’ (1998) 27
Anglo-American L Rev
341 and 438.
Cowen to Acheson, Despatch No 53, 15
March 1949, File CD22-1-19, Box 98, RG 330, National Archives and Records
Administration, Washington,
For one account of how Evatt defies
easy categorisation, see F Bongiorno, ‘Commonwealthmen and Republicans: Dr
“The Monarchy and India”’ (2000) 46
Pol and Hist
Treaty of Peace (Japan) Act
1952. The main treatments of the immediate postwar period are Day, above, n 1;
Edwards, above n 22; A Renouf,
Let Justice Be Done: The Foreign Policy of Dr
(1983); D Lee,
Australia’s Postwar Foreign and Defence Policy
(1995); C Waters
The Empire Fractures: Anglo-Australian Conflict 1945-1949
(1995); D Lee and
C Waters (eds),
Evatt to Evans: the Labor Tradition in Australian Foreign
(1997); D Lowe,
Menzies and the ‘Great World
Struggle’: Australia’s Cold War 1948-1954
Crockett, above n 2, 229.
For a range of useful detailed
accounts of the early Cold War years from the extensive literature on the
origins of the Cold War,
see: F J Harbutt,
The Iron Curtain: Churchill,
America, and the Origins of the Cold War
(1986); R B Woods and H Jones,
Dawning of the Cold War: The United States’ Quest for Order
M P Leffler,
A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman
Administration, and the Cold War
H V Evatt, ‘Risks of Big-Power
Foreign Affairs
The same piece, under the title
‘The Framing of the Peace’, is to be found in H V Evatt,
Australia in World Affairs
(1946) 123.
W J Hudson and W Way (eds),
Australia in the Postwar World: Documents 1947
(1995) 3. Evatt used the
same expression in his Holmes Lectures, above, n 53, 48.
Hudson and Way, above n 61; Evatt
(1948) above n 52, 41.
‘The United Nations’ in G
Greenwood and N Harper (eds),
Australia in World Affairs 1950-1955
‘Hot and Cold: Dr Evatt and the
Russians, 1945-1949’ in A Curthoys and J Merritt (eds),
Australia's
First Cold War 1945-1953, Vol 1, Society, Communism and Culture
Evatt, above n 52, 81;
House of Reps
) 30 August 1945, 5024.
Note (T G Glasheen),
‘Instructions Received from the Minister’, 19 January 1948, P Andre
Australia and the Postwar World: Beyond the Region Documents
(2001) 82-83. The predisposition to use the language of the law was
evident when Glasheen recorded Evatt’s opinion that the
Committee’s
Observation Teams were ‘possibly
ultra vires
the Assembly
Resolution’ (italics supplied).
The United Nations
(1948) above n 52, 118.
Ibid 63-68.
Crockett, above n 2, 229.
Greenwood and Harper, above n 63,
Charter of the United Nations
House of Reps
) 30 August 1945, 5016.
Evatt, above n 53, 20, 106.
(1907-1955);
Dictionary of National
Biography 1951-1960
(1971) 679-680.
Public Records Office (UK) DO 35/2747
(hereinafter ‘PRO’).
(1902-2003). Shawcross was the Chief
Prosecutor for the UK at Nuremberg; Lord Shawcross,
Life Sentence
The Anatomy of the Nuremberg Trials
(1992). Evatt’s
suggestion appears to have been made informally to McNeil. I have not located
any record of the words actually
used by Evatt. Shawcross attributed to McNeil a
request by Evatt in the terms of Evatt saying ‘that he would like to
Junior Counsel
to me’ (italics supplied): PRO, Shawcross,
Memo to Beckett, 8 November 1947, Memo to Beckett, 11 December 1947. Despite the
antagonism and skepticism towards Evatt displayed by high officials of the
Foreign Office and the Dominions Office, a willingness
by Evatt to appear as a
to Shawcross in the ICJ strikes this writer as entirely plausible,
perhaps analogous, in the domestic context, to the Attorney-General
leading the
Solicitor-General in a case of great public importance. It seems beyond belief
that Evatt (as First Law Officer of the
Commonwealth of Australia) would have
expected the First Law Officer of a party to the ICJ proceeding to defer to
Evatt. Notwithstanding
what Shawcross later said about the limited scope for
Evatt’s participation (see text at n 91 below), the trial of the case
the merits could have been divided between counsel. It was, after all, a very
complex case. The case on the preliminary objection
may have been different. I
was unable to locate any material concerning this episode in the Evatt Papers
held at the Flinders University
of South Australia. See also Hasluck,
Diplomatic Witness
, above n 21, ch 3.
Bolton, above n 2, 108. Evatt’s
revulsion at war was directly affected by tragic personal experience. His
brother, Ray, who
had been decorated for bravery at the Somme was killed in
action near Ypres in September 1917. Another brother, Frank, was wounded
same battle at Ypres, returned to active service, was again wounded and as a
result died in September 1918: Buckley, Dale
and Reynolds, above n 2.
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1.
[1950] AC 235.
The Editor of the
Appeal Cases
was moved to introduce the listing of counsel as follows:
‘The hearing of the appeal lasted for 36 days between March 14 and
inclusive – a record for length of time’; Ibid 240.
Evatt (1948) above n 52, 42,
PRO, Memo, Beckett to Shawcross, 19
November 1947.
Waters, above n 57.
PRO, McNeil, Handwritten memo, 22
November 1947. Philip John Noel-Baker (1889-1982) was Secretary of State for
Commonwealth Relations
(1947-1950).
This is a somewhat tantalising detail.
The Dominions Office file, DO 35/2747, in the UK Public Records Office does not
obvious clue as to the identity of the delegation members to whom
Shawcross spoke. Hasluck had resigned from government employment
in late March
1947 and left the US in July 1947 to return to Australia. He had attended a
Security Council meeting for the last time
on 25 March 1947. Hasluck’s
resignation had followed the controversial appointment of Dr J W Burton as
permanent head of the
Department of External Affairs. Hasluck had not welcomed
the appointment: Edwards, above n 22, 181; Hasluck, above, n 20, 292. In
House of Representatives on 27 March 1947, Evatt was asked by H E Holt about
Hasluck’s resignation. In a detailed answer
several weeks later, Evatt
said that the resignation was for personal reasons:
) 23 April 1947, 1587. This was, at best, a half-truth. On Evatt’s
treatment of Hasluck as a senior (albeit temporary) officer
of the Department of
External Affairs and Hasluck’s deep resentment at that treatment, see
Porter, above n 21, ch 3. For Hasluck’s
arrestingly blunt comments
following Evatt’s death, see P Hasluck,
The Chance of Politics
(1997) 79. Hasluck considered that he had reason enough to resign. But perhaps
Evatt’s attitude to the delegation’s conduct
in the Security Council
treatment of the Corfu Channel incident reinforced Hasluck’s conviction
that he would be better off
not having to put up with Evatt’s badgering
and that his diplomatic career should be ended. Hasluck was elected to the House
of Representatives at the historic 1949 election and was Minister for External
Affairs between 1964 and 1969 when he left politics
to become Governor-General
of Australia.
(1881-1951);
Dictionary of National
Biography 1951-1960
(1971) 102-110;
Ernest Bevin,
Foreign Secretary 1945-1951
(1983) 308, 399. According to that astute
observer of Balkan politics and history, C M Woodhouse, during the Greek civil
war (1946-1949)
Bevin was uncompromising in his dealings with Albania
‘having never forgiven the Communist government for mining [the] British
destroyers ... in 1946’, Woodhouse, above n 6, 234.
PRO, Shawcross, Minute, 11 December
PRO, Memo Shannon to Machtig, 15
December 1947.
(1907-1980); Parliamentary Under
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations (1947-1951);
Dictionary of
National Biography 1971-1980
(1986) 352-354. There is no mention of the
Corfu Channel incident or the ICJ case in R Pearce (ed),
Patrick Gordon
Walker: Political Diaries 1932-1971
PRO, Handwritten File Memo,
Gordon-Walker, 16 December 1947.
PRO, Letter, McNeil to Shawcross, 18
February 1948.
PRO, Handwritten File Memo, 24
December 1947. This passage in the Shawcross draft was amended by the Foreign
Office to read as follows:
‘Whilst, however, it seems impracticable to
enlist your assistance in the Corfu case, there is another matter which will
come before the International Court which we like to commend to you as
being worthy of your personal intervention. I refer, of course,
to the request
for an advisory opinion, adopted on the proposal of the Belgian delegation, on
the considerations which may properly
affect votes on the election of new
members to the United Nations, which raises an important issue of principle. It
will therefore
be most important, both politically and from the point of view of
the Court proceedings, that the case should be adequately argued.
Perhaps you
will consider this possibility.’ This passage appeared in the final
version signed by McNeil.
See Advisory Opinion,
Conditions of
Admission of a State to Membership in the United Nations (Article 4 of the
ICJ Reports, 1948, 61; http://www.icj-cij.org/icjwww/
igeneralinformation/ibbook/Bbook8-2.02.HTM; see also Advisory Opinion,
Competence of the General Assembly for the Admission of a State to Membership
in the United Nations
, ICJ Reports, 1950, 4;
http://www.icj-cij.org/icjwww/igeneralinformation/ibbook/Bbook8-2.02.HTM.
Hudson and Way, above n 61, 3. In
1946, an application by Albania for UN membership was vigorously opposed by
Greece which, as a
part of the continuing postwar treaty-making process, was
seeking to have its northern boundary adjusted to include northern Epirus
expense of Albania. On 29 August 1946, Britain and the United States had vetoed
the Albanian application. This led to the
Soviet Union vetoing the membership
applications of Ireland, Portugal, Siam and Transjordan: Alexander, above, n 5,
210-212. Albania
was not admitted to UN membership until 14 December 1955;
Curr Notes on Int Affairs
558; (1947) 18
Curr Notes on Int
Hudson and Way, above n 61, 3.
PRO, Memo, Horne to Hunt, 16 January
Above n 90.
PRO, Letter, McNeil to Shawcross, 18
February 1948. I have so far been unable to locate the original or a file copy
of Evatt's letter
of reply. The absence of an attached typescript copy of
Evatt’s letter in the Dominions Office file and his use of the expression
‘This is a hurried note’ suggest that Evatt penned the reply.
PRO, Handwritten notation on file, 19
February 1948.
The UK was represented by Shawcross,
Beckett, Dr Hersch Lauterpacht, Professor of International Law in the University
of Cambridge,
C H M Waldock, Professor of International Law in the University of
Oxford, R O Wilberforce, J Mervyn Jones, and M E Reed.
ICJ Reports, 1948, 15; Jones, above
n 9; Green, Note
; H F Bancroft and E Stein,
‘The Corfu Channel case: Judgment on the Preliminary Objection’
Corfu Channel case (Merits)
ICJ Reports, 1949, 4, 18-23. On the hearing on the merits, the UK was again
represented by Shawcross, Beckett (who had been recently
knighted), Waldock,
Wilberforce, Jones, and Reed. On 15 November 1948, Shawcross had been replaced
by the UK Solicitor-General, Sir
Frank Soskice, MP. The two dissenters on the
issue of Albanian responsibility, were Judges Azevedo (Brazil) and Krylov
(Soviet Union).
For commentary on the case, see L C Green, Note
; Q Wright. ‘The Corfu Channel case’ (1949) 43
491; Jones, above n 9; Note, ‘Peacetime Passage By Warships
Through Territorial Straits’
; Ngantcha,
above n 7, 79-82, 93, 127-128, 171.
ICJ Reports, 1949, 244; Jones,
above n 9, 449-450.
ICJ Reports, 1949, 244. Between
July and October 1949, Albania made overtures to the British Government to
settle the case.
Case of the Monetary Gold
Removed From Rome in 1943
Italy v France, United Kingdom and United
States of America)
ICJ Reports, 1954, 19;
http://www.icj-cij.org/icjwww/igeneral
information/ibbook/Bbook8-1.12.HTM; D H N Johnson, ‘The Case of the
Monetary Gold Removed from Rome in 1943’
http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/hoxha/works/stalin/meet5.htm.
19 March 1990, col 451.
14 January 1991
Memorandum of
Understanding
signed in Rome (1992) 63
Brit YB Int L
9 May 1992, 10; Kathimerini
(Athens), 9 May 1992, 21.
Later that year, the first Royal Navy ship for 54 years sailed into Albanian
waters as part of sanctions
enforcement against Serbia:
November 1992, 29. See also Speech by H E Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President of
the International Court of Justice, given at
the University of Cambridge
(Lauterpacht Research Centre for International Law) 9 November 2001,
http://www.law.cam.ac.uk/RCIL/Guillaume.doc,
31 October 1996, WA, col 224; Note, (1996) 67
Brit YB Int L
Evatt, above n 52, 95.
Above n 63, 105.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (1.16 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter