URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boyne, S M --- "Crisis in the classroom: using simulations to enhance decision-making skills" [2013] LegEdDig 27; (2013) 21(1) Legal Education Digest 40
Journal of Legal Education
, Vol. 62, No. 2, 2012-2013, pp 311-322
There is no better way to capture students’ attention than to detonate
a ‘dirty bomb’, or rather a simulated news
report that a dirty bomb
has exploded less than ten blocks away from the law school. Certainly this was
no ordinary class session,
but instead a well-planned counter-terrorism
simulation involving 40 students drawn from Indiana University School of Law
Indianapolis and the Indiana University School of Public and
Environmental Affairs (SPEA) held in October 2009. From the early minutes
simulated decision-making exercise to its conclusion three hours later, the
highly engaged students responded to a series
of public safety crises while
striving to balance competing objectives and operate within the boundaries of
My own introduction to non-clinic based experiential teaching methods
occurred in the summer of 2006 when I attended the Summer Workshop
on Teaching
Terrorism (SWOTT) held at the University of Maryland. The SWOTT program mixes
lectures and teaching demonstrations in
an attempt to introduce participants to
the best practices in teaching terrorism-related courses. While high-level
government officials
and noted academics updated us on the latest developments
and research in the counter-terrorism and homeland security fields, the
teaching exercises were creative and thought provoking. One particular exercise,
in which groups were asked to plan a terrorist
attack using common household
materials, remains fresh in my memory to this day. The exercise quickly forced
participants to adopt
a terrorist’s operational mindset. Most importantly,
the session demonstrated to me how active student engagement in a creative
problem-solving exercise could challenge student performance, capture student
attention, and develop critical thinking skills.
As I began my own academic career, I was determined to supplement the
traditional Socratic Method with a variety of exercises that
forced students to
approach the law not as law students, but as legal practitioners. My own
experience as a prosecutor in the State
of New Mexico, as well as my research on
the impact that organisational culture plays in shaping legal decision-making in
service, spurred my search for teaching exercises that would
highlight the constraints and challenges facing lawyers in government
Many of these challenges were brought to the forefront in the wake of the
9/11 terrorist attacks. In particular, national and international
criticism of
the Bush Administration’s policies regarding torture, the use of force,
and the rendition and detention of enemy
combatants highlight the tension that
lawyers employed in government service may confront in finding legal support for
policies that
may violate national and international law. Whether one points to
the infamous ‘torture memos’ drafted by Bush Administration
that allowed waterboarding of suspected terrorists or the government’s
illegal targeting of immigrants and the use
of racial profiling to target
persons of particular descent in the wake of 9/11, the fingerprints of
government lawyers are adhered
to some of the most questionable government
practices of the past decade.
While it is easier now, more than a decade after 9/11, to second guess
decisions made in the aftermath of those attacks, my goal in
teaching the
seminar was not to take a stand on those decisions but rather to bring to life
for the students the challenges of preserving
allegiance to the rule of law
while protecting national security. Although traditional law school courses in
professional responsibility
may touch on the ethical dilemmas confronting
lawyers in public service, the volume of material that must be covered in that
invariably means that brief attention is given to the topic. Thus, as I
prepared my syllabus for a new seminar in comparative national
security law, I
sought to find a teaching exercise that would specifically highlight the tension
that government lawyers face as
they advise government leaders in times of
crisis. To get my students to appreciate the contextual pressures of making
in a crisis management mode, I wanted to find a way to recreate a
crisis environment and then ask them to make decisions in that
environment.
My initial vague goal of introducing students to an atmosphere of crisis
decision-making resonated with the need to provide students
with several of the
fundamental lawyering skills and values identified in the MacCrate Report. In
particular, my goal of teaching
crisis decision-making by stepping beyond the
four corners of appellate opinions, from the start coincided with two key skills
by the report, namely, problem solving and recognising and resolving
ethical dilemmas.
As I began planning my counterterrorism course, I stumbled upon a description
and some short videos describing a series of counter-terrorism
simulations that
Amos Guiora had run at Utah Law School. While I embraced many of the Utah
model’s core components, I decided
to break from the model and include
students from the Indiana University’s School of Public and Environmental
Administration
(SPEA). With dreams of matching the sophistication and excitement
of the Utah simulation, I approached two members of the SPEA faculty
knowledge and prior experience in the fields of public safety and
counterterrorism far exceeded the length of my college and
graduate school
As with many multi-disciplinary projects, our initial planning meetings were
marked by tentative commitments and scepticism. Although
I wanted to place
ethical decision-making at the centre of the simulation, my partners were
initially more operationally focused.
While I was envisioning decision-making
dilemmas based on issues of constitutional law, my partners questioned how law
students would
be able to make operational decisions.
Two key goals were involved in the structuring of the script. One was to
create enough action to involve approximately 50 students
who would play roles
at different levels of government. The second goal was to create a
decision-making dilemma that would force
students to wrestle with the core
concepts of the class. I began with an initial rough idea of a scenario –
a dirty bomb attack
in Indianapolis with possible international implications. As
the idea evolved, I decided that I needed more action to engage the
decision-makers at the White House and to challenge students to set priorities.
To accomplish this goal, I added a series of embassy
bombings in Washington D.C.
In the midst of the bombings, I threw students a curve ball involving
international politics by having
the Iranian Ambassador to the United Nations
visiting the Pakistani Embassy to the US as a bomb exploded outside the embassy.
allowed me to add a statement by the Iranian President that blamed Israel
for the embassy attack as well as a threat from Israel
to attack the Iranian
nuclear facilities. This action sequence naturally lent itself to the inclusion
of an American embassy in Israel.
With the script for the news broadcasts written and sent to the
‘studio’ for filming, we set about planning the sets and
the simulation. We ended up with five main sets: (1) White House National
Security Council; (2) White House National Security
Council Support Room; (3)
Office of the Governor of Indiana; (4) Office of the Mayor of Indianapolis; and
(5) US Embassy, Israel.
In addition, we had a generic press conference room that
could be used by any of the officials who wanted to give a press briefing.
The key technological pieces of the simulation included installing a
videoconferencing capability in each room, designing a Web dashboard
students could use to view the media reports and through which the public could
watch the action taking place in each of
the rooms. As the simulation exercise
was taking place, members of the public could access the dashboard and view the
action live
as well as access the media reports. The dashboard also performed a
coordination function as it enabled our control room staff to
monitor the action
in each of the rooms and be on the lookout for any unanticipated problems.
Each student received his or her assigned role two weeks before the
simulation. At minimum, students were expected to research the
function and
responsibilities of the position, the function of that position within the
larger institutional structure, as well as
current possible threats that an
individual in that position might be expected to confront. Most of the students
reviewed the course
materials and read recent media reports related to terrorist
attacks prior to the simulation as well as a plethora of articles and
information my research assistant had compiled in an intelligence database. Just
like government officials in real life, the students
had little time to sort
through volumes of material and determine what was relevant to their role.
As the simulation began, the simulation dashboard lit up with reports of a
bombing at the Pakistani Embassy in Washington, DC and
the explosion of a dirty
bomb near Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis. The students in the DC and
Indianapolis locations were quickly
involved in trying to verify the information
reported by the media, determine casualties and response needs, and to assess
the likelihood
of further attacks. In order to facilitate information gathering,
I had a handful of students, faculty members, and members of the
playing the roles of actors in the field including a police sergeant playing the
role of the commanding officer at the
scene of the explosion at Lucas stadium.
In addition to cell phone communication, the student teams could communicate
with each other through videoconferencing capability
provided in each room.
Intel ‘injects’ were the final piece in our information management
strategy. At various points
in the simulation, we sent envelopes into the room
directed at certain participants with special instructions for that participant.
The injects contained new information from the ‘field’ as well as
instructions to key participants that were designed
to move the decision-making
processes forward or to add additional uncertainty to the scenario. Sample
injects included: (1) an instruction
to hold a press conference in ten minutes
to answer questions from the press corps; (2) the revelation that a member of
was about to post inaccurate and potentially panic inciting
information on a newspaper blog; and (3) top secret information that
one country
was going to take advantage of the situation by bombing another country.
The performance of each team ranged from good group decision-making with
effective leadership to a less inclusive leadership style
that left some
students on the periphery of the decision-making processes. In general, the
undergraduate public policy students interacted
well with the law students.
The primary goal of hosting the simulation exercise was to improve
students’ critical thinking skills through teaching techniques
beyond the Socratic Method. As students read or listened to the news reports,
they had to decide how the government should
best respond to the events. But as
the response planning efforts commenced, the key decision-makers also had to
determine what further
information was needed to guide the planning efforts and
direct their staff to obtain that information.
Some of the field intelligence agents provided only vague information at
first and students learned quickly that the mere relaying
of information from
the field would not satisfy the information needs of the key
decision-makers.
The simulation format forces students to take steps to determine and weigh
sifting facts on the ground and reach decisions that will
have consequences for
the security and civil rights of other players in the game. By creating a series
of decision scenarios that
forced students to think through the consequences of
action or inaction, the exercise challenged students’ critical thinking
skills beyond the typical class room format. Moreover, the decision scenarios
had multiple ripple effects on the actions of other
The second pedagogical goal was to introduce students to the challenge of
working with individuals from different disciplinary backgrounds.
Not only did
the student teams mix law students with undergraduates in the public policy
school, but we injected law enforcement
and public safety personnel into the
simulation as well. The individuals who relayed what was happening at the scenes
of the terrorist
attacks were police officers with the Indianapolis Metropolitan
Police Department. After the exercise, the law students reported
that it was an
interesting challenge to work with the embedded experts as well as the public
policy students and that everyone was
not always on the same page. There were
interdisciplinary challenges between the law students as well. The students
appeared to quickly
adopt the mindset of their respective agencies as the
individuals assigned to defence and intelligence roles essentially ignored
recommendations produced by the State Department. In the heat of the simulated
crisis environment, the student decision-makers
in the White House roles were
more likely to turn to the tools of warfare rather than diplomacy even as
embassy personnel in the
Middle East recommended diplomacy.
One of the key themes of the Carnegie Report is its call for law schools to
teach professionalism. Our simulation project aimed to
embrace the concept of
professionalism on two levels. First, regardless of their role within the
simulation, students were encouraged
to act as a professional and to communicate
with each other respectfully. Second, the instructions to the law student
participants
asked them to reflect upon their identity as a future member of the
legal profession and to act with good judgement during the simulation.
end, it was evident that students took their assigned roles seriously.
By using a team centred decision-making model, the simulation encouraged
students to share information, discuss possible courses of
actions, and to
reflect on the short-term outcomes of their decisions. By targeting
students’ abilities to solve problems,
communicate effectively, and work
in a multidisciplinary team, the project targeted key skills critical to the
successful practice
In the field of public sector management, many governments have turned to
simulation exercises to improve leaders’ ability to
respond to a crisis.
Yet, as the bungled response to Hurricane Katrina demonstrated, many public
leaders and front line responders
are often unprepared to handle the
communication and decision-making challenges posed by a crisis. For these
reasons, educational
institutions that hope to prepare their students to assume
positions of leadership, cannot afford to ignore the fact that the complexity
the modern decision-making environment requires the use of new pedagogies to
prepare students.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (52 KB)
PDF format (3.21 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter