URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:46:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Loughland, Amelia; Dixon, Rosalind --- "Response: Querying The Gender Dynamics Of Interruptions At Australian Oral Argument" [2021] UNSWLawJlF 2; (2021) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 2
I INTRODUCTION
II THE ORIGINAL STUDY
III WHAT STILL CAN BE LEARNED
IV CONCLUSION
RESPONSE: QUERYING THE GENDER DYNAMICS OF INTERRUPTIONS AT
AUSTRALIAN ORAL ARGUMENT
AMELIA LOUGHLAND
AND ROSALIND
I INTRODUCTION
In ‘Querying the Gender Dynamics of Interruptions at Australian Oral
Argument’ published recently on the
UNSW Law Journal
Tonja Jacobi, Zoë
Robinson and Patrick Leslie engage with the empirical study ‘Female
Judges, Interrupted: A Study of
Interruption Behaviour during Oral Argument in
the High Court of Australia’ (‘the original
Theirs is a
thorough, detailed empirical analysis that takes up the invitation of the
original article
to verify whether
the gendered patterns which were observed in a smaller sample of oral argument
in the High Court could be replicated
over a longer period of study.
We are delighted that the authors have taken up this challenge and have
valuably extended the academic conversation regarding gendered
power dynamics in
Australia’s highest judicial institution. It is particularly rewarding to
have Professor Jacobi, one of the
original authors of the American foundational
study on judicial interruptions,
comment and engage so thoroughly with these findings in an Australian context.
The response to both studies has ignited valuable
public and academic debate
over the existence of unconscious biases and gendered norms within the legal
profession.
The purpose of this comment is to address some of the limitations of the
original study and consider further areas of research and
analysis that are
raised by the authors’ data.
II THE ORIGINAL STUDY
The original study arose in the context of a research paper at the
encouragement of Professor Rosalind Dixon. Its purpose was to test
whether the
results of Professor Jacobi’s landmark study in the United States
(‘US’) (which found that female judges
on the US Supreme Court
suffered much higher rates of interruption than their male
colleagues)
could be observed in
the Australian context. Given the appointment of Australia’s first female
Chief Justice to the High Court
of Australia, it seemed particularly pertinent
to interrogate the gendered dynamics of the country’s highest court.
The period of the study (mid-2015 to the end of 2017) was thus not selected
as a random sample to test the hypothesis of interruptive
behaviour, but was
intended to test whether there was any discernible difference in the behaviour
of the judges and advocates at
the High Court when led by a woman for the first
time. Loughland was fortunate to have had the assistance of Professor Jacobi in
developing the research methodology for the Australian study, which analysed all
transcripts for hearings in
(seven-judge) hearings in the High
Court. That study found an indicative trend for a higher number of interruptions
by male advocates
as against female judges, and also observed that the nature
and pre-emptive type of interruptions experienced by female judges may
disadvantaged their participation during oral argument in the High Court.
Since the publication of both studies, several academics and barristers have
taken issue with the use of transcripts as a reliable
method of recording
interruptions of speech. That is a separate contention, and one which does not
need to be addressed in the context
of considering the relative contributions of
the present two studies. Nonetheless, (as has been suggested in responses to
both papers)
it would be a fascinating new avenue of research in this field to
conduct firsthand research in courtrooms and determine how the
observed results
differed from the court transcripts, and whether similar interruptive trends
could be identified.
Other commentators have also queried whether the broader significance of the
study’s findings is limited by the fact that it
was confined to
Australia’s highest court with its particular set of practices and norms.
The original study did not intend
to make claims about gendered interruption
behaviour in all Australian courts. Rather, it sought to investigate whether in
the highest
judicial institution, judges at the peak of high-status careers were
still subject to gendered conversational dynamics. Although
the original study
only sought to speak for the High Court, it would be another interesting pursuit
for further research to investigate
the extent to which the indicative findings
from the original study were evidenced in other institutions such as the state
of appeal and the Federal Court.
Putting those questions aside, Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie’s own
empirical analysis of High Court transcripts over a 25-year
period found that
female judges were indeed interrupted more than their male colleagues in
consistent with the trend identified in Loughland’s initial findings.
But they also found that this trend could not be reliably generalised to a
broader empirical statement about gendered interruptions
In particular, the authors
found that being female was not positively correlated (at least to a
statistically significant degree)
with a higher number of interruptions and that
there were more years across the period of study in which male justices were
interrupted
at higher rates than female justices, although senior female
justices were more likely to be interrupted than their similarly situated
colleagues.
The authors identified
several interesting alternatives for interruptions based on their statistical
analysis, in particular noting
that female judges were more likely to be
interrupted as they became more experienced on the
This, for example, might be explained by the fact that judges tended to talk
more or ask more questions, and interruptions are measured
in absolute not
relative terms, or because countering a judge’s scepticism through a
pre-emptive interruption might be perceived
as more important to counsel’s
chance of succeeding in their argument. Consistent with this, Jacobi, Robinson
and Leslie also
find that judges are more likely to be interrupted as they
engage in more ‘speech episodes’, or active forms of questioning;
interruptions against female justices also appeared at their highest average
rate in 2002–2003, when Justice Gaudron was about
to retire from the
Bench, and her Honour’s influence was arguably at its
We are incredibly grateful to the three authors for approaching this question
with such empirical rigour over a longer time period.
As was noted in the
original study, we were aware that such a small sample size would not produce a
statistically significant result
across the history of the High Court.
Similarly, the original study was quite open about the fact of employing
relatively simple
statistical tools, which involved counting and hand-coding
each interruption and considering its qualitative effect on the speaker
oral argument. Nonetheless, the study provided an interesting indicative trend
– albeit in a short time frame and small
sample size – in a pivotal
moment in the High Court’s history; when it was first led by a female
Chief Justice. While
these findings might not be able to speak for a broader
statistical fact about the High Court as an institution, the original study
especially its qualitative analysis provided at least some evidence that female
judges were spoken to differently on the contemporary
High Court, in a way that
was reminiscent of the conversational norms women have come to expect in
everyday conversations and the
For this reason, it
seemed important to open the conversation around the potential gendered dynamics
on the Court, in the way that
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie have also so valuably
The response to the publication of Loughland’s study at the beginning
of 2020 also suggested that, beyond whether such interruptions
statistically proven, the experience of being interrupted even as the most
senior person in the room resonated with many
women. This, coupled with the fact
that men constitute the overwhelming majority of advocates appearing before the
High Court,
confirms the
importance of interrogating underlying norms about what it means to have an
authoritative ‘voice’ in the
legal profession.
III WHAT STILL CAN BE LEARNED
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie’s study has added new insights to the
public conversation around gendered dynamics on the High Court
of Australia. The
breadth and rigour of their data also offer new opportunities for further
avenues for research in this field.
In particular, their data
suggests a spike in interruptions of women justices in around 2002–2003
followed by a significant drop in 2005 and then a gradual
but consistent
increase until 2019.
From 1995–2007, there was only one woman on the High Court at any one
with a two-year gap (from
2003–2005) where there were no female judges on the Court at all. From
2007 when Justice Kiefel (as
her Honour then was) started serving on the High
Court to 2019, there have been at least three female judges on the High Court.
means that for almost half the period of the study, there was only one
woman on the Court, as compared to at least six male judges
who in some years
received a higher number of interruptions than their female colleagues.
When the authors’ data becomes publicly available, it would be
interesting to consider two possible scenarios further. First,
it would be
interesting to consider how the authors’ findings interact, or are
modified by, the number and particular judicial
personality of the judge on the
Court at that time. As mentioned, there was a substantial period – from
1987–2003 –
in which Justice Gaudron was the only female member of
the Court. Justice Gaudron’s tenure alone thus accounts for almost half
the relevant period of study (from 1995–2019). And while in
2002–2003, Justice Gaudron was the female judge most likely
interrupted (compared to historical averages), she was also less likely to be
interrupted than later justices for much of her
tenure on the Court.
Justice Gaudron was also a very distinctive judicial figure: she was an
outstanding intellect, an outspoken
and judge with a sharp
wit, who had an important coalitional role on the
There was therefore a
particular detriment to counsel’s prospects of success if they interrupted
Justice Gaudron, unless perhaps
it was in response to an especially direct and
probing question from her Honour.
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie go some way to considering this in their existing
study, noting that they cluster their standard errors
But their article does
not fully explain or unpack what this means for understanding the role of
specific female judges over time,
and especially the disproportionate influence
of Justice Gaudron on their overall findings. It would thus be interesting to
in a formal way, the possibility of a ‘Gaudron fixed effect’
on the overall rate of interruptions of female justices
on the Court. At the
very least, through further qualitative and empirical analysis, it would be
as one explanation for why Jacobi, Robinson
and Leslie may not find a consistent gender effect in interruptions.
Secondly, the fact that average interruptions against women appear to drop
significantly while Justice Crennan was the only woman
on the Court, but then
steadily increase until 2019 (as compared to the historical averages of
interruptions against women), raises
other questions about the effect of
multiple women on the High Court at one time. It is possible that at some level
advocates are
more self-conscious about gender issues and the fact of
interrupting when there is only one woman on the Court, who is a judicial
anomaly. This would also suggest that the presence of multiple female judges on
the Court at one time could normalise the presence
of women to the extent that
advocates no longer self-consciously modify their behaviour to account for
gender dynamics.
This itself could be a significant sign of progress: it suggests that a
critical mass of female judges may reshape professional and
institutional norms
and behaviours in ways that lead to a less pervasively gendered way of
interacting. But it may also have dangers,
if in ordinary life men are
accustomed to interrupting women but are not aware that they tend to do so. In
this case, the presence
of a greater number of women on the Bench may lead men
to begin to speak and interact with female judges in the same manner as research
has suggested they would the other women in their lives – ie, by speaking
more frequently and interrupting more often, even
when they are not aware of
This would also add weight to the discussion in the original Australian study
which queried whether the mere presence of women is
sufficient to transform
traditionally male-dominated
institutions.
Instead, depending
on the outcomes of that additional analysis, such norms underlying the Court
must be directly addressed. This
idea is supported by Iris
who pointed out the need
for intentional design of institutions by setting prescriptive norms and
self-consciously designing interventions
to address gender bias, rather than
simply assuming that institutions will change organically.
That is, if women are treated deferentially as the ‘exceptional
woman’ but are more likely to be interrupted when their
presence on a
court has been normalised, the Court could be considered a microcosmic
representation of gendered conversational norms,
regardless of the presence of
powerful women, and further evidence of the need for structural interventions to
challenge implicit
gender bias.
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie suggest that this does not seem to be the
but it would be useful to
further test and explore this possibility, focusing on both the number of women
on the Bench at a given
time, and judge specific effects.
Finally, the authors query the suggestion from Loughland’s original
study that male Chief Justices may be more effective than
their female
counterparts in addressing gendered interruption
The authors found no
support for the ‘claim’ that male Chief Justices reduce the rate of
interruption of female justices,
noting in particular that the rate of male
advocates interrupting judges plateaued during Chief Justice French’s
began to reduce again in Chief Justice Kiefel’s
This is another fascinating empirical insight of the authors’ study.
However, it misunderstands the nature of the claim made
in the original study.
The study did not argue that male Chief Justices were
preventing interruptive behaviour than their female colleagues. Rather,
Loughland suggested that, once the Court was made
aware of the indicative
findings of the study, a male Chief Justice might be more effective in policing
that behaviour as they are
less likely to be accused of partisanship towards
female colleagues (and indeed all judges), in light of the norms which require
female judges to over-perform ‘impartiality’ rather than identifying
themselves with a feminist
The opposite may also be true: male Chief Justices may be subject to the same
forms of implicit gender bias that lead to greater interruptions
justices by male advocates, and yet have significantly more power to interrupt
– because of their role in presiding
over oral arguments. There is
certainly evidence that Chief Justice John Roberts has been both
self-consciously willing to correct
gendered forms of interruption in the US
Supreme Court,
and unconsciously
subject to gendered and ideological biases in his approach to interruptions
during recent telephone
Alternatively, there may be no difference at all between Chief Justices in
this respect; or that any differences are not differences
due to gender, or the
interaction between a Chief Justice’s gender and the gender composition of
the Bench, as opposed to a
Chief Justice’s individual approach to their
role. But given the widespread academic and media discussion of interruptive
on the Australian High Court, it would be interesting to conduct a
follow-up study that assessed whether, and to what extent, judges
changed their
behaviour and were more active in preventing advocates from interrupting their
colleagues.
IV CONCLUSION
The publication of Loughland’s pilot study on judicial interruptions
triggered a public conversation in Australia about the
possibility that women,
even at the height of prestigious careers, are treated differently to their male
colleagues.
The findings resonated with the anecdotal experience of many women at the bar
and the Bench who attested to their exasperation at
being spoken over and
interrupted by male colleagues, and male barristers who cited their new
consciousness of interruptive behaviour
during oral argument. The broader public
interest in Loughland’s work further suggested that similar dynamics exist
the legal profession.
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie’s research has added a layer of empirical
depth to this research, by giving us cause to reconsider
the extent to which it
is fair to say these norms have been replicated in the High Court as a general
or longer-term proposition.
Their data also opens up opportunities for further
research and the potential for new insights, such as the effect of particular
judicial personality, and the interaction effect of multiple female judges on
the High Court and whether this suggests a loss of
self-consciousness over
gender issues over time.
But it is important to recall the original insights provided by
Jacobi’s own research in the US in this context, namely: that
patterns of interruption can and do occur at the highest institutional levels,
in ways that suggest that these patterns
are likely even more pervasive in
ordinary life.
Loughland’s
original study, and the reaction to it, have provided important, even if
temporally limited, support for that point
in an Australian context.
Further, both Loughland’s original study and Jacobi, Robinson and
Leslie found that
over-represented in speaking roles at the High Court and did the overwhelming
amount of interrupting compared to their female
colleagues. This means that
there is still a long way to go in addressing the gendered construction of voice
and power in the legal
profession, and the gendering of conversational norms in
law, as in life.
It is a privilege to be a part of that important conversation.
* Solicitor, and Fellow, Gilbert + Tobin Centre of Public Law UNSW.
** Professor of Law, UNSW Sydney.
Tonja Jacobi, Zoë Robinson and Patrick Leslie,
‘Querying the Gender Dynamics of Interruptions at Australian Oral
University of New South Wales Law Journal
Amelia Loughland,
‘Female Judges, Interrupted: A Study of Interruption Behaviour during Oral
Argument in the High Court of
[2020] MelbULawRw 10
(2019) 43(2)
University Law Review
Tonja Jacobi and Dylan
Schweers, ‘Justice, Interrupted: The Effect of Gender, Ideology and
Seniority at Supreme Court Oral
(2017) 103(7)
Virginia Law
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie (n
Ibid 8–9, 15–16.
Ibid 16–17.
Ibid 8 Figure 2, 16.
See, eg, behavioural
studies that have found that men tend to interrupt women in everyday
conversation at a far higher rate than
vice versa: Don H Zimmerman and Candace
West, ‘Sex Roles, Interruptions and Silences in Conversation’ in
Barrie Thorne
and Nancy Henley (eds),
Language and Sex: Difference and
(Newbury House Publishers, 1975) 105, 116–17; see also
Marianne LaFrance, ‘Gender and Interruptions: Individual Infraction
Violation of the Social Order?’ (1992) 16(4)
Psychology of Women
Winsome Hall and George
Williams ‘100 Years of Speaking: Gender Equality among Barristers before
the High Court’
(2020) 94(12)
Australian Law Journal
See especially Jacobi,
Robinson and Leslie (n 1) 8 Figure 2.
Justice Gaudron served on
the Bench from 1995–2003; Justice Crennan from 2005–2014; Chief
Justice Kiefel was appointed
as a puisne judge from September 2007; Justice Bell
was appointed in February 2009 and Justice Gordon was appointed in June 2015.
See, eg, Justice Mary
Gaudron, ‘Speech for Women Lawyers Association of New South Wales
Anniversary Gala Dinner’ (Speech, NSW Parliament House, 13
<https://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/speeches/former-justices/gaudronj/gaudronj_wlansw.html>.
See, eg, Justice
Gaudron’s high concurrence rate on the High Court, as reported in Andrew
Lynch, ‘The Gleeson Court
on Constitutional Law: An Empirical Analysis of
Its First Five Years’
[2003] UNSWLawJl 2
(2003) 26(1)
University of New South Wales Law
See especially at 58–60.
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie
(n 1) 14 n 51.
LaFrance (n 11) 498.
Loughland (n 2) 842.
Iris Bohnet,
What Works:
Gender Equality by Design
(Harvard University Press, 2016).
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie
(n 1) 15 n 54.
Loughland (n 2) 822, 845.
Jacobi, Robinson and Leslie
(n 1) 4, 11–12.
See, eg, Rosemary Hunter,
‘Can Feminist Judges Make a Difference?’ (2008) 15(1–
International Journal of the Legal Profession
Adam Liptak, ‘Nice
Argument, Counselor, but Let’s Hear Mine’,
The New York Times
(online, 4 April 2011)
<https://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/05/us/05bar.html>.
Leah Litman and Tonja
Jacobi, ‘Does John Roberts Need to Check His Own Biases?’,
New York Times
(online, 2 June 2020)
<https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/02/opinion/john-roberts-supreme-court.html>.
See, eg, Julia Hare,
‘Girl Interrupted: Talking over the Top of Female Judges’,
BroadAgenda
(Blog Post, 11 February 2020)
<https://www.broadagenda.com.au/2020/girl-interrupted-if-it-happens-to-high-court-judges-rude/>;
Michaela Whitbourn, ‘Female High Court Judges “Far More
Likely” to Be Interrupted than Male Peers: Study’,
Morning Herald
(online, 5 February 2020)
<https://www.smh.com.au/national/female-high-court-judges-far-more-likely-to-be-interrupted-than-male-peers-study-20200204-p53xjw.html>;
‘Overcoming Disproportionate Interruptions Faced by Female Judges’,
The Lawyers Weekly Show
(LawyersWeekly, 6 March 2020)
<https://www.lawyersweekly.com.au/podcast/27645-overcoming-disproportionate-interruptions-faced-by-female-judges>.
See, eg, Adam Liptak,
‘Why Gorsuch May Not Be So Genteel on the Bench’
, (online, 17 April 2017)
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/17/us/politics/why-gorsuch-may-not-be-so-genteel-on-the-bench.html>;
Ann-Marie Alcántara, ‘It’s Not Just You – Women on the
Supreme Court Are Constantly Interrupted by Men,
(online, 19 April 2017)
<https://www.popsugar.com/news/Female-Supreme-Court-Justices-Interruption-Study-43413662>;
Ang, ‘Even Ruth Bader Ginsburg Gets “Manterrupted” at
Work: What to Do When It Happens to You’
(Blog Post, 14
April 2017)
<https://www.marketwatch.com/story/even-ruth-bader-ginsburg-gets-manterrupted-at-work-what-to-do-when-it-happens-to-you-2017-04-14>;
Jim Axelrod, ‘Female Supreme Court Justices Interrupted More than Male
Colleagues, Study Says’,
CBS Evening News
(online, 12 April 2017)
<https://www.cbsnews.com/news/female-supreme-court-justices-interrupted-more-male-colleagues-study/>;
Maggie Mallon, ‘Here’s How Frequently Women Supreme Court Justices
Are Interrupted by Men’,
(online, 6 April 2017)
<https://www.glamour.com/story/how-frequently-women-supreme-court-justices-are-interrupted-by-men>.
See also Daniel Reynolds
and George Williams, ‘Gender Equality Among Barristers before the High
(2017) 91(6)
Australian Law Journal
; Hall and Williams
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (76.1 KB)
PDF format (475 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter