URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/AboriginalLawB/1997/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:42:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Charlesworth, Hilary --- "'Little Boxes': A Review of the Commonwealth Hindmarsh Island Report" [1997] AboriginalLawB 26; (1997) 3(90) Aboriginal Law Bulletin 19
'Little Boxes': A Review Of The Commonwealth Hindmarsh Island Report
Origins Of The Mathews Report
The Place Of Secret Women's Knowledge In The Mathews Report
Indigenous Voices In The Mathews Report
Conclusions
'Little Boxes': a Review of the Commonwealth Hindmarsh
Island Report
by Justice Jane Mathews
Reviewed by Hilary Charlesworth
The Hindmarsh Island/Kumarangk saga will surely enter Australian folklore as
one of the most complex, and litigated, of disputes.
It began with the attempt
by Adelaide developers, Tom and Wendy Chapman, to construct a bridge linking the
South Australian mainland
with a small island in the waters of Lake Alexandrina
near the mouth of the Murray River, part of which they intended to develop
marina and tourist resort. The Bannon Labor State government supported the plans
for bridge building, but significant environmental
and Aboriginal opposition to
it began to emerge. The Brown Liberal government, elected in 1993, was initially
lukewarm about the
bridge, but decided to proceed, apparently because of
contractual commitments with the Chapmans. The first attempts at construction
the bridge in 1993 provoked angry demonstrations and confrontations. These
protests then gave way to elaborate legal processes.
The Hindmarsh Island/Kumarangk dispute has generated a number of court cases
and official reports concerning contract and commercial
law, administrative and
constitutional law, and the protection of Aboriginal heritage. It has also
prompted great public debate on
the nature of Indigenous culture and the way it
should be taken into account in the imported legal system. At the end of the
the epic of Hindmarsh Island/ Kumarangk suggests major flaws in the
Australian legal system with respect to protection of Indigenous
heritage. It
has underlined the inability of Australian law to accommodate certain forms of
belief and knowledge in the little boxes
it has established.
Origins of the Mathews Report
The Commonwealth Hindmarsh Island Report, dated 27 June 1996, was prepared by
Justice Jane Mathews of the Federal Court. It was commissioned
Commonwealth government under
Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Heritage Protection Act 1984
(Cth) ('the
Heritage Protection
) after an application had been made in December 1995 by members of the
Ngarrindjeri people, the traditional owners of the Lower Murray
region. The
applicants sought an order for the protection and preservation of a corridor of
land and water, which would prevent the
bridge from being built.
the Act allows the Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs to
make a declaration preserving areas of Aboriginal
heritage from injury or
desecration after commissioning, receiving and considering a report from the
Minister's nominee.
This was the second attempt by members of the Ngarrindjeri people to use the
heritage legislation to stop the bridge from proceeding.
In late 1993, an
application had been made under
, and in May 1994 Professor Cheryl Saunders
was appointed as the Minister's nominee to report on the Aboriginal heritage
significance
of the area affected by the proposed bridge. After lengthy
consultations, Professor Saunders reported that the major heritage significance
of the area was in its great importance to the spiritual and cultural beliefs of
the Ngarrindjeri. These beliefs were in the exclusive
possession of certain
Ngarrindjeri women and could not be publicly revealed.
Attached to the Saunders Report was a report prepared by a University of
Adelaide anthropologist, Dr Deane Fergie, which had two confidential
detailing the importance of the area to Ngarrindjeri women. The annexures were
in sealed envelopes and were labelled 'Confidential:
to be read by women only'.
After arranging for a woman staffer to read the confidential annexures and
inform him as to her view on
their significance, the Minister made a declaration
prohibiting work on the bridge for 25 years. This action by the Minister was
challenged by the Chapmans under the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review)
(Cth) on the basis that the requirements of
Protection Act
had not been complied with. The Full Federal Court found there
had been a technical error in the notification of Professor Saunders'
investigation, and also that the Minister was required to personally consider
the representations from interested parties attached
to the Saunders Report.
Because he had delegated this task, the Court found that the terms of
not been fulfilled.
Taking up a judicial suggestion made in the challenge to the Saunders Report
(Tickner v Chapman & Ors,
[1995] FCAFC 1726
(1995) 57 FCR 451
at 479 per Burchett J), the 1995
application requested that the report be considered by an acting woman Minister
for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Affairs (the then Minister being
Robert Tickner), because Ngarrindjeri custom and beliefs demanded that
traditional
women's knowledge be made known only to certain women. The then
Prime Minister, Paul Keating, agreed to the request and appointed
Rosemary Crowley to act on behalf of Mr Tickner in this matter.
Justice Mathews faced some serious constraints in preparing her report. One
was the fact that a Coalition Federal government was elected
in March 1996, and
the new Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, Senator
Hereon, refused to nominate an acting
woman Minister to consider the report. For
this reason, the Ngarrindjeri women who had been prepared to give information
spiritual beliefs centred on Hindmarsh Island (on the understanding
that the information would only be revealed to particular women)
withdrew most
of their submissions. Moreover, in the course of justice Mathews'
investigations, the Full Federal Court delivered
a decision in another case to
the effect that the
reporting process is subject to the requirements of
natural justice, and that culturally sensitive information cannot be kept
confidential
from those whose interests would be affected by the making of a
declaration under that section (Tickner v Western Australia, unreported,
The place of secret women's knowledge in the Mathews
The women's knowledge was thus not considered in any detail in the Mathews
Report; nor was the well-known attack on the authenticity
of this knowledge by
the so-called 'dissident' Ngarrindjeri women, which sparked a 1995 South
Australian Royal Commission. The Mathews
Report, however, cast serious doubt on
some of the findings made by that Royal Commission. Although Justice Mathews
stated that,
from her reading of the transcripts of the proceedings of the Royal
Commission, she did not question the sincerity of the dissidents,
she challenged
some of the Royal Commission's findings that the 'women's knowledge' had been a
fabrication. Thus, in her discussion
of the 'Seven Sisters' story, stated by the
Royal Commission to have been no part of the Dreaming of the Ngarrindjeri,
Justice Mathews
points to considerable material that refutes the findings of the
Royal Commission (pp 179-181).
With the major, if contentious, rationale for the application for a
declaration unable to be investigated, the Mathews Report considered a much
narrower set of heritage considerations. One of the major
problems in the
application was its designation of the area sought to be protected. The area was
essentially the bridge corridor
- the land approaches to the bridge on the
mainland and Hindmarsh Island and the water between them. And yet, as Justice
pointed out, the real concern of the Ngarrindjeri applicants was the
protection from injury or desecration of Hindmarsh Island itself
(p187). This
mismatch in formal definition and actual intent meant that justice Mathews had
to focus on a particular small area,
and was unable to consider the effect of
the bridge on the island itself. She acknowledged the problem of fitting
Aboriginal beliefs
Heritage Protection
'it is inimical to Aboriginal culture to single out a small discrete piece of
land and say that this will be the area desecrated.
For the land is, to them, a
single and indivisible part of their culture, and segments of land must be
viewed as part of the whole'
To emphasise this point Justice Mathews quoted one of the Ngarrindjeri women,
Rhonda Agius, who said:
Western society has a way of putting things in little boxes. You don't see
things holistically as we do. To us, you damage even one
part of that land, it
is going to affect the whole lot' (p 192).
Justice Mathews examined information on both archaeological sites and burials
and the significance of the waters in the designated
area. She found that the
physical damage done to many of the sites reduced their significance. While
Justice Mathews rejected an
argument by the Chapmans that burial sites were only
Heritage Protection Act
if they were in used or
recognised burial grounds (rather than individual burial places), she found no
evidence of burial sites in
the actual area that was the subject of the
application. With respect to the significance of the waters surrounding
Hindmarsh Island,
Justice Mathews concluded that they were of spiritual
importance as the home of the ngatji, the totem animals and birds associated
with the Ngarrindjeri, and crucial to their religious well-being. She accepted
also that the waters were considered the home of the
Mulyewongk, a creature
important in Ngarrindjeri belief, and that they were associated with the Seven
Sisters Dreaming story. Justice
Mathews did not, however, consider that the
applicants had provided enough information about the traditions to establish
proposed bridge would injure or desecrate this area.
Indigenous voices in the Mathews Report
The Mathews Report contains a balanced guide to many aspects of the Hindmarsh
Island dispute. One striking aspect is the strong Ngarrindjeri
voices that
appear in its text. Here is George Trevorrow on the indivisibility of culture
'this part of the country to us is like a big book. You know when we're
driving through it with our children and grandchildren, we're
able to point out
the places, the meaning of those places to them ...
'Now, over the years, people been taking-like tearing pages out of our book
so there's bits and pieces getting lost. Sometimes it's
like whole chapters torn
out of that book and then that leaves us, you know, with a big blank ...
'So our country is a big book. Every mile is a page in our history ... You
know, it's a wonder that the Ngarrindjeri people have
survived this long because
of the damages that have been done to the important things in our life, in our
way, our culture, you know
... But we know if this damage continues, especially
to the most important site in our part of the country, there's not much hope
us as a people any more. You're taking too much away then' (pp
The Mathews Report is valuable also for prompting thought on issues it does
not, indeed cannot, deal with, most importantly the appropriate
relationship
between the imported and Indigenous legal systems. For example, what is the
proper content of the rules of natural justice
in the context of culturally
sensitive information? Justice Mathews accepted the Full Federal Court's ruling
Tickner v Chapman
Tickner v Western Australia
disclosure of even confidential traditions is required to both the Minister, and
persons affected by a declaration under the
Heritage Protection Act
the same time in the Report, Justice Mathews includes anthropological voices
that question such an approach. For example, with
respect to whether the bridge
would affect the Seven Sisters Dreaming story by violating its rule that nothing
must come between
the waters around Hindmarsh Island and the sky, justice
Mathews searched for a causal connection between the story and the rule.
then quoted Dr Peter Sutton, an anthropologist, who had told her:
'there is no inherent reason why Ngarrindjeri women would have to be able to
specify a logical link between the Seven Sisters and
the prohibition on covering
the waters, in order to make the link between the two. That is, the link may
have been handed down minus
its rationale' (p 204).
Dr Sutton had pointed to three reasons why such causal connections may not be
made explicit: the prohibition of revealing such things
in certain contexts; the
absence of a consciousness about the connections in the group; and the
obviousness of the connecting symbolism
to members of the group. After quoting
at length from Dr Sutton's submission on the issue of causation, justice Mathews
'In light of all this one might well ask why should Aboriginal applicants be
required to disclose the details of their traditions-particularly
confidential
traditions-in order to establish their entitlement to a declaration. The answer
is that the law requires that those
who oppose a declaration must be given an
opportunity to respond to the "case" against them. And if the case depends on
"embargoes"
or "rules" which are associated with a particular tradition, then
the law says that the opponents of a declaration must be told of
the details of
that tradition.
'This no doubt places a heavy burden on applicants, particularly those who
are relying on confidential traditions... ' (p 205).
Justice Mathews' juxtaposition of the (imported) legal rules, and the
Indigenous reality that the rules cannot take into account,
is an important
aspect of her Report. Perhaps unintentionally, the narrative highlights the
irony of the inability of legislation
designed to protect Aboriginal heritage to
understand that heritage in its own context. The legislation depends rather on
images of Aboriginal culture.
Conclusions
Although the Mathews Report did not recommend that the Minister grant a
declaration under the Aboriginal heritage legislation, it
generated its own
legal baggage when the "dissident" Ngarrindjeri women challenged the nomination
of a Federal judge to take on an
administrative reporting responsibility. The
Federal Court upheld the challenge, deciding that such activity by a Federal
judge violated
the principle of separation of powers (
Wilson v Minister for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs
[1996] HCA 18
(1996) 138 ALR 220).
Mathews Report, therefore, now has no formal legal status. Given the fate of the
Mathews Report, the 1995 application for a declaration
is still live. Frank
Brennan, the Director of Uniya Jesuit Social Justice Centre, has proposed that
the Minister could simply appoint
Lindy Powell QC, counsel assisting Justice
Mathews, as his reporter and allow her to use, with due notice, the
representations received
by Justice Mathews as the basis of her report (see
'Building a Bridge on a Sea Change' by Frank Brennan in
Uniya Focus
10, November 1996). The Commonwealth government has adopted, however, a much
more problematic approach by introducing the Hindmarsh
Island Bridge Bill,
prohibiting the Minister from taking any action on an application for heritage
protection of Hindmarsh Island.
This legislation would clearly breach the spirit
and letter of the
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth), and deepen the
perception that the Howard government has discarded reconciliation as a policy
objective in its relations with
Australia's Indigenous peoples. The legislation
would, moreover, violate the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination, and would be an appropriate case to bring to the
attention of the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination under its communications procedures.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter