URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Son, Nguyen Tan --- "Towards a Compatible Interaction between Dispute Settlement under the WTO and Regional Trade Agreements" [2008] MqJlBLaw 6; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 113
Towards a Compatible Interaction between Dispute Settlement under the WTO and Regional Trade Agreements
I Dispute Settlement under the WTO and RTAs
A Dispute Settlement under the WTO
B Dispute Settlement under RTAs
C Why RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Mechanisms have been used Less Frequently than that of the WTO?
II Potential Problems arising from the Relationship between WTO and RTA Dispute Settlement
A The Nature of the Relationship between the WTO and RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Procedures
B Overlaps of Jurisdiction between WTO and the RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Procedures
C Clinical Isolation of WTO and RTA Law
III Towards a Compatible Interaction between Dispute Settlement under the WTO and RTAs
A Dealing with the Issue of Overlapping of Jurisdiction.
B Mutual Recognition of Law in Interpretation Processes between the WTO and RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Bodies
III Conclusion
Towards a Compatible Interaction between Dispute
Settlement under the WTO and Regional Trade Agreements
The interaction between dispute settlement under the WTO and that under
Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) has gained a lot of currency
in recent years.
This results from the fact that while RTAs are conditionally established under
the GATT Article XXIV, most of these
RTAs provide for their own mechanisms to
settle trade disputes. This complex relationship raises many concerns, including
of overlaps of jurisdiction between dispute settlement under the WTO
and RTAs as well as the isolation in interpreting law between
RTAs’s dispute settlement bodies, which may lead to the fragmentation of
international trade law. As will be discussed
later, at the present, it can be
said that the dispute settlement mechanism under RTAs does not sufficiently
constitute a significant
threat to the multilateral dispute settlement mechanism
of the WTO. Nevertheless, given the increasing complexity of international
relations as well as the proliferation of RTAs, especially in the condition
where many of these RTAs have sophisticated and
well-developed dispute
settlement, the nature of the relationship between the WTO and RTAs may
significantly change in the future.
As a result, the world trading system would
suffer a serious conflict between these two systems of dispute settlement.
in order to make the international trade relations more secure and
predictable, it is now an appropriate time to think about some
solutions that
can help to avoid potential problems arising from the interaction between
dispute settlement under the WTO and RTAs.
It is arguable that in order to have
a compatible interaction between these two systems, the issue of overlaps of
to be effectively dealt with. In addition, there should be
mutual recognition in interpreting law by both the WTO and RTA dispute
settlement bodies to avoid the threat of fragmentation of international trade
law. Accordingly, on the one hand, the panel under
RTA dispute settlement should
take into account the WTO law as guidance in interpreting and applying law. On
the other hand, the
WTO should also consider RTAs as a source of international
law and as a means to interpret the WTO covered agreements. It should
that a clinical isolation of WTO and RTA law might contribute to nothing, but
undermining the security and predictability
of the world trading system as a
I Dispute Settlement under the WTO and
A Dispute Settlement under the WTO
The WTO dispute settlement process can be generally
divided into three main stages. The
stage is to make a request for
consultations with the other Member(s). The member concerned must reply within
ten days, and must enter
into good faith consultations within 30 days after
receiving the request
stage is the recourse to establish a panel if the consultation
fails to settle the dispute within 60 days
. Unless the parties to a dispute agree
otherwise, the panel is composed of three panelists chosen from the lists
maintained by the
Secretariat
After the establishment of the panel, parties present their submissions to it.
The panel then issues its conclusions and recommendations
in a final report,
which is adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) within 60 day, unless
there is a consensus against
. Parties apply the
decisions of the panel or can refuse them. In the later case, they can seize the
Appellate Body, which is composed
of seven independent
personalities
. The conclusions and
recommendations of the Appellate Body are automatically adopted, unless the DSB
decides by consensus not to
. Lastly, the
stage consists of the implementation of the recommendations (panel or Appellate
Body). The implementation of the final decision has
to be made for ‘a
reasonable period of time’
If the defendant does not conform to the final decision, the plaintiff can
impose temporary trade retaliatory measures (i.e. concessions
or obligations
suspension)
, and the level of these
retaliations is the object of
arbitration
. Noticeably, any WTO
Member can formally participate in the dispute settlement proceedings as either
a co-complainant or as an interested
In term of principle, WTO dispute settlement is an exclusive system. Article
23 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) requires
all Members to resort
exclusively to WTO dispute settlement mechanism to seek ‘redress’
for a violation of a covered
. This article was
originally created in order to prevent the United States from making a
determination that WTO rules have been violated
outside the framework of the
. However, in reality this
article has a broader
application
. It has been
considered a fundamental factor to attain the objective of the DSU as a
mechanism to provide ‘security and predictability’
international trading system as set out in the Article
. It is arguable that
security and predictability of the international trading system would be
seriously undermined if the alleged
violation of the WTO law were allowed to be
decided outside the mechanism of the
It has been widely accepted that WTO dispute settlement is a relatively
successful system. Indeed, it has been used quite extensively
inception. In the period from 1995 to the time of writing (November 2007), 369
complaints have been filed by both developed
and developing
. The number of
requests for consultation is also quite high. For example, from January to
November 2007, there have been 60 requests
consultation
. Interestingly,
over time, developing countries have become more active in participation in the
WTO dispute settlement system. Of
369 complaints filed from 1995 to the time of
writing, 106 complaints were made by developing
The success of the WTO dispute settlement system can be traced to a number of
since WTO dispute settlement requires a period of
consultation, it encourages parties to raise and settle a dispute on a formal or
informal basis without going to litigation, which requires intensive
WTO dispute settlement operates in an automatic manner. Accordingly, there is
specific time frame for various phases of dispute
settlement and mechanisms to
ensure that a complaint can be put forwards if it wishes to do
. The ‘blocking’
defects, which used to exist under GATT dispute settlement was eliminated. Under
the WTO dispute settlement
system, Members cannot block the initiation of a
dispute, the establishment of a panel, or the adoption of a panel
dispute settlement results in a very thorough vetting of the issues by neutral
. Such thoroughness comes
from the careful approach followed by the panels in considering cases as well as
the existence of an appellate
extent, the WTO system has also detailed rules to monitor the compliance of the
default parties, including reporting requirements,
and the possibility of
negotiating compensation or suspending
concessions
In general, the DSU is a rule-oriented system. It provides for an independent
and rule-based formal dispute settlement mechanism,
for which the source of law
is essentially the ‘covered agreements’ of the WTO
. Under such a regime,
law rather than power would govern the distribution and enforcement of legal
rights and duties
. This would
interests of members as well as minimizing
the abusive exercise of
. This does not mean that
WTO dispute settlement is an ideal system. It has been sometimes correctly
criticized that the legalization
of the dispute settlement under the WTO
requires intensive human and financial resources, which are often lacking in
developing countries.
In addition, given the existing disparities of market
power, the retaliatory remedy seems not an effective measure for developing
countries. As a result, developing countries suffer many disadvantages in
participating in the WTO dispute settlement
B Dispute Settlement under RTAs
In the period from 1990s to 2000s, the world trading system has witnessed an
amazing proliferation of RTAs
At the time of this writing, only Mongolia does not engage in any
. 141 agreements had been
notified to the WTO and are still in
. According to the WTO,
there is also a quite substantial number of agreements that are in force but not
(or not yet) notified to
. Noticeably, the number of
RTAs are continuing to increase; based on the number of agreements that are
under negotiations, it is
estimated that the world trading system will have
around 400 RTAs in force in
. Generally, these modern
RTAs have formal legal mechanisms for dispute settlement between the
This is quite different to older RTAs. Some older agreements have no dispute
settlement mechanism, while some others have political
rather than legal
. Nevertheless, the number
of older agreements that have added a mechanism for dispute settlement has
increased, including the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and the Southern African
Customs Union (SACU)
result, only the Australian New Zealand Closer Economic Relations (ANZCERTA or
CER) is now the older agreement that provides
no mechanism for dispute
. Interestingly, the
ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (AFTA) not only added but also legalized its existing
dispute settlement mechanism
Initially, the ASEAN Agreements provided for a relatively diplomatic dispute
settlement with the inception of the Protocol on dispute
settlement in 1996.
Subsequently, this Protocol was replaced by the 2004 Protocol on Enhanced
Dispute Settlement Mechanism, which
provides for AFTA a legalistic and
rule-based dispute settlement process modeled on the WTO’s Dispute
Settlement Understanding
The AFTA legalized dispute settlement has many features in common with the
modern RTAs’ dispute
. Indeed, many modern
RTAs’ dispute settlement mechanisms also resemble the WTO system.
Accordingly, while the details may be
different from agreement to agreement,
these RTAs typically have provisions for consultations to resolve differences.
Especially,
disputes may be referred to a panel of experts that will issue a
report on the merits of the
. This spread of WTO-like
dispute settlement mechanisms in RTAs can be arguably seen as an inevitable
influence of the success of
WTO dispute settlement system. As D Morgan
identified: ‘the DSU, and the regime implementing it, has created a
standard that
has made WTO members that were previously unwilling or thought it
unnecessary to adopt a formal adjudiciary system of dispute settlement
change their approach’
This trend towards a quasi-judiciary model of adjudication can be seen in recent
agreements between the EU and some non-neighbouring
countries such as Mexico
(2000), Chile (2002), or in agreements under negotiations between EC and Mercado
Comun del Sur (MERCOSUR),
and Gulf Cooperation Council
. Such formal legal dispute
settlement mechanisms can also be found in the Australia’s agreements with
Singapore, Thailand and
the USA, or in its underway negotiating agreements with
ASEAN, Chile, China, the GCC, Japan and
Along with the success of WTO legalized dispute settlement, NAFTA, which was
the first RTA including binding arbitration
, also provides some
good experience for subsequent
. The most important lesson
from NAFTA is that RTAs should embrace a formal legal dispute settlement
mechanism, especially those between
developed and the developing
. Noticeably, this
lesson has been consistently learnt by parties of NAFTA; all subsequent
agreements between NAFTA parties with other
countries, such as the EU-Mexico
agreement, comprise such quasi-judicial dispute settlement
Although there is an obvious trend towards a model of quasi-judicial
adjudication among both older and modern RTAs, dispute settlement
under RTAs in fact have been used much less frequently than WTO dispute
settlement. For example, since the entering into
force of NAFTA in 1994, there
have been only three cases filed under the Chapter 20’s dispute settlement
mechanism (two successful
Mexican complaints and an unsuccessful US
. This unsatisfactory
record raises the question about the effectiveness of NAFTA dispute settlement
as well as suggesting that the
principal system for resolving this dispute is
the WTO, not the NAFTA system
MERCOSUR offers a slightly better picture. Indeed, there have been 14 arbitral
decisions since 1992, and all four parties of the
MERCOSUR has invoked the
. Nevertheless, it has
been argued that the success of MERCOSUR dispute settlement is quite unusual
among the general picture of RTAs’
dispute settlement
. Indeed, many other
RTAs have complex dispute settlement mechanisms; but these systems have never
been used, for examples, dispute
settlement mechanisms under
, or the EU-Mexico and EU-
Chile agreements
C Why RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
have been used Less Frequently than that of the WTO?
The above analysis reveals that except for NAFTA and MERCOSUR, dispute
settlement in RTAs does not seem as successful as WTO dispute
. It has been argued
that this is because parties to RTAs do not have trade disputes. However, this
line of reasoning seems improper
because there is a fact that while many parties
to RTAs do not bring disputes to the RTA forum, they are willing to initiate
against other parties in the WTO forum. It should be noted that there has
been 32 cases among NAFTA parties in the WTO, compared
to only 3 sate-state
cases among these countries in the NAFTA
. Similarly, parties to
MERCOSUR and even ASEAN have brought cases against other parties in the WTO
forum. Therefore, there must be
some factors that are responsible for the less
frequent use of the RTAs’ dispute settlement mechanisms.
One of the most obvious reasons is the nature of the relationship between
parties to RTAs. Indeed, the relationship between parties
to RTAs is not purely
commercial or legal, but quite political and strategic. As D Morgan pointed out
that ‘these agreements
should be seen as the contemporary equivalents of
treaties of friendship, commerce and
navigation’
. For example,
the South American Development Community (SADC) provides that the aim of this
treaty is to ‘promote the coordination
and harmonization of the
international relations of the Member
. Given this
nature, parties to RTA ‘often have a preference for diplomatic resolution
of disputes rather than formal
adjudicatory’
arguably that settling by diplomatic measures permits governments to fully take
into account special needs and interests of
both parties to a dispute so that it
may offer a more desirable outcome than the legal
. As a result, in many
cases, parties do not need to use the formal legal mechanism to settle their
Another explanation for the less frequent use of the RTAs’ dispute
settlement mechanisms is that the WTO dispute settlement
is a more sophisticated
mechanism for resolving disputes than that of
. While many of RTAs’
dispute settlement mechanisms resemble the WTO model, in reality they do not
operate in a sophisticated
and effective manner like the WTO
. Indeed, there are
some features of the WTO, such as the automaticity of the dispute settlement
system, that may be duplicated in
RTAs; nevertheless, they can never work
effectively as expected. For example, the automatically appointing panelists in
NAFTA dispute
settlement is not operational. In the Mexican Sugar case, the US
authorities have refused for more than four years to appoint
. More significantly,
while WTO panelists and the Appellate Body benefit from assistance of trained
experts, there is no truly independent
secretariat like this in the RTAs’
dispute settlement procedures so the latter heavily depends on the panelists
to do all of the
. Although the decision is
made by panelists or the Appellate Body, the adequate assistance from trained
experts would permit WTO
panelists and the Appellate Body to fully devote their
time and effort to the key issues of the case, which may result in a better
A third possible rationale for countries to bring trade disputes to WTO forum
rather than the RTAs’ ones is that many RTAs lack
effective enforcement
. Therefore, even
disputes have been brought to the formal forum; they can only be solved through
other measures such as
negotiations
. In 2006, Canada
chose a negotiated settlement for the long-running softwood lumber dispute with
the USA, even it had achieved favorable
rulings by NAFTA Chapter 19 panels and
the Extraordinary challenge
. In addition, it is
not clear whether the WTO remedies can provide incentive for countries to bring
disputes to the WTO forum, it
seems that the informal pressures to comply are
much greater in the WTO system than a bilateral situation arising under
The fourth aspect that may significantly lead to scant use of the RTAs’
dispute settlement procedures is that WTO decisions
are considered as more
legitimate than thosen of the RTAs. Indeed, in terms of neutrality, the WTO
provides a more reliable mechanism
than those of the RTAs since panelists are
typically from neutral states, while the RTAs’ panels may include
nationals of
the disputing parties such as the case of NAFTA arbitral panels.
This may lead to the concerns of favoritism for the panelist’s
. In addition, the
possibility to appeal may contribute to the disparity of use between WTO and RTA
dispute settlement mechanisms.
This is an important systemic difference between
WTO and RTAs, while typically RTAs provide no mechanism to appeal, WTO panel
are appellable to the Appellate Body. This makes the WTO dispute
settlement system more formal, detailed and legally rigorous, and
. Moreover, as a
multilateral system, the WTO provides a more legitimate result, a result that is
more likely to be accepted by member
states than
There are also many other factors which may result in the choice of WTO forum
rather than RTAs’ ones. For example, if a party
wants to create a
multilateral precedence, it may bring the case to the forum of WTO rather than
RTAs. It is true that reports of
panels and the Appellate Body are binding only
on the disputing parties
Nevertheless, the Appellate Body is unlikely to change its mind as well as
explicitly overruling previous decisions. As a result,
its rulings have some
value as precedents. This may be attractiveness, especially for respondents.
Indeed, if a respondent can prove
that its measures are consistent with WTO law,
it would avoid not only similar complaints from its fellow parties but also any
member from suing such measures. Similarly, if a complainant can be
successful at the WTO level, it not only creates a precedent
against its fellow
parties, but also all WTO
. This is not to mention
the possibility to receive support from third parties when bringing a case to a
multilateral forum.
From the above considerations, it can be seen that for various reasons, the
WTO is now still a preferable forum for parties to RTAs
to resolve disputes with
their fellow parties. It seem that currently the RTA dispute settlement
processes have not sufficiently
constituted a threat to the multilateral forum
of the WTO. Although this view is also shared by many highly respected
in a world with an
ever-increasing number of RTAs, one should not be over-optimistic with this
conclusion.
Indeed, given the proliferation of RTAs and most of them having
formal legal dispute settlement mechanisms as well as the increasing
and variety in trading relations, the existence and operation in parallel of two
distinct dispute settlement systems but
dealing with many similar even identical
trade issues would be the seeds of serious conflicts between these systems. The
WTO and RTAs’ dispute settlement procedures may be involved in
very similar, even identical, trade issues is that RTAs are
conditionally
established under GATT Article XIV, and typically RTAs explicitly or implicitly
incorporate many provisions of the
GATT and (prospectively) the WTO. Therefore,
if the issues of conflicts between the WTO and RTAs’ dispute settlement
are not appropriately identified now, the world trading system would
suffer serious problems in not so a far distant future. All
of these issues will
be discussed in the following sections.
II Potential Problems arising from the
Relationship between WTO and RTA Dispute Settlement
A The Nature of the Relationship between the WTO
and RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Procedures
The current quite happy co-existence between the WTO and RTAs’ dispute
settlement systems may have twofold effects. On the one
hand, it reflects the
fact that RTAs’ dispute settlement procedures have not been a significant
threat to security as well
as predictability of the world trading system.
Nevertheless, on the other hand, it may lead to the danger of under-estimating
potential impact of the interaction between the WTO and RTAs’ dispute
settlement mechanisms. Obviously, the latter is not a
desirable trend. If one
looks at the nature of the relationship between the WTO and RTAs’ dispute
settlement procedures, they
may change their mind on the co-existence of WTO and
RTAs dispute settlement. Indeed, the nature of this relationship is more complex
than it has been often thought. This takes root from the fact that RTAs are
conditionally established under GATT Article XXIV for
a deeper integration among
WTO members
. Therefore, the
substantive law of RTAs is largely influenced – and indeed, dependent upon
In general, this interaction of obligations between RTAs law and WTO law,
which governs the nature of the relationship between the
WTO and RTAs’
dispute settlement procedures, can possibly be divided into four following
obligations under RTAs that are largely independent from WTO
obligations; or in other words, obligations that are not regulated by
. For example, in the
agreement between EU and Chile, preferential schedules of market access
commitments for goods and services,
provisions on the rights of establishment or
capital movements, or title on government procurement (as Chile is not a party
WTO multilateral Government Procurement Agreement) are areas that are not
regulated by the WTO
even in such independent areas, it is impossible to say that WTO law does not
have any impact on RTA law because many of
underlying legal concepts of these
obligations are common WTO law
obligations under RTAs that go beyond WTO obligation
(so-called WTO-plus provisions)
It should be noted that in establishing such WTO-plus obligations, negotiators
are not drawing from blanket piece of paper; on the
contrary, they often
consider WTO obligations as starting
. Again, to take the
EU-Chile Agreement, it can be seen that this agreement seeks to develop
disciplines on technical standards and
regulations and on sanitary and
phytosanitary measures which go beyond the provisions of the WTO, Technical
Barriers to Trade (TBT),
and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measure (SPS)
obligations under RTAs that are a confirmation of WTO
obligations
. These obligations
are often related to trade remedies such as subsidies, safeguards, antidumping
and countervailing measure. For
example, Article 78 on Antidumping and
Countervailing Measures in the EU- Chile agreement is a confirmation of WTO
obligations
under RTAs that are implicitly reproduced from WTO
. For instance,
Article 47 of the EU-Chile Agreement on national treatment of internal taxes and
regulations is simply a duplicate
of Article III GATT. Similarly, the regulatory
provisions on services are largely modeled on the equivalent provisions of
In terms of principles, disputes concerning the two later types of
obligations can be brought to both WTO and RTA
. On the contrary,
disputes about the first and the second types of obligations can only be
adjudicated under RTAs (if they can be
adjudicated at
. However, such interaction
between the WTO and RTAs’ dispute settlement procedures is much more
complicated in reality, and
would give rise to many problems for the world
trading system. Arguably, two most obvious potential difficulties are overlaps
considered in the next following sections.
B Overlaps of Jurisdiction between WTO and the
RTAs’ Dispute Settlement Procedures
Overlaps of jurisdiction in dispute settlement can arguably be defined as
‘situations where the same dispute or related aspects
of the same dispute
could be brought to two distinct institutions or two different dispute
settlement systems’
certain circumstances, the overlaps of jurisdiction can lead to difficulties
concerning ‘forum-shopping’ whereby
parties to a dispute would have
a choice between two adjudicating bodies or between two different jurisdictions
for the same facts
situations where dispute settlement processes of two agreements are activated in
parallel or in sequence, two types of problems
may arise: first, the two dispute
settlement mechanisms may claim that they are final jurisdiction (supremacy)
and, second, these
mechanisms may reach different or even contrary conclusions
on the merit of the dispute
There are many types of overlaps, within the scope of the current discussion, an
overlap may occur in the following types: (i) when
two fora assert to have
exclusive jurisdiction over the disputed matter; (ii) when one forum maintains
to have exclusive jurisdiction
and the other one offers jurisdiction, on a
permissive basis, for dealing with the same matter or a related one; (iii) when
the dispute
settlement mechanism of two different fora are obtainable (on a
non-mandatory basis) to consider the same or similar matters. Conflicts
possibly happen in any of these
Whether such overlaps can potentially occur between the WTO dispute
settlement system and that under RTAs? Unfortunately, to a great
extent, the
answer is ‘yes’. This is because, as considered in the previous
sections, while conditionally established
under GATT Article XXIV, most of RTAs
have their own dispute settlement mechanisms. Except for custom unions and some
other relatively
closely related regional ‘communities’ in which
members have to bring the dispute to the regional forum, RTAs generally
for a choice of forum in resolving disputes relating to obligations that are
simply a confirmation of WTO obligations or
implicitly produced from WTO
obligations. This would permit complainants to choose between WTO and
RTAs’ dispute settlement
mechanisms to solve the
. For instance, the NAFTA
Article 2005 regulates that a dispute regards a matter arising under both the
WTO and NAFTA, in principle,
the choice of forum is left to the discretion of
the complaining parties
choice of forum clauses can be found in many other agreements such as ASEAN, the
EU-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, the United
States – Israel Free Trade
Agreement, Australian – United States Free Trade Agreement (AUSFTA), or
New Zealand –
Singapore Free Trade Agreement
. However, it should be
noted that most of choice of forum clauses are exclusive ones. For example NAFTA
Article 2005(6) sets out
that ‘once dispute settlement procedures have
been initiated … the forum selected shall be used to the exclusion of the
The problem is that, as discussed in the previous section, existing in
parallel with the RTAs’ dispute settlement mechanisms
is the compulsory
obliges that any WTO member seeking redress
of an alleged violation by another
member of its commitments to ‘have recourse to, and abide by, the rules
and procedures’
. Therefore, by
simply alleging that a measure affects or impairs its trade benefits, a WTO
member is entitled to trigger the quasi-automatic,
rapid and powerful WTO
dispute settlement process, excluding thereby the competence of any other
mechanism to consider WTO law
Such compulsory and automatic jurisdiction for WTO alleged violations puts a
critical question on the validity of the exclusion clauses
under RTAs. It is
clear that the intended purpose of exclusion clauses under RTAs is to avoid the
overlaps of jurisdiction between
RTAs and the WTO. However, it is doubtful
whether such exclusion clauses can in reality preclude disputing parties from
the same case a second time to another
. This is because there
are many factors that may affect disputing parties in choosing the forum such as
process issues, procedural
issues, and the possibility to appeal, the
possibility to receive the support from third
. While the extent to
which these factors have an effect on disputing parties may be various, the
practice has showed that factors
like applicable law, enforcement mechanisms and
the scope of the precedents have strong impact on the parties’
. Accordingly, parties
tend to choose the forum at which the applicable law is more favorable for them.
They also favour the forum
that provides an effective mechanism for enforcement.
Similarly, the possibility of creating a multilateral precedent is also an
attraction for parties to bring cases to the WTO rather than the RTAs’
More suspiciously, whether such an exclusion provision would suffice to allow
a WTO panel to refuse to exercise its jurisdiction in
situations where the
dispute settlement process of the RTA has been
. Given the
compulsoriness and automaticity of the WTO process, it is unlikely that a WTO
panel would give much consideration to the
defendant’s request to stop the
procedures just because similar or related procedures are being pursued under an
. Precisely this happened
Mexico - Tax Measures on Soft Drinks and Other
case, Mexico alleged that ‘the United States’ claims … [were]
inextricably linked to a broader dispute,
and that only a NAFTA panel could
resolve the dispute as a
. On that ground,
Mexico requested the panel not to exercise its jurisdiction on this
. Nevertheless, both the
panel and the Appellate Body refused Mexico’s
. In upholding the
panel’s decision, the Appellate Body held that ‘under the DSU,
… [the panel] ha[d] no discretion
to decline to exercise its jurisdiction
in the case that ha[d] been brought before
Noticeably, the Appellate Body held that the decline to exercise jurisdiction on
a case that has been properly brought before the
WTO would impair the right of
Members in seeking ‘redress’ under Article
Therefore, the possibility for overlaps of jurisdiction is very obvious. Both
the WTO and a RTA’ dispute settlement mechanisms
may claim that they have
supremacy jurisdiction on a disputed issue. Even worse, since a case concerning
similar or the same matters
may be heard twice, both at an RTA dispute
settlement mechanism and that under the WTO, in parallel or sequence, the WTO
dispute settlement mechanisms may come with different, or even contrary
on the similar, even identical issues. This would be a serious
undermining the security and predictability of the world trading system. As K
Kwar and G Marceau emphasize: ‘contrary
findings based on similar rules
from [an RTA] and WTO institutions would have unfortunate consequences for the
trust that the states
are to place in their international
institutions’
The WTO panels and the Appellate Body have had several chances to rule out on
the issue concerning the validity of exclusion clauses;
regrettably, they
provide no decisive findings
In the case
Argentina-Poultry Antidumping
Brazil’s complaint about the imposition of antidumping measures by
Argentina, the WTO panel held that the exclusion
clause was not valid since
simply the Protocol of Olivos was signed by parties to MERCOSUR, but not
ratified by all of them. The
panel went on to conclude that the exclusion clause
under MERCOSUR therefore offers parties a choice of forum, but this could not
an exclusive one. The panel gave no opinion on whether its consideration affects
the validity of MERCOSUR’s choice of forum
. Such a careful
approach to the exclusion clause was repeated in
Mexico - Tax Measures on
Soft Drinks and Other Beverages.
when going beyond the scope
of Mexico’s appeal, the Appellate Body did not express its view on
‘whether there may be other
circumstances in which legal impediments could
exist that would preclude a panel from ruling on the merits of the claims that
result, the issue of overlaps of jurisdiction is still an open-ended question.
Disputing parties may not know where the most
appropriate forum to bring the
dispute to is, or worse, they may intentionally abuse the process. In these
cases, the security and
predictability of the world trading system would be
seriously undermined. The last section will offer several suggestions to avoid
these dilemmas, after considering another potential difficulty arising from the
interaction between the WTO and RTAs’ dispute
settlement procedures.
C Clinical Isolation of WTO and RTA Law
Although RTAs are separate treaties, it is impossible to consider WTO law and
RTA law as totally independent entities. This is because,
as so far pointed out,
RTAs are conditionally established under GATT Article XXIV for a deeper
integration among WTO members. Therefore,
there is a strong interaction of
obligations between the WTO and RTAs. In many cases, obligations under RTAs are
simply a confirmation
or implicit reproduction of that under the WTO. It means
that the RTAs’ dispute settlement procedures may in reality deal with
same or very similar issues as what a WTO panel or Appellate Body often deal
with. Regardless of such close relationship, WTO
and RTAs’ dispute
settlement have no institutional relationship that can instruct the
interpretation as well as application
of WTO and RTA law by adjudicatory bodies.
Therefore, it is totally reasonable to be concerned about the clinical isolation
and RTA law on issues that are substantially similar. The security and
predictability of the world trading system would suffer if
disputes concerning
very similar issues were to be resolved in inconsistently by the WTO and
RTAs’ dispute settlement entities.
It seems that if not effectively addressed, the problem of isolation between
WTO and RTA law may potentially happen to the world trading
system. The practice
shows that although WTO and RTA law is not totally ignored by WTO and RTA
adjudicatory bodies, to a great extent,
the current integration between RTA law
into multilateral WTO legal regime is highly unsatisfactory and ambiguous. It is
highly unsatisfactory
because there have not been many cases in which WTO and
RTA law is taken into account by the other regime’s dispute settlement
mechanism. Indeed, while WTO law has been taken into account by a few RTA panels
such as NAFTA Chapter 20 panels in
, Cross-Border
Trucking Service
‘the WTO dispute settlement procedure is blind to the fact of an
increasing body of [RTA] law and practice around the
. Indeed, the WTO
panels have rejected the relevance of RTA law in interpreting the WTO law in a
number of cases. For example, in
the panel held
that ‘practice under the bilateral and multilateral treaties cited could
not be taken as practice under the
General Agreement, and therefore could not
affect the interpretation of
. Surprisingly, in
Chile-Price Band
seemed to allude that the WTO Agreement on Agriculture might qualify as a
‘relevant rule for interpretation of Article
24 of the Economic
Complementarity Agreement No.35 as well as this Agreement in general, but
rejected the reverse
The current integration between RTA law into the multilateral WTO legal
regime is not only highly unsatisfactory as mentioned but
also very ambiguous.
This results from the fact that there has been no clear and systematic mechanism
for the integration between
WTO law and RTAs in the dispute settlement process.
As a consequence, where such integration happens, it has been done in an
and confused manner. For example, in two NAFTA Chapter 20 cases given
above, the NAFTA panels seemed to blindly consider WTO rulings
as guidance; no
significant discussion on the related NAFTA provisions had been
. Arguably, it is highly
undesirable for RTA panels to totally ignore the WTO; nevertheless, it is also
not a wise idea for RTA panels
to completely adopt WTO interpretations where
there are like-provisions in the RTAs since they are separate
. Similarly, in
Korea – Various Measures on
although the
panel looked at various bilateral agreements between Korea and the disputants to
interpret ambiguous WTO provisions,
they only considered such bilateral
agreement as supplementary means of
interpretation
consideration of RTA law as a subsidiary means is not a reasonable approach. All
of these issues will be discussed in the last
III Towards a Compatible Interaction between
Dispute Settlement under the WTO and RTAs
It can be seen from previous analyses that there are many difficulties
arising from the interaction of jurisdiction between the WTO
dispute settlement mechanisms. Two typical potential problems of which are
overlaps of jurisdiction and the clinical
isolation of WTO and RTA law.
Therefore, in order to make the relationship between the WTO dispute settlement
system and that under
RTAs more compatible in the future, avoiding the danger of
fragmentation in international trade law, which has become a big concern
recent years
, these problems
need to be effectively dealt with. This section will provide some solutions to
overcoming these difficulties.
A Dealing with the Issue of Overlapping of
As discussed, there could be potential overlaps of jurisdiction between WTO
and RTAs’ dispute settlement. Nevertheless, it seems
that currently
international law does not appear to offer any solution for this
. Indeed, while GATT
Article XXIV does not make any reference to the dispute settlement mechanism of
RTAs, the exclusion clauses under
RTAs seems not valid in relation to the
compulsory jurisdiction for alleged WTO violations provided by Article 23 of the
a result, a WTO dispute settlement bodies always has the authority and
even the obligation to examine claims of WTO violations. WTO
members cannot be
required, and arguably cannot even agree, to take its WTO dispute to another
forum, even if that other forum may
be more relevant or better equipped to
resolve the sort of disputed
. However, DSU
Article 23 cannot prohibit adjudicators established by other treaties from
exercising jurisdiction over claims arising
from their treaties’
provisions that operate parallel to, or overlap with, the WTO
Obviously, the current international law cannot effectively deal with the
situations where two members are encountered with two treaties
that include
overlapping and potentially conflicting jurisdiction. The expectation that WTO
panels or the Appellate Body can address
and resolve this difficulty seems quite
impractical. Given the current legal framework of the WTO, the panels and
Appellate Body
would never give a determinative decision on this issue. It is
sure that the WTO adjudicatory bodies fully understand that if they,
example, allow for WTO alleged violations are decided outside the DSU mechanism,
WTO members would perceive that their rights
under DSU Article 23 are seriously
impaired, not only in a legal but also a political sense. This explains why the
WTO adjudicatory
bodies have been very careful when they did not provide any
conclusion on the validity of the RTAs’ exclusion clauses not only
Argentina-Poultry Antidumping
, but also in
Mexico - Tax Measures on Soft Drinks and Other
Clearly, it seems over-expected to demand WTO adjudicatory bodies to give
decisive rulings on the issue of overlaps of jurisdiction
between the WTO and
Therefore, in order to thoroughly resolve this dilemma, the current author
believes that WTO members should negotiate to develop a
set of principles that
govern the allocation of jurisdiction between the WTO and RTAs. Bearing in mind
this approach, the current
author also thinks that the negotiation on this issue
should take into account, including but not limited to the following
the RTAs’ jurisdiction should be recognized. This is not
an unreasonable approach since one of the principles of Public International
as set out in the Article 33 of the Charter of the United
is the principle of
‘free choice of means’. Trade is one of the fields in which parties
have the rights to design their
own mechanisms to resolve disputes at both
multilateral level, as in the WTO, and regional level, as in
. Accordingly, as long as
an RTA provides for a dispute settlement mechanism in its text, parties to a
treaty may invoke that mechanism
to settle a dispute relating to the
interpretation and application of that
. It should be noted
that by initiating a WTO dispute where there is also a mechanism to resolve that
dispute under RTAs, the RTA
member may nullify the benefits of another RTA
member. The WTO explicitly recognizes the legitimacy of RTAs under GATT Article
(with conditions). Why does not WTO also recognize the capacity of the
RTAs’ dispute settlement mechanisms in enforcing RTA
obligations? It is
arguable that if recognized, the RTAs’ dispute settlement procedures can
share some burden with WTO dispute
settlement rather than undermine the power of
the multilateral dispute settlement system.
This light of reasoning should not only be applicable in cases where there is
no clear allocation of jurisdiction between the WTO
and RTAs, but also in
situations where there is an exclusion clause. Accordingly, when the conditions
set out in the exclusion clause
are met, WTO adjudicatory bodies should give
effect to this clause and decline to exercise the
approach goes to the most sensitive issue concerning what is the applicable law
before WTO adjudicatory
. Some scholars argue
that the WTO adjudicatory can only apply WTO
. If this correct, the
exclusion clauses set out in RTAs are never valid before WTO panels or the
Appellate Body since they are not
WTO covered law. Nevertheless, if the WTO
dispute settlement bodies in examining of WTO claims can also take cognizance of
of other non-WTO treaties - a position that supported by many
as well as the
current author - then the exclusion clauses set out in RTAs can be valid before
the WTO panels or the Appellate Body.
This view is not only consistent with the
principle of ‘free choice of means’, but also can effectively deal
current dilemma about the overlaps of jurisdiction between the WTO and
the principle of
res judicata
can also be taken into
account to avoid duplication. The general principle underlying
res judicata
is that ‘a right, question or fact distinctly put in issue and
distinctly determined by a court of competent jurisdiction as
a ground of
recovery, cannot be
. If adopted,
this principle can effectively deal with the issue of duplication since it can
prevent disputing parties from bringing
the same case a second time to another
forum. Traditionally, the
res judicata
requires that three conditions
must be met in order to apply such a principle: (i) identity of parties; (i)
identity of object or
subject matter; and (iii) identity of legal cause of
. Nevertheless, there
should be a flexible approach here. In this regard, the requirements set out in
English and American
estoppel doctrines could be a good guidance. Under
English estoppel doctrine, the identity of cause is not
. The American
collateral estoppel doctrine even goes further to recognize ‘the
effect of a judgment to encompass the same issues arising in a
different action and even to different parties where the issues have
determined in prior litigation with adequate opportunity to be heard for the
party to be precluded’
Under such a flexible approach to the
res judicata
principle, an RTA
party can be prevented from bringing a claim previously decided by an RTA panel,
or vice versa
another principle that is distinct from
res judicata
has a similar effect on preventing needless and costly duplication of
proceedings on the same matter, as between the same parties,
is the doctrine of
abuse of process, and thus needs to be also taken into
. In international
law, a state, by initiating a second procedure on the same matter, may be
considered as abusing its process or
. A tribunal should
therefore decline jurisdiction if it considers that the proceedings have been
triggered to annoy the defendant
or that they were frivolous or
. The general
obligation of states to enforce their treaty obligations in good faith requires
them to bring the case to the most appropriate
. Therefore, it is
justified for the WTO adjudicatory to consider consultations and the use of the
RTAs’ dispute settlement
mechanisms in a context or the efforts to achieve
a mutually agreeable resolution to the dispute as a proof of the good faith of
its member(s). Once consultations have been requested by a party, another party
must respect and become involved in this procedure
. Failing to do so
should be considered as a basis for WTO adjudicatory bodies to refuse exercising
Recognition of Law in Interpretation Processes between the WTO and RTAs’
Dispute Settlement Bodies
It is arguable that in order to have a compatible relationship between the
WTO and RTAs’ dispute settlement procedures, there
should be a mutual
recognition of law between these two regimes in their interpretation processes.
On that ground, not only WTO law
should be viewed as a guide for the
RTAs’s dispute settlement procedures in interpretation of RTA obligations,
but also the
WTO should consider RTA law as a means to interpret WTO covered
agreements. Doing so may help the WTO and RTAs dispute settlement
integrate into each other, resulting in a happier co-existence between these two
Indeed, since many RTA obligations are simply a confirmation or reproduction
of WTO obligations, there is a strong rationale for RTA
dispute settlement
bodies to refer to and reply on WTO law, including case law, in interpreting
these WTO-modeled provisions. Doing
so would make the interpretation of RTA
obligations more consistent with WTO principles. This is very important since it
contributes
to the predictability of the RTAs’ dispute settlement
procedures; parties to such treaties would be better advised on potential
interpretation under RTAs
addition, the preference on WTO law would permit the RTAs’ dispute
settlement mechanisms be able to draw on the expertise
of WTO dispute settlement
system in development of their own legal concepts and
. More importantly,
the preference on WTO law can also help to ameliorate the potential
fragmentation of international trade law by
significantly eliminating the
possibility that the WTO and the RTAs’ dispute settlement mechanisms would
reach different conclusions
on similar even the same issues. Given the above
advantages, where relevant, the RTAs’ dispute settlement bodies should
to, and reply on WTO law in interpretation of their RTA obligations.
The only issue is how should RTA adjudicatory bodies make a preference to WTO
law? The analyses in the previous section have pointed
out that current
consultations by RTA adjudicatory bodies to WTO law are unsatisfactory and
ambiguous since there is no clear mechanism
for this preference to be conducted.
As a result, WTO law may be totally ignored or blindly adopted in the
interpretation of RTA
obligations. Both of these extreme trends are undesirable.
Therefore, there should be a mechanism for making a preference to WTO
adjudication bodies. It is arguable that since RTAs are separate treaties, they
should first be viewed in accordance with
Article 31 and 32 of Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties(VCLT)
in the light of their text, context and
. Where there is a
language in the RTA that is similar or identical to the WTO treaty language, an
RTA panel have to interpret the
RTA language in accordance with these
. In the light of
that RTA’s text, context and objective, the RTA panel may come to an
interpretation that may be similar or
different from what is in a particular WTO
case. It is not a problem for an RTA panel to have a different interpretation
of the WTO, since an RTA interpretation must be primarily based on its
text, context and objective
As observed elsewhere, ‘the application of international law rules on
interpretation of treaties to identical or similar provisions
of different
treaties may not yield the same results, having regard to differences in the
respective contexts, objects and purpose,
subsequent practice of parties and
prepatoires’
In general, RTA panels should not completely ignore the WTO law, but it is
also not a wise idea for them to slavishly and blindly
refer to WTO law.
In order to have a compatible interaction between the WTO and RTAs’
dispute settlement procedures, taking into account the law
of another regime is
not only the requirement for RTA dispute settlement, but also for the WTO
adjudicatory bodies. Accordingly,
RTA law should be considered as a means to
interpret WTO covered agreements. The ground for this is the Article 31(3)(c) of
which requires that the interpretation of a treaty shall take into
account, along with the context of the treaty, ‘any relevant
international law applicable in the relations between the
. Nevertheless,
as analyzed in the previous part, this point has been taken for granted by WTO
adjudicatory bodies. They may reject
the idea that RTAs should be consulted to
interpret WTO covered agreements as in
, Cross-Border
Trucking Service
or they just refer to RTAs as a subsidiary means of interpretations, as in
Korea – Various Measures on
As a result,
as pointed out by I V Damme, ‘after ten years of WTO dispute settlement,
there is little or no mention of Article
31(3)(c) VCLT in the case law of panels
and the Appellate
Obviously, WTO adjudicatory bodies should not overlook Article 31(3)(c) VCLT
in interpretation of WTO covered agreements. It should
be noted that the good
faith obligation in interpretation set out in Article 31(1)
‘encapsulate[s] a
presumption that states negotiate treaties taking into account all relevant
international law’
Noticeably, the source referred to in Article 31(3)(c) VCLT is an authentic
rather than a secondary means of interpretation. Therefore,
Article 31(3)(c)
VCLT should be read as a further elaboration and application of the obligation
to interpret a treaty in good faith;
WTO dispute settlement bodies should not
avoid it to justify the recourse to rules of international law such as rules of
. More importantly, in
the context where there is an emergence of specialized and semi-autonomous
sub-systems of international law,
it is necessary to have build-in-guarantees
for coherence between these various systems. Article 31(3)(c) VCLT can be seen
of such tools to achieve a ‘certain degree of synchronization
between these sub-systems of international law, through the interpretation
treaties in the context of other rules of international
. Arguably, the
application of Article 31(3)(c) to justify the recourse to RTA law thus does not
undermine the security and predictability
of the world trading system; instead,
it is a means to stabilize and structure the international trade law in a world
with an ever-increasing
The difficulty with this argument is that the term ‘parties’ set
out in Article 31(3)(c) VCLT is quite ambiguous. From
textual analysis, it is
not clear whether the term ‘parties’ means disputants or all members
of the WTO. If Article 31(3)(c)
required a rule of international law to be
applicable between all WTO members in order to be taken into account in
interpreting WTO
law, this would strongly limit the amount of rules relevant for
the interpretation of WTO law and would exclude bilateral and most
multilateral
treaties such as RTAs
However, while the text of WTO agreements should reflect the common intentions
of all WTO members
not mean that the means to interpret such agreements should be binding on, or
reflect the intentions of all WTO
. It should be noted
that an interpretation given by a panel or the Appellate Body is not binding on
other panels and Appellate body
reports. The consideration of an RTA to which
not all WTO members are parties in a particular dispute, therefore, does not
the rights of those who are not bound by that
In short, WTO panels or the Appellate Body may consult and examine the
RTAs’ law when interpreting WTO law if such treaties
are binding on, or
relevant to the parties to a dispute. As discussed, such consultation and
examination would enhance rather than
undermine security and predictability of
the world trading system.
III Conclusion
The paper has provided an analysis on the relationship between the dispute
settlement mechanism under the WTO and that under RTAs.
It suggests that dispute
settlement mechanisms under RTAs have not been a significant threat on the
multilateral dispute settlement
regime. Nevertheless, given the proliferation of
RTAs, especially in the condition where most of them include quasi-judicial
for dispute settlement, it is argued that such a conclusion about the
happy co-existence between these two dispute settlement regimes
seems no longer
true in the future. Indeed, it has been pointed out that among potential
difficulties arising from the interactions
between WTO and RTAs’ dispute
settlement, the possibility for overlaps of jurisdiction and the danger of
clinical isolation
between WTO and RTA law are the most obvious ones. The paper
therefore argues that in order to have a compatible relationship between
RTAs’ dispute settlement, which may significantly enhance the coherence of
international law, these potential problems
must be eliminated. Since current
international law does not appear to offer any practical solution on the issues
of overlaps of
develop a set of principles that can govern the allocation of jurisdiction
between the WTO and RTAs. Some aspects that should be taken into account in such
negotiation are also discussed. The other solution
that would help to eliminate
the possibility of clinical isolation between WTO and RTA law is also given in
this paper. Accordingly,
it is suggested that there should be a mutual
recognition of law between the WTO and RTA adjudicatory bodies in their
interpretation
process. The current author strongly believes that if the above
suggestions are realized, WTO and RTAs’ dispute settlement
can gradually
integrate into each other, bringing more security and predictability to the
world trading system.
N T Son is a
post-graduate student at the Law Faculty, the University of Melbourne. Email:
tansonpvdn@yahoo.com.
DSU, Article 4.3.
DSU, Article 4.7 and 4.8.
DSU, Article 8.4 and 8.5.
DSU, Article 16.4.
DSU, Article 17.1.
DSU, Article 17.4.
DSU, Article 21.3.
DSU, Article 22.
DSU, Article 22.7.
DSU, Article 9.1 and
DSU Article 23.
Settlement under PTAs: Political or Legal?’
, Printed Material - Free
Trade Agreements, Melbourne Law School (2007) 261.
WTO website,
Settlement Pages,
www.wto.org/English/tratop_e/dispu_e/dispu_e.htm
at 15 November 2007.
W J Davey, ‘Dispute
Settlement in the WTO and RTAs: A Comment’ in L Bartels and F Ortino
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal System
(2006), 343,
‘Participation in WTO Dispute Settlement: Complainants, Interested Parties
and Free Riders’(2005) 19(2)
The World Bank Economic Review
W J Davey, above n 19,
International
Trade Law of the WTO
(2006), 428.
‘Weaknesses and Proposed Improvements to the WTO Dispute Settlement
System: An Economic and Market-Oriented View’
(Paper presented at the
conference: The WTO at 10: A Look at the Appellate Body, São Paulo,
Brazil,15-17 May 2005).
M R Islam, above n
See, for example, R Abbott,
‘Are Developing Countries Deterred from Using The WTO Dispute Settlement
System?’ (Working
Paper No 01, European Centre for International Political
Economy (ECIPE) 2007); C Bown, ‘On the Economic Success of GATT/WTO
Dispute Settlement’ 86
The Review of Economics and Statistic
811(2004); C Bown, ‘Participation in WTO Dispute Settlement:
Complainants, Interested Parties and Free Riders’ 19(2)
The World Bank
Economic Review
For a critical analysis on
RTAs’ proliferation and dispute settlement, see D Morgan,
‘Dispute Settlement under PTAs: Political or Legal ?’
Trade Agreements: Printed Materials, Melbourne Law School (2007) 249-264.
Ibid, 251-252.
Y Luo, ‘Dispute
Settlement in the Proposed East Asia Free Trade Agreement: Lessons Learned from
the ASEAN, the NAFTA, and
the EU’ in L Bartels and F Ortino (eds),
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal System
(2006) 419, 431.
D Morgan, above n 12,
W J Davey, above n 19,
D Morgan, above n 12,
I G Bercero, ‘Dispute
Settlement in European Union Free Trade Agreements: Lessons Learned ?’ in
L Bartels and F Ortino
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal
(2006) 383, 387-389.
D Morgan, above n 12,
I G Bercero, above n 43,
D Morgan, above 12,
NAFTA Secretariat Wedsite
http://www.nafta-sec-alena.org/DefaultSite/index_e.aspx?DetailID=5
at 15 November 2007.
W J Davey, above n 19,
MERCOSUR Wedsite <
http://www.sice.oas.org/Dispute/mercosur/ind_s.asp
at 15 November 2007.
W J Davey, above n 19,
E R Robles,
‘Political & Quasi-Adjudicative Dispute Settlement Models In European
Union Free Trade Agreements Is the quasi-adjudicative
model a trend or is it
just another model?’ (Staff Working Paper ERSD-2006-09, WTO, 2006),
W J Davey, above n 19,
D Morgan, above n 12,
SADC Treaty, Article 5.2
D Morgan, above n 12,
W J Davey, above n 19,
Mexico - Tax Measures On
Soft Drinks and Other Beverages,
WTO Doc WT/DS308/AB/R (2006) [54] (Report
of the Appellate Body).
David A. Gantz ,
‘The United States and NAFTA Dispute Settlement: Ambivalence, Frustration
and Occasional Defiance’ (Discussion
Paper No. 06-26 The University of
Arizona, James E. Rogers College of Law, 2006) 26.
W J Davey, above n 19,
D Morgan, above n 12,
W J Davey, above n 19,
David A. Gantz , above n
J Pauwelyn, ‘Going
Global, Regional, or Both ? Dispute Settlement in the South American Development
Community (SADC) and Overlaps
with the WTO and Other Jurisdictions’
Minnesota Journal of Global Trade 231
W J Davey, above n 19,
DSU, Article 3.2, 3.4,
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
See, for examples, D
‘Dispute Settlement under PTAs: Political or Legal?’
Printed Material - Free Trade Agreements, Melbourne Law School (2007) 263; W J
Davey, ‘Dispute Settlement in the WTO and RTAs:
A Comment’ in L
Bartels and F Ortino (eds),
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal
(2006), 343, 357; A D Mestral, ‘NAFTA Dispute Settlement:
Creative Experiment or Confusion?’ in L Bartels and F Ortino
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal System
(2006), 359, 381.
I would like to thank Mr D
Morgan for his useful instructions on this argument.
GATT, Article XIV.
M J Trebilcock and R Howse,
Regulation of International Trade
, 2005), 142; I G
Bercero, 399.
I G Bercero, above n 43,
The EU-Chile Agreement,
http://www.bilaterals.org/IMG/html/EU-CL_assoc_agreement-2.html
at 18 November 2007.
I G Bercero, above n 43,
The EU-Chile Agreement,
http://www.bilaterals.org/IMG/html/EU-CL_assoc_agreement-2.html
at 18 November 2007.
I G Bercero, above n 43,
The EU-Chile Agreement,
Article 74.
I G Bercero, above n 43,
D Morgan, above 12,
K Kwar and G Marceau,
‘Overlaps and Conflicts of Jurisdiction between the World Trade
Organization and Regional Trade Agreements’
in L Bartels and F Ortino
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal System
(2006), 465,
D Morgan, above n 12,
NAFTA, Article 2005(1).
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
NAFTA, Article
DSU, Article 23.
K Kwar and G Marceau,
above 92, 466, 467.
D Morgan, above 12,
Mexico - Tax Measures
On Soft Drinks and Other Beverages,
WTO Doc WT/DS308/AB/R (2006) (Report of
the Appellate Body).
Ibid, [54].
Ibid, [42].
Ibid, [5, 57].
Ibid, [57].
Ibid, [53].
D Morgan, above n 12,
Argentina-Poultry
Antidumping Duties,
WTO Doc, WT/DS241/R (2003) (Panel Report)
D Morgan, above n 12,
Mexico - Tax Measures
On Soft Drinks and Other Beverages,
WTO Doc WT/DS308/AB/R (2006) [54]
(Report of the Appellate Body).
NAFTA Chapter 20 Panel
US Safeguard Action Taken on Broomcorn Brooms from Mexico
NAFTA Chapter 20 Panel
In the Matter of Cross-Border Trucking Service
A D Mestral,
‘NAFTA Dispute Settlement: Creative Experience or Confusion?’, in L
Bartels and F Ortino (eds),
Regional Trade Agreements and the WTO Legal
(2006), 359, 366.
Doc, DS29/R (1994) (Panel Report).
Ibid, [5.19].
Chile- Price Band
WTO Doc WT/DS207/R (2002) (Panel Report)
I V Damme, ‘What
role is there for Regional International Law in the Interpretation of the WTO
Agreements ?’ in L Bartels
and F Ortino (eds),
Regional Trade
Agreements and the WTO Legal System
(2006), 553, 570.
‘Applicability of WTO Law in Regional Agreements: Identifying the
Link’ in L Bartels and F Ortino (eds),
Regional Trade Agreements and
the WTO Legal System
(2006), 525, 543-547.
Korea – Various
Measures on Beef,
WTO Doc, WT/DS161/R (2001) (Appellate Body Report).
Ibid, [539].
See, for examples, for a
deep discussion on this issues, R Higging, ‘A Babel of Judicial Voices ?
Ruminations from the Bench’
International and Comparative Law
Quarterly 719
Study Group of the International Law Commission,
‘Fragmentation of International Law: Difficulties Arising from the
and Expansion of International Law’, UN Doc A/CN.4/l.682
K Kwar and G Marceau,
above n 92, 484.
K Kwar and G Marceau,
above n 92, 476.
Argentina-Poultry
Antidumping Duties,
WTO Doc, WT/DS241/R (2003) (Panel Report)
Mexico - Tax Measures
On Soft Drinks and Other Beverages,
WTO Doc WT/DS308/AB/R (2006) (Report of
the Appellate Body).
Charter of the United
Nations article 33
E R Robles, above n 54,
K Kwar and G Marceau,
above n 92 476.
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
See, for example,
J P Trachtman, ‘The Domain of WTO Dispute Resolution’
Harvard International Law Journal
; G Maceau, ‘Conflicts of
Norms and Conflicts of Jurisdiction: The Relationship between WTO Agreement and
MEAs and Other Treaties’
Journal of World Trade
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
286; J Pauwelyn, “Adding Sweeteners to Soft Lumber: The WTO-NAFTA
‘Spaghetti Bowl’ is
international Economic Law
Amco Asia Corp v
1988 89 I.L.R 368
V Lowne ‘Res
Judicata and the Rule of Law in International Arbitration’ (1996) 8AFR.
J.IIN’T.COMP.38, 40.
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
E F Scoles et al,
Conflict of Laws
(2000), 1141.
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
J Pauwelyn, above n 71,
K Kwar and G Marceau,
above n 92, 478.
L Hsu, above n 126, 551,
Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties,
Article 31, 32.
L Hsu, above n 126,
Mox Plant Case
(Ireland v United Kingdom), Order on Provisional Measures
(2002) 41 ILM 405
Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties, Article 31(3)(c).
NAFTA Chapter 20 Panel
US Safeguard Action Taken on Broomcorn Brooms from Mexico
NAFTA Chapter 20 Panel
In the Matter of Cross-Border Trucking Service
Korea – Various
Measures on Beef,
WTO Doc, WT/DS161/R (2001) (Appellate Body Report).
I V Damme, above n 125,
Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties,
Article 31(1).
I V Damme, above n 125,
W Weiss ‘Security
and Predictability under WTO Law’
World Trade Review
J Pauwenlyn,
of Norms in Public International Law-How WTO Law Relates to Other Rules of
International Law
(2003), 257, 261.
I V Damme, 559.
W Weiss ‘Security
and Predictability under WTO Law’
World Trade Review
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter