URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MqJlBLaw/2008/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:20:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Haloush, Haitham A; Melhem, Basem; Malkawi, Bashar H --- "Equality of Arms in the Digital Age" [2008] MqJlBLaw 3; (2008) 5 Macquarie Journal of Business Law 73
Equality of Arms in the Digital Age
I Introduction
II Equality of Arms in OADR Schemes
A. Different Levels of Access to Technology and its Implications on the Equality of Arms in OADR Schemes
III Conclusion
Equality of Arms in the Digital Age
and Bashar H.
Electronic commerce is important, and perhaps, inevitable. Thus to consider
the legal implications of the growth and development of
electronic commerce is
essential. However, the lack of suitable dispute resolution mechanisms in
cyberspace will constitute a serious
obstacle to the further development of
electronic commerce. Bearing this in mind, this paper argues that when
Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR) moves to cyberspace, particularly
arbitration and mediation as the main types of ADR, the form of online
alternative
dispute resolution (OADR) can maximise the growth of
e-commerce.
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) and the internet are two very topical
issues. Online alternative dispute resolution (OADR), or
ADR online, refers to
the use of internet technology, wholly or partially, as a medium by which to
conduct the proceedings of Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR), in order to
resolve commercial disputes which arise from the use of the internet. Those
proceedings are
operated by neutral private bodies under published rules of
Accessibility to OADR schemes means that the OADR mechanism can be called
upon when needed. Since ADR is a fast growing area of law,
and since the
internet is fast becoming ubiquitous, accessibility is one of OADR’s
greatest strength. However, given that OADR
is conducted through electronic
means, accessibility will be associated to a great extent with technology.
Therefore, this article
concludes that there are technological challenges that
need to be overcome if there is to be a swift and successful deployment of
online ADR in a cross-border environment.
I Introduction
Electronic commerce is important, and perhaps, inevitable. Thus to consider
the legal implications of the growth and development of
electronic commerce is
essential. However, the lack of suitable dispute resolution mechanisms in
cyberspace will constitute a serious
obstacle to the further development of
electronic commerce. Bearing this in mind, this paper argues that when
Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR) moves to cyberspace, particularly
arbitration and mediation as the main types of ADR, the form of online
alternative
dispute resolution (OADR) can maximise the growth of e-commerce.
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) and the internet are two very topical
issues. Online alternative dispute resolution (OADR), or
ADR online, refers to
the use of internet technology, wholly or partially, as a medium by which to
conduct the proceedings of Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR), in order to
resolve commercial disputes which arise from the use of the internet. Those
proceedings are
operated by neutral private bodies under published rules of
In the context of OADR, it must be pointed out that the challenge faced by
online arbitration lies more in the realm of law than technology,
challenge faced by online mediation lies more in the realm of technology than
law. This is due to the less stringent legal
requirements and the crucial role
of the communication process in conducting mediation. As a result, as online
arbitration is faced
with many legal issues, and, as online mediation requires
complex and sophisticated communication schemes, which are difficult and
expensive to set up presently, given time, OADR will be within the ambit of
legally and technically possible in the near future.
Consequently, from
technical standpoint, a critical examination of online mediation is beyond the
limits of this paper.
Accessibility to OADR schemes means that the OADR mechanism can be called
upon when needed. Since ADR is a fast growing area of law,
and since the
internet is fast becoming ubiquitous, accessibility is one of OADR’s
greatest strength. However, given that OADR
is conducted through electronic
means, accessibility will be associated to a great extent with technology.
Therefore, there are technological
challenges that need to be overcome if there
is to be a swift and successful deployment of online ADR in a cross-border
environment.
At the most basic level, technical standards define and limit cyberspace,
and, by extending the logic, OADR proceedings. As a result,
OADR providers and
participants need to know and understand the information technology limits. It
must be borne in mind that OADR
is not dealing with technology versus human.
Instead, it deals with technology amplifying human abilities. For instance, if
providers use too much technology and put too much emphasis on efficiency,
they risk minimising the human element in the process
since the whole procedure
is very sanitised and distant. This factor could lead to a decreasing acceptance
of the authority of third
party neutrals. Consequently, it is crucial to strike
an appropriate balance between reliance on technology and reliance on people
supporting ADR.
Equally, it must be borne in mind that technology itself is not neutral.
Third party neutrals will be working online where many electronic
resolution contexts may favour people who are more technically adept. From this
perspective, technical expertise is essential
in OADR as the third party neutral
is not only required to use computer software and communication technology, but
he/she is required
to assist the parties and educate them about the process.
Consequently, OADR providers need to know and understand the internet
limits. Indeed, because technology changes so rapidly, it is
reasonable to argue that not every internet user is equal. Arguably,
may be even more technically adept than third party neutrals. In this respect,
Square Trade
requires its mediators and arbitrators to have the
technological competence to conduct the dispute resolution process
effectively.
It should be pointed out that the success of OADR is highly related to ease
of use. The more user-friendly the OADR system is designed,
the more the
information balance between parties will be equalised. If one party can prove
that he or she was seriously disabled
to participate in OADR proceedings by a
lack of technological competence, he or she may have a possibility to challenge
the outcome(s)
of OADR and prevent its execution. Apparently, equal access to
information implies equality of arms in OADR schemes. This issue will
analysed in the following part of this paper.
In advancing this issue, this paper will deal with the issue of equality of
arms in OADR schemes. This paper will proceed to discuss
the different levels of
access to technology and its implications on the equality of arms in OADR
schemes. Finally, this paper summarises
and relates the findings of the paper to
each other in a coherent way which might help in the future development of
It must be noted that there will be special references to the implications of
OADR upon English litigation. Such implications have
to be analysed because they
constitute a reference point for the assessment of the quality of justice of a
given OADR provider and
they provide a framework for reflecting upon the general
requirements of fair process in OADR. As a result, the priority in this
is towards the implications of OADR on the United Kingdom and English
litigation. The default is the English law where it
is well developed,
appropriate, and constructive. In the United Kingdom, the encouragement of
electronic commerce is a matter of
public policy. The United Kingdom government
is enthusiastic about developing the potential for electronic transactions,
a method of delivering government services, and partly as the basis
for promoting competition and economic growth. It appears that
there is now a
strong political imperative in the UK to prompt various actions that will create
trust, reliance, and confidence in
doing business over the internet. The
strategy of the UK government is to make the country the best place in the world
for e-commerce.
For the purpose of this paper, business to consumer (B-to-C) internet
transaction disputes and internet trademark infringement disputes
in the form of
domain name disputes will be deployed as two case studies. Businesses to
consumer and domain name dispute resolution
have been a major area of activity
for online ADR because of the need to build electronic commerce through
increasing internet users’
confidence. On the one hand, the domain name
system is generated and becomes an indispensable element for electronic commerce
work properly. Electronic commerce is a source of growing demand on domain
names because currently there is no effective alternative
method of finding a
company’s internet location. Accordingly, the utility of Domain Name
System (DNS) should be understood
primarily within the broader context of
electronic commerce and doing business on the internet. Due to the nature of the
the domain name is as important as the business itself, or more
precisely, the domain name is the company’s primary asset.
consumer, a domain name allows an access to the internet, provides a direct link
to the online business, and provides a mode
of initiating transactions online.
Equally, a domain name owner’s interest in a domain name is that
acquisition of a domain
name is considered as a prerequisite step to conducting
business online. As a result, firms and others, increasingly seek to have
internet presence because without a domain name, a company would be practically
invisible on the internet. Customers would not
know were to find the
On the other hand, given
that a business to consumer internet transaction means in a broad sense the sale
of goods and services over
the internet from business entities to individuals
acting in their personal capacity, uncertainty over the legal framework of
internet transaction disputes may inhibit both consumers from purchasing
products or services over the internet, and companies from
entering into the
electronic marketplace.
II Equality of Arms in OADR Schemes
In administrative law, natural justice is a well-defined concept which
compromises a fundamental rule of fair process: a man’s
defence must
always be fairly heard. The rules requiring fair hearings and fair opportunities
to present a case can be traced back
to medieval times, and, indeed, they were
not unknown in the ancient world.
In the case of
Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation
Time and time again in the cases I have cited it has been stated that a decision
given without regard to the principles of natural
justice is void and that was
expressly decided in
Wood v. Wood
. I see no reason to doubt these
authorities. The body with the power to decide cannot lawfully proceed to make a
decision until it
has afforded to the person affected a proper opportunity to
state his case.
Undoubtedly, fair hearings and fair opportunities to present a case are focal
points of dispute resolution. Conventional litigation
includes, as a matter of
fairness, a right to present evidence and to respond to evidence offered by
one’s opponent. The reliability
of evidence is tested through the combined
effects of physical presence, oath, cross examination, and observation of
In this respect, it is
important to recall that Article 6 (1) of the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) states that:
In the determination of his civil rights and obligations everyone is entitled to
a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time
by an independent and
impartial tribunal established by
This begs the question of whether Article 6 (1) of the ECHR applies to
arbitral proceedings. In principle, it does not apply. However,
some rights of
it are so fundamental that they cannot be waived. That said, it must be stressed
that fair hearings and fair opportunities
for parties to present a case may be
lacking if there is an infraction to the right of equality of arms which
incorporate the idea
of a fair balance between the parties. Equality of arms
requires that the parties be allowed access to facilities on equal terms
have a reasonable opportunity of presenting their case under conditions which do
not place them at substantial disadvantage
Resolving disputes requires communication. The capacity of parties to
communicate among themselves and with the third party will be
decisive for the
resolution of the dispute. A realistic probability for the parties to reach an
agreement depends on their opportunity
to participate. Lack of proper
communication may jeopardise fair process, and may lead to insufficient quality
of justice, and may
reduce trust in the dispute resolution process.
No strategy for dispute resolution, however much it seeks to modernise the
way in which it operates, can ignore a very basic truth,
i.e., that hearing and
presenting a case will continue to be effective means of examining all sides of
the argument and reaching
decisions about difficult and complex problems.
In an online hearing and presenting a case, one must keep in mind that
transmitting documents in electronic format is one thing and
pleading and
presenting the case is another thing. Moreover, to the extent that a hearing and
presenting a case are conducted online,
signs of non-verbal communication might
be lost. Furthermore, in the online context, the inexperienced or inarticulate
may be disadvantaged against the professionally presented case of the
claimant who has a sufficient knowledge of
technology.
Any strategy for using information technology in arbitration, in particular,
must address the hearing process effectively in order
not to deprive disputants
of the chance to tell their story that is an important part of a
disputants’ feeling that they have
been given meaningful hearing.
Given the impossibility of dividing public and private law, and given that
the implications of fairness in public law proceedings
such as adjudication in
courts can be applied to private law proceedings such as arbitral proceedings,
it must be noted that with
regard to equality of arms in arbitration, Article
5(1) (b) of the New York Convention subjects an award to challenge if the:
against whom the award is invoked…was unable to present his
In arbitration, arbitral procedure and arbitration rules often have
provisions as to the cases in which a hearing must be held. Traditionally,
settlement of disputes in arbitration is often made on the basis of a hearing,
in which the parties and the decision maker participate.
A hearing will be
normally an oral hearing. In various situations, however, practicalities may
justify dispensing with oral hearings,
particularly, when it incurs added costs
to the parties. For instance, it may suffice to give an opportunity to make
representations
in writing provided, as always, that the demands of fairness are
substantially met.
English law requires the arbitral tribunal to comply with rules of natural
justice and an award may be challenged or enforcement resisted
if it is made in
breach of them. The minimum requirements are now set out in section 33 (1) (a)
of the English Arbitration Act
Section 33 (1) (a)
provides that the tribunal shall:
Act fairly and impartially as between the parties, giving each party a
reasonable opportunity of putting his case and dealing with
that of his
Although the requirements of natural justice established under the common law
go further than the duty set out in section 33, the
section reflects the
requirement that each party must be given a fair opportunity to be heard, which
is one of the basic minimum
requirements of natural
Government of
Ceylon v. Chandris
It is, I apprehend, a basic principle. In arbitration as much as in
litigation in the Courts, that no one with judicial responsibility
may receive
evidence, documentary or otherwise, from one party without the other party
knowing that the evidence is being tendered
and being offered an opportunity to
consider it, object to it, or make submissions on it. No custom or practice may
over-ride that
In the context of online arbitration, it depends on the rules agreed to by
the parties which may include an online hearing. In actual
fact, an online
hearing in arbitration may be more practical than an in-person oral hearing for
disputes involving relatively small
amounts and/or located at a great distance
from each other, such as business to consumer internet transaction disputes and
name disputes. In actual fact, online applications may succeed with
traditional forms of ADR in some sectors more than others. For
example, it will
not replace offline major international commercial arbitration, but in
business-to-consumer cross-border disputes,
there is little alternative.
A. Different Levels of Access to Technology and its
Implications on the Equality of Arms in OADR Schemes
If one assumes that the participants may use various electronic communication
tools including e-mails, online chat sessions, web-conferencing
in conducting an
online hearing and presenting a case, then it is important to analyse whether
there are equality of arms in the
online hearing and presenting the case or not.
At a basic level, since electronic disputes concern B-to-C internet
transactions and domain names, assumptions can be made that the
parties to the
dispute have the requisite technical facilities to participate in the online
resolution of the dispute. However, such
assumption is qualified by the need to
recognise different levels of access to technology.
One area that may be unique in OADR, as compared to ADR, is the varied level
of technical expertise and capability. There is a significant
variance in online
skills, connect speeds, connection costs, and software availability which can
impact parties’ ability to
communicate. Inevitably, this will result in
different levels of access to technology, and therefore, power imbalance between
parties. Indeed, technological skill and equipment that affects ability to
participate can create a power
As a result, different levels of access to technology imply that OADR systems
are necessary but not sufficient to ensure confidence
in online commerce. From
this perspective, it is important to remember that online ADR versus offline ADR
is not an either/or proposition
since OADR does not have to happen entirely
online. ADR practitioners need to see that online ADR can powerfully complement
techniques. The task for dispute resolution professionals therefore is
to choose the right mix of online ADR techniques and offline
ADR techniques that
are appropriate to the dispute in question. This would allow OADR mechanism to
be responsive and flexible as
it would be too strict to exclude, for instance,
sending a paper copy of the online mediation agreement or the online award or
accepting evidences provided offline in an OADR
From this perspective, a gradual transition to online system in OADR process
is needed. It must be borne in mind that the use of offline
technologies, such
as, mail, telephones and faxes, or any other means of communication including
face-to-face, might be supportive
and useful to the use of internet technology,
as a medium to conduct the proceedings of OADR. Indeed, the primary goal of any
resolution system must be to resolve the dispute by deploying the most
appropriate means available. What matters most, for any conflict
process, is the right use of the right tools in the right context. Accordingly,
the ideal ADR process would include online
and offline interactions that take
advantage of the strengths of each. The gradual transition to online system in
OADR process is
reasonable for the following five reasons.
First, given the increasing conceptual questions hidden behind the
practicality of OADR solutions, it would be too ambitious to identify
comprehensive solution for internet commercial disputes. Indeed, thinking about
placing a complete trust in a system, such
as OADR, which is new and which has
the capacity to affect valued rights of parties, particularly fair process, is
irrational, to
say the least. Indeed, the use of offline technologies entails
the possibility to adapt or modify certain rules of OADR in view of
changing technologies.
However, one should not overestimate the power of OADR to solve disputes.
There will be some disputes, where for reasons of a long
standing relationship
or a complexity of legal issues, getting face-to-face will be preferred over
OADR. Besides, in some cases,
special arrangements may be considered in dispute
settlement, such as that a particular piece of written evidence, should be
mailed, or otherwise physically delivered. This is not possible in a
fully automated OADR schemes. Moreover, third party neutrals
may conduct on site
inspections of a product or service that is the subject of a dispute. Such
inspections might prove pivotal in
determining whether a fault exists, and, if
so, where that fault lies. Apparently, there is no cyber-equivalent of such
inspections
in OADR. Furthermore, it must be borne in mind that any
communication over the internet, including OADR, bears the risk of the
failure to conclude the communication properly. Therefore, OADR
providers and disputants have to understand that there could be an
interruption
in service, which could happen during their discussion. In such circumstances,
the use of offline technologies, such
as, mail, telephones and faxes, or any
other means of communication including face-to-face, is indispensable. And
finally, in the
event there is a delay in receiving a response online, the third
party neutral should be empowered to telephone, fax, or use whatever
other means
are available to contact a participant. Equally, the parties should assume that
if there has been a considerable delay
in communication, they should make every
effort to contact the third party neutral and determine what the problem is. In
actual fact,
the lack of reliable contact details of disputants in OADR is often
highlighted as a major obstacle in the resolution of disputes.
Therefore, the
use of offline technologies might be useful in this
Second, the gradual transition to online system in OADR process ensures
impartiality as it emphasizes that all parties can participate
competently in an
online process. If one or more cannot, either because of lack of access to
computers or lack of technological skill
or even lack of typing ability, then it
is advisable to have the parties participating through different means. For
instance, it
will always be the case that the person who types faster in real
time discussions over the internet will have a real advantage. And
always be the case that a party which has a visual or physical problem is
disadvantaged in the internet setting compared
to the other party. In such
cases, certain individuals may exercise an undue influence online since they
enjoy a marked communication,
and thus tactical advantage, during OADR sessions.
Indeed, technological skill and equipment that affects ability to participate
can create a power
The digital divide, that is the divide between people who use the internet,
sometimes called “virtual elites”, and people
who do not, is often
mentioned as one of the fundamental obstacles to OADR because the full capacity
of the mechanism may not be
utilised by those who are uncomfortable or
unfamiliar with the
technology.
In this regard, Article 3 (b) (iii) of the Rules for Uniform Domain Name
Dispute Resolution Policy (the “Rules”) requires
the complainant to
specify a preferred method of communications in the proceeding. The same
requirement from the respondent was stated
in Article 5 (b) (iii) too. Article 3
(b) (iii) reads as follows:
The complaint shall…specify a preferred method for communications
directed to the Respondent in the administrative proceeding
(including person to
be contacted, medium, and address information) for each of (A) electronic-only
material and (B) material including
And third, to be effective, the right of access to courts requires that a
person be given personal and reasonable notice of an administrative
that interfere with his civil rights and obligations so that he has time to
challenge it. Apparently, notice means official
notice. Indirect knowledge of
the proceedings is not sufficient. This is reasonable since there should be a
notice with a statement
of reasons for the initial action giving rise to the
dispute. This notion contemplates that the claimant set forth his or her
thus defining the controversy to be resolved. Besides, this represents
the defendant’s opportunity to answer the complaint
and presenting legal
or factual defences. Indeed, an important component of procedural fairness is
the right to receive timely and
meaningful notice that a claim has been
Given the impossibility of dividing public and private law, and given that
the implications of fairness in public law proceedings
such as adjudication in
courts can be applied to private law proceedings such as arbitral proceedings,
it has been stated that the
duty to enforce arbitral awards does not extend to
awards rendered without minimal fair process protections, specifically, an
appropriate
regard, Article 5(1) (b) of the New York Convention permits refusal of
enforcement if:
The party against which the award is invoked was not given proper notice of
the appointment of the arbitrator or of the arbitration
proceedings or was
otherwise unable to present his
However, given that proper notice is an important safeguard to fair process,
it is conceivable that the courts of the enforcing state
in electronic
arbitration may consider that the notice requirements of the New York Convention
have not been complied with if notice
of the proceedings was given online. For
instance, it may be questionable whether the link on a web site through which
the terms and conditions of electronic arbitration is offered may
suffice to satisfy the criteria of the providing of a possibility
to take notice
of the terms. Similarly, a person who fails to check his or her e-mail, during
an absence on vacation for example,
may lose by default. Equally, given that an
e-mail may bounce, merely initiating communications via an e-mail is not an
notice by all measures. Therefore, although the issue of proof of
delivery of a transmission is technically possible since it is
possible to keep
a trace of the date and hour of access to the transmission, it must be pointed
out that backing up electronic transmissions
by traditional transmissions may be
much safer and fairer.
III Conclusion
Given that OADR is conducted through electronic means, accessibility will be
associated to a great extent with technology. Therefore,
there are technological
challenges that need to be overcome if there is to be a swift and successful
deployment of online ADR in
a cross-border environment.
The internet is a quickly changing medium where new possibilities appear
daily. One must remember that the technology that we have
today is not the
technology we are going to have in six months or a year. Speculating on the
direction of technology, especially
as it relates to the internet, is a
difficult and risky business. Innovation when mixed with lots of money can
produce instability.
In fact, one should not conclude that the internet has
finished changing. On the contrary, it will, indeed it must, continue to change
and evolve at the speed of the computer industry if it is to remain relevant. In
this regard, Ethan Katsh, a leading author on OADR,
Cyberspace is in transition, both in terms of how populated it is and in what
it is used for.
Consequently, the idea of OADR is indeed valid, but it is still ahead of its
time. That is to say, although OADR has a future in cyberspace,
the capabilities
and use of OADR mechanisms will increase rapidly in the coming years. This is
reasonable since the regulation of
online economy will shape opportunities for
ADR in the future and guide the development of ADR framework in cyberspace.
As internet use increases, and as the use of the internet as a medium to
conduct the proceedings of ADR increases, and as the capabilities
that are built
into such use increases, and as our skills in such use evolve, we may find new
ways of using technologies that change
how we think about ADR. The increased use
and application of new technologies is inevitable, and as technology advances,
the accessibility
and availability of ADR will advance too.
It is not secret among computer professionals that devices such as
interactive digital television and advanced mobile telephony will
range of mechanisms for online access, including the access to OADR schemes.
This may lead to more powerful dispute resolution
tools that could potentially
increase the power of ADR.
In this context, web-conferencing can be defined as the holding of a
conference among people at remote locations by means of transmitted
video signals via the internet. Each participant sits before a computer equipped
with a sound equipment and video camera.
On their screen appear frames
containing the faces of the other participants while receiving the other
participants’ spoken
In actual fact, web-conferencing, with full sounds and images, is the most
similar medium to actual physical meetings and, therefore,
an obvious solution
to the lack of face-to-face encounters in
However, although lower quality web-conferencing is becoming more affordable
and it may be the next phase in technological development,
it must be noted that
there are bandwidth issues for broadcast-quality web-conferencing, which require
specialised facilities. It
must be clear therefore that we are not at a point
where we can anticipate how web-conferencing might be employed in OADR and when
it will be widely and reliably available.
At present, we should not take the extreme view as to reject OADR until
technology progresses to the point where replicating face-to-face
interaction is
universal, accessible, and inexpensive, and, until ADR profession fundamentally
reorient itself to take into account
the different demands of the online
Besides, although there are more than ten years experience with OADR, one
must acknowledge that future technological changes might
render any OADR model
obsolete. For example, OADR projects that were created as recently as 1999 and
2000 can now appear out of date
while the technology of 1998 is obsolete.
Indeed, over the three years of this research, new OADR providers came online
and existing
services terminated or changed significantly This might explain why
there has not been an established model for OADR solutions. In
actual fact, no
OADR guidelines or standards or specific regulations have emerged as a dominant
code of practice within the OADR
In the context of OADR, it must be pointed out that the challenge faced by
online arbitration lies more in the realm of law than technology,
challenge faced by online mediation lies more in the realm of technology than
law. This is due to the less stringent legal
requirements and the crucial role
of the communication process in conducting mediation. As a result, as online
arbitration is faced
with many legal issues, and, as online mediation requires
complex and sophisticated communication schemes, which are difficult and
expensive to set up presently, given time, OADR will be within the ambit of
legally and technically possible in the near future.
Having said that, taking into account the accessibility to OADR schemes which
is commonly associated with fair process that has been
examined in this paper,
it has been concluded that accessibility to OADR schemes can be sacrificed to
some extent in order to increase
efficiency of the OADR process.
Haitham Haloush is Assistant
Professor of Commercial Law at the Hashemite University, Jordan. He holds PhD in
commercial law from
Leeds University, England, College of Law, and L.L.M. from
Aberdeen University, Scotland, College of Law.
Basem Melhem Assistant
Professor of Commercial Law at the Jordan University, Jordan. He holds PhD in
Commercial Law from Leeds University,
England, College of Law, and L.L.M. from
Aberdeen University, Scotland, College of Law.
Bashar Malkawi is Assistant
Professor of Commercial Law, Hashemite University, Jordan. He holds an S.J.D in
law from the American
University, Washington College of Law, and an L.L.M in
International Trade law from the University of Arizona.
The authors we would
like to thank Professor Clive Walker for his assistance.
http://www.squaretrade.com
, last visited
of October 2007.
For a full account on UK
government’s strategy in relation to the encouragement of e-commerce, see
the office of the e-Envoy,
available online at
http://archive.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/e-envoy/index-content.htm
last visited on the 1
of October 2007.
Burk, D., “Trademarks
along the Infobahn: A First Look at the Emerging Law of Cyber-Marks”,
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology
Ghemawat, P., “Distance
Still Matters”,
Harvard Business Review
Wade, H. and Forsyth, C.,
Administrative Law
edition, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2000) 436.
[1969] 2 AC 171.
Thornburg, E., “Going
Private: Technology, Due Process, and Internet Dispute Resolution”, (2000)
University of California Law Review
Article 6(1) of the European
Convention of Human Rights. Available online at
http://www.hri.org/docs/ECHR50.html
last visited on the 1
of October 2007
Harris, D., O’Boyle,
M., and Warbrick, C.,
Law of the European Convention on Human Rights
(Butterworths, London, 1995) 218.
Thornburg, E., “Going
Private: Technology, Due Process, and Internet Dispute Resolution”, (2000)
University of California Law Review
Article 5 (1) (b) of the
New York Convention of 1958 on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards. Available online
http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/uncitral_texts/arbitration/NYConvention.html
last visited on the 1
of October 2007. For a full discussion on the
division between private law and public law see Woolf, H., “Public
Law-Private
Law: Why the Divide? A Personal View”,
edition, Penguin Books Limited, London, 1995) 1177.
Mustill M., and Boyd, S.,
Commercial Arbitration
, (Butterworths, London, 2001) 191.
Sutton, D., Kendall, J., and Gill, J.,
Russell on Arbitration
& Maxwell, London, 1997) 402.
Section 33 (1) (a) of the
English Arbitration Act 1996.
Mustill M., and Boyd, S.,
Commercial Arbitration
, (Butterworths, London, 2001) 191. Sutton, D.,
Kendall, J., and Gill, J.,
Russell on Arbitration
, (Sweet & Maxwell,
London, 1997) 402.
[1963] 1 LIoyd’s Rep.
Katsh, E., and Rifkin, J.,
Online Dispute Resolution: Resolving Conflicts in Cyberspace
(Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 2001) 78.
Online Dispute
Resolution for Business: B2B, E-Commerce, Consumer, Employment, Insurance, and
other Commercial Conflicts
, (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 2002) 248. Katsh,
E., and Rifkin, J.,
Online Dispute Resolution: Resolving Conflicts in
, (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 2001) 135.
WIPO, “The Management
of Internet Domain Names and Addresses: Intellectual Property issues, Final
Report of the WIPO Internet
Domain Name Process”, 30
1999, available online at
http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/amc/en/docs/report-final1.pdf
, last visited on the 1
of October 2007.
Goldsmith, J.,
“Against Cyber-Anarchy”,
University of Chicago Law
Katsh, E., and Rifkin, J.,
Online Dispute Resolution: Resolving Conflicts in Cyberspace
(Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 2001) 78.
Gordon, R., “The
Electronic Personality and Digital Self”,
Dispute Resolution
Article 3 (b) (iii) of the
Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (the “Rules”), as
approved by ICANN on the
of October 1999, available online
http://www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-rules-24oct99.htm
last visited on the 1
of October 2007.
Wade, H. and Forsyth, C.,
Administrative Law
edition, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2000) 508. Friendly, H., “Some Kind of Hearing”, (1975) 123
University of. Pennsylvania Law Review
1267. Thornburg, E., “Going
Private: Technology, Due Process, and Internet Dispute Resolution”, (2000)
University of California Law Review
For a comprehensive
analysis on the division between private law and public law see Woolf, H.,
“Public Law-Private Law: Why
the Divide? A Personal View”,
Article 5(1) (b) of the New
York Convention of 1958 on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
Awards. Available online
http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/uncitral_texts/arbitration/NYConvention.html
last visited on the 1
of October 2007
Kessedjian, C., and Cahn,
S., “Dispute Resolution Online”,
The International
Katsh, E., “Dispute
Resolution in Cyberspace”,
Connecticut Law Review
Katsh, E., and Rifkin, J.,
Online Dispute Resolution: Resolving Conflicts in Cyberspace
(Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 2001) 9.
Katsh, E., Rifkin, J., and
Gaitenby, A., “E-commerce, E-disputes, and E-dispute Resolution: In the
Shadow of E-bay Law”,
Ohio State Journal of Dispute
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (119 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter