URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'Connell, John --- "A Case for Recognition: A Fiduciary Relationship Between the Crown and Indigenous Australians" [2021] CanLawRw 21; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 233
Case for Recognition: A Fiduciary Relationship Between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians
John O’Connell*
This article provides insights into how Indigenous Australians have
unsuccessfully attempted to utilise fiduciary law principles to
gain greater
recognition of their unique status in Australian society. It contrasts these
unsuccessful attempts against the greater
success that indigenous Canadians have
enjoyed. It goes on to contrast the fiduciary law regimes in Australia and
Canada, highlighting
the stark differences between the two jurisdictions,
particularly in the context of judicial decision-making about the recognition
a fiduciary obligation owed to indigenous peoples. The article contends that the
success that indigenous Canadians have enjoyed,
with favourable judicial
decisions recognising such a fiduciary obligation owed to them by the Crown, is
in part due to Canada’s
progressive approach to constitutional recognition
of indigenous Canadians, in particularly section 35 of the Canadian
Constitution
. Section 35 recognises the rights and treaties of indigenous
Canadians. The article contends that if Australia was to take a similarly
progressive approach to indigenous constitutional recognition, courts would have
greater flexibility to make decisions recognising
a broad fiduciary relationship
between the Crown and indigenous Australians. This article also addresses some
of the challenges that
such a course of action would give rise to and provides
an overview of what constitutional and fiduciary recognition of indigenous
Australians could look like in the future.
Introduction
‘For the king ought not to be under man but under God,
and under the law’
History has remembered Chief Justice Edward Coke’s courageous and
controversial disagreement with King James I in a multifarious
and eclectic
fashion. Some say that during this encounter Coke’s timidity was palpable
and that he recanted his ‘treacherous’
words soon after uttering
Others say that he, in
typical English lawyer fashion, boldly appealed to Magna Carta for justification
of his comments and for defence
against the king’s raised
Whether Coke almost lost his
head for his verbal challenge to the king’s unfettered power or not is a
mystery that will likely
remain unknown forever. What is more certain is that
this short encounter depicted by contemporary legal historians is used today
justification for the principle that the Crown is ‘under the law’
and therefore bound by it. To assert the opposite
is a flagrant disregard for
the rule of law and a notion that is entirely unacceptable in the contemporary
Australian legal system.
This article takes as an unequivocal starting point that the Crown is under
the law and embarks upon its analysis with this as an
underlying theme. The
question that this article asks and answers is; what is the law by which the
Crown is bound? Specifically,
what is the state of fiduciary law in Australia
(compared with Canada) and can it, with the help of constitutional law reform,
used to bind the Crown to act in a fiduciary capacity with respect to
Indigenous Australians?
This article consists of three parts.
is an analysis of the current
state of fiduciary law in Australia. It will argue that fiduciary law in this
country is unlikely to
be effective as a means of furthering indigenous rights
and interests unless indigenous constitutional recognition is successfully
implemented in this country.
will also outline the indefinability of
fiduciary relationships whilst pointing to two fundamental principles that
assist in recognising
when such relationships arise. These fundamental
principles are undertaking
The part will demonstrate
that whilst Australian fiduciary law principles are flexible, Australian
fiduciary law precedents are rigid
and unlikely to shift without a broad
systemic change such as the implementation of indigenous constitutional
recognition.
will consist of a similar analysis to
except within the
Canadian context. It will argue that indigenous constitutional recognition and
the recognition of a fiduciary relationship
between the Crown and indigenous
peoples go hand in hand. It will demonstrate the flexibility that has been
employed by Canadian
courts at the level of principle when dealing with matters
involving indigenous rights and interests. It will also point to specific
precedents that have discussed the interrelated nature of indigenous
constitutional recognition and the protection of indigenous
interests through
fiduciary law principles.
will highlight the differences between the two jurisdictions discussed
and analysed in the two preceding parts. It will outline what
Australia can
learn from Canada with respect to these issues. The primary lesson being that
indigenous constitutional recognition
may be a useful and effective means of
protecting indigenous rights and interests. However, as will be seen such a
course of action
is not without its challenges. This part will also provide a
focused outline of what such development, both constitutional and fiduciary,
might look like in the future.
– Fiduciary Law in Australia
In this part, I will argue that the two most fundamental principles of the
fiduciary relationship are 1) undertaking and 2) reliance.
I will discuss the
most relevant precedents in Australian fiduciary law so as to assist with the
comparative analysis that will be
undertaken in
of this article. This
case law analysis will be confined to the most relevant High Court and State
Supreme Court precedents and will
demonstrate that the fiduciary law in
Australia is largely based on the two fundamental principles; undertaking and
I will demonstrate that
the fiduciary law in Australia confines fiduciary obligations to negative, as
opposed to positive duties
largely confined to relationships with an economic
Having outlined the
precedents relevant to fiduciary law generally, I will provide a focused case
analysis of fiduciary law cases
involving indigenous litigants. Finally, I will
answer the question, whether Australian courts can, given the current state of
law in this country, find a fiduciary relationship between the Crown
and Indigenous Australians.
OF AUSTRALIAN FIDUCIARY LAW
Fiduciary law is a difficult area of law, so the delineation of firm
underlying principles is a challenging endeavour. It has been
said that the
principles of fiduciary law have been characterised by ‘disagreement,
uncertainty and controversy.’
Indeed, Paul Miller, professor of law at the University of Notre Dame, contends
that the ‘dominant academic view is [that]
the fiduciary relationship is
indefinable.’
The High Court
of Australia has made similar comments. Dawson and Toohey JJ stated in
that ‘the law has not, as yet, been able to formulate any
precise or comprehensive definition of the circumstances in which
a person is
constituted a fiduciary in his or her relations with
Consequently, it
is no easy task to outline such principles with
However, it is possible
to provide a cursory outline of some of the fundamental and underpinning notions
of fiduciary law. In the
analysis that will follow, particular attention will be
given to the principles that are most relevant to the current inquiry; that
potential fiduciary obligation owed by the Crown to indigenous peoples. I
contend that the most important principles of the
fiduciary relationship in
Australia are: 1) the fiduciary undertaking and 2) the reposing of trust and
confidence in the fiduciary
and consequent power of that fiduciary. This second
principle can usefully be termed ‘reliance.’ Other ancillary
notions like vulnerability and the higher expectations placed on
fiduciaries flow from these two fundamental
principles.
Importantly, it is not the case that the presence of these two fundamental
principles unequivocally necessitates the finding of a
fiduciary relationship.
Indeed, sometimes one or more of these principles is missing, or other
principles are present, and a fiduciary
relationship will nonetheless
The most that can be said
is that the presence of these two principles
the existence of a
fiduciary relationship.
The Fiduciary Undertaking
James Edelman has spilt much ink on positing and defending his contention
that the fiduciary undertaking is a fundamental principle
of fiduciary law. For
Edelman, the fiduciary ‘undertaking to act in a particular manner’
is a necessary condition of
the creation of a fiduciary
relationship.
This is not a
novel argument. Mason J’s landmark decision in
Hospital Products Ltd v
United States Surgical Corporation
which, despite
being a dissenting judgment, has subsequently been applied in several later
fiduciary law cases, stated that the ‘critical
feature’ of the
fiduciary relationship is that the fiduciary ‘undertakes or agrees to act
for or on behalf of or in the
interests of another
The notion of the fiduciary undertaking is important and relevant to the
current inquiry because, if Edelman and Mason J are correct,
to find a fiduciary
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Australians, there must first be a
finding that the Crown has made
an undertaking to act in a fiduciary capacity
with respect to Indigenous Australians.
Settled fiduciary law concepts, such as the constructive trust, demonstrate
that such an undertaking need not be express and may be
imposed rather than
voluntarily assumed. Nonetheless, for a fiduciary relationship to be recognised
between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians, a notion of undertaking, implied
or express, actual or constructive, must be established. As will be explained
the notion of undertaking is fundamental in determining the nature and
scope of any potential fiduciary obligation owed by the Crown
to Indigenous
Australians.
Reliance: Trust and Confidence & Power
Another fundamental principle of the fiduciary relationship is the trust and
confidence that a beneficiary reposes in the fiduciary.
In another landmark
fiduciary law case,
United Dominion Corporation Ltd v Brian Pty
the notion of the
reposing of trust and confidence in the fiduciary was characterised as
‘necessary.’
necessary element has its origins in broader equitable principles. Equity, as
the mother of fiduciary law, has greatly influenced
the development of fiduciary
law principles. For example, the trustee-beneficiary relationship, a fundamental
relationship of equity,
was and is the archetypical example of the fiduciary
relationship.
relationship, the trustee, ‘determines whether, when, how, and how far the
beneficial interest of the
It is the power
of the trustee, with respect to the beneficiary’s interests, that imposes
the notion of trust and confidence.
The trust and confidence of the beneficiary,
on the one hand, and the power of the fiduciary, on the other hand, are two
the same coin. The power of the trustee necessitates the trust of the
beneficiary, and the trust reposed in the fiduciary is what
gives the fiduciary
his/her power. Again, this notion of power is contained in Mason J’s
oft-quoted dictum. He says the ‘critical
feature’ of the fiduciary
relationship is that the fiduciary undertakes to exercise ‘power or
discretion which will affect
the interests of another person in a legal or
practical sense.’
century American jurist Cardoza CJ remarked, that
‘the level of conduct for fiduciaries’ is to be ‘kept at a
level than that trodden by the
This dictum
provides an insight into both of the two fundamental principles of the fiduciary
relationship, outlined above. Cardoza
CJ’s ‘higher standard’
is a consequence of 1) the undertaking that the fiduciary makes and consequent
responsibility
he/she assumes and 2) the trust and confidence that the
beneficiary reposes in the fiduciary, who consequently holds power. In the
context of a potential fiduciary relationship between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians, these two fundamental principles arguably
already exist. Firstly,
the Crown, by virtue of its initial possession and retention of land or perhaps
by an implied assumption
of responsibility in relation to Indigenous Australians
more broadly, may be taken to have made an
undertaking.
Secondly, the power
of the Crown in relation to Indigenous Australians and the consequent trust and
confidence that Indigenous Australians
repose in the Crown, is also arguably
justifiable on colonisation grounds. Consequently, contemplating these two
principles it appears
that there is scope for the finding of a fiduciary
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Australians at the level of
Perhaps this is why other common law jurisdictions, such as Canada,
have been able to do so. Canada’s approach will be discussed
at length in
Nonetheless, as will be seen in the Australian context, this same
development is not as suitable at the level of precedent.
Fiduciary law precedents in Australia confine fiduciary obligations to
negative, as opposed to positive, duties and to the protection
of economic
rights, rather than personal or human
The barriers posed by
these broad precedents are exacerbated by the specific precedents that have been
established in cases where
indigenous litigants have unsuccessfully pleaded that
a fiduciary obligation was or is owed by the Crown.
AUSTRALIAN FIDUCIARY LAW PRECEDENTS
As has been seen, the task of reaching firm conclusions about the nature and
extent of fiduciary relationships in Australian law,
at the level of principle,
is a difficult task. This task is no less arduous at the level of precedent.
This is, in part, due to
the uncertainty that attends to this complex area of
law and the disparate views that Australian jurists have offered.
The following case law analysis is limited in scope. It will largely be
confined to the most prominent and pertinent High Court and
State Supreme Court
authorities. These include some of the several Australian cases that have
addressed broad fiduciary law principles
as well as a few cases that have dealt
explicitly with fiduciary law in relation to Indigenous Australians. A selection
cases will be used to come to some conclusions about the current state
of fiduciary law in this country.
Hospital Products
provides a good starting point for the analysis of Australian fiduciary law
precedents. Mason J stated that the ‘critical feature’
fiduciary relationship is ‘that the fiduciary undertakes or agrees to act
for or on behalf of or in the interests of
another person in the exercise of a
power or discretion which will affect the interests of that other person in a
legal or practical
As discussed, this statement of principle does not necessarily constitute a
barrier to the finding of a fiduciary relationship between
the Crown and
Indigenous Australians. However, the same cannot be said of other High Court
authorities.
Breen v Williams
whilst not a case brought by Indigenous Australians,
is an example of a
precedent that has, perhaps inadvertently, placed the finding of a fiduciary
relationship between the Crown and
Indigenous Australians further out of reach.
This case was concerned with whether a doctor owed a fiduciary obligation to his
to provide access to the patient’s medical records. Gaudron
and McHugh JJ clearly stated that, ‘the law of this country
does not ...
impose positive legal duties on the fiduciary to act in the interests of the
person to whom the duty is
This precedent,
relying on previous cases, expressly excluded from the notion of the fiduciary
duty, a positive duty to act in the
interests of a beneficiary. Consequently,
fiduciary obligations in Australia are confined to negative duties; that is
duties to refrain
from acting to the beneficiary’s detriment. In the
commercial context, an example of such a negative duty is the fiduciary
to obtain an improper profit or not to put oneself in a position of conflict.
The former is stated in
United Dominions Corporation Ltd v Brian Pty
as the ‘duty to
from pursuing, obtaining or retaining for itself or himself any
collateral advantage in relation to the proposed project without the
and informed consent of the
beneficiary.’
Paramasivam v Flynn
the Full Federal Court expressed reluctance to extend fiduciary obligations
beyond the protection of economic rights. In that case,
one of the legal issues
was whether the parental relationship was fiduciary in nature. Whilst the court
unsurprisingly found that
the parental relationship was protected by law
(criminal and family law), it did not go so far as to recognise the relationship
fiduciary in nature.
was, in part, due to the desire of the court to keep fiduciary relationships
confined to the economic sphere.
Stephen Gageler makes the interesting point that, in Australia, fiduciary law
is rightly confined to the sphere of commercial relationships
because whilst
there is an expectation of loyalty between fiduciaries in commercial dealings,
commercial relationships also demand
a measure of self-interest, subject, of
course to whatever contractual duties are imposed by the parties. Consequently,
in the commercial
context fiduciary ‘loyalty’ or good faith can be
limited by justifiable consideration of commercial self-interest. However
outside of the commercial context bright lines, that can confine the scope of
the fiduciary relationship, are more difficult to ascertain.
This is because
outside the commercial context any amount of self-interest in fiduciary
relations would likely be deemed ‘unacceptable’.
This fear of the
unlimited extension of the fiduciary relationship has acted as one of the
rationales for confining fiduciary law
to the commercial sphere and is an
obvious obstacle to the extension of fiduciary law into non-commercial areas
like indigenous rights.
This is perhaps why in ‘Anglo-Australian law the
interests which the equitable doctrines ... have hitherto protected are economic
interests.’
When it comes to Indigenous Australian cases
Mabo v The State of
a useful place to begin. The decision of Toohey J in
expressed the
opinion that the Crown owes a fiduciary obligation to Indigenous Australians. In
accordance with the latter of the two
fundamental fiduciary principles outlined
, Toohey J said that ‘the fiduciary relationship arises ... out
of the Crown to extinguish traditional title by alienating
The arguments contained in Toohey J’s decision were not echoed by the
rest of the bench in
nor in any subsequent cases. In fact, in
Peoples v The State of
dismissed the notion stating, ‘I am unable to accept that a fiduciary duty
can be owed by the Crown to the holders
of native title in the exercise of a
statutory power to alienate
Brennan J came to
this conclusion on the basis that the discretionary power granted by the
relevant statute to affect native title
interests precluded the finding of a
fiduciary obligation. The relevant discretion would lose its content if a
fiduciary obligation
that purported to limit that statutory discretion, was
superimposed on it. Consequently, he found that there was ‘no foundation
for imputing to the Crown a fiduciary
Several years later in
Cubillo and Gunner v Commonwealth
Full Federal Court declined to find a fiduciary duty owed to Indigenous
Australians.
was brought by Lorna Cubillo and Peter Gunner who
alleged that they had been forcibly removed from their families and taken to
‘aboriginal
institutions’ to be raised away from their communities,
tribes and culture.
case, the Full Federal Court found that the Crown did not owe a fiduciary duty
to Cubillo or Gunner on two separate bases.
Firstly, that the actions taken by
the Crown in that case were not shown to be outside of the powers granted by the
relevant statute.
If the conduct was not a breach of the statute, it could not
be a breach of any potential fiduciary duty, because ‘any fiduciary
obligation must accommodate itself to the terms of the
‘a fiduciary obligation cannot modify the operation or effect of statute:
to hold otherwise, would be to give equity
supremacy over the sovereignty of
Parliament.’
basis for declining to make a finding of a fiduciary relationship was consistent
with the reasoning in
Paramasivam
. Sackville, Weinberg and Hely JJ stated
that it would be improper to find that a fiduciary duty is owed in circumstances
common law, for example through the law of tort, already covered the
field in terms of the duties owed in the circumstances of any
relationship.
The closest that the Australian judiciary has come to finding a fiduciary
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Australians
has been in
Trevorrow v State of South Australia
case involved very similar facts to
, although in
the actions of the Crown were found not to comply with the obligations under the
statute and therefore the finding of a breach of
fiduciary obligation
open to the court, without the court having to overturn
at trial, awarded Bruce Trevorrow $525,000 in damages for the defendant’s
misfeasance in public office, negligence,
false imprisonment and breach of
fiduciary duty, stating that the fiduciary relationship arose by operation of
the relevant statute
which imposed duties of guardianship upon the State of
South Australia.
South Australia appealed this decision. The appellate court in
South Australia v
Lampard-Trevorrow
) found that, whilst the State of South Australia
had breached its statutory duty and therefore, remained liable for the tortious
claims, it was not liable under fiduciary law. The
did not comment on the existence of a fiduciary relationship but
stated that South Australia’s actions did not constitute a
breach of the
duties contained in any potential fiduciary
relationship.
This decision
seems to have marked the end of attempts, to plead the existence of a fiduciary
relationship between the Crown and
Indigenous Australians. Consequently, the
landscape of the precedents governing this area of law are not particularly
to indigenous litigants. As mentioned, at the level of principle,
there is more flexibility, however at the level of precedent, there
rigidity and Australian courts have been reluctant to find a fiduciary
obligation owed to Indigenous Australians.
Having outlined the principles and precedents that govern Australian
fiduciary law and its interactions with Indigenous Australians
possible to answer the question posed at the outset of this part: can Australian
courts recognise a fiduciary relationship
between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians?
AUSTRALIAN COURTS RECOGNISE A FIDUCIARY OBLIGATION?
The short answer to this question is that it is
unlikely unless there is a systemic or paradigmatic shift such as the
implementation
of indigenous constitutional recognition. Given the current state
of the principles and precedents of Australian fiduciary law it
is unlikely that
anything will change in the sphere of judicial decision-making.
It should be clear from the above analysis that there is a general reluctance
to extend the principles of fiduciary law. Gaudron and
McHugh JJ in
exemplified this reluctance when they stated, ‘in our view,
there is no basis upon which this Court can hold that Dr Williams
owed Ms Breen
a fiduciary duty to give her access to the medical records. She seeks to impose
fiduciary obligations on a class of
relationship which has not traditionally
been recognised as fiduciary in nature and which would significantly alter the
already existing
complex of legal
doctrines.’
reluctance is also evident in several of the aforementioned Australian
The two loose principles (undertaking and reliance) outlined above and more
importantly, the inherent uncertainty in Australian fiduciary
law principles
provides a potential avenue for alteration and extension of the fiduciary
relationship. As mentioned, the notion of
undertaking can be implied through an
interpretation of what responsibilities the Crown may have assumed upon
colonisation and the
notion of trust and confidence, as well as the consequent
power of the Crown, arguably flows from such a finding. Thus, at the level
principle, Australian courts may be able to extend the fiduciary relationship
into novel areas precisely because of a
principles.
However, there is
understandable reluctance to extend a principle that may subsequently be widely
and irresponsibly applied.
contrast, at the level of precedent, flexibility in fiduciary law is more
difficult to ascertain. As has been demonstrated, the
existing precedents in
this area of law make extension unlikely, if not impossible.
Following the current Australian legal precedents in this area, courts
cannot, in the absence of a substantial systemic change, such
as indigenous
constitutional recognition, recognise a fiduciary duty between the Crown and
Indigenous Australians. The current state
of the relevant precedents means that
the recognition of a fiduciary relationship between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians will
not be achieved through novel interpretation of existing
precedents but rather will require a more concerted reform project. A
comparative
analysis with the Canadian jurisdiction, which has recognised
indigenous rights and treaties in its constitution, will explain that
same course is taken in Australia in relation to constitutional recognition,
there may be a possibility for the extension
of the fiduciary law to include the
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Australians.
– Fiduciary Law in Canada
In this part, I will outline the current state of Canadian
fiduciary law principles and precedents. I will demonstrate that Canadian
principles and precedents in the area of fiduciary law are distinct from those
of the Australian legal system. Most relevantly, the
confining of fiduciary
relationships to the commercial or economic sphere, a hallmark of Australian
fiduciary law, has been rejected
in Canada. To establish the relevance of
certain precedents, I will provide another case law analysis, highlighting the
cases in Canada that found that a fiduciary relationship existed
between the Crown and Indigenous Canadians. As will be seen in
fiduciary relationship found to exist in Canadian law, relies heavily on
constitutional justification, in particular s 35(1) of
the Canadian
constitution.
In this part, I
will also discuss how Canadian courts have come to interpret s 35(1) of the
Canadian constitution, in the years following
the Canadian Supreme Court
decision in
R v Sparrow
FIDUCIARY LAW GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND PRECEDENTS
In the Canadian context, as in Australia, there are several important cases
that are relevant to any inquiry into the current state
of Canadian fiduciary
law and how it deals with Indigenous Canadians. These cases have largely been
decided in the Supreme Court
of Canada. This part is not intended to be an
exhaustive analysis of all the relevant precedents in the area of Canadian
law but rather a focused survey of the fiduciary law cases in Canada
that will assist in comparing Canada’s approach with the
approach taken in
The first important Canadian fiduciary law decision is
This case was
other parent to have access to their children.
The Court rejected the argument
that a fiduciary relationship existed, but the dissent of Wilson J was to become
influential in later
cases in the years that followed. Wilson J, in contrast to
the majority, rejected the notion, still the orthodox position in Australia,
that fiduciary duties could only protect economic interests. He stated that it
‘would be arbitrary in the extreme’ for
fiduciary law to protect
material interests but ‘afford no protection to human and personal
interests.’
Wilson J pointed to English authorities to justify his
He cited, among others,
a House of Lords decision,
Attorney-General.
involved an English soldier who served in Egypt during the war. The soldier was
given favourable treatment by the local
Egyptian guards because he wore an
English army uniform. The soldier used this favourable treatment to obtain a
profit by smuggling
items across borders. The court found that the soldier owed
the Crown a fiduciary duty and was liable to account for profits. Wilson
that the interest that had been infringed by the soldier’s actions was not
a strictly legally recognised interest but
was nonetheless protected by
fiduciary law principles. He said, ‘the Crown’s interest was a
practical or even a moral
one, namely that its uniform should not be used in
corrupt ways.’
Wilson J’s dissent is particularly relevant to the comparative inquiry
being undertaken in this article because, as has been
confining of fiduciary law to the economic or commercial sphere represents a
significant barrier to the finding of a fiduciary
relationship between the Crown
and Indigenous Australians. Wilson J’s dissent in
Frame v Smith
well as his citation of English jurisprudence, was dealt with in detail by
McLachlin J in a later case,
This case was concerned with a doctor-patient relationship. Dr Wynrib induced
Ms Norber to engage in sexual activity with him in exchange
for prescription
drugs. In this case the Supreme Court found that a fiduciary relationship
existed between the parties and that Dr
Wynrib had breached his fiduciary duty
by his unconscionable conduct.
In making this finding McLachlin J discussed Wilson J’s dissent in
Frame v Smith
, stating ‘that fiduciary duties are not confined to
the exercise of power which can affect the legal interests of the beneficiary,
but extend to the beneficiary’s vital non-legal or practical
interests.’
McLachlin J
went on to state ‘that [the present case] is not concerned with the
protection of what has traditionally been regarded
as a legal interest. It is,
however concerned with the protection of interests, both societal and personal,
of the highest
importance.’
McLachlin J
also went on to affirm Wilson’s statement that the protection of economic
interests, without protection of ‘human
or personal interests would ... be
arbitrary in the extreme.’
He stated that the ‘principles alluded to by Wilson J in
are principles of general application ... they are capable of
protecting not only narrow legal and economic interests but can also
defend fundamental human and personal
interests.’
In relation
to the confining of fiduciary law to economic interests McLachlin J stated that,
the ‘closed, commercial view
of fiduciary obligations is neither defended
nor reconciled with the authorities, including those of this
Interestingly, Australian courts have rejected the notion that a fiduciary
relationship exists between a doctor and patient. In
Breen v Williams
question was whether a patient had the right to access their own medical records
on the basis that a fiduciary obligation was
owed to a patient by his/her
doctor. This argument was rejected; however, the court also took the opportunity
to state, in line with
existing authority, that fiduciary relationships are
confined to the commercial sphere. Dawson and Toohey JJ stated that a fiduciary
obligation may arise where a doctor places ‘himself in a position with
potential for a conflict of interest - if, for example,
the doctor has a
financial interest in a hospital or a pathology
laboratory.’
However, as
the facts of the case and the particulars of the purported breach lacked any
commercial element, the court decided not
to find a fiduciary relationship
between doctor and patient. Arguably, the same result would have been found if
Norber v Wynrib
before an Australian court, because that case also lacked any commercial
element. It was concerned primarily with a ‘moral’
breach rather
than a commercial one. This points to the different ways in which Canadian
courts have conceived of fiduciary relationships
compared with Australian
Wilson J’s dissent in
Frame v Smith
was also approved by Sopinka
and La Forest JJ in
LAC Minerals Ltd v International Corona
concerned duties of confidentiality between potential joint venturers. Important
commercial information was disclosed during
negotiations and the question for
the court was whether the parties owed fiduciary obligations, including a duty
of confidentiality,
to one another. Whilst the question in this case
economic or commercial in character, it nonetheless elucidated some fundamental
principles and importantly once again affirmed Wilson
J’s dissent. Sopinka
and La Forest JJ approved of the enunciation of the principles of fiduciary law
found in Wilson J’s
After applying these
principles to the case before them, they concluded that the categories of
fiduciary relationships are not closed
but should be ‘reserved for
situations that are truly in need of the special protection that equity
As the following
analysis will demonstrate, the relationship between the Crown and Indigenous
Canadians was decided by the courts
to be one such situation.
LAW AND INDIGENOUS CANADIANS
Any discussion of the legal and equitable rights of Indigenous Canadians
needs begin with a discussion of s 35(1) of the Canadian
constitution. This
section has been very influential in the furtherance of indigenous rights in
Section 35(1) of the
Constitution
provides that ‘the existing aboriginal and
treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are hereby recognized and
This simple yet
powerful provision of the Canadian constitution has been instrumental in the
furtherance of indigenous rights in
Canada, including the Canadian judicial
system’s recognition of a fiduciary relationship between the Crown and
Indigenous Canadians.
constitutional imperative should be borne in mind, throughout the case law
analysis that will form the bulk of this section.
The landmark case in this area of fiduciary law is
Guerin v The
involved the surrender of native land to the Crown by a group of Indigenous
Canadians on certain terms that were to be agreed
by the parties. However,
during the transaction the Crown withheld information relevant to the
transaction and in doing so secured
more favourable
One question for
determination was whether the Crown owed a fiduciary duty to native title
holders and if so whether the Crown’s
conduct was in breach of that duty.
The Supreme Court of Canada found that there
a fiduciary obligation
owed by the Crown. The decision was based primarily on s 18 of the
Section 35(1) of the
Canadian constitution, which, as will be seen, played a pivotal role in later
cases, did not feature in this
landmark case. Rather this decision justified the
finding of a fiduciary relationship with reference to statute. Specifically,
Section 18(1) of the Indian Act confers upon the Crown a broad discretion in
dealing with the surrendered land ... after the Crown's
agents had induced the
Band to surrender its land on the understanding that the land would be leased on
certain terms, it would be
unconscionable to permit the Crown simply to ignore
these terms. Equity will not countenance unconscionable behaviour in a fiduciary
whose duty is that of utmost loyalty to his principal. ... the Crown breached
the fiduciary obligation it owed to the Band and it
must make good the loss
suffered in consequence.
Whilst constitutional factors were not considered in this case, subsequent
justified on constitutional grounds. The two most
relevant cases of this sort were
R v Sparrow
was concerned with the constitutional validity of an
enactment that purported to infringe on the rights of a group of Indigenous
The law purported to make it unlawful for persons to fish with a net
larger than a prescribed size. The question for the court was
whether this
provision was inconsistent with s 35(1) of the Canadian constitution and
therefore invalid by virtue of the operation
of s 52(1) of the Canadian
constitution. Section 52(1) states ‘the
Constitution
of Canada is the
supreme law of Canada, and any law that is inconsistent with the provisions of
Constitution
is, to the extent of the inconsistency, of no force or
The court invalidated the impugned law and made a finding that a fiduciary
relationship existed between the Crown and Indigenous Canadians.
stated that s 35(1) of the Canadian constitution requires the government
‘to act in a fiduciary capacity with respect
to aboriginal peoples and so
import some restraint on the exercise of sovereign
This notion echoes
the comments of Dawson J in
Mabo v The State of Queensland (No
when he stated,
whilst undertaking a comparative analysis with respect to Canada, that the
‘responsibility [to act in a fiduciary
capacity] is said to arise out of
the Crown’s historic powers over, and assumption of responsibility for,
those aboriginal
peoples and out of the recognition and affirmation of existing
aboriginal rights contained in s. 35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution
Relatedly, the court in
R v Sparrow
also grounded its finding of a
fiduciary relationship on the unique status of indigenous peoples and the
Crown’s historic assumption
of power and responsibility. The Court said
sui generis
nature of Indian title and the historic powers and
responsibilities assumed by the Crown constitute the source of ... a fiduciary
obligation. ’
went on to say that,
the government has the responsibility to act in a fiduciary capacity with
respect to aboriginal peoples. The relationship between
the government and
aboriginals is trust-like, rather than adversarial and the contemporary
recognition and affirmation of aboriginal
rights must be defined in light of
this historic relationship.
R v Sparrow
established a fiduciary relationship between the Crown and
Indigenous Canadians and subsequent cases adopted and applied the test
to invalidate other acts of the Crown that purported to infringe
upon indigenous rights. In this way, aboriginal rights have taken
prominence in the Canadian legal system. As
protection of aboriginal rights has the capacity even to bind the Parliament.
was a very similar case to
R v Sparrow
. It involved
an Indigenous Canadian who was charged with an offence of fishing without a
license. This license was ‘only available
on application for the exercise
of ministerial
discretion.’
The question
for the court was whether this administrative decision-making process was
inconsistent with s 35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution
. The court concluded
‘that the regulations did not provide sufficient direction to those
exercising the discretion to fulfil
the Crown’s fiduciary duty to the
aboriginal peoples.’
CJ stated that ‘in light of the Crown’s unique fiduciary obligations
towards aboriginal peoples, Parliament may
not simply adopt an unstructured
discretionary administrative regime which risks infringing aboriginal
He continued that
if the Parliament purports to do so, ‘the statute will be found to
represent an infringement of aboriginal
, especially the former,
foundation for the constitutional analysis that would become orthodox in
constitutional invalidity matters related to indigenous
Now that it was been demonstrated that a fiduciary relationship between the
Crown and Indigenous Canadians was found by Canadian courts
to exist, it will be
useful to look at how this finding was refined in later constitutional cases.
Particular attention will be given
to how s 35(1) has been interpreted.
have Canadian courts interpreted s 35(1)?
This section will analyse the relevant case law that has interpreted s 35(1)
of the Canadian constitution. It will be seen that, with
the exception of
Guerin v The Queen
courts deciding indigenous rights cases invariably employed s 35(1) to justify
and rationalise their decisions to find a fiduciary
relationship between the
Crown and Indigenous Canadians. As has been seen, this is most obvious in
and in fact, later cases applied what became known as the
test, to determine the constitutional validity of laws and
regulations that purported to infringe upon indigenous rights. However,
in later cases also, paradoxically, used the principle that the Crown owed
indigenous peoples a fiduciary obligation (which
was justified by s 35(1) in
R v Sparrow
) to inform the content and scope of the interpretation of s
35(1). As will be seen, it is possible to 1) use constitutional justification
to find the existence of a fiduciary relationship, as was done in
, and 2) use the fiduciary relationship (justified on constitutional
grounds) to inform the constitutional interpretation that follows.
interpretative actions are not mutually exclusive.
The Sparrow test
The test formulated in
R v Sparrow
was used to determine the
constitutional validity, with reference to s 35(1), of an impugned law. The test
has three limbs; 1) whether
the practice, custom or tradition, that is
purportedly infringed, is an existing aboriginal right, 2) if so, whether the
law constitutes a
prima facie
infringement of that right and 3)
if so, whether the
prima facie
infringement is
The third limb of the
test, namely the ‘justification limb’ consists of two further limbs.
Firstly, whether the government
in imposing the infringement, was acting
pursuant to a valid legislative objective and secondly, and most relevantly for
purposes, whether the infringement is consistent with the fiduciary duty
owed by the Crown to Indigenous
This test was
subsequently applied in three important cases:
R v Van der Peet
R v NTC Smokehouse
R v Van der Peet
concerned s 27(5) of the
British Columbia Fishery
(General) Regulations.
These regulations purported to infringe on the right
of indigenous peoples to sell fish on a non-commercial basis. The court found
that the right to sell fish, was an existing aboriginal right (the first limb)
and that the regulation purported to infringe on that
right (second limb) and
that the regulation was unjustified because it was not consistent with the
fiduciary obligations that the
Crown owed to Indigenous Canadians (third limb).
Consequently, the law was found to be of no force and effect pursuant to s 52(1)
of the Canadian
Constitution
by virtue of its inconsistency with s 35(1) of the
Constitution
Throughout its reasoning the court stated that; ‘because of [the]
fiduciary relationship ... treaties, s. 35(1) and other statutory
constitutional provisions protecting the interests of aboriginal peoples, must
be given a generous and liberal
interpretation.’
‘generous and liberal interpretation’ does however, have its limits.
The court also stated that s 35(1),
does not oust the federal power to legislate with respect to aboriginals, nor
does it confer absolute rights. Federal power is to
be reconciled with
aboriginal rights by means of the doctrine of justification. The federal
government can legislate to limit the
exercise of aboriginal rights, but only to
the extent that the limitation is justified.
R v NTC Smokehouse
similar factual matrix to the previous case and the court came to a similar
conclusion. The first two limbs were made out
easily. In relation to the third
limb of the test, whether the infringement was justified, the court imported a
purposive notion
stating that, the law, as well as being consistent with the
fiduciary duty of the Crown, must also ‘establish that [it] was
for a compelling and substantial
This served to
give greater clarity to the notion of the ‘valid legislative
objective’ contained in the
R v Gladstone
applied the same test but found that the impugned law in
that case was not inconsistent with s 35(1) and was therefore not
constitutionally
invalid. This case imported a notion of proportionality asking
if there had been ‘as little infringement as possible in order
the desired result.’
The court found that the infringement was proportionate and therefore
constitutionally valid.
notion of proportionality further refined the
test providing
greater certainty in relation to matters of constitutional validity by virtue of
inconsistency with section 35(1)
of the Canadian
Constitution
These cases from
, and the myriad of cases
that I have not mentioned here, serve to outline the orthodox interpretation
that Canadian courts have given
to constitutional inquiries involving s 35(1).
It has been seen that the fiduciary relationship found to exist in
finds justification in s 35(1) but also informs how s 35(1) is to be
interpreted when it comes to inquiries about the constitutional
validity of
enactments. On the one hand s 35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution
, requires the
government ‘to act in a fiduciary capacity with respect to aboriginal
peoples and so import some restraint on
the exercise of sovereign
However, on the
other hand, the interpretation that courts have given to s 35(1) involves an
inquiry about whether the law is consistent
with the fiduciary obligation
already found to be owed by virtue of,
Canadian courts have successfully found that the Crown owes a broad fiduciary
duty to Indigenous Canadians. This has not been accomplished
in Australia. This
part has demonstrated that Canadian courts have freed themselves from the narrow
economic view of the fiduciary
obligations and have been able to broaden
fiduciary principles to the recognition of indigenous rights. It has also
provided some
examples of how s 35(1) has been interpreted in light of the
that the Crown owes a fiduciary obligation to
Indigenous Canadians.
The private law of fiduciary obligations and the public law of constitutional
recognition and interpretation need not be confined
to separate and distinct
areas of operation. The current state of the law in Canada attests to this fact.
By highlighting some of
the benefits and limitations of the Canadian approach, a
useful model for dealing with these issues in Australia can be ascertained.
will outline what Australia can learn from Canada when it comes to recognising
a fiduciary relationship between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians.
– Reform Inquiry
CAN AUSTRALIA LEARN FROM CANADA?
The most relevant lesson that Australian courts can draw from the Canadian
experience is that indigenous constitutional recognition
may facilitate the
protection of indigenous rights. One manifestation of this potential protection
may be the effect that indigenous
constitutional recognition could have on the
extension of fiduciary law principles. This extension might consist of the
recognition
of a special relationship between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians.
R v Sparrow
is a significant Canadian decision that supports
this contention. Dickson CJ and La Forest J state in that case, ‘that the
words "recognition and affirmation" incorporate the fiduciary relationship
referred to earlier and so import some restraint on the
exercise of sovereign
They go on to
say, ‘that recognition and affirmation requires sensitivity to and respect
for the rights of aboriginal peoples
on behalf of the
government.’
Interestingly, in the same judgment Dickson CJ and La Forest J state that the
recognition of a fiduciary relationship, first achieved
Guerin v The
‘grounds a general guiding principle for s
Consequently,
it appears that although s 35(1) is used as
justification
for the finding
of a fiduciary relationship in
R v Sparrow
, it is also true that in
Guerin v The Queen
, the court found that a fiduciary relationship existed
between the Crown and Indigenous Canadians independent of any constitutional
justification. The fiduciary finding was then subsequently used to inform or
‘ground’ the interpretation of the words
‘recognised and
affirmed’ in s 35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution
. So, whilst it may be
inaccurate to assert that constitutional recognition in Canada
the courts finding a fiduciary relationship (because such a relationship
had already been found to exist in
Guerin v The Queen
independent of any
constitutional justification) it is nonetheless accurate to state that
constitutional recognition in Canada played
a part in defining the content and
scope of that fiduciary relationship. In fact, in contrast to
Guerin v The
, constitutional recognition in some cases, namely
R v Sparrow
as justification for the finding of a fiduciary
relationship.
It has been seen that the Canadian approach to the finding of a fiduciary
relationship was based, at least as evidenced by
on indigenous
constitutional recognition. The recent argument in the Australian polity over
what form such recognition could and
should take in Australia, goes to the heart
of what consequences would flow from that recognition and how effective it would
achieving its goals. One thing to keep in mind when dealing with these
issues, is that any constitutional recognition would not involve
a process of
‘creation’ but rather would involve ‘recognition’ of
existing well-established indigenous rights
This is clarified
by the use, in s 35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution
, of the word
‘existing.’ Whatever form indigenous constitutional recognition in
Australia may take, the Canadian approach
demonstrates that it need not be
complicated in order to achieve substantial developments. Indeed, s 35(1) of the
Canadian constitution
is very simple in its wording. It states, ‘the
existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples of Canada are
hereby recognized and
words have altered the legal landscape in Canada dramatically, especially in the
area of fiduciary law. The significant
impact that this simple provision has
made, supports the argument that indigenous constitutional recognition in this
country need
not be extravagant. With minimal constitutional intervention,
courts in Australia through a natural and organic process of constitutional
interpretation, may alter the legal landscape with respect to indigenous rights,
including in the fiduciary law space.
There is obvious and understandable fear about how significant any changes in
this area might be if constitutional recognition were
to gain traction and be
implemented through a referendum. The notion that nothing would change if
indigenous constitutional recognition
were successful is inaccurate. The
potential changes to many areas of law including property, contract,
administrative law and of
course fiduciary law could be significant. This is
because, if indigenous constitutional recognition was implemented, litigants in
legal actions involving indigenous rights would likely seek to justify their
legal positions on constitutional grounds citing the
newly implemented
indigenous constitutional recognition as justification. The consequences of this
are unknowable. It is the ‘unknown’
associated with law reform that
incites scepticism, reluctance, and fear. This scepticism represents a
significant barrier to
Scholars have called s 35(1) of the Canadian
Constitution
‘a force that
changes everything.’
similar constitutional amendment in Australia, recognising the rights and
interests of Indigenous Australians, could be similarly
described. Peter Grose
has dryly remarked that constitutional recognition is ‘not something used
to maintain the status
The fear of
alteration of the status quo is perhaps accentuated by the liberal
interpretation that Canadian courts have given to
s 35(1). In
R v Van der
, the court stated that ‘because of [the] fiduciary relationship
... treaties, s. 35(1) and other statutory and constitutional
protecting the interests of aboriginal peoples, must be given a
generous and
interpretation
The notion of generous and liberal constitutional interpretation is capable of
inciting fear. However, Australia, having the benefit
of assessing the situation
in Canada, can draw on that experience and devise suitably Australian ways of
dealing with and interpreting
indigenous constitutional recognition. This may
serve to limit or extend its application where necessary.
Whist reform in this area will likely effect significant change, the idea
that constitutional recognition, however construed, will
result in an
impermissible and unprincipled extension of existing legal and equitable
principles currently governing indigenous rights
may also be inaccurate and
exaggerated. Canadian courts when recognising the relevance of s 35(1) for the
protection of indigenous
rights and the finding of a fiduciary relationship,
where quick to place limitations on its application. For example, after Dickson
CJ and La Forest J in
R v Sparrow
stated that s 35 ‘imports some
restraint on the exercise of sovereign power.’ They went on to say in the
very next sentence
that the ‘rights that are recognised and affirmed are
not absolute. Federal legislative powers continue.’ The mechanism
been employed in Canada to limit the unprincipled and uncontrolled extension of
indigenous rights is the constitutional
doctrine of justification. This doctrine
states that federal legislative power will only be rendered invalid if its
purported exercise
represents an unjustified infringement of aboriginal rights.
Using this doctrine, Canadian courts have been able to exercise a supervisory
role over legislative action with respect to Indigenous Canadians by balancing
competing interests. This balancing exercise employs
criteria like whether the
legislative act is pursuant to a valid legislative objective or whether it is
consistent with the fiduciary
duty owed by the Crown to indigenous peoples.
In the Australian context a similar doctrine could be employed. Historically,
Australian courts have preferred the doctrine of proportionality
determining the constitutional validity of existing laws or
regulations.
The concept of
proportionality is similar to the concept of justification, in that they are
both directed towards an analysis of
the impugned law to determine its validity
from a quasi-normative point of
Both concepts allow the
court to employ their powers to limit or extend interpretation of any
potentially unconstitutional law to
facilitate development of the law in line
with community and societal expectations.
One scholarly opinion that has addressed the fear and reluctance surrounding
indigenous constitutional recognition and its implications
has suggested that a
useful way forward is to characterise any indigenous constitutional recognition
in a limited fashion. Kirsty
Gover has suggested that indigenous constitutional
recognition and any fiduciary relationship that is subsequently found to exist
should be construed as nothing more than providing the ‘rules of
engagement.’
reforms could then be used simply ‘to urge the parties to deal with one
another reasonably and in good faith and to comment
on instances of procedural
unfairness.’
approach would serve to limit the application of any constitutional or fiduciary
law reforms by placing limits on their application
at the outset. This approach
would also quell fears that have been voiced about the creation in Australia of
positive fiduciary obligations,
which have not yet been
recognised by Australian
Currently, Australian fiduciary law confines the obligations owed by
fiduciaries to negative duties. Even if fiduciary law principles
were extended
to include a special relationship between the Crown and Indigenous Australians,
this fundamental principle, of fiduciary
obligations being confined to negative
obligations, could be safeguarded through clear judicial interpretation.
Although Canada has
extended fiduciary law to a great extent, recognising a
fiduciary relationship in Australia does not mean that the extension of
principles needs to be as extensive as in Canada. Ensuring that any
proposed extension does not purport to impose positive duties
on the fiduciary
is another way to limit the application of any potential extension of fiduciary
law that might arise as a consequence
of indigenous constitutional recognition.
This may or may not be possible, depending on the specific wording of the
proposed constitutional
recognition. It is therefore difficult to predict how
limiting indigenous fiduciary duties to negative duties would work in practice
before any actual indigenous constitutional recognition is implemented.
Nonetheless, a broad potential model for what extension of
existing fiduciary
principles may look like, will be proposed in the third section of this
One’s view of the judiciary and one’s faith in the justices of
our High Court will inform one’s opinion about whether
these suggestions
are permissible safeguards or
A defence or critique of
the High Court’s ‘judicial activism’ in the last 50 to 100
years would be able to inform
a response to this question but that is most
certainly not a task that will be undertaken in this article. What can be said
and its implications and consequences has been broadly
SCOPE AND CONTENT OF THE RECOGNITION
If constitutional recognition were to result in the extension of Australian
fiduciary law to recognise a fiduciary obligation owed
by the Crown to
Indigenous Australians, the content and scope of that relationship would need to
be clearly defined, so far as it
is possible given the indefinable and elusive
nature of the fiduciary
relationship.
demarcations would help to quell fears, previously mentioned, about the
unprincipled and uncontrolled extension of fiduciary
law principles.
As has been discussed, it would be prudent to confine any fiduciary
relationship to include only negative duties, in line with existing
fiduciary law principles. This would require the Crown to refrain from acting to
the detriment of indigenous peoples in
the making of laws and in administrative
decision making that affects indigenous peoples but would not impose any
positive duty on
the Crown to act for the benefit of indigenous individuals or
groups. Such a model would be less susceptible to uncontrolled extension
would remedy fears about the potentially detrimental implications that a lack of
confinement might have on the fundamental principles
and doctrines of the
fiduciary law and our legal system, more broadly.
Confining any potential fiduciary relationship to negative duties would be a
useful limitation but would nonetheless allow for significant
protection of
indigenous interests. Scholars have argued that a potential fiduciary
relationship between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians should recognise and
protect indigenous autonomy and
self-government.
proposal to be successfully initiated and implemented, recognition of the
existing organisational systems of indigenous
cultures would need to be
widespread. A lack of knowledge and respect for indigenous systems and cultural
mores would de-legitimise
any attempt to protect indigenous
self-government.
something of this magnitude concerted efforts from various disciplines would be
required. Education would be a useful
starting point but more fundamentally
mutual respect between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians would need to
ground any efforts.
Questions of how to heal the wounds of the past and to begin
to seek out a unified future is well and truly a task that goes beyond
academic sphere. Nonetheless, indigenous self-government represents a useful
conceptual starting point for beginning to inform
the content of any potential
fiduciary obligation that might be found to exist.
Specifically, the content of the
potential fiduciary obligation would include a notion that the Crown would be
required to act in
a fiduciary capacity with respect to Indigenous Australians
when it comes to legislative or administrative infringements on existing
aboriginal rights or interests that directly affect indigenous individuals or
groups. This could be further refined to apply only
to situations where a right
of autonomy or self-government is concerned. Even if the content of the
potential fiduciary obligation
were confined only to these types of situations,
there would already be substantial changes in the way indigenous interests are
and protected in Australia.
The proposed content of any obligation is not very informative unless a
can be placed on that obligation. As has already been
mentioned, confining the scope of any potential fiduciary relationship could
managed effectively by the courts in their process of judicial interpretation of
discrete questions of fact and law upon application
to the court by an affected
party. It is impossible to give any specific answers when it comes to the scope
within which courts will
confine any potential fiduciary duty. Much will depend
on the court hearing the particular matter, the particularities of the judge
judges hearing that matter and the facts of the particular case. However, as has
been said, the constitutional principle of justification
or a notion of
proportionality are useful limiting factors. The doctrine of proportionality
could be employed by judicial decision
makers with respect to purported
infringements upon indigenous rights and interests by virtue of a breach of the
fiduciary duty owed
by the Crown. This would provide some certainty about the
scope of any potential fiduciary obligation. For example, if purported
of fiduciary obligation were permissible on public policy grounds or on the
grounds that such measures were justified or
proportionate to the aim being
sought, then courts would have principled justification for dismissing those
purported breaches as,
for example, reasonable administrative action or on
grounds of parliamentary sovereignty. In employing this kind of
quasi-constitutional
interpretative structure with respect to potential breaches
of fiduciary obligation, courts would be able to reconcile any potential
fiduciary obligation with notions of parliamentary sovereignty and
representative government.
As has been said, the precise content and scope of any potential fiduciary
relationship that could arise as a consequence of indigenous
constitutional
recognition is unknowable. The above analysis merely consists of a few ideas
that could usefully be employed when
thinking about what a potential fiduciary
relationship would look like.
There are some important lessons that can be taken from the Canadian
experience when it comes to indigenous constitutional recognition
content and scope of any potential fiduciary relationship that could be found as
a consequence. Indigenous constitutional
recognition, if not a direct cause of
the finding that Canadian courts have made about the existence of a fiduciary
relationship
between the Crown and indigenous Canadians, has certainly been
useful in determining the content of that fiduciary relationship.
If indigenous
constitutional recognition can be successfully implemented in Australia, the
chances of finding a fiduciary relationship
between the Crown and Indigenous
Australians are enhanced. What the relationship would look like is a difficult
question to answer.
In this part, I have sought to provide some general
principles about the content and scope of such a relationship. The normative
inquiry about whether such constitutional or fiduciary recognition is a
‘good’ or a ‘bad’ development or
reform is a question
for another time and another author. Opinions about that inquiry will depend on
a myriad of interdisciplinary
questions. Such questions are outside of the scope
of this article. What can be said with a degree of certainty is that the
in Canada, with respect to indigenous constitutional recognition and
fiduciary law extension, provides a case study for Australia
to learn from in a
real and tangible way.
Jeremy Bentham reportedly once stated that ‘the power of the lawyer is
the uncertainty of the law.’ It is common ground
that the rule of law
relies on the certainty of the law by which people are to be bound.
Consequently, uncertainty in the law, whilst
providing lawyers with potency,
leaves citizens impotent against arbitrary government. For this reason,
certainty is a desirable
ideal towards which our legal system should strive but
something that can be as elusive as it is desirable, and as fragile as it
stabilising.
As has been seen, in this area of law, uncertainty abounds. The future will
hopefully bring clarification to many of the issues raised
in this article. I
have argued and defended the notion that if indigenous constitutional
recognition is successful in Australia,
the fiduciary law may be one means by
which indigenous rights and interests can be protected.
Edward Coke’s words, mentioned at the outset of this article and for
which he risked losing his head, were in a certain sense,
a push for greater
certainty in the 15
Century English legal system. His courageous
contribution in that historical moment, has arguably provided significant
benefits for
future generations, including today’s generation. However,
today presents us with other challenges. Arbitrary and tyrannical
governance,
akin to King James I’s rule, are not immediate and pressing issues in this
country, but rather other matters, equally
important, require our attention and
action. The healing of past wounds that have been inflicted on Indigenous
Australians represents
one of these pressing issues. The ideas contained in this
article about how constitutional recognition and fiduciary law may be used
avenues for redress for Indigenous Australians, can serve to facilitate a
continuing process of reconciliation, healing and progress.
Indigenous constitutional recognition is a topical issue today and many
proffer opinions, from a moral point of view, about the benefits
and detriments
of its success. This article represents a short and focused analysis of some of
the legal issues that the moral arguments
of public figures on all sides of the
debate might benefit from keeping in mind. This article, in some sense, is a
prediction of
the future. Only time will tell if its questions, inquiries,
analyses, and conclusions are accurate. Its legitimacy and relevance,
all academic literature, will be a matter for history to judge.
Geoffrey Robertson,
Tyrannicide Brief
(Vintage Books, 2005), 26.
Augusto Zimmermann, ‘Sir
Edward Coke and the Sovereignty of the Law’
[2017] MqLawJl 7
(2017) 17(1)
Macquarie Law
James Edelman, ‘When Do
Fiduciary Duties Arise?’
Law Quarterly Review
Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical Corporation
(1984) 156 CLR
United Dominions Corporation
Ltd v Brian Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 49
(1985) 157 CLR 1
Hospital Products Ltd v
United States Surgical Corporation
(1984) 156 CLR 42, 96.
Breen v Williams
186 CLR 71, 113.
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489
Lionel Smith, ‘Fiduciary
Relationships: Ensuring the Loyal Exercise of Judgement on behalf of
Law Quarterly Review
Paul Miller, ‘The
Fiduciary Relationship’ in Andrew Gold and Paul Miller (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Fiduciary law
(Oxford University Press,
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 92.
Stephen Gageler,
‘Expansion of the Fiduciary Paradigm into Commercial Relationships: The
Australian Experience’ in Peter
Devonshire and Rohan Havelock (eds),
The Impact of Equity and Restitution in Commerce
(Hart Publishing,
Oxford, 2018), 165, 168.
James Edelman, ‘When
Do Fiduciary Duties Arise?’
Law Quarterly Review
310; James Edelman, ‘The Importance of the Fiduciary Undertaking’
(Speech delivered at the Conference on Fiduciary Law,
University of New South
Wales, 22 March 2012)
<https://www.supremecourt.wa.gov.au/_files/UNSW%20Conference%20of%20Fiduciary%20Law%2022%20Mar%202013%20Edelman%20J.pdf>.
James Edelman, ‘The
Importance of the Fiduciary Undertaking’ (Speech delivered at the
Conference on Fiduciary Law, University
of New South Wales, 22 March 2012)
<https://www.supremecourt.wa.gov.au/_files/UNSW%20Conference%20of%20Fiduciary%20Law%2022%20Mar%202013%20Edelman%20J.pdf>.
James Edelman, ‘When
Do Fiduciary Duties Arise?’
Law Quarterly Review
Hospital Products Ltd v United States Surgical
Corporation
(1984) 156 CLR 42.
James Edelman, ‘The
Role and Status of the Law of Obligations: Common Callings, implied terms and
lessons for fiduciary duties’
(Speech delivered at the University of
Alberta and DePaul University Conference, Chicago, 18 July 2013).
United Dominions
Corporation Ltd v Brian Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 49
(1985) 157 CLR 1
Stephen Gageler,
‘Expansion of the Fiduciary Paradigm into Commercial Relationships: The
Australian Experience’ in Peter
Devonshire and Rohan Havelock (eds),
The Impact of Equity and Restitution in Commerce
(Hart Publishing,
Oxford, 2018), 165, 166.
Paul Miller, ‘The
Fiduciary Relationship’ in Andrew Gold and Paul Miller (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Fiduciary law
(Oxford University Press,
2014), 65, 78.
Hospital Products Ltd v
United States Surgical Corporation
(1984) 156 CLR 42, 96.
Meinhard v Salmon
(1928) 546.
Mabo v State of
Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
, 166 (Dawson J).
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 113;
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489
Hospital Products Ltd v
United States Surgical Corporation
(1984) 156 CLR 42.
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71.
United Dominions
Corporation Ltd v Brian Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 49
(1985) 157 CLR 1.
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489.
Mabo v The State of
Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
Wik Peoples v The State
of Queensland
(1996) 187 CLR 1.
Cubillo and Gunner v
Commonwealth
[2001] FCA 1213
(2001) 112 FCR 455.
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489.
Cubillo and Gunner v
Commonwealth
[2001] FCA 1213
(2001) 112 FCR 455
Tito v Waddel (No 2
Cubillo and Gunner v
Commonwealth
[2001] FCA 1213
(2001) 112 FCR 455
Trevorrow v State of
South Australia
(2007) 98 SASR 136.
State of South Australia
v Lampard-Trevorrow
[2010] SASC 56
(2010) 106 SASR 331.
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 110.
Stephen Gageler,
‘Expansion of the Fiduciary Paradigm into Commercial Relationships: The
Australian Experience’ in Peter
Devonshire and Rohan Havelock (eds),
The Impact of Equity and Restitution in Commerce
(Hart Publishing,
Oxford, 2018), 165, 181.
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 110;
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489
Cubillo and Gunner v Commonwealth
[2001] FCA 1213
(2001) 112 FCR 455
South Australia v Lampard-Trevorrow
[2010] SASC 56
(2010) 106 SASR 331
R v Sparrow
Canada Act 1982
c 11, sch B, s 35(1) (‘
Constitution
Frame v Smith
Attorney-General
[1951] UKHL 1
[1951] AC 507.
Frame v Smith
Norber v Wynrib
[1992] 2 SCR 226.
Ibid 283-284.
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 94.
Norber v Wynrib
[1992] 2 SCR 226.
LAC Minerals Ltd v
International Corona Resources
[1989] 2 SCR 574.
Kirsty Gover, ‘The
Honour of the Crowns: State-Indigenous Fiduciary Relationships and Australian
Exceptionalism’
[2016] SydLawRw 16
(2016) 38(1)
Sydney Law Review
Canada Act 1982
c 11, sch B, s 35(1).
R v Sparrow
Mabo v The State of Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Guerin v The Queen
[1984] 2 SCR 335.
, RSC 1952,
Guerin v The Queen
[1984] 2 SCR 335
R v Sparrow
Canada Act 1982
c 11, sch B, s 52(1).
R v Sparrow
Mabo v State of
Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
R v Sparrow
Ibid 104-105.
Guerin v The Queen
[1984] 2 SCR 335.
R v Sparrow
R v Van der Peet
[1996] 2 SCR 507.
R v NTC Smokehouse Ltd
[1996] 2 SCR 672.
R v Gladstone
R v Van der Peet
[1996] 2 SCR 507
Ibid [231].
R v NTC Smokehouse Ltd
[1996] 2 SCR 672.
R v Sparrow
R v Gladstone
[1996] 2 SCR 723
R v Sparrow
R v NTC Smokehouse Ltd
[1996] 2 SCR 672
R v Sparrow
Ibid 1109 & 1119.
Benjamen Franklen Gussen,
‘A Comparative Analysis of Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal
Peoples’ (2017) 40(3)
Melbourne University law Review
Canada Act 1982
(UK) c 11, sch B, s 35(1).
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 110;
Paramasivam v Flynn
[1998] FCA 1711
(1998) 90 FCR 489
State of South Australia v Lampard-Trevorrow
[2010] SASC 56
(2010) 106 SASR 331
Peter Grose,
‘Developments in Recognition of Indigenous Rights in Canada: Implications
for Australia’
(1997) 4(1)
James Cook University Law Review
R v Van der Peet
[1996] 2 SCR 507
McCloy v New South
[2015] HCA 34
(2015) 257 CLR 178
JT International SA v Commonwealth
[2012] HCA 43
, [337]-[338];
Maloney v The Queen
[2013] HCA 28
; 252 CLR 168,
Beverley McLachlin,
‘Proportionality, Justification, Evidence and Deference: Perspectives from
Canada’ (Speech delivered
to the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Judicial
Colloquium, 24 September 2015),
<https://www.hkcfa.hk/filemanager/speech/en/upload/144/Proportionality,%20Justification,%20Evidence%20and%20Deference%20-%20Perspectives%20from%20Canada.pdf>,
Benjamen Franklen Gussen,
‘A comparative Analysis of Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal
Peoples’ (2017) 40(3)
Melbourne University law Review
1, 37; Lisa
Di Marco, ‘A Critique and Analysis of the Fiduciary Concept in
[1994] MelbULawRw 19
(1994) 19(4)
Melbourne University Law Review
Kirsty Gover, ‘The
Honour of the Crowns: State-Indigenous Fiduciary Relationships and Australian
Exceptionalism’
[2016] SydLawRw 16
(2016) 38(1)
Sydney Law Review
Camilla Hughes,
‘The Fiduciary Obligations of the Crown to Aborigines: Lessons from the
United States and Canada’
[1993] UNSWLawJl 6
(1993) 16(1)
University of New South Wales
Law Journal
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 113.
Peter Grose,
‘Developments in Recognition of Indigenous Rights in Canada: Implications
for Australia’
(1997) 4(1)
James Cook University Law Review
Kirsty Gover, ‘The
Honour of the Crowns: State-Indigenous Fiduciary Relationships and Australian
Exceptionalism’
[2016] SydLawRw 16
(2016) 38(1)
Sydney Law Review
Paul Miller, ‘The
Fiduciary Relationship’ in Andrew Gold and Paul Miller (eds),
Philosophical Foundations of Fiduciary law
(Oxford University Press,
Breen v Williams
(1996) 186 CLR 71, 92.
Camilla Hughes,
‘The Fiduciary Obligations of the Crown to Aborigines: Lessons from the
United States and Canada’
[1993] UNSWLawJl 6
(1993) 16(1)
University of New South Wales
Law Journal
Peter Grose,
‘Developments in Recognition of Indigenous Rights in Canada: Implications
for Australia’
James Cook University Law Review
Lisa Di Marco, ‘A
Critique and Analysis of the Fiduciary Concept in
[1994] MelbULawRw 19
(1994) 19(4)
Melbourne University Law Review
Camilla Hughes,
‘The Fiduciary Obligations of the Crown to Aborigines: Lessons from the
United States and Canada’
[1993] UNSWLawJl 6
(1993) 16(1)
University of New South Wales
Law Journal
, 92 and 94.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (566 KB)
PDF format (492 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter