URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Middleton, Tom --- "ASIC's Director Disqualification Power Under Section 206f of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) - Regulatory Problems and Suggested Reforms" [2023] JCULawRw 5; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 71
ASIC’s Director Disqualification Power Under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) – Regulatory Problems and
Suggested Reforms
Dr Tom Middleton*
ASIC has an administrative (non-judicial) power under
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) to disqualify a person from managing a
corporation (for up to five years).
Section 206F
is intended to assist ASIC to
achieve its regulatory objectives in
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission Act 2001
(Cth) of protecting and promoting the
confidence of Australian business participants (including investors and
creditors) and enforcing
the corporations legislation efficiently and
cost-effectively. However, s 206F, in its current form, does not promote those
objectives particularly because there are many uncertainties about
the interpretation of the language used in s 206F and these problems
resolved on a case-by-case basis. Section 206F should be redrafted in clearer
terms so that ASIC has a clearer and a more
efficient and effective power to
disqualify directors where their conduct in relation to the corporation's
failure makes them unfit
to be corporate managers.
I Introduction
ASIC has an administrative (non-judicial) power under
Corporations Act 2001
Corporations Act 2001
to prevent persons, who are unfit to act as directors, from managing
corporations
(for up to five
years). ASIC can exercise this power if within seven years before ASIC issued
the notice of the disqualification
hearing, the person has been an officer of
’two’ or more corporations, and while that person was an officer, or
12 months after that person ceased to be an officer of those
corporations, each of those corporations was wound up on the ground
insolvency. ASIC’s power under
can only be exercised where the
liquidator has lodged a report under
Corporations Act
Section 206F
is intended to enable ASIC to quickly restrain particular
conduct, or to quickly prevent a person from operating in the relevant
sector, thereby protecting the public from the potential harm that may otherwise
be caused by allowing a continuation of
while evidence is gathered
for possibly protracted court proceedings at other levels of the enforcement
ASIC’s director disqualification power under
alternative to ASIC’s power to apply to the court for a disqualification
under other provisions such
Corporations Act 2001
Section 206F
procedurally less complex
court action and gives ASIC (rather than the court) the power to make the final
disqualification order.
Section 206F
was intended by Parliament to be a quick and cheap alternative
to court action.
Section 206F
intended to assist ASIC to achieve its public interest regulatory objectives in
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
) of protecting and promoting the
confidence of Australian business participants (including investors and
creditors) and enforcing
the corporations
legislation
efficiently and
cost-effectively and with a minimum of procedural requirements.
Cost-effectiveness has been identified by Baldwin
as one of the benchmarks of
effective regulation.
However, it is argued in this article that s
does not promote those
regulatory objectives particularly because there are many uncertainties about
the interpretation of the language
used in s 206F and these problems have to be
resolved on a case-by-case basis. The problem concerning the interpretation of s
is exacerbated by the fact that proceedings for a judicial review (on the
ground of an error of law) of ASIC’s disqualification
decision under s
206F can be commenced in the Federal Court or in the different State or
Territory Supreme courts (exercising vested
The Federal Court
and the courts of the different States or Territories are not bound by each
other’s decisions. There are
also a number of examples of inconsistent
decisions between the courts of the different States in the context of
interpreting the
corporations
legislation.
The Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT) also has jurisdiction to conduct a merits review of
ASIC’s disqualification decision.
In making that decision the AAT has also
been required to resolve issues relating to the interpretation of s
These jurisdictional
issues indicate that legislative reform would better promote a uniform approach
to ascertaining the meaning
and scope of s 206F, rather than the present
case-by-case approach.
The current problems with the drafting of s 206F encourage legal
entrepreneurship
affected persons (the persons who may be the subjects of the disqualification
order) may commence costly and protracted
collateral litigation concerning the
uncertainties in the law regarding the interpretation of s 206F to promote their
own private
interests, rather than the public interest.
The reforms suggested in this article would reduce the need for collateral
litigation about the interpretation of s 206F, as has occurred
in cases like
ASIC v Murdaca
Bolton v ASIC.
cases involved numerous appeals to the AAT and Federal Court resulting in
considerable additional costs and delay in implementing
ASIC’s original s
206F disqualification decisions. Notably in
Bolton v ASIC
[2023] AATA
the AAT made the comment that ‘The proceedings have a lengthy
history. They arise out of a delegate’s reviewable decision
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) on 6 October 2015 to disqualify Mr Bolton
from managing corporations for three years.’
According to some commentators, ASIC’s disqualification power in
also imposes too many ‘legislative hurdles and
preconditions’ for its effective
It is argued that
should be redrafted in clearer terms so that ASIC
has a clearer and a more efficient and effective power to disqualify directors
where their conduct in relation to the corporation's failure makes them unfit to
be corporate managers.
II Preconditions to ASIC’s Disqualification Hearing
Two or More Failed Corporations
ASIC’s disqualification power under
can only be used in those
cases where there are at least ‘two’ corporate failures involving
the same officer.
Section 206F
does not adequately prevent or deter phoenix
activity because the precondition or threshold of ‘two’ means that
be used in the first resurrection of the failed
commentators suggest that ASIC should also have the power under
disqualify directors in cases involving ‘first-time’ corporate
In the context of a ‘first-time’ corporate failure, ASIC could
apply to the court for a disqualification order under
for a contravention
of the civil penalty provisions, such as the directors’ duties provisions
Corporations Act 2001
or the insolvent trading
provision in
of that Act. However, such a court application is more
costly and protracted in comparison to ASIC’s administrative
disqualification
proceedings under
Was Wound Up
There has also been doubt about the meaning of the words ‘was wound
In particular there has been doubt about whether those
words mean the date on which the corporation was first placed into liquidation
and the winding up begins, or whether those words mean ‘fully wound
up’ and only refer to the date when the winding up
is complete or
finished. Under the first interpretation ASIC could take action to protect the
public under
at the earliest possible date against all potential
officers of the corporation who may have been responsible for its collapse even
though the winding up process is ongoing and is not finalised. By contrast, if
ASIC had to wait until the corporation was fully wound
up before it could take
action under
, then ASIC could only take action against a limited
group of officers who continued to hold office at that point in time, or who
were officers in the 12 months prior to that point in time. This interpretation
would mean that ‘ASIC could not take swift
action to protect the public
nor could it take action, at least under
, against all potential officers
of the corporation who may have been responsible for the failure of the
corporation.’
An amendment that clearly defines the words ‘was wound up’ to mean
‘the date on which the corporation was first
placed into liquidation and
the winding up begins’ would prevent repeated litigation in the courts and
the AAT about the same
interpretation issues. This definition would better
promote ASIC’s regulatory objectives in s 1(2) of the
promoting more timely regulatory intervention.
III Public or Private Hearing?
Section 206F
Corporations Act 2001
is silent on whether
ASIC’s director disqualification hearings must be conducted in public or
private. This means that, in
such cases, ASIC has a discretion under s 52(1) of
Section 52(2) provides that in determining whether a hearing should take
place in public or private, ASIC shall have regard to:
(a) whether the evidence is of a confidential nature or relates to the
commission of an offence;
(b) any unfair prejudice to a person's reputation that would be likely to be
caused if the hearing took place in public;
(c) any public interest in a public hearing; and
(d) any other relevant matter.
Section 53(2) empowers ASIC to direct that the hearing take place in
private where, having regard to the matters referred to in s
52(2), that is
As a general rule, the common law favours the open administration of justice
by way of public hearings. Publicity is the very soul
of justice and contributes
to the integrity of the decision-makers, thereby promoting public scrutiny and
public confidence in the
independence and fairness of the decision-making
However, the case law also indicates that private hearings may contribute to
the administration of justice by allowing the issues
to be determined informally
and expeditiously. They encourage openness and they may allow matters to be
discussed that the parties
may be otherwise reluctant to raise at a public
hearing. They may also be less intimidating for the affected
If ASIC decided to hold a s 206F hearing in public, the affected person could
attempt to delay the hearing process by seeking a review
of that decision by the
Federal Court under
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act
AD(JR) Act’
) on the ground of an error of
law. For example, the affected person may argue that ASIC has failed to take
into account a relevant
consideration under s 52(2) of the
such a case, the affected person could also apply to Federal Court for a
non-publication or suppression order pending the outcome
of that review.
Section 37AF
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
that the Federal Court may make a non-publication or suppression order
prohibiting or restricting the disclosure of the
identity of the party or
witnesses to the proceedings.
Section 37AE
provides that when deciding
whether to make such an order, the Federal Court must take into account that the
primary objective of
the administration of justice is to safeguard the public
interest in open justice.
applications involve further costs and delays and do not promote the regulatory
objectives underpinning s 206F.
By contrast,
s 920A(2)(a)
Corporations Act 2001
provides that
ASIC’s banning hearings (to determine whether a person should be banned
from providing financial services) must
be conducted in private. There is no
clear justification for this inconsistency regarding mandatory private hearings
and the option of public or private hearings under
administrative hearings are similar in nature and serve similar
regulatory purposes (of protecting the public). The concerns and
interests of
the affected persons (such as potential reputational harm and loss of
employment) are the same in both types of hearings.
The public interest in giving ASIC the power to make administrative director
disqualification orders under
must be balanced with the need to protect
the private interests of affected persons who may be the subject of those
Section 206F
should be amended so that ASIC is required to hold such
hearings in private. This would eliminate the risk of any unfair prejudice
the affected person’s personal and business reputation that would be
likely to be caused if the hearing took place in public.
The public interest in
informing and protecting investors and creditors is still promoted by a private
hearing. This is because when
private hearing is completed, and
ASIC decides to make a disqualification order, ASIC’s disqualification
decision then becomes
public by way of ASIC making an entry in its register of
disqualified directors and other
This register may be
IV ASIC’s Notice of the Disqualification Hearing
Once the preconditions to the operation of
s 206F(1)(b)(i)
requires ASIC to give the affected persons a notice in the
prescribed form (Form 5249) of the disqualification hearing. Form 5249
the affected persons to show cause why they should not be disqualified from
managing corporations.
ASIC’s obligation to give the affected person a notice of the hearing is a
statutory device for achieving procedural fairness
or natural justice which ASIC
is bound to observe at its disqualification
Formal Requirements for a Valid Notice
Form 5249 requires ASIC to identify its ‘areas of concern’
that person should be disqualified (and to attach the supporting documentation
on which those concerns are
also requires some additional disclosures to be made in
the notice. For example, s 57(1) of the
requires the notice to
specify the place and time of the hearing. Section 57(3) also provides that the
notice should set out the
affected person's right to make written submissions to
ASIC in lieu of a personal appearance at the hearing.
Section 59(2)(c) of the
provides that ASIC is required
to observe the rules of natural justice or procedural fairness at the
disqualification hearing. Accordingly,
ASIC’s notice of the
disqualification hearing must also meet the requirements of those rules.
The fact that the words ‘areas of
concern’ in Form 5249 are not defined and have an imprecise meaning,
and the broad content
of the rules of natural justice, mean that there are a
plethora of grounds (based on either a ‘defect in form’ or a breach
of natural justice) which the affected person could use to challenge the
validity of ASIC’s notice of the disqualification
If there is a significant or material ‘defect in form’, the
notice may be challenged by way of judicial review on the
ground that ASIC has
not acted within its statutory power to issue
ASIC's decision to
issue a notice that contains a material ‘defect in form’ may be
reviewable under s 5(1)(e) of the
on the ground of an improper exercise of power or abuse of power. If
ASIC’s notice does not comply with the rules of natural
ASIC’s decision to issue that notice could be reviewed under
s 5(1)(a) of the
on the ground of a breach of those
An additional problem is that the courts have adopted two approaches to
determining whether the formal requirements for a valid notice
have been met.
Generally speaking, the first approach to ‘form’ dictates that the
notice is valid if it appears regular
on its face. There is no obligation on the
issuer of the notice to set out in the notice or elsewhere the justification for
the notice or the purpose for which it has been
This approach favours
the public interest underpinning ASIC’s regulatory powers as it affords
the recipient of the notice very
few grounds on which to challenge the validity
of the notice. This approach also promotes the public interest in protecting the
public and creditors because it assists ASIC to obtain immediate
compliance and to quickly conduct the disqualification hearing.
The second approach to ‘form’ involves a number of additional
implied disclosure requirements. As a general rule, to be
formally valid under
this second approach to ‘form’, the regulator’s notice must
disclose the purpose for which
it was issued, the relationship between any
information sought and the matter that the regulator is pursuing to assist the
to determine whether the regulator is acting within its statutory
power and whether the information sought does relate to that
This approach favours
the recipient of the notice because it requires ASIC to provide more information
in its notices.
There is no clear judicial authority about which of the two approaches to
‘form’ will prevail in relation to Form 5249.
The uncertainties in the law have meant that the formal and natural justice
requirements of ASIC’s notices have to be resolved
on a protracted and
costly case-by-case basis.
For example, in
ASIC v Murdaca
[2008] FCA 1399
affected person challenged the validity of ASIC’s notice of the
disqualification hearing because it failed to
specify the preconditions for the
s 206F hearing. The court held that s 206F and Form 5249 did not require any of
the preconditions
for the issue of a notice under that section to be stated in
the notice.
The courts have indicated that, provided that ASIC complies with the
requirements of Form 5249, the fact that a relevant matter is
not stated in the
notice will not, of itself, provide a ground for excluding consideration of that
matter at the subsequent disqualification
hearing. The s 206F notice is merely
the initial way by which ASIC notifies the affected person of certain matters
relating to the
subsequent hearing. ASIC’s obligation to follow proper
procedures at the hearing is distinct from its obligation to issue a
notice of that hearing. Accordingly, ASIC may consider matters at the hearing
that were not stated in the s 206F notice provided
that ASIC (before making a
final decision about whether to make a disqualification order) complies with the
rules of natural justice.
This means that ASIC must give the affected person all
of the material that is relevant to ASIC’s final decision and afford
person a reasonable opportunity to respond to, make submissions on, and call
evidence in relation to, that
Further uncertainty about the formal requirements of ASIC’s
disqualification notice may be created by s 59(1) of the
requires ASIC to conduct the hearing with little formality and technicality.
Section 59(1) only applies to ASIC’s administrative
hearings and it does
not apply to ASIC’s other powers to issue notices, such as its
investigative powers to issue notices to
and notices to attend for
an oral examination.
59(1) suggests that perhaps the formal requirements for ASIC’s
disqualification notices (Form 5249) are not as strict
as for its notices to
produce books or its oral examination notices.
As a general rule, where a person is charged with a breach of the law, full
particulars of the charge should be given to that
In a court proceeding
the defendant could successfully object where there has been a departure from
the exact terms of the charge.
This principle may not strictly apply to
ASIC’s disqualification hearings in view of the requirement in
s 59(1) of the
that the hearing is to be conducted with
little formality and technicality. Subsequent events may necessitate the
widening of the
scope of ASIC's hearing. Arguably, ASIC’s notice of the
disqualification hearing will be valid as long as it complies with
the rules of
natural justice (as required by s 59(2)(c) of the
) by setting
out in broad terms what is alleged against the affected person. The rules of
natural justice would require that, if there
is a departure at the
disqualification hearing from the matters set out in the notice that genuinely
catches the affected person
by surprise, that person should be granted an
adjournment to deal with that
Section 206F
Corporations Act 2001
should be amended by
including a provision that specifies a brief and exhaustive list of the
disclosures that are required to be
made in ASIC’s notice of the
disqualification hearing. The words ‘areas of concern’ in
Form 5249 should be given
a more precise meaning so that those words refer
(consistent with the rules of natural justice) to the critical issues or factors
relating to the fitness or competence of a person to manage corporations.
Section 206F
should also be amended so that it imposes a statutory obligation on
ASIC (consistent with the rules of natural justice) to disclose
in the notice of
the disqualification hearing any adverse and credible material that is relevant
and significant to ASIC’s
proposed disqualification decision so that the
affected persons are given an opportunity to address these matters at the
ASIC should also be
required (by an amendment to
to identify in the notice of the
disqualification hearing the powers and functions upon which it relies to ensure
that the affected
person is informed that ASIC is acting within its statutory
These reforms would assist to ensure that ASIC’s hearing staff (who
prepare and issue the notices of disqualification hearings)
address such matters
in the notice. This would provide more information to the affected persons and
dissuade such persons from making
applications for judicial review on grounds
such as a ‘defect in form’ or a breach of the rules of natural
justice. This
would achieve greater certainty in the law, reduce the need to
resolve such issues on a case-by-case basis, and save time and cost
ASIC and the affected persons, thereby promoting more effective regulation.
Time Within Which Notice Must Be Issued
Section 206F
fails to specify the time frame within which ASIC must issue the
notice of the disqualification hearing. This has resulted in challenges
validity of ASIC’s decisions to issue the notices resulting in additional
costs and delay. In
Heerey J indicated that,
given the protective nature of ASIC’s disqualification power, ASIC must
issue the notice to the affected
person within a reasonable time of ASIC having
received the liquidator’s report. This approach also assists to ensure
the affected person is not kept in an ‘indefinite state of
uncertainty’
possible disqualification.
One problem is that the question of what is a reasonable time is difficult to
resolve and it must be determined on a case-by-case
basis. It is a question of
fact depending on the circumstances of the case. According to Heerey J, while
the affected person’s
and the relevant corporation’s affairs may be
complex, ASIC should be in a position to make a decision about whether to issue
the notice with reasonable promptness. This is because ASIC does not
‘start from
ASIC does have the benefit of the liquidator’s report and the liquidator
will usually be able to provide ASIC with further
information upon
However, in
the court held that if
notice of the disqualification hearing is given under
period of seven years after the lodging of the liquidator’s report (that
first triggered ASIC’s disqualification
power), ASIC’s subsequent
disqualification decision may be valid. In such a case, any lapse of time is
only one of a range
of discretionary factors that is relevant to both the
exercise of ASIC’s disqualification decision and the attainment of the
required satisfaction that a disqualification order is justified. Where the
notice is issued within the seven-year period, as stated
above, any lapse of
time (such as the delay between the winding up of the corporations and
ASIC’s disqualification decision)
is not a pre-condition or bar to the
exercise of ASIC’s disqualification power, but is simply a discretionary
factor to be
taken into account. The weight, if any, to be given to any period
of delay is a matter for ASIC’s delegate (who conducts the
disqualification hearing)
determine in light of all of the relevant circumstances in the particular case.
ASIC’s disqualification power under
is not subject to any
implied requirement that it must be exercised within any shorter period than the
seven years immediately preceding
the giving of the
ASIC is not required to
act any more promptly or quickly than within the express seven-year time limit
The approach adopted in
Kardas v ASC
means that ASIC should issue the
notice with ‘reasonable promptness’ before that director becomes
involved in new business
enterprises. From a public interest regulatory
perspective, the problem with the approach in
Kardas v ASC
ASIC’s decisions to issue the notices may be subject to numerous
challenges on the ground that the notice was not issued
within a reasonable
There are a wide variety of scenarios in which ASIC’s decision to issue
the notice could be challenged on the ground that more
than a reasonable time
has elapsed. In any such collateral litigation the onus is on ASIC to adduce
evidence to explain what activity
occurred during the delay period, or the
reason for inactivity during that delay
ASIC may have a wide
range of plausible explanations for any delay. This is because when deciding
whether to issue the notice, ASIC
must consider all matters known to it that are
relevant to the ultimate decision about whether to disqualify the affected
For example, as
discussed below, whether the ‘two’ or more failed corporations are
‘related’ is a relevant
consideration. If there is uncertainty about
whether the relevant corporations are related which causes delay in both issuing
notice of the disqualification hearing and the final resolution of the
matter, such uncertainty provides a reasonable explanation
In some cases ASIC may have a reasonable explanation for the delay in issuing
the notice such as where the director failed to keep
adequate records and the
liquidator had insufficient funds to conduct a thorough investigation into the
collapse. The absence of
adequate information and the complexity of the
corporation’s affairs may mean that ASIC requires additional time to
whether it should issue the
Where ASIC has received two liquidators’ reports in relation to
corporations in which the relevant person was a director, it
may be reasonable
for ASIC to delay its decision about whether to issue the notice to that person
until it determines whether any
further liquidators’ reports will be
lodged in respect of other corporations in which that person was also a
director. This
approach enables ASIC to make a properly informed decision about
whether to issue the notice. By contrast, where liquidators' reports
already been lodged with ASIC in respect of several corporations in which the
relevant person is a director, it is not reasonable
for ASIC to delay issuing
the notice until it determined whether liquidators' reports would be lodged in
relation to two other corporations
in which that person was a
The precondition or threshold under
that the affected person must be
an ‘officer’ of two or more failed corporations may be met by
including cases where
the affected person is a deemed director (a de facto
director or a shadow
of a failed corporation.
Corporations Act 2001
does not impose any
obligation on liquidators to report to ASIC that there may have been deemed
This means that, in
some cases, where the affected person is not a properly appointed (or de jure)
director of the relevant failed
corporations, ASIC may have to investigate the
matter (pursuant to s 13(1) of the
) to determine whether the
affected person was a deemed director of those corporations. In such a case, it
would be reasonable for
ASIC to postpone its decision about whether to issue a
notice of a s 206F disqualification hearing until the outcome of that
investigation
To avoid collateral litigation about whether ASIC has issued the notice
within a reasonable time and the associated costs and delays,
s 206F should be
amended by adopting the approach in
Culley v ASIC
. Under this
approach ASIC’s notice of the hearing is prima facie valid if it is given
within the period of seven years after
the lodging of the liquidator’s
report (that first triggered ASIC’s disqualification power). This approach
better promotes
the public interest underpinning ASIC’s disqualification
power by ensuring that the matter will be resolved by the conduct
ASIC’s hearing. The private interests of the affected persons are still
protected by the fact that they will have the opportunity
to make submissions at
that subsequent hearing to ASIC about why the disqualification order should not
be made. For example, ASIC
would not make a disqualification order at the
subsequent hearing if the affected persons could show that commercial factors
their control, rather than incompetence, caused the failure of the
relevant corporations.
V Factors Relevant to Whether ASIC’s Disqualification
Order is Justified
Section 206F provides that in determining whether a disqualification
order is justified, ASIC must consider whether any of the insolvent
corporations
were related to one another. Section 206F also provides that ASIC may consider
the affected person's conduct in relation
to the business, property, or
management of any corporation; whether the disqualification would be in the
public interest (including
the protection of persons who deal with corporations
from conduct involving breaches of duty and recklessness and the need to
professional management standards); and ‘any other matters that
ASIC considers appropriate.’
General Deterrence
Section 206F does not expressly include the need to promote general
deterrence as a relevant consideration when ASIC is determining
disqualification order is justified. This leaves room for an argument that
ASIC’s decisions under s 206F involve
an error of law under s 5 of the
on the ground that ASIC has taken into account an irrelevant
consideration (such as general deterrence). Arguably the need to promote
“general deterrence” would impliedly fall within the ‘catch
all’ provision in s 206F(2)(b)(iii) which states
that when considering
whether a disqualification order is justified, ASIC may take into account
‘any other matters that ASIC
considers appropriate.’ It may be that
those words will be interpreted by the courts more restrictively to exclude the
to promote ‘general deterrence’ by applying the rules of
statutory interpretation, such as the ejusdem generis rule.
Alternately, the
courts may interpret those general words more broadly to include the need to
promote ‘general deterrence’
in view of ASIC’s public interest
regulatory objectives in
s 1(2) of the
and the remedial protective nature of ASIC’s financial
services and credit regulation
Some AAT and Federal Court decisions now indicate that the need to promote
general deterrence must be taken into account in deciding
disqualification order should be made and, if so, the duration of that
The AAT has indicated
that the need to promote general deterrence, of itself, may justify a
disqualification order under s
The reason why ASIC should consider general
deterrence in deciding whether to make a disqualification order under s 206F
and, if so,
the duration of that order is that general deterrence:
(a) discourages other directors from breaching their professional
obligations;
(b) assists to ensure that directors conform to exacting standards of honesty
thereby meeting the expectations of the commercial world;
(c) reduces the risk of substantial financial loss being incurred by the
The express omission of ‘general deterrence’ from s 206F
encourages legal entrepreneurship which, in turn, involves costly
and protracted
collateral litigation in the different administrative and judicial forums
challenging whether ‘general deterrence’
should be taken into
account. The express recognition of the need to promote general deterrence in s
206F would eliminate such litigation.
Such an amendment would also better
recognise and promote the protective purpose of s 206F.
Support for such a reform is found in
s 16A(2)(ja)
(Cth) which expressly provides that, in the context of deciding upon
the sentence to be imposed for a Commonwealth offence, the court
must take into
account the general deterrent effect that the proposed sentence may have on
other persons.
Section 16A(2)(ja)
was inserted in 2015 to provide greater
certainty in the law.
Liquidator’s Report
The liquidator’s report (issued pursuant to
Corporations Act 2001
) triggers ASIC’s disqualification power under
regardless of the content of that
expressly require ASIC to consider the liquidator’s report in deciding
whether a disqualification order is justified.
Whether ASIC has an implied
obligation to consider those reports, and the accuracy of those reports, is not
In some cases, the affected persons have argued that ASIC must satisfy itself
before it issues the notice
of the disqualification hearing under
Some AAT and Federal Court
decisions indicate that ASIC is not required to investigate the truth of the
information contained in
the liquidator’s report when it appears to be
regular on its face and comply with the requirements of
ASIC is entitled
to expect that the liquidators have acted bona fide when preparing their reports
and that their views, as stated
in their reports, are genuinely held. The
liquidators are not required to have reasonable grounds for those
The latter point is understandable because the purpose of the
liquidator’s report is to simply forewarn ASIC about potential
‘delinquent or aberrant
behaviour.’
liquidator’s report promptly alerts ASIC about potential problems within
the corporation that may require subsequent investigation
by ASIC (pursuant to s
13(1) of the
) to determine whether suspected contraventions have
occurred (as reported by the
liquidator).
Those suspected
contraventions could become the subject of future enforcement action by ASIC at
any level of the enforcement pyramid
regardless of the outcome of any s 206F
proceedings.
Some AAT and Federal Court decisions indicate that when deciding whether a
person should be disqualified, ASIC could, at the subsequent
disqualification hearing, consider the correctness of the liquidator’s
report but ASIC is not required to consider that
matter when it issues the
notice of the disqualification hearing. If it were otherwise, there would be
endless challenges to the
validity of the liquidators’ reports and this
would render s 206F
unworkable.
To promote the public interest in giving ASIC a broad power to conduct a
disqualification hearing, s 206F should be amended to expressly
state that ASIC
is not required to consider the accuracy of the liquidator’s report as a
precondition to ASIC’s decision
to issue the notice of the
disqualification hearing. However, to promote the private interests of the
affected persons, s 206F should
also expressly provide that where ASIC places
reliance on the liquidator’s reports at the subsequent s 206F hearing, it
required to assess the accuracy/correctness or ‘worth’ of those
reports when deciding whether a disqualification order
under s 206F is
Related Corporations
ASIC is required by s 206F(2)(a) to consider whether the failed or
insolvent corporations are related to each other and whether the
failure of the
corporations should be treated as several separate failures, or as the failure
of one overall business
This requirement is
imposed to ensure that the director’s failures do not appear worse than
they are just because the affairs
of a single failed business enterprise are
carried on through several corporations, rather than one
corporation.
The requirement that ASIC consider whether the insolvent corporations are
related means that ASIC can assess the reasonableness or
otherwise of the
directors’ conduct and, the need to protect the public, by considering
whether that conduct occurred in the
context of one set of factual
circumstances, events or transactions between those related corporations. If the
conduct occurred within
the one set of circumstances within a corporate group,
this may mean that the seriousness or gravity of the directors’ conduct
may be less because there is no continuous pattern of failure or non-compliance
between different corporations or
businesses.
Corporations Act 2001
provides that a
corporation is ‘related’ to another corporation where it is a
holding corporation of that other corporation,
or a subsidiary of that other
corporation, or a subsidiary of a holding corporation of that other
corporation.
Corporations Act 2001
provides that a corporation is subsidiary of
another corporation only if that other corporation controls the composition of
corporation’s board, or controls more than fifty percent of the
voting shares, or holds more than half of the issued capital
of the first
corporation.
Despite the statutory definition of a ‘related’ corporation, it
is not clear whether that definition applies to
For example, in
Aghili v ASIC
at [11]–[12] the AAT indicated that, even though the
corporations in that case were not related for the purposes of
not determinative. According to the AAT, in deciding whether a disqualification
order was justified, regard could be given
to the fact that the corporate group
was ’holistic’ in nature or ‘operated as a single unitary
commercial operation’
in a practical sense and that the failure of those
corporations was the result of a single action, namely the appointment of an
administrator.
Similarly in
Gilbert v ASIC
the AAT indicated that corporations may be related where they are related
operationally (rather than established for distinct business
purposes), or where
they are a part of the one business
By contrast in
JYWV v ASIC
at [33] and
the AAT indicated that
whether corporations are related for the purpose of
interpreted in accordance with
Corporations Act 2001
not according to broader concepts, such as whether they have common connections
in terms of directors and activities.
Section 206F
should be amended to make it clear that the narrower concept of
related corporation in
This would prevent collateral
litigation about which test applies. It may also give ASIC a broader
disqualification power under
The private interests of the affected
persons are still protected under such a reform because they still have the
opportunity to
make submissions at the disqualification hearing about why ASIC
should not make a disqualification order.
Section 206F
does not expressly give ASIC any guidance about the consequences
that may flow from ASIC’s conclusion that the relevant corporations
related to one another.
Grossman v ASIC
at [36] the AAT indicated that ASIC may make a
disqualification order under
if it is ‘justified’ even though
the relevant corporations were related because in that case there were still two
failures of other unrelated corporations, within the relevant time
Guss v ASIC
at [13] and [14] the
AAT indicated that even if the relevant corporations were related to one
another, that would not deprive ASIC
or the AAT of the ability (or jurisdiction)
to be satisfied that a disqualification order is
In some cases the AAT has indicated that the question of whether any of the
relevant corporations are ‘related’ is matter
which must be taken
into account by ASIC but is not, of itself, determinative of whether the
affected person should be disqualified
It is just one of a
wide range of matters to be considered by
To provide greater clarity, and given that the courts are not bound by
decisions of the AAT,
should be amended to expressly provide that where
ASIC decides that the relevant corporations were related, such a finding does
deprive ASIC of the power to make a disqualification order where such an
order is justified based on all other relevant factors.
Directors’ Duties
Section 206C
Corporations Act 2001
makes it clear that the
court’s power to disqualify a person from managing corporations is subject
to the requirement that
a declaration of contravention of a civil penalty
provision (including the directors’ duties in
) has been made.
By contrast,
does not make it clear whether a breach of the
directors’ duties must be established before ASIC can make a
disqualification
order under this section. This omission has meant that affected
persons have commenced protracted and costly proceedings challenging
ASIC’s disqualification decision under
on the ground that they have
complied with the directors’
The AAT has indicated that evidence of contraventions of the corporations
legislation or breaches of the directors’ duties will
be relevant to
ASIC’s decision about whether to disqualify a particular director under
However, according to the AAT, ASIC is not required to identify
specific contraventions of the corporations legislation, or breaches
directors’ duties when making that decision. Rather, the operation of
is triggered by evidence of a pattern of failure that invites closer
scrutiny to determine whether the public should be protected
by preventing the
director from managing
corporations.
One problem is that the decisions of the AAT do not necessarily resolve the
question once and for all about whether a breach of the
directors’ duties
must be established for the purposes of a disqualification order under
This is because, as noted previously, decisions of the AAT are not binding on
the various State or Territory Supreme courts or the
Federal Court which also
have jurisdiction in matters involving
Section 206C
has a different sphere of operation or scope as it applies to a
broader range of situations than
This is because
applies to any
cases involving a contravention of any civil penalty provision and, unlike
is not restricted to cases involving repeated corporate failures.
In some cases, there may be the potential for an overlap between
the operation
such as cases where there are both repeated corporate
failures and contraventions of the civil penalty provisions (for example, the
directors’ duties civil penalty provisions in
and the insolvent
trading civil penalty provision in
This limited overlap does not mean
that ASIC should be impliedly required to prove the same elements required by
the civil penalty
provisions (such as a breach of the directors’ duties)
to make a disqualification order under
As noted previously, Parliament enacted
to give ASIC an administrative
disqualification power (at the base of the enforcement pyramid) in those
specific cases involving
a director’s involvement in repeated corporate
Section 206F
is intended to provide a quicker and more cost-effective
alternative to court proceedings under
(at a higher level on the
enforcement pyramid) for a disqualification order for a breach of the civil
penalty provisions (including
the directors’ duties in
Section 206F
was enacted to give ASIC an additional power in its regulatory
toolkit to promote higher public interest regulatory objectives (including
protecting the public in a timely manner) by quickly ‘weeding out
directors with a track record of
ASIC’s s 206F disqualification hearing is more timely, cost-effective
and efficient in comparison to court proceedings because
s 59(1) of the
provides that the s 206F hearing, unlike court proceedings, ‘must
be conducted with as little formality and technicality, and
with as much
expedition, as the requirements of the corporations legislation ... and a proper
consideration of the matters before
ASIC permit.’ In addition, s 59(2)(a)
provides that ASIC, at its disqualification hearing,
‘is not bound by the rules of evidence’ and procedure that apply
court proceedings.
The lower protections for the affected persons under s 206F, compared to the
usual protections available to defendants in court proceedings
under s 206C
would be of concern to those who are the subject of s 206F proceedings. However,
those lower protections may be partly
justified on the basis that s 206F
promotes higher public interest regulatory objectives including obtaining a more
timely and efficient
regulatory outcome by eliminating some of the collateral
litigation that occurs in court proceedings about whether the relevant
and procedural rules have been observed. Those lower protections may
also be partly justified by the fact that the maximum disqualification
that ASIC can order under s 206F is 5 years whereas a court, acting under s
206C, may disqualify a person for an unlimited
period of time. Those lower
protections for the affected persons, in the context of s 206F, also suggest
that a s 206F hearing is
not the proper forum to make a final determination
attract more serious consequences – including a potentially
unlimited period of disqualification under s 206C and a substantial
penalty under s 1317G).
Section 206F should be amended by including a provision that makes it clear
that ASIC does not have to establish a breach of the directors’
duties as a precondition to making a disqualification order under s 206F. This
reform is consistent with the express approach
adopted in relation to the
operation of s 206C (noted above) and would better recognise the different
regulatory purposes and sphere
of operation of s 206C and s 206F and their
different levels on the enforcement pyramid, as well as eliminating the
collateral litigation
described above.
VI Standard of Proof
Section 206F does not specify the standard of proof that applies in
ASIC’s disqualification proceedings. As noted above, a s
206F hearing,
unlike court proceedings, is conducted ‘with little formality and
technicality’ and ASIC ‘is not
bound by the rules of evidence’
and procedure that apply in court
proceedings.
This suggests that
ASIC is not required to adopt the same standard of proof in its administrative
disqualification proceedings as
is applicable in court proceedings. The
advantage for ASIC of not being bound by the rules of evidence is that ASIC can
adopt a flexible
procedure and can inform itself by whatever means it sees fit
and is not restricted by technical rules regarding
admissibility.
Accordingly, ASIC can consider documents at the hearing that would be
inadmissible as evidence in a court of law. The use of such
documents by ASIC in
reaching its decision would not constitute an error of law for the purpose of
judicial review under s 5 of the
Section 1332
Corporations Act 2001
provides that,
‘[w]here, in proceedings other than proceedings for an offence, it is
necessary to establish, or for the Court
to be satisfied, for any purpose
relating to a matter arising under this Act, that ... a person has contravened a
provision of this
Act; ... it is sufficient if [the contravention] is
established, or the Court is so satisfied, as the case may be, on the balance
probabilities’.
It is not clear whether
ASIC’s disqualification proceedings under
because, for the reasons
discussed previously, ASIC’s s 206F disqualification power does not
require proof of a ‘contravention’
Corporations Act
(such as the directors’ duties provisions). In addition,
refers to ‘the Court’. In the context of
, ASIC makes the
disqualification decision, rather than the court.
There may be an error of law where a decision-maker adopts the wrong standard
of proof. However, given that ASIC is not bound by the
rules of evidence at its
hearing, there is no error of law where ASIC chooses not to adopt the
common law rules of evidence, such as the
rule, or the
statutory equivalent in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) (and the
various State and Territory equivalents), or the statutory rule of evidence in
Corporations Act 2001
. In addition,
(Cth) (and the various State and Territory equivalents) only apply
to proceedings in the Federal Court and High Court (and the relevant
Territory Supreme Courts) and do not apply to ASIC’s administrative
proceedings under s 206F.
Bringinshaw
rule (and the equivalent provision in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth)) means that the phrase ‘on the balance
of probabilities’ has various shades of meaning. The rigour of the court's
application of this civil standard of proof varies, depending upon the
seriousness of the allegations made, the nature of the cause
of action and any
defence, the nature of the subject matter of the proceeding, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given
description and the gravity of the
consequences that may flow where a contravention is
rule (and the equivalent provision in
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth)) reflects the concepts of common sense, fairness and
reliability.
According to the case law, whether ASIC adopts the rules of evidence at its
administrative hearings (such as hearings under s 206F),
including the rules
relating to the applicable standard of proof, is a matter for ASIC to
While s 59(2)(a)
provides that ASIC is not bound by the rules of evidence,
the scheme of that Act does not preclude the operation of those rules.
Section 59(2)(a) does not prevent ASIC from applying the rules of
In some cases it may
be preferable for ASIC to adopt the rules of evidence because those rules
provide a useful guide and assist
to provide ‘a method of inquiry best
calculated to prevent error and elicit
The AAT has indicated that ‘the rules of evidence embody the
accumulated wisdom of the courts on how to elicit probative and
evidence in a way that is procedurally
The rules of
evidence may be of assistance where the
provides no guidance.
ASIC may, for example, rely on the rules of evidence to determine practical
problems, such as the sequence
of receiving evidence and what to do if it is
unable to reach a clear conclusion on the
ASIC’s administrative disqualification decision under
Corporations Act 2001
has grave or serious consequences for the affected
persons ( concerning their reputation, livelihood and employment prospects) and,
in such cases, it is not reasonable for ASIC to make a decision based on
‘inexact proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect
references.’
the serious nature of the allegations involved in ASIC’
disqualification proceedings, and the serious consequences for the affected
person that flow from making a disqualification order,
it is argued that ASIC
should apply the common law
standard of proof (or the
equivalent standard of proof in
Evidence Act 1995
deciding whether such an order should be
This reform could be adopted by adding a note to s 206F about the applicable
standard of proof. This would remove any uncertainty
in the law and prevent
collateral litigation challenging ASIC’s disqualification decision on
grounds relating to the applicable
standard of proof. This reform may also
reduce challenges to ASIC’s disqualification decision based on an alleged
the rules of natural justice or procedural fairness under s 5(1)(a) of
. This is because, as noted above, the
rule promotes ‘fairness’ in decision-making. The adoption of this
rule may assist ASIC to meet its obligation under s
59(2)(c) of the
to afford the affected person natural justice or procedural fairness at
the disqualification hearing. A similar amendment about the
applicable standard
of proof should also be made in relation to ASIC’s administrative power to
ban persons from providing financial
services and credit
VII Conclusion
As at 30 June 2023, ASIC had disqualified 28 directors from managing
corporations under
Corporations Act 2001
, compared to 58 in
2022, and 49 in 2021.
those disqualifications in 2023, eight of those disqualifications in 2022, and
four of those disqualifications in 2021,
involved the disqualification of
directors who were engaged in illegal phoenix activity. ASIC has indicated that
it is committed
to using its regulatory powers to identify, disrupt and take
enforcement action against directors and other persons who engage in
illegal phoenix activity.
Corporate insolvencies have increased by 62.5% in 2023, when compared to
These statistics indicate
that there may be an increased need for ASIC to conduct
disqualification
hearings in future years.
It is recognised that there needs to be an appropriate balance between the
competing public and private interests. The private interests
of the affected
persons must not be sacrificed simply to promote the efficiency of ASIC’s
administrative disqualification
However, the reforms
suggested in this article would not impact on the affected person’s rights
to seek review of ASIC’s
disqualification decisions in the AAT or the
Federal Court. Rather, they would simply reduce the need for such external
or collateral litigation, on grounds concerning the interpretation of
, as has occurred in cases like
The adoption of
clearer language in
would not only promote ASIC’s regulatory
objectives but would also better safeguard the rule of law and protect the
community from a potential exercise of arbitrary
* Adjunct Associate Professor, Law Discipline, James Cook University,
Townsville.
Nicholas v Corporate Affairs Commissioner (Vic)
[1988] VicRp 40
, 299 cited in
Quinlivan v ASIC
[2010] AATA 113
Kender v ASIC
, [4], [9] and [10] (‘
[2020] AATA 1325
Sage v ASIC
, [30]; and
Chapel Road Pty Ltd v ASIC
[2007] NSWSC 975
Corporations Act
is based on an enforcement pyramid model. Administrative (non-judicial)
proceedings are at the base of the pyramid (see, for example,
banning or disqualification proceedings under
proceedings for non-punitive court orders are at the next level of the pyramid
(see, for example,
injunctions and
compensation orders). Civil
proceedings for punitive court orders are at the next level (see, for example,
disqualification orders,
pecuniary penalties). Criminal proceedings
are at the top of the pyramid (see, for example, the criminal offence for a
the directors’ duties in
Evidential and procedural
complexity, the protections for the defendant, and costs and delay in achieving
a regulatory outcome, increase
as the enforcement response is escalated up the
pyramid: See generally Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Report on the Social and Fiduciary Duties and Obligations of Company
(1989), 190; Ayres I and Braithwaite J,
Responsive Regulation:
Transcending the Deregulation Debate
(Oxford University Press, New York,
1992) p 35;
ASIC v HLP Financial Planning (Aust) Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 1868
, [50]; and T Middleton,
ASIC Corporate
Investigations and Hearings
(Thomson Reuters Subscription Service, 2022) at
Murdaca v ASIC
[2009] FCAFC 92
178 FCR 119
258 ALR 223
[2009] FCAFC 92
, [101]; and
[2010] AATA 1063
See s 59(1) and s 59(2)(a) of
, as discussed subsequently.
(n 5), [101];
(n 5), [30];
[2013] AATA 180
ASE16 v ASIC
(2016) 112 ACSR 36
Oreb v ASIC (No 2)
(2017) 247 FCR
[2017] FCAFC 49
Bolton v ASIC
[2018] AATA 976
Corporations Act 2001
to include that Act and the
Baldwin R and Cave M,
Understanding Regulation: Theory, Strategy, and Practice
University Press, Oxford, 1999) 76.
s 206F(1)(b)(i)
Corporations Act 2001
which specifies that
ASIC’s notice of the disqualification hearing must be in the prescribed
form: Form 5249.
Section 1337B(1)
Corporations Act 2001
See, for example, the
inconsistent decisions in
Green v FP Special Assets Ltd
[1992] 1 Qd R 1;
(1990) 3 ACSR 731
ASC v Ampolex Ltd
(1995) 38 NSWLR 504
85 A Crim R 240
18 ACSR 735
14 ACLC 80.
Section 1317B
Corporations Act 2001
; and s 25 of the AAT Act. See, for example,
See J Braithwaite,
Markets in Vice, Markets in Virtue
(Federation Press, 2005) 247.
[2008] AATA 209
ASIC v Murdaca
[2008] FCA 1399
Murdaca v ASIC
Bolton v ASIC
Bolton v ASIC
[2018] AATA 4215
[2021] AATA 5293
Bolton v ASIC
[2023] AATA 2022.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, Corporate Insolvency Laws: a
Stocktake, June 2004, [8.52]–[8.59]:
http://www.aph.gov.au/binaries/senate/committee/corporations_ctte/completed_inquiries/2002-04/ail/report/ail.pdf
viewed 1 November 2022; and Anderson H, ‘‘The Proposed
Deterrence of Phoenix Activity: An Opportunity Lost?’’
[2012] SydLawRw 20
Sydney Law Review
Anderson H, n 17, 419.
Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services, n 17.
(n 7), [44],
[62] and [64];
(n 7), [55]; and
Reed v ASIC
[2017] AATA
JTMJ v ASIC
, [6] and [13].
Re ABCD and Commissioner
of Taxation
(2008) 50 AAR 287
[2008] AATA 898
See generally
(1994) 52 FCR 187
[1994] FCA 1252
, 189 (FCR);
[72]–[75]; and
Zivanovic v ASIC
[2017] FCA 1633
Section 1274AA
Corporations Act 2001
ASIC v Murdaca
[2008] FCA 1399
(n 7), [92]; and
(n 7), [42].
Professional
http://www.asic.gov.au/asic/asic.nsf/byheadline/Professional+registers?openDocument,
viewed 1 November 2022; and see Anderson H,
Section 206F(1)(b)(i)
Corporations Act 2001
ASIC v Murdaca
[2008] FCA 1399
[16]. See generally
Warne v ASIC
[2009] AATA 340
Sgaravizzi v
[2019] AATA 6890
, [10]; and
Timeless Sunrise Pty Ltd v BigJ
Enterprises Pty Ltd (No 7)
[2022] VSC 549
Section 59(2)(c) of the
Porter v APRA
[2010] FCA 125
(n 5), [101];
(n 5), [30];
(n 7), [4];
(n 7), [20] and [22];
O’Sullivan v ASIC
O’Sullivan’
Wang v ASIC
[2023] AATA 1568
See generally
(n 26), [94].
Re ABM Pastoral Co Pty
(1978) 3 ACLR 239
Melbourne Home of Ford
Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
[1979] FCA 15
(1979) 36 FLR 450 (FC
Phillips v Corporate Affairs Commission (SA)
[1986] SASC 9540
(1986) 11 ACLR 182
ASC v Lucas
[1992] FCA 234
(1992) 36 FCR 165
108 ALR 521
10 ACLC 888
, [44], [45], [58] and [59].
Commissioner of Taxation
(Cth) v Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
(1979) 143 CLR 499
; 79 ATC 4,039, 522 per Gibbs ACJ;
Pyneboard Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
[1982] FCA 17
(1982) 57 FLR 368
, 571 (ALR) (FC Fed Ct);
Bannerman v Mildura Fruit Juices Pty Ltd
[1984] FCA 156
(1984) 2 FCR 581
, 370 (ALR) (FC Fed Ct);
SA Brewing Holdings Ltd
[1989] FCA 398
(1989) 23 FCR 357
, 116 per Fisher and French JJ;
MacDonald v ASC
[1993] FCA 594
(1993) 43 FCR 466
116 ALR 514
11 ACSR 128
11 ACLC 804
Pilnara Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
; Kluver J, ‘‘ASC Investigations and Enforcement: Issues and
Initiatives’’ (1992) 15(1)
University of New South Wales law
31, 42; and Bolton B, ‘Compelling Production of Documents to
the ASC’ (1995) QLSJ 221, 229.
ASIC v Murdaca
, [40]–[41].
ASIC v Murdaca
, [40]–[41]; and
Murdaca v ASIC
(n 5), [93], [94] and
See ss 30-34 of the
See s 19 of the
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
Russell v Duke of Norfolk
[1949] 1 All ER 109
Connell v NCSC
(1989) 14 ACLR 765
, 754 (ACLC).
Story v NCSC
13 NSWLR 661
13 ACLR 225
, 238 (ACLR).
Hodgkinson v Companies
Auditors and Liquidators Disciplinary Board
(1994) 50 FCR 504
12 ACLC 648
650 (ACLC) per Drummond J, citing
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
, 587 (CLR) per Mason J. See also
McLachlan v
[1999] FCA 244
(1999) 85 FCR 286
17 ACLC 656
Murdaca v ASIC
(n 5), [94];
Snedden v Minister for Justice for the Commonwealth
(2014) 315 ALR 352
[2014] FCAFC 156
, [175] and the authorities referred to therein; and
Transformer Company Pty Ltd v Anti-Dumping Review Panel
[2022] FCAFC 4
Broken Hill Pty Co Ltd v
[1986] HCA 31
(1986) 160 CLR 492
Elders IXL Ltd v NCSC
[1987] VicRp 1
[1987] VR 1.
[1998] FCA 775
(1998) 16 ACLC 1
[1998] FCA 1381
, 313-314 (ACSR).
Kardas v ASC
[1998] FCA 775
29 ACSR 304
[1998] FCA 1381.
Ibid cited in
[2010] AATA 54
(n 1), [89]–[91]; and
JYWV v ASIC
[2010] AATA 936
(2010) 183 FCR 279
, [30], [36] and [50] (‘
See s 102 of the
(n 44), [30],
[35], [36] and [50];
Quinlivan v ASIC
[2010] FCAFC 161
Quinlivan 2’)
, [36]; and
(n 43), [106].
(n 44), [2]
and [9]. In
Culley v ASIC
[2010] HCASL 282
, the High Court dismissed an
application for special leave to appeal that decision. See also
Quinlivan 2
(n 46), [36]; and
(n 43), [106].
Quinlivan 2
These terms are defined in s
Corporations Act 2001
(n 2), [6],
[29]-[30], [52] and [55].
ASIC v Wily
, [69] and [72] (‘
Sheslow v ASIC
(1994) 20 AAR 161
12 ACLC 740
Andrews v ASIC
[2006] AATA 25
See the statutory
interpretation rule in s 1(3) of the
Grossman v ASIC
[2011] AATA 6
, [112], [119]–[120] and [125]
Zivanovic v ASIC (No 2)
126 ACSR 634
[2018] FCA 676
, [37], [39], [45] and [50] (‘
Zivanovic (No
R v Pantano
A Crim R 328
(2003) 198 ALR 400
[2003] NSWSC 447
R v Richard
[2011] NSWSC 866
, [90]–[93]; and
DPP (Cth) v
[2013] VSCA 72
Murdaca v ASIC
[100], [103]-[106] and [114];
(n 55), [64]; and
See, for example,
(n 5), [62].
Murdaca v ASIC
[86]–[120] cited in
Aghili v ASIC
[2012] AATA 353
, [13] and [14]
(n 27), [17] and
Murdaca v ASIC
[86]–[120];
(n 63), [13] and [14];
(n 7), [4];
Boorer v HLB Mann Judd (NSW) Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 100
, [28]; and
[2023] FCA 975
(n 27), [17]; and
(n 64), [732].
Murdaca v ASIC
[101] and [118];
Thompson v ASIC
(n 5), [30];
(n 7), [20];
(n 27), [17] and [29];
Ehrenfeld v ASIC
[2019] AATA 6892
Boorer v ASIC
, [12], [19] and [42] (
Quinlivan v ASIC
Quinlivan 2
(n 46), [39];
(n 7), [22]; and
[2013] AATA 924
Gabay v ASIC
Gilbert v ASIC
See generally
(n 68), [13] and [14];
(n 63), [10]–[12];
(n 70), [18]; and
Holden v ASIC
[2016] AATA 605
[14]–[15], citing
Quinlivan 2
(n 46), [39]; and
(n 43). Not
(n 56), [39].
Guss v ASIC
[2006] AATA 401
(n 58), [37].
58), [36] and [37].
See, for example, the
submissions in
(n 72), [7].
(n 75), [48];
(n 1), [70]–[71];
(n 43), [138];
[2011] AATA 235
(n 63), [17];
Zivanovic (No 2)
(n 58), [28]; and
(n 69), [22];
(n 2), [15]; and
(n 27), [219].
See ss 59(1) and (2)(a) of
Re Delonga and ASC
[1994] AATA 346
(1994) 15 ACSR 450
13 ACLC 246
, 250 (ACLC) (AAT), citing
Cullen v Corporate
Affairs Commission
(1988) 14 ACLR 789
, 124 (ACLC) per
Young J. See also
Marelic v Comcare
[1993] FCA 599
(1993) 47 FCR 437
121 ALR 114
, 119 (ALR) per Beazley J.
Winter v ASC
13 ACLC 422
, 432 (ACLC) per von Doussa J.
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Briginshaw’
Ibid, 362 per Dixon J;
ASIC v RAC Cochrane
[1999] NSWSC 814
; and Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Discussion Paper 65: Civil and Administrative Penalties
The Role of Penalties in Government
https://www.alrc.gov.au/publication/securing-compliance-civil-and-administrative-penalties-in-federal-jurisdiction-dp-65/
(viewed 1 November 2022);
Commonwealth Bank of Australia v Saleh
[2007] NSWSC 903
Orrong Strategies Pty Ltd v Village Roadshow Ltd
(2007) 207 FLR 245
[2007] VSC 1
, [31], [818]–[819] and [821];
Macdonald (No 11)
[2009] NSWSC 287
, [182]–[184];
ASIC v Australian
Property Custodian Holdings Ltd (No 3)
[2013] FCA 1342
, [33] and [35];
Patrick Stevedores Holdings Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Maritime,
Mining and Energy Union
[2019] FCA 451
, [16]; and
ASIC v Gallop
International Group Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 1514
Sullivan v Civil Aviation
Safety Authority
(2014) 226 FCR 555, [93] and [99]
Ibid, [8], [91], [92], [93],
[97], [99], [101], [115], [116], [121] and [122];
Tarrant v ASIC
317 ALR 328
[2015] FCAFC 8
WWKJ v Minister for Foreign
[2018] AATA 3894
, [60]; and
ASIC v Hutchison
[2020] FCA 978
[93]. See generally
McDermott v ASIC
[2020] AATA 3362
Bolton v ASIC
R v War Pensions
Entitlement Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Bott
(1933) 50 CLR 228
n 86), [93]; and
(n 88), [72].
Daly v ASIC
Director-General of Social Security
(1984) 1 FCR 354;
, 356 (FCR) per Woodward J; and
Nom v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2012] VSCA 198
Frugtniet v ASIC
[2022] AATA 295
YFFM v ASIC
[2010] AATA 340
Catena v ASIC (No 2)
[2010] FCA 865
, [24]; and
(n 91), [90] and the authorities cited
Corporations Act 2001
; and s 80 of the
National Consumer Credit
(Protection) Act 2009
Annual Report
2023, 61, at
https://download.asic.gov.au/media/b3zf3or3/asic-annual-report-2022-23_full.pdf
Annual Report
, 2022, 31,
https://download.asic.gov.au/media/10dg0aqv/asic-annual-report-2021-22_full.pdf
Annual Report
, 2021, 31,
https://download.asic.gov.au/media/2aaomxuz/asic-annual-report-2020-21-full-1.pdf
Annual Report
2023, 61, at
https://download.asic.gov.au/media/b3zf3or3/asic-annual-report-2022-23_full.pdf
Annual Report
, 2022, 45, at
https://download.asic.gov.au/media/10dg0aqv/asic-annual-report-2021-22_full.pdf
Annual Report
, 2021, 47, at
https://download.asic.gov.au/media/2aaomxuz/asic-annual-report-2020-21-full-1.pdf
ASIC, Corporate Insolvency
Update, Issue 28, June 2023, at
https://asic.gov.au/about-asic/corporate-publications/newsletters/asic-corporate-insolvency-update/asic-corporate-insolvency-update-issue-28/.
Hyland, Margaret ‘Who
is Watching the Watchdog?: A Critical Appraisal of ASIC's Administrative
Powers’ (2009) 2
Journal of the Australasian Law Teachers Association
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (143 KB)
PDF format (491 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter