URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CICrimJust/2018/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:50:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lovell, Melissa; Guthrie, Jill; Simpson, Paul; Butler, Tony --- "Navigating the Political Landscape of Australian Criminal Justice Reform: Senior Policy-Makers on Alternatives to Incarceration" [2018] CICrimJust 3; (2018) 29(3) Current Issues in Criminal Justice 227
Navigating the Political Landscape of Australian Criminal Justice Reform:
Senior Policy-makers on Alternatives to Incarceration
Melissa Lovell,
Political ideology and populism are often thought to be major impediments to
criminal justice reform. Our research has attempted to
deconstruct these ideas
so that the robustness of the ‘punitive turn’ in criminal justice
policy can be better understood.
This article reports upon in-depth interviews
conducted with five very senior criminal justice policy-makers, each of whom was
sympathetic to reforming criminal justice policy to achieve the goal of
lower incarceration levels. The interviews reveal that these
policy-makers
conceived of prison reform primarily in terms of political risk, especially when
reform was related to the adoption
of prison alternatives and models that focus
on ‘decarceration’. Furthermore, policy-makers’ perceptions of
risk were intricately bound up with concerns about potential public
policy and program failure. This research indicates the need
political will for reform, alongside the further development of the myriad
evaluation and policy development processes
required to enable successful reform
in the criminal justice space.
citizens’ jury – criminal justice policy
– punitive turn –
justice reinvestment – elite interviewing – Australia
Introduction
Australia’s incarceration rates are higher than at any time since
Federation and substantially higher than those in many western
countries. While Australia may not have the mass incarceration culture of the
United States (‘US’), it has nonetheless
seen rates of incarceration
more than double in the past 30 years to 208 per 100,000 people in 2016
(Australian Bureau of Statistics
(‘ABS’) 2016; Wood 2014).
Indigenous incarceration rates in Australia are even higher at 2346 per 100,000
(ABS 2016),
and Indigenous Australians match African Americans as the most
incarcerated populations in the world (International Centre for Prison
2015). Imprisonment is expensive: each new adult prison bed costs between
$250,000 and $500,000 in infrastructure costs and
around $100,000 per annum in
running costs (Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service Provision
2015). Youth justice
beds each cost around $200,000 per year. In 2013–14,
it was estimated that direct costs of imprisonment in Australia were increasing
by approximately one million dollars per day (Steering Committee for the Review
of Government Service Provision 2015). Since crime
rates have mostly stabilised
or fallen since the 1990s, the ongoing increases in incarceration rates are
often seen as the result
of conservative ‘tough on crime’ political
agendas and a corresponding ‘punitive turn’ in public attitudes
(Tonry & Michael 2011; Wood 2014).
This article provides an analysis of interviews with five senior
policy-makers in three Australian states. Starting from the assumption
Australia’s current high-incarceration approach to criminal justice is
likely to be unsustainable in the long term, we
sought to establish
policy-makers’ attitudes towards criminal justice and alternatives to
high-incarceration policy approaches, their perceptions of public opinion and
their preferences for policy reform and development.
Given the small number of
participants and the qualitative nature of the research means, the results of
this study are not generalisable
to the broader Australian policy community.
However, as Richards has observed, the views of people in positions of power can
be difficult
or even ‘impossible’ to obtain by other methods
(Richards 2011, p. 68).
The in-depth engagement with very senior policy-makers as part of this
research project contributes to a better understanding of
the issues, concerns
and values underpinning criminal justice policy in Australia. In particular, the
finding that policy-makers
view decarceration and similar reforms primarily in
terms of political risk provides insight into the ongoing robustness of
incarceration
as a default policy approach. That these perceptions of political
risk were intricately bound up with concerns about potential public
program failure extends previous scholarship on the influence of public opinion
and evidence-based policy-making in the
criminal justice context (see, for
example, Gelb 2006; Wood 2016). The implication of this research is that
successful criminal justice
reform will probably require the concurrent
development of both political will for the adoption of lower incarceration
and a better evidence base for successful implementation of
alternatives to incarceration.
Criminal courts in Australia can utilise incarceration alternatives such as
probation, fines and good behaviour bonds (with or without
conviction), orders
to perform community service, suspended custodial sentences, deferral of
sentencing for rehabilitation, and participation
in diversionary programs
(Richards 2010). Diversionary programs, where disputes are resolved without
judicial intervention, operate
through a police referral approach in most
Australian jurisdictions. Prominent and well-known diversionary programs include
restorative
justice in the form of victim-offender conferencing, and pre-charge
programs that typically refer an offender to a treatment or rehabilitative
program in response to drug, cognitive disability and/or a mental health issue.
Indigenous and circle sentencing courts also occur
in most jurisdictions and
offer an alternative to mainstream judicial intervention. A central element is
the involvement of community,
through Elders or Respected Persons with whom the
offender has a relationship. However, participation in such courts can be
to certain offence types and some outcomes may result in a sentence of
imprisonment. Further, the evidence base supporting the effectiveness
these interventions is lacking (Richards 2010).
An innovative policy idea that is gaining traction in Australia is justice
reinvestment (‘JR’) (Brown et al. 2016; Wood
2014). Justice
reinvestment is both a philosophy for justice reform and a set of place-based
strategies for investing funds that
would typically be spent on incarceration on
socially constructive policy interventions that aim to reduce offending.
Research has
shown that a policy of mass incarceration is itself a generator of
crime problems (Brown et al. 2016). Justice reinvestment compels
policy-makers
to consider the implications of current punitive policies that have produced
higher rates of incarceration, particularly
of Indigenous Australians and,
instead, to fund initiatives that redress the social determinants of
incarceration (Krieg et al. 2016).
It promotes greater social investment in
communities with the socio-demographic features that disproportionately
contribute to prisoner
populations. As a systems-based approach, JR involves all
levels of government, as well as non-government organisations. It also
encompasses a comprehensive range of areas such as health, housing, employment,
justice, family support, mental health and substance
misuse services. The
approach retains prison as a last resort. Justice reinvestment has become a
popular approach in some US states,
in the United Kingdom and elsewhere (Allen
2011; Austin & Coventry 2014; Homel 2014). It has been criticised by those
it as a neoliberal approach to criminal justice (Austin et al. 2013;
Berger 2013), and by those who are concerned that current piecemeal
could fall short of the full systems-level approach required to actually reduce
incarceration rates (Fox et al. 2011).
There has been considerable political interest in the concepts of JR in
Australia with a number of government and official reports
advocating for
greater engagement with JR concepts by Australian governments (Australian Human
Rights Commission 2009, 2014; Senate
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee 2013). Local evidence of the effectiveness of JR is not yet available
JR has yet to be formally adopted by any Australian jurisdiction.
However, preliminary JR-focused programs are being developed in
several regional
locations, including Bourke (KPMG Australia 2016) and Cowra in New South Wales
(‘NSW’) (Guthrie et al.
2017), Ceduna in South Australia and
Katherine in the Northern Territory (Australian Red Cross 2016). The Australian
Capital Territory
(‘ACT’) Government also recently announced a JR
trial to be undertaken in collaboration with the local Aboriginal
community-controlled
health service, Winnunga Nimmityjah (ACT Government 2017).
The movement towards JR in Australia appears particularly focused on reducing
incarceration of Indigenous Australians since rates of Indigenous incarceration
are much higher than for the non-Indigenous population
(Austin & Coventry
2014; Gooda et al. 2012; Schwartz 2010).
These research findings were part of a larger project that used a Citizens
Jury approach in three Australian cities to explore the
opinions and views of a
critically informed public towards how the community views regarding
incarceration and alternatives to incarceration
(Simpson et al. 2015a; Simpson
et al. 2015b).
Citizens Juries typically involve bringing together
a selected group of citizens, providing them with information on the issue at
hand and asking them, as community representatives, about their preferences for
certain policy options or priorities. In contrast
to surveys, opinion polls or
focus groups, jurors may have access to, and critically engage with, a range of
or knowledge producers on the subject at hand. They may
ask questions and clarify key points with the experts and discuss issues
other jurors. This process is facilitated and can last from a half-day to five
days. This is aimed at enabling jurors to develop
considered preferences for
particular policy approaches (Carson 2003; Mooney 2010). Citizens Juries were
held in Sydney, Canberra
and Perth between December 2012 and October 2013
respectively. Jurors were asked which principles they would like to see underpin
the treatment of offenders and how those principles might be put into practice.
Jury findings revealed a preference for prison alternatives.
Independent
oversight of the research process was by means of a research reference group
(‘RRG’) comprising Indigenous,
legal and social advocacy experts.
As part of this project we examined policy-makers’ views following the
Citizens Juries to explore to what extent policy-makers
are influenced by the
views of a critically informed citizenry on issues of justice and incarceration.
After consultation with the
RRG, 11 senior policy-makers (such as government
ministers, leaders of statutory authorities, commissioners, etc) from the
Indigenous,
legal and treasury sectors of government in NSW, the ACT and Western
Australia were invited to participate in an interview. If the
policy-maker was unable to participate, then an appointed delegate was sought.
Five senior policy-makers and public office
bearers (referred to as P1, P2, P3,
P4, P5) agreed to be interviewed. Studies that target elite participants are
often based on small
numbers (Berry 2003; Goldstein 2003), and this was a
reasonably good response rate given the rank and seniority of the targeted
participants.
All comments were treated as ‘not for attribution’
(Goldstein 2003, p. 671), meaning that participants were assured their
would not be linked to their names, professional roles or organisational context
in the research results. Arguably the opportunity
to participate anonymously
allowed their responses to be more candid than might have been the case if their
comments were identifiable.
Semi-structured, in-depth interviews were conducted (Galletta 2013, p. 45).
There were two phases to the interviews. The first was
designed to discover
policy-makers’ attitudes towards incarceration and knowledge of possible
alternatives to incarceration.
This part of the interview included questions
diversion from prison, their opinions and endorsement of such programs, and
their views on JR. The second phase of the interviews
was designed to evaluate
the influence of the jurors’ deliberations on policy-makers’ views.
The structure and objectives
of the juries were briefly discussed, together with
any questions about the purpose or validity of the juries. Policy-makers were
then shown a summary of the outcomes from the three citizen jury events,
including a list of key principles for dealing with offenders
recommendations for enacting those principles. They were asked whether any of
the outcomes stood out or whether the jury findings
changed their tendency to
endorse non-imprisonment policy approaching, including in relation to the JR
paradigm. A full schedule
of interview questions and the jury outcomes has been
reported earlier (Simpson et al. 2015b). Interviews were transcribed and
using a thematic analysis protocol (Braun & Clarke 2006). Ethics
clearance for the project was obtained from five Human Research
Committees (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health and University) across
three jurisdictions.
The initial aim of the policy-maker interviews was to explore the extent to
which policy-makers were likely to be influenced by the
views of a critically
informed citizenry based on the Citizens’ Jury outcomes. As reported
earlier (Simpson et al. 2015b),
it is possible that a self-selection effect was
present among policy-makers who opted to participate in this study;
policy-makers’
already high levels of support for prison alternatives
precluded those participants from experiencing large attitudinal shifts based
their exposure to the jury findings. Policy-makers were very interested in the
Citizen Jury findings but did not change their
level of support for justice
reforms. Access to five senior policy-makers with high knowledge and support for
criminal justice policy
reform presented a unique opportunity for the
researchers to explore the political landscape of criminal justice reform from
perspective of elite and influential actors in the criminal justice sector.
This article therefore presents additional, unpublished
analysis of the
interviews with policy-makers, and focuses on identifying obstacles to policy
reform from the perspectives of policy-makers
who are open to alternative
approaches to justice.
The policy-makers interviewed found current approaches to justice problematic
and out-of-step with their knowledge and experience
of crime and offending, but
they were also very cautious about prospects for policy reform. This section
outlines the conceptions
of crime and the justice system underlying
policymakers’ views about the effectiveness — or otherwise —
approaches to criminal justice. It shows that an awareness of
possible flaws or limitations in incarceration-based approaches does
automatically translate into policy reform. Criminal justice reform was
considered to be desirable by all policy-makers, but
also quite risky.
Significant impediments to reform included policy-makers’ concerns about
community attitudes, and the relative
complexity of non-incarceration options
when compared to incarceration based approaches.
Conceptions of crime and the justice system
Discussions of crime and policy reform revealed policy-makers had a
sophisticated understanding of the criminal justice system. All
policy-makers
conceived of the main objective of the criminal justice system as one of crime
prevention through rehabilitation of
offenders. For example, P1 observed,
‘I see one of the necessary functions of Corrections as
rehabilitation.’ Similarly,
P4 reasoned that ‘[t]he best effort that
we could put into crime prevention are [those] diversionary programs which focus
the rehabilitation of the individual’. P3 provided the most
individualist interpretation of the causes of crime. They felt
that society
would never be able to completely move away from prisons as an instrument for
retribution because some people are ‘just
not right’, and because
bad behaviour can come from people who might be expected to know better
including people from ‘very
well off families’. Nonetheless, even P3
felt that reform was possible for some offenders and supported a rehabilitative
for the criminal justice system.
Support for this rehabilitative ideal arguably stems from
policy-makers’ willingness to acknowledge that some factors behind
criminal behaviour are broader social issues and possibly beyond the control of
individual offenders. For instance, P5 argued that,
while offending behaviour is
‘a choice made by individuals’, this choice is made in the context
of broader social norms
and problems. P2 singled out mental health as a
particular problem contributing to criminal activity — the issue
screaming out is mental health’ — and observed
that offenders in prison with mental health issues comprised ‘about
70%’. P4 identified the importance of a range of social issues as
contributors to criminal behaviour:
Fifty per cent of everything [the police] do is trying to solve what I would
call social issues, and I’ll mention things like
family violence, you can
mention things like mental health, substance abuse, and all of those things, but
... [the police] are not
the people to solve that or sort it out, and neither
are the prisons really.
Race was also viewed as a factor contributing to the likelihood of
experiencing social disadvantage and consequently to the likelihood
with the criminal justice system. P2 was aware of the impact that social
disadvantage has on Indigenous people, arguing
that Indigenous Australians, like
‘the Afro American’ people in the US, were not dealt a level playing
field in terms
of access to education and other opportunities. They specifically
referred to the educational disadvantages experienced by Indigenous
children and
spoke of the gaps between ‘Anglo white’ and Indigenous children
emerging in early childhood and being clear
‘by the time they get to go to
Acknowledging the combination of individual and social factors underlying
criminal activity seems to have predisposed these policy-makers
to the view that
society has a duty to provide opportunities for offender rehabilitation.
Referring to the need for offenders to
learn basic life skills, P1 described
programs that helped individuals to learn basic procedures such as how to buy
and use a bus
card so they could use public transport to navigate across town.
It was also suggested that rehabilitative programs could focus on
offenders’ cognitive skills. For example, P2 sanctioned a drug diversion
program that sought to place young offenders
in counselling in order to help
them ‘get better control around their lives’. The need to boost
individuals’ skills
and capabilities for ordinary everyday functioning was
therefore one of the chief justifications provided for rehabilitation as a
objective of the criminal justice system.
Understandings on the effectiveness of incarceration and its
alternatives
Prima facie incarceration of offenders was viewed as an inadequate policy
approach by all policy-makers interviewed. Each policy-maker
viewed at least
some alternatives to incarceration as desirable in principle.
Two of the five policy-makers emphasised that incarceration was sometimes a
necessary and appropriate response to addressing crime.
P2 and P3 argued that
incarceration was an effective method for keeping the community safe from
dangerous offenders. As P2 argued:
‘When we put somebody into gaol for
armed hold-ups, for the period that they’re in gaol they’re not
going to commit
one more [armed robbery].’ P3 felt that some people
‘don’t deserve to live in the community’ because they
‘make other people unsafe’.
Current approaches to justice were, however, seen as inadequate by all
policy-makers. For example, P2 argued that current approaches
to policing
involved acting like ‘an occupying army’ and that this has led to
unsustainable ‘bursting’ prisons
and the ‘largest prison
population we’ve ever had’. They admitted that ‘by and large,
the majority of people
who go before a Court should not be incarcerated’
and acknowledged that prison is not particularly rehabilitative. P4 argued
the current system also leads to high levels of recidivism: ‘[I]f you look
at the statistics of people coming out of prison,
there’s a very high
recidivism rate because the underlying problems are not treated.’ Focusing
on the overall effects
of the justice system, P5 described the current approach
as ‘a very expensive process, and [one that] doesn’t necessarily
produce the best outcomes in terms of stopping reoffending behaviour,
restoration to victims and so on’.
Policy-makers described a range of policy options that they viewed as
potentially more effective than current approaches to criminal
justice. Several
focused on early intervention and broader social support for people at risk of
engaging in criminal activity. P1
mentioned the importance of public investment
in social work and ‘social intervention ... before people are put in gaol
first time’. P3 supported this: ‘There’s certainly an
argument for putting more investment ... into prevention
activities, and I think
that’s very important. And it’s not just police that you put that
money into, it’s obviously
lots of programs and all these [programs] in
the community sector.’ P2 outlined another approach to prevention,
focusing on
reducing opportunities for criminal activity, ‘through
environmental design, or better educating and preparing people in communities
against becoming victims of crime’, adding that ‘[t]he more we can
prevent crimes from happening, the less we have to
deal with this question of
incarceration versus some other kind of program’. Collectively, these
approaches to intervention
tended to emphasise the importance of addressing the
social determinants of contact with the criminal justice system.
Policy-makers also focused on programs designed for offenders, such as
diversionary programs involving social services, restorative
justice programs,
and rehabilitative programs aimed at prisoners. All policy-makers were familiar
with, and supportive of, current
restorative justice initiatives. For instance,
P4 argued that ‘[t]here needs to be ... much wider diversionary programs
place to deal with these things [that is, social and health issues]’.
P1 spoke approvingly of a range of such programs in the
ACT, including the
planned Bush Healing Farm for Indigenous offenders, and restorative justice
programs where people meet with those
affected by their crimes and are therefore
‘forced to confront the consequences of their actions’. P5 argued
that restorative
justice approaches were:
more effective at achieving a good qualitative outcome, whether that’s
a sense of shame on the part of the offender and that
translating into a reduced
likelihood of reoffending, or better restoration for the victim, an
acknowledgement of wrongdoing and
understanding that the offender has done wrong
against the victim.
P5 also suggested that restorative justice was ‘fundamentally ... more
effective’ and ‘certainly cheaper’
than the ‘more
traditional Court process’. P3 was supportive of the objectives of
restorative justice but felt that it
had some practical limitations, such as
some offenders not wanting to face the victims of their crimes. P2 suggested
that programs
aimed at offenders should target repeat rather than first-time
offenders, stating: ‘Most of the crime that we deal with, and
most of the
success we’ve enjoyed over say the recent, five, seven, ten years, has
come about because we have targeted [programs
for] recidivist
offenders.’
Policy-makers were familiar with the concept of JR but defined it in a
variety of ways. Three policy-makers conceived of JR as a
shift in the kinds of
justice sector activities that are prioritised for funding; namely, a move from
spending on incarceration to
diversionary, restorative justice and
rehabilitation programs. P1 described JR broadly and bluntly as ‘things
that are not
gaol’, and that involve using ‘justice money to try and
potentially avoid future reoffending’. P4 was ‘highly
supportive of
JR’ and saw it as an opportunity to use police to ‘divert people
from the justice system’. They felt
that this would result in a better
alignment between justice sector practices and the expectations of the broader
community. P5 described
JR as ‘fundamentally about dealing with the causes
of crime, rather than the consequences of crime’, and saw
‘significant
capacity’ for the criminal justice sector to do more in
this regard. P5 fused the ideas of restorative justice (which they
familiar with) with those of JR and was highly supportive ‘in
principle’ of such developments, seeing them
as having the capacity to
‘deal with offending behaviour, and to try and reduce ... the cost to the
community of [the] more
traditional judicial and imprisonment process’.
The other two policy-makers outlined a broader conception of JR as an
approach focused upon increasing engagement between the criminal
justice and
community sectors.
P2’s understanding of JR was expansive and included early intervention,
as this example of early childhood education demonstrates:
I think the research pretty clearly showed that if you could perhaps invest
in that period, say [between ages] two to five, before
they go to school, get
all of them into some sort of preschool environment whereby you can lift their
level of education so that
when they do get to school they’re not
disadvantaged [that would make a difference].
JR was therefore viewed by P2 as more than diversion of offenders from
prison. Rather, JR was about whether people, particularly young
‘go into the criminal justice system or whether they step out of it and
stay away from it’. P3 described JR as
a method that could lead to better
coordination of justice-related programs and as a way to ensure that multiple
including health, housing, education and police — worked
collectively towards ‘early intervention impact’.
Overall, the policy-makers expressed a high level of interest in the concept
of JR. When asked about support for JR, P1 was ‘very
supportive’, P3
‘absolutely endorse[d] it’, and P2 said that an ‘alternate
[sic] way’ to reduce crime,
if shown to be effective, would be
‘fantastic’. P4 felt that the police and courts had become overly
responsible for
the justice system and that the ‘community having more say
argued that JR
could only work in Australia if policy-makers looked at the ‘broader
construct ... of the community’ and
asked, ‘What are the
expectations we have about education, and what are the expectations we have
a high level of interest in JR among the
Australian policy community: ‘I’ve had discussions [about JR] with
senior policy-makers
right across Australia, and particularly police
commissioners and their ministers as recently as last year. So we’re all
that [development] with a great deal of interest.’
In summary, policy-makers were familiar with a range of recent programs that
present alternatives to incarceration approaches to
criminal justice and saw
these as having advantages over incarceration of offenders. They were highly
supportive, at the level of
broader principle and values, of the development of
alternatives to incarceration including JR strategies.
Reform as political risk: public opinion and policy complexity as an
impediment to policy reform
While supportive of alternatives to incarceration, policy-makers also
considered criminal justice policy reform to be highly risky
at this point in
time. As P3 noted, while JR was a ‘valid option’, it might take 20
to 30 years to develop a ‘really
good working model’ in Australia.
Policy-makers described two types of risk: first, the implementation of
non-incarceration
and JR approaches risked public backlash and electoral defeat;
second, such reforms were described as complicated and therefore presenting
risk of policy failure.
All policy-makers interviewed felt that governments are reluctant to
institute criminal justice policy because they consider the
public to hold
highly punitive attitudes towards offenders. For example, P2 argued that public
opinion, as assessed through what
political party (and their proposed
justice-related policies) the majority of the public votes for in an election,
is quite punitive
towards offenders. They suggested that community and media
attitudes are behind current attempts in some Australian states to legislate
mandatory detention and tougher sentencing laws:
The fact is communities are telling governments directly through the
electoral process that this [tougher sentencing] is what we expect
governments ... if you spoke to a lot of people in certain parts of this state,
at least, they’re going to say they
[the judiciary] need to get tougher,
they need to get stronger, they need to give them [offenders] more
P3 concurred, arguing that community attitudes, fed by social and traditional
media, can be a problem. P3 stated that it was frustrating
that the public
rarely understand the complexity of the issues that police and the court systems
face. P4 agreed that governments
view public opinion as punitive, but disagreed
that this was an accurate portrayal of public attitudes. They argued that the
‘Government
thinks that the public want ... tougher penalties for just
opportunity to express their opinion, actually like the idea of
reinvestment’.
The perception that community attitudes are punitive can lead governments to
consider building new prisons as the easy and politically
palatable option. P1
was of the view that legislating for justice sector reform is often seen as a
politically risky option, stating
that ‘an element of JR is the political
will not to build any new prison beds, you know at a point in time, how
politically
palatable is that?’ They added that it ‘would be fatal
... and have significant consequences for ... justice reinvestment
alternatives to incarceration, if we [policy-makers] were to get too far ahead
of the community. It’s that fine line in
leadership’. P2 described
governments as ‘risk averse’ and argued that this made it difficult
to obtain funding
for JR initiatives, summarising their view as, ‘you know
it’s that electoral cycle that drives everything that governments
[JR is] a social experiment. If it goes wrong it will cost them everything, they
won’t be in government’.
The complexity of implementing JR was considered to pose as much of a risk
to the chances of successful implementation as public
opinion. Policy-makers
were highly supportive of JR in principle; however, they identified the need for
a more robust evidence base
P1 talked of the need to develop better systems to support JR, arguing that
‘there is preparatory work that needs to be done in ensuring the integrity
of those systems’ and stating that, while
there was a ‘strong
academic case to be made’ for JR, there are ‘gaps ... in the
practical side of it [implementing
JR]’. P3 demonstrated a high level
of awareness of overseas models of JR. However, P3 was clear in their view that
policy-makers could not just copy overseas models:
[Y]ou can’t just look in the justice space alone and just say,
‘Well take money from them, and pocket it here,’
you’ve got to
really look at the whole scope and your whole picture, and not just say,
‘Well Finland’s got this
good program,’ or ‘Canada is
doing this.’ You’ve really got to look at the whole way society is
and the community is operating, and the types of expectations on
P2 was watching developments in JR closely but felt that they had not yet
‘seen a program that works’. One of the issues
for P2 was that JR
was not yet clearly defined but was ‘different in the minds of different
people’. This last observation
is supported by the findings in this paper,
which earlier showed that the policy-makers interviewed held at least two
different conceptions
Policy-makers were of the view that the implementation of JR would require
governments to display considerable policy sophistication.
P3 discussed a number
of challenges to policy implementation such as the need for greater policy
coordination and the need to effect
cultural change within policing
organisations, arguing that JR ‘won’t work unless you’ve
actually got all the other
components working together’. P3 saw
integration between justice and human services sectors as crucial to effective
implementation
of JR. On the issue of cultural change, P3 pointed out that the
police force has traditionally been ‘response motivated’
‘it’s a complete flip to have police think about prevention’.
The complexity of JR seems to make prison
building an easier option for
politicians even if incarceration does not work effectively. P4 summarised this
view in the following
One of the reasons there is this disconnect is because Justice Reinvestment
and solving some of the social problems, you know making
sure fairness occurs,
making sure that citizens have a say, is complex and expensive. What’s
very simple and very cheap is
to simply strike a piece of legislation ... which
just says ‘You’re going to spend more time in prison for this
offence.’ Now there is a cost of course at the other end when
people go to prison, but governments really opt for that because
easy way out, that it’s much more difficult to have sustainable programs
in the community which target the root
causes of crime and actually deflect
people away from the justice system.
The complexity of implementing preventative-orientated JR strategies
therefore appears to constitute a considerable hurdle to moving
forward with
such strategies.
Three policy-makers discussed the cost of JR, suggesting that the
possibility of making an expensive mistake increased the perceived
riskiness of
the reform process. P3 argued:
Policing, like every type of service industry, is pressured by resources, and
particularly now we’re going into a period ...
where a lot of government
departments and services are getting pressured ... [to] provide what you need to
provide and really cut
away that excess type work. Prevention is probably seen
as excess type work, because really the prime focus for police is to be there
For P5, the level of difficulty in making an economic case for JR in an
environment focused on immediate and up-front costs was high:
I think the more challenging aspect with justice reinvestment is being able
to demonstrate tangible benefit. It’s one of those
dilemmas similar to
health, you know you’re spending a lot of money upfront on ... dealing
with the consequences of crime,
and that’s the most pressing and immediate
need. It’s difficult to make the case to divert resources from that area
prevention, or dealing with the causes of crime, because you’re still
having to spend upfront. So you’re almost having
to spend twice to get a
long term benefit, and then hopefully reduce your expenditure in that bottom of
the cliff service delivery
Policy-makers appeared frustrated with these limitations regarding
implementation of JR. P2 suggested that it might be worth looking
enterprise models for JR in order to make it more palatable to risk-averse
governments. Both risk and accountability under
this idea is shifted from the
state to the private sector.
In summary, the policy-makers interviewed acknowledged public opinion as an
impediment to policy reform, but also listed a range
of other issues and
impediments to criminal justice reform.
Policy-makers viewed present mass-incarceration approaches to criminal
justice policy as inadequate and of limited effectiveness.
However, they were
also cautious about the possibility of implementing alternatives to
incarceration in substantive ways that might
significantly reduce levels of
incarceration. Given the high levels of knowledge of — and support for
— JR and other
low-incarceration policy options among this study’s
participants, their reluctance to implement such reforms serves to highlight
strength of the obstacles facing substantial criminal justice reform in
Australia. Among the obstacles to substantive reform
of the criminal justice
system are policy-makers’ perceptions of public opinion and the
‘risk’ associated with
supporting reforms that could fail and become
a political liability.
We have seen in this study the way in which conceptions about the social
causes of crime and understandings of the purpose of the
justice system are
linked to attitudes about policy reform. This study also shows that perceptions
of public opinion count even where
policy-makers disagree with the (perceived) views of the public. This finding
supports previous research, which states that governments
often privilege
‘public opinion about the desirability of ever harsher sentences’
over evidence about the ‘efficacy
... of these measures in reducing and
preventing crime’ (Gelb 2006, p. 3). While they do not mention the
scholarship explicitly,
our five policy-makers appear to be acutely aware of the
now substantial body of research that has found public attitudes towards
offenders to be highly punitive in Australia and other Western countries
(Brookman & Weiner 2015; Gelb
2006; Roberts 2002).
The perception that
community attitudes are highly punitive increases
policy-makers’ concerns about possible public backlash if ‘tough
on crime’ approaches to criminal justice are dismantled.
Politicians might
be doubly penalised in electoral terms if such reforms were viewed as failures
against other criteria of importance
to the public such as fiscal
sustainability.
However, as P4 argued (see above), it is possible to overstate the
resistance of the broader community to justice reform. Research
is beginning to
show that public opinion on issues of criminal justice is actually much more
varied than is often acknowledged, with
a significant portion of the population
holding either neutral or positive attitudes to policy reform (Maruna & King
2004). Even
those who do hold punitive views may respond in more nuanced ways if
they better understood the broader context of policy decisions
and rationale for
reform. For instance, we have previously reported that, when given the
opportunity to be informed by deliberating
on the wider context of criminal
offending, the community favours non-punitive prison alternatives (Simpson et
al. 2015a; Simpson
et al. 2015b). In a similar vein, a study by David Indermaur
and his co-authors found a high degree of reflection and engagement
research participants who were asked to evaluate information about a number of
criminal justice policy dilemmas to judge the
relative importance of several key
arguments for and against particular ways of addressing those dilemmas
(Indermaur et al. 2012).
Further challenging the view that the public holds
punitive attitudes, an Australian study of 138 trials found that 90 per cent of
jurors who participated in those trials perceived the judge’s sentence as
‘very or fairly’ appropriate (Warner
et al. 2011). Members of the
public appear to respond differently when placed in a deliberative context
compared to when asked for
‘very general opinions’ about justice and
sentencing issues (Indermaur et al. 2012). Given that policy-makers’
of public opinion is one of the factors that inhibits their
willingness to forge ahead with major reforms to criminal justice, it
important that scholars continue to engage in research that accurately captures
the more nuanced and considered views of the public,
and that this research is
communicated to policy-makers.
More positive community views towards criminal justice reform are only
likely to be influential, however, if policy-makers are also
convinced that
alternatives to incarceration are both feasible and cost effective. The
policy-makers interviewed for this research
were all positively inclined towards
policy reform, yet all five emphasised the risks of policy reform over the
potential benefits.
This suggests that incarceration is a strong policy norm and
an extremely difficult one to successfully challenge. In respect to
particular option for policy reform, the participants in this study all
expressed concerns about the gaps in the JR evidence
base. Studies in
international contexts have previously demonstrated the importance of bipartisan
political approaches to JR as well
as the importance of implementation being
‘data-driven’ and subject to ongoing evaluation and adjustment
(Clement et
al. 2011). It is possible that these strategies, if adopted in
Australia, may be effective in assuaging concerns about the overall
feasibility
of JR approaches.
Policy-makers highlighted the need to develop an Australian model of JR
rather than transplanting a model from overseas, yet they
paid relatively little
attention in their interviews to the issue of race. This is surprising because
the issue of Indigenous over-representation
in prison statistics has, arguably,
been one of the key factors motivating an interest in JR within Australia. As
noted by Wood (2014),
JR appears to have the most promise for Indigenous
Australians though the questions of who will identify the needs of Indigenous
communities, which stakeholders will have the power to negotiate with
governments and make decisions, and how JR initiatives and
strategies will be
delivered would all need to be resolved. Perhaps proponents of justice policy
reform will be able to help policy-makers
to better articulate what might be
unique about an Australian model of JR, and how racial issues might be
acknowledged as part of
criminal justice policy reform. There are, as pointed
out earlier, a number of highly innovative JR-focused collaborations between
researchers and communities in the Australian context and all of these have
engaged, to differing degrees, with Indigenous peoples’
concerns about
high levels of Indigenous contact with the criminal justice system (Australian
Red Cross 2016; Guthrie et al. 2017;
KPMG Australia 2016). Hopefully these
small, local experiments with JR will eventually contribute to the development
of a persuasive
Australian model for JR.
This article highlights some of the obstacles to policy reform from the
perspective of
policy-makers who are already open to alternative approaches to justice. The
policy-makers interviewed for this research were all
very aware of the
limitations of conventional approaches and were all broadly sympathetic to the
expansion of non- and low-incarceration
alternatives and JR. They nonetheless
spoke of multiple impediments to policy reform. Perceptions of public opinion
were an important
concern for policy-makers — this finding supports
previous research suggesting that punitive public attitudes to crime and
have an impact on justice policy (see Gelb 2006) — and concerns about the
administrative complexity and feasibility
of non-incarceration options also
impeded policy reform. Incarceration occupies a privileged position in criminal
justice policy,
in spite of its failures and high cost (Hogg & Brown 1998).
These interviews with five senior policy-makers highlight that incarceration
continues to be the default approach to addressing the problem of crime in
Australia. Furthermore, this article points to the value
of campaigners adopting
a two-pronged approach for seeking policy reform. This approach should seek to
both effect changes to public
opinion and support the development of an
effective, cost-effective model for reforming Australia’s criminal justice
Allen, R 2011 ‘Justice reinvestment and the use of imprisonment: policy
reflections from England and Wales’,
Criminology & Public
, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 617–27.
Austin, J, Cadora, E, Clear, T, Dansky, K, Greene, J, Gupta, V, Mauer, M,
Porter, N, Tucker, S & Young, M 2013,
Ending mass incarceration:
charting a new justice reinvestment
, The Sentencing Project.
Austin, J & Coventry, G 2014, ‘A critical analysis of justice
reinvestment in the United States and Australia’,
, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 126–48.
Australian Bureau of Statistics 2016,
4517.0 – Prisoners in
, Commonwealth of Australia, viewed 30 March 2018,
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/
4517.0~2016~Main%20Features~Imprisonment%20rates~12.
Australian Capital Territory Government 2017,
Family-focused justice
reinvestment trial to help reduce over-representation of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders in justice
, viewed 31 March 2018,
http://www.cmd.act.gov.au/open_government/inform/act_government_media_releases/rattenbury/2017/family-focused-justice-reinvestment-trial-to-help-reduce-over-representation-of-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islanders-in-justice-system.
Australian Human Rights Commission 2009,
Social justice report.
Australian Human Rights Commission 2014,
Social justice and native title
Australian Red Cross 2016,
Rethinking justice: vulnerability report
Berger, D 2013 ‘Social movements and mass incarceration: what is to be
nos. 1–2, pp. 3–18.
Berry, J 2003, ‘Validity and reliability issues in elite
interviewing’,
PS: Political Science & Politics
, vol. 35, no.
4, pp. 679–82.
Braun, V & Clarke, V 2006, ‘Using thematic analysis in
psychology’,
Qualitative Research in Psychology
, vol. 3, no. 2, pp.
Brookman, R & Wiener, K 2015, ‘Predicting punitive attitudes to
sentencing: does the public’s perceptions of crime
and Indigenous
Australians matter?’,
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 56–77.
Brown, D, Cunneen, C, Schwartz, M, Stubbs, J & Young, C 2016,
reinvestment: winding back imprisonment
, Springer.
Carson, L 2003,
Consult your community. a handbook. a guide to using
citizens’ juries
, Planning NSW, pp. 1–64.
Clement, M, Schwarzfeld, M & Thompson, M 2011,
The national summit on
justice reinvestment and public safety. Addressing recidivism, crime and
corrections spending
, Justice Center.
Fox, C, Albertson, K & Warburton, F 2011, ‘Justice reinvestment:
can it deliver more for less?’,
The Howard Journal of Criminal
, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 119–36.
Galletta, A 2013,
Mastering the semi-structured interview and beyond: from
research design to analysis and publication
, NYU Press.
Gelb, K 2006,
Myths and misconceptions: public opinion versus public
judgment about sentencing
Sentencing Advisory Council.
Goldstein, K 2003, ‘Getting in the door: sampling and completing elite
interviews’,
PS: Political Science & Politics
, vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 669–72.
Gooda, M, Priday, E & McDermott, L 2012, ‘Looking beyond offenders
to the needs of victims and communities’,
Indigenous Law Bulletin
vol. 8, p. 13.
Guthrie, J, Dance, P, Lokuge, K, Levy, M, Walsh, C & Lovell, M 2017,
Exploring the potential of justice reinvestment in Cowra: community
, The Australian National University, Canberra.
Hogg, R & Brown, D 1998,
Rethinking law & order
Press, Sydney.
Victims & Offenders
, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 6–12.
Indermaur, D, Roberts, L, Spiranovic, C, Mackenzie, G & Gelb, K 2012,
‘A matter of judgement: the effect of information
and deliberation on
public attitudes to punishment’,
Punishment & Society
vol. 14, pp. 147–65.
International Centre for Prison Studies 2015,
International prison news
, University of London, Institute for Criminal Policy Research.
KPMG Australia 2016,
Unlocking the future: Maranguka justice reinvestment
project in Bourke preliminary assessment
September 2016
Krieg, AS, Guthrie, JA, Levy, MH & Segal, L 2016, ‘“Good kid,
mad system”: the role for health in reforming
justice for vulnerable
communities’,
Medical Journal of Australia
, vol. 204, no. 5, pp.
Maruna, S & King, A 2004, ‘Public opinion and community
penalties’, in A Bottoms, S Rex & G Robinson (eds.),
Alternatives to prison: options for an insecure society
Cullompton, pp. 83–112.
Mooney, G 2010,
A handbook on citizens’ juries with particular
reference to health care
self-published.
Richards, K 2010,
Police-referred restorative justice for juveniles in
, Australian Institute of Criminology, pp. 1–8.
Richards, K 2011, ‘Interviewing elites in criminological research:
negotiating power and access and being called “kid”‘,
Bartels & K Richards (eds.),
Qualitative criminology: stories from the
, Federation Press, Sydney, pp. 68–79.
Roberts, J 2002, ‘Public opinion and sentencing policy’, in S Rex
& M Tonry (eds.),
Reform and punishment: the future of sentencing
Routledge, London, pp. 18–39.
Schwartz, M 2010, ‘Building communities, not prisons: justice
reinvestment and Indigenous
over-representation’,
Australian Indigenous Law Review
no. 1, pp. 1–17.
Simpson, P, Guthrie, J, Lovell, M, Doyle, M & Butler, T 2015a,
‘Assessing the public’s views on prison and prison
alternatives:
findings from public deliberation research in three Australian cities’,
Journal of Public Deliberation
, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1–25.
Simpson, P, Guthrie, J, Lovell, M, Walsh, C & Butler, T 2015b,
on alternatives to imprisonment: a citizens jury approach
, The Lowitja
Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service Provision 2015,
Report on Government services 2015
, Commonwealth of Australia,
The Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee 2013,
Value of a justice reinvestment approach to criminal justice in
, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra, pp. 1–141.
Tonry, M & Michael, T 2011, ‘Making Peace, not a desert: penal
reform should be about values not justice reinvestment’,
Criminology
& Public Policy
, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 637–49.
Warner, K, Davis, J, Walter, M, Bradfield, R & Vermey, R 2011,
judgement on sentencing: final results from the Tasmanian jury sentencing
Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice
no. 407, Australian Institute of Criminology, Canberra.
Wood, W 2014, ‘Justice reinvestment in Australia’,
& Offenders
, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 100–19.
Convenor and Research Fellow,
The Herbert and Valmae Freilich Foundation, The Australian National University,
Sir Roland Wilson
Building, 120 McCoy Circuit, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia.
Email: melissa.lovell@anu.edu.au.
Senior Research Fellow,
National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, The Australian National
University, Building 63A,
Cnr Mills & Eggleston Roads, Canberra ACT 2601,
Australia. Email:
jill.guthrie@anu.edu.au.
Research Fellow, Justice
Health Research Program, The Kirby Institute, Level 6, Wallace Wurth Building,
High Street, University
of New South Wales NSW 2052, Australia. Email:
psimpson@kirby.unsw.edu.au.
Professor and Program
Head, Justice Health Research Program, The Kirby Institute, Level 6, Wallace
Wurth Building, High Street,
University of New South Wales NSW 2052, Australia.
Email: tbutler@kirby.unsw.edu.au.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (510 KB)
PDF format (390 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter