URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bretherton, Brittany --- "Opting out of parenthood: A discussion on equality of reproductive rights and men's right to 'statutory termination'" [2021] CanLawRw 16; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 97
Opting out of parenthood: A discussion on equality of
reproductive rights and men’s right to ‘statutory
termination’
Brittany Bretherton
The adoption of a right to ‘statutory termination’ raises
interesting novel questions about parenthood and equality in
reproductive
rights, but also difficult fundamental questions about equality before the law.
The concept of statutory termination
is that men should have equal reproductive
choice and rights as women by providing a reciprocal right to terminate all
responsibilities
relating to an unintended pregnancy. The topic is not a
comfortable one and not one that has been well embraced either socially or
legally in any country, including Australia. However, it is incrementally
gaining acceptance and some women have started speaking
out in favour of these
reforms due to their own concerns about fundamental inequality under the law.
The article provides an introductory
discussion to the concept of statutory
termination and its recent history and considers the viability and practicality
of its introduction
into Australia’s legal system. In doing so, it draws
heavily on US case law to analyse the relevant legal principles found
common law and contextualises the discussion within the social and academic
debate on relevant public policy issues.
INTRODUCTION
Abortion is a vexed issue that produces strong and emotive arguments on each
side of the debate, and it is no different in the context
of novel arguments in
favour of ‘abortion’ rights for
Proposed ‘abortion
rights’ for men – hereafter referred to as ‘statutory
termination’ - have no physical
implications for a pregnant woman, but
rather take the form of severing financial and parental responsibilities and
rights for children
borne out of unintended pregnancies to which the father is
opposed continuing.
It raises novel
legal and philosophical questions in the specific context of reproductive
rights. However, it also raises fundamental
questions about whether it is
acceptable, desirable, or necessary for inequalities to be written into and
applied by the law where
it is thought justifiable on bases of social
convention, traditional notions of morality, or public policy. This article
on the assumption that our society seeks to resolve and remedy
inequalities under the law when and where they are identified. Within
context, the history of the concept is outlined to define the scope and
application of the right to statutory termination as
discussed in this article.
The application of existing common law principles is then considered through an
analysis of US case law
but ultimately rejected as a viable source of legal
foundation for the introduction of this right. The implications for
Australia’s
legislative framework governing parental rights and
responsibilities are considered and potential areas of statutory reform are
to give effect to a right to statutory termination. Arguments for and
against the introduction of this right are considered and ultimately
that their introduction is necessary to achieve parity in reproductive rights
between men and women and may also better
serve the best interests of the child.
The legal, theoretical, and philosophical implications of changing
society’s legal approach to parenthood are vast in breadth
and complexity.
A detailed identification and analysis of all issues stemming from the proposed
reforms is unfortunately beyond the
scope of this article. Principally, the
limitations of this article mean that it provides only a superficial
identification of key
areas of the concept, legal issues, and public and
academic debate. The proposed legislative amendments offer only a high-level
identification
of key areas for reform and suggested key amendments that would
be necessary to give effect to a right to statutory termination.
Furthermore,
given the intensity of views and debate within the sphere of reproductive
rights, it is important to clarify that this
article does not take a general
position on men’s or women’s right. It is not, for example, argued
that women’s
rights have reached a pinnacle and should be wound back, nor
that women's rights further no further advancement. Additionally, the
of the rights of the unborn child, or whether it is ethically or morally
appropriate to bring a child into the world when
one parent is vehemently
opposed to its existence, are acknowledged as being relevant to the issue, but
also beyond the limited scope
of this article. Rather, the focus is placed on
the current state of reproductive rights of men and women in the context of
pregnancies and the apparent tensions that arise between the state of
these rights and the fundamental tenet of equality under the
PART I: THE CONCEPT OF STATUTORY TERMINATION AND
ITS HISTORY IN BRIEF
Statutory termination is the term used to refer to a man’s right in
certain circumstances to legally and financially sever any
legal or social ties
to a child upon becoming aware of its existence during pregnancy or after its
This form of termination is
distinguished from the pregnancy termination available to women in that it has
no physical bearing on
whether a woman brings a pregnancy to term and bears a
child. Rather, the man is only legally empowered to choose whether to assume
responsibilities of parenthood or not. A decision to terminate his status as
parent would not only absolve him of financial responsibilities,
terminate any rights to privileges in the child such as spending time with the
child or playing any role in the child’s
life, effectively transforming
his status from ‘father’ to ‘sperm
There is no
suggestion in this article that pregnancy termination laws should be changed in
relation to the rights that women now
possess, or that a man’s right to
terminate his parental responsibilities should have any legal impact on a
woman’s decision
to either continue or terminate a pregnancy. It is also
assumed that, in situations where each parent has voluntarily assumed
responsibility
for their child, they have an ongoing equal responsibility for
their child’s ongoing care and support, even in circumstances
later separated.
The circumstances in which it is envisaged that this right may be enlivened
is in limited cases where there was no intention between
the man and woman for a
pregnancy to result from intercourse, coupled with expressed opposition to the
pregnancy continuing by the
father. As with most areas of the law, the novel
scenarios in which an unintended father might seek to enliven this right, and
potential disputable variables that might arise are potentially innumerable.
However, for illustrative purposes, the types of cases
where it might be applied
include, for example, where a man and woman agree to use prophylactics and
contraceptives prior to intercourse
and mutually agree to an abortion in the
event of an unintended pregnancy, but the woman changes her mind and decides
against terminating
the pregnancy. It would also capture situations where a
woman might be deceptive about her fertility status or intentions with regards
to pregnancy. It is unnecessary for the purposes of this article to consider
similar situations in which a woman has a stated desire
not to fall pregnant as
women have existing rights to termination services in Australia, if they choose
to access them.
The concept of statutory termination most notably gained traction with a 1996
article written by Stephen Hales who argued that men
should not have an absolute
duty to provide ‘material’ support to their children and should have
a right of refusal.
Hales based his
argument on the following presuppositions and the inconsistencies arising
between them: that women have been granted
an absolute right to abortion on
demand; that men and women have equal moral rights and duties and should have
correspondingly equal
legal rights and duties; and, that parents have a moral
duty to support their child once they are born and any legal duty currently
supervenes those moral duties.
concept was also heavily litigated in the United States through the 1970s, 1980s
and 1990s, as fathers of children borne out
of unintended pregnancies (hereafter
referred to as ‘unintended fathers’) sought to avoid financial
responsibility for
their offspring. The most well-known of these cases was
Dubay v Wells
which, at the time, was billed as being “
Dubay v Wells,
argued against the obligation to pay child
support on grounds of reproductive fraud on the part of the mother,
Wells had made undertakings
that she was infertile and taking contraception as an additional precautionary
measure due to their mutually
stated intention of avoiding an unintended
Following this case, in
1998, Frances Goldscheider, a female philosopher, produced an op-ed out of Brown
University in which she
voiced support for providing men with equal rights and
responsibilities in fatherhood and advocated for statutory termination as
means of achieving equal rights between men and
In 2016, the issue gained some prominence in the Australian context with an
opinion piece by Australian comedian and columnist Catherine
Deveny who argued
strongly in favour of men’s rights to statutory termination on feminist,
equality, and social progression
Specifically, Deveny
argued that: consent to sex should no longer be construed as consent to
parenthood; that if it is not fair to
force a woman to become a parent then it
cannot be fair to force the same upon a man; and, that women would be better
supported by
policies and laws that allowed them to make fully informed
decisions about the responsibility of single parenthood without forcing
into an ongoing situation of tension with an unintended father. Deveny’s
solution was to introduce rights of statutory
termination for men coupled with
supplementary financial support provided by the
Deveny’s article
has received strong support from some as the logic of ‘consent to sex does
not amount to consent to
parenthood’ applies equally to men and
Furthermore, support was
subsequently expressed for Deveny’s view that any notion of men being
‘providers’ and
women being ‘cared for’ are founded in
outdated and oppressive heteronormative
Kerri Sackville, an
Australian commentator, subsequently responded to Deveny’s article in
vehement opposition. Sackville argued
that any moves to provide men with rights
abrogating their parental responsibilities would further oppress women and that,
would it be undesirable for men to have equal rights to avoid
parenthood as women, but it would be impossible until men were physically
capable of bearing children
themselves.
Two key reasons supporting the introduction of statutory termination have
emerged from the public debate on the issue: principled
opposition to forcing a
person to be responsible for a child they did not intend to produce or took
steps to avoid producing, and,
achieving parity in reproductive rights between
men and women. Despite these seemingly legitimate and compelling reasons for
introducing
a right for the termination of parental responsibilities, all
litigation on the issue in the United States has so far failed. There
currently no case in which principles of the common law have successfully been
found to support a man’s right to abrogate
his responsibilities towards
unintended offspring. However, the litigation on the issue from the United
States provides a useful
means of analysing the applicable common law principles
to demonstrate the need for statutory reform to achieve equality of reproductive
rights between men and women.
PART II LEGAL PRINCIPLES AND THE COMMON LAW
The genesis and extent of parental duties under the law have not yet been
settled. There is a compelling theoretical and philosophical
argument that
parental duties arise by artificial social convents rather than by natural
From this, it is argued
that the superficiality of social conventions explains the lack of
proportionality between the extent of
parental duties acquired and the level of
risk or precautions taken during
intercourse.
convention basis for parental duties also goes towards explaining the tolerance
of inequalities in the law, as well as
the inconsistencies and incoherencies
provided by courts when denying relief to fathers of unintended
pregnancies.
In contrast, the
common law takes the view that parental duties arise from natural law dating
where parents were considered to have a
duty to provide for the maintenance of their children as a principle of natural
Blackstone opined that, by
being a party to the conception, parents entered into a voluntary obligation to
support and preserve their
child’s life, thus giving rise to a right in
the child to receive maintenance from their
The application of the natural law line of reasoning forms the basis of
common law decisions of paternal responsibilities for unwanted
children and has
been relied upon to refuse relief on a number of grounds including equality,
fraud or misrepresentation of fertility
or contraceptive use, intentional
infliction of emotional distress and financial harm, and breach of
The only case in the
US that held a mother’s conduct should impact a child support award
occurred in 1981 but was subsequently
overturned on
The trial judge
had held that equity required the court to read an exception into paternity
statutes where a mother had intentionally
deceived him regarding her use of
contraception.
The court did not
take an absolutist position of absolving the father of his child support rights,
but rather held that the mother
would not be entitled to child support until her
resources were insufficient to meet the child’s needs as a means of
the child was provided
The inconsistencies of legal reasoning noted above can perhaps be best
illustrated in considering the core reasoning in
woman’s constitutionally protected right to privacy protects the right of
any person, either married or single, to
be “free from unwarranted
governmental intrusions into matters so fundamentally affecting a person as to
the decision whether
to bear or beget a
However, this reasoning
is demonstrably not applied and in fact is argued against by the judiciary in
the context of a father’s
right to decide the same. Inconsistencies can
also be demonstrated when considering the common law approach to consent,
intercourse,
and parenthood. This lends weight to arguments that duties imposed
upon parents by the State result from social convention rather
than any sense of
natural law. Furthermore, arguments that a man’s consent to sexual
intercourse was contingent upon undertakings
that the female was taking
precautions against pregnancy or was incapable of falling pregnant have been
routinely struck down by
This rejection of
the relevance of consent is, in a strict legal sense, at odds with the courts
own reasoning in cases of assisted
reproduction where, for example, a couple who
have created fertilised embryos must equally consent to use of the embryos.
In assisted reproductive cases, a lack of consent by the father was initially
sufficient grounds to prevent the mother from impregnating
herself with their
jointly created embryos.
Subsequent legal reforms have allowed men to withdraw consent to being treated
as the legal ‘father’ but still allow
the woman to use the embryos,
which, as noted above, effectively converts his status from ‘father’
to ‘donor’.
by the judiciary indicate that the assumption underlying these changes appears
to be that, it is less harmful to prevent
the viability of an embryo than to
impose parenthood on an unwilling
and that a man “is
entitled to say that he does not want to become a father by a woman...with whom
he no longer has anything
in common part form the frozen
embryos..."
Furthermore,
that it would not be unreasonable for a father to decline fatherhood when he
would not be in a position to play “a
full and proper paternal
With assisted
reproduction, each parent has the right – regardless of the other parents'
preferences or intentions - to reject
parenthood at any point before
impregnation occurs, even though the embryo
The common law therefore considers that the right to not have a child or
accept parenthood exists but that engaging in sexual intercourse
is a course of
conduct inconsistent with the exercise of that
The rationale behind this
is that the reproductive consequences of a father’s actions are imposed by
‘operation of nature,
Further, it has
been held that there is no requirement for the law to correct any sense of
unfairness in this context by allowing
biological fathers to abrogate their
financial responsibilities for supporting a child ‘as a proxy for the loss
of the events that naturally flow from sexual
intercourse'.
We have therefore
progressed from a position at common law where men had exclusive rights in their
children with the mother merely
entitled to ‘reverence and
to a position where
women have all rights to pregnancy and to decide whether a child is brought into
existence. The law further operates
in such a manner as to create a strict
liability standard for men who have no right to consent to sex on the belief
or otherwise – that there is a mutual intent not to
produce a child.
Furthermore,
the seminal case on the matter in the US,
Dubay v Wells
, found any
introduction of a right for men to terminate parent responsibilities as being
‘so foreign to our legal traditions
that it has no “foundation", no
chance of success'.
clear from the case law is that, there are no legal principles that the
judiciary is either willing or able to draw upon
to recognise a right for
fathers not to become a parent in the contexts discussed in this article. The
only means of achieving this
are through legislative reforms.
PART II PROPOSED LEGISLATIVE REFORM
It is acknowledged that the case law and common law principles discussed
above are based on the US legal system and are not neatly
analogous to the
Australian legal context. For example, arguments based on
not particularly translatable to the Australian context as we do not have a
recognised legal right to privacy, either constitutionally,
in statute, or at
common law. Furthermore, a key argument underpinning the decisions of US courts
is that “it is well settled
that the State does not have an affirmative
duty to correct underlying inequality in
While this may be true
of the social context in America, it is not necessarily true for the Australian
context where the State has
a much more prominent role in supporting vulnerable
members of society. Additionally, it is plainly open to the Australian
to legislate on this matter at the federal level under the Australian
Constitution
which provides the federal government with the power to make laws
with respect to 'divorce and matrimonial causes; and in relation
parental rights, and the custody and guardianship of
As a brief overview of the relevant aspects of Australia’s legal
framework, women’s abortion rights are regulated at the
State level and
parental rights and obligations are principally regulated federally under the
Family Law Act 1975
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
. The current state of abortion rights in
Australia provides women generally with access to abortion in all States but
with varying
degrees of access depending on the stage of pregnancy. For example,
in Queensland, abortion is legal up to 22 weeks but thereafter
requires the
approval of two doctors whereas in Tasmania, abortion is only available up to 16
weeks before the requirement for two
doctor’s approval is
In the Northern
Territory, the laws are stricter again with abortions being legal up to 16 weeks
with one doctors’ approval,
up to 23 weeks with two doctors’
approval, and illegal thereafter unless required to save the mother’s
None of the state-level or
federal level laws in Australia provide men with any rights in relation to
abortion, including either
notification of intent to terminate a pregnancy or
any right to participate in any part of the decision-making with the mother.
the current legal framework for parental rights, parents have a
presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, but this does
not translate
into a right to equal shared
Children also enjoy a
right to know and have meaningful relationships with each parent and to be
protected from harm.
also have a duty to support the child, regardless of who the child lives with,
and parents are able to arrange this between
themselves if they obtain
independent legal advice and meet a range of
obligations
Alternatively, parents can apply for a government conducted child support
assessment to determine the amount of payable child
The legislative
framework is complex, and reforms should seek to give effect to a right to
statutory termination in a simplified
A number of proposals have been raised in academic literature and social
debate for resolving the inequality between men and women’s
rights and for
introducing frameworks for giving effect to a right to statutory termination.
Goldscheider advocated for women to
be obliged to inform their sexual partner as
soon as the mother becomes aware of the pregnancy and to decide within a
period of time whether to continue with the
Further, Goldscheider
favoured penalties for women who failed to meet their obligations for violating
their sexual partner’s
Deveny suggested that,
similar to an organ donor register, a ‘no children’ register be
created so that men could register
their lack of desire to have
The intent behind this
would be to provide men with a means of evidencing their lack of desire to have
children. McGulley provided
a draft statute that would require women to notify
the father within a specified period of time; would provide the father with
to terminate his responsibilities and rights regardless of whether the
woman complied with the statutory notification periods or
not; and, would create
an avenue to petition the courts to recognise his termination of rights and
responsibilities with a specified
In general, the thrust of
the various proposed methods of giving effect to a right to statutory
termination base their timeframe
on the point of viability of a foetus and focus
on the following key requirements: for the father to have demonstrated their
of reproductive intent, to have taken active steps in to give effect to
that intention, and to communicate their opposition to continuing
pregnancy once they became aware of
The fundamental problem with the proposed approaches is that they rely
heavily on the introduction of a burden of proof and fault
element as triggering
mechanisms for enlivening a right to statutory termination. However, this has
significant potential to increase
tension between unintended mothers and
fathers, and to result in an influx of litigation to the court systems. Any
reforms should
instead focus on empowering each parent to make their own
decision independent of the other, taking into consideration their individual
life circumstances. The aim of these reforms should be for men and women to gain
have equal rights to choose whether to embrace the
rights and responsibilities
of parenthood, and for any resulting child to be wanted and supported by a
willing parent or willing
parents. The focus of the reforms suggested in this
article therefore focus on implementing carve outs in existing laws for
fathers. Although state level abortion laws do not require reform and
would be unaffected by a right to statutory termination, they
implications for the timeframe within which a man’s right to statutory
termination would need to be exercised. However,
as demonstrated above, the
abortion laws in Australia are not harmonised to a single point of pregnancy
stages, so determining the
timeframe within which a statutory termination would
have to occur requires considered thought. It may not be satisfactory for the
right to decide to simply match the equivalent state-level timeframe within
which a woman must decide whether to continue with or
terminate a pregnancy.
Giving effect to a right to statutory termination would require reforms to
Australia’s federal
Family Law Act 1975
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
Family Law Act 1975
would require changes to at least
, Division 2, to provide an
exception to
section 61C
, which currently stipulates that each parent has
parental responsibilities. It would also be prudent to amend
1, Sub-division BA to allow the court to determine that the best interests of
the child may be best served by allowing
the father to sever his financial and
other ties to the child. Corresponding reforms would also be required for the
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
to exclude application
of the Act to fathers who had exercised their right to statutory termination.
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
already provides
for Government funded financial assistance to be prorated depending upon the
percentage of care that a parent undertakes
New Tax System (Family
Assistance) Act 1990 (Cth)
s 35B) and this is further adjusted if there are
any relevant child support arrangements in place (
New Tax System (Family
Assistance) Act 1990 (Cth)
sub-div F). It would appear that the legislation
has been drafted with sufficient flexibility to allow for scenarios where a
may conceivably have all care time of a child and receive government
financial support that would otherwise be provided through child
However, significant research and analysis would be required to properly
consider the legislative reform implications of
financial support under
Australia’s social support and tax legislation.
PART IV RECONSIDERING THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE
The right to statutory termination in the terms discussed in this article is
relatively modern; however, critics of the proposal argue
that it is simply a
of wedlock and women had no recourse
to obtain financial
assistance.
This line of
argument cites concerns that, although women have the choice of not continuing
with a pregnancy, enabling men to abrogate
their responsibilities will
perpetuate the oppression that women have historically
However, within the
modern context, the provision of child support is arguably primarily providing
for the best interests of the
State as it has a vested interest in ensuring that
the mother and child are not relying on the State and taxpayer for public
assistance.
relationship between citizen and the State has evolved to a point where there is
now an expectation that the State provide
support for members of society, and
vulnerable members of society in particular. Children are undoubtedly vulnerable
members of society,
and it is justifiable for the State to intervene in
circumstances where it is in the best interests of the child. It seems
particularly
reasonable for the State to intervene in circumstances where a
child is caught between parents who cannot agree on the most fundamental
issues - its very existence.
In these circumstances, it may be in the best interests of the child for a
number of reasons to allow the reluctant father to remove
themselves and there
are compelling arguments supporting this. For example, Swedish sociologist and
feminist academic Karen Sjurop
argues in favour of the proposal on grounds that
voluntary termination of parental rights may serve to protect the best interests
of the child by avoiding constant rejection through non-payment and subsequent
conflict between the parents.
This is further echoed by arguments that two parents do not always make for a
positive and stable environment for a child, and that
it may be less traumatic
and disruptive for a child if the father is able to remove himself from the
situation in the very early
stages of the child’s
The current approach of
forcing fathers to remain involved appears to be based on assumptions that child
rear must necessarily take
place within a family context resembling a
traditional ‘nuclear family‘, and that a parent‘s involvement
is therefore
assumed to be in the best interests of the
This appears to further assume that all adults are capable of looking after
themselves to some degree and, by extension, are also
capable of caring for a
child. The courts themselves assume that ’many...will necessarily expand
the boundaries of their moral
sensibility' and that parenthood ’has the
potential to set in motion a process of engagement that is powerful and
cumulative,
and whose duration spans a
Reconsideration of
these assumptions is, however, justified in circumstances where either parent
states that they are unwilling or
unable to assume the significant
responsibilities of raising a child. Currently women have a range of options
available to them to
enable them to make this decision in a responsible and
considered way; however, as a society, we currently cast aside any opinion
potential fathers as ’intrusive, irrelevant, and
patriarchal’.
circumstances, it may be more responsible for a parent to remove themselves and
this may also better serve the best interests
of the child. The means of
achieving this are through re-evaluating society and the law’s approach to
parental responsibility
and introducing reforms that empower men to make their
own choices, whilst also empowering women to take on the role of motherhood
without having to choose between financial destitution or ongoing conflict with
an unwilling father.
The current state of reproductive rights is one in which women have
rightfully gained the power to control their bodies and to choose
when and how
they become parents, if at all. However, male parties to an unintended pregnancy
have largely lost control of their
reproductive rights. They have no recourse
once a pregnancy occurs, and the strict liability threshold employed by the
current legal
regime means that their primary choices are preventative in
nature: to abstain from sexual intercourse. It may be that this is an
life and law where it is neither achievable nor desirable to realise equality,
and that society is satisfied with the status
quo as the lesser of two evils. If
so, then the current state of law which imposes parenthood on reluctant fathers
is suitable if
unjust. If this is the case then, in situations where the
necessary means of achieving true parity of rights is unpalatable to the
communal conscience, we must acknowledge that we are not in truth seeking
equality, but rather are satisfied with qualified equality.
However, any notion
that equality should be abandoned because it is inconvenient or unpleasant is
arguably a more repellent notion
than reassessing the dominant historical social
narrative that intercourse necessarily gives rise to each parent’s
obligation, and capacity to raise a child. If inequalities are neither
desirable nor necessary, then rights for men to terminate
responsibilities in the limited circumstances discussed in this article may be
beneficial for the fathers and mothers. Furthermore,
in circumstances where a
father opposes the child’s existence, allowing an unintended father to
voluntarily remove himself
from the child’s life potentially has the added
benefit of removing a significant source of tension from the child and
lives. Where the financial support is supplemented by the State,
this situation may ultimately better serve the best interests of
The rights discussed may be
referred to interchangeably as ‘statutory termination', ‘statutory
abortion', ‘financial
termination', ’financial abortion',
‘paper termination', or ‘paper abortion' within public debate
sources and academic
literature. See, generally, Catherine Deveny, 'Financial
abortion: Should men be able to 'opt out' of parenthood?'
Broadcasting Corporation
(Online, 19 December 2016)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-04/financial-abortion-men-opt-out-parenthood/8049576?nw=0>.
Ibid; Anne Morris and Sue Nott,
'Rights and responsibilities: contested parenthood'
(2010) 31(1)
Social Welfare and Family Law
Stephen Hales, ’Abortion
and Fathers’ Rights’ in James M. Humber and Robert F. Almeder (eds)
Reproduction, Technology, and Rights
, (Humana Press, 1996) 1, 5.
The National Center For Men,
'Roe vs. Wade....For Men: Men's Center files pro-choice lawsuit in federal
Press Release
(Web Page, March 2006)
<https://nationalcenterformen.org/roe-vs-wade-for-men-press-release/>.
Dubay v Wells
Supp. 2d 405 (Lawson
, District Judge) (United States District Court, E.D.
Michigan, 2006) ('
Dubay v Wells
Frances Goldscheider, 'Men,
Children and the Future of the Family in the Third Millennium',
Children, and the Future of the Family in the Third Millennium
article, December 1998)
<https://www.brown.edu/Administration/News_Bureau/Op-Eds/Goldscheider.html>.
Deveny (n 1).
Frances Goldscheider, 'The
case for 'financial abortion'',
Policy Forum
(Web Page, 13 February 2017)
<https://www.policyforum.net/case-financial-abortion/>; Michael Cook, 'Is
'financial abortion'
an idea whose time has come? ',
10 December 2016)
<https://www.bioedge.org/bioethics/is-financial-abortion-an-idea-whose-time-has-come/12123>.
Cook (n 13).
Kerri Sackville, 'Swedish
group wants men to be given 'legal abortion' rights ',
(Online, 15 March 2016)
<https://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/parenting/pregnancy/swedish-group-wants-men-to-be-given-legal-abortion-rights/news-story/8b07c1a8513e6d3bd92d2ba0b490b3d0>.
Jill E. Evans, 'In Search of
Paternal Equity: A Father's Right to Pursue a Claim of Misrepresentation of
Fertility' (Pt 2) (2005)
Loyala University Chicago Law Journal
William Blackstone,
Commentaries on the Laws of England in Four Books
(Clarendon Press,
1765-1770) 447.
Evans (n 16), 1047.
Ibid 3079, citing
P v Frank S
443 NYS 2d 343 (NY
Fam Ct, 1981).
Einstadt v Baird
[1972] USSC 61
Melanie G. McCulley, 'The
Male Abortion: The Putative Father's Right to Terminate His Interests In and
Obligations to the Unborn
(1998) 7(1)
Journal of Law and Policy
Anne M. Payne
Parents Child Support
Liability as Affected by Other Parent’s Fraudulent Misrepresentation
Regarding Sterility or Use of Birth
Control, Or Refusal to Abort
(1992) 2(5)
American Law Reports
Davis v. Davis
842 SW 2d 588 (Tenn
Nott (n 4).
Evans v Amicus
Healthcare Ltd,
WSHC 2161, 319 (Fam, 2003).
Nott (n 4).
Child Support Enforcement
Agency v Doe
, 125 P.3d 461, 469 (Haw, 2005).
N.E. v Hedges
[2004] USCA6 464
Circuit, 2004).
Dubay v Wells
citing W.E Shipley, Women’s Rights to Have Abortion Without Consent of, or
Against Objection of, Child’s Father’,
American Law
McCulley (n 26), 26-28.
Dubay v Wells
Deshaney v Winnebago
County Department of Social Services
[1989] USSC 28
, 195 (1989).
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Termination of Pregnancy
Reproductive Health (Access to
Terminations)
(No 72. Of 2013) (Tas)
Termination of Pregnancy
Law Reform Act 2017
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Act 1975
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
Goldscheider (n 10).
Deveny (n 1).
McCulley (n 26).
Ibid; Goldscheider (n 3); Deveny (n 1).
Joseph Millum, 'How Do We
Acquire Parental Responsibilities? ' (2008) 34(1)
Social Theory and
Claudia Mills, ‘What
Do Fathers Owe their children?’ in A. Byrne. R Stalnaker, and R Wedgwood
Facts and Value: Essays on Ethics and Metaphysics for Judith Jarvis
(A Bradford Book, 2001) 183, 195.
McCulley (n 26); Ibid.
Interview with Karen Sjorup,
Associate Professor (Kristian Villesan, Information, 6 February 2016)
<https://www.information.dk/moti/2016/02/juridisk-abort-god-ting-ogsaa-kvinderne>.
Deveny (n 1).
Interview with Sjorup (n
Rivera v Minnich
, 584-85 (1987).
Kirsten West Savali, 'Should
Men Have the Right to 'Financial Abortions'?', 20 December 2011)
<https://www.huffpost.com/entry/fathers-financial-abortion_b_1015286?guccounter=1>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (488 KB)
PDF format (374 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter