URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/CanLawRw/2021/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Andriunas, Heidi --- "Evaluating The Consequences Of Criminalising Coercive Control In The Australian Capital Territory" [2021] CanLawRw 19; (2021) 18(2) Canberra Law Review 172
Evaluating The Consequences Of Criminalising Coercive
Control In The Australian Capital Territory
Heidi Andriunas*
This article examines whether the Australian Capital Territory should
consider the introduction of a standalone offence of coercive
control. Recently,
criminalising, coercive and controlling
behaviours. Tasmania, Scotland, England
and Wales have all implemented coercive control offences. New South Wales and
are currently conducting inquiries into the creation of an offence.
As these jurisdictions begin to recognise family violence as
a course of action
in the criminal law, it is pertinent to consider whether the ACT should follow.
This article evaluates this question
through discussion of the potential
consequences of criminalising coercive control and mitigation strategies for
these. Additionally,
it evaluates how an offence might be constructed in the
ACT. The article ultimately concludes that a coercive control offence is
necessary for the protection of victims of family violence in the ACT. However,
it cannot operate in isolation, and must only be
implemented if accompanied by
extensive non-legislative activities.
Introduction
The issue of family violence is serious. Its prevalence within Australia is
appalling, with the Australian Bureau of Statistics documenting
17% of women and
6% of men as having experienced intimate partner violence from the age of
Alarmingly, every nine
days in Australia a woman is killed by her intimate
The NSW Domestic Violence
Death Review Team (NSW DVDRT) recently found that ‘a number of its cases
were not preceded by an
evident history of physical abuse – instead
homicides were preceded by histories of other forms of coercive and controlling
behaviour.’
This troubling
revelation suggests that more needs to be done to combat coercive control.
Current civil and criminal laws in the ACT do not provide adequate protection
to victims of coercive control. Instead, this complex
and concerning aspect of
domestic and family violence has been historically overlooked by the law.
Coercive control is characterised
by violence, intimidation, isolation,
subordination, and control.
encompassed by a broad range of behaviours such as control of financial
resources, isolation from friends and family, deprivation
of personal autonomy,
and psychological manipulation.
this way, coercive control entraps a person, causing significant loss of
liberty, deprivation of substantive
and consequences for
health and wellbeing. Additionally, the concept of coercive control rejects the
incident-based model of family
violence, instead suggesting it is a persistent
pattern of abuse – one that lies beyond the reach of criminal laws.
of coercive control appear innocuous to outsiders, particularly when
viewed beyond the context of the
relationship.
Consequently, the
very nature of coercive control is pervasive, ongoing, and potentially
Over the past two years, awareness of coercive control in Australia has been
driven by the extensive public interest in the murder
of Hannah Clarke by her
former partner in early 2020.
lack of a criminal law response to coercive control, combined with its serious
impacts, has brought about support for its criminalisation
To this end, both NSW
and Queensland have begun considering whether coercive control should be
criminalised, each conducting respective
inquiries into the issue. As
serious harms and impacts
of coercive control, it is pertinent to evaluate
whether the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) should follow.
Despite this, criminalising coercive control comes with numerous challenges.
There are concerns that a coercive control offence might
floodgates’ for
prosecutions.
Some academics
argue that the legal system does not have the capacity to respond to coercive
control, and that if it is criminalised,
the offence will not achieve its
desired outcomes.
there is potential for a coercive control offence to cause serious negative
implications for female victims of family violence,
namely through
misidentification of victims and abuse of court
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people may also face disproportionate adverse impacts,
furthering their existing overrepresentation
in the Australian criminal justice
As such, implementation
of a coercive control offence requires careful consideration of risks and
possible mitigation strategies,
in both legal and social contexts.
II Aim and Scope
This article analyses the key consequences of criminalising coercive control,
evaluating whether an offence should be implemented
in the ACT. Although
coercive control has significant impacts for all Australian jurisdictions, this
article will solely examine
the implementation of an offence in the ACT. This is
because significant inquiries have already been conducted, or are in process,
other Australian jurisdictions. As the ACT is yet to consider this issue, this
article offers a novel analysis of criminalisation
in this area.
Furthermore, whilst family violence impacts people of all genders, it has
been shown that family violence is perpetrated predominantly
by men against
Hence, this article
focuses primarily on impacts for women, both in experiences of coercive control
and in the implementation of
an offence.
III Methodology
This article primarily concentrates on research for law reform purposes,
combining doctrinal, comparative, and qualitative interdisciplinary
contributing to the ‘new legal research
environment.’
Undertaking
qualitative research methods from both sociological and legal contexts assists
in gaining a broader understanding of
the law and its impacts through
consideration of the wider issues of family violence. This allows for analysis
of the content of
the law, and how it contributes to resolving social issues of
coercive control.
Doctrinal research was undertaken into existing coercive control laws in
England and Wales, Scotland, and Tasmania. Reported cases
relating to
Tasmania’s coercive control offences were located by utilising the
Australasian Legal Information Institute (AustLII)
up’ function. Unreported cases were found through the Tasmanian Law
Library database, by entering
the relevant offence (either “emotional
abuse or intimidation”, “economic abuse”, or “persistent
violence”).
A comparative research methodology was employed to evaluate the effectiveness
of coercive control legislation across jurisdictions.
This was completed by
engaging with interdisciplinary secondary source materials, which provided
insight into benefits and consequences
of criminalising coercive control. To
find relevant secondary sources, legal databases such as Lexis Advance, Westlaw
AU, Attorney-General’s
Information Service (Informit), HeinOnline,
Proquest Central, and AustLII were searched using a combination of the following
“coercive control”, “criminalisation”,
“intimate partner violence”, “criminal law”,
“domestic violence” and “domestic abuse”.
IV Structure
This article is divided into five parts. The first part provided an overview
of the aims and purposes. The second part offers a broad
context and background
to coercive control, examining the negative impacts of coercive control and
presenting a brief overview of
current reforms in NSW and QLD. The third part
provides a detailed outline of existing legislative frameworks in Tasmania,
and Wales, and Scotland, and evaluates the implementation of the
offences in each jurisdiction. The fourth part analyses outcomes
of coercive
control offences. This section evaluates potential consequences of coercive
control legislation that have been previously
identified by researchers,
referencing the implementation of coercive control legislation in different
evaluates the potential for a coercive control
offence to be implemented in the ACT. Here, the article outlines reasons why an
is needed in the ACT through evaluating the adequacy of current ACT
family violence laws. The article then examines how an offence
constructed in the ACT by assessing each element of a coercive control offence.
Following this, the article considers non-legislative
activities that would be
required to support a coercive control offence.
COERCIVE CONTROL: CONTEXT AND
I Impacts of coercive control
Victims of coercive control face numerous significant impacts as a result of
a partner’s abusive behaviours. Experiences of
emotional and psychological
abuse can lead to numerous adverse outcomes, including post-traumatic stress
depression and
and increased risk
of substance abuse.
Victims may
not even recognise that they are experiencing family violence, with some
believing their experiences are ‘part
of ordinary relationship
victims with children, coercive control can have negative implications on the
victim’s relationship with her child,
alongside the child themselves.
Perpetrators of coercive control may attempt to prevent mothers from spending
time with their children,
leading to emotional and behavioural problems in
disempowerment, and
loss of confidence and
Furthermore, coercive control causes ‘entrapment’, which has been
described as ‘the most devastating outcome of
This can be
exacerbated by the lack of self-trust a victim has after being subjected to
emotional abuse by an intimate
autonomy to ‘say and do things and to meet their own needs without worry
or fear’ is also impacted.
As a result of entrapment, alongside loss of autonomy and
self-identity,
victims are
disempowered to leave abusive
relationships.
These impacts
arise both immediately after the abuse, and well into the victim’s future
following the end of the
relationship.
II Coercive control reforms in
The legal system has been a key component of Australia’s response to
family violence over the last thirty
with domestic violence
protection orders at the
However, recently
various Australian states have begun to consider whether coercive control
offences would be a desirable element
of our family violence response. To this
end, both NSW and QLD have begun the process of considering whether to
incorporate an offence
of coercive control into criminal law.
In late 2020, Anna Watson MP headed a NSW Bill to include an offence of
coercive control in the
Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence)
This bill, termed
Preethi’s Law, is named after Preethi Reddy, a Sydney dentist who was
tragically murdered by her former partner.
Anna Watson brought forth this bill
to ‘change the way we respond to domestic abuse and to better define what
constitutes domestic
abuse to enable greater protection for victims and their
Following the
bill, NSW formed a Joint Select Committee for Coercive Control, which undertook
an inquiry into whether coercive control
should be criminalised. In June 2021,
the committee released a report outlining the findings from the various
submissions made to
the inquiry, unanimously recommending the criminalisation of
coercive control in NSW.
government response to this report is due in December 2021.
Similarly, Queensland formed a taskforce in early 2021 for the purpose of
determining whether coercive control should be made an
This followed the
murder of Hannah Clarke and her three children by her former husband, who had
engaged in coercive and controlling
behaviours prior to the homicide. Since
Hannah’s death, her parents have campaigned for greater awareness of
coercive control,
calling for Queensland to criminalise
Recently, the Queensland
Taskforce has recommended the creation of a coercive control offence in
Queensland in its first report reviewing
the submissions to its
COERCIVE CONTROL LEGISLATION ACROSS NATIONAL
AND INTERNATIONAL JURISDICTIONS
I The offences of economic abuse and emotional
abuse or intimidation: Tasmania’s novel non-physical family violence
Overview of the offences
Tasmania is presently the only Australian jurisdiction to have criminalised
coercive and controlling behaviour in the context of family
violence. In 2004,
Tasmania enacted the
Family Violence
which established two
novel family violence offences, reflecting an unprecedented attempt to
criminalise non-physical family violence.
These offences formed part of numerous
reforms aimed to better address family violence, and were developed in reaction
to criticisms
of Tasmania’s family violence
With these reforms,
Tasmania proposed to ‘introduce a pro-arrest, integrated criminal justice
response to family
The offence of economic abuse states:
Economic abuse
A person must not, with intent to unreasonably control or intimidate his or
her spouse or partner or cause his or her spouse or partner
mental harm,
apprehension or fear, pursue a course of conduct made up of one or more of the
following actions:
(a) coercing his or her spouse or partner to relinquish control over assets
(b) disposing of property owned –
(i) jointly by the person and his or her spouse or partner; or
(ii) by his or her spouse or partner; or
(iii) by an affected child –
without the consent of the spouse or partner or affected child;
(c) preventing his or her spouse or partner from participating in decisions
over household expenditure or the disposition of joint
(d) preventing his or her spouse or partner from accessing joint financial
assets for the purposes of meeting normal household expenses;
(e) withholding, or threatening to withhold, the financial support reasonably
necessary for the maintenance of his or her spouse or
partner or an affected
The offence of emotional abuse or intimidation states:
Emotional abuse or intimidation
(1) A person must not pursue a course of
conduct that he or she knows, or ought to know, is likely to have the effect of
unreasonably
controlling or intimidating, or causing mental harm, apprehension
or fear in, his or her spouse or partner.
(2) In this section –
a course of conduct
includes limiting the freedom of movement of
a person's spouse or partner by means of threats or
intimidation.
Since enactment of the legislation, only three reported cases have mentioned
either of these offences. These cases were all heard
in the Tasmanian
Magistrates Court, and mentioned the s 9 emotional abuse or intimidation
offence. They include
Benjamin James Nunn.
only mentioned s 9 in passing, and did not discuss it, as the case focused
on an application to revoke a family violence order. The
other two cases
discussed the requirements of the s 9 offence in greater detail.
, the defendant was charged under s 9, alongside two other
charges relating to violations of a police family violence
In this case, the
defendant allegedly threatened to take the victim’s child to Melbourne, if
she did not comply with his request
to stay the night with him. This single
conversation was relied upon by the prosecution to constitute a course of action
purpose of the act. The court did not accept this conversation as
meeting the requirements for the course of
and stated that the
prosecution failed to submit that the intimidation by the perpetrator was
unreasonable.
Police v Benjamin James Nunn
, the defendant was charged with
emotional abuse or intimidation for pouring petrol over a vehicle that the
victim’s child was
in, and threatening to set the car on fire whilst the
victim was watching.
court accepted that the defendant’s behaviour was aimed at the victim and
caused her fear and
apprehension,
the charge was
dismissed due to the lack of a course of
As demonstrated, both cases did not meet the requirements of the legislation
as they lacked a course of conduct. Yet, family violence
rarely occurs in single
It is likely that in
both cases, the perpetrators were exerting other coercive and controlling
behaviours that were not identified
by the police and prosecutors. As a result,
the criminal justice system failed to adequately respond to these incidents of
violence and provided limited protection to the victims.
Effectiveness of Tasmania’s
As demonstrated by the limited case law, the uptake of Tasmania’s
family violence offences has been slow if not virtually non-existent.
2013-14 there were 2376 incidents of family violence recorded in Tasmania, with
1634 police family violence orders and 380
court issued family violence
In that same year, only
one charge of emotional abuse or intimidation was
Moreover, from the time of
enactment to 2015, only seven charges of emotional abuse or intimidation were
with only the two above
mentioned cases making it to the Magistrate’s court. The lack of success
of these offences suggests
there are deficiencies in either the construction or
implementation of the offences.
1 Construction of the offences
(a) Short limitation periods
Flaws in the construction of the offences may contribute to the scarcity in
prosecutions. Both offences initially had a limitation
period of six months from
the most recent incident, but this has now been extended to twelve
A short limitation
period may reduce prosecutions,
especially where victims do not immediately report a perpetrator’s
behaviour. Notably, in the years since the amendment of
the limitation period,
higher numbers of charges have been
Although, this could
be attributed to increases in community and professional awareness. Despite
this, these figures are still comparatively
low when regarding the yearly number
of family violence incidents.
(b) Broad vs narrow construction of the offences
The offence of economic abuse is narrowly construed, making it difficult to
In contrast, the offence
of emotional abuse or intimidation is broad but lacks specificity. This is
illustrated by the course of
conduct requirement in s 9, which is not
specifically defined in the act. By not explicitly defining a course of conduct,
are required to turn to existing case law to determine a definition, such
as through stalking cases.
Interestingly, existing case law has determined that stalking could constitute a
course of conduct (or even a threat or act of intimidation)
in circumstances
where the victim’s freedom of movement is
With the narrow construction of s 8 and broad construction of s 9, the s 8
offence is rendered unnecessary, as any conduct that could
be charged under s 8
would also qualify for s 9.
Marilyn McMahon and Paul McGorrery argue that the economic abuse offence is
over-criminalisation, identifying merely three differences
between both
offences, being the section headings, the
and the proscribed
behaviours.
Section headings
have no relevance to the offences other than being a description of the
s 9 is easier to prove than s 8, as it includes the requirement that
‘knows or ought to know’ as opposed to strict
The proscribed
behaviours in s 9 include any behaviour that is likely to be unreasonably
controlling or intimidating, or cause apprehension,
mental harm or fear, whilst
s 8 lists only five separate
behaviours.
Moreover, in the
five cases where economic abuse have been prosecuted to date, emotional abuse or
intimidation was also charged.
This demonstrates that behaviour charged under the s 8 economic abuse offence
may be better charged under the s 9 emotional abuse
offence, effectively
rendering s 8 unnecessary.
(c) The unreasonableness requirement
The s 9 offence requires that the perpetrator knows, or ought to know, that
their behaviour would likely have the effect of unreasonably
controlling,
intimidating, causing mental harm to, or apprehension or fear in the
Whilst this means that
there is no requirement that the victim is actually controlled or intimidated,
the language suggests there
is some level of controlling or intimidating
behaviour that would be considered
reasonable.
determining reasonableness requires an understanding of the relationship’s
context. As Paul McGorrery and Marilyn
McMahon state, ‘should a man who
migrated from a patriarchal culture be subjected to a different standard when
determining
whether his conduct towards his wife was controlling or
intimidating?’
this requirement creates difficulties for courts in objectively determining what
standards of reasonableness should be applied.
2 Implementation of the offences
In addition to flaws in their construction, further issues exist in the
implementation of the offences, which contribute to a lack
of prosecutions.
These include the absence of specialised professional training and limited
community education regarding non-physical
family violence.
Upon the introduction of the new Act, police officers in Tasmania received
training on their new powers, but not on the specific offences
of economic and
emotional abuse.
This meant that
officers lacked the necessary skills to identify non-physical family violence
and investigate it. Investigation and
obtaining evidence for a course of conduct
offence is complex and time
Without the requisite
knowledge and skills, it is likely near impossible for police officers to
conduct an adequate investigation.
Alongside this, identifying subtle behaviours
and patterns of abuse is difficult, especially when police are only called in
an incident of physical violence has occurred. In these cases, it is
probable that the physical violence will be charged whilst any
non-physical
family violence is overlooked. Consequently, it is easy to see how these
offences are rarely charged.
Inadequate community awareness of non-physical family violence further
exacerbates this. If victims or witnesses are not aware that
constitutes a criminal act, then it is unlikely they will make reports to
police. Likewise, victims may only call police
when an incident of physical
violence or a threat has occurred, and then that behaviour will be solely
focused on. A Tasmanian prosecutor
has stated that in twenty cases involving the
offences of economic or emotional abuse, all were preceded by physical
Without adequate
community awareness regarding the behaviours that constitute family violence,
prosecutions are likely to remain
II England and Wales: The Offence of
Controlling or Coercive Behaviour
Overview of the offence
England and Wales introduced a new offence of controlling or coercive
behaviour in December 2015 following consultation processes
initiated by the
support of strengthened laws against
This offence was further
motivated by a report that found police had an inadequate understanding of
domestic violence,
concerns by the Law Commission regarding policing of domestic
Reasons for the
implementation of this offence include to close the gap that existed in law
regarding coercive control, to send a
message to abusers that their behaviour
constitutes a serious offence, and to provide greater protection to
The introduction of s 76 of the
Serious Crime
criminalises
‘coercive or controlling behaviour in an intimate or family
relationship.’
offence states:
(1) A person (A) commits an offence if—
(a) A repeatedly or continuously engages in behaviour towards another person
(B) that is controlling or coercive,
(b) at the time of the behaviour, A and B are personally connected,
(c) the behaviour has a serious effect on B, and
(d) A knows or ought to know that the behaviour will have a serious effect on
For A and B to be personally connected, they must either be in a personal
relationship, live together and be members of the same family,
or live together
and have previously been in an intimate personal
relationship.
previous intimate partners who do not live together are excluded from this
offence. For A’s behaviour to have a
serious effect, it must either cause
B to fear that violence will be used against them on at least two occasions, or
cause B serious
alarm or distress that leads to a substantial adverse effect on
their usual day-to-day
activities.
The Home Office has published statutory guidance surrounding investigation of
this offence per s 77(1) of the Act. In this publication,
coercive and
controlling behaviour is defined, alongside numerous examples of relevant
behaviours. Controlling behaviour is defined
as being ‘acts designed to
make a person subordinate and/or dependant by isolating them from sources of
support, expositing
their resources ... depriving them of the means needed for
independence, resistance and escape and regulating their everyday
behaviour.’
behaviour is defined as ‘a continuing act or a patterns of acts of
assault, threats, humiliation and intimidation
or other abuse that is used to
harm, punish, or frighten the
Alongside this, the College of Policing authorised professional practice on
domestic abuse has produced principles regarding the new
offence for police
officers and the public in response to a recommendation by the
This guide provides an
explanation for identifying controlling and coercive behaviour, particularly in
relation to distinguishing
normal relationships from abusive ones. It states
that normal relationships may sometimes involve one partner making a decision
the other or taking control of a situation, however, in abusive
relationships when decisions are made by the abuser, if the victim
follow those decisions, consequences
Analysing the offence
In years prior to the introduction of the offence in England and Wales and
since, significant legal discourse has occurred regarding
the criminalisation of
coercive control. Many academics have argued that there must be caution in
implementing these offences, particularly
as they may cause negative
implications for victims. With the introduction of a coercive control offence in
England and Wales, it
is crucial to understand its strengths and weaknesses to
evaluate its effectiveness.
1 Uptake of the offence
A coercive control offence may be redundant if it is not utilised. This has
been seen in Tasmania’s offences, which are rarely
used, contributing no
significant positive impacts to the protection of coercive control victims.
Likewise, the uptake of the offence
in England and Wales was initially slow.
From April 2015 to March 2018, 314 offences had reached a first hearing at a
Magistrates
since, uptake has increased considerably, with 1177 offences reaching a first
hearing at a magistrates’ court from
April 2018 to March
and 9,053 coercive control
offences recorded by police in that same
Early research has
indicated that the offence has a prosecution rate of 91%, however it is noted
that this may be due to ‘extreme
diligence and/or caution by investigators
and prosecutors during the early years of the offence being in
operation.’
Still, these
early results of the offence are impressive, and suggest it is an effective
measure against coercive and controlling
behaviours.
2 Limitations of the offence
Despite the positive uptake of the offence, it has numerous limitations.
Firstly, the offence does not cover former intimate partners
who do not live
together. This is likely due to how the offence is operationalised. The home
office definition of coercive control
naturally excludes former intimate
partners, as it focuses on abuse that occurs within the context of a current
relationship. This
is achieved by using phrases such as ‘make a person ...
dependent’ and ‘depriving them of the means needed for
independence,
resistance, and escape’
the definition of controlling behaviour. However, whilst former partners might
not be controlled in that manner, they can still
be subject to controlling and
coercive behaviours. This can take the form of threats of violence towards the
victim or their children
or pets, or even through technologically assisted
abuse. The home office considers behaviours such as threats to hurt or kill,
to a child, threats to publish private information, assault, and
criminal damage as being parts of a course of conduct that may amount
coercive control.
Additionally,
they state that behaviours do not only occur at home, and that phones and social
media may be utilised to cause a victim
Furthermore, serious
issues may arise where a child is involved and contact is required between two
former partners to exchange care
of the child. This contact can present
additional opportunities for exertion of coercive and controlling behaviours.
Therefore, excluding
former intimate partners from the offence is a significant
limitation, and could cause victims of coercive control to be disallowed
to justice through the criminal justice system.
A further limitation is the victim focused nature of the offence, as it
requires for the behaviour to have a ‘serious effect’
This means victims may
be required to become heavily involved in court processes as witnesses for
successful prosecution and sentencing
of offenders. This is an unacceptable
burden for victims, and may allow for further opportunities for a victim to be
abused by the
perpetrator.
Moreover, the adversarial nature of the court could exacerbate these issues, as
victims may have to describe the abuse in detail,
the impacts it has had on
them, and be cross-examined about it. Being cross-examined about private aspects
of a relationship and
the abuse can be highly challenging. As such, the
requirement that there be serious harm evidenced is a limitation of this
as is causes significant negative implications for victims.
Lastly, the drafting of the offence lacks specificity. This is particularly
evident in the definition of a course of conduct. As seen
in Tasmania, poor
drafting of the meaning of a course of conduct can be a factor in potential
under-utilisation. Furthermore, it
may cause courts to apply the law
inconsistently. This offence requires that there is ‘repeated or
continuous’ behaviour,
however this phrase is not specifically defined by legislation. The statutory
guidance framework provides some detail on what is
meant by repeated or
continuous behaviour, stating that ‘continuously means on an ongoing
It further states
that one or two isolated incidents would not satisfy the
requirement.
This clarification
by the home office is still quite vague and could be refined to aid courts in
interpreting and applying the offence.
In summary, the limitations of England and Wales’s offence casts
significant doubts on its capacity to provide adequate protection
and recourse
to victims of coercive control.
III Scotland’s Offence of Domestic
Overview of the offence
In March 2017, Scotland introduced the
Domestic Abuse (Scotland)
that proposed to
criminalise coercive control. This bill was passed through Parliament
unanimously in February 2018 and came into
force in April 2019. When the bill
passed, all members of Parliament gave a standing ovation to the survivors of
domestic violence
and advocates for the offence who were seated in the public
The bill was
introduced in response to consultation undertaken by the Scottish government in
2015, which asked whether a specific
offence of domestic abuse would improve
responses to domestic violence within the criminal justice
From the responses to
the consultation, 96% agreed that an offence of domestic violence would be
beneficial.
The bill was
drafted in consultation with policy experts from Scottish Women’s Aid,
alongside survivors of domestic violence,
who had input into the language
The Scottish offence
has recently been referred to as the new ‘gold standard’ of coercive
control offences.
Domestic Abuse (Scotland)
criminalises
‘abusive behaviour towards partner or
ex-partner.’
offence states:
(1) A person commits an offence if–
(a) the person (“A”) engages in a course of behaviour which is
abusive of A’s partner or ex-partner (“B”),
(b) both of the further conditions are met.
(2) The further conditions are–
(a) that a reasonable person would consider the course of behaviour to be
likely to cause B to suffer physical or psychological harm,
(b) that either—
(i) A intends by the course of behaviour to cause B to suffer physical or
psychological harm, or
(ii) A is reckless as to whether the course of behaviour causes B to suffer
physical or psychological harm.
The Act contains detailed explanations as to what constitutes abusive
Behaviour that is
directed at B that is violent, threatening or intimidating is abusive
Additionally,
behaviour directed at either B, B’s child or another person that either
has a purpose of causing one of the relevant
effects or would be considered by a
reasonable person to be likely to have one or more of the relevant effects is
abusive behaviour.
relevant effects include causing dependence, subordination or isolation,
controlling day-to-day activities, depriving freedom
of action, and frightening,
humiliating, degrading or punishing
Violent behaviour includes
both sexual and physical
This offence is
aggravated when a child is involved in any manner, such as by seeing, hearing,
or being present during the behaviour,
or if the behaviour is directed at
It is required that a
reasonable person would consider the behaviour to be likely to adversely affect
the child, who must be usually
residing with either A or B or
Evaluation of the domestic abuse
Evaluation of the effectiveness of the Scottish offence may be limited due to
its recent enactment. However, preliminary research
suggests its uptake has been
high, particularly in comparison to the English and Welsh
The Scottish offence
has been described by academics Evan Stark and Marianne Hester as being
‘one of the most radical attempts
yet to align the criminal justice
response with a contemporary feminist conceptual understanding of domestic abuse
as a form of coercive
The offence has numerous strengths. Firstly, formulation of the legislation
reduces impacts on victims. By utilising the reasonable
person test, the offence
focuses on the perpetrator’s actions instead of any effects on a victim.
Additionally, the offence
explicitly states that there is no requirement that
the victim suffers harm,
that the perpetrators behaviour actually has any of the relevant
As a result, the
victim is less involved with the court process and the potential for
re-traumatisation is reduced.
Alongside this, the legislation acknowledges the harms endured by children
who are present during domestic abuse. As Marsha Scott
‘re-frames the experience of children and young people involved in
domestic violence, constructing them as
experiencing
the abuse rather
than merely
The offence is
aggravated not only when a child has behaviour directed at them by a
perpetrator, but also when they see, hear, or
are present during a
perpetrator’s
There is no
requirement that the child has to be aware of the behaviour or have an
understanding of the nature of the behaviour,
nor do they have to be adversely
Theoretically, an
offence may be aggravated if even a baby or toddler is in the same room, or if a
perpetrator makes threats of violence
towards a young child but does not follow
through with them. It has been shown that children are negatively impacted by
non-violent
coercive control perpetrated against their
Therefore, the
inclusion of children as victims of coercive control is a major strength of the
Scottish offence.
In summary, the Scottish offence has the potential to greatly improve
outcomes for victims of coercive control, advocating for the
rights of children
and women in the country. Despite this, there is still room for improvement. The
domestic abuse offence only accounted
for 4% of offences recorded by police as
part of incidents of domestic abuse in
Other offences
such as the offence of breach of the peace, which includes crimes of threatening
and abusive behaviour, and stalking,
accounted for 26% of offences
However, the
offence was enacted very recently, and it may be many years before the true
effectiveness is known. Still, the offence’s
capacity to promote greater
protection for victims is a positive impact that cannot be ignored, particularly
given its comparative
high uptake in its first year.
THE POTENTIAL POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE
IMPLICATIONS OF COERCIVE CONTROL OFFENCES
I Benefits of a coercive control offence
An offence that encompasses physical and non-physical aspects of family
violence would allow for the criminal justice system to better
complex issues of coercive control. It would acknowledge the serious impacts
coercive control has on victims, and send
a message to perpetrators that their
behaviour is not acceptable. Likewise, criminalisation would ‘provide
women with better
opportunities for recourse of the suffering they have
By criminalising coercive control, the justice system will have the capacity
to intervene in cases where physical violence is not
present. Because coercive
control is a precursor to physical violence, this may result in possible
prevention of future violence
and intimate partner homicide. Alongside this,
criminalisation will provide a greater opportunity for community and
professional
education on coercive control. This may increase the general
public’s capacity to recognise situations of family violence.
For victims,
it may mean understanding that they are experiencing abuse and seeking help
II Overview of the negative
implications
Despite these benefits, it is essential to recognise that an offence of
coercive control will come with difficulties, both in its
construction and
implementation. As coercive control is a concept that describes the nature of
family violence and its many impacts,
it is not as dichotomous as existing
criminal laws. Moreover, the criminal law predominately focuses on
Perpetrators of
family violence may face charges of assault for incidents of physical violence,
and these incidents can be reasonably
easy to prove due to actual, physical
evidence. On the contrary, the broad and contextual nature of coercive control
makes it difficult
to define, and hence there may be issues with translating
this into law.
As coercive
control encompasses both physical and emotional behaviour, and takes place as a
course of conduct, it is difficult to
construct legislation that encompasses its
nature. This section will discuss the limitations in the construction and
implementation
of a coercive control offence, offering counter arguments and
potential mitigation strategies for these issues.
III Over-criminalisation
The risk of overcriminalisation is a major challenge in creating a coercive
control offence. There are concerns that if a coercive
control offence is framed
too broadly, behaviours that exist in ordinary relationships will become
criminal. Indeed, it is not the
role of the legal system to intervene in these
relationships. However, it is necessary that the law intervenes in behaviour
causes significant impacts to victims, breaches human rights, and is a
factor in intimate partner
To prevent over-criminalisation, a coercive control offence will need to
distinguish between behaviours that are normal in intimate
relationships, and
behaviours that would collectively form a course of abusive
However, distinguishing between these behaviours is fraught with problems,
because considering whether behaviours are coercive or
controlling depends on
individual relationship
distinguishing these, the offence should include provisions that relate to the
intended impacts of the behaviour and their
frequency. Additionally, it should
include a non-exhaustive list of behaviours that exist in coercive and
controlling relationships,
akin to the list of family violence related
behaviours in the ACT
Family Violence Act
Commonwealth
Family Law Act
IV A course of conduct within incident based
legal systems
Current criminal laws focus almost exclusively on singular
In contrast, an
offence of coercive control would criminalise a course of conduct. For the
concept of coercive control to translate
into law, the legal system needs to be
ready to evaluate courses of conduct instead of singular incidents. There are
concerns that
the legal system is not ready for nor capable of doing
The current focus on single incidents of violence means that ‘there is
often insufficient regard for the context in which the
violence and injury
As a result,
perpetrators can more easily present themselves as a
particularly where
there has been a retaliatory act of violence by a victim. In determining if a
behaviour forms a part of a course
of conduct, police need to be able to
recognise the subtle processes that occur in relationships. Currently, no
Australian jurisdiction
possesses the police capability to identify and evaluate
patterns of coercive control.
However, with adequate police training there is a chance this issue may be
Alongside this,
current laws of stalking have been successfully prosecuted in the
suggesting that the
legal system is capable of understanding courses of conduct. Therefore, this
concern may not be relevant, particularly
as courts move towards deeper
understandings of family violence.
V Misidentification of victims as
perpetrators
A particularly troubling issue regarding criminalisation of coercive control
is that female victims may be misidentified by police
as perpetrators. Given the
gendered nature of coercive control, it is a concern that a potential offence
will be used against the
people it aims to
This issue is
evident in domestic violence protection orders, where female victims have been
subject to orders from abusive
This section
discusses the significant impacts faced by victims who have been misidentified,
the factors that contribute to misidentification,
and potential options for
mitigation.
Female victims who are incorrectly identified as perpetrators face serious
impacts. If arrested, victims could experience a loss of
protection from abuse,
as they may no longer feel they have safe access to the criminal justice
Victims can become
hesitant in contacting police for help due to fears of being arrested again, and
because of this, they may experience
an escalation in violence from
perpetrators.
Furthermore,
arrests can increase the likelihood of victims being subject to domestic and
family violence protection orders, which
could have impacts on a victims
If a perpetrator was
to attempt to utilise the criminal justice system as a further means for abuse,
a victim may become more likely
to face further charges on the basis of a
history of offending.
addition, misidentification and criminalisation can have repercussions for
employment, child custody arrangements, and
Numerous factors contribute to misidentification. These include cases where
violence occurs by both parties, a lack of evidence relating
to the family
violence, or a misrepresentation by the perpetrator as being a
Misidentification of
victims is a particular challenge in cases that appear ambiguous due to violence
on both sides. This is because
of police difficulty in identifying the primary
victim where a female victim has reacted violently towards an
However, violent or
aggressive responses by victims are often a result of a partner’s coercive
and controlling behaviours.
As such, increased police awareness of these behaviours and understanding of the
gendered nature of family violence may contribute
to reduced misidentification
of female victims.
This is demonstrated in England and Wales, which has been found to have a
remarkably low number of women sentenced for their offence
of controlling or
coercive behaviour.
offenders sentenced, 106 were male
Victims of these
offences were also overwhelmingly female (106 of
Despite the
gender-neutral nature of the offence, the police response has been highly
gendered, with police being capable of correctly
identifying the primary
perpetrator. This can be attributed to training of police, who developed an
understanding of the gendered
nature of family
As such, if an
offence of coercive control is enacted alongside extensive training of police
regarding coercive control,
then misidentification can be prevented.
VI Burdens on victims
The criminalisation of coercive control may require victims to become
involved in court processes, particularly as witnesses. Engaging
court processes as witnesses could cause re-traumatisation, due to emotional
costs and the need to extensively prepare
Furthermore, reluctant
victims may be urged by police officers to provide large amounts of evidence,
and may even experience further
control by the legal system
On the other hand,
when police do not believe victim’s claims of abuse, they may be
re-traumatised and disempowered to take
To mitigate these burdens, the employment of a perpetrator focused approach
may be useful. The Scottish offence demonstrates this,
and has been hailed by
academics for its approach.
England and Wales, who do not adopt a perpetrator focused approach, have a high
rate of guilty pleas (73%) for their offence of controlling
or coercive
Guilty pleas
require less involvement by victims, and therefore burdens on victims may be
significantly reduced.
VII Legal systems abuse
A highly concerning risk of a coercive control offence is that it might be
utilised by perpetrators as an additional method for abuse
of their current or
former partners.
behaviour has been described by Professor Heather Douglas, who refers to it as
‘legal systems
Perpetrators
may engage in legal systems abuse to place pressure on victims to withdraw their
own legal applications, to escape repercussions
for their actions, or even to
cause financial and emotional harm to
This behaviour is
often utilised to continue to control partners after separation, particularly
due to the loss of opportunity to
exert control that comes with the end of a
relationship.
Responding to
false or vexatious claims made by perpetrators can come at a significant
personal cost for victims, who are required
to dedicate time and money in
defending themselves.
However, it must be considered whether an offence of coercive control would
contribute to this, or whether it would work against
legal systems abuse by
changing perceptions of family violence.
Legislative actions that seek to criminalise coercive and controlling
behaviours understand it as a pattern of abuse. If enacted alongside
educational
campaigns, a coercive control offence could effectively contribute to a change
in professional and community understandings
Therefore, by
understanding both the context of family violence and its associated behaviours,
instead of viewing it as single and
discrete incidents, legal systems abuse may
be reduced.
Whilst there is
no guarantee that legislative reforms would lead to significant cultural
evidence from other
overwhelmingly male, which recognises
the gendered nature of family
This was achieved
through educating police to develop a thorough understanding of the patterns of
abuse that take place in coercive
Therefore, there is
tentative evidence that an offence of coercive control, if developed and
implemented effectively, could contribute
to cultural change.
Changes in understandings of coercive control would positively impact members
of the legal profession. Lawyers who are more knowledgeable
in behaviours and
tactics exerted by perpetrators may be more capable of recognising clients
engaging in legal systems abuse. Therefore,
they may be more hesitant to
represent them or assist them with their claims. This means perpetrators will
have reduced options for
legal representation, and their actions might be less
successful. Furthermore, judges who have a greater capacity to recognise legal
systems abuse will respond to perpetrators in a more appropriate manner,
particularly in cross-applications for family violence
Applications to
declare a perpetrator as a vexatious litigant may be more likely to succeed,
particularly where a judge has a greater
understanding of coercive control and
there is evidence that legal systems abuse has occurred. Alongside this,
attempts at legal
systems abuse could be used as evidence of coercive and
controlling behaviour. This may assist victims in gaining recourse through
criminal law or in applications for family violence orders. Finally, victims who
adequately understand coercive control may be
more likely to recognise legal
systems abuse as coercive control. This could cause them to report abuse to the
police earlier than
they otherwise would.
A coercive control offence may bring about more awareness to legal systems
abuse by contributing to a greater understanding that using
the legal system to
exert control over a current or former partner is a family violence associated
behaviour. Therefore, a coercive
control offence may be useful in advocating for
the recognition of legal systems abuse, and reducing its occurrence.
VIII Implications for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Australians
Criminalising coercive control is likely to disproportionately impact
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Aboriginal and
Torres Strait
Islander people are already overrepresented in the criminal justice
representing more
than 27% of the total adult prison population in
This is evident in
existing domestic and family violence laws, in particular protection orders,
which operate as entry points into
the criminal justice system for these
Recent studies have
indicated that domestic violence laws are a strong contributor to
overrepresentation, with tougher penalties
being imposed by courts on Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
They are more likely
to receive prison or probation sentences as opposed to fines, and less likely to
receive good behaviour
Additionally,
punishments relating to criminal offences have been shown to impact marginalised
groups to a greater extent.
The harsher sentences placed on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people has
significant negative outcomes, with isolation from
community and greater
potential for re-entry into the system after
An offence of coercive control is unlikely to escape the issues that existing
domestic violence laws face regarding criminalisation
of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people. It may, in fact, exacerbate these issues and act as a
further measure for marginalised
groups to enter the criminal justice system.
This includes Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, who may be wrongly
as perpetrators of
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people may also be resistant to intervention from police,
particularly due to past experiences
of systemic racism alongside a lack of
cultural awareness by police
They may experience
difficulties in reporting violence to the police, due to distrust of police and
the criminal justice system.
Alongside this, these women may be fearful of repercussions from the perpetrator
and their family, be reluctant to engage in colonial
justice systems that have
been historically utilised as a means for oppression, be fearful about removal
of children, and may have
had previous negative experiences with
An offence of coercive control needs to accept the differences that exist in
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, and
should be implemented
alongside policy reform to address these differences in needs. Negative
implications for these minority groups
can only be mitigated through extensive
consultation with members of the community. Preventative measures targeted
towards these
communities must be considered when determining if a coercive
control offence is necessary. Alongside this, before criminalising
control there must be specialised training for police regarding family violence
in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
communities, so that police can change
their responses to victims of family violence and engage in strategies to
support them in
a culturally appropriate
IX Can the negative implications be
Through comprehensive engagement in mitigation strategies, alongside
consultation with vulnerable communities, there is a strong potential
negative implications of coercive control offence to be overcome. As such, it
can be argued that the benefits of a coercive control
offence outweigh the
consequences. The next section will further discuss this, paying particular
attention to current laws in the
IMPLEMENTING A COERCIVE CONTROL OFFENCE IN THE
ACT: ENSURING AN OFFENCE IS EFFECTIVE
I Why does the ACT need a coercive control
There are numerous reasons why an offence of coercive control is needed in
the ACT. These reasons are as follows:
1. The serious negative impacts of family violence are not being adequately
addressed by existing civil and criminal laws, namely
family violence orders
2. Coercive control has been found to be a precursor to intimate partner
and emotional abuse
is correlated with escalating future
3. The patterns of abuse that take place in coercive and controlling
relationships are out of reach of the criminal law, leaving victims
unprotected
and preventing perpetrators from being adequately punished for their
Without adequate data on family violence and coercive control in the ACT, it
is difficult to determine the impact of existing laws,
and indeed, if a coercive
control offence would positively impact those experiencing family violence in
the ACT. However, evidence
from across Australia demonstrates that coercive
control poses a serious issue, being present in the vast majority of cases of
partner homicide. The NSW DVDRT found that in 111 of 112 cases of
intimate partner homicides, the perpetrator had engaged in coercive
controlling behaviours.
Additionally, behaviours of stalking in a coercive and controlling relationship
have been described as a precursor to non-fatal
strangulation,
and emotional
abuse in relationships is associated with a higher risk of escalating violence
in the future.
Furthermore,
70% of domestic partner assaults reported to police occur alongside coercive
implementing a coercive control offence may allow for the legal system to
intervene in cases where there is a lack of
physical violence earlier,
potentially preventing future violence and intimate partner homicides.
Many women across Australia have experienced emotional abuse from intimate
partners. This is apparent from the most recent Australian
Bureau of Statistics
Personal Safety Survey.
survey found that 23% of women had experienced emotional abuse by a current or
former partner since the age of
Of those women who had
experienced emotional abuse by a former partner, the types of behaviours most
commonly reported included being
verbally abused (63.4%) and being constantly
insulted (59.4%).
reported that their partners utilised controlling behaviours on them, including
controlling or attempting to control their
community (50%), their movement or who they saw (46%), decisions about household
money (38%), and
controlling or attempting to control them from working
These behaviours would
be captured and prohibited by an offence of coercive control. Therefore,
criminalising coercive control may
put a stop to these behaviours earlier,
intervening prior to escalation of violence or homicide.
Moreover, criminalising coercive control in the ACT would take a further step
in acknowledging the serious wrongs of coercive and
controlling behaviours
within intimate relationships. Criminalising these behaviours ‘provides
the opportunity to promote a
clear understanding of the lived experience of
domestic violence and/or the abuse that many victims
criminal laws do not capture the reality of family violence, then there is no
real prohibition of the patterns of abuse
that are ordinarily seen in family
violence. Given the serious negative impacts of coercive control as discussed in
earlier sections,
criminalisation of behaviour causing such negative outcomes
for victims is surely justified. This is particularly important because
of coercive control have described their experiences of these behaviours as
being more harmful than any physical abuse they
Perhaps, if victims
know that these behaviours are illegal, they will be more likely to report them
or seek assistance. Acknowledging
these wrongs not only assists victims with
validating their experiences but sends a clear message to perpetrators that
their behaviour
is not acceptable and will not be tolerated in the ACT.
II Do existing laws sufficiently address the
issues of family violence and coercive control?
Criminal laws
Present criminal offences in the ACT such as assault and stalking may be
charged in cases of family violence. However, these do not
adequately cover the
scope of behaviours and patterns of abuse that exist in coercive control. An
offence of coercive control in
the ACT, if drafted appropriately, would capture
and criminalise these behaviours.
The offence of stalking in the ACT prohibits stalking someone with the intent
to cause apprehension of harm, fear of harm, cause harm
The proscribed
behaviours must be engaged in on at least two
This offence has been used against perpetrators of family violence, most
notably in the case of
In this case, the
defendant was found guilty of stalking after tracking the victims location
without consent through activation of
location services on her phone, sending
her numerous messages and phone calls regardless of her requests to stop, and
accessing her
emails without
The victim stated
that the defendant was ‘controlling and that she was fearful of
defendant was found guilty of charges of sexual assault in the second degree,
sexual intercourse without consent, and an
Throughout the
relationship, the perpetrator made comments such as ‘your responsibility
lies between these four walls’
and attempted to reduce ‘the
victim’s contact with her extended
The defendant
was charged with six months’ imprisonment for the stalking
This case illustrates
a perpetrator who engages in patterns of abusive behaviour, with a victim who is
unable to gain sufficient
recourse due to a lack of criminal laws prohibiting
coercive and controlling behaviours.
Stalking laws play an important role in the criminal justice system,
particularly for people who are stalked by someone who is not
a current or
former partner. Although these laws are associated with family
and have been
prosecuted in the ACT in this
they are not
effective against preventing family violence. They do not provide victims with
adequate recourse against harms done
by perpetrators of coercive control. This
is because stalking forms a larger part of the pattern of
As such, the ACT
stalking offence is not adequate in addressing coercive control as a whole.
Family violence orders
In 2016, the ACT enacted the new
Family Violence Act
implemented as a part of broad reforms to address the significant issues of
family violence. The Act aims to prevent and
reduce family violence, protect
victims and children, and encourage accountability for perpetrator’s
The legislation was
enacted following the homicide of Tara Costigan, who was killed by her former
partner just a day after taking
a domestic violence order out against him. This
homicide sparked multiple inquiries into the effectiveness of the ACT’s
to family violence, all of which recommended that the previous Act, the
Domestic Violence and Protection Orders Act 2008
A predominant
concern of these inquiries was that non-physical violence was not being
adequately recognised by
legislation.
The current
Family Violence Act
defines family violence as including
behaviours of physical violence, sexual violence, emotional or psychological
abuse, economic
abuse, threatening behaviour, coercion, or any other behaviour
that controls or dominates and causes the victim to feel fear for
their own or
another’s safety or
The Act provides
examples of these behaviours.
To ensure their safety from family violence, an affected person can apply for a
family violence order (FVO).
In making an order, the court may consider a range of
and must give
paramount consideration to the safety of the victim and any involved
However, this is
balanced with the requirement that the court must ensure conditions on a
FVO’s are ‘the least restrictive
on the personal rights and
liberties of the
respondent.’
FVO’s have become the most common response to family violence
throughout Australia,
there have been many claims that the focus on civil orders has practically
decriminalised domestic
These claims are
supported by arguments that offences for breaches of orders are prosecuted more
regularly than criminal offences
that could be applicable, such as assault or
Many of the behaviours listed in the ACT
Family Violence Act
violence related behaviours fall under the definition of coercive control.
Therefore, if a victim is able to obtain an
FVO, the perpetrator will be
prohibited from engaging in these behaviours. However, FVO’s do not in
themselves prohibit behaviour.
Criminal liability arises when a breach of an
order has been made. Furthermore, family violence orders do not provide victims
resource for the actions of a perpetrator prior to the commencement of the
order, unless those actions are already covered by criminal
laws. Likewise,
breaches generally carry an inappropriately low
meaning that abuse
goes without punishment.
Additionally, FVO’s carry risks of legal systems abuse, particularly in
cross-applications by
perpetrators.
standard of proof in FVO applications, being only on the balance of
probabilities, exacerbates
If a coercive control
offence was created, the standard of proof would be beyond a reasonable doubt,
which would minimise risks of
legal systems abuse. Whilst FVO’s are a
crucial domestic and family violence response, they are not a complete or
measure against coercive control.
II How should the ACT construct a coercive
control offence?
This section considers different aspects of an offence of coercive control,
drawing from various constructions of coercive control
offences internationally
and within Australia. It evaluates the benefits of different elements of a
potential offence, determining
which components would be the most effective in
an offence in the ACT.
A Legislative definition of coercive
Any legislative definition of coercive control needs to adequately capture
the complexities of coercive control. In particular, it
needs to acknowledge
that whilst some patterns of behaviour may appear innocuous, in the context of a
relationship these behaviours
are an exertion of coercion and control by a
perpetrator.
Alongside this, a coercive control offence would criminalise a course of
behaviour as opposed to a singular event. As such, careful
consideration needs
to be made to ensuring the course of conduct is adequately defined.
Scotland’s offence states that behaviours
must occur on two or more
Conversely,
England and Wales’s offence requires ‘repeated or
continuous’
which leaves the interpretation of this meaning up to
The clarity in
Scotland’s offence lends to easier interpretation by legal professionals
and judicial officers and may prevent
confusion. Moreover, defining a specific
number of occurrences of behaviour aligns with the ACT’s current stalking
requires behaviour on two or more
Therefore, a
specific approach like Scotland’s would be preferred.
B Scope of relationships covered
Most jurisdictions that have criminalised coercive control prohibit behaviour
against partners or ex-partners. This aligns with academic
understandings of
coercive control, which define it as occurring in intimate
relationships.
The offence in
England and Wales covers members of the same family who live together, but
excludes ex-partners who do not live
The Scottish
offence focuses on abuse between partners or ex-partners, and is aggravated when
children are involved in the
Excluding ex-partners that do not live together fails to recognise the
ongoing attempts at coercion and control by perpetrators after
the end of a
relationship. Research has shown that victims are ‘most at need of
protection’ when leaving a
relationship,
so drawing this
arbitrary line doesn’t make
On the other hand,
including members of the same family that are not intimate partners is not
necessary, because coercive control
is perpetrated almost exclusively by men
against their female
Therefore, it would
be most effective for the ACT to implement an offence that covers both partners
and ex-partners, but does not
cover other relationships.
Alongside this, it would be worthwhile for the ACT to consider whether the
involvement of children should be an aggravating factor
in sentencing a coercive
control offence, as it is in
Because of the
serious negative impacts children face when exposed to coercive
acknowledging this
in a coercive control offence is important.
C Relevant behaviours
Behaviours that occur in coercive and controlling relationships may not
appear to be obviously coercive or controlling to
As mentioned
previously, this is because these behaviours may only have the impact of
coercion or control in the context of the
relationship.
To this regard,
some jurisdictions have provided non-exhaustive lists of behaviours that might
be considered relevant,
whilst others have framed the behaviour requirement
It is important that behaviours included are not solely emotional or
psychological. Stark and Hester have stated that ‘the mistaken
association
of coercive control with “psychological abuse” ... risks leaving
“real” partner violence outside
the crime’s spectrum, not
merely isolated
As such, an
offence of coercive control needs to include behaviours that are both physical
and non-physical. Scotland’s offence
aligns most closely with academic
conceptions of behaviours in coercive
encompassing a range
of physical, sexual, and psychological behaviours alongside their
This offence has
tentatively been found to be effective, with a high uptake in comparison to
other jurisdictions,
received positively by academics for its comprehensive
construction.
non-exhaustive list of behaviours in all these categories would be the most
effective method for defining relevant behaviours.
D Impacts of relevant behaviours
The actual impacts of the prohibited behaviour on a victim might form part of
the requirements of a coercive control offence. In England
and Wales, actual
harm must be caused by the perpetrator’s
whilst in Tasmania
and Scotland, there is no need to prove that actual harm has
In Scotland, a
reasonable person must consider the behaviour to be likely to cause one of the
relevant effects of dependence, subordination,
or isolation, among other
The reasonable person approach reduces the need for a victim’s
involvement in court processes and may prevent re-victimisation
as victims are
less likely to be required to provide extensive evidence about
In contrast, the
requirement that harm be done to a victim may cause significant barriers to
justice. In England and Wales where
harm is required, initial prosecutions were
largely extreme cases involving physical
meaning milder
cases were likely missed. Therefore, requiring actual harm be done to a victim
sets too high a threshold, and could
cause significant negative impacts for
victims. As such, an offence of coercive control should adopt a reasonable
person test similar
to Scotland’s. Objective reasonable and ordinary
person tests already exist in current ACT criminal laws, and because of this
should not require significant judicial interpretation to
E Gendered nature of coercive control
Coercive control is a gendered issue, being predominantly perpetrated by men
against women.
Despite this,
a coercive control offence should be framed in a gender-neutral manner. Whilst
this means there is the chance that
female victims are misidentified by police
officers, it is necessary to ensure that people from all situations are
protected. Framing
the offence in this way will recognise that coercive control
can occur beyond heterosexual relationships and may very occasionally
perpetrated by women.
A gender-neutral offence has been shown to be effective in ensuring male
perpetrators of coercive control are charged, and from preventing
female victims
from being misidentified. This is evident in England and Wales, with 99% of
offenders being male despite their gender-neutral
This has been
attributed to police education regarding the gendered nature of coercive
and demonstrates
that a gender-neutral offence would still be effective in protecting women.
Therefore, a coercive control offence in the ACT should be framed in a
gender-neutral manner, so that it is not exclusionary to male
victims and those
in same sex relationships. However, extensive training should be undertaken to
ensure that police are knowledgeable
and can correctly identify manipulative tactics employed by perpetrators.
F Limitation period
The Tasmanian offences of emotional abuse and intimidation and economic abuse
initially had a limitation period of six months, but
these have now increased
this to twelve months.
Coercive control offences in England and Wales, and Scotland, currently have no
limitation period. As previously noted, the Tasmanian
offence faced significant
challenges that can be partly attributed to short limitation
A limitation period would prevent victims from accessing justice in failing
to recognise the nature of coercive control as a pattern
abuse occurring over a
long period of time.
will be prevented from considering the entire course of conduct, and ‘the
full extent of the victims’ experience
will be obscured in the
courtroom’.
to implement the most effective offence in the ACT, a limitation period should
not be included.
The inclusion of a defence within the legislation would allow for a person to
defend themselves where their behaviour might be considered
reasonable,
or if their
behaviour is not actually coercive or controlling despite appearing
There are limited
circumstances where a person might need to engage in controlling behaviour, such
as attempting to prevent their
partner from self-destructive
England and Wales allow for an accused person to raise a defence when their
behaviour is in all circumstances reasonable, and they
are acting in the best
interests of the victim.
Likewise, Scotland allows a defence if the accused shows that their behaviour
was reasonable in the
circumstances.
defence of reasonableness would be useful if the ACT was the implement a
coercive control offence. In NSW, various groups
supported the inclusion of a
defence of reasonableness in their submissions to the NSW inquiry into coercive
This defence would
act as an important safeguard to ensure people are not sentenced when they have
genuinely acted reasonably and
in the best interests of the victim.
H Penalties
The determination of which penalty should apply to an offence of coercive
control is complicated, particularly because behaviours
and impacts differ
significantly between relationships. Maximum penalties for coercive control
offences vary substantially across
offence of controlling or coercive behaviour carries a maximum penalty of 5
years imprisonment,
the Tasmanian offences only carry a maximum penalty on 2 years
imprisonment.
At the higher
end, the Scottish offence has a maximum penalty of 14 years
imprisonment.
This higher
penalty recognises the severity of coercive and controlling behaviours, and the
serious harms caused to
The offence of stalking in the ACT carries a maximum imprisonment of two
years, and is increased to five years if the offender was
contravening a court
order or was in possession of an offensive
The offence of a
contravention of a family violence order has a maximum penalty of 5 years
imprisonment.
Considering the
pervasive nature of coercive control, and the serious negative impacts it has on
victims, it would be wise for the
ACT to inflict a greater maximum penalty than
these two offences. This would allow for greater judicial discretion when
sentences, giving judges the capacity to the range of severity and
behaviours that occur.
However, it is also important to recognise that harsh punishments, particularly
long imprisonment, are not necessarily an effective
measure against
III What non-legislative activities would be
required to support a coercive control offence?
A coercive control offence cannot operate effectively unless it is
implemented alongside non-legislative policy reforms and activities.
that is purely symbolic would not have a meaningful impact on coercive
Relying on the
criminal law as a single means of addressing family violence ignores the
associated social and cultural health issues
and can have negative impacts for
victims of abuse.
non-legislative activities would have the effect of mitigating risks and
ensuring that an offence achieves its desired
Police officers and members of the community alike can have difficulties in
identifying coercive and controlling behaviour because
behaviours may align with
ordinary expectations of men’s
Consequently, a
crucial non-legislative action is to provide extensive funding and resources
towards educating police officers on
coercive control, alongside all other
professionals who are involved in matters of family violence.
A holistic approach to addressing family
In implementing their coercive control offence, Scotland undertook a
multi-agency system-wide
The Scottish
legislation is supported by their four pillars approach to domestic violence
prevention,
which involves
legal protection, effective provision of services, prevention by stopping
domestic abuse and reducing reoffending,
and participation in systems by
Current ACT family violence response and management plans reflect this same
approach. The ACT has prioritised primary prevention and
improving support and
service system responses in their fourth action plan to reduce violence against
women and their children.
This involves educating ACT public service employees, with a focus on frontline
staff such as teachers, nurses, and those who are
regularly involved in family
violence cases.
Additionally,
the ACT is currently working on a new risk assessment and management framework
for supporting an integrated domestic
and family violence service
Furthermore, in
undertaking reform processes that involve change on a systemic level, it is
important that the government consults
a varied range of
which the ACT has
committed to do.
Hence, the ACT already has measures in place to ensure continued improvement
in family violence responses, demonstrating that structures
already exist to
support an offence of coercive control. Working towards an integrated approach
between police, courts, and domestic
violence support services would improve
outcomes of a coercive control offence, as evidenced in Scotland. This ensures
the criminal
justice system is not solely relied upon, and the social and
cultural issues associated with coercive control are acknowledged and
Community education campaigns
Community education is essential for the success of a coercive control
offence. Initiatives that aim to educate the community could
cause a culture
shift regarding public perceptions and understandings of coercive
Research has shown
that female victims of coercive control are less likely to seek assistance if
there has been no physical
As such, community
education is essential so that victims and general members of the community
alike can understand and identify
coercive and controlling behaviours.
Tasmania’s coercive control offences were enacted without a campaign of
community engagement.
result, these offences had historically low rates of charges and prosecutions,
particularly when compared to rates of family
violence incidents. These offences
have seen more use in recent
, which could be
partially attributed to current cultural changes in understandings of family
However, community
perceptions that family violence primarily involves physical violence
alongside beliefs
that physical violence is more severe than emotional
Yet, victims of family
violence report that their experiences of coercive control are more severe than
any physical abuse they have
perceptions of family violence as a pattern of abuse as opposed to single
incidents of violence may have impacts on earlier
recognition of abusive
behaviour, empowering victims to take action. As such, community education is
essential to ensure effective
implementation of a coercive control offence.
Training legal professionals and
There are numerous impactful benefits of engaging police in specialised
coercive control training. Police training programs would
result in police
officers who are more responsive to coercive control, and who understand the
complex relationship dynamics that
occur in abusive
relationships.
cause a reduction in missed cases of coercive control, as police officers focus
on the greater context of incidents of
family violence. In doing this, police
may become more capable of capturing relevant evidence and bringing charges
against perpetrators.
With a thorough understanding of the behaviours associated
with coercive control, police may develop the capacity to recognise subtle
manipulative tactics employed by perpetrators. As a result, they may become more
understanding of the difficulties victims face when
discussing their abuse and
engaging with police
investigations.
These benefits have been recently demonstrated in Scotland. In preparation
for the enactment of Scotland’s domestic abuse offence,
funding was
allocated for widespread training of police and first
responders.
As a result,
Scotland police are better equipped to identify coercive and controlling
behaviours. The uptake of Scotland’s
offence has been substantial, and 96%
of charges laid have been
prosecuted,
suggesting that
police are correctly identifying coercive control. A recent study found that
training of police officers resulted
in a 41% increase in coercive control
offence arrests.
the fast uptake of the Scottish offence can be attributed to the extensive
education provided to police prior to the commencement
of the legislation.
It is therefore necessary to provide adequate training for all professionals
who are involved in matters of family violence. This
includes police, judicial
officers, lawyers, domestic violence crisis services, and women’s aid
organisations.
A number of significant consequences exist in creating an offence of coercive
control. The complex nature of coercive control creates
challenges in both
construction and implementation of an offence. Risks of misidentification of
victims, substantial burdens on victims,
and the use of legal systems as a
method for further abuse create difficulties in determining whether an offence
would be worthwhile.
Additionally, criminalisation may well contribute to the
serious disproportionate issues that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people encounter in the Australian criminal justice system. Nevertheless,
through comprehensive understanding of the potential risks,
alongside engagement
with mitigation strategies, these consequences can be overcome.
Therefore, the evaluation provided in this article supports the conclusion
that it is time for the ACT to consider criminalising coercive
Acknowledging the wrongs of coercive and controlling behaviours validates the
experiences of victims, and sends a clear
message to perpetrators that their
behaviour is unacceptable and will not be tolerated in the ACT. Indeed, it is
surely justified
to criminalise behaviours that cause considerable adverse
effects for victims. By taking a proactive approach, greater protection
afforded to victims of family violence. Alongside this, early intervention could
prevent further deaths of women in the ACT, like
Tara Costigan, a Canberra woman
who was tragically murdered by her ex-partner following experiences of emotional
However, it is crucial for the ACT to recognise that a coercive control
offence cannot operate in isolation. The Territory must make
a commitment to
investing in system-wide reforms through multi-agency support services,
community education campaigns, and extensive
specialised training of police
officers. In this way, a coercive control offence will achieve the result of
providing better protection
to victims of family violence without causing
harmful consequences.
Heidi Andriunas undertook her LLB (Hons) at the University of
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Personal Safety,
(Catalogue No 4906.0, 8 November 2017).
Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare,
Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence in Australia: Continuing
the National Story
, Report (2019) 62.
NSW Domestic Violence Death
Review Team (NSW DVDRT),
NSW Domestic Violence Death Review Team Report
Report (2020) 68.
Evan Stark,
Control: How Men Entrap Women in Personal Life
(Oxford University Press,
2007) (‘Coercive Control’).
Sandra Walklate and Kate
Fitz-Gibbon, ‘The Criminalisation of Coercive Control: The Power of
Law?’ (2019) 8(4)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social
Evan Stark, ‘Rethinking
coercive control’ (2009) 15(12)
Violence Against Women
Hayley Boxall and Anthony
Experiences of coercive control among Australian women
(Australian Institute of Criminology statistical bulletin 30, March 2021)
Marilyn McMahon and Paul McGorrery,
‘Criminalising Emotional Abuse, Intimidation and Economic Abuse in the
Context of Family
Violence: The Tasmanian Experience
[2016] UTasLawRw 2
(2016) 35(2)
University of Tasmania Law Review
, 3 (‘The Tasmanian
Experience’).
Ibid, citing John Stannard,
‘Sticks, Stones and Words: Emotional Harm and the English Criminal
Criminal Law Review
Walklate and Fitz-Gibbon (n
7) 103-104; Walklate, Fitz-Gibbon and McCulloch, ‘Is more law the answer?
Seeking justice for victims
of intimate partner violence through the reform of
legal categories’
(2018) 18(1)
Criminology & Criminal Justice
See, eg, Heather Nancarrow
Accurately Identifying the “person most in need of
protection” in domestic and family violence law
(Research Report,
Issue 23, November 2020); Heather Douglas, ‘Legal systems abuse and
coercive control’
(2018) 18(1)
Criminology & Criminal Justice
(‘Legal systems abuse’).
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Pathways to Justice – An Inquiry into the Incarceration
Rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
(ARLC Report 133,
December 2017) 93.
Dale Bagshaw and Donna
Women, Men and Domestic Violence
(Report, 2000).
As described by Terry
Hutchinson, ‘Developing Legal Research Skills; Expanding the
[2008] MelbULawRw 33
Melbourne University Law Review
Mindy Mechanic, Terri Weaver
and Patricia Resick, ‘Mental health consequences of intimate partner
abuse: A multidimensional
assessment of four different forms of abuse’
(2008) 14(6)
Violence Against Women
Theo Vos et al,
‘Measuring the impact of intimate partner violence on the health of women
in Victoria, Australia’ (2006)
Bulletin of the World Health
Organisation
Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare,
Specialist homelessness services annual report
report, December 2020) <
https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/homelessness-services/specialist-homelessness-services-annual-report/contents/clients-who-have-experienced-family-and-domestic-violence
Erin Straight, Felicity
Harper and Ileana Arias, ‘The impact of partner psychological abuse on
health behaviours and health
status in college women’ (2003) 18(9)
Journal of Interpersonal Violence
1035, 1050.
NSW Domestic Violence Death
Review Team (n 3) 69.
Emma Katz, ‘Beyond the
Physical Incident Model: How Children Living with Domestic Violence are Harmed
By and Resist Regimes
of Coercive Control’ (2015) 25
Child Abuse Review
Defining and
responding to coercive control
(Policy brief, 2021) 2 (‘
and responding to coercive control’
), citing Eve Buzawa, Carl Buzawa
and Evan Stark,
Responding to domestic violence: The integration of criminal
justice and human services
(SAGE Publishing, 5
Patricia Easteal, Submission
No 2 to Parliament of NSW Joint Select Committee on Coercive Control,
Coercive Control in Domestic Relationships
(4 January 2021) 6.
Emma Katz (n 23) 48, citing
Nicole Westmarland and Liz Kelly, ‘Why extending measurements of
‘success’ in domestic
violence perpetrator programmes matters for
social work’ (2013) 43(6)
The British Journal of Social Work
Flora Matheson et al,
‘Where did she go? The transformation of self-esteem, self-identity, and
mental well-being among women
who have experienced intimate partner
violence’ (2015) 25(5)
Women’s Health Issues
Easteal (n 26) 6.
Women’s Aid Scotland,
Coercive Control
(Report, 2017) 2 <
https://womensaid.scot/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/CoerciveControl.pdf
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
Sally Goldfarb,
‘Reconceiving Civil Protection Orders for Domestic Violence: Can Law Help
End the Abuse without Ending the
Relationship?’
Cardozo Law
Crimes (Domestic and
Personal Violence) Amendment (Coercive Control – Preethi’s Law) Bill
New South Wales,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 24 September 2020 (Anna
Watson, Member for Shellharbour).
Parliament of NSW Joint Select Committee on Coercive
Coercive control in domestic relationships
(Report 1/57, June
Women’s Safety and
Justice Taskforce,
Options for legislating against coercive control and the
creation of a standalone domestic violence offence
(Discussion Paper 1, 27
See, eg, Sarah Malik,
‘Coercive control legislation could have saved Hannah’s life: Sue
and Lloyd Clarke’,
(online at 1 July 2021) <
https://www.sbs.com.au/topics/voices/relationships/article/2021/04/27/coercive-control-legislation-could-have-saved-hannahs-life-sue-and-lloyd-clarke
Amanda Gearing, ‘Queensland moves to criminalise coercive control after
murder of Hannah Clarke and her children’,
The Guardian
17 February 2021) <
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2021/feb/17/queensland-moves-to-criminalise-coercive-control-after-of-hannah-clarke-and-her-children
Rachel Riga, ‘Hannah Clarke’s parents push for coercive control to
be made a crime one year on from horrific murders’,
(online at 19 February 201) <
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-02-14/qld-hannah-clarke-domestic-violence-murder-anniversary-brisbane/13137484
Women’s Safety and
Justice Taskforce,
Hear her voice: Addressing coercive control and domestic
and family violence in Queensland,
(Report one, 2 December 2021) xlii.
Family Violence Act 2004
Department of Justice and
Industrial Relations (Tasmania),
Safe at home: a criminal justice framework
for responding to family violence in Tasmania,
(Options paper, August 2003)
https://www.safeathome.tas.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/567440/Options_Paper.pdf
Ibid p 7, 2.1.
Family Violence Act 2004
[2012] TASMC
[2013] TASMC
Police v Benjamin James
[2021] TASMC 3.
Police v Benjamin James
Walklate and Fitz-Gibbon (n 7) 101.
Sentencing Advisory Council
Sentencing of Adult Family Violence Offenders,
(Final Report No 5,
October 2015) 9.
Family Violence Act 2004
Family Violence Amendment Act 2015 (Tas)
s 5 brought this
new limitation period into effect on 6 October 2015.
Heather Douglas, ‘Do
we need a specific domestic violence offence?’
[2015] MelbULawRw 26
University Law Review
Women’s Legal Service
Submission: Inquiry into Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence
(Submission, July 2020) 2.2 <
https://womenslegaltas.org.au/wordy/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Submission-240720-Inquiry-into-Family-Domestic-and-Sexual-Violence-Coercion-and-Control.pdf
Karen Wilcox, ‘Island
Innovation, Mainland Inspiration: Comments on the Tasmanian
Family Violence
Alternative Law Journal
Thomas v Stewart
[2017] TASMC (unreported, 4 September 2017);
McLean v Rundle
TASMC (unreported, 4 November 2011).
Thomas v Stewart
[2017] (n 58), citing
Gunes v Pearson
(1996) 89 A Crim R 297
[2013] TASMC 33.
McMahon and McGorrery,
‘The Tasmanian Experience’ (n 10) 18.
Ibid 19, citing
Acts Interpretation Act 1931
Kerryne Barwick, Paul McGorrery and Marilyn McMahon,
‘Ahead of Their Time? The Offences of Economic and Emotional Abuse in
Australia’, in Marilyn McMahon and Paul McGorrery (eds)
Criminalising Coercive Control: Family Violence and the Criminal Law
(Springer, 2020) 145.
Family Violence Act 2004
McMahon and McGorrery,
‘The Tasmanian Experience’ (n 10) 8, 14.
Barwick, McGorrery and
McMahon (n 68) 151.
Strengthening the law on domestic abuse – Summary of Responses
(Report, December 2014) 5 <
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/389002/StrengtheningLawDomesticAbuseResponses.pdf
Vanessa Bettinson and
Charlotte Bishop, ‘Is the creation of a discrete offence of coercive
control necessary to combat domestic
(2015) 66(2)
Ireland Legal Quarterly
, 179 citing Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of
Constabulary,
Everyone’s Business: Improving the Police Response to
Domestic Abuse
(Report, 2014).
Ibid, citing Law Commission,
Reform of Offences Against the Person: A Scoping Consultation Paper
(Consultation Paper No 217, November 2014).
Controlling
or Coercive Behaviour in an Intimate or Family Relationship,
Guidance Framework, December 2015) 3 (‘Statutory guidance
framework’).
Serious Crime Act 2015
Ibid s 76(1).
Ibid s 76(2).
Ibid s 76(4).
‘Statutory guidance framework’ (n 78) 3.
College of Policing
Authorised Professional Practice,
Major investigation and public protection,
‘Authorised professional practice on domestic abuse’ (Web Page,
25 October 2021); HMIC,
Everyone’s Business: Improving the Police
Response to Domestic Abuse
(Report, 2014) 21.
NSW Government,
(Discussion Paper, October 2020) 15 (‘
Coercive control
discussion paper’
Ibid, citing Office of
National Statistics, Domestic abuse and the criminal justice system –
Appendix tables (2019) Table 15
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/domesticabuseandthecriminaljusticesystemappendixtables>.
Ibid, citing 6 Office for
National Statistics. Domestic abuse in England and Wales: year ending March 2018
(2018) (accessed 21 September
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/domesticabuseinenglandandwales/yearendingmarch2018#domestic-abuse-related-offences-specific-crime-types>.
Paul McGorrery and Marilyn
McMahon, ‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive behaviour in England and
Wales: Media reports of a
novel offence’
(2021) 21(4)
Criminology and
Criminal Justice
, 578 (‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive
behaviour in England and Wales’).
‘Statutory guidance framework (n 78) 3.
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) s 76 (1)(c).
Douglas, ‘Legal
Systems Abuse’ (n 13).
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) s 76 (1)(a).
‘Statutory guidance framework (n 78) 5.
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Bill 2017
Marsha Scott in
‘The Making of the New ‘Gold Standard’: The
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018’
in Marilyn McMahon and Paul McGorrery (eds)
Criminalising Coercive Control: Family Violence and the Criminal Law
(Springer, 2020) 177, citing Louise Wilson and Craig Hutchinson, ‘MSPs
pass Domestic Abuse Bill’,
(online at 1 February 2018)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/live/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-42858902>.
NSW Government,
Coercive Control Discussion Paper
(n 88) 14; Scottish Government,
Equally Safe: Reforming the Criminal Law to Address Domestic Abuse and Sexual
(Consultation Paper, March 2015)
<https://spf.org.uk/wp/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/15-14.pdf>.
Scott (n 101) 183.
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018.
Ibid s 2(2)(a).
Ibid s 2(2)(b).
Ibid s 2(3).
Ibid s 2(4)(a).
Ibid s 5(3).
NSW Government,
Coercive Control Discussion Paper
Evan Stark and Marianne
Hester, ‘Coercive control: Update and review’ (2019) 25(1)
Violence Against Women
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Ibid s 4(2).
Scott (n 101) 187.
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
s 5(2),(3).
Katz (n 23) 56.
Scottish Government,
Domestic abuse recorded by the police in Scotland, 2019-20
statistics publication, June 2021) <
https://www.gov.scot/publications/domestic-abuse-statistics-recorded-police-scotland-2019-20/pages/9/
InTouch Multicultural
Centre Against Family Violence,
Criminalisation of Coercive Control: Should
coercive control be a criminal offence in Victoria?
(Position paper, January
Walklate and Fitz-Gibbon
(n 7) 100-101.
Parliament of NSW Joint
Select Committee on Coercive Control,
Coercive control in domestic
relationships
(Report 1/57, June 2021) 1.
Marilyn McMahon and Paul
McGorrery, ‘Criminalising Coercive Control: An Introduction’ in
Marilyn McMahon and Paul McGorrery
Criminalising Coercive Control:
Family Violence and the Criminal Law
(Springer, 2020) 4
(‘Criminalising Coercive Control: An Introduction’).
Walklate, Fitz-Gibbon and
McCulloch (n 12) 121.
Family Violence Act
This will be discussed in more detailed in later sections of
the thesis.
Family Law Act
Walklate and Fitz-Gibbon
Walklate, Fitz-Gibbon and
McCulloch (n 12) 118.
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
of this article
contains further discussion of the importance of police training in mitigating
implications of coercive control offences.
Walklate and Fitz-Gibbon
Alicia Jillard and Julia
Mansour, ‘Women victims of violence defending intervention orders’
(2014) 39(4)
Alternative Law Journal
Melissa Dichter,
They Arrested Me – And I was the Victim”:
Women’s Experiences with Getting Arresting in the Context of Domestic
Violence’ (2013) 23(2)
Women & Criminal Justice
Heather Douglas and Robin
Fitzgerald, ‘Legal Processes and Gendered Violence: Cross-Applications for
Domestic Violence Protection
[2013] UNSWLawJl 3
(2013) 36(1)
UNSW Law Journal
Julie Poon, Myrna Dawson,
and Mavis Morton, ‘Factors Increasing the Likelihood of Sole and Dual
Charging of Women for Intimate
Partner Violence’ (2014) 20(12)
Against Women
1447, 1450.
Lisa Young Larance and
Susan Miller, ‘In Her Own Words: Women Describe Their Use of Force
Resulting in Court-Ordered Intervention’
(2017) 23(12)
Violence Against
1536, 1538.
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
Jane Wangmann,
‘Incidents v Context: How Does the NSW Protection Order System Understand
Intimate Partner Violence?’
[2012] SydLawRw 32
Sydney Law Review
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
26-27; Hayley Boxall, Christopher Dowling and Anthony Morgan, ‘Female
perpetrated domestic violence:
prevalence of self-defensive and retaliatory
violence’ (2020) 584
Trends and Issues in Crimes and Criminal
McGorrery and McMahon,
‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive behaviour in England and Wales’
(n 91) 579.
See also Ellen Reeves,
‘Family violence, protection orders and systems abuse: views of legal
practitioners’
(2020) 32(1)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
Heather Douglas, Submission No 21 to Parliament of
NSW Joint Select Committee on Coercive Control,
Coercive Control in Domestic
Relationships
(26 January 2021) 9-10, citing Heather Douglas,
‘Domestic and family violence, mental health and well-being and Legal
Engagement’
(2018) 25(3)
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
wound under my heart”: Constructions of complex trauma and implications
for women’s wellbeing and safety
from violence
(Research report, Issue
11, May 2020) 107.
Stark and Hester (n
McGorrery and McMahon,
‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive behaviour in England and Wales’
(n 91) 576.
Douglas, ‘Legal
systems abuse’ (n 13) 84.
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
Douglas, ‘Legal
systems abuse’ (n 13) 85.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Family violence: A national legal response
(ALRC Report 114,
October 2010) 291.
Douglas, ‘Legal
systems abuse’ (n 13) 85.
McGorrery and McMahon,
‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive behaviour in England and Wales’
(n 91) 579.
Douglas, ‘Legal
systems abuse’ (n 13) 94.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
Pathways to Justice – An Inquiry into the Incarceration
Rate of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Prisoners in Australia
(Catalogue No 4517.0, 8 December
Heather Douglas and Robin
Fitzgerald, ‘The Domestic Violence Protection Order System as Entry to the
Criminal Justice System
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People’
(2018) 7(3)
International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy
Hamish Thorburn and Don
Weatherburn, ‘Effect of Indigenous status of sentence outcomes for serious
assault offences’
(2018) 51(3)
Australian & New Zealand Journal of
Criminology
, 450; Neil Donnelly and Suzanne Poynton,
Prison penalties
for serious domestic and non-domestic assault
(Crimes and Justice Statistics
Bureau Brief Issue paper no 110, October 2015) 12.
Robin Fitzgerald, Heather
Douglas and Lachlan Heybroek, ‘Sentencing, Domestic Violence, and the
Overrepresentation of Indigenous
Australians: Does Court Location Matter?’
(2019) 36(21-22) 10588, 10604.
Christy Visher, Sara
Debus-Sherrill and Jennifer Yahner, ‘Employment After Prison: A
Longitudinal Study of Former Prisoners’
Justice Quarterly
Ibid 10605, citing Martin
and the Sentencing of Indigenous Offenders’
(2004) 16(9)
Judicial Officers’ Bulletin
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
Bee Cook, Fiona David and
Anna Grant,
Sexual violence in Australia
(Research and public policy
series no. 36, 1 June 2001) 23.
models in addressing violence against Indigenous women
(State of knowledge
paper issue 8, August 2015) 13.
Nancarrow et al (n 13)
NSW Domestic Violence
Death Review Team (n 3) 325.; Jane Monckton Smith, ‘Intimate Partner
Femicide: Using Foucauldian Analysis
to Track an Eight Stage Progression to
Homicide’ (2020) 26(11)
Violence Against Women
Sara Rahman,
‘Assessing the risk of repeat intimate partner assault’ (2019) 220
BOSCAR NSW Crime and Justice Bulletins
NSW DVDRT (n 3) 325.
Martyna Bendlin and
Louise Sheridan, ‘Nonfatal Strangulation in a Sample of Domestically
Violent Stalkers: The Importance of
Recognizing Coercively Controlling
Behaviour’ (2019) 46(11) C
riminal Justice and Behaviour
1528, 1538;
Richard Standsfield and Kirk Williams ‘Coercive Control Between Intimate
Partners: An Application to Nonfatal Strangulation’
Interpersonal Violence
Rahman (n 184) 11.
Evan Stark and Cassandra
Weiner, Submission No 12 to Parliament of NSW Joint Select Committee on Coercive
Coercive Control in Domestic Relationships
(26 January 2021) 6,
citing Paige Hall Smith et al, ‘A Population-Based Study of the Prevalence
and Distinctiveness of Battering,
Physical Assault, and Sexual Assault in
Intimate Relationships’ (2002) 8(1)
Violence Against Women
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Personal Safety, Australia
Bettinson and Bishop, (n
76) 180-181.
McMahon and McGorrery,
‘Criminalising Coercive Control: An Introduction’ (n 129) 14.
Crimes Act 1900
R v NO (no 2)
[2018] ACTSC 37
Ann Burgess et al,
‘Stalking Behaviours within Domestic Violence’ (1997) 12
of Family Violence
[2018] ACTSC 30
R v NO (no 2)
[2018] ACTSC 37
Douglas, ‘Do we
need a specific domestic violence offence?’ (n 58) 452; Stark and Hester
(n 116) 89.
Family Violence Act
Lorana Bartels, Patricia
Easteal and Shannon Dodd,
Review of the Implementation of the
Family Violence
(Report, 14 December 2020) 5.
ACT Domestic Violence
Prevention Council,
Findings and Recommendation from the Review of Domestic
and Family Violence Deaths in the ACT – Public Report
Recommendation 23; ACT Community Services Directorate,
ACT Domestic Violence
Service System: Final Gap Analysis Report
(2016) 36; Laurie Glanfield,
Report of the Inquiry: Review into the System Level Responses to Family
Violence in the ACT
Family Violence Act
Douglas, ‘Do we
need a specific domestic violence offence?’ (n 58) 437-438 citing Sally
Goldfarb, ‘Reconceiving
Civil Protection Orders for Domestic Violence: Can
Law Help End the Abuse without Ending the Relationship?’
Cardozo Law Review
Ibid 438, citing Heather
Douglas and Lee Godden, ‘The Decriminalisation of Domestic Violence:
Examining the Interaction between
the Criminal Law and Domestic Violence’
Criminal Law Journal
Douglas and Godden (n
Heather Douglas,
‘Not a Crime Like Any Other: Sentencing Breaches of Domestic Violence
Protection Orders’
(2007) 31 Criminal Law Journal 220
Douglas, ‘Legal
systems abuse’ (n 13) 86.
Family Violence Act
Charlotte Bishop and
Vanessa Bettinson, ‘Evidencing domestic violence, including behaviour that
falls under the new offence
of “controlling or coercive
behaviour”’
(2018) 22(1)
International Journal of Evidence and
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Serious Crime Act 2015
Vanessa Bettinson,
‘A Comparative Evaluation of Offences: Criminalising Abusive Behaviour in
England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland
and Tasmania’ in Marilyn McMahon and
Paul McGorrery (eds)
Criminalising Coercive Control: Family Violence and the
Criminal Law
(Springer, 2020) 200.
Crimes Act 1900
See, eg, Stark,
Coercive Control
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) ss 76(2)(b), 76(6).
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Cassandra Weiner,
‘From Social Construct to Legal Innovation: The Offence of Controlling or
Coercive Behaviour in England and
Wales’ in Marilyn McMahon and Paul
McGorrery (eds)
Criminalising Coercive Control: Family Violence and the
Criminal Law
(Springer, 2020) 169 citing Deborah Tuerkheimer,
Yale Journal of Law and Feminism
(n 4); Helen Reece, ‘The end of domestic violence’
(2006) 69(5)
Modern Law Review
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Katz (n 23) 56.
Bishop and Bettinson (n
Abuse (Scotland) Act 2018
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) s 76; Home
Office, ‘Statutory guidance framework’ (n 78) 3.
Violence Act 2004
Stark and Hester (n 116)
Bettinson (n 225) 214,
citing Evan Stark
, Coercive Control
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
NSW Government,
Coercive Control Discussion Paper
Stark and Hester (n 116)
86; Scott (n 101) 177.
Serious Crime Act 2015
Family Violence Act
Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2018
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Michele Burman and Oona
Brooks-Hay, ‘Aligning policy and law? The creation of a domestic abuse
offence incorporating coercive
(2018) 18(1)
Criminology and
Criminal Justice
McGorrery and McMahon,
‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive behaviour in England and Wales’
(n 91) 579.
For an exploration of
evaluating the difficulties in applying these tests, see Tony Nisbet and
Ann-Claire Larsen, ‘Normativity
and the ordinary person formula: Comparing
provocation and duress in Australia’
[2019] UWALawRw 19
(2019) 45(2)
University of Western
Australia Law Review
; Eric Colvin, ‘Ordinary and Reasonable
People: The Design of Objective Tests of Criminal Responsibility’
[2001] MonashULawRw 9
Monash University Law Review
McGorrery and McMahon,
‘Prosecuting controlling or coercive behaviour in England and Wales’
(n 91) 579.
Family Violence Act
Family Violence Amendment Act 2015 (Tas)
s 5 brought
this new limitation period into effect on 6 October 2015.
Douglas, ‘Do we
need a specific domestic violence offence?’ (n 58) 457.
Bettinson (n 225)
Abuse (Scotland) Act 2018
Serious Crime Act 2015
NSW Young Lawyers,
Submission to the Inquiry into coercive control in domestic relationships
(4 February 2021) 18
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/ladocs/submissions/70522/Submission%20-%20112.pdf>.
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) s 76(8).
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Parliament of NSW Joint
Select Committee on Coercive Control,
Coercive control in domestic
relationships
(Report 1/57, June 2021) 98.
Serious Crime Act 2015
(UK) s 76(11)(a).
Family Violence Act
Domestic Abuse
(Scotland) Act 2018
Bettinson (n 225)
Crimes Act 1900
Family Violence Act
Bettinson (n 225)
See David Brown,
‘The limited benefit of prison in controlling crime’
(2010) 22(1)
Current Issues in Criminal Justice
State of Victoria,
Victorian Royal Commission into Family Violence
Summary and
recommendations
(Paper No 132, March 2016) 27
http://rcfv.archive.royalcommission.vic.gov.au/MediaLibraries/RCFamilyViolence/Reports/RCFV_Full_Report_Interactive.pdf
No To Violence,
Predominant Aggressor Identification and Victim Misidentification
(Discussion paper, 21 November 2019) 4, citing Leigh Goodmark,
Decriminalizing Domestic Violence: A Balanced Policy Approach to Intimate
Partner Violence
(University of California Press, 2018).
Michele Burman and Oona
Brooks-Hay, ‘Aligning policy and law? The creation of a domestic abuse
offence incorporating coercive
(2018) 18(1)
Criminology and
Criminal Justice
Defining and
responding to coercive control
Scott (n 101) 181, citing
Scottish Government and Convention of Scottish Local Authorities,
Partnership Approach to Tackling Violence Against Women in Scotland: Guidance
for Multi-Agency Partnerships
ACT Government,
Australian Capital Territory Response: Australian Government National Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2010-2022
(Fourth Action
Plan 2019-2022, 2019) 4
<https://www.communityservices.act.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/1451272/Implementation-of-the-4AP.pdf>.
ACT Government Community
Services Directorate,
ACT Domestic and Family Violence Risk Assessment and
Management Framework: Supporting an integrated domestic and family violence
(Draft framework, October 2020).
Defining and
responding to coercive control
ACT Government,
Australian Capital Territory Response: Australian Government National Plan to
Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2010-2022
Douglas, ‘Legal
systems abuse’ (n 13) 94.
Hayley Boxall and Anthony
Experiences of coercive control among Australian women
(Statistical Bulletin 30, March 2021) 10.
Barwick, McGorrery and
McMahon (n 68) 149.
Women’s Legal
Service Tasmania (n 59) 2.2.
For example, through
media campaigns following the death of Hannah Clarke in QLD.
NSW Government,
Coercive Control Discussion Paper
Kim Webster et al,
Australians’ attitudes to violence against women and gender equality:
findings from the 2017 National Community Attitudes towards
Violence against
Women Survey
(Research report, March 2018) 41.
McMahon and McGorrery,
‘Criminalising Coercive Control: An Introduction’ (n 129) 14.
McGorrery and McMahon, ‘Prosecuting controlling
or coercive behaviour in England and Wales’ (n 91) 579.
Heather Douglas,
‘Battered Women’s Experiences of the Criminal Justice System:
Decentring the Law’
Feminist Legal Studies
Scotland Police,
Domestic Abuse Matters Scotland Evaluation Report
(Report, May 2020)
Crown Office and
Procurator Fiscal Service (Scotland),
Domestic Abuse and Stalking Charges in
Scotland 2019-20
(Report, 8 September 2020) 8.
<https://www.copfs.gov.uk/media-site-news-from-copfs/1902-domestic-abuse-and-stalking-charges-in-scotland-2019-20>.
Iain Brennan et al,
‘Policing a new domestic abuse crime: effects of force-wide training on
arrests for coercive control’
Policing and Society
online publication) 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (730 KB)
PDF format (632 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter