URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/39.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ailwood, S et al --- "Connecting research and teaching: a case study from the School Of Law, University of Canberra" [2013] LegEdDig 39; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 25
Connecting research and teaching: a case study from the School Of Law, University of Canberra
Connecting research and teaching: a case study from
the School Of Law
, University of Canberra
S Ailwood, P Easteal, M Sainsbury and L Bartels
Legal Education Review
, Vol 22, No.2, 2012, pp 317-338
The need to produce law graduates with the capacity and competency to engage
in complex practice has been widely noted in commentary
on legal education.
A strong ability to research is crucial to develop the necessary higher order
skills. One approach to developing research skills is
through research-led
education (RLE). The student benefits of RLE are well documented and include:
(1) deepening understanding of
the knowledge bases of disciplines and
professions, including their research methods and contemporary research
challenges and issues;
(2) building higher-order intellectual capabilities and
enhancing their skills for employment and lifelong learning; (3) developing
capacity to conduct research and enquiry; and (4) enhancing engagement and
developing capacity for independent learning.
However, RLE is not only of benefit to students. For the law academic,
research in education is also a multi-faceted concept. It includes
such as pedagogical research, reflection on one’s own teaching practices,
and discipline-based research which informs
Within many Australian universities, it is likely that there is a subcultural
change taking place, which recognises the nexus between
research (broadly
defined) and learning and offers inducements to integrate the two. This cultural
change is likely to be more significant
for newer universities, like University
of Canberra (UC), which have not traditionally had sufficient access to research
Such an initiative requires institutional commitment to
teacher-researchers who cultivate a climate of inquiry for students at all
stages of their journey.
Like all universities, UC’s internal research strategy is heavily
influenced by external funding and assessment drivers in the
form of grant
income and research quality evaluation. The Excellence in Research for Australia
(ERA) Initiative assessed and evaluated
research quality in Australian
universities, with the result being a score card produced in a national report.
With the prospect
of ERA scores driving funding to universities, internal
research strategies are focused on raising these scores. There is a move
focusing research effort into selected areas – those that can achieve
higher scores in future ERA assessments.
The emphasis on ERA rankings thus impacts legal research and the
teaching–research relationship directly. First, it limits
recognition of
research to those outputs that are recognised in the ERA, excluding other
outputs that may be beneficial to teaching.
For example, textbooks, casebooks
and commentaries are generally excluded from the definition of research, but are
a valuable teaching
resource. The performance expectation of applying for grant
income also impacts on the type of research undertaken. This may result
focus on applied research that is relevant to industry, rather than doctrinal,
theoretical or critical research, whereas a balanced
law curriculum should
incorporate a range of approaches to knowledge.
These factors have the potential to weaken the teaching–research
alignment, particularly where staff are pressured into producing
ERA-recognised
research outputs at the expense of research contributions and activities
reflecting a broader conception of scholarship.
There is some encouragement for staff producing pedagogic research; however,
academics are still expected to be producing discipline-based
research which is
valuable for ERA reporting. And, while UC has incentive schemes to promote and
recognise quality teaching, designed
to increase the number of applicants for
teaching awards at a national level, the scholarship of teaching is one small
these. It was in this context that the UC School of Law was required
to implement an RLE signature theme.
In 2011, UC had to settle on a meaning for RLE and consider practical
measures to implement its RLE signature theme. Different terms
are used in the
literature to describe different aspects of the nexus between teaching and
research. According to Colbeck, where
a broad and inclusive definition of
research is adopted, it is easier to integrate it into teaching. A broad
definition also supports
a range of approaches to developing the
teaching-research connection, which can be more sensitive to disciplinary
differences and
diverse student bodies. A discipline-based approach is important
in studying the research–teaching nexus because the nature
of knowledge
construction and research methods differ between disciplines.
With this principle in mind, a central committee at UC articulated a model
conceptualising the interaction of research with teaching.
That model was
predicated upon a view of best practice teaching as student-driven instead of
simply pedagogical – that is,
the theory that learning is best achieved
with students not acting as passive recipients of knowledge imparted through
traditional
lectures, but driving their own learning. This has been labelled
‘learner-centredness’. The model reflected a broad interpretation
RLE practices and of research. The latter was defined as advancing knowledge or
ways of making knowledge, in agreement with Brew’s
view that research is a
‘complex phenomenon’ and that there is no one thing, nor even one
set of things, which defines
‘research’.
An understanding of effective teaching practices and continuous reflection on
and evaluation of one’s own practices is vital
for effective teaching.
Accordingly, UC has a strong focus on evaluating teaching, which is recognised
as a crucial stage in conducting
action research aimed at understanding which
teaching approaches are most conducive to students achieving learning outcomes.
Researcher–teachers,
in coordinating and monitoring learning activities,
can engage in observation and chronicle their ‘impressions’ about
the efficacy of the various aspects of learning cycles. In this regard, student
engagement with, and performance in, assessment tasks
are also fertile sources
of feedback to reflective teachers on the effectiveness of their approaches and
practices. Such evidence
can be gathered through standardised formal university
evaluation instruments, by more informal electronic and face-to-face discourse,
and through peer observation.
UC has established the Unit Satisfaction Survey (USS), which is conducted for
every unit (subject). Students are asked to comment
on a range of aspects of the
delivery of the unit that reflect on teaching and overall satisfaction with the
unit. Results are distributed
to the academic, as well as Faculty Deans and
Associate Deans (Education). Students also complete questionnaires after
to assess their course level experience (UC Course Experience
Questionnaire). These surveys, together with other evaluation methods,
part of the University’s Courses and Teaching Evaluation and Improvement
Although the UC USS does not directly address the integration of research
training and research projects, it is likely to impact on
other questions,
including whether students ‘found this unit intellectually
stimulating’ or it ‘helped [them] to
develop skills and
knowledge’. It will also impact on responses to the following questions
with respect to generic skills:
‘The unit sharpened my analytic
skills’, ‘The unit developed my problem-solving skills’,
improved my skills in written communication’ and ‘As
a result of the unit I feel confident about tackling unfamiliar
Analysis of Australian awards for university teaching award winners over the
period 2001– 2005 reveals that although not all
winners were active
researchers, most were. As Lee has noted, ‘Courses taught by those at the
cutting edge of research will
necessarily be of higher quality than those taught
by those merely using the research results of others – whatever the
quality of their style of delivery’. Thus, it is important that
the topics, information and reading materials are contemporary
and reflect the
current ‘state of play’. This requires a commitment to ongoing study
in the areas in which one is teaching.
UC has steps in place to encourage a
research-informed curriculum and academics are expected to be research active.
Annual performance
expectations for all academic staff include a doctoral degree
or progress towards one, and a minimum number of publications and grant
applications.
Research outputs attract funding, which can be directed towards teaching.
They also raise a university’s esteem, which will
be attractive to
students, particularly those at postgraduate level.
Research exploring the way people learn has found that learning is correlated
positively with students’ ability to make cognitive,
experiential neurological links: making connections. Research has also shown
that ‘more explorative and less formal’
teaching approaches are
conducive to students thinking independently (and making those connections).
Inquiry-based learning and assessment
have thus been found to be conducive to
transformative learning, and correlated with the development of critical
thinking and socially
responsible global professionals.
While students at all year levels will benefit from connections between
research and teaching, the nature of the interactions should
vary depending on
the year level. In the United States, the Council on Undergraduate Research has
developed a Researcher Skill Development
Framework that contains a series of
levels of researcher autonomy that might be useful in determining ways to
incrementally introduce
students to research. The Boyer Commission on Educating
Undergraduates in the Research University suggests beginning with inquiry-based
learning in Year 1 and culminating with a ‘capstone’ experience
based around a major project.
To learn about our colleagues’ approaches, we developed a survey that
listed 10 intersections between research and teaching
and provided illustrations
of each. Research was defined broadly in the examples and included identifying
and retrieving information,
and rigorous analysis of primary sources and their
application. This instrument was distributed to all 21 teaching academics by
Eleven responses were received and responses were analysed qualitatively
and thematically. The limitations of the survey are acknowledged:
only just over
half the potential participants (52 per cent) responded, and the results could
therefore not be said to map the field
at UC or more broadly. Nevertheless, we
argue that they provide instructive insights into current teaching practices and
future directions.
Academic staff in the UC School of Law are actively encouraged to research
their teaching and present the results at conferences and
in publications. Such
research is treated in the same way as discipline-based research: funds are
available for conference attendance
and the system of rewarding academics who
publish applies to scholarship of teaching and learning.
Staff are also encouraged to showcase their teaching methods and pedagogy in
fortnightly faculty seminars and at university-wide seminars
hosted by the
Teaching and Learning Centre (TLC).
The survey reveals the common practice of acting on quantitative and
qualitative feedback from the USS. Academics report collaborating
colleagues, the Associate Dean (Education) and the TLC, as well as individual
personal reflection, to understand USS feedback
and develop appropriate
responses in the next iteration of the unit.
Research by another law teacher, through observation, reflection and student
choice in assessment items.
This teacher begins the semester with a discussion about the assessment items
set for the unit, and the
different assessment items available to students
throughout the semester. These options have been developed in cooperation with
and the TLC, making use of the utilities available on Moodle, the
University’s online teaching and learning platform. The results
assessment methods that students find engaging and manageable, increased student
choice and autonomy, and assessments that are
topical and practically
Several Law School academics also evaluate their teaching through surveys
specifically tailored to investigate targeted aspects of
their teaching. Seven
respondents had designed their own surveys to seek feedback on specific aspects
of their pedagogical practice.
These instruments have been used to gauge the
effectiveness of new and innovative approaches to teaching core aspects of the
curriculum,
particularly the use of authentic assessment and work-integrated
learning approaches, and to inform changes to unit design.
Finally, peer review, in which colleagues observe and provide feedback on
each other’s teaching (including classroom lessons,
online delivery,
assessment, feedback) is well established among some Law School staff, and is
growing with support from a
2011–12 ALTC Grant. Peer review provides an additional source of
information about teaching and learning practices, one that
is not dependent on
student perceptions of quality teaching, but is instead underpinned by the
expertise and experience of colleagues.
In 2010, the UC Law curriculum was re-energised by major changes to the
Bachelor of Laws (LLB) and Juris Doctor (JD) degree structures.
Each degree now
has nine elective subjects instead of the previous four. This restructure was
driven by a number of factors, including
the desirability of student choice and
flexibility, and the introduction of more work-integrated learning options, as
well as the
need to increase student participation in research and opportunities
for staff to teach in their areas of research.
Several teaching academics have developed new elective units that mirror
their areas of research expertise, enabling them to teach
the results of their
own research (eg Literature and the Law). The School also has a shell unit,
Current Legal Issues, which can
be used by staff to teach about a topic of
current research. For some academic staff, the curriculum they deliver is
informed by
their own need to remain current with legal and scholarly
developments.
The development of a Law School culture in which staff are encouraged to
collaborate on teaching and research, teach in teams and
undertake peer review
of teaching is also resulting in increased opportunities for staff to teach in
their areas of research in circumstances
where they are not responsible for
convening a unit and determining the curriculum. Survey results indicate a
strong culture of academics
guest lecturing in their areas of research
expertise, a practice which benefits both colleagues and students. An example
research on privacy: although there is no unit dedicated to privacy,
one respondent had given lectures and seminars on this topic
in a range of other
units, based on his research.
RLE for the academic is thus a much broader concept than academic engagement
in discipline- based research. While engagement in discipline-based
research is
a prerequisite to RLE, it is not enough in isolation; that research needs to be
integrated into curriculum in a way that
is engaging to the students.
Several respondents report that they use research-based activities during
class time to develop a pedagogical style that moves beyond
transmission of
content to ‘deep learning’ and cooperative experience. Accordingly,
students actively research as they
are learning. One respondent, for
example, requires first year students to consolidate their newly acquired
research skills by
discussing a scholarly journal article in weekly seminar
classes, thereby increasing students’ exposure to academic research
critical analysis.
The capacity to conduct and effectively communicate legal research and
analysis is a fundamental skill for successful legal professionals.
clearly reflected in the Learning and Teaching Academic Standards Statement for
the Bachelor of Laws. Threshold Learning
Outcome 4 states: Graduates of the
Bachelor of Laws will demonstrate the intellectual and practical skills needed
to identify, research,
evaluate and synthesise relevant factual, legal and
policy issues.
Although some survey respondents felt limited by the necessity of an exam in
Priestley Eleven units, in reality, it is possible to
combine the Priestley
focus on content and exam-based assessment with RLE practices.
Within the Law School, many units now involve research-based assessment, as
opposed to the traditional examination path. Elective
units such as Intellectual
Property Law contain a strong research component, which requires students to
formulate their own research
question and write a paper. In other electives,
assessment is wholly research based: in Mental Health and the Law, assessment
of a peer-review activity, research proposal, research paper and
legislative research; in Law and Literature, students complete a
short and then
long essay on the same topic, enabling them to develop their ideas, arguments
and expression with feedback. In other
units, research-based assessment departs
from this traditional model of scholarly research and writing by embedding
research tasks
in assessments such as participation in online discussions,
reflective journals and learning chronicles.
Canberra Law Review
unit provides opportunities for
high-performing students to enrol as student editors and manage the online
publication of a scholarly
journal. Student editors are responsible for liaising
with contributing authors, editing research articles and checking references,
well as preparing a book review, case note or other piece for publication in the
journal. This unit provides research-focused
students with an opportunity to
gain a greater understanding of scholarly research and publication.
In the new elective unit Law in Action, students complete a project for an
external partner. More general benefits that we have observed
with this type of
RLE include fostering a greater knowledge- building community and developing
student–staff relationships.
This is particularly evident in units such as
Law in Action. It enables the professional community to engage with the Law
and obtain a tangible benefit. The student obtains valuable experience of
the legal community, in addition to enhancing research
skills and developing
A number of survey respondents indicate that academic staff within the Law
School collaborate with students outside the curriculum
itself. Two respondents
report collaborating with Honours students on scholarly publications based on
their Honours theses. Several
respondents also report employing undergraduates
as research assistants. This practice represents multiple intersections between
teaching and research. This practice represents multiple intersections between
teaching and research. The students learn research
skills by acting as
quasi-apprentices on projects.
We have demonstrated that a whole-of-institution approach to RLE is necessary
for its implementation. This enables the complex overlap
between staff and
student research to be accommodated and encouraged, and provides the best
strategy for integrating staff and students
in creating communities of practice.
However, there still needs to be strong discipline-based support to develop a
culture of RLE.
A range of institutional pressures, driven by external factors,
also have the potential to limit RLE. These include limits on what
is recognised
as research.
Students and staff need to be supported to gain the benefits of RLE. The
limited time of staff to mentor students needs to be acknowledged.
Institutions
need to develop sufficient rewards and incentives for participation.
Finally, all changes need to be evaluated to ensure they are leading to
better outcomes. Fittingly, we are thus recommending that
pedagogically oriented
research needs to be conducted on RLE as practised by an institution and
individual faculties or schools,
to determine whether it is working.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (689 KB)
PDF format (4.08 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter