URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/JCULawRw/2023/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:06:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Davies, Chris --- "Women, Sport and the Law in the Twenty-First Century" [2023] JCULawRw 6; (2023) 29 James Cook University Law Review 93
Women, Sport and the Law in the Twenty-First Century
Chris Davies
A feature of sport in Australia has been the rise of women’s sport,
particularly in regard to leagues in team sports, namely
netball, cricket,
basketball and Australian football. Rugby union’s appearance at the 2016
Rio Olympic Games in its sevens
format included women while the success of
soccer’s 2023 Women’s World Cup highlights the rise of women in that
A legal issue with the Australian Football League Women’s League
(‘AFLW’) is the use of a draft system to spread
the available
playing talent, and it is the author’s view that a draft system, while a
restraint on a player’s freedom
of employment is a reasonable, and
therefore a legal, one. While issues of labour market controls are not
restricted to women’s
sport, issues of the participation of pregnant women
and intersex/transgender athletes are unique to women’s sport. The present
legal position is that it is discriminatory to exclude pregnant women from
participation in sport, and while the issue of intersex/transgender
from women’s sport remains a complex one, regulations limiting their
participation have been upheld by the Court of
Arbitration for Sport (CAS).
While World Aquatics has implemented a policy to effectively prohibit
intersex/transgender swimmers
from competing in elite women’s events, it
is presently looking at how an open division can be included.
I Introduction
The success of the recent women’s football World Cup and the level of
support for the Australian team, including record television
ratings, is an
indication of the potential for women’s sport. However, it is not alone as
other sports have seen a rise in
interest with leagues in team sports, such as
netball, cricket, basketball and Australian football being formed over, in
particular,
the last decade. Rugby union’s re-appearance at the 2016 Rio
Olympic Games in its sevens format included women, with Australia’s
medal win giving the team a high profile on the world sevens circuit. The
Australian Football League Women’s League (‘AFLW’)
success while in cricket the Women’s Big Bash League continues to increase
its profile, with the success of the
2020 Women’s T20 World Cup also
enhancing its profile.
There are a number of legal aspects arising from the formation of these
leagues, the AFLW, for instance, relies on a draft system
to spread the
available playing talent, as does the men’s competition, the Australian
Football League (‘AFL’),
while maximum wage restraints have been
implemented by some of these leagues. The fact that these leagues are now
professional, or
at least, semi-professional, raises potential contract issues,
such as Cricket Australia’s (‘CA’) pregnancy disclosure
clause, with the issue of the participation of pregnant women being a potential
legal one for all sports, as is the participation
of intersex and transgender
This paper will therefore examine the legal aspects of these women’s
leagues, as well as individual sports, in regard to the
application of contract
law, restraint of trade, torts, discrimination and doping. It will highlight the
interaction of the law with
these sports, both actual and potential, with the
underlying themes being whether there is anything unique in regard to this
application
of the law to women’s sport, and what the cases have
contributed to sports law overall.
II Professional Women’s Leagues
Contract Issues
An earlier contract that CA had with its women players included a clause that
required them to inform CA if they were pregnant. This
raised the issue of
whether this was discriminatory, or merely involved an employer needing to know
medical condition that could have potential
workplace health and safety issues. Thus, while the legislation is clear that
discrimination
based on pregnancy is unlawful, there is a question as to whether
it is discriminatory to merely ask a player if they are pregnant.
Considering it
is not a question the male players need to be asked, it arguably is.
It is suggested therefore that CA, like any governing body, should have first
engaged in a full consultation process with the players.
A possible compromise
situation for all sports is to have a confidentiality clause that allows any
pregnant player to initially seek
medical advice from their own doctor, with a
doctor from a governing body, such as CA, only becoming involved when it becomes
for the governing body to be made aware of it, that is, when it may
have become a genuine workplace health and safety issue.
It should be noted that CA, or its earlier equivalent, the Australian Cricket
Board, have had to deal with young male fast bowlers
with potentially
career-ending back injuries. One example is present-day captain, Pat Cummins,
who made his test debut in 2011 at
the age of 18, with an historical example
being Dennis Lillee who made his debut in 1970 and went on to become one of
Australia’s
greatest-ever bowlers. On both occasions the player was able
to make a recovery, with one of the key factors being that the governing
was fully aware of the situation and was therefore able to work with the player
in regard to matters such as workloads. Thus,
dealing with player medical
conditions does not need to be an employer against employee situation and, in
relation to pregnant players,
it is suggested the best solution is for the
players to work with governing bodies such as CA. It also should be noted that
was subsequently removed from the CA’s women’s contracts.
The Restraint of Trade Doctrine
Any sporting governing body that implements a labour market control will be
subject to the restraint of trade doctrine. This requires
the use of the
test, developed in the late nineteenth century in
Nordenfelt v Maxim
Guns and Ammunition Company
which requires the court
Is the contract or are the regulations reasonably necessary to protect the
interests of the party in whose favour the contract or
regulations are made?
1. Is the contract or are the regulations an unreasonable restraint on the
party who is affected by them?
2. Is it unreasonably injurious to the
The restraint of trade doctrine is therefore a part of contract law, though
it is arguably a distinct area of law in its own right.
test has been applied to sports cases that have reached the courts regarding the
control of payments to players, and player movement
between clubs. In its
application to sport, the
test involves examining the
protection of the league’s interests, known as protectable interests, and
asking the question as
to whether it is reasonable on the players, and also not
contrary to the public interest.
regard to women’s leagues the labour market controls that have so far been
utilised have been maximum wage restraints and
draft systems.
A maximum wage restraint places a limit on the amount each
individual player, no matter how good, can be paid. This system was first
introduced into English football in 1901, with the maximum amount any player at
the time could be paid being £4, the equivalent
of about $10.00. It lasted
in English soccer until 1961 when it was dropped by the English Football
Association after the players
threatened to go on strike if it was retained.
Maximum wages, however, did continue in the Northern Ireland Football League
the 1980s when a player claimed it was a restraint on freedom to practice
his trade. In the subsequent case of
Johnston v Cliftonville Football
and Athletic Club Ltd,
was held that the maximum wage was an unreasonable restraint of trade as it
restricted the amount of money the player could earn,
and the regulations were
declared invalid.
However, it is the author’s view that a maximum wage restraint is an
example of a labour market control that is reasonable in
a certain situation,
namely, a fledgling league. For example, it was probably reasonable when first
introduced into English league
football over a hundred years ago when the
clubs’ only real income was from fickle gate receipts in what was then
still a fledgling
league. However, it was most definitely unreasonable by 1961
when other revenue streams, such as television rights, were available
was by then a well-established league.
This raises the question as to whether the use of a maximum wage restraint in
the women’s leagues, such as the Women’s
National Basketball
Association (‘WNBA’) in the United States, and the former
Trans-Tasman Netball Competition, constitutes
an unreasonable restraint of
trade. It, firstly, should be pointed out that the players in these leagues
agreed to such a restraint,
and it is suggested that in fledgling leagues such
as these it is reasonable on the players as it can help to ensure the league
financially viable. Looking at it from a player’s perspective,
there is not much benefit in being a well-paid player if the
competition folds
because it is not financially sustainable. It is suggested therefore that
imposing a maximum wage is a reasonable
restraint in new women’s leagues,
as it is in any fledgling league, particularly if it is combined with a
guaranteed minimum
wage and the league has a longer-term goal of reverting to a
less restrictive salary cap.
A feature of the AFLW is that it involves the use of a draft system where
players wishing to enter the competition are selected by
the clubs in the
reverse order in which those clubs finished the previous season’s
competition. That is, the team finishing
last has first selection, the team
finishing second last gets second selection etc until the winner of the
competition has a selection.
The process is then repeated for a second and
subsequent rounds. Players already in the competition can be traded for other
or for draft selections in the national draft. Rugby league also
implemented a draft system in 1990, though it was successfully
challenged by the
Adamson v New South Wales
In that case the Full Court of the Federal Court held that the rules of the
draft were more restrictive than was necessary to help
the league obtain its
stated objective of a more even
competition.
The Court, however,
did state that a set of draft rules that was less restrictive on the players may
be reasonable.
The author has
suggested that the AFL draft can be distinguished from the rugby league draft
successfully challenged in
due to greater
bargaining power for the players, which now includes the introduction of free
agency in 2012 which allows players
to leave their club without having to go
through the trade process after eight years’ service.
In the AFLW, the draft for the inaugural 2017 season could not be conducted
in the traditional way, but instead used a lottery style
system to ensure that a
few clubs could not sign all the best players. However, a traditional style
draft has taken place prior to
the start of subsequent seasons and has included
similar trade provisions to the AFL draft that allowed players to seek a trade
another club in exchange for draft selections and/or other players. It is
suggested that once the AFLW is in operation for eight
years it will need to
incorporate free agency into its draft system, as it is in the men’s AFL,
because it unquestionably helps
to improve its
reasonableness.
Gender Issues and Equal Pay Issues
While the question of equal pay for women in sport raised the issue of gender
equality, it should also be kept in mind that it also
involves the application
of market forces. Even in men’s sports there are varying levels of
spectator support for different
sports which, in turn, affects the amount of
money generated, and therefore player’s income, in that sport. Within a
sport there are, at present, usually differing levels of support
between men’s and women’s competition which can determine
differences in pay based purely on market forces.
Tennis, however, is an example of a sport that has equal prizemoney for men
and women in what is a joint tour which means gender equality
is essential. When
equal pay was introduced there were suggestions it actually favoured the women
as they only played the best of
three sets matches while for the men it was
often five. The logical solution to this perceived problem was to reduce the
matches to the best of three which is now the norm in all
tournaments, except in the four Grand Slam events. Golf meanwhile has always
a separate women’s tour which raises its own prizemoney. Thus, golf is one
sport where the income earned by players is
based purely on market forces.
Compared to tennis and golf, women’s leagues in team sports are
relatively recent. While women have been representing Australia
in cricket since
century, the players were, until relatively recently, purely
amateurs. However, the introduction of a T20 Big Bash League Women tournament
has provided an opportunity for players to earn enough to be fully professional.
The success of this tournament can be gauged by
the fact that it now has its own
broadcasting rights. The introduction of an Indian Women’s Premier League
meanwhile has brought
in a new era for women’s cricket since the top
players are now earning over $500 000 for the six-week
tournament.
In rugby league, all
games in the National Rugby League Women’s competition are now all shown
on free to air television, a
sign of the growing interest in that competition
which will lead to increases in salaries.
Women’s football leagues have been around for many decades in Europe
with Australia now having its own Women’s A-League.
While these leagues
are already professional, there is no doubt that interest will only grow after
the huge success of the recent
World Cup which became the first women’s
event to break even after generating $888m in
The broadcasting rights
were relatively miniscule as, locally, the Seven Network paid only a reported
$5m for the Australian rights.
This resulted in a financial bonanza for the network due to the record-breaking
ratings with the 7m viewers for the Australia versus
England semi-final being
the highest ranked Australian programme of all time. There is no doubt that the
broadcasting rights will
be much greater for the next World Cup. However, at
present, the total prizemoney awarded to the women’s World Cup is only
quarter of that awarded to the men, being $110m as against
Thus, there is no doubt
the quest for parity in this prizemoney will be an on-going one until it is
The success of the women’s football World Cup is already having an
impact on other women’s sports, with Rugby Australia
recently receiving a
letter of complaint from a number of its players concerning the way they are
presently being treated in the
15-a-side version of the game compared to the
men. This is in comparison with the Matildas who, since 2019, have had an
whereby they have the same treatment as the men’s Socceroos
side. While rugby union was at one time ahead of the other football
its involvement of women in its sevens programme it now has some catching up to
do with other codes and has recently announced
that its 15-a-side women’s
players will be full time professional by
With Australia to host the
Women’s Rugby World Cup in 2029 there will be an opportunity to promote
the women’s game just
as the recent football World Cup did for that sport.
III Discrimination
General Gender Discrimination
The gender discrimination that has existed against women in sport is perhaps
best illustrated by the fact that no women competed in
the First Modern Olympic
Games in 1896, the founder of the modern Olympics, Baron Pierre de Coubertin,
being opposed female participation.
Guttnam, however, does suggest that this
prejudice against women may have been derived more from Victorian attitudes
femininity’, and therefore was not so much a
result of direct hostility against women as
over-protectiveness.
Women’s tennis and golf were included in the 1900 Paris Olympic Games
with women also being able to compete in croquet. However,
the prestigious
swimming and athletic programmes did not include any women’s events until
1912 and 1928 respectively. Today,
however, paragraph 6 of the Fundamental
Principles of Olympism outlined in the Olympic
states that:
The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set forth in this Olympic Charter
shall be secured without discrimination of any kind, such
as colour, sex, sexual
orientation, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or
other states.
It should be noted that the women’s programme at the 2020 Tokyo Olympic
Games was all but the same as the men’s and in
swimming, for example, a
women’s 1500m freestyle was finally added. Swimming, athletics and
triathlon also had mixed relays
for the first time.
In Australia, legislation at both Commonwealth and state levels makes
discrimination in sport unlawful, and usually it does not allow
children being
excluded from any sport up until the age of 12. After the age of 12, however,
children can be excluded on the basis
of gender, with s 66(1) of the
Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic), for example, stating a person may be excluded on
the grounds of gender from participating in a competitive sport if strength,
stamina or physique are relevant to the
For instance,
Taylor v Moorabbin
involved Football
Victoria’s Female Participation Regulation, which excluded girls over the
age of 12 from competing in boys’
competitions. It was held that, while it
was unlawful for the football association to exclude girls from the under-14
competition,
the relative
differences in strength, stamina and physique between the sexes in the under-15
competition was sufficiently significant
to be make it lawful for girls to be
excluded from under-15
competitions.
It is suggested that this decision is relatively uncontroversial. What has
been controversial, however, in regard to gender discrimination
issues has been
the participation of pregnant, transgender and intersex women. .
Discrimination against pregnant woman is prohibited by the
Discrimination Act 1984
(Cth), and while it needs to be acknowledged that
the law relating to the unborn can be a complicated one, a pregnant woman does
owe a duty of care to the unborn
The issue of banning
pregnant women from participating in sport reached the courts in
Australia Netball Association
Trudy Gardner was
captain of the Adelaide Ravens in the Commonwealth Bank Trophy, the then
national competition organised by the
All Australian Netball Association
(‘AANA’). On 18 June, 2001, the AANA imposed a ban on pregnant women
playing in the
competition. Gardner, who was 15 weeks pregnant at the time, was
therefore prevented from playing in three
before successfully
obtaining an injunction to allow her to resume
At the subsequent trial
it was held that Gardner had been discriminated against by being prevented from
playing in those three matches.
Damages of $6750 were
, the Australian Sports Commission (‘ASC’)
produced guidelines in regard to pregnant woman in
which leaves the decision
whether to compete or not being left to the individual player, with medical
advice being recommended.
worth noting that Gardner had in fact sought medical advice when she discovered
she was pregnant, firstly from her General
Practitioner, then from an
obstetrician to whom she was referred. That advice was that there was no medical
reason preventing her
from playing netball at her stage of what was a healthy
The fact that it is
now 20 years since
suggests the guidelines have worked well with
a sport like netball.
However, with the ever-increasing number of women playing professional sport,
the legal issues arising from pregnancy are yet to be
fully determined,
particularly as some of these sports involve far more physical contact than
Intersex Athletes
The term intersex refers to the fact that ‘some individuals have
congenital conditions that cause atypical development of their
chromosomal,
gonadal, and/or anatomic sex.’ These are ‘known as differences of
sex development, or DSD’s and sometimes
referred to as
“intersex”.’
In sport the issue invariably involves athletes who identify as being female but
have naturally high levels of testosterone and whether
they should be allowed to
compete in female competitions. South African middle-distance runner, Caster
Semenya, for example, was
ordered to undergo sex tests after winning the 800m at
the 2009 World Athletics Championships. She was allowed to compete at the
London Olympic Games, where she won the silver medal, before winning gold at the
2016 Rio Olympic Games.
Prior to the Rio Games there was a CAS decision in relation to Dutee Chand,
an Indian sprinter.
banned under the International Association of Athletic Federations
(IAAF)’s Regulations Governing the Eligibility
of Females With
Hyperandrogenism to Compete in Women’s Competition (the
‘Regulations’).
Panel held that, on the then current evidence, it was ‘unable to conclude
androgen-sensitive hyperandrogenic female athletes
enjoyed such a substantial
performance advantage.’
The Regulations were therefore suspended for two years during which time the
IAAF (now World Athletics) was required to produce evidence
supporting their
need, otherwise they were to be declared
On 23 April 2018 the IAAF announced it was reintroducing rules to prevent or
limit hyperandrogenic females from competing in women’s
events, with the
Eligibility Regulations for the Female Classification (Athletes with Differences
of Sex Development) (‘DSD
Regulations’)
coming into
operation on 1 November 2018. The IAAF referred to medical and scientific
evidence it had collated to support a level
of five nmol/L being selected, based
on that evidence, as being the cut-off
Athletes affected needed
to reduce their blood testosterone level to below this level by means of
hormonal contraceptives for at
least six months in order to be eligible to
compete. Another feature of the DSD Regulations is that they are restricted to
track events where intersex athletes are considered to have an
advantage, these being distances from 400m to 1500m (and one
The announcement of the DSD Regulations received immediate criticism from the
African National Conference (‘ANC’) that
the rules were ‘yet
another attempt... to exclude and discriminate against’
In response, IAAF
President, Sebastian Coe, stated that ‘it had a responsibility to ensure a
level playing field for
Semenya then
challenged the DSD Regulations in the
but the majority of the
Panel was satisfied that DSD athletes enjoyed ‘significant performance
advantage over other female
athletes without such DSD, and that this advantage
is attributable to their exposure levels of circulating testosterone in the
male range.’
the DSD Regulations were considered ‘necessary to maintain fair
competition in female
therefore ‘necessary and
reasonable.’
Well respected sports journalist, David Walsh, suggests that the governing
bodies need ‘to be allowed to decide the rules for
their competition
because it is their responsibility to ensure fairness for the majority of
participants.’ He further suggests
that in regard to the participation of
intersex athletes that ‘World Athletics has got this right.’
Walsh’s comments
came after the European Court of Human Rights had found
in Semenya’s favour in her appeal after the Swiss Federal Tribune had
ruled against her appeal of the CAS
It is also worth
noting that the CAS verdict was only a majority decision, indicating this is a
matter that is far from settled.
What has recently become another major legal issue in sport is the separate,
but related, area of the participation of transgender
athletes in sport.
Transgender
Transgender is a term used when a person is born as one gender but identifies
with being the other. While athletes who were originally
female and wish to
compete in men’s events does not raise issues with fair competition, there
are issues when biologically
born males wish to compete in women’s events.
The IOC has adopted an open policy in regard to the participation of
transgender athletes and, for instance, 43-year-old Lauren Hubbard
Zealand participated in the women’s weightlifting competition at the 2020
Tokyo Games. Hubbard had won national junior
titles and set records in the
boy’s divisions before giving the sport away. In 2017, five years after
her transition, she began
competing in the women’s heavyweight division.
She was eligible to compete at the Games as she had met the requirements set
the International Weightlifting Federation (‘IWF’), namely having a
testosterone level at below 10 nanomoles (nm)
per litre for twelve months before
first competition. However, many sports scientists suggest this level is too low
as the average
range for women is between 0.3nm and
Despite the IOC’s open policy, international governing bodies are still
free to develop their own. In the year following the
Tokyo Olympics, the world
governing body for swimming, Federation Internationale de Natation (FINA - now
World Aquatics), released
a transgender policy. This was done after its Congress
in Budapest where the attending delegates had received a detailed report FINA
had commissioned from independent scientists and medical experts. Its most
significant conclusion was ‘that the physical benefits
males derive from
puberty cannot be
Seventy-one of
the delegates voted in favour of the
which bans male to female
transgender and 46 XY DSD athletes from elite female competition unless they can
comply with cl 4(b). It
states that they need to ‘establish to
FINA’s comfortable satisfaction that they have not experienced any part of
puberty beyond Tanner Stage 2 or before age of 12, whatever is the
later.’ It then states they must specifically produce evidence’
which establishes that they either ‘have complete androgen insensitivity
and could not have experienced male puberty’
or that ‘they are
androgen sensitive but had male puberty suppressed.’ They are then
required to ‘have maintained
testosterone levels below 2.5
It was stated the
Policy applied to FINA-organized events and also in regard to the recognition of
world records. Thus, it was restricted
to elite competitions. That then raises
the issue as to what is elite. The author suggests it should include state
championships.
Swimming has not only been one of the first sports to produce a detailed
policy on the participation of transgender athletes but is
also the first to
announce that a trial open category event would go ahead sometime in 2023. It
would allow ‘swimmers to compete
regardless of their sex, their legal
gender or gender identity.’ The problem is how it will require a working
group that consists
of ‘scientists, human rights advocates, lawyers and
athletes, to come up with
recommendations.’
suggested that the fact this working group required people from such diverse
professional backgrounds indicates just how complex
this issue is.
Within Australia, Basketball Victoria has been willing to approve the
participation of a transgender player in the NBLI South women’s
competition, a decision, like most in this area, that drew strong and divided
views. Former Australian player, Andrew Bogut, being
one who was strongly
against it, stating that a ‘“biological man” would be playing
in the NBLI this season.’
However, Basketball Victoria had collaborated
with Basketball Australia to produce Guidelines for the Inclusion of Transgender
Gender Diverse People in regard to this issue of allowing such players to
participate .
Australia meanwhile has changed its rules ‘to allow transgender people to
self-identify and compete in all community
It is a decision
that has been criticised, including by tennis champion, Martina Navratilova, a
supporter of women’s sport
being restricted to biological females.
One of Navratilova’s concerns is that competitors she considers to be
biological males would not only be competing against females
but will also be
allowed to use female changerooms which she describes as something that
‘heavily discriminates against young
While this is a potential issue, there is no doubt the main issue surrounding
the participation of transgender athletes in women’s
competitions is
whether these athletes have in fact retained a significant physical advantage.
The IOC has therefore funded a research
programme at the University of
Loughborough to assess the performance, strength and speed of elite athletes
‘over a period
of time after transitioning and undergoing hormone
therapy.’ However, in a blow for the IOC, and sport in general, three of
the four participants have withdrawn from this
While decisions need to
be made in this area based on reliable scientific evidence, this result
highlights just how hard it is going
to be to obtain such evidence.
IV Doping in Sport
The issue of doping in sport is probably of more relevance to women than it
is to men for the simple reason that women invariably
have more to gain from the
use of prohibited substances, particularly strength related substances, such as
steroids. This is illustrated
by the dominance of the East German women athletes
and swimmers during the 1970s and 1980s after being part of a state-based doping
program. In some events, such as the women’s athletics’ 400m, this
dominance continues to the present day as the world
record is still held by East
Germany’s Marita Koch.
However, the now well-known long-term health problems faced by many of the East
German athletes also highlights the negative health
aspects of the use of
performance-enhancing drugs.
In order to help remove, or at least, reduce doping in sport, the World
Anti-Doping Agency (‘WADA’) was established in
November 1999. It
produced the World Anti-Doping Code (‘WADA Code’) in 2003. This
document sets out to harmonise the
rules relating to drug testing, with the
banned substances being listed in the WADA Prohibited List. Article 4.3 sets out
the criteria
for including substances on the Prohibited List, namely that there
is medical evidence the substance has the potential to, or does,
enhance sport
performance, or represents potential health risks to athletes, or its use
violates the spirit of sport.
Five times tennis Grand Slam winner, Maria Sharopova is one of the most
high-profile female athletes to have failed a doping test.
This was after she
tested positive at the 2016 Australian Open to meldonium, a substance that she
had been taking for health reasons
for many years, and one that had only been
added to the banned list on 1 January
Sharapova also delegated
the job of finding out about what was on the WADA banned list to her agent. It
was acknowledged by the CAS
Panel that this was an acceptable action for a
professional athlete.
it also held that she had not given sufficient instructions to the agent as to
exactly what he was supposed to do, and banned
her for fifteen months, backdated
to January 2016.
The response to
her return to women’s tennis in 2017 was mixed, with some being adamant
she should not have been allowed back
in as she was a drug cheat who had been
taking a performance-enhancing drug for the best part of a
This was a response
that, in the author’s opinion, showed ignorance of both the WADA Code and
the CAS decision.
The issue of contamination has been raised in a number of CAS cases and one
such case involving a female competitor was that of Australian
swimmer, Shayna
Jack had been subjected to
an out-of-competition test on 26 June 2019 at the Tobruk Pool in Cairns while
preparing for the World
Swimming Championships. It returned a positive test for
ligandrol, a substance that is classified under ‘other anabolic
and ‘is prohibited at all times under the WADA Prohibited
Jack received an
immediate provisional suspension and was subsequently given a four-year period
of ineligibility, backdated to 12
July 2019 when her provisional suspension was
On appeal to CAS the
Sole Arbitrator held that the anti-doping rule violation (ADRV) was not
intentional
and that she did not
know how it had entered her body,
noting that Jack was a
‘reliable and very plausible
A two year ban
commencing on 12 July 2019 was therefore
Sports Integrity
Australia (SIA) and WADA appealed that decision, but were unsuccessful.
A feature of the present doping rules is that after a positive test,
competitors can now be retrospectively disqualified from events.
One of the best
examples of this involves Marion Jones who had been considered by many to be one
of the greatest female track athletes
of all times after her performances in the
2000 Sydney Olympic Games. However, in 2006 she returned a positive test to the
boosting hormone, erythropoietin (EPO), before confessing to steroid use
prior to the 2000 Games. She was forced to return her five
Olympic medals.
More recently the retest of doping samples taken at the 2008 Beijing and 2012
London Olympic Games, has seen many athletes, including
women, retrospectively
lose their medals. During the Beijing Games, Ukrainian Lyudmila Blonksa had lost
her silver medal won in the
women’s heptathlon after returning a positive
test for methyltestosterone, American, Hyleas Fountain then receiving the silver
while Russian Tatyana Chernova was given the bronze.
However, Chernova’s Beijing sample was retested in July 2016, and this
revealed the presence of dehydrochlormethyltestosterone
(Turinabol).
In the subsequent
appeal to the CAS Panel it was held that the laboratory analysis of
Chernova’s sample was
which meant she lost the
bronze medal she had only won as a result of a positive test by another athlete.
The retest of women’s weightlifting also resulted in the
re-distribution of medals, the first two in the 48kg, China’s
Chen Xiexia
and Turkey’s Sibel Ozkan later being disqualified. The gold and bronze
medallists in the 69kg, China’s Liu
Chunhong and Ukraine’s Nataliya
Davydora, also later returned positive retests, as did the first and third
placegetters in
the 75kg, China’s Cao Lei and Russian Nadezhda
Evstyukhina.
At the London Games meanwhile the women’s 800m had been won by Russian
Mariya Savinova, but in 2017 she was considered to have
had irregularities in
her biological passport with the gold medal being awarded to South
Africa’s Caster Semenya. The winner
of the 3000m steeplechase, Russian
Yuliya Zaripova, returned a positive retest for anabolic steroids and in 2015
also lost her medal.
The 1500m results meanwhile were changed even more remarkably as both the
original gold and silver medallists, Turkey’s Asli
Cakir Alptekin and
Gamze Bulut, were found in 2015 to have breached doping
regulations.
Women’s field
events meanwhile saw Russian athletes losing medals with the retesting of the
sample of original gold medallist
in the hammer throw, Russian Tatyna Lysenko
Beloborodva, for instance producing a positive result for metabolites of
dehydrochlormethyltestosterone.
Both the original winner of the shot put, Nadzeya Ostapchuk from Belarus, and
silver medallist, Russian Yevgeniya Kolodko, lost their
medals which elevated
original bronze medallist, New Zealand’s Valarie Adams, to Olympic
champion. Other minor medals were
also lost for doping violations, including
silver medallist in the discus, another Russian, Darya Pishchalnikova, after she
a drug test in 2013.
Women’s weightlifting in London also had its doping issues with 2016
retests leading to the disqualifications of Zulfiya Chinshanlo
of Kazakhstan,
gold medallist in the 53kg, and bronze medallist, Cristina Iova of Moldova, both
results being for steroids. Bronze
medallist in the 58kg class, Yuliya Kalina of
Ukraine, likewise failed a 2016 retest for steroids as did the 63kg division
gold medallist,
Maiya Maneza from Kazakhstan. In the 75kg division meanwhile all
three medallists, Svetlana Podobedova, from Kazakhstan, Russian
Zabolotnaya, and Iryna Kulesha from Belurus, failed these 2016 retests for
steroids. It took a few more years, but in 2020,
original silver medallist in
the 69kg division, Romania’s Roxana Cocos, failed a retest of her London
V Conclusion
Women’s competitive sport has been around for over a hundred years,
first appearing, for instance, in the 1900 Paris Olympic
Games, even if it was
limited to just three sports. In the Grand Slam events of tennis, women have
been competing at Wimbledon since
1884 while women have been representing
Australia at cricket since the nineteenth century. However, there is no doubt
that women’s
sport has reached a new level in the twenty-first century,
particularly in relation to ever-growing team leagues, while the success
recent women’s football World Cup has highlighted the interest in
international team sports.
With the continuing increase in the participation of women in sport,
particularly at the professional level, there will almost certainly
increase in the number of cases involving women needing to be heard by CAS, and
possibly the general courts. An examination
of the decided CAS cases indicates
that, with many, the fact that one of the parties was a female athlete was not
directly relevant.
However, decisions involving the likes of tennis player Maria
Sharapova and swimmer Shayna Jack have still contributed to the
of one of the most significant areas of sports law, namely doping.
Similarly, in Australia the tax case involving Joanne
provided a significant
High Court decision in relation to what constitutes income for Olympic athletes,
whether they be male or female.
There are two areas of sports law which are unique to female participants,
namely pregnancy and intersex/transgender athletes. The
issue of pregnant women
competing in sport has raised discrimination, torts and contract issues in
sports such as netball and cricket.
While guidelines developed by the ASC appear
to have presently provided a sound basis for avoiding issues in netball, it is
that further issues are still probable with the increase of
women’s participation in sport, particularly contact sport.
The IAAF’s DSD Regulations have been approved by the CAS and presently
provide the foundation for the participation of intersex
athletes in
women’s track events, though it is the author’s view that further
hearings in CAS are likely. Each governing
body is also going to need to develop
a policy for the participation of both intersex and transgender athletes
suitable for its sport.
There is no doubt that the year 2023 has been a significant one for
women’s sport with the introduction of a women’s Indian
League in cricket and the success of the women’s football World Cup. Both
have indicated that gender parity in team
sports may not be far away and that
women’s sport will continue to grow in future years – as will its
legal challenges.
Associate Professor, College of Business, Law and Governance,
James Cook University.
[1894] UKLawRpAC 52
[1894] AC 535.
Chris Davies, ‘The Use of
Salary Caps in Professional Team Sports and the Restraint of Trade Doctrine
Journal of Contract Law
[1984] NI 9.
Note that while salary caps
have used in men’s leagues for many decades, they have never actually
challenged in court. For
further discussion on the use of salary caps see
Antonio Buti, ‘Salary Caps in Professional Teams Sports: An Unreasonable
Journal of Contract Law
Davies, ‘The Use of Salary Caps in Professional Team Sports and the
Restraint of Trade Doctrine
Journal of Contract Law
[1991] FCA 425
(1991) 31 FCR 242.
Chris Davies, ‘Draft
Systems in Professional Team Sports and the Restraint of Trade Doctrine’
Australian and New Zealand Sports Law Journal
Justin Cook and Chris
Davies, ‘Free Agency and the Australian Football League’,
Will Stanton, ‘Reality
bites as T20 riches create an awkward truth,’
The Australian
February 2023, 28.
Marco Monteverde,
‘Best ever’ World Cup’,
The Australian
, 23 August 2023,
John Stensholt and Sophie
Elsworth, ‘Operation Matildas and the $1b Cup,’
, 17 August 2023, 7.
John Stensholt and Jessica
Halloran, ‘Matilda’s Cup motza won’t stop parity pay
The Australian,
3 August 2023, 3.
Pamela Whaley,
‘Wallaroos go public in brawl over funds’,
The Australian
August 2023, 7.
Alan Guttnam,
From Ritual
to Record: the Nature of Modern Sport
, Columbia University Press, New York,
The Olympic Charter, in
force 15 October 2023,
https://olympi
See also s 57M
Discrimination Act 1991
Anti-discrimination Act
s 111(1)(c)
Anti-discrimination Act 1991
(Qld); s 49ZYW (1)
Anti-discrimination Act 1977
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Anti-discrimination
(Tas); s 85Q
Opportunity Act 1984
Taylor v Moorabbin Saints
Junior Football League and Football Victoria Ltd
[2004] VCAT 158.
Ibid, [82].
Ibid. Note the decision is
consistent with
Robertson v
Australian Ice Hockey Federation and
Victorian Ice Hockey Association
(Unreported, ADTVIC, No 207 of 1997) where
a 15 year old girl was prevented from playing in a boys’ competition, it
that s 62(2) of the
Equal Opportunity Act 1995
(Vic) permitted
age restrictions in participating in competitive sporting activities.
Lynch v Lynch
25 NSWLR 411.
[2003] FMCA 81
(2003) 197 ALR 28.
Australian Sports
Commission,
Pregnancy in Sport: Guidelines for the Australian Sporting
, Canberra, ASC, 2002.
Gardner v All Australian
Netball Association Ltd
[2001] FMCA 50
(2001) 182 ALR 408
Nicole Jeffrey,
‘Gender Games’,
The Australian
, 17 August 2016, 31.
CAS 2014/A/379
Chand v Athletics Federation of India & International Associations of
Athletic Federations.
Ibid, [532].
Ibid, [548].
https://www.iaaf.org
‘New Testosterone
rules racist, say African National Congress’
The Australian
April, 2018, 45.
CAS 2018/O/5794
Semenya and Athletics South Africa v International Association of Athletics
Federation:
CAS 2018/O/5798
Athletics South Africa v International
Association of Athletics
https://www.tas-cas.org.
Ibid, [575].
Ibid, [580].
Ibid, [584].
David Walsh, ‘Semenya
case highlights need for sports to be able to create level playing field’,
The Australian
, 24 July 2023, 22.
Matt Dickenson, ‘Early
exit cannot allow IOC to dodge transgender issue’,
The Australian
4 August 2021, 25.
Julien Linden, ‘What
science has to say about male advantage’
The Weekend Australian
25-26 June 2022, 40.
‘Policy on Eligibility
for the Men’s and Women’s Competition Categories’
https://resources.fina.org.document.2022/06/19
Chris Davies,
‘FINA’s transgender policy and the integrity of women’s
sport’ (2023) 1
Julien Linden, ‘The
first plunge into trans comp’
The Australian
, 26 July 2023, 22.
Matt Logue, ‘Sporting
world in new trans dilemma’
The Australian
, 14 March 2023.
Jacquelin Magnay,
‘Navratilova slams gymnastics’ trans stance’
The Weekend
, 7-8 October 2023, 11.
Marty Zeigler and Craig
Lord, ‘Athlete exodus rocks trans study’,
The Australian
February 2023, 24.
This was run in Canberra,
Australia on 6 October 1985.
https://www.iaaf.org/record/worldrecords
CAS 2016/A/ 4643
Sharapova v International Tennis Federation
Ibid, [40].
Ibid, [103].
Will Swanton,
‘Sharapova aims to rebuild reputation’,
The Australian
January 2018, 26.
CAS A1/2020
Shayna Jack v
Swimming Australia & Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority.
Ibid, [14].
Ibid, [77].
Ibid, [83].
Ibid, [87].
Ibid, [102].
CAS 2017/A/5124
Chernova v International Olympic Committee (IOC)
CAS 2016/A/4615
Cakir Alptekin v World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
CAS 2018/O/5674
International Association of Athletic Federations (IAAF) v Russian Athletics
Federation (RUSAF) & Tatyana Lysenko Beloborodva
Commissioner of Taxation
(2005) 229 CLR 289.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (88.2 KB)
PDF format (403 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter