URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/MelbJlIntLaw/2024/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:17:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hines, Ben --- "Reinterpreting the Legality of Forcible Self-Defence in Response to Non-Kinetic Cyber Attacks" [2024] MelbJlIntLaw 4; (2024) 25(1) Melbourne Journal of International Law 51
I INTRODUCTION
II FORCING THE ISSUE? WHY THE JUS AD BELLUM
A Can Non-Kinetic Cyber Attacks Ever Be “Force”?
1 Defining “Non-Kinetic Cyber Attacks”
2 “Force” under the UN Charter
3 Rejection of Economic Coercion
B Ramifications
2 Armed Attack
III “SCALE AND EFFECTS”: A PHYSICAL BARRIER TO SELF-DEFENCE?
A Historical Interpretation of the UN Charter
1 The Text of the UN Charter
2 The ICJ: Nicaragua and Beyond
B Issues with the Lex Lata: “Virtually” Inapplicable?
1 The Jurisprudential Cyber Lacuna
2 A Physical Gravity Threshold by Deduction?
3 Drafting of the “Armed Attack” Precondition
C Indications from State Practice
IV WHAT’S NEXT
A Issues with Present Academic Approaches
1 Instrument-Based
2 Target-Based
3 Effects-Based
B A Novel Framework: Substantive Necessity
1 Apprehended by the Victim State Based on Clear and Convincing Evidence
2 Hostile Act or Set of Acts
3 Fundamentally Compromised or Is Imminently Poised
4 Functioning or Security
5 Infrastructure Crucial to a State’s Ability to Function as Such
C Robustness Testing the New Approach
1 Appropriately Exclusive
(a) Disinformation or Electoral Interference
(b) Espionage
2 Appropriately Inclusive
(a) Major Economic Shutdown
(b) Attacks with Other Significant Non-Physical Ramifications
V CONCLUSION
REINTERPRETING THE LEGALITY OF FORCIBLE SELF-DEFENCE IN
RESPONSE TO NON-KINETIC CYBER ATTACKS
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations provides states who are
subject to an armed attack the right to respond in self-defence
through the use
of force, a form of recourse prohibited in all other circumstances, absent
Security Council authorisation, by art
2(4). Despite unequivocal agreement that
the Charter of the United Nations applies to the cyber realm, there remains no
as to how arts 2(4) and 51 apply to cyber attacks. This uncertainty is
significantly more pronounced vis-à-vis “non-kinetic”
attacks which do not manifest physically. Given the imperatives underpinning the
ability to defend against ever-increasing
cyber attacks which may have
ramifications far greater than traditional weaponry, a novel approach is
required. This article provides
a bespoke framework to appropriately fill this
lacuna, termed the “Substantive Necessity” approach. In arguing that
of “force” and “gravity” do not have inherent
requirements of physicality, it proposes that a non-kinetic
cyber attack will
amount to an “armed attack” animating the right to forcible
self-defence where it is apprehended by
the victim state based on clear and
convincing evidence as a hostile act or set of acts which (a) has fundamentally
compromised,
or (b) is imminently poised to fundamentally compromise, the (i)
functioning or (ii) security of (c) infrastructure crucial to a
ability to function as such. This framework, it is argued, protects state
interests and reinstates critical deterrents
for aggressor states, yet crucially
does not “open the floodgates” to enable the unacceptable escalation
of unlawful
I INTRODUCTION
Quite unlike the milieu in which the
Charter of the United
’) was conceived and drafted, conflict in the
century is no longer confined to the visceral horrors of
physical decimation to persons and property. The virtual realm, intuitively
separate yet intimately connected with the “real world”, is the
‘new frontier of warfare’ which ‘any
future conflict between
reasonably advanced actors’ will
Technology is the bedrock
of economies, infrastructure and governments. Perhaps then it is unsurprising
that malicious acts between
states have increasingly utilised
cyberwarfare.
The capacity of states to generate substantial harm across the globe at the
press of a button has revolutionised modern conflict
at a pace far outstripping
the evolution of applicable legal
frameworks.
Prominent examples of
(allegedly)
state-conducted cyber attacks can be found as early as 2007 and 2008, when
were the victims of widespread distributed denial-of-service
(‘DDoS’) attacks, in response to conflict and as a prelude
respectively, which saw significant portions of the economy, media and
government paralysed.
In 2010, the
‘Stuxnet’ worm, purportedly created by the United States and Israel,
led to a serious nuclear accident which
physically destroyed Iranian nuclear
centrifuges.
In 2012, US banks
were targeted by cyber
operations,
and in 2021 cyber
attacks described as ‘nuclear terrorism’ were conducted against
Iranian electricity grids.
listing is not to labour the point. In fact, it substantially understates the
frequency of such occurrences.
With this trend only likely to
questions must be asked as to the consequences of such acts under a
which, in its modern form, finds its origins in the early
century well before cyber attacks had even entered science
Whilst the cyber age no doubt escaped the minds of the framers of the
it appears unequivocal that the relevant provisions — specifically here
prohibiting the use of
force and art 51
self-defence in limited circumstances — do
cyberspace.
Nonetheless, owing to scarce jurisprudence and the infancy of state practice,
the precise nature of this application remains subject
to debate, particularly
in situations where specific cyber attacks lack physical
manifestations.
appears to be emerging that cyber attacks may in some circumstances amount to
but consensus as to what these circumstances are remains conspicuously
Scholars tend to focus
on attacks promulgating physical consequences akin to kinetic weaponry, being
the destruction of property
or physical injury, and generally agree that such
acts will be forceful owing to the perceived severity of the physical
“Non-kinetic” acts, being those which lack physical consequences
— such as the crippling of financial institutions
or the inhibition of
vital government services — attract no such
It remains even less certain when, or indeed if, such cyber attacks may amount
to “armed attacks” enlivening rights of
self-defence.
The debate appears polarised between, on the one hand, expansive perceptions
that all cyber attacks are armed attacks — which
are largely linked to
stances that argue that all force generally amounts to an armed
— and, on the other, a significantly restrictive emphasis on physicality
which excludes non-kinetic attacks despite their potentially
consequences.
Neither approach is satisfactory. Questions also arise regarding whether cyber
attacks should instead be considered unlawful on other
grounds outside the
Given the potentially devastating ramifications of non-kinetic cyber attacks,
which may even surpass those of kinetic
operations,
the imperatives of, in appropriate circumstances, permitting states to respond
in self-defence appear
This article therefore seeks to reinterpret the legality under the
of forcible self-defence in response to non-kinetic cyber attacks. It
argues that cyber attacks, even those lacking physical consequences,
to both force and, more pertinently, armed attacks animating a right to
self-defence. Despite an increased academic interest
in this topic area in
recent years, this article thus largely departs from the existing literature. It
is part of a small minority
proposing that sufficiently severe non-kinetic cyber
attacks might suffice as armed attacks notwithstanding that they do not manifest
physically.
Moreover, not only does it synthesise and detail existing perspectives in this
area, but it is unique in proposing a normative framework
for assessing such
attacks rather than merely positing the
possibility
that such attacks
might qualify or conflating all cyber force with cyber armed
In doing so, this
article’s framework is also eminently practical. Drawing on wider
principles generally accepted under the
jus ad bellum
as well as recent
state practice, it provides a standard against which states may assess cyber
attacks in practice to determine if
an armed attack has occurred. To this extent
the framework does not necessarily seek to
a cyber armed attack
per se, but instead to provide the indicia that such an attack has occurred.
The article’s core propositions are as follows. Part II justifies
focusing on the
jus ad bellum
, outlining that non-kinetic cyber attacks
may be considered “force” before describing the applicable legal
consequences
of this characterisation as compared to other varieties of
international illegality. Part III synthesises the existing legal landscape,
describing traditional interpretations of the
jurisprudential lacuna relating to cyberwarfare. It contends that the reasoning
of the International Court of Justice (‘ICJ’)
has developed in
contexts tied to physical warfare and that academic consideration of
“gravity” has erroneously adopted
a physical bent where contemporary
state practice has not. Part IV argues that present academic approaches have
failed to appropriately
extend the law. It subsequently seeks to fill this
lacuna by proposing that a non-kinetic cyber attack will amount to an
attack” animating the right to forcible self-defence where it
apprehended by the victim state based on clear and convincing evidence as
a hostile act or set of acts which (a) has fundamentally
compromised, or (b) is
imminently poised to fundamentally compromise, the (i) functioning or (ii)
security of (c) infrastructure
crucial to a state’s ability to function as
. It finally assesses this “Substantive Necessity” approach
to conclude that it appropriately reinterprets the legality
of forcible
self-defence in response to non-kinetic cyber attacks.
II FORCING THE ISSUE? WHY
JUS AD BELLUM
Despite the frequency of malicious cyber operations between states, the
overwhelming balance of commentary argues that they are indeed
unlawful, in one
form or another, under international
Even where not suggesting
such attacks amount to force, scholars have contended that where conducted by a
hostile state
they breach rules
of non-intervention,
state sovereignty,
human rights
or if carried out
on a state’s territory indicate failure of ‘due diligence’
obligations to suppress such
We might then proceed on the assumption that cyber attacks are prohibited by
international law, at which point the acerbic reader
is minded to question just
what this article seeks to achieve. Yet the bare claim “cyber attacks are
already considered unlawful”
neglects the fact that the consequences of
each form of unlawfulness differ
significantly.
This article argues that non-kinetic cyber attacks are specifically illegal
jus ad bellum
as prohibited force which if sufficiently grave
may amount to armed attacks.
Can Non-Kinetic Cyber
Attacks Ever Be “Force”?
Before tackling the self-defence issue, one must first deal with the
threshold question of whether cyber attacks which do not cause
physical harm can
ever amount to “force” under art 2(4) of the
A negative answer
would be fatal to the proposition that they could be responded to forcibly in
self-defence.
“Non-Kinetic Cyber Attacks”
The term “cyber attack” lacks a universal formal definition and
is often used interchangeably with, or alongside, similar
terms such as
“cyber operation” or “cyber
Looking, however, to various informative definitional sources, provided both by
there appears to be a general understanding of the ambit of acts to which the
term refers alongside several consistently cited indicia.
Generally, a cyber
attack will involve (i) the use of computers or computer networks, (ii) action
taken against or coopting the computers
or computer networks of the target and
(iii) ‘hostile’
This characterisation is
not intended to be
authoritative
but suffices for present purposes.
Cyber attacks are often understood through examples or
categories.
A simple example is
a DDoS attack, where thousands of computers are coopted remotely to overwhelm
servers with traffic which prevents
Meanwhile, malware is
a broad category of software which hijacks computer systems, including viruses,
worms and Trojan horses.
Phishing and spoofing involve attackers soliciting sensitive information by
posing as legitimate sources or
individuals.
Hacking or domain
name system (‘DNS’) tunnelling involves gaining access to the
target’s network, enabling retrieval
of information or control of
This list is not
exhaustive but is indicative of acts I shall consider “cyber
attacks” for the purposes of this article.
As can be seen, each example
and category reflects the indicia described above.
In defining which cyber attacks are “non-kinetic”, one looks to
their outcome. Whilst some uses of the above forms of
cyber attack may manifest
in physical harm — such as the Stuxnet virus causing physical destruction
of centrifuges by causing
them to spin too quickly via their computer control
— a non-kinetic
attack is circumscribed to the cyber
manifestation as ‘destructive or injurious’
It may corrupt data or
prohibit computer functions, for example, in some cases to devastating
yet any harm is not a
direct kinetic result of the attack.
Prominent examples of the consequences of such attacks might include data
theft, economic losses, disruption to cyber systems, disruption
infrastructure reliant on such cyber systems, national security threats,
misinformation and much more. Of course, in defining
whether a cyber attack is
kinetic or non-kinetic one must draw a clear chain of causality: to the extent
an effect is primarily precipitated
because of the cyber attack it is an effect
of that cyber attack which may define whether the attack itself is physical or
non-physical.
If secondary effects are necessary and natural consequences of the
specific attack — for example, the physical destruction
of centrifuges by
Stuxnet as a secondary result of the virus speeding up their operation —
then the attack is kinetic. Conversely,
if any physical consequences are not the
direct result of the effect of the operation — for example, an inability
on a patient due to power outages caused by a cyber attack —
then the attack itself remains non-kinetic.
under the UN Charter
Having defined “non-kinetic” cyber attacks, their inclusion
jus ad bellum
becomes contingent on whether
“force” as contemplated by art 2(4) of the
definitionally excludes acts which are not physical in nature, no matter the
severity of their non-physical impact. It appears that
the dominant view within
the literature is that cyber attacks which manifest in physical harm comparable
to that caused by traditional
prima facie may amount to force
owing to their physical
consequences.
This article shall
not retread this ground. However, as outlined, there remains ‘significant
uncertainty’ as to whether
non-kinetic cyber attacks may definitionally
amount to unlawful
The foundational principles underlying the
are decidedly
anti-force.
Article 2(4), a
‘cornerstone’ of the
provides the ‘central rule on the use of
‘All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of
Despite such foundational and even
the definition of force lacks
a problem no doubt exacerbated by a lack of formal definition within the
A not-insignificant proportion of scholars has, it is acknowledged, argued that
force refers to armed or physical
Yet art 2(4) does not refer to physical or armed
This distinction is
all other provisions in the
which refer to force, except art
44 which may be read as referring to art
speak of ‘armed
The absence of the
qualifier in art 2(4) implies the provision may be read more
having been left
‘vague’ to capture sufficiently harmful conduct that was not
explicitly conceived of at the time of
Recourse to the
préparatoires
reveals an intent ‘to state in the broadest terms an absolute
all-inclusive prohibition ... [to prevent any]
loopholes’.
It also reflects the ICJ’s declaration that the
to ‘any use of force, regardless of the weapons
Accepting that there is a ‘cascading
relationship’
between force, aggression and armed attack, it is telling that the UN General
Definition of Aggression
considers acts including
blockades and the acquiescence to the use of territory as
‘aggression’ when the ‘consequences’
of such acts are
plainly not
Even if these acts are argued as possessing a kinetic element — such as
existing physically as a
of physical force
they still do not create physical
consequences
this is consistent with ICJ jurisprudence, which has ‘rejected a narrow
interpretation ... [limiting] the term to ...
As states continue
to witness the significant harm non-kinetic cyber attacks may cause, there
appears nascent acceptance in the literature
of their status as at least
prohibited “force”.
Yet still, despite these perspectives, requirements of physicality remain a
schism in the scholarship.
article posits that eschewing physical requirements and deeming non-kinetic
cyber attacks as capable of amounting to force is
the more appropriate position
to adopt as a matter of law and in practice. The legal argument has already been
canvassed, but it
is also pragmatically prudent to note that neglecting to adopt
such perspectives would produce ‘illogical’ outcomes where
attacks that might ‘jeopardise the survival of the targeted state’
would not even amount to “force”,
armed attacks
capable of permitting
self-defence.
Rejection of Economic
At the point at which it is accepted that physicality is not a prerequisite
for “force”, it appears the largest legal
hurdle to considering
non-kinetic attacks as forcible is the contention that they nonetheless
intrinsically better reflect economic
coercion, which is not prohibited by art
2(4) of the
and cannot amount to an “armed
It is imperative, therefore, to outline why non-kinetic cyber attacks are
distinct from so-called “economic coercion”.
After significant debate in the latter half of the 20
it is now generally accepted that acts of economic coercion — commonly
considered to refer to acts undertaken by one
state which indirectly seek to
induce specific acts from another state by harming it
economically,
such as ‘trade restrictions, ... embargoes and other economic
— do not fall afoul of art
Whilst such measures may
otherwise violate international law, this “indirect force” does not
violate the
jus ad bellum
. The argument is that coercion aims to
influence the acts of a state as with force, but unlike the latter it is
indirect and only
, rather than
The taxonomical distinction between force and coercion has significantly
informed academic reticence to consider non-kinetic cyber
attacks as unlawful
Indeed, parallels between
non-kinetic cyber attacks and economic coercion certainly exist, especially as
both lack physical manifestation
in the way that “force” as
traditionally conceived possesses. If, therefore, non-kinetic cyber attacks were
more akin to coercion than force, then the ability to respond in
self-defence would be precluded and this article moot. This article
however, that non-kinetic cyber attacks may readily be distinguished from
Non-kinetic cyber attacks are better characterised as violently
rather than
A cyber attack
wiping out a stock exchange is more akin, in terms of
the relevant consequences are imparted, to a kinetic bombardment which attacks
by decimating the building it is contained
in, thus directly preventing its
function, than to an economic sanction undermining the economy as a whole and
indirectly impairing
Further, in many
instances a cyber attack is not even “economic” in
An attack shutting down
power grids mirrors the outcome of their physical destruction — being an
inability to function —
rather than any economic
Even if economic harm
stems from this cyber attack, it is secondary, being a derivative consequence of
the physical shutdown rather
than of the attack itself, and one which would also
occur if the attack were physical. As Lianne JM Boer notes, economic coercion
and force are ‘not ends to the same
continuum’,
former definitionally contingent on economic means.
A further important distinction is the definitional function of
“intent” within coercion. Oftentimes, an act considered
such as a decision to not trade with a state, would be legally permissible
absent coercive intent.
is not true of acts comprising cyber attacks. Finally, acts traditionally
considered as coercion often “exist”
as a decision made within the
“coercing” state, and the act or omission is “carried
out” as such.
embargo requires no interference directly with the “coerced” state,
even where its effects are
in said state. A cyber attack, meanwhile,
interferes with the systems of the victim state
the victim state;
whilst the push of the button may occur at home, the cyber attack
“exists” not in the location of the
initial act, but
Non-kinetic cyber attacks can therefore be readily distinguished from
coercion. The consequences of this distinction are twofold.
First, non-kinetic
cyber attacks are not thus excluded from the
jus ad bellum
and, second,
their inclusion therein will not impermissibly broaden “force” to
capture previously excluded
Ramifications
Having seen that it is
to consider non-kinetic cyber attacks
jus ad bellum
, we turn to the normative desirability of such an
approach at law.
If non-kinetic cyber attacks are considered as potentially forceful, the
primary consequence is, of course, that they are prohibited
by art 2(4) of the
. This coincides with the jurisprudential, practical, and
normative consequences described above, and their use shall violate the
prohibition found in that provision. It also leads to a number of further
consequences. Consideration of non-kinetic cyber
attacks as acts which may
amount to prohibited force prevents their use as
countermeasures
between states. Whilst states may utilise certain acts in response to
internationally wrongful acts as
countermeasures,
forceful countermeasures are likely prohibited by international
If non-kinetic cyber attacks were not considered forceful, states might see them
as legitimate in response to wrongful acts which
would permit recourse to
countermeasures. In any event, they likely would be legally permitted as such.
Thus, characterising cyber
attacks as force prevents this countermeasure-based
increase of their use and the escalation of harms that they may precipitate.
Further, the
status of the
prohibition
in art 2(4) of
excludes the possibility that states may rely on
‘grounds precluding wrongfulness’ as justifications for acts
non-kinetic cyber attacks are not considered to be force, states may invoke
these grounds as justification for such attacks, only
further exacerbating their
increased prevalence.
norms also render void all treaties which conflict
with their content,
states are obligated to cooperate to bring to an end any unlawful breaches of
these norms.
Armed Attack
Plainly, the most pertinent ramification of including non-kinetic cyber
attacks in the
jus ad bellum
as force under art 2(4) of the
is that they might amount to armed attacks under art 51 and enliven
the right to self-defence in appropriate circumstances. As we
will see, the
precondition for forcible self-defence is that a state suffers an “armed
a subspecies
If cyber attacks do
not fall within the
jus ad bellum
, they cannot amount to armed attacks,
at which point self-defence will not be permitted in response to their
occurrence.
Conversely, if a
cyber attack may amount to an armed attack, states may forcibly
subject to customary
restrictions of necessity and
proportionality.
This might enable a state to ‘hack back’, utilise responsive cyber
or even where necessary to respond with kinetic
Given the significant
ramifications even non-kinetic cyber attacks may have, this self-defence is
crucial in protecting states’
interests and
III “SCALE AND
EFFECTS”: A PHYSICAL BARRIER TO SELF-DEFENCE?
The notion that “unauthorised”
is prohibited by the
, save for circumstances of self-defence, is at an abstract
level settled.
‘grande confusion’ has befallen
jus ad bellum
jurisprudence,
and its practical application to novel circumstances remains shrouded in
uncertainty, especially with the advent of
technologies beyond the comprehension
of those in the mid-20
The aim of this Part is not to provide a full overview of the legal background
— as much has been comprehensively dealt with
— but to demonstrate that physicality in nature or consequence is not an
intrinsic component of “gravity” necessary
to transform
“mere” force into an “armed attack”. Rather, notions of
“armed attack” may encompass
force which precipitates non-physical
consequences of sufficiently grave “scale and effect”.
Interpretation of the UN Charter
To demonstrate that “force” and “gravity” are not
contingent on physical ramifications, it is prudent to ascertain
what underlies
this assumption and reveal that physical consequences have never been explicitly
to enliven rights to self-defence, even where such consequences
in previous cases.
The Text of the UN
jus ad bellum
is grounded in both customary and treaty
it finds its most
authoritative modern source in the
As alluded to, the relevant framework exists under arts 2(4) and 51 of the
Absent Security Council
authorisation,
the right to
use force exists only in self-defence under art 51: ‘Nothing in the
shall impair the inherent right of individual or
collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Thus, questions of residual customary rights beyond the
it is generally
accepted that the
conditio sine qua non
for forcible self-defence is that
an ‘armed attack’ has
Once more, this concept remains undefined in the
isolation, there is nothing textually to indicate that art 51 of the
only permits self-defence in response to armed attacks
physical consequences
, especially if the argument that “force”
need not be physical, as made by this article, is
The ICJ: Nicaragua and
’s text providing scant guidance, one may
turn to how these provisions have been judicially interpreted. Despite art
foundational quality and
nature, uncertainty
remains given the limited instances in which the ICJ has been called upon to
adjudicate formal disputes about
art 51 of the
The line of authority stems from the 1949
Corfu Channel
yet finds its most
authoritative origins in the seminal 1986
Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua
, the ICJ drew the formative distinction between ‘armed
attacks’ and ‘mere’ uses of
This distinction was
reliant on a so-called “gravity threshold”, wherein ‘the most
grave forms of the use of force
(those constituting an armed attack)’ are
distinguished from ‘other less grave
Court’s only yardstick for this distinction was reference to the
‘scale and effects’ of the
Here we are left
to question the parameters of this phrase, for the Court neglected to describe
“Scale” has been generally accepted to refer to notions of extent,
such as intensity, duration or geographical
Meanwhile, “effects” has been taken to refer to the
consequences.
Perhaps intentionally, although certainly for present purposes inconveniently,
the Court did not elaborate on what form these consequences
Importantly, there was
nothing within the concept of “effects” which was explicitly tied to
consequences.
These principles have garnered ongoing approval in subsequent jurisprudence
and, barring certain separate or dissenting judgments,
have largely escaped
judicial criticism
In subsequent cases, the Court would not provide further exegesis of the
meanings of “scale and effects” or
Advisory opinions
little further guidance.
all instances, the principles were cited without additional explanation, and in
no case was the requirement of physicality considered,
It appears therefore that the position of the ICJ is essentially that
outlined in
: force will amount to an “armed attack”
if its “scale and effects” are sufficiently “grave”,
whatever that term is deemed to entail. The same requirements must, in theory,
apply to cyber attacks. The question then remains
just how “scale and
effects” applies to cyberspace.
Issues with the Lex
Lata: “Virtually” Inapplicable?
The youth of cyber warfare and lack of meaningful judicial engagement with
arts 2(4) and 51 of the
since cyber attacks entered common
practice is responsible for a dearth in directly applicable jurisprudence.
Reversion to more generalist
jus ad bellum
principles does not
satisfactorily translate to assessing cyber attacks. Such principles are, in
their current form, irretrievably
tied to kinetic
Thus, cyber attacks,
which are able to cause significant harm even without physical consequences in a
way which other uses of force
may not, warrant bespoke consideration. By more
closely analysing the legal landscape it is clear that notions of
as applied previously may appear inapplicable
they grappled with the physical realm, not that generalist
be restricted to physical
The Jurisprudential
Cyber Lacuna
The point has already been laboured that the
, drafted in
1945, did not foresee the existence of cyber
The notion that harm
equivalent to then-contemporary forms of force could be effected by non-kinetic
means was alien. The result
is a distinct lacuna in the international legal
framework owing to the intrinsic difference between traditional kinetic attacks
non-kinetic cyber attacks. No case before the ICJ has addressed the
application of the
jus ad bellum
Whilst traditional
warfare has been regulated by various treaty agreements, cyber warfare remains
largely unregulated in a formal
Perhaps the most
authoritative source on the matter, the
Tallinn Manual 2.0 on the
International Law Applicable to Cyber Operations
Tallinn Manual
’) — whilst of significant informative value — is
nonetheless an academic
It also did not
produce consensus amongst its experts on a number of critical issues including,
pertinently, requirements of physicality
for cyber armed
Simply, at present
the manner in which the
jus ad bellum
applies to cyber attacks is
undetermined. The lacuna in “settled” law, then, appears gaping.
A Physical Gravity
Threshold by Deduction?
It is here that we encounter the central question of this section, querying
whether anything in the principle underlying the nebulous
effects” formulation requires physical manifestation, notwithstanding that
no such requirement has been formally
implemented to date. Consideration of the
context of cases considered by the ICJ demonstrates that its decisions have
the status of acts before it — in each case kinetic acts
— but do not outline principles of universal
applicability.
was decided in 1986, cyberspace was in its infancy. The Court
may only have had physical effects in mind, but that is not to say
endeavoured to formulate a principle to limit “force”
Judge Abdulqawi A
Yusuf, former President of the ICJ, explicitly argues that in
the Court was to characterise the acts before it, rather than to
‘define an armed attack
Despite the
march of time and technology, the fact remained that only kinetic acts were
complained of to the ICJ, providing no opportunity
for comment on cyber attacks
or non-kinetic force generally. The ICJ thus developed, and subsequently relied
upon, principles applicable
in such kinetic situations. As Judge Yusuf would
opine: ‘[w]hat this means is that the concept of “armed
, and in the cases that were subsequently dealt
with ... is always contextually
Noting the irrevocably differing context between traditional, physical and
military force and cyber attacks, especially non-kinetic
cyber attacks, these
conceptualisations of gravity and “armed attack” must not be
myopically taken outside of the context
to which they are bound as if the cyber
realm were analogous. With kinetic weapons, there is a clear correlation between
and physical effects.
Yet, in the 21
-century context and as applied to cyberspace, it is
entirely conceivable that notions of “gravity” and
“physicality”
do not move in tandem so as to be broadly synonymous
or correlative.
not one judgment dealing with art 51 of the
speaks of required
effects, this requirement should not
be inferred without further grounding. We cannot state blindly that physical
effects are more
grave than non-physical effects, or that the minimum intensity
for an armed attack must lie somewhere above an intensity marked by
physicality.
As noted in Part II, various examples of acts which would be considered
potential armed attacks provided by the UN’s
Definition of
bear no physical
consequences.
As such, if one
accepts that this demonstrates that physical
consequences
component of aggression, one may derive the proposition that they should not be
considered as required by “armed”
force. Thus, the
“armed” qualifier does not necessarily import a requirement of
“physicality”. By extension,
an “armed” attack cannot,
at least not solely by way of the “armed” qualifier, bear such a
requirement. This
demonstrates that it is possible that a physical
with non-physical consequences may suffice as an armed attack. We might now
recall that cyber attacks which precipitate physical consequences,
such as the
explosion of a pipeline or meltdown of a nuclear reactor, would likely be
considered armed attacks.
This consensus may ground a second proposition, being that an act itself need
not be physical, or make use of traditional military
weaponry, to have the
potential to amount to an armed attack.
Taking these two propositions together, we see that for an “armed
attack” in some instances there is not necessarily a
requirement of
consequences
, and in others there is no requirement of a
. In sum, a non-kinetic cyber attack therefore ought not to
be categorically excluded solely for lacking either of these clearly
non-essential
elements if its consequences are of sufficient gravity.
Drafting of the
“Armed Attack” Precondition
With nothing at this juncture suggesting an “armed attack”
be physical, one might explore the intention of the drafters.
Turning to the
préparatoires
the minutes of
the United States Delegation to the San Francisco drafting conference provide an
insight into the minutiae of drafting
art 51. Therein it is shown that
“armed attack” was inserted to replace the earlier term
“aggression”. However,
upon deciding such a replacement was
warranted, ‘no substantial discussion took place as to its precise
This decision
alone, often described with reference to the apparent obviousness of meaning to
the drafters, is not sufficient to
show that the intention was to
the provision to physical affronts. Rather, in earlier drafts retaining the
term ‘aggression’,
[d]efinition was intentionally avoided ... as it was impossible for a
definition ... to cover all instances of aggression ... [and]
attempting to
define it would result in genuine acts of aggression being committed that did
not fit the terms of the
definition.
Even when “armed attack” was substituted, a definition remained
absent and nothing indicated that this hope to ensure
that genuine affronts
which warranted self-defence would not be excluded had abated. The intent of the
drafters, it appears, was
for the term to be left broad so as to be inclusive
enough that “genuine acts” which would violate the intent of the
provision yet were not foreseen or explicitly considered would not be excluded.
As Tom Ruys notes, the intent was that any proposed
acts to be included should
be ‘tested against present day [sic] customary
This implies
that serious and harmful affronts such as non-kinetic cyber attacks would have
been unlikely targets for exclusion by
the drafters.
Indications from State
In discerning the possibility of non-physical armed attacks, examination of
state perspectives towards cyber attacks specifically
serves as an illustrative
example. Such analysis may provide apt indication for the central proposition of
this article, especially
with the uncertainties arising from ICJ jurisprudence
and the drafting of the
. However, it would be disingenuous to
imply that state practice was entirely consistent and erroneous to depict it as
fixed. It is
also relatively non-existent in, ironically, practice, remaining
instead largely as statements or policy
Adding to the
complexity is the fact that states continue to refine their stated positions.
Nonetheless, exegesis of state practice
does illuminate specific trends and
elements of consistency that are informative.
The rapid developments in this area can be seen by the fact that writing only
in 2018, relatively recently compared to the 1945 inception
, Christine Gray described that ‘[m]any states have now adopted
cyber strategies, but these say only that international law
applicable’.
time, several states — including
Netherlands,
New Zealand,
Switzerland
and the United
— have explicitly declared their view that cyber attacks may amount to
force, armed attacks or both. As is clear from these
declarations, there appears
widespread acceptance that cyber attacks are forcible in nature and ought to be
assessed by their “scale
and effects”, as with any other form of
force. This, of course, is relevant insofar as the adoption and development of
norms in this nebulous space will be tied to the acts and views of states.
However, as within the literature, there is a divide even
among those states
which accept that cyber attacks may be forcible, centring around requirements of
physicality.
Of the above, Estonia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore and
Switzerland take a generalist approach, essentially claiming
that if the
“scale and effects” are sufficiently serious, the threshold will be
Others go further in disclaiming requirements of physicality. The US explicitly
identifies major economic cyber attacks as potential
France notes
‘a cyberoperation without physical effects may also be characterised as a
use of force’
Netherlands ‘cannot ... [rule] out that a cyber operation with very
serious financial or economic impact may qualify
as a use of force’ or an
armed attack.
This appears
consistent with the perspective of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, with
Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg claiming
a ‘serious cyberattack could
trigger Article 5 of our founding treaty’ and provoke collective
self-defence.
In doing so, he
cited the 2017 WannaCry ransomware attack, which ‘shut down multiple
hospitals and cost over £90
but was not physical in effect.
Other states, however, such as Germany, Italy and the UK, claim that the
“scale and effects” of cyber attacks must be
“comparable” to conventional armed attacks, in many instances citing
Tallinn Manual
Again, one is left
to interpret the term “comparable”, querying whether it speaks to
nature or intensity. Interestingly,
despite reference to equivalence with
‘an armed attack using kinetic means’, the UK also characterises a
attack which causes ... severe economic or social
consequences’ as a ‘Category 1 ... [n]ational cyber
emergency’,
potentially
supporting the contention that “comparable” has grown to refer more
so to the latter.
deduction would appear in line with the comments of Australia, which in a
-esque fashion outlined that whilst ‘[s]tates should
consider whether the activity’s scale and effects are comparable
traditional kinetic operations that rise to the level of use of
involve not only considering physical impacts but also ‘damage or
destruction (including to their functioning) to
objects or critical
infrastructure’.
is some blurring of distinctions here, yet reference to the
“functioning” of critical infrastructure, even read
alternative considerations of damage, appears to demonstrate that physical
effects are not required to be “comparable”
to an attack involving
traditional weaponry and thus an armed
A third group of states remains uncertain. China, for example, strongly
argues that the prohibition on force applies to
cyberspace.
However, it
emphasises that understanding the precise details of applying the
to cyberspace must not be rushed and must be achieved by honest
cooperation between states.
Russia similarly opines that ‘the application of international law to the
use of information and communications technologies
... should not be automatic
... [or] be carried out by simple
extrapolation’.
Thus, whilst state practice has largely adopted the notion of “scale
and effects”, there appears to exist discontent with
the notion that
gravity as applied to conventional warfare — that is, a
gravity — should exclude non-kinetic
universally agreed, an increasing number of states and international
organisations appears to consider that in the appropriate
circumstances
non-kinetic cyber attacks can amount to armed attacks under art 51 of the
if their non-kinetic consequences are sufficiently
“grave”, including a number which had previously advocated for
requirements
physicality.
These statements are, however, merely stated position papers. As a result,
their status as sources of international law remains subject
to debate. Although
they may reflect
opinio juris
, it is unclear whether they amount to
formal state practice.
Nonetheless, they may be treated as indicating the opinions and approaches of
states. Presently, as will be seen, their nature is
such that they represent in
writing the beliefs of states about the status of the law. Specifically, they
deal with what will or
will not amount to cyber force and cyber armed attacks.
To that extent, they provide clarity on how states interpret the
and demonstrate how they may act in practice. Absent any tangible acts amounting
to practice, these positions provide the best indication
of what may begin to
form. To that extent, they may guide the creation of legal norms in this area,
provide some form of certainty
and, importantly, illustrate the legal views of
states on an issue which still remains to be tested.
Therefore, despite not being formal acts of state practice, it is important
that legal development, alongside strategic and policy
development, accounts for
these perspectives. As Michael N Schmitt notes, ‘it is almost certain that
states will begin to treat
[non-kinetic] cyber operations as armed
imperative that analytical frameworks reflect this burgeoning reality.
IV WHAT’S NEXT
With the legality of forcible self-defence in response to non-kinetic cyber
attacks not adequately assessable by the contextually
derived principles of the
jus ad bellum
, it has fallen largely to modern scholars to seek a
solution. Importantly, they have often recognised that the
remains a ‘living document’ drafted to be adaptable to novel
circumstances.
Such a jurisprudential approach is central to the
ongoing relevance some 80 years after its
and provides ample foundation for expansion to cyber attacks. In this Part,
current scholarly frameworks for interpreting the
analysed to explicate that presently no solution is fit for purpose. This Part
will then seek to provide such extension
de lege ferenda
, extrapolating a
framework deemed the “Substantive Necessity” approach.
Issues with Present
Academic Approaches
Whilst approaches proposed by scholars possess individual nuances and
qualifications, secondary literature has widely found it apt
to group these
frameworks into three categories owing to their fundamental similarities,
labelled ‘instrument-based’,
‘target-based’ and
‘effects-based’
approaches.
Ultimately,
whilst each framework has its merits, each remains inappropriate for principled
and pragmatic utilisation in the cyber
Instrument-Based
Central to ‘instrument-based’ approaches is a focus on the
weaponry employed. These approaches suggest a cyber attack
may amount to an
armed attack if it possesses sufficient intrinsic comparability to conventional
weaponry or is employed to assist
‘conventional’
Consequently, these
approaches neglect analysis of outcomes or targets. Often it is argued that
these approaches only capture instances
where cyber attacks are a
These approaches
would likely include situations such as Russian cyber attacks on Viasat believed
to target Ukrainian military communications
a mere hour prior to Russia’s
invasion in February 2022, which assisted its conventional military
Commonly levied criticisms of ‘instrument-based’ approaches
depict them as ‘outdated’ or
‘inflexible’.
Schmitt, for example, explicitly notes that such approaches are insufficient to
address cyber
As noted, the analogy between the instruments of cyber attacks and traditional
kinetic force is a strained
On one hand, a threshold only incorporating cyber technology with sufficient
intrinsic comparability to traditional weaponry appears
unlikely to capture the
means most commonly used for such
activities.
On the other
hand, a threshold that considered computer technology per se as a sufficiently
military instrument which would prima
facie enliven a right to self-defence
would be absurdly broad.
Target-Based
‘Target-based’ approaches evaluate attacks by virtue of that
which they, as the name suggests,
The rhetoric largely
centres on the supposed importance of the target, spoken in terms of
‘sufficiently important ...
infrastructure’.
questions of material damage are
A purely ‘target-based’ approach is unacceptably
If one considers
solely what is targeted, one neglects the success or likelihood of success of
the operation and is blind to the
potential practical ramifications of an attack
of that kind
Further, a state may
deem any target sufficiently important that an attack on it will justify
responsive force. For example, the
US has deemed ‘nearly all government or
commercial activit[ies]’ sufficiently important
Consequently,
responsive force is permitted in an extensive range of scenarios which otherwise
might not warrant self-defence. Such
a broad approach unnecessarily heightens
the risk of conflict in
Effects-Based
Under ‘effects-based’ approaches, primacy is given to the
consequences as opposed to the characteristics of the act
Whilst there exists
significant variance within this school of thought, for most, if the
‘scale and effects’ of the consequences
of a cyber attack are
sufficiently grave, the right to self-defence will be
Oftentimes, the
approach proposed by
and noted by the authors of the
Tallinn Manual
is considered the
leading version of the
approach incorporated the six criteria of (i) severity, (ii) immediacy, (iii)
directness, (iv) invasiveness, (v)
measurability and (vi) presumptive
legitimacy.
The literature
largely concurs that ‘effects-based’ approaches receive the most
support from scholars and states
Despite this status,
effects-based approaches are not above criticism. This article does not,
however, seek to entirely discredit
such approaches but rather to demonstrate
not-insignificant shortcomings which must be addressed.
The effects-based frameworks as understood unfairly prejudice non-kinetic
cyber attacks by importing requirements of
physicality.
As outlined,
this threshold is not grounded in jurisprudence or policy but in history and
ought not to be myopically transposed into
the cyber context. Whilst some
scholars accept that a sufficiently severe non-physical attack would suffice,
this appears a distinctly
minority view; to most scholars, the effect must be
This understanding
continues to neglect the fact that the harm caused by cyber attacks will
necessarily differ in nature yet not
necessarily in seriousness and that an
inability to respond in self-defence where required could be devastating. The
notion of comparability
relied upon by scholars such as Schmitt is often a
literal one, meaning that, as Katharine C Hinkle notes, ‘this approach is
as notable for what it leaves out of the “armed attacks” category as
[for] what it brings into
Effects-based
frameworks are also inherently consequentialist, meaning that states must wait
until the consequences of an attack
have manifested
with sufficient
seriousness
before they can take preventative forceful
This problem is only
exacerbated by the rapidly developing nature of cyber attacks, whose tangible
effects may not be able to be
confirmed for a significant time or due to a lack
of technology.
Whilst Schmitt’s factors may be of use in analysing an attack,
comprehensive and accurate use of this complex multivariate model
in fast-paced
crisis situations appears
given the need for
a quick response to any
Further shortcomings are apparent in that often the standard required for
effects or severity may be unclear or inherently
subjective.
Effects-based
frameworks have repeatedly been faced with the critique that in providing
‘criteria’ in the form of descriptors
alone their application is at
the behest of the state and that often, when applied to cyber attacks, they may
give rise to diametrically
opposed conclusions depending on the aims or emphasis
of the user.
For example,
whilst Schmitt applied his factors to demonstrate that the Estonian DDoS attacks
were armed attacks,
Nguyen was able to persuasively apply them to demonstrate that they were
Notions such as
“severity” are inherently
‘malleable’:
either the attacks
severe as they crippled cyber
because nobody was
No doubt states in
practice would err on the side of the former to expand rights to
self-defence.
A Novel Framework:
Substantive Necessity
We have now seen that in the context of cyber attacks extant paradigms for
assessing self-defence must be replaced with an approach
that is more nuanced
and aligned with state practice. As cyber attacks continue to intensify on the
global stage, such a task is
Yet at the same
time, cautionary considerations must not be forgotten. After all, a key
principle underpinning the
forceful acts
where possible rather than to encourage
With this in mind, the
field is, for all intents and purposes, clear to propose such a solution. To the
extent that proposals to
to account for cyber
attacks would almost certainly
and given the eminent
foreseeability that a treaty-based approach would not find adequate support, a
novel framework operating within
the present
structure is
Recognising the exigencies and vicissitudes facing any novel framework, this
article proposes a multifaceted standard capable of wide
and flexible
application termed the “Substantive Necessity” approach. This
approach, it is argued, allows states to assess
when a cyber attack has
sufficiently grave consequences so as to allow the use of forcible self-defence
under art 51 of the
, even if these consequences are
non-physical. Under the Substantive Necessity approach, a cyber attack will
amount to an “armed
attack” animating the legal right to forcible
self-defence where it is
apprehended by the victim state based on clear and
convincing evidence as a hostile act or set of acts which (a) has fundamentally
compromised, or (b) is imminently poised to fundamentally compromise, the (i)
functioning or (ii) security of (c) infrastructure
crucial to a state’s
ability to function as such.
It is readily observable that this framework borrows elements of existing
approaches. Such appropriation is not unintentional but
recognises the
meritorious components of each approach and supplements them with additional
considerations to mitigate their shortcomings.
Apprehended by the
Victim State Based on Clear and Convincing Evidence
The Substantive Necessity approach’s condition precedent requires that
the state targeted by a cyber attack apprehend the criteria
enlivening legal
self-defence
“based on clear and convincing evidence”. Notably, this inclusion of
what appears to be an evidentiary standard is not
necessarily reflective of the
legal obligations owed by the state acting in self-defence but rather provides a
practical guideline
in formulating a decision to respond.
Perhaps subtly, the fact that “apprehension” must be on the part
of the “victim state” improves equitable
application. States no
doubt possess differing cyber
capabilities.
Oftentimes, the most vulnerable states possess worse technology than those
attacking them.
By requiring
an apprehension of the
victim state
, the Substantive Necessity approach
ensures that the burdens of apprehension are not placed above the legitimate
technological capacity
of a state being targeted. In any event, whilst the
approach makes this explicit, it is almost unavoidable that subjective
apprehension
will be employed by states in
Far from imposing an arbitrary standard ripe for exploitation, the
potentially subjective “apprehension” is fettered by
requirements of
“clear and convincing evidence”. This standard is not foreign to
use-of-force
jurisprudence
and adequately places a robust threshold restricting force and requiring that
states consider the grounds for their supposed apprehension.
acknowledged that international law ‘does not currently have a
well-developed body of evidentiary rules on the use
of force’ nor
‘any straightforward, express statement of the standard of proof
However, there are ‘indications in international law that the standard
should be something like the clear and convincing standard
found in the United
concerning art 51 of the
it appears that whilst evidence
beyond reasonable doubt has not been required, more than cursory evidence has
The “clear and compelling” standard, situated between the two
aforementioned alternatives, appears to garner support from
international
and in the literature.
Because an objective grounding is required, states are precluded from claiming a
mere subjective belief to receive legal exculpation
for using force. This is
congruent with the restrictive aims of the
jus ad bellum
and ensures that
forcible self-defence is only permitted in response to an armed attack
‘which is clear, unambiguous, subject
to proof, and not easily open to
misinterpretation or
fabrication’.
By including such phraseology, the Substantive Necessity approach provides a
clear guide to states as to what is expected of them.
Even if this approach is
not applied in a legalistic sense by states during conflict, the question of
whether the basis of a state’s
desire to act in self-defence is
“clear and compelling” may be readily answered in the lay sense.
This provides an important
guardrail against states seeking forceful recourse,
even if imperfectly applied as a practical, rather than legal, standard.
Hostile Act or Set of
The Substantive Necessity approach is also specific about the quality of the
affront captured, being acts — individual or cumulative
accompanied by a hostile intent.
Importing a requirement of hostility aligns the Substantive Necessity
approach with general state practice on forcible self-defence.
replete with examples of states claiming to have suffered an armed attack or to
be legally justified in responsive force
with reference to the intent of the
perpetrator.
This requirement
is referred to, albeit not extensively, in
where the ICJ noted
that owing to a lack of information on ‘possible motivations’ it was
‘difficult to decide’
if an armed attack had
In practice, the requirement acknowledges that a cyber attack that requires
self-defence will likely be hostile, meaning force will
be required to end the
intentional affront. Intrusion into cyber systems or causing harm thereto
without hostile intent is likely
only if the attack spread by mistake or missed
its intended target.
severe damage may result from such a mistake, there appears little utility in
allowing an attack which would only be retaliatory,
especially if the mistake
cannot be rectified. If the perpetrating state is unable to stop the attack,
then a forceful response will
do nothing but escalate conflict and damage. More
appropriate remedies, such as reparations, would suffice. If the perpetrating
was able to stop the attack but decided not to, then it is argued that
such a decision would transform the act into one of hostile
intent, thus
enlivening the right to self-defence.
Furthermore, by requiring the cyber attack be an “act” in the
sense understood by international
the approach ensures
that only actively undertaken conduct of the requisite nature will permit
self-defence, with no scope to claim
that a failure or an omission to act
This again is aimed
at restricting the unnecessary escalation of force and prevents the imposition
of additional duties of protection
on other states in respect of cyber force
that are not present in respect of physical force. It is important to clarify
distinction between an omission to act and an omission to rectify as
described above. Under the approach, a state would not be liable
to recourse if
it simply failed to actively intervene to stop acts of another state in which it
had no involvement. Such omissions
fall outside the approach. However, as
outlined, the perpetrating state’s omission to rectify its own act should,
Substantive Necessity approach, be considered with reference to the
act itself. The harm precipitated continues on from the initial
act rather than
the omission. Thus, the perpetrating state’s wilful decision to not stop
that act creates a constructive intent,
rendering it responsible for the harms
that flow from that act. This remains the case even where the initial act was
not intended
to cause harm. At the point at which knowledge of the harm arises,
and the state declines to cease its act, a constructive intent
The Substantive Necessity approach also expressly adopts the
‘Nadelstichtaktik’, or ‘accumulation of events theory’,
reflecting the fact that an accumulation of smaller-scale acts, taken together,
may permit self-defence even where each individual
act may not
This recognises that
ultimately the harm, whether it is caused by one act or many distinct acts, will
ultimately have the same
It may be the case
that a single cyber act is either indistinguishable or itself unable to satisfy
the approach, but that many taken
in conjunction as part of a concerted attack
should nonetheless be deemed sufficient where pragmatically prudent. After all,
be illogical as discussed previously for seriously harmful cyber
campaigns to fall outside the
jus ad bellum
on technicalities if they may
otherwise be captured. The holistic treatment of potentially distinct cyber
attacks, especially where
they may be perpetrated cumulatively by a large number
of individual operators on behalf of states rather than by one source, is
therefore crucial.
Such a framework was also endorsed by the
Tallinn Manual
appropriate for cyber attacks
and indeed would appear in line with the stated positions of
Moreover, this
framework expressly emphasises the gravity of an attack in substance rather than
mere form, allowing for the normative
imperatives of the Substantive Necessity
approach to not be undermined by a technicality that an overall cyber campaign
might consist
of distinct acts that cause cumulative devastation.
Fundamentally
Compromised or Is Imminently Poised
Whilst lamenting existing emphases on physicality, we have nonetheless seen
the imperatives underpinning a requirement of severity
that raises
“mere” force to an “armed attack”. The first way the
Substantive Necessity approach
incorporates this threshold is through a
requirement reminiscent of, yet more clearly defined than, Schmitt’s
‘severity’,
to “fundamentally compromise”. This distinguishes the approach from
overly broad target-based frameworks and reduces
the potential for exploitation
present in existing effects-based frameworks. It does, however, draw on the
useful elements present
in effects-based frameworks to attempt to categorically
and clearly outline when non-kinetic cyber attacks will possess sufficient
“scale and effects” to amount to armed attacks.
There is inherent to many “critical infrastructure” approaches
the view that an affront that merely “disrupts”
or “interferes
with” the function of a target that the state has deemed especially
“critical” will enliven
the right of
self-defence.
Whilst such a
low threshold may be satisfactory in seeking to characterise whether a specific
act amounts to force, this article
argues that when considering whether an act
amounts to an “armed attack” this view is too permissive. Noting the
imperatives
of restricting recourse to force, it is unacceptable to consider
even minor affronts as armed attacks that would permit self-defence
even if the
target is important. Conversely, to “fundamentally compromise”
carries connotations of
something more than inhibition or frustration that may be persevered through,
even with increased
difficulty.
The impact is
fundamental
to the nature of the target; it has been so
compromised
as to prevent reliance. To “fundamentally compromise” also
presents a minimum threshold of severity beyond which the right
of self-defence
would be enlivened. This also appears to be in line with state practice, as
outlined previously, which has largely
accepted that there must be a genuinely
severe interference with specific targets for force to become an armed
The requirement under
the Substantive Necessity approach incorporates these positions but defines them
more clearly than the nebulous
terminology employed by states. This article
argues that this is appropriate both in terms of reflecting the will of states
in practice in terms of setting the “gravity”
Acknowledging concerns for the retrospectivity of effects-based
frameworks,
this enquiry
provides for an assessment to be made both reasonably ex ante
and ex post
facto. Even where the target is yet to be fundamentally compromised — and
thus yet to see the significant harms
precipitate — in circumstances where
it is (apprehended on clear and convincing evidence as) imminently poised to do
so, self-defence
may be warranted. By requiring that states apprehend not that
had a certain effect, but that it is
to have said effect, the Substantive Necessity approach ensures that
a state need not wait until the initial attack has played itself
result, cyber attacks may be promptly responded to and their most devastating
consequences potentially prevented.
This notion is not itself novel, nor does it provide untrammelled license to
consider an attack as “imminent”. Rather,
it invokes the doctrine of
‘anticipatory self-defence’ as understood in customary international
Stemming from the
seminal Caroline affair,
proposition of US Secretary of State Daniel Webster speaking of a
‘necessity of self-defense, instant, overwhelming, leaving
no choice of
means, and no moment for
deliberation’
invoked as justifying proportionate self-defence against an
The doctrine itself
remains controversial, and is not universally accepted by academics or
owing largely to textual interpretation of the retrospective language of art 51
Nonetheless, there exists a significant school of thought that supports the
existence of the doctrine, often citing the “inherent
self-defence posited by art 51 of the
and the purported
customary law surrounding anticipatory
self-defence.
whilst the ICJ has neglected to make findings on the issue, as Samantha Ria
Shahriar describes at length, state practice
appears to indicate ‘deeply
entrenched’ beliefs as to rights of anticipatory
self-defence.
Indeed, even if
practice were mixed on this issue, the fact that cyber attacks may be
essentially instantaneous once they have been
fully operationalised may
undermine any capacity for retrospective response and may cause potentially
devastating harms renders it
irrational to prevent states from responding, in
appropriate circumstances, where an attack is apprehended until the effects have
manifested and it is effectively “too late”. Therefore, even if
anticipatory self-defence is not appropriate in the context
of traditional
military force, it should be considered as appropriate in the context of cyber
attacks because of their unique nature.
The Substantive Necessity approach makes as much explicit in its formulation
and is governed appropriately by the same strictures
as would govern the
customary anticipatory self-defence doctrine in kinetic
It is also careful
to note that it is not sufficient that a state apprehend that an attack might
occur in the future or, indeed,
the near future. Rather, a specific attack must
itself be imminently poised to take effect in the requisite manner.
This also increases the deterrence factor of the Substantive Necessity
approach. If a state had to wait for manifest consequences
before being able to
respond, its ability to respond might be significantly inhibited. This means
that, for aggressor states, the
risk of engaging in a cyber attack might be
considered worthwhile. However, if a cyber attack may be responded to before it
the desired effect, or even in circumstances where it is unclear that it
will succeed overall, then the risk is significantly heightened.
Functioning or
It is not sufficient that any component of the requisite infrastructure is
fundamentally compromised. Rather, an attack must undermine
“functioning or security” of the infrastructure as a whole. This
standard limits forceful recourse to situations
of severe necessity and attacks
of sufficient gravity and once again crystallises the standard at which the
“scale and effects”
of an attack are severe enough so as to warrant
recourse by force rather than other means.
To fundamentally compromise “functioning”, an attack must prevent
infrastructure from working or operating for its intended
For example, a power
grid shutdown would prevent the power grid from fulfilling its purpose of
delivering electricity to citizens.
It is not enough that a component of the
infrastructure’s function is prevented from working or that its
functioning is moderately
inhibited; rather, the compromise must be
fundamental
to the infrastructure itself. The fact that the power grid
would produce electricity at a lower rate than before would impact its
but would not fundamentally compromise it. The fact that a nuclear plant might
not be able to communicate with the outside
world might fundamentally compromise
its ability to communicate but not its function of generating power. Thus,
again, the severity
of the non-kinetic effects is grounded specifically and at a
level of sufficient centrality to the targeted infrastructure.
Alternatively, to fundamentally compromise “security”, it must be
that the infrastructure is no longer protected adequately
against external
control or further
exploitation.
illustration, if malware were introduced which allowed an external cyber
operator to control or direct a military weapons system,
the security of that
infrastructure would be lost. The malware would become such a serious threat,
which may itself cause significant
harm or could be used so as to enable future
significant harms, that it could be defended against with force. For example,
SolarWinds hack involved hackers, supposedly backed by a state, gaining
access to computer networks and systems through a backdoor
and being able to
upload malware to tens of thousands of
Again, mere
incursions or minor exploitations would be insufficient, as the security must be
fundamentally
compromised. A hacker gaining the mere ability to listen to
intercepted communications would not fundamentally compromise the security
military institution, whereas a hacker gaining the ability to remotely control
the nuclear weapons of a state would.
Plainly, owing to the central importance of the “functioning or
security” of infrastructure which is itself “crucial”,
attack on such a target would be of sufficient “gravity” to warrant
forcible self-defence. Again, here the fact that
the Substantive Necessity
approach considers that attacks which undermine the “functioning or
security” of the relevant
infrastructure is sufficiently grave to enliven
the right of self-defence does not mean that it claims that such attacks chart
metes and bounds of “gravity” in the cyber context. Rather, it
argues that specific instances of suck attacks will be
sufficiently grave in
their “scale and effects”. It is readily foreseeable that, with
advances in technology and cyber
attacks, further examples with different
consequences may nonetheless be so grave as to be armed attacks enlivening the
self-defence.
Infrastructure Crucial
to a State’s Ability to Function as Such
There is nothing particularly novel about the notion of “critical
infrastructure” in the cyber attack
literature.
In any event, its
inclusion here is narrowed further to “infrastructure crucial to the
ability for a state to function
”, that is, as a state. This
caveat narrows the scope of targets to targets attacks on which
necessitate
response through force, unlike impermissibly broad target-based or
“critical infrastructure”
approaches.
As discussed previously, presently what constitutes “critical
infrastructure” is often left to the determination of individual
Whilst there appear
to be some consistent features in domestic definitions — such as
requirements that infrastructure be vital,
necessary or essential to national
functions or safety
it is also the case that states adopt additional broad considerations such as
“wellbeing” or “government
unforeseeable that emphasis placed by individual states on certain aspects of
society would inform definitions of “critical
infrastructure”.
States can apply self-serving definitions to this nebulous term, and as seen
with examples — such as
that of the US — described previously, it is
likely that states will err on the side of inclusion and expansion of their own
rights to self-defence.
The Substantive Necessity approach directly addresses this problem. It does
so by defining “critical infrastructure” more
concretely, thereby
limiting states’ discretion to define it more expansively. Infrastructure
must be crucial, or
, for the functioning of the state
. This formulation speaks to the inherent operations, duties and
characteristics that define a state and enable it to exist, operate
recognised as a manifestation of the determination of its people. These include,
but are not limited to, what is required
for ensuring the safety of citizens,
facilitating the economy, maintaining military defence and providing
public services. Infrastructure of convenience or utility will
not suffice. Examples such as public transport networks, whilst important,
not crucial to the existence of the state
, even where they might
otherwise be deemed “critical infrastructure”. Conversely, the
central banking systems of a state,
especially in an increasingly digitalised
economy, dictate the function of the state
through its economy
and are therefore captured under this definition.
Nevertheless, characterisation of infrastructure as “crucial to a
state’s ability to function” does require careful
consideration to
ensure that “crucial” is not interpreted too expansively. Some
regimes may very well perceive infrastructure
beneficial to the
government’s power, such as propaganda apparatuses, as fundamental to
their function, or seek to expand the
definition to infrastructure which
facilitates
the effective function of the state.
The definition of “critical infrastructure” under the Substantive
Necessity approach, however, has two safeguards against
this. First, the
distinct reference to the
rather than the
the emphasis on the body politic rather than the ruling
In much the same way
that civil war might be viewed as an expression of a
self-determination
that a state may continue to function despite changing governments or systems of
government, this does not permit the inclusion
of regime-centric factors.
Second, the requirement that infrastructure be “crucial” almost
amounts to a “but for”
test. Infrastructure can only be
“crucial” if the state is unable to operate as such absent the
infrastructure. Mere
considerations of ease or efficiency will not suffice.
Robustness Testing the
New Approach
Whilst the above analysis explains factors and scenarios which permit
self-defence where appropriate, when push comes to (cyber) shove
the Substantive
Necessity approach should be framed robustly so that “generous”
interpretation by states is not so expansive
as to undermine its effectiveness
but also so that states have legal recourse to self-defence where necessary. To
test the veracity
of the approach, this section will explore whether acts
commonly understood as non-kinetic and harmful to states, yet not warranting
forceful recourse, would be appropriately
and whether those
which ought to be considered sufficiently grave would be included.
Appropriately
(a) Disinformation or Electoral
Interference
Drawing particular notoriety in recent times has been the use of cyber means
to allegedly spread disinformation or propaganda, especially
with the intent of
influencing another state’s internal political processes, such as its
elections, perhaps epitomised to many
by the alleged Russian campaign to
interfere with the 2016 US presidential
Such acts venture
plainly into the domain of a violation of the principle of non-intervention yet
are widely accepted as not amounting
to an “armed
Whilst there exists potential for disruption or political harm through such
means, and the impact on a state may be significant,
they do not necessitate
armed responses. Misinformation may be responded to domestically — for
example, through media or communication
— and indeed forceful recourse
against an external state is unlikely to remedy the damage caused internally
within the political
Such acts, whilst able to be met with
countermeasures,
fall outside
the scope of the proposed approach. Whilst they might interfere with or disrupt
political processes, they do not
fundamentally compromise
the processes
they are directed at. Even if the electoral process was considered a sufficient
target, the function of that process
would continue insofar as citizens could
make a free decision, even if based on erroneous grounds. The increased
provision of such
erroneous grounds does not mean the function is unable to
occur as intended from a mechanism standpoint. At its highest, the effectiveness
or efficiency of the function is impeded. The act would be appropriately
(b) Espionage
With governments now storing sensitive information digitally within computer
networks, such data has emerged as both crucial and a
significant risk.
Information impacting national security or the functions of the state remains a
valuable target of espionage from
The theft thereof, despite potential seriousness, does not amount to a use of
Since this is a covert
intelligence-gathering exercise which does not harm or coerce directly and is
carried out almost ubiquitously
permitting forceful recourse would be disproportionate and could lead to
widespread escalation.
Such activities are no doubt not captured by most of the Substantive
Necessity approach. The only requirement which might give pause
is that of the
“security” of infrastructure. However, this argument may be
dismissed. The security referred to is of
the infrastructure itself rather than
the data contained therein per se. If espionage rose to such a level that there
was a fundamental
compromising of the systems, such as a cyber incursion
allowing for ongoing control over key systems, then this would have
ramifications
which could amount to an armed attack. However, it is this
newfound cyber influence rather than the espionage per se
enliven a right to self-defence. No doubt this is rightly so. Mere cyber
espionage would not be caught by the Substantive Necessity
approach unless its
extent went further and took on a different fundamental nature as described so
as to no longer be espionage.
Thus, espionage remains appropriately
Appropriately
(a) Major Economic Shutdown
The characterisation of major economic devastation as permitting self-defence
is rife with conflict in the
literature.
Indeed, it is
example upon which schisms rotate. After all, it is
significantly impactful yet distinctly not physical. This article has been clear
that the ramifications are sufficiently impactful to citizen and state that they
ought to enliven a right to self-defence both as
a recourse and as a deterrence.
Attacks which cause such major economic damage — such as devastating
banking systems, stock markets or financial systems generally
doubt be captured. It is unclear how a state is to function, as a state, without
its economy. The infrastructure
that permits the existence and use of money
where the world has moved away from cash and where wealth is substantially tied
up intangibly
is crucial to the function of a society and its economy. To that
extent, a cyber attack which caused a major economic shutdown would
fundamentally compromise the function of infrastructure crucial to the
state’s function as such and would be captured.
Interestingly, this also demonstrates the nuance present in the approach. The
example has been posited in this article of the destruction
of a single stock
exchange building. Application of the approach to such an occurrence becomes
contingent on the actual effect of
the attack. A cyber attack which shuts down a
single trading location in a large, intertwined economy may cause economic harm
might otherwise not affect the economy. Stock prices may drop and trades
from that location may be unable to occur, but the effect
is not fundamental. No
doubt under the approach taken by this article such an attack would amount to a
use of force, but it would
not enliven the armed attack threshold. Conversely,
if the attack targets a number of exchanges, or a more fundamental economic
institution,
such that the economy or financial system is severely impacted,
then the standard would be enlivened as described and the attack
appropriately
included. Importantly, this demonstrates the necessity for a bespoke approach
here to art 51 of the
. Under present conceptions of force and
armed attack, it is possible that the lack of physical consequences as a result
of such economic
impacts would mean that such an attack would not be considered
as force or an armed attack. This is normatively and legally undesirable
further demonstrates the usefulness of the present standard.
(b) Attacks with Other Significant Non-Physical
Ramifications
Intuitively, there are a number of scenarios that may be contemplated whose
ramifications may be non-physical in their
simultaneously sufficiently dangerous or serious that they both enliven the
right to self-defence and require the concomitant
deterrence to aggressor states
which the exercise of this right brings.
Such scenarios may be explored through indicative, but non-exhaustive,
examples. Cyber attacks which cripple an electricity grid in
a modern society
may do so by interfering with the systems underpinning the infrastructure yet
may plunge civilisations into darkness,
halt essential services or
communications, disrupt livelihoods and ultimately put lives at risk. Similarly,
cyber attacks which impact
healthcare infrastructure directly, undermine
emergency communication systems or destroy other essential utilities may have
devastating
impacts and must be prevented. As attacks on such infrastructure may
in some instances impact physical safety, these are captured.
Finally, cyber
attacks which substantially inhibit military infrastructure — as a prelude
to physical attack or otherwise —
would strike at a fundamental area of
statehood, being the defence force and its capacity to defend the nation, and
would be captured.
V CONCLUSION
In an era where states exhibit ever-increasing reliance on the digital
it is plainly
unsatisfactory that they cannot defend against attacks on digital systems as
they may against attacks on physical assets
or infrastructure, including where
necessary with force. This proposition and the need to maintain the aims of the
, particularly the prohibition of force, are not mutually
was not drafted to apply for the handful of decades
following its inception only to require renegotiation when circumstances or
technologies
changed. The foundational document of modern international
relations is by all accounts a “living document” and ought
interpreted with flexibility to enable its continued application. Yet to date,
present approaches to interpreting arts 2(4)
and 51 of the
with respect to cyber attacks inadequately account for the nuances of
cyberspace. Such approaches are not comfortably concomitant
with the realist
approaches of states in practice and therefore are unlikely to be accepted as
legitimate. This anachronism is only
exacerbated in situations where the
“gravity” criterion is considered through the lens of notions of
physicality which
were derived in contexts well before non-physical attacks of
the ilk of cyber attacks were possible. The critical question is, therefore,
just how the
shall apply to the lacuna resulting from the
underlying differences between cyber attacks and traditional kinetic
In answering this pressing query, this article has argued that a novel and
principled approach to interpreting the
is required with due
deference to the context and nature of acts undertaken state-against-state. It
has argued that gravity, being
a criterion of severity not of physicality, may
still exist in the cyber realm. It has therefore argued that a cyber attack
be considered as amounting to an “armed attack” animating the
legal right to forcible self-defence where it is
apprehended by the victim
state based on clear and convincing evidence as a hostile act or set of acts
which (a) has fundamentally
compromised, or (b) is imminently poised to
fundamentally compromise, the (i) functioning or (ii) security of (c)
infrastructure
crucial to a state’s ability to function as such
approach appropriately empowers states to defend themselves where necessary
whilst preventing the “opening of the floodgates”
of force in
international relations.
Conflict continues to evolve. One need only look to Russia’s
‘concerted [cyber] campaign to disrupt Ukrainian critical
infrastructure’
‘Special Military Operation’ or the US’ frequent use of drones
in the Middle East
that as states develop new technologies, they also find ways to use these
technologies to exert force in new ways. It is imperative
that such hostile acts
be regulated and deterred by international law. The solution may be readily
envisaged: the
must be interpreted to appropriately account
for hostile acts in the cyber realm. Perhaps then, when we may perceive with
certainty that these harmful acts no longer occupy their legal lacuna
but are bound by the
illegality of force and enliven the
protective ambit of self-defence, we might better declare
per jus ad bellum
processimus
et in jus contra bellum
BCom, BAdvStud (Hons I,
Medal), LLB (Hons I) (Syd); Tipstaff to the Hon Richard White, Justice of the
New South Wales Court of Appeal;
Sessional Academic at the University of Sydney.
My sincere gratitude goes to Professor Ben Saul, Challis Chair of International
at the University of Sydney and United Nations Special Rapporteur on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms while
Countering Terrorism, for his invaluable feedback throughout the process of
writing this article. I am also grateful
to Dr Alison Pert for her constructive
commentary on an earlier version, as well as for the feedback of two anonymous
referees and
the editorial team of the
Melbourne Journal of International
. All errors remain my own.
Charter of the United
Preamble (‘
Nat Katin-Borland,
‘Cyber War: A Real and Growing Threat’ in Sean S Costigan and Jake
Perry (eds),
Cyberspaces and Global Affairs
(Routledge, 2012) 3, 3. See
also Espen Barth Eide and Anja Kaspersen, ‘Cyberspace: The New Frontier in
(online, 24 September 2015) <
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/09/cyberspace-the-new-frontier-in-warfare/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/V4D9-MQCF
States Joint Forces Command, ‘The Joint Operating Environment 2010’
(Report, 18 February 2010) 36; Nick Heath,
‘NATO Creates Cyber-Defence
(online, 9 April 2008) <
https://www.zdnet.com/article/nato-creates-cyber-defence-command/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/HMQ7-WFZ3
>; Mary Ellen
O’Connell, ‘Cyber Security without Cyber War’
(2012) 17(2)
Journal of Conflict and Security Law
Noah Simmons, ‘A Brave
New World: Applying International Law of War to Cyber-Attacks’ (2014) 4(1)
Journal of Law and Cyber Warfare
42, 44; Ido Kilovaty, ‘Cyber
Conflict and the Thresholds of War’ in David L Sloss (ed),
International Legal Order Unraveling?
(Oxford University Press, 2022) 251,
251; Oona A Hathaway et al, ‘The Law of Cyber-Attack’
(2012) 100(4)
California Law Review
Priyanka R Dev,
‘“Use of Force” and “Armed Attack” Thresholds in
Cyber Conflict: The Looming Definitional
Gaps and the Growing Need for Formal UN
Response’ (2015) 50(2–
Texas International Law Journal
382; Thomas Eaton, ‘Self-Defense to Cyber Force: Combatting the Notion of
“Scale and Effect”’
(2021) 36(4)
American University
International Law Review
, 698–9; Bradley Raboin,
‘Corresponding Evolution: International Law and the Emergence of Cyber
(2011) 31(2)
Journal of the National Association of
Administrative Law Judiciary
, 603; Scott J Shackelford, ‘From
Nuclear War to Net War: Analogizing Cyber Attacks in International Law’
(2009) 27(1)
Berkeley Journal of International Law
, 194; Cassandra M
Kirsch, ‘Science Fiction No More: Cyber Warfare and the United
(2012) 40(4)
Denver Journal of International Law and Policy
, 622; Reese Nguyen, ‘Navigating
Jus ad Bellum
in the Age of
Cyber Warfare’
(2013) 101(4)
California Law Review
Cyber attribution presents
significant challenges owing to various methods of creating anonymity online.
Consequently, many cyber
attacks see responsibility denied by states and a
dearth of evidence with which to conclusively attribute culpability. However, in
many instances it has been possible to identify perpetrators with reasonable
certainty, and in any event the mere difficulty of attribution
is no reason to
dispense with the designation of such acts as illegal: Daniel B Silver,
‘Computer Network Attack as a Use of
Force under Article 2(4) of the
United Nations Charter’ (2002) 76
International Law Studies
Russell Buchan and Nicholas Tsagourias,
Regulating the Use of Force in
International Law
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021) 126.
Joshua Davis, ‘Hackers
Take Down the Most Wired Country in Europe’,
(online, 21
August 2007) <
https://www.wired.com/2007/08/ff-estonia
archived at <
https://perma.cc/L3FU-CZNS
Herzog, ‘Revisiting the Estonian Cyber Attacks: Digital Threats and
Multinational Responses’ (2011) 4(2)
Journal of Strategic Security
49; Eaton (n
) 703; Damien
McGuinness, ‘How a Cyber Attack Transformed Estonia’,
(online, 27 April 2017) <
https://www.bbc.com/news/39655415
archived at <
https://perma.cc/55KS-ZSTE
Lesley Swanson, ‘The Era
of Cyber Warfare: Applying International Humanitarian Law to the 2008
Russian-Georgian Cyber Conflict’
(2010) 32(2)
Loyola of Los Angeles
International and Comparative Law Review
, 303; Khatuna Burkadze,
‘A Shift in the Historical Understanding of Armed Attack and Its
Applicability to Cyberspace’
(2020) 44(1)
Fletcher Forum of World
, 37; Sandra L Hodgkinson, ‘Crossing the Line’
International Lawyer
, 615, 624.
Kilovaty (n
) 258; Burkadze (n
) 37; Davis (n
); McGuinness (n
James P Farwell and Rafal
Rohozinski, ‘Stuxnet and the Future of Cyber War’ (2011) 53(1)
23, 29; Kim Zetter, ‘An Unprecedented Look at Stuxnet, the
World’s First Digital Weapon’,
(online, 3 November
https://www.wired.com/2014/11/countdown-to-zero-day-stuxnet
archived at <
https://perma.cc/ZV49-PB5C
Nakashima and Joby Warrick, ‘Stuxnet Was Work of US and Israeli Experts,
Officials Say’,
The Washington Post
(online, 2 June 2012) <
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/stuxnet-was-work-of-us-and-israeli-experts-officials-say/2012/06/01/gJQAlnEy6U_story.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/CR68-CX4A
Nicole Perlroth and Quentin
Hardy, ‘Bank Hacking Was the Work of Iranians, Officials Say’,
The New York Times
(online, 8 January 2013) <
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/09/technology/online-banking-attacks-were-work-of-iran-us-officials-say.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3JNC-9NBF
) 382; Daniel Campbell,
‘Operation Ababil’ in Nicholas Michael Sambaluk (ed),
Conflict in
Century: The Impact of Cyber Warfare, Social Media, and
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2019) 65, 66.
Maziar Motamedi,
‘Iran Calls Blackout at Natanz Atomic Site “Nuclear
Terrorism”’,
(online, 12 April 2021) <
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/4/11/incident-at-iranian-nuclear-site-targeted-by-blast-last-year
archived at <
https://perma.cc/9QW7-MDYG
Corera, ‘Iran Nuclear Attack: Mystery Surrounds Nuclear Sabotage at
(online, 13 April 2021) <
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-56722181
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8C7G-ZVKS
See, eg, ‘Significant
Cyber Incidents’,
Center for Strategic and International Studies
(Web Page) <
https://www.csis.org/programs/strategic-technologies-program/significant-cyber-incidents
archived at <
https://perma.cc/KD3M-JRY5
Michael Gervais,
‘Cyber Attacks and the Laws of War’ (2012) 1(1)
Journal of Law
and Cyber Warfare
8, 18; Burkadze (n
) 36; Kilovaty (n
Robert Kolb, ‘Origin
of the Twin Terms
Jus ad Bellum
International Review of the Red Cross
, 553; Carsten Stahn,
‘“Jus ad Bellum”, “Jus in Bello” ... “Jus
post Bellum”?: Rethinking
the Conception of the Law of Armed Force’
(2006) 17(5)
European Journal of International Law
, 925; Lothar
Kotzsch, ‘The Concept of War in Contemporary History and International
Law’ (Librairie E Droz, 1956) 86;
Cassandra M Kirsch, ‘Science
Fiction No More: Cyber Warfare and the United States’
(2012) 40(4)
Denver Journal of International Law and Policy
François Delerue,
Cyber Operations and International Law
(Cambridge University Press, 2020)
277; Gervais (n
) 27; Burkadze
) art 2(4).
Ibid art 51.
Report of the Group of
Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and
Telecommunications in the Context of International
sess, Agenda Item 94, UN Doc A/68/98 (24 June 2013) 8 [19]–[20]
UN Doc A/68/98
Report of the Group of Governmental
Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in
the Context of International
, UN GAOR, 70
sess, Agenda
Item 93, UN Doc A/70/174 (22 July 2015) 12 [26] (‘
’). See also Nicholas Tsagourias, ‘Electoral Cyber
Interference, Self-Determination, and the Principle of Non-Intervention
Cyberspace’ in Dennis Broeders and Bibi van den Berg (eds),
Cyberspace: Behavior, Power and Diplomacy
(Rowman & Littlefield, 2020)
45, 45; Ma Xinmin, ‘Key Issues and Future Development of International
Cyberspace Law’
(2016) 2(1)
China Quarterly of International Strategic
119, 128; Guiguo Wang, ‘Are There International Rules
Governing Cyberspace?’
(2021) 8(2)
Journal of International and
Comparative Law
, 370; Delerue (n
) 277; Harold Hongju Koh,
‘International Law in Cyberspace’
Harvard International
Law Journal Online
, 3; Michael N Schmitt, ‘Cyberspace and
International Law: The Penumbral Mist of Uncertainty’
(2013) 126(5)
Harvard Law Review Forum
, 177; Todd C Huntley, ‘Controlling the
Use of Force in Cyber Space: The Application of the Law of Armed Conflict during
of Fundamental Change in the Nature of Warfare’
Michael N Schmitt (ed),
Tallinn Manual 2.0 on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Operations
(Cambridge University Press, 2017) 328 (‘
Tallinn Manual
’); Walter Gary Sharp Sr,
CyberSpace and the Use of Force
(Aegis Research Corporation, 1999) 5; Simmons (n
) 51; Burkadze (n
Kilovaty (n
See Michael Kenney,
‘Cyber-Terrorism in a Post-Stuxnet World’ (2015) 59(1)
111. See also Anna Wortham, ‘Should Cyber Exploitation Ever Constitute
a Demonstration of Hostile Intent That May Violate UN
Charter Provisions
Prohibiting the Threat or Use of Force?’
(2011) 64(3)
Communications Law Journal
, 650–1; Wolff Heinegg von Heintschel,
‘Territorial Sovereignty and Neutrality in Cyberspace’ (2013) 89
International Law Studies
123, 128–9; Davis Brown, ‘A
Proposal for an International Convention to Regulate the Use of Information
Systems in Armed
(2006) 47(1)
Harvard International Law
, 187; Marco Roscini, ‘World Wide Warfare:
and the Use of Cyber Force’
Max Planck Yearbook of
United Nations Law
, 130; Schmitt,
Tallinn Manual
Tsagourias (n
) 3; Sean Watts, ‘International Law
and Proposed US Responses to the DNC Hack’,
Just Security
Post, 14 October 2016) <
https://www.justsecurity.org/33558/international-law-proposed-u-s-responses-d-n-c-hack/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/Y6ZP-MEV4
>; Duncan B
Hollis, ‘Russia and the DNC Hack: What Future for a Duty of
Non-Intervention?’,
Opinio Juris
(Blog Post, 25 July 2016)
http://opiniojuris.org/2016/07/25/russia-and-the-dnc-hack-a-violation-of-the-duty-of-nonintervention/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4GN3-A7MD
Egan, ‘International Law and Stability in Cyberspace’
(2017) 35(1)
Berkeley Journal of International Law
Kilovaty (n
) 263; Jackson Maogoto,
Technology and
the Law on the Use of Force: New Security Challenges in the Twenty-First Century
(Routledge, 2015) 57; Michael N Schmitt, ‘The Law of Cyber Warfare:
(2014) 25(2)
Stanford Law and Policy Review
(‘The Law of Cyber Warfare’).
See, eg, Abraham Sofaer,
‘Address by: Abraham D Sofaer’ (1988) 82
Proceedings of the ASIL
Annual Meeting
420, 426; Office of General Counsel, Department of Defense
Department of Defense Law of War Manual
(Manual, July 2023) 1030
[16.3.3.1]; Eaton (n
Demitrios Delibasis,
The Right to National Self-Defence in Information
Warfare Operations
(Arena Books, 2007) 131; Stephen Petkis,
‘Rethinking Proportionality in the Cyber Context’
(2016) 47(4)
Georgetown Journal of International Law
See, eg, Gary D Solis,
The Law of Armed Conflict: International Humanitarian Law in War
(Cambridge University Press, 3
ed, 2022) 556; Nguyen (n
) 1129; Vida M Antolin-Jenkins,
‘Defining the Parameters of Cyberwar Operations: Looking for Law in All
the Wrong Places’
Naval Law Review
, 161; Hathaway et
) 841; Yoram Dinstein,
‘Cyber War and International Law: Concluding Remarks at the 2012 Naval War
College International Law
Conference’ (2013) 89
International Law
Ashley Deeks, ‘Defend
Forward and Cyber Countermeasures’ in Jack Goldsmith (ed),
States’ Defend Forward Cyber Strategy: A Comprehensive Legal Assessment
(Oxford University Press, 2022) 181, 186; Egan (n
) 178; Michael N Schmitt,
‘“Below the Threshold” Cyber Operations: The Countermeasures
Response Option and International
[2014] VirgJlIntLaw 12
(2014) 54(3)
Virginia Journal of
International Law
, 699; Simmons (n
) 68; Michael N Schmitt, ‘Cyber
Operations and the
Jus ad Bellum
(2011) 56(3)
Villanova Law Review
, 582 (‘Cyber Operations’).
Jakub Spáčil,
‘Cyber Operations Against Critical Financial Infrastructure: A
Non-Destructive Armed Attack?’
(2022) 22(2)
International and
Comparative Law Review
27, 28; Matthew C Waxman, ‘Cyber-Attacks and
the Use of Force: Back to the Future of Article 2(4)’
(2011) 36(2)
Journal of International Law
Michael Preciado, ‘If
You Wish Cyber Peace, Prepare for Cyber War: The Need for the Federal Government
to Protect Critical
Infrastructure from Cyber Warfare’ (2012) 1(1)
Journal of Law and Cyber Warfare
99, 100–103. See
) 28; Maogoto
See, eg, Spáčil
); Petkis (n
) 1451; Simmons (n
) 54; Ferry Oorsprong, Paul Ducheine and
Peter Pijpers, ‘Cyber-Attacks and the Right to Self-Defense: A Case Study
of the Netherlands’
(2023) 6(2)
Policy Design and Practice
See above n
Richard Suofade Ogbe,
‘International Law, Cyber Crime and Crime of Aggression’ (2023) 8
African Journal of Criminal Law and Jurisprudence
24, 27; Antonio Coco,
Talita Dias and Tsvetelina van Benthem, ‘Illegal: The SolarWinds Hack
under International Law’
(2022) 33(4)
European Journal of International
, 1279; Alexia Fitz and Richard L Wilson, ‘Just Warfare: Is a
Nuclear Attack an Appropriate Response to a Cyber Attack?’
(2023) 18(1)
Proceedings of the 18
International Conference on Cyber Warfare
and Security
534, 536; Shan Ali and Sabira Naz Qureshi, ‘Legal
Framework of Right of Self Defense in Cyber Warfare: Application through Laws
Armed Conflict’ (2022) 3(2)
Journal of Development and Social Sciences
1076, 1079.
The application of the
jus ad bellum
to cyber attacks carried out by non-state actors is beyond
the scope of this article, though is itself both complex and important.
the significantly reduced barriers to entry as compared to traditional forms of
conflict or warfare, the ability for non-state
actors to carry out immensely
harmful attacks through cyber means is significantly heightened.
Buchan and Tsagourias
) 121–2; Russell Buchan,
‘Cyber Attacks: Unlawful Uses of Force or Prohibited Interventions?’
(2012) 17(2)
Journal of Conflict and Security Law
211, 214; Delerue
Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security
GA Res 66/24, 66
plen mtg, Agenda Item 93, UN
Doc A/RES/66/24 (13 December 2011) para 4;
UN Doc A/68/98
) 8 [20]; Benedikt Pirker,
‘Territorial Sovereignty and Integrity and the Challenges of
Cyberspace’ in Katharina Ziolkowski
Peacetime Regime for State
Activities in Cyberspace
(NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of
Excellence, 2013) 189, 190; Andrey L Kozik, ‘The Concept of Sovereignty as
a Foundation
for Determining the Legality of the Conduct of States in
Cyberspace’ (2014) 14
Baltic Yearbook of International Law
) 260; Human Rights Council,
Promotion, Protection and Enjoyment of Human Rights on the Internet
sess, Agenda Item 3, UN Doc A/HRC/32/L.20 (27 June 2016) 3 [1];
The Right to Privacy in the Digital Age
, GA Res 68/167, 68
plen mtg, Agenda Item 69(b), UN Doc A/RES/68/167 (21
January 2014) para 3.
) 211; James A Green, ‘Disasters
Caused in Cyberspace’ in Susan C Breau and Katja LH Samuel (eds),
Research Handbook on Disasters and International Law
(Edward Elgar
Publishing, 2016) 406, 412, 418; Catherine Lotrionte, ‘State Sovereignty
and Self-Defense in Cyberspace: A Normative
Framework for Balancing Legal
Rights’ (2012) 26(2)
Emory International Law Review
See generally Russell
Buchan, ‘Non-Forcible Measures and the Law of Self-Defence’
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
, 2; Yarik Kryvoi,
‘Responding to Public and Private Cyberattacks: Jurisdiction,
Self-Defence, and Countermeasures’ in
Tomoko Ishikawa and Yarik Kryvoi
Public and Private Governance of Cybersecurity: Challenges and
(Cambridge University Press, 2023) 103; Michael N Schmitt,
‘Cyber Activities and the Law of Countermeasures’ in Katharina
Ziolkowski (ed),
Peacetime Regime for State Activities in Cyberspace:
International Law, International Relations and Diplomacy
(NATO Cooperative
Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence, 2013) 659, 662; Robin Geiß and Henning
Lahmann, ‘Freedom and Security
in Cyberspace: Shifting the Focus Away from
Military Responses towards Non-Forcible Countermeasures and Collective
Threat-Prevention’
in Katharina Ziolkowski (ed),
Peacetime Regime for
State Activities in Cyberspace: International Law, International Relations and
(NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence, 2013) 621,
) art 2(4). See also Petkis
) 1446; Buchan and Tsagourias
) 114; Dev (n
Burkadze (n
) 35; Hathaway et al (n
) 881; Enenu Onyikwu Okwori,
‘Cyber-Attacks as an Emerging Use of Force under International Law’
Aberdeen Student Law Review
33, 36; Medhi Kadivar,
‘Cyber-Attack Attributes’ [2014] (November)
Technology Innovation
Management Review
22, 23; Vasile Coman, ‘Cyber Aggression in
Conditions of Armed Conflict: Regulation and Counteraction’ (2023) 24(133)
Romanian Journal of Forensic Science
84, 86; Paul AL Ducheine and Peter
BMJ Pijpers, ‘The Notion of Cyber Operations’ in Nicholas Tsagourias
and Russell Buchan
Research Handbook on International Law and
(Edward Elgar Publishing, 2021) 272; Max Smeets and JD Work,
‘Operational Decision-Making for Cyber Operations: In Search of
Model’ (2020) 5(1)
Cyber Defense Review
Vice Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff (US), ‘Joint Terminology for Cyberspace Operations’
(Memorandum, November
2010) 5; ‘How Cyber Attacks Work’,
Cyber Security Centre
(Web Page, 14 October 2015) <
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/how-cyber-attacks-work
archived at <
https://perma.cc/PDV9-LM54
‘Cyber Attack’,
Australian Signals Directorate
https://www.cyber.gov.au/glossary/cyber-attack
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3CLJ-Y7E2
See, eg, Schmitt,
Tallinn Manual
) 452; Hathaway et al (n
) 821; William A Owens, Kenneth W Dam and
Herbert S Lin (eds),
Technology, Policy, Law, and Ethics regarding US
Acquisition and Use of Cyberattack Capabilities
(National Academies Press,
2009) 10–11; Marco Roscini,
Cyber Operations and the Use of Force in
International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2014) 17 (‘
’); M Uma and G Padmavathi, ‘A Survey on Various Cyber
Attacks and Their Classification’ (2013) 15(5)
International Journal of
Network Security
390, 390; Waxman (n
Nor need it be, for in
practice the issue of whether an act is a “cyber attack” under a
formal definition appears unlikely
to cause issues for states.
See, eg, TR Shejin and KT
Sudheer, ‘A Review on Major Cyber Threats and Recommended Counter
Measures’ (2023) 11(3)
International Journal for Research in Applied
Science and Engineering Technology
1758, 1760.
See Jose Nazario,
‘Politically Motivated Denial of Service Attacks’ in Christian
Czosseck and Kenneth Geers (eds),
The Virtual Battlefield: Perspectives on
Cyber Warfare
(IOS Press, 2009) 163; Sherwin Kati et al,
‘Comprehensive Overview of DDOS Attack in Cloud Computing Environment
Using Different
Machine Learning Techniques’ (Conference Paper,
International Conference on Innovative Computing and Communication, 19–20
April 2022); 新华社 [Xinhua News Agency], «
北京警方专项打击网络攻击违法犯罪抓获嫌疑人379名»
[Beijing Police Specifically Cracked Down on Illegal and Criminal Cyberattacks,
Arresting 379
中华人民共和国中央人民政府
Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of
(Web Page, 17 December 2019) <
https://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2019-12/17/content_5461787.htm
[tr author], archived at <
https://perma.cc/U54V-KB47
Elmer EH Lastdrager,
‘Achieving a Consensual Definition of Phishing Based on a Systematic
Review of the Literature’ (2014)
Crime Science
Huajun Huang, Junshan Tan and Lingxi Liu, ‘Countermeasure Techniques for
Deceptive Phishing Attack’ (Conference
Paper, International Conference on
New Trends in Information and Service Science, 30 June – 2 July 2009)
David J Gunkel,
(Westview Press, 2001) 2–4; Tim Jordan, ‘A Genealogy
of Hacking’
(2017) 23(5)
Convergence
, 535; DeJarvis Oliver and
Adriane B Randolph, ‘Hacker Definitions in Information Systems
Research’ (2022) 62(2)
Journal of Computer Information Systems
403; Yue Wang et al, ‘A Comprehensive Survey on DNS Tunnel
Detection’ (2021) 197
Computer Networks
108322:1–19, 1.
Sean Collins and Stephen
McCombie, ‘Stuxnet: The Emergence of a New Cyber Weapon and Its
Implications’ (2012) 7(1)
Journal of Policing, Intelligence and Counter
80, 85; Ivanka Barzashka, ‘Are Cyber-Weapons Effective?
Assessing Stuxnet’s Impact on the Iranian Enrichment Programme’
(2013) 158(2)
RUSI Journal
Martti Lehto and Gerhard
Henselmann, ‘Non-Kinetic Warfare: The New Game Changer in the Battle
Space’ in Brian K Payne
and Hongyi Wu (eds),
Proceedings of the
International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security
(Academic Conferences and Publishing International, 2020) 316, 318; Rob
Schrier, ‘COVID-19 and Cyber: Foreshadowing Future Non-Kinetic
Warfare’ (2021) 6(2)
Cyber Defense Review
29, 32–3; Schmitt
‘The Law of Cyber Warfare’ (n
) 279; Preciado (n
Schmitt, ‘The Law of
Cyber Warfare’ (n
Such as undermining
critical medical infrastructure.
) 1447; Hathaway et al (n
) 842; Solis (n
) 556; Buchan and Tsagourias (n
) 118; Schmitt, ‘The Law of Cyber
Warfare’ (n
) 279; Green
arts 1, 2(4), 51. See also Franklin Berman, ‘The UN Charter and the
Use of Force’
[2006] SGYrBkIntLaw 3
Singapore Year Book of International Law
10; John C Yoo, ‘Force Rules: UN Reform and Intervention’
Chicago Journal of International Law
Armed Activities on the
Territory of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v Uganda)
[2005] ICJ Rep 168, 223 [148] (‘
’); Carlos Tünnermann Bernheim, ‘United States
Armed Intervention in Nicaragua and Article 2(4) of the United Nations
(1985) 11(1)
Yale Journal of International Law
Ido Kilovaty, ‘Rethinking the Prohibition on the Use of Force in the Light
of Economic Cyber Warfare: Towards a Broader
Scope of Article 2(4) of the UN
Charter’ (2015) 4(3)
Journal of Law and Cyber Warfare
Yoram Dinstein, ‘Computer Network Attacks and Self-Defense’ in
Michael N Schmitt and Brian T O’Donnell
Computer Network Attack
and International Law
(Naval War College, 2002) 99, 99; James Crawford,
Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law
University Press, 8
ed, 2012) 719.
Christine Gray,
International Law and the Use of Force
(Oxford University Press,
ed, 2018) 32; Rachel Buckman, ‘Expansive Application of
Self-Defence: Protecting Security at the Expense of Legality’
(2019) 17(2)
New Zealand Journal of Public and International Law
Military and
Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v United States of
America) (Merits)
[1986] ICJ Rep 14, 100 [190]
’); Schmitt,
Tallinn Manual
) 331; Gray (n
) 32; Kamrul Hossain, ‘The Concept
of Jus Cogens and the Obligation under the UN Charter’
(2005) 3(1)
Santa Clara Journal of International Law
, 89; Sondre Torp Helmersen,
‘The Prohibition of the Use of Force as
: Explaining
Apparent Derogations’
(2014) 61(2)
Netherlands International Law Review
, 173; Olivier Corten and Vaios Koutroulis, ‘The
Status of the Prohibition on the Use of Force: What Is Its Scope and Why Does It
Matter?’ in Dire Tladi (ed),
Peremptory Norms of General International
Law (Jus Cogens): Disquisitions and Disputations
(Brill, 2021) 629, 629.
Tom Ruys, ‘The
Meaning of Force and the Boundaries of the
Jus ad Bellum
“Minimal” Uses of Force Excluded from UN Charter Article
(2014) 108(2)
American Journal of International Law
(‘The Meaning of Force’); Brian L Cox, ‘The Risk of
Obsolescence: Reframing the Contemporary Use of Force
Model to Achieve a More
Holistic Application of the
UN Charter Jus ad Bellum
Canadian Yearbook of International Law
, 299; Tomohiro
Mikanagi, ‘Establishing a Military Presence in a Disputed Territory:
Interpretation of Article 2(3) and (4)
of the UN Charter’
(2018) 67(4)
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
, 1023; Coman (n
) 85; Buchan and Tsagourias (n
) 119–20; Preciado (n
) 727; Ruys, ‘The Meaning of
) 163; Oorsprong,
Ducheine and Pijpers (n
Tom J Farer, ‘Political and Economic Coercion in Contemporary
International Law’
(1985) 79(2)
American Journal of International Law
, 407–8; Oscar Schachter, ‘The Right of States to Use Armed
Force’ (1984) 82(5–
Michigan Law Review
, 1624; Heather
Harrison Dinnis,
Cyber Warfare and the Laws of War
(Cambridge University
Press, 2012) 40–1; Ian Brownlie,
International Law and the Use of Force
(Oxford University Press, 1963) 362; Preciado (n
) 132–3; Tom Ruys,
Attack” and Article 51 of the UN Charter: Evolutions in Customary Law and
(Cambridge University Press, 2010) 55 (‘
Attack” and Article 51
art 2(4). See also Buchan and Tsagourias (n
Report of the
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia:
(Report, September 2009) 242.
Henning Lahmann,
Unilateral Remedies to Cyber Operations: Self-Defence, Countermeasures,
Necessity, and the Question of Attribution
(Cambridge University Press,
2020) 24, 24; Lianne JM Boer, ‘“Echoes of Times Past”: On the
Paradoxical Nature of
Article 2(4)’
(2015) 20(1)
Journal of Conflict
and Security Law
art 44. See also Murray Colin Alder,
The Inherent Right of Self-Defence
in International Law
(Springer, 2013) 82; Nico Schrijver, ‘Challenges
to the Prohibition to Use Force: Does the Straitjacket of Article 2(4) UN
Begin to Gall Too Much?’ in Niels Blokker and Nico Schrijver
The Security Council and the Use of Force: Theory and Reality –
A Need for Change?
(Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2005) 31, 34.
Preamble, arts 41, 46.
) 11; James A Delanis, ‘Force under
Article 2(4) of the United Nations Charter: The Question of Economic and
Political Coercion’
(1979) 12(1)
Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational
As permitted by the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
, opened for signature 23 May
1969, 1155 UNTS 331
(entered into force 27 January 1980) art 32
Summary Report of
Eleventh Meeting of Committee I
(Documents of the United Nations Conference
on International Organization, San Francisco, 1945) vol 6, 334, 335; Thomas
Recourse to Force: State Action against Threats and Armed
(Cambridge University Press, 2002) 12.
Legality of the Threat
or Use of Nuclear Weapons (Advisory Opinion)
[1996] ICJ Rep 226, 244 [39]
Nuclear Weapons
Ruys, ‘The Meaning of
) 162. See also
Claus Kreß, ‘“Armed Attack” and Article 51 of the UN
Charter: Evolutions in Customary Law
and Practice’
(2013) 83(1)
Yearbook of International Law
, 162; Delerue (n
Definition of Aggression
GA Res 3314 (XXIX), UN GAOR, 2319
plen mtg, UN Doc A/RES/3314(XXIX)
(14 December 1974) annex (‘
Definition of Aggression
Definition of
arts 3(c), 3(f), 3(g).
Yet blockades are
themselves considered to be forceful, rather than enlivening the limb of art
2(4) of the
which prohibits the ‘threat’ of force.
Moreover, examples such as acquiescence as described above would not enliven art
2(4) as a ‘threat’ as no such threat can be inferred from such
action: ibid.
Burkadze (n
Ibid 39; Schmitt,
‘The Law of Cyber Warfare’ (n
See, eg, Yoram Dinstein,
War, Aggression and Self-Defence
(Cambridge University Press,
ed, 2011) 88; Delerue (n
) 296–8; Michael Schmitt and
Jeffrey Biller, ‘The NotPetya Cyber Operation as a Case Study of
International Law’,
EJIL: Talk!
(Blog Post, 11 July 2017) <
https://www.ejiltalk.org/the-notpetya-cyber-operation-as-a-case-study-of-international-law/
archived at <
https://perma.cc/RV3Y-ZV4S
Antolin-Jenkins (n
) 155; Green (n
William Banks, ‘The
Role of Counterterrorism Law in Shaping
Norms for Cyber
Warfare’ (2013) 89
International Law Studies
157, 166; Green
) 413; Stephenie Gosnell
Handler, ‘The New Cyber Face of Battle: Developing a Legal Approach to
Accommodate Emerging Trends
in Warfare’
(2012) 48(1)
Stanford Journal
of International Law
Richard B Lillich,
‘Economic Coercion and the International Legal Order’ (1975) 51(3)
International Affairs
358, 361–2; EY Benneh, ‘Economic
Coercion, the Non-Intervention Principle and the Nicaragua Case’ (1994)
African Journal of International and Comparative Law
235, 239; Farer
) 408; Antonios Tzanakopoulos,
‘The Right to be Free from Economic Coercion’ (2015) 4(3)
Cambridge Journal of International and Comparative Law
Economic Measures as a
Means of Political and Economic Coercion Against Developing Countries
Res 42/173, UN GAOR, 42
plen mtg, UN Doc
A/RES/42/173 (11 December 1987) para 3.
) 34; Dev (n
) 387; Farer (n
) 413; Oliver Dörr and Albrecht
Randelzhofer, ‘Purposes and Principles: Article 2(4)’ in Bruno Simma
et al (eds),
The Charter of the United Nations: A Commentary
University Press, 3
ed, 2012) 200, 208–10; Preciado
Christian Payne and
Lorraine Finlay, ‘Addressing Obstacles to Cyber-Attribution: A Model Based
on State Response to Cyber-Attack’
(2017) 49(3)
George Washington
International Law Review
) 224–7; Herbert S Lin,
‘Offensive Cyber Operations and the Use of Force’
(2010) 4(1)
Journal of National Security Law and Policy
, 80; Huseyin Kuru,
‘Prohibition of Use of Force and Cyber Operations as
“Force”’ (2017) 2(2)
Journal of Learning and Teaching in
Digital Age
Ekow N Yankah, ‘The
Force of Law: The Role of Coercion in Legal Norms’
(2008) 42(5)
University of Richmond Law Review
, 1216, 1218; Ignaz
Seidl-Hohenveldern, ‘The United Nations and Economic Coercion’
(1984–85) 18(1)
Revue Belge de Droit International
[Belgian Review
of International Law] 9, 11.
Preciado (n
Wolfgang McGavran,
‘Intended Consequences: Regulating Cyber Attacks’
Tulane Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property
, 260; Jordan J
Plotnek and Jill Slay, ‘Cyber Terrorism: A Homogenized Taxonomy and
Definition’ (2021) 102
Computers and Security
102145:1–9, 5.
Council on Foreign
A Cyberattack on the US Power Grid
(Memorandum, April 2017) 3;
) 396; James E McGhee,
‘Cyber Redux: The Schmitt Analysis, Tallinn Manual and US Cyber
Policy’ (2013) 2(1)
Journal of Law and Cyber Warfare
See, eg, Mohamed S Helal,
‘On Coercion in International Law’
(2019) 52(1)
New York University Journal of International Law
and Politics
1, 104–8; Marko Milanovic, ‘Revisiting Coercion as
an Element of Prohibited Intervention in International Law’
(2023) 117(4)
American Journal of International Law
, 630; Schmitt, ‘The Law
of Cyber Warfare’ (n
The role of intent in such a characterisation is also demonstrated in case law.
For example, whilst a trade embargo with a
coercive intent to induce a change in
policy may violate the principle of non-intervention, the decision to cease
trading with a
state absent such intent may be permissible:
) 115–16 [244]–[245].
Moreover, the ICJ in
) referred to the fact that acts taken by
one state which impact another only violate the principle of non-intervention
former has ‘a view to the coercion’ of the latter: at 124
Schmitt, ‘The Law of
Cyber Warfare’ (n
See Silver (n
In the sense that they are
not otherwise unlawful.
Responsibility of States
for Internationally Wrongful Acts
, GA Res 56/83, UN GAOR, 56
plen mtg, Agenda Item 162, Supp No 10, UN Doc A/RES/56/83
(28 January 2002, adopted 12 December 2001) annex (‘
Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
’) art 49(1); David J
Bederman, ‘Counterintuiting Countermeasures’
(2002) 96(4)
American Journal of International Law
, 821; Enzo Cannizzaro,
‘The Role of Proportionality in the Law of International
Countermeasures’
(2001) 12(5)
European Journal of International Law
, 893; Michael N Schmitt and Sean Watts, ‘Collective Cyber
Countermeasures?’
(2021) 12(2)
Harvard National Security Journal
, 377; Nicholas Tsagourias, ‘The Law Applicable to Countermeasures
against Low-Intensity Cyber Operations’ (2015) 14(1)
Baltic Yearbook of
International Law Online
Delimitation of the
Maritime Boundary
(Guyana v Suriname) (Award)
(Permanent Court of
Arbitration, Case No 2004–04, 17 September 2007) [446]; James
State Responsibility: The General Part
(Cambridge University
Press, 2013) 691; Olivier Corten, ‘Judge Simma’s Separate Opinion in
Oil Platforms
Case: To What Extent Are Armed “Proportionate
Defensive Measures” Admissible in Contemporary International Law?’
in Ulrich Fastenrath et al (eds),
From Bilateralism to Community Interest:
Essays in Honour of Bruno Simma
(Oxford University Press, 2011) 843, 849;
) 387; Ruys, ‘The
Meaning of Force‘ (n
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
See above n
Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
, UN Doc A/56/33 (n
) arts 26, 50. See also Ruys,
‘The Meaning of Force‘ (n
Tom Ruys, ‘The
True Meaning of Force: A Reply to Mary Ellen O’Connell’ (2014) 108
American Journal of International Law Unbound
) art 53; Stefan Kadelbach,
‘Genesis, Function and Identification of
Netherlands Yearbook of International Law
Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts
, UN Doc A/56/33 (n
) arts 40 and 41.
) 101 [191]; Sean D
Murphy, ‘Terrorism and the Concept of Armed Attack in Article 51 of the UN
(2002) 43(1)
Harvard International Law Journal
42–3; Constantine Antonopoulos, ‘Force by Armed Groups as Armed
Attack and the Broadening of Self-Defence’
(2008) 55(2)
Netherlands
International Law Review
) arts 2(4),51. See also Ruys,
‘The Meaning of Force’ (n
) 103 [194]. See also Gray
) 156; Tom J Farer,
‘Drawing the Right Line’
(1987) 81(1)
American Journal of
International Law
, 113; Eaton (n
) 761; Alison Pert, ‘Proportionality
in Self-Defence: Proportionate to What?’ (2017) 24
Pandora’s Box
Such as hacking into the
systems of the aggressor to disrupt their operation or cause similar damage:
One potential qualm is
that if cyber attacks may amount to force an aggressor might illegally use
“forcible” cyber attacks
below the “armed attack”
threshold, yet victim states cannot forcibly respond in kind. To some extent
this is true, however
where the severity does not rise to an armed attack,
traditional countermeasures likely suffice and prevent undue escalation of
A second exception to
art 2(4) is that force may be “authorised” by the Security Council:
(n 1) arts 39, 41, 42.
) 65; Iain Scobbie, ‘Exceptions:
Self-Defence as an Exception to the Prohibition on the Use of Force’ in
Lorand Bartels
and Federica Paddeu (eds),
Exceptions in International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2020) 150, 171–2.
Tadashi Mori,
of the Right of Self-Defence in International Law: From the Caroline Incident to
the United Nations Charter
, tr Jonathan Bloch (Brill Nijhoff, 2018) 4;
Richard A Falk, ‘What Future for the UN Charter System of War
Prevention?’
(2003) 97(3)
American Journal of International Law
, 592; Elena Cirkovic, ‘Incomplete World Order: United Nations
Security Council Resolution 2249 (2015) and the Use of Force
in International
Law’ (2016) 7(2)
Comparative Law Review
See, eg, Gray (n
) 120–99; Fu-Shun Lin,
‘Self-Defence: A Permissible Use of Force under the UN Charter’
(1963) 13(1)
DePaul Law Review
; Natalino Ronzitti, ‘The
Expanding Law of Self-Defence’
(2006) 11(3)
Journal of Conflict and
Security Law
; DW Greig, ‘Self-Defence and the Security Council:
What Does Article 51 Require?’
(1991) 40(2)
International and
Comparative Law Quarterly
; DW Bowett,
Self-Defense in International
(Manchester University Press, 1958); Ian Brownlie, ‘The Use of
Force in Self-Defense’
British Yearbook of International
Aiden Warren and Ingvild
Governing the Use-of-Force in International Relations
Macmillan, 2014) 9; John Norton Moore, ‘
Jus ad Bellum
International Court of Justice’
[2012] VirgJlIntLaw 14
(2012) 52(4)
Virginia Journal of
International Law
, 910; Christopher R Rossi, ‘
Jus ad Bellum
in the Shadow of the 20
(1994) 15(1)
New York Law
School Journal of International and Comparative Law
, 60; Michał
Kowalski, ‘Some Remarks on the Relationship between the
Regulations under the UN Charter and Customary International Law: Why
Does It Matter So Much?’ (2018) 8(2)
Wroclaw Review of Law,
Administration and Economics
) arts 2(4), 51.
Ibid arts 39, 41
42. See also Niels Blokker, ‘Is the Authorization Authorized? Powers and
Practice of the UN Security Council
to Authorize the Use of Force by
“Coalitions of the Able and Willing”’
(2000) 11(3)
Journal of International Law
, 544; Thomas M Franck, ‘When, If
Ever, May States Deploy Military Force without Prior Security Council
Authorisation?’
(2000) 4(2)
Singapore Journal of International and
Comparative Law
“Armed Attack” and Article 51
) 912; Rossi (n
) 66; Judge Abdulqawi A Yusuf,
‘The Notion of “Armed Attack” in the
and Its Influence on Subsequent Case Law’
(2012) 25(2)
Leiden Journal
of International Law
, 462; Burkadze (n
Even given the previous
analysis of art 2(4) and its lack of an “armed” qualifier, there is
nothing within the latter
which indicates that any “arms” must
approximate traditional military weaponry. Given the previously noted
willingness
of the ICJ to expand the provisions of the
forms of “weaponry”, cyber weapons should not be excluded from art
51 on this ground. See also
) 94 [176]; Preciado (n
Corfu Channel (United
Kingdom v Albania) (Merits)
[1949] ICJ Rep 4 (‘
). See also Yusuf
) 462; William Schabas,
‘The Use of Force in the Nicaraguan Cases’ in Edgardo Sobenes
Obregon and Benjamin Samson (eds),
Nicaragua before the International Court
2018) 305, 305.
) 101 [191], 103–4
Ibid 101 [191].
Ibid 103–4 [195].
The Court did refer to a
requirement that acts be so ‘[grave] as to amount to ... [an] armed attack
conducted by regular forces’:
ibid. This was, however, in the context of
responsibility to clarify that if irregular forces sent by a state undertook
conducted by military forces would amount to force, then
such acts were not excluded from art 2(4). The Court therefore did not impose
requirement
of conventional kinetic violence: ibid.
Georgina Redsell,
‘Illegitimate, Unnecessary and Disproportionate: Israel’s Use of
Force in Lebanon’ (2007) 3
Cambridge Student Law Review
Tsagourias (n
) 73; Nicholas Tsagourias, ‘The
Tallinn Manual on the International
Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare: A Commentary on Chapter II’
Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law
) 465; A Constantinou, ‘Forcible
Activities of Armed Bands as a Case of a Use of Force That Amounts to an Armed
Attack in the
Context of the Judgment of the ICJ in the Nicaragua Case’
(1997) 9(1)
African Journal of International and Comparative Law
161; 何志鹏 [He Zhipeng] and 王惠茹 [Wang
Huiru], «“非国家行为体”
对使用武力法的挑战与发展»
[Challenges and Developments
of the Law of Use of Force by “Non-State
Actors”] (2019) 8 法学杂志 [
Law Journal
44, 49 [tr author]; Buchan and Tsagourias (n
) 465; Michał Kowalski,
‘Original Sin Reaffirmed: The Nicaragua Judgement’s Impact on the
Notion of Armed Attack
as the Most Grave Form of the Use of Force’
Polish Yearbook of International Law
, 41–2. See, eg,
Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America) (Judgment)
[2003] ICJ Rep 161, 187 [51] (‘
Oil Platforms
Bellum: Ethiopia’s Claims 1–8 (Ethiopia v Eritrea) (Partial Award)
(2005) 26 RIAA 457, 466 [12] (‘
Jus ad Bellum
’). See also
) 468; Roman
Kwiecień, ‘The Nicaragua Judgment and the Use of Force: 30 Years
Polish Yearbook of International Law
Oil Platforms
Jus ad Bellum
Armed Activities
Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
(Advisory Opinion)
[2004] ICJ Rep 136.
Andrea Bianchi,
‘Dismantling the Wall: The ICJ’s Advisory Opinion and Its Likely
Impact on International Law’
German Yearbook of International
) 464; Dev (n
See above n
That is, the issue has
not been raised directly in any relevant proceeding.
Nori Katagiri,
‘Why International Law and Norms Do Little in Preventing Non-State Cyber
Attacks’ (2021) 7(1)
Journal of Cybersecurity
That is, the more
serious the physical impact, the more “grave” the attack.
) 15; Nguyen (n
See above nn
See above n
Attack” and Article 51
Attack” and Article 51
Iron Rhine Railway (Belgium v
Netherlands) (Award)
(2005) 27 RIAA 35, 125 [79]–[81].
Buchan and Tsagourias
) 116–17; Dev (n
Official Compendium
of Voluntary National Contributions on the Subject of How International Law
Applies to the Use of Information
and Communications Technologies by States
Submitted by Participating Governmental Experts in the Group of Governmental
Advancing Responsible State Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of
International Security Established pursuant to General Assembly
sess, UN Doc A/76/136 (13 July 2021) 30
UN Doc A/76/136
French Ministry of
International Law Applied to Operations in Cyberspace
Paper, December 2021) 5.
German Federal Foreign
Office, German Federal Ministry of Defence and German Federal Ministry of the
Interior, Building and Community,
On the Application of International Law in
(Position Paper, March 2021) 15.
Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation (Italy), Presidency of the Council of
Ministers (Italy) and Ministry of
Defence (Italy),
Italian Position Paper on
‘International Law and Cyberspace’
(Position Paper, September
Letter from the Minister
of Foreign Affairs (Netherlands) to the President of the House of
Representatives (Netherlands), 5 July
https://www.government.nl/documents/parliamentary-documents/2019/09/26/letter-to-the-parliament-on-the-international-legal-order-in-cyberspace
archived at <
https://perma.cc/64SM-HMQZ
(‘Netherlands Position’).
Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Trade (NZ) and Crown Law (NZ),
The Application of International
Law to State Activity in Cyberspace
(Media Release, December 2020) 1.
UN Doc A/76/136
(n 160) 69.
Federal Department of
Foreign Affairs (Switzerland),
Switzerland’s Position Paper on the
Application of International Law in Cyberspace
(Position Paper, 27 May 2021)
United Kingdom Mission
to the United Nations,
Application of International Law to States’
Conduct in Cyberspace
(Position Paper, 3 June 2021) 3.
See above nn
Department of Defence
Cyberspace Policy Report
(Report, November 2011) 3–4.
French Ministry of
Defence (n 161) 3.
Netherlands Position (n
Jens Stoltenberg,
‘NATO Will Defend Itself’,
(online, 27 August 2019)
https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/world/nato-will-defend-itself-summit-jens-stoltenberg-cybersecurity
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8C56-723W
Ibid; Sarah Chen and
Jennifer Taw, ‘Conventional Retaliation and Cyber Attacks’ (2023)
Cyber Defense Review
67, 70; ‘WannaCry Cyber-Attack Cost the
NHS £92m after 19,000 Appointments Were Cancelled’,
Health Executive
(online, 12 October 2018) <
https://www.nationalhealthexecutive.com/articles/wannacry-cyber-attack-cost-nhs-ps92m-after-19000-appointments-were-cancelled
archived at <
https://perma.cc/TQ35-SM65
See above nn 59,
United Kingdom Mission
to the United Nations (n
National Cyber Security Centre (UK), ‘Categorising UK Cyber
Incidents’ (online, 23 August 2023) <
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/information/categorising-uk-cyber-incidents
archived at <
https://perma.cc/UQY4-S9LL
Oorsprong, Ducheine and
UN Doc A/76/136
Given Australia
considers ‘information technologies’ as critical infrastructure:
Critical Infrastructure Resilience Report: Policy Statement
(Statement,
<https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Economics/Foreign_Investment_Review/Submissions>,
archived at <https://perma.cc/9PLP-FPBY>.
«网络空间适用禁止使用武力原则的法律路径»
[Legal Approaches to Apply the Prohibition of the Use of Force in Cyberspace],
Internal Security
] (online, 29
March 2023) <
https://www.secrss.com/articles/40792?fbclid=IwAR2Hpib1bYtGMxK0a6Yz7qIGpXUe7ACbiVWl83T6DjfLtkb4sOF-4NMjs9A
, archived at <
https://perma.cc/9RL5-2S8L
UN Doc A/76/136
(n 160) 80.
Buchan and Tsagourias
See, eg, nn
Jan Klabbers, ‘The
Redundancy of Soft Law’ in Martti Koskenniemi (ed)
International Law
(Ashgate, 2000) 189, 190; Michael Akehurst, ‘Custom
as a Source of International Law’ in Martti Koskenniemi (ed),
of International Law
(Ashgate, 2000) 251, 251–3.
Thomas Franck,
Fairness in International Law and Institutions
(Oxford University Press,
1995) 260; Clark M Eichelberger, ‘The United Nations Charter: A Growing
Document’ (1947) 252
Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science
97, 101; ‘Secretary-General Presents His Annual Report
to General Assembly’ (Press Release No SG/SM/7136-GA9596, United
20 September 1999)
http://www.un.org/press/en/1999/19990920.sgsm7136.html
archived at <
https://perma.cc/NR83-PD7W
>; Ove Bring,
‘The Use of Force under the UN Charter: Modification and Reform through
Practice or Consensus’ in Jonas
et al (eds),
International Law and Changing Perceptions of Security
(Brill Nijhoff,
2014) 1, 13; Jane E Stromseth, ‘New Paradigms for the
(2006) 38(3)
George Washington International Law
, 563; James Larry Taulbee, ‘Governing the Use of Force:
Matter Anymore?’ (2001) 4(2)
1, 8; Jessica Liang, ‘Modifying the
through Subsequent
Practice: Prospects for the Charter’s Revitalisation’
(2012) 81(1)
Nordic Journal of International Law
, 4; Ronald C Slye and Beth Van
International Criminal Law: Essentials
(Aspen Publishers, 2009)
92; Łukasz Kulesa and Rafał Tarnogórski, ‘The Future of
the UN: Reinterpretation
or Amendment of the UN Charter?’ (2005) 5(2)
Polish Foreign Affairs Digest
Eichelberger (n
) 98. Cf Liang (n
Burkadze (n
) 43; Spáčil (n
) 29; Simmons (n
) 53; Hathaway et al (n
) 845; Nguyen (n
) 1117; Delerue (n
Burkadze (n
) 43; Hathaway et al (n
) 845; Roscini,
Cyber Operations
) 50; Simmons (n
) 54; Spáčil (n
) 30; Nguyen (n
Hathaway et al
‘Russia behind
Cyber Attack with Europe-Wide Impact an Hour before Ukraine Invasion’,
National Cyber Security Centre
(Web Page, 10 May 2022) <
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/russia-behind-cyber-attack-with-europe-wide-impact-hour-before-ukraine-invasion
archived at <
https://perma.cc/A288-TVZH
>; Foreign,
Commonwealth and Development Office (UK) and Elizabeth Truss, ‘Russia
behind Cyber-Attack with Europe-Wide Impact
an Hour before Ukraine
Invasion’ (Press Release, 10 May 2022) <
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/russia-behind-cyber-attack-with-europe-wide-impact-an-hour-before-ukraine-invasion
archived at <
https://perma.cc/X2XA-TNWM
Sanger and Kate Conger, ‘Russia Was behind Cyberattack in Run-Up to
Ukraine War, Investigation Finds’,
The New York Times
(online, 10
May 2022) <
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/10/us/politics/russia-cyberattack-ukraine-war.html
archived at <https://perma.cc/RS9F-35DJ>.
) 227; Simmons (n
) 55; Spáčil (n
) 30; Nguyen (n
Michael N Schmitt,
‘Cyber Operations in International Law: The Use of Force, Collective
Security, Self-Defense, and Armed Conflicts’
in National Research Council,
Proceedings of a Workshop on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing Strategies and
Developing Options for US Policy
(National Academies Press, 2010) 151, 163;
Stephen Moore, ‘Cyber Attacks and the Beginnings of an International Cyber
(2013) 39(1)
North Carolina Journal of International Law and
Commercial Regulation
, 248; Burkadze (n
Buchan and Tsagourias
) 289; Burkadze (n
) 1119; Burkadze (n
) 43; Simmons (n
) 56; Delerue (n
) 288; Hathaway et al (n
) 247; Hathaway et al (n
) 846; Burkadze (n
) 43; Spáčil (n
) 130; Spáčil (n
) 30; Simmons (n
) 56; Delerue (n
) 130; Spáčil (n
Hathaway et al
) 846–7; Delerue
) 288; Simmons (n
) 288; Roscini (n
) 54; Spáčil (n
) 31; Yaroslav Radziwill,
Cyber-Attacks and the Exploitable Imperfections of International Law
(Brill Nijhoff, 2015) 138.
) 57; Nguyen (n
) 1121; Preciado (n
) 25; Burkadze (n
) 43; Simmons (n
) 58; Eaton (n
) 698; Spáčil (n
) 36; Chen and Taw (n
Michael N Schmitt,
‘Computer Network Attack and the Use of Force in International Law:
Thoughts on a Normative Framework’
(1999) 37(3)
Columbia Journal of
Transnational Law
, 914–15 (‘Computer Network
Tallinn Manual
) adopts Schmitt’s
criteria, but with the addition of the criteria ‘[m]ilitary
character’ and ‘[s]tate involvement’
and the substitution of
the criterion “presumptive legitimacy” with ‘[p]resumptive
legality’: at 333–7.
) 1122; Spáčil (n
Schmitt, ‘Computer
Network Attack’ (n
) 288; Simmons (n
) 58; Hathaway et al (n
) 847; Spáčil (n
Shaun Roberts,
‘Cyber Wars: Applying Conventional Laws to War to Cyber Warfare and
Non-State Actors’
(2014) 41(3)
Northern Kentucky Law Review
Katharine C Hinkle,
‘Countermeasures in the Cyber Context: One More Thing to Worry
Yale Journal of International Law Online
See, eg, Schmitt,
Tallinn Manual
Pantaleone Nespoli et
al, ‘Optimal Countermeasures Selection against Cyber Attacks: A
Comprehensive Survey on Reaction Frameworks’
(2018) 20(2)
Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Communications Surveys and Tutorials
1361, 1363.
) 1124; Simmons (n
Schmitt, ‘Cyber
Operations’ (n
Ibid 1123; Simmons
Schmitt, ‘Cyber
Operations’ (n
Harjinder Singh Lallie
et al, ‘Cyber Security in the Age of COVID-19: A Timeline and Analysis of
Cyber-Crime and Cyber-Attacks
during the Pandemic’ (2021) 105
and Security
102248:1–20, 3; Shannon Williams, ‘Number of
Cyberattacks Will Continue to Increase in 2023’,
SecurityBrief
(online, 11 January 2023) <
https://securitybrief.com.au/story/number-of-cyberattacks-will-continue-to-increase-in-2023
archived at <
https://perma.cc/4YUF-5E83
>; Joy LePree
Anderson, ‘Global Cyberattacks Increased 38% in 2022’,
(online, 20 January 2023) <
https://www.securitymagazine.com/articles/98810-global-cyberattacks-increased-38-in-2022
archived at <
https://perma.cc/69HB-4H7Y
>; Brad Ryan,
‘Microsoft to Help Australia Build “Cyber Shield”, Anthony
Albanese Announces in Washington’,
(online, 24 October
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-10-24/anthony-albanese-in-washington-dc-microsoft-deal/103012802
archived at <
https://perma.cc/3KPV-3AFA
) Preamble.
) 4; Shirley V Scott, ‘The
Question of UN Charter Amendment, 1945–1965: Appeasing “the
(2007) 9(1)
Journal of the History of International Law
, 88; Carolyn L Willson, ‘Changing the Charter: The United Nations
Prepares for the Twenty-First Century’
(1996) 90(1)
American Journal of
International Law
, 125; Karen A Mingst and Margaret P Karns,
United Nations in the 21
(Westview Press,
ed, 2012) 50.
The element of
“apprehended by the victim state” reflects the fact that the
Substantive Necessity approach, being a framework
which is applied to determine
whether forcible self-defence is permissible in response to a cyber attack, is
applied by the state
subject to that cyber attack.
Daniele Archibugi, Mario
Denni and Andrea Filippetti, ‘The Technological Capabilities of Nations:
The State of the Art of Synthetic
Indicators’ (2009) 76(7)
Technological Forecasting and Social Change
917, 925; Martin Bell and
Keith Pavitt, ‘The Development of Technological Capabilities’ in
Irfan ul Haque et al (eds),
Trade, Technology, and International
Competitiveness
(World Bank, 1995) 69, 70–1.
Lech J Janczewski,
‘An Overview of the Unique ICT Situation of Small States’ in Lech J
Janczewski and William Caelli
Cyber Conflicts and Small States
(Routledge, 2016) 33, 44; Yuchong Li and Qinghui Liu, ‘A Comprehensive
Review Study of Cyber-Attacks and Cyber Security: Emerging
Trends and Recent
Developments’ (2021) 7
Energy Reports
8176, 8179–80;
Christopher Darby and Sarah Sewall, ‘The Innovation Wars: America’s
Eroding Technological Advantage’
(2021) 100(2)
Foreign Affairs
After all, a state would
not neglect to act in self-defence on mere speculation that more advanced
technology might have precipitated
a different conclusion.
O’Connell, ‘Rules of Evidence for the Use of Force in International
Law’s New Era’
American Society of International Law
Proceedings
Ibid 44. See also
Alejandro Chehtman, ‘The Use of Force’ in Carlos Espósito and
Kate Parlett (eds),
The Cambridge Companion to the International Court of
(Cambridge University Press, 2023) 448, 454; Ruys,
Attack” and Article 51
Trail Smelter (United
States of America v Canada) (Award)
(1938/1941) 3 RIAA 1905, 1964;
Velásquez Rodríguez v Honduras (Merits)
(Inter-American
Court of Human Rights, Series C No 4, 29 July 1988) [127]
Velásquez Rodríguez
Dinah L Shelton,
‘Judicial Review of State Action by International Courts’
Fordham International Law Journal
, 386; Christopher J
Greenwood, ‘International Law and the United States’ Air Operation
against Libya’
(1987) 89(4)
West Virginia Law Review
Jules Lobel, ‘The Use of Force to Respond to Terrorist Attacks: The
Bombing of Sudan and Afghanistan’
(1999) 24(2)
Yale Journal of
International Law
Louis Henkin, ‘The
United Nations and Its Supporters: A Self-Examination’
(1963) 78(4)
Political Science Quarterly 504
Attack” and Article 51
) 120 [231].
See, eg, Daniel E
Capano, ‘Throwback Attack: How NotPetya Ransomware Took Down
Industrial Cybersecurity Pulse
(online, 30 September 2021)
https://www.industrialcybersecuritypulse.com/threats-vulnerabilities/throwback-attack-how-notpetya-accidentally-took-down-global-shipping-giant-maersk/
archived at <https://perma.cc/4G4R-BDUT>. See also Matteo Iaiani et al,
‘Analysis of Cybersecurity-Related Incidents
in the Process
Industry’ (2021) 209
Reliability Engineering and System Safety
107485:1–20, 7; Neil C Rowe, ‘Ethics of Cyber War Attacks’
in Lech J Janczewski and Andrew M Colarik,
Cyber Warfare and Cyber Terrorism
(Information Science Reference, 2008) 105, 108.
Velásquez Rodríguez
Franck Latty,
‘Actions and Omissions’ in James Crawford, Alain Pellet and Simon
Olleson (eds),
The Law of International Responsibility
(Oxford University
Press, 2010) 355, 356; Gordon A Christenson, ‘Attributing Acts of Omission
to the State’
(1991) 12(2)
Michigan Journal of International Law
, 321; John C Hall, ‘Acts and Omissions’
(1989) 39(157)
Philosophical Quarterly
Such an approach was
alluded to in
109–10 [231]
, Oil Platforms
) 191–2 [64]
) 222–3 [146].
The literature also broadly appears to accept this theory: Ruys,
Attack” and Article 51
) 174; Albrecht Randelzhofer and Georg
Nolte, ‘Article 51’ in Bruno Simma et al (eds),
The Charter of
the United Nations: A Commentary
(Oxford University Press, 3
ed, 2012) vol 2, 1397, 1409; Delerue (n
) 334–5; Terry D Gill and Paul AL
Ducheine, ‘Anticipatory Self-Defense in the Cyber Context’
Israel Yearbook on Human Rights
, 106; Mark B Baker, ‘Terrorism
and the Inherent Right of Self-Defense (A Call to Amend Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter)’
(1987) 10(1)
Houston Journal of International Law
, 42; Victor Kattan, ‘Israel, Hezbollah and the Conflict in Lebanon: An
Act of Aggression or Self-Defense?’
(2006) 14(1)
Human Rights Brief
Mark R Jacobson,
‘War in the Information Age: International Law, Self‐Defense, and
the Problem of “Non‐Armed”
(1998) 21(3)
Journal of Strategic Studies
, 13; Boris Kondoch, ‘North Korea and
the Use of Force in International Law’ (2013) 18(2)
Korean Journal of
Security Affairs
See above nn
Ibid 282–3; Boer
) 25; Delerue (n
Oxford English
(online at 15 August 2024) ‘fundamentally’ (def 1);
Oxford English Dictionary
(online at 15 August 2024)
‘fundamental’ (def 1).
‘Compromise’,
Computer Security Resource Center
(Web Page) <
https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/compromise
archived at <
https://perma.cc/963C-A5XR
See above the discussion
regarding states which have adopted the “scale and effects”
The precise status of
the doctrine is not settled, with the ICJ ‘express[ing] no view’:
) 103 [194].
See also Matthew C Waxman, ‘The Caroline Affair in the Evolving
International Law of Self-Defence’,
(online, 28 August
https://scholarship.law.columbia.edu/faculty_scholarship/2507
archived at <
https://perma.cc/H5Y3-YVUS
) 33; Schmitt, ‘The Law
of Cyber Warfare’ (n
See Howard Jones,
‘The Caroline Affair’ (1976) 38(3)
The Historian
485; Nguyen
Van Sang, ‘The Caroline Affair and the Diplomatic Crisis between Great
Britain and the United States, 1837–1841’
[Law and Politics] 73.
Letter from Daniel
Webster to Lord Alexander Baring Ashburton, 27 July 1842 <
https://lccn.loc.gov/09022080
archived at <
https://perma.cc/FM4E-N3D9
James A Green,
‘Docking the
: Understanding the Relevance of the Formula
in Contemporary Customary International Law concerning Self-Defense’
(2006) 14(2)
Cardozo Journal of International and Comparative Law
464; Gábor Kajtár, ‘The Caroline as the “Joker”
of the Law of Self-Defence: A Ghost Ship’s
Message for the 21
(2018) 21(1)
Austrian Review of International and European Law
, 3; James A Green, ‘The
Ratione Temporis
Elements of
Self-Defence’ (2015) 2(1)
Journal on the Use of Force and International
97, 104; Ezdi (n
Samantha Ria Shahriar,
‘The Issue of Imminence: Can the Threat of a Cyber-Attack Invoke the Right
to Anticipatory Self-Defence
under International Law?’ (2020) 9
Journal of Law and Jurisprudence
Ibid; John Alan Cohan,
'The Bush Doctrine and the Emerging Norm of Anticipatory Self-Defense in
Customary International Law'
(2003) 15(2)
Pace International Law Review
Reference is made by
Shahriar to UN reports, the Third Arab-Israeli War, the US campaigns in Libya
and Afghanistan, speeches of prominent
UK government officials, the actions of
the UN Security Council and other UN documents: Shahriar (n
David Kretzmer,
‘The Inherent Right to Self-Defence and Proportionality in
(2013) 24(1)
European Journal of International Law
250; Chris O’Meara,
Necessity and Proportionality and the Right of
Self-Defence in International Law
(Oxford University Press, 2021) 11; Chris
O’Meara, ‘Reconceptualising the Right of Self-Defence against
Armed Attacks’ (2022) 9(2)
Journal on the Use of
Force in International Law
Oxford English
(online at 15 August 2024) ‘functioning’ (def 1);
Oxford English Dictionary
(online at 15 August 2024)
‘function’ (def 1).
Trent Jaeger,
Operating System Security
(Springer, 2008) 3–4;
Oxford English
(online at 15 August 2024) ‘security’ (def 1);
‘Glossary’,
Australian Government Department of Home Affairs
(Web Page) <
https://www.protectivesecurity.gov.au/resources/glossary
archived at <
https://perma.cc/ZRQ3-WGHJ
Saheed Oladimeji and
Sean Michael Kerner, ‘SolarWinds Hack Explained: Everything You Need to
(online, 3 November 2023) <
https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/feature/SolarWinds-hack-explained-Everything-you-need-to-know
archived at <
https://perma.cc/T3F8-DDS3
See, eg, C Gallais and E
Filol, ‘Critical Infrastructure: Where Do We Stand Today? A Comprehensive
and Comparative Study of
the Definitions of a Critical Infrastructure’
(2017) 16(1)
Journal of Information Warfare
; Buchan and Tsagourias
); Hodgkinson (n
); Kilovaty (n
); Oorsprong, Ducheine, and Pijpers
); Simmons (n
); Schmitt, ‘The Law of Cyber
Warfare’ (n
) 284; Preciado
Creation of a Global
Culture of Cybersecurity and the Protection of Critical Information
Infrastructures
, GA Res 58/199, UN GAOR, 58
sess, Agenda Item
91(b), UN Doc A/RES/58/199 (30 January 2004, adopted 23 December 2003); SC Res
mtg, UN Doc S/RES/2341 (13 February 2017) 2. See also
Colleen M Newbill, ‘Defining Critical Infrastructure for a Global
Application’
(2019) 26(2)
Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies
, 764; Roberto Setola, Eric Luiijf and Marianthi Theocharidou,
‘Critical Infrastructures, Protection and Resilience’ in
Setola et al (eds),
Managing the Complexity of Critical Infrastructures: A
Modelling and Simulation Approach
(Springer, 2016) 1, 2–3; Christer
Pursiainen, ‘The Challenges for European Critical Infrastructure
Protection’
(2009) 31(6)
Journal of European Integration
Jakub Harašta, ‘Legally Critical: Defining Critical Infrastructure in
an Interconnected World’ (2018) 21
International Journal of Critical
Infrastructure Protection
Uniting and
Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT Act) Act
, Pub L No 107-56,
§ 1016(e), 115 Stat 272;
Security of Critical Infrastructure Act
; ‘Critical National Infrastructure’,
National Protective Security Agency (UK)
(Web Page, 25 April 2023) <
https://www.npsa.gov.uk/critical-national-infrastructure-0
https://perma.cc/X66M-7LGG
Ministry of the Interior (Germany),
National Strategy for Critical
Infrastructure Protection
(Report, 17 June 2009) 4.
«关键信息基础设施安全保护条例»
[Regulations on the Security Protection of Critical Information Infrastructure]
(People’s Republic of China) State Council,
Order No 745, 30 July
2021, art 2; Information Security Policy Council (Japan),
Second Action
Plan of Information Security Measures for Critical Infrastructures
3 February 2009) 10.
Theresa Paola Stawski,
‘The State-Regime-Nexus: Law and Legal Order’ (2021) 15(3)
Zeitschrift für Vergleichende Politikwissenschaft
[Journal for
Comparative Politics] 357, 360; Dino Bozonelos et al,
Introduction to
Comparative Government and Politics
(Academic Senate for California
Community Colleges, 2022) 70; Robert M Fishman, ‘Rethinking State and
Regime: Southern Europe’s
Transition to Democracy’ (1990) 42(3)
World Politics
422, 427; Kevin Ward, ‘Regime’,
Encyclopaedia Britannica
(Web Page, 21 January 2016) <
https://www.britannica.com/topic/regime
archived at <
https://perma.cc/5TTN-YL89
Wouter G Werner,
‘Self-Determination and Civil War’
(2001) 6(2)
Conflict and Security Law
, 175; Kathleen Gallagher Cunningham,
the Politics of Self-Determination
(Oxford University Press, 2014) 40; Kyle
Beardsley, David E Cunningham and Peter B White, ‘Resolving Civil Wars
before They
Start: The UN Security Council and Conflict Prevention in
Self-Determination Disputes’
(2017) 47(3)
British Journal of Political
, 676; Solomon E Salako, ‘Civil Wars and the Right to
Self-Determination’ (2013) 2(1)
International Law Research
Noting previous
distinctions with economic coercion, such acts are plainly not captured.
See generally Joe
Burton, ‘Cyber-Attacks against the UK Electoral Commission Reveal an
Ongoing Threat to Democracy’,
The Conversation
(online, 16 August
https://theconversation.com/cyber-attacks-against-the-uk-electoral-commission-reveal-an-ongoing-threat-to-democracy-211550
archived at <
https://perma.cc/ZPT7-BYEZ
>; Kimberly
Lim, ‘Singapore Presidential Election: Authorities Warn against Foreign
Interference, “Malicious”
Cyber Threats’,
South China
Morning Post
(online, 15 August 2023) <
https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/politics/article/3231176/singapore-presidential-election-authorities-warn-against-foreign-interference-malicious-cyber
archived at <
https://perma.cc/AUB6-9H3F
Alexander, ‘Security Experts Warn of Foreign Cyber Threat to 2024
Associated Press
(online, 22 February 2023) <
https://apnews.com/article/iran-united-states-government-russia-arizona-3cbfa1c46051416fac1f4183774a0f05
archived at <
https://perma.cc/8867-DNJ6
Benson, ‘Don’t Mess With Our Democracy, Home Affairs Minister Clare
O’Neil Warns’,
The Australian
(online, 21 February 2023)
https://www.theaustralian.com.au/nation/dont-mess-with-our-democracy-home-affairs-minister-clare-oneil-tells-china/news-story/d1cfea70b676c72708b73f8e4012b07f
archived at <https://perma.cc/56EV-67MV>; Will Ziebell, ‘Australia
Forms Task Force to Guard Elections from Cyber
(online, 9 June 2018) <
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-australia-security-elections-idUSKCN1J506D
archived at <
https://perma.cc/NLW9-PP9S
‘Canada Opens Inquiry into Allegations of Election Meddling by China,
(online, 7 September 2023) <
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/9/7/canada-opens-inquiry-into-allegations-of-election-meddling-by-china-russia
archived at <
https://perma.cc/PH6Z-6CKJ
‘Responding to Election Meddling in the Cyberspace: An International Law
Case Study on the Russian Interference
in the 2016 Presidential Election’
(2020) 30(2)
Duke Journal of Comparative and International Law
Nicholas Tsagourias, ‘Electoral Cyber Interference, Self-Determination,
and the Principle of Non-Intervention in Cyberspace’
in Dennis Broeders
and Bibi van den Berg (eds),
Governing Cyberspace: Behavior, Power, and
(Rowman & Littlefield, 2020) 45, 51.
Muhammad Faizal Bin
Abdul Rahman et al,
Countermeasures against Foreign Interference
April 2020) 16–19; Xiao (n
) 361; Michael N Schmitt, ‘Foreign
Cyber Interference in Elections’ (2021) 97
International Law
739, 762; Rahman et al (n
Dominik Herrman,
‘Cyber Espionage and Cyber Defence’ in Christian Reuter (ed),
Information Technology for Peace and Security: IT Applications and
Infrastructures in Conflicts, Crises, War, and Peace
(Springer Vieweg, 2019)
83, 84; William C Banks, ‘Cyber Espionage and Electronic Surveillance:
Beyond the Media Coverage’
(2017) 66(3)
Emory Law Journal
Jon R Lindsay, ‘Cyber Espionage’ in Paul Cornish (ed),
Handbook of Cyber Security
(Oxford University Press, 2021) 223, 225.
Preciado (n
) 135; Petkis (n
Luke Pelican,
‘Peacetime Cyber-Espionage: A Dangerous but Necessary Game’
CommLaw Conspectus: Journal of Communications Law and Policy
364; Joe Devanny, Ciaran Martin and Tim Stevens, ‘On the Strategic
Consequences of Digital Espionage’ (2021) 6(3)
Journal of Cyber
429, 431; Banks (n
Devanny, Martin and
) 430; Jarno
Limnéll, ‘Proportional Response to Cyberattacks’ (2017) 1(2)
Cyber, Intelligence, and Security
See, eg, Buchan and
Tsagourias (n
See above nn
) 87; Hathaway et al (n
Marcus Willett,
‘The Cyber Dimension of the Russia-Ukraine War’ (2022) 64(5)
Global Politics and Strategy
7, 7; Seonghwan Choi, ‘Analysis and
Aspects of Space Warfare in the Russia-Ukraine War (Russian Invasion of Ukraine)
and Considerations
for Space Technology Development’ (2022)
Journal of Space Technology and Applications
169, 170; Paul Ducheine, Peter
Pijpers and Kraesten Arnold, ‘Bits- or Blitzkrieg? Cyber Operations in the
Russia-Ukraine War’
(2022) 46(3)
Atlantisch Perspectief
Perspective] 42, 44.
Leila Hudson, Colin S
Owens and Matt Flannes, ‘Drone Warfare: Blowback from the New American Way
of War’ (2011) 18(3)
Middle East Policy
122, 123; Christine Sixta
Drones and Targeted Killing in the Middle East and Africa: An
Appraisal of American Counterterrorism Policies
(Lexington Books, 2016) 23.
‘Through the right
to war we have proceeded, and into the law against war we have evolved’.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.19 MB)
PDF format (884 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter