URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Grose, C --- "Outcomes-based education one course at a time: my experiment with estates and trusts" [2013] LegEdDig 35; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 12
Outcomes-based education one course at a time: my experiment with estates
Journal of Legal Education
, Vol 62, No. 2, 2012-2013, pp 336-366
Over the last five years, the legal academy has been under pressure to
‘reform’, with the three most prominent and widely
cited sources of
this criticism charging that legal education does not adequately prepare
students to be lawyers. The three sources
are the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching, description by various members of the legal academy of
‘best practices’
in legal education, and a report issued by the
Outcome Measures Committee of the American Bar Association Section of Legal
and Admissions to the Bar.
In the aggregate, these reports challenge law schools to radically rethink
the delivery of legal education by starting at the end
and working backwards.
The current buzzword for this kind of education is ‘outcomes-based’
The idea of ‘outcomes-based education’ is hardly new. Moreover,
many institutions of lower- education – e.g, elementary
follow a four-step structure for curriculum design and review developed by K-12
scholars, Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe.
With outcomes-based education, course planning happens in reverse. The
educator starts by identifying the desired results and then
the evidence
necessary to determine that the results have been achieved. Only after the
results and assessment tools have been clearly
specified does the educator plan
the teaching needed to equip students to successfully meet assessments of
whether the outcomes have
been achieved.
Thus in planning and ultimately delivering my Estates and Trusts course for
the first time, I started by identifying my desired outcomes.
In Stage II, I
identified what evidence I would need to determine whether students had achieved
these goals. Having identified such
evidence, I designed assessment tools and
activities that would measure it and help me determine the level of proficiency.
III involved designing instruction tools and teaching activities geared
toward helping students gather the evidence necessary to
allow me to assess
whether they were achieving the outcomes. I planned to teach toward my goals.
And finally, in Stage IV, I reviewed
the whole process – one goal at a
time, one class at a time, one assessment tool at a time – to figure out
how I as an
instructor had succeeded or not – at designing and delivering
the course from end to beginning.
The first in the four-stage curriculum or course design protocol I am
calling ‘outcomes- based teaching’ is identifying
curricular or
course outcomes. This method depends on educators’ intentionality and
transparency about their teaching goals
and the connection between those goals
and everything that follows – the assessment tools, the classroom
activities, the instruction.
For this stage of the inquiry, consistent with the process described above, I
asked: What should students leave my course understanding,
knowing and being
able to do? What enduring ideas and concepts will they take from the course?
I determined that for me, this stage of inquiry involved identifying and
describing outcomes that combined an exploration of professional
identity and
contextual knowledge.
I had by now travelled higher up the spiral of outcome determination,
beginning from the very broad question of what a law student
should know,
understand and be able to do. I then considered a slightly narrower inquiry into
what a legal professional knows, understands,
and is able to do. At that point,
I took up the question of what an estates and trusts lawyer knows, understands
and is able to do.
I arrived finally at the pinnacle inquiry into what a student
in an introductory estates and trusts survey course taught by someone
the professional literature and pedagogy of narrative and clinical theory should
know, understand and be able to do.
After working through this process, here is what my syllabus describes:
The overarching story of estates and trusts law is about planning for and
communicating about transferring assets and/or decision
making and other powers
from one person or entity to another person or entity, usually across
generations, usually as a result of
death or incapacity.
The stock characters in the story are the person who has the assets or power
(the transferor), the assets or power themselves, the
person or entity to whom
the assets or power are being transferred (the transferee), the lawyer who plans
for and facilitates the
transfer, the administrative actors who facilitate the
transfer. The specific characters depend on the context in which the story
being told (e.g, which instrument or instruments), and might include legally
extraneous but nonetheless relevant characters like
disinherited or forgotten
spouses or children, same-sex partners, disabled children, charitable
organisations, etc.
An estates and trusts lawyer, therefore, needs to be able to identify the
various plot lines and characters that might present themselves
to him in a
client’s situation; he must be able to figure out how the relevant law or
laws interact with those characters and
plot lines, and to explain that
interaction to his client and he must be able to work with his client to
construct a story or stories
that meet his client’s needs.
These characters and stories provide the framework for this course.
The next stage in the process is designing an assessment program for the
course. Tempting as it might be to start trying to design
teaching and learning
activities that will help students achieve the outcomes the educator has
identified, Wiggins and McTighe urge
teachers to emphasise first the importance
of clarifying what desired outcomes look like in practice.
In this way, outcomes-based educators will teach transparently and
authentically what they ultimately will assess, rather than looking
backward and
assessing what they may have taught.
Criteria-referenced assessments describe explicitly and in detail the skills
and abilities students should demonstrate for the particular
assessment and the
grounds on which the teacher will assess the students’ demonstration of
those abilities and skills. According
Best Practices
such assessments
fit the theory of outcomes-based teaching ‘by matching learning objectives
with assessment items’ and
therefore testing students’ ability to
achieve the outcomes described to them by the instructor.
A formative assessment provides feedback to faculty about whether the student
is achieving a particular outcome but also provides
such feedback to the
student, thereby serving as a learning tool in and of itself. Unlike a single
exam at the end of the semester,
which provides ‘no navigational
assistance’, formative assessments involve feedback – often
instantaneously –
aimed at improvement.
Finally, authentic assessment confronts students with ‘real-world
challenges’. Such assessments are formative as well,
meant not only to
test but to ‘teach students (and teachers) what “doing” a
subject looks like and what kinds of
performance challenges are considered most
important in a field or profession.’
Designing assessment tools that are criteria-based, formative and authentic
is a first step. Next, teachers must determine whether
the tools effectively
measure the outcomes they are designed to measure. Are they, in other words,
valid, reliable and fair?
This kind of assessment-criteria-based, formative, authentic assessment that
is reliable, valid and fair-is not simply one tool. These
assessments need occur
in the context of the evidence being sought and the outcome being taught. For
example, basic knowledge may
be suitably tested by a multiple-choice quiz, but
measurement of deep insight may require contextual performance. Given that
assessment takes many forms, teachers should use a variety of
assessment techniques throughout the semester.
I found I could not simply move from Stage One (identification of outcomes)
to Stage Two (assessment) in a purely linear fashion.
Instead, I realised that
my goal for students to take on roles as competent estates and trusts attorneys
needed to be broken down
into two distinct but related pieces: knowledge and
understanding of basic estates and trusts doctrine and the ability to apply that
doctrine in the context of the lawyer-client relationship, which might include
interviewing, counselling, drafting and more.
Based on this insight, I determined that I needed two kinds of assessment
tools: those that would quickly alert me and the students
to how well they were
grasping the basic black letter law laid out in the case book and those that
would give the students the opportunity
to apply that black letter law to real
life practice situations, thus enhancing their understanding of the law in the
These two sets of assessment tools ideally, would work in complement. Lack
of success on either instrument would alert the student
and me to the need to
go back and reteach and relearn the foundational principles and how they apply
in context.
Here is what I ended up with, as described in the syllabus: The course is
divided into roughly three units: wills, non-probate instruments
and trusts.
Each unit will end with a 10 to 15 question collaborative quiz on the doctrine
covered in that unit.
Before each class, you will be asked to write a creative reflection on the
reading assigned for the class, organised around a fictional
client (of your
creation) and her estate planning issues. You will revisit your writing at the
end of each class and offer that client
concrete advice based on the class
discussion. You will turn in the entire written project at the end of the
semester, for pass/
fail credit.
The final project of the course will involve some kind of review of a client
file, with the assignment to develop an estate plan and/or
draft some kind of
estate planning instrument. There will be no final exam in addition to that
Each student should expect to be called upon at least twice during the
semester, and asked to present a case or problem that has previously
assigned. Such interactions will be Socratic in nature, with the professor
following up on the student’s initial presentation
with clarifying
questions and/ or requests for further information or analysis. The goals of
these dialogues are (1) to further the
student’s understanding of the
particular question, (2) to further the class’ understanding of the
particular question
and (3) to help the professor assess how well the class is
absorbing the material.
The collaborative quizzes will work as follows: I will hand out the quiz,
containing 10-15 questions on material we have covered in
preceding classes. You
will have 20 minutes to take the quiz, and turn it in. I will then put students
into groups of three or four
and hand out one copy of the same quiz again. You
will have 25 minutes as a group to take the quiz and turn it in. We will review
the quiz and answers in the following class.
My goals for each quiz, in general, were: (1) to give students an opportunity
to test themselves on how well they had learned the
doctrine; (2) to give
students an opportunity to teach each other the doctrine we covered; (3) to pull
together the pieces we covered;
(4) to give me information on how well I
succeeded in teaching the doctrine; and (5) to give me an opportunity to see how
fits together.
By the time these review sessions took place, I had graded all the quizzes
and returned them along with detailed explanations of the
correct answers. So I
began the review class with a slide listing what I had identified – by the
number of wrong answers –
as the questions that had been most difficult
and asked for questions or comments about them.
As I went through the materials the previous summer, trying to get a handle
on the doctrine and scope of the course, I kept asking
myself, ‘Why would
a lawyer ever need to know this? What does a lawyer do with all of this?’
I found that the more I
imagined the answers to those questions – which
for the most part were simply to counsel clients – the better I understood
the particular doctrine. So the creative writing exercise began as a way to help
students achieve the outcome of learning the doctrine
of estates and trusts,
with an eye toward counselling clients.
At the beginning of each class, I asked for a volunteer to read his or her
story for that week as a framework for us to analyse the
doctrine. Students were
able to assess their this skill by how well they could answer their
classmates’ questions about their
own client story and by how well they
were able to think of questions to ask of others. A portion of the final project
students to reflect on their creative writing projects and their
responses confirmed my sense that this had been an effective assessment
Moving into Stage Three, I needed to figure out learning activities for the
To most effectively design a course that leads students to succeed in
achieving the identified learning goals, the literature says
teachers should
approach this work from a macro perspective. Also, by looking at the big
picture, teachers are likely to use multiple
teaching methods throughout the
course and not feel pressured to do everything all at once in each class.
Educational theory posits that use of multiple methods enhances adult
learning by challenging students to engage in different activities
and come out
of their comfort zones from time to time.
I wanted my students to begin to develop a sense of their professional role
as lawyers and to understand the contours of the lawyer/client
relationship in
the context of client representation.
I built my lesson plan for each topic around the assessment tools I had
identified as best reaching particular aspects of the client
representation
I figured if discussion and role-playing – two of the tools I am most
comfortable using – work well to reach the outcomes
I had identified, why
not use them? I decided, consistent with this theory, that my main teaching mode
would be small- and large-group
discussion of problems and questions,
interspersed with role-plays. In addition, I anticipated the potential need for
some lecture
and Socratic dialogue to focus the discussion and/or highlight
particular points of law.
My challenge throughout the semester was how to connect my presentation of
the doctrine to the goals/outcomes of the course. I came
up with two substantive
guidelines that framed the small- group and discussion work we did: (1) Frame
the rules/doctrine in terms
of professional identity, e.g, what kind of
lawyering is this? Does this implicate? and (2) Frame the rules/doctrine in
storytelling, e.g, what are the plot lines here? The characters? The
Thus in each class, with each point of law, I put a statute or case up on
PowerPoint and then challenged the class in groups of three
or four to perform
the legal analysis and critical thinking to figure out how the rules applied to
their client, whether the rules
made sense, how they fit with each other, what
the underlying themes were and how the rules fit in with that theme.
These guidelines also enhanced the role-playing I had the students do. They
engaged in one consistent and thematic role-play throughout
the semester, namely
the ‘lawyering’ they did in their creative writing project. At the
end of each class, they were
given the opportunity to revise or expand their
advice, based on the work we had done during class. Thus, the client narrative
was a way of engaging the students in doing the analytic work necessary
to be a competent estates and trusts attorney.
The more doctrine the students learned, the more complex their fact-gathering
became. The more complex their fact-gathering, the more
likely they were to
elicit fleshed out client stories.
My overall outcome was to get them thinking critically as practitioners and
professionals. My means of achieving that outcome was
to have them engage in the
lawyer-client relationship as professionals.
Having discussed determination of outcomes, development of assessment tools
and teaching methods/delivery, the course planning process
would seem to be
finished. However, the final phase, evaluation, is perhaps the most
With this inquiry, the designer constantly evaluates how he or she is
succeeding in the planning and implementation process, with
the ultimate goal,
of course, to have his or her students achieve identified outcomes.
I had identified the goals of professional identity and the lawyer-client
relationship because I believed that they fit best within
my professional and
personal understanding of training a competent lawyer. I found the evaluative
exercise of referring back to those
goals limiting but in a comforting way. The
universe of assessment tools and teaching activities was not infinite.
Thus in planning the course, I went through the materials multiple times in
different groupings to identify the goals of each one
and to make sure the
activities I had designed facilitated achievement of those goals.
Furthermore, I found that the recursiveness of the process, and my
deep understanding of the relationship among the four
stages, allowed me to be
transparent and non-defensive with the students about why the course was
designed the way it was and why
particular activities or topics played out the
way they did. Having a statement of outcomes in the syllabus allowed me to refer
to my course-design process and to explain my thinking without feeling like
the students and I were playing a game of hide the ball.
This transparency alone
marks such a departure from the traditional law school teaching and learning
experience that I found it refreshing
and liberating.
As for whether this approach worked for my students, I think the answer is
mixed. The highest marks I received in my student evaluations
were in answers to
questions about opportunities for self-evaluation and the practical application
of legal concepts. The students
found the small group work in the classroom
effective as a tool that ‘helps us stay on track and make sure we are
for the day’. They appreciated the quizzes as ‘really
found the creative writing assignment ‘fun’, ‘novel’ and
but also in developing
‘critical thinking throughout the course’. However, some of them
complained about the lack of
‘substance’ in the course, and
suggested that client counselling could be taught in a clinic or interviewing
and counselling
course instead of in a ‘doctrinal’ estates and
trusts course.
I take from these observations that I did not succeed in making clear enough
the connection between my goals of helping them develop
as professionals and my
methods of doing so.
My understanding of the connection among goals, assessment and instruction
deepened as the course proceeded.
Based on the answers to these reflective questions, I will refine the
statement of outcomes in the syllabus. I will adjust the creative
writing and
interview exercises to more neatly fit within those outcomes. I will tighten up
the quizzes and small group discussion
questions. And through it all, I will
consider and reconsider my outcomes. So here I am, right back where I started,
ready to do
it all over again.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (737 KB)
PDF format (3.06 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter