URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/SydLawRw/2024/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:38:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nicholson, Rowan --- "An Indigenous Right to Be Heard on the International Stage?" [2024] SydLawRw 20; (2024) 46(3) Sydney Law Review 387
I Introduction
II The Value of Surveying Indigenous Participation in International Governance
III Is Indigenous Participation in International Governance Legally Obligatory?
IV Why Might It Matter Whether Indigenous Participation Is Legally Obligatory?
V An Inchoate and Developing Area of Law
Review Essay
An Indigenous Right to Be Heard on the International Stage?
Self-Determination As Voice: The Participation of Indigenous Peoples in
International Governance
by Natalie Jones (2024) Cambridge University Press,
362 pp, ISBN 9781009406314
Rowan Nicholson
In the early 20th century, Indigenous peoples were effectively locked out of
international organisations. In
Self-Determination As Voice
valuable work of scholarship, Natalie Jones surveys the extent to which that has
changed. Mechanisms for Indigenous participation
in the United Nations and other
organisations have proliferated since the creation of the Working Group on
Indigenous Populations
in 1982 and especially since the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples of 2007. Jones concludes that it
is arguable that there is now sufficient practice and opinio iuris to evidence a
rule of customary international law about Indigenous
participation in
international governance. In this review essay, it is suggested that some might
not fully agree with her analysis,
either because they are more doubtful about
the opinio iuris or because they place more weight on the practice of economic
organisations
and treaties that continue to exclude Indigenous peoples. But in
any case the book identifies an accelerating trend. It also raises
challenging
questions about the role of soft law and how much it differs from international
law in the strict sense.
Introduction
Natalie Jones begins
Self-Determination As Voice: The Participation of
Indigenous Peoples in International Governance
by introducing us to the
Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) and Māori leaders who petitioned the League of
Nations in the early 20
century but who were turned away without a
Another Indigenous leader, who she does not mention but whose story will
resonate with Australian readers, is Pearl Gibbs, a Ngemba
or Muruwari woman and
the general secretary of the Aborigines’ Progressive
Association.
Gibbs wrote to the
League in 1938 about the ‘ill treatment of the aborigines throughout
Australia’ and asked it to intervene
in the Northern Territory ‘in
the cause of
An official from the League simply noted on the file: ‘I don’t think
any action is possible or
desirable’.
How much has changed?
International organisations frequently still cannot act in the cause of
justice; their power is limited by politics and practicalities.
But insofar as
they have influence, a precondition for getting these organisations to exercise
participate
in them: to receive the hearing that Gibbs was
denied. What Jones achieves in this book is to show that Indigenous
participation
in international governance is desirable and possible — and
becoming more and more common. I begin this review essay by highlighting
value of that achievement. I then focus on two points where Jones might have
deepened her analysis: the question whether this
participation is an actual
binding right under international law, and the question why its legal status
The Value of Surveying Indigenous Participation in
International Governance
Figuring out what international law says on a topic can be an arduous task.
Sometimes a treaty tells us explicitly and comprehensively.
But often we face
the daunting prospect of locating and weighing up the two elements that can
evidence a rule of customary international
law: ‘a general practice’
(primarily of states but sometimes also of international organisations) and the
‘acceptance
as law’ of that practice (
That can involve trawling through a vast and open-ended category of materials
comprising everything from diplomatic notes to public
speeches to judgments by
domestic courts.
If we come across
a shortcut — as when a court or the International Law Commission does the
work — we sigh with
Jones does not take any shortcuts; she does the work herself. Much of
Self-Determination As Voice
is an encyclopaedic survey of Indigenous
participation in international organisations. She begins with the creation in
1982 of the
Working Group on Indigenous Populations at the ‘lowest
level’ in the United Nations
She progresses through
milestones such as the emergence of the United Nations Permanent Forum on
Indigenous Issues in 2000 and, in
2007, the adoption by the General Assembly of
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
’, about which I will have more to
She looks at specialised agencies such as UNESCO, at development institutions
such as the World Bank, at regional processes in the
Arctic and the Americas and
elsewhere, at environmental standard setting, and at potential future
developments. She leads us with
assurance through a forest of acronyms.
Jones is conscious that her perspective — like mine — is that of
a non-Indigenous scholar who is writing about a system
of international law
whose origins and sensibility are
She weaves Indigenous
voices into her narrative while acknowledging that they are not monolithic and
‘that mechanisms for Indigenous
peoples’ participation in
international governance may function in part to legitimize and protect
(neo)colonial global
structures’.
Even with that unavoidable caveat, her achievement is hugely valuable. This
book is where other international lawyers will turn first
whenever they want
information on this topic.
Is Indigenous Participation in International
Governance Legally Obligatory?
Though all other international lawyers will value the evidence that Jones
gathers, some might draw different conclusions from it.
In particular, some
might not fully agree with her analysis of whether, under customary
international law, Indigenous peoples have
a binding right to participate in
international governance that other entities are obliged to respect.
A strength of Jones’ analysis is how she positions it within the wider
law of self-determination. Historically the most important
function of that body
of law has been decolonisation: to give certain peoples the right to establish
their own independent states
or to choose some other external
But this right to
external self-determination only unambiguously and uncontroversially applies to
Western colonies in Africa, Asia
and elsewhere — in technical terms, trust
and non-self-governing territories — and in analogous cases such as
Relatively few cases
like that remain.
self-determination has generally not been seen as applicable to Indigenous
minorities in settler colonies that are already
independent, such as Australia
— and in fact the
provides explicitly that none of its
provisions may be ‘construed as authorizing or encouraging any action
which would dismember
or impair, totally or in part, the territorial integrity
or political unity of sovereign and independent
But as Jones
observes, the law of self-determination continues to evolve: other
‘specific legal rules have emerged in a remedial
manner so as to provide
redress’ for other ‘situations of domination, subjugation, or
exploitation’.
Indigenous peoples now have a right to self-determination of a different kind:
to ‘freely determine their political status
and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development’ within the boundaries of an
existing state.
Jones argues that ‘international organizations and collectives of
states exert power over Indigenous peoples’ in ways
that create ‘a
relationship of the kind self-determination is concerned with ... one of alien
domination, subjugation, or
exploitation’
‘it can be argued that the law of self-determination is called on to
evolve to provide a
Has it in fact
evolved to answer that call? Several provisions of the
relevant, depending on how they are interpreted, including arts 18 and
The most directly on point
is art 41, in particular its final sentence on participation in international
organisations:
The organs and specialized agencies of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations shall contribute to the
full realization of the
provisions of this Declaration through the mobilization, inter alia, of
financial cooperation and technical
assistance. Ways and means of ensuring
participation of indigenous peoples on issues affecting them shall be
established.
, since it is not a treaty, is not
in itself legally binding.
least some of its provisions correspond with binding rules of customary
international law, though this must be assessed article
by article or perhaps
even by distinguishing between parts of a single article based on criteria
articulated by the International
The prevailing view up to now has been that art 41 is
provisions that correspond with custom. Willem van Genugten and Federico
Lenzerini — writing several years before
Jones published her book —
described art 41 as ‘not controversial, either from a political or
from a legal perspective’
and pointed out that, in contrast to most of the
surrounding provisions of the
use the word ‘right’ or refer to law-related
matters, such as legislative measures. That implies that the drafters of
Article did not mean to create a legally enforceable right to assistance,
although the provision might evolve in that direction.
Given the fact that the
United Nations and other international organizations are the duty-holders of
Article 41, it would in any
case not be easy to apply the traditional customary
does not directly disagree with this. Her claim is modest and qualified: that,
as van Genugten and Lenzerini foreshadowed, it
is ‘arguable that a rule of
custom’ about Indigenous participation in international governance now
‘exists, or
is at least
She presents
abundant practice by states and international organisations to support such a
One respect in which her analysis might be deepened is in how she identifies
the other element required for a customary rule:
opinio iuris
. Sometimes
— I do not suggest she does this everywhere — she relies on
assertions by states or international organisations
that participation in an
international body is ‘a requirement of the
example, ‘some states, as well as [the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
] itself, have
stated that the participation of Indigenous peoples in [the Local Communities
and Indigenous Peoples Platform] is required
plain meaning this is an unremarkable and straightforward observation about what
says: it just applies the final sentence of art 41 to the
particular case of the Platform. Affirming that something is a requirement
is not necessarily the same thing as accepting it as a binding
legal requirement — the kind of acceptance that qualifies as
To some extent Jones acknowledges this. When she quotes
Australia’s view that the Platform should facilitate Indigenous
participation
in line with the
, she clarifies in a footnote that
‘Australia does not accept that the
represents binding
international law, so it is unlikely that this statement can be viewed as an
instance of
problem is not restricted to states such as Australia; it exists wherever a
statement refers solely to the
, as distinct from going further by
referring expressly or impliedly to binding law. Despite this problem with the
evidence Jones
cites, she concludes that the Platform ‘is a good example
of a mechanism for Indigenous participation ... that states are beginning
accept as required by
The result is that, though Jones can also point to clear instances of
opinio iuris
she intermingles them with statements that are
unlikely to be
opinio iuris
. That may overplay the evidence for a
customary rule on Indigenous participation in international governance.
Similarly, she may
underplay countervailing evidence, in particular from
economic bodies such as the World Trade Organization. As she points out,
all existing treaties, only trade and investment treaties have
consistently achieved their intended
objectives’.
She makes an
astute observation about how these bodies and treaties represent barriers to
Indigenous self-determination:
[A]ll of the international organizations, treaties, and processes discussed
herein relate to the environment, development, human
rights, and regional
governance. What the previous chapters have not discussed is Indigenous
peoples’ participation in international
economic law-making, policymaking,
and decision-making. This is because states and international organizations, on
the whole, have
not enabled Indigenous peoples to participate in these
may suggest that the practice of facilitating Indigenous participation in
international organisations is not ‘general’
enough — meaning
‘both extensive and virtually
‘sufficiently widespread and representative, as well as
consistent’
order to constitute customary international law. It may be that states and
international organisations are willing to
engage in the practice in some
contexts but wish to remain free
to engage in it when that suits
them. Jones does not seem to give this due weight in her survey of practice.
Why Might It Matter Whether Indigenous
Participation Is Legally Obligatory?
Since Jones does not assert categorically that Indigenous peoples have a
right to participate in international governance under customary
international
law — only that it is
my comments about how she deals with practice and
opinio iuris
ultimately just quibbles. Most international lawyers will agree that it is not
possible to speak categorically either way. What
Jones establishes beyond doubt
is that, at a minimum, there is a body of soft law on Indigenous participation
in international governance
that includes provisions of the
as art 41 but is being extended further through the practice of international
organisations.
‘Soft law’ is law in the same sense that plant-based meat is
meat. That is to say: it is not law at all; the term is just
an analogy. It
principles, rules, and standards governing international relations which are not
considered to stem from one of the sources of international
law ... a complex of
norms lacking binding force, but producing significant legal effects
nevertheless.
theory, the distinction between the two categories of norms is sharp. But in
practice in international law the categories blur
together. Frequently —
unlike at the domestic level, where the police can be called in —
international law in the strict
sense is no more enforceable than soft law.
Frequently both law and soft law serve, instead, to influence the behaviour of
and international organisations in more subtle ways. And frequently, as
seen here in
Self-Determination As Voice
, the content of both can be
fuzzily expressed and difficult to pin down.
All those propositions are true of the
insofar as it applies to
Indigenous participation in international governance. It might have been
interesting, then, to hear more
from Jones about why the distinction between law
and soft law might matter in this context.
For example, if the participation of Indigenous peoples is — or becomes
— legally obligatory under international law whenever
issues affect them,
will that have implications for the interpretation of the internal rules of
international organisations or in
other areas of international law? Will that
have any effect on economic bodies and treaties that continue to exclude
Indigenous peoples
from participation? And precisely how much participation will
be obligatory in a particular case? As Jones observes, the meaning
of the term
‘participation’
varies across a spectrum: at one extreme lies Indigenous peoples’
exclusive control over decision-making; close by lies co-governance
power-sharing with states; while at the other extreme Indigenous peoples might
be invited to consultations, have one seat or a
small minority of seats on a
decision-making committee, or make up an advisory body to the
decision-maker.
might be assumed that, if their participation becomes legally obligatory, the
law will also have to contend with some other difficult
questions, including
which peoples qualify as Indigenous and which individuals and entities can
represent them.
Jones suggests
that, on the contrary, the term ‘Indigenous peoples’ has ‘in
no case ... needed to be defined in
order for mechanisms enabling their
participation to effectively function’ and ‘[w]e have also not seen
any requirement
for participating Indigenous peoples’ organizations to
demonstrate that they are
representative’.
An Inchoate and Developing Area of Law
These may be matters for future legal research that builds on the foundations
laid by Jones. She identifies some further open questions
and possible future
developments. One is the potentially ‘transformative’ idea of
‘a category of membership for
Indigenous peoples at the General Assembly
... designed in a way that preserves and promotes Indigenous self-determination
and sovereignty’.
is how Indigenous experiences ‘might inform the questions asked by other
peoples and marginalized groups when seeking
access to, or justice from,
international institutions and the wider international
community’.
Self-Determination As Voice
illustrates how much progress has been made
since Pearl Gibbs sought a hearing in 1931 but, at the same time, suggests that
is still an inchoate and developing area of international law.
Please cite this review essay as:
Rowan Nicholson, ‘Review Essay: An Indigenous Right to Be Heard on the
International Stage?’
[2024] SydLawRw 20
(2024) 46(3)
Sydney Law Review
DOI: https://doi.org/10.30722/slr.20333
This work is licensed via CC BY-ND 4.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0. Unmodified content is free to
use with proper
attribution
* Senior Lecturer, College of Business, Government and Law, Flinders
University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. Email:
rowan.nicholson@flinders.edu.au;
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9327-8495.
Natalie Jones,
Self-Determination As Voice: The Participation of Indigenous Peoples in
International Governance
(Cambridge University Press, 2024) 1–3.
It is uncertain whether her
mother was Ngemba or Muruwari: Jack Horner, ‘Pearl Gibbs: A Biographical
Tribute’ (1983) 7(1)
Aboriginal History
10, 10 n 1. See also
Heather Goodall, ‘Gibbs, Pearl Mary (Gambanyi) (1901–1983)’ in
Diane Langmore (ed),
Australian Dictionary of Biography
University Press, 2007) vol 17, 429.
Letter from Pearl Gibbs to
President of the League of Nations, 4 July 1938 (ILO Archives, Political Section
1/34895), quoted in Marilyn
Lake, ‘Women’s International
Leadership’ in Joy Damousi, Kim Rubenstein and Mary Tomsic (eds),
Diversity in Leadership: Australian Women, Past and Present
(ANU Press,
2014) 71, 84.
) 85. See further Sophie Rigney,
‘On Hearing Well and Being Well Heard: Indigenous International Law at the
League of Nations’
Third World Approaches to International Law
122, 133–5, cited in Jones (n
) 3 though without discussion of the
particular example of Pearl Gibbs.
‘Conclusions on
Identification of Customary International Law’ [2018] 2(II)
Yearbook of
the International Law Commission
90, 90 (Conclusion 2) (‘Conclusions
on Identification’). On international organisations, see at 97 (Conclusion
4 Commentary
[5]) (citations omitted): the ‘practice of international
organizations in international relations (when accompanied by
) may count as practice that gives rise or attests to rules of
customary international law, but only those rules (a) whose subject
matter falls
within the mandate of the organizations, and/or (b) that are addressed
specifically to them (such as those on their
international responsibility or
relating to treaties to which international organizations may be
parties)’. This reasoning
is applied in Jones (n
‘Conclusions on
Identification’ (n
(Conclusion 6) (on forms of practice), 91 (Conclusion 10) (on forms of
See further Rowan Nicholson,
‘The International Court of Justice as a “Shortcut” to
Identifying Custom’ (2021)
Law and Practice of International
Courts and Tribunals
Douglas Sanders, ‘The UN
Working Group on Indigenous Populations’
(1989) 11(3)
Human Rights
, 407, quoted in Jones (n
United Nations Declaration
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
, GA Res 61/295, UN GAOR, UN Doc
A/RES/61/295 (13 September 2007) annex (‘
Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
1514 (XV), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/RES/1514(XV) (14 December 1960);
Which Should Guide Members in Determining Whether or Not an Obligation Exists to
Transmit the Information Called for in
Article 73(e) of the Charter of the
United Nations
GA Res 1541 (XV), UN GAOR, UN Doc A/RES/1541(XV) (15
December 1960) annex, principle VI;
Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
Accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations
GA Res 2625 (XXV),
UN GAOR, UN Doc A/RES/2625(XXV) (24 October 1970) annex, principle (e)
(‘The establishment of a sovereign
and independent State, the free
association or integration with an independent State or the emergence into any
other political status
freely determined by a people constitute modes of
implementing the right of self-determination’).
Re Secession of Quebec
[1998] 2 SCR 217
, 282–6 [126]–[133]. On Palestine, see Antonio
Self-Determination of Peoples: A Legal Reappraisal
University Press, 1995) 230–48. There is a debate about whether the right
also applies in rare cases of ‘remedial
secession’: see Abhimanyu
George Jain, ‘Bangladesh and the Right of Remedial Secession’ in
Jure Vidmar, Sarah McGibbon
and Lea Raible (eds),
Research Handbook on
(Elgar, 2022) 312.
One remaining
non-self-governing territory that has both an Indigenous population and a
population descended from settlers is the
French ‘sui generis
collectivity’ of New Caledonia: see John Connell, ‘The 2020 New
Caledonia Referendum: The Slow
March to Independence?’ (2021) 56(2)
Journal of Pacific History
) art 46(1).
See ibid 51–8 for
discussion of the relationship between these provisions and art 41.
‘A resolution adopted
by an international organization ... cannot, of itself, create a rule of
customary international law’:
‘Conclusions on Identification’
) 91 (Conclusion 12.1). See further
Willem van Genugten and
Federico Lenzerini, ‘Legal Implementation and International Cooperation
and Assistance: Articles 37–42’
in Jessie Hohmann and Marc Weller
The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: A Commentary
(Oxford University Press, 2018) 539, 570;
Legality of the Threat or Use
of Nuclear Weapons (Advisory Opinion)
[1996] ICJ Rep 226, 255;
‘Conclusions on Identification’ (n
) 108 (Conclusion 12 Commentary
[5]–[6]) (summarising further statements by the Court).
Van Genugten and Lenzerini
) 571 (emphasis in original).
) 198, citing
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
opened for signature 9 May
(entered in force 21 March 1994).
) 198 n 274.
North Sea Continental
Shelf (Federal Republic of Germany v Denmark) (Merits)
[1969] ICJ Rep 3, 43
‘Conclusions on
Identification’ (n
(Conclusion 8.1). In addition, inaction or ‘negative practice’ may,
in limited circumstances, constitute a form of
practice in itself: at 91
(Conclusion 6.1), 99 (Conclusion 6 Commentary [3]).
Daniel Thürer,
‘Soft Law’ (2009) in Anne Peters and Rüdiger Wolfrum (eds),
Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law
(Oxford University
Press, online, September 2024) [5], [37]. See further CM Chinkin, ‘The
Challenge of Soft Law: Development
and Change in International Law’
International & Comparative Law Quarterly
; Mauro Barelli,
‘The Role of Soft Law in the International Legal System: The Case of the
United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples’
International and Comparative Law Quarterly
, both cited in the
discussion of the status of the
in Jones (n
Some of these questions are
discussed in ibid 178–82. Further on the definition of
‘Indigenous’, see José
R Martínez Cobo, Special
Rapporteur,
Study of the Problem of Discrimination against Indigenous
Populations
UN Doc E/CN.4/Sub.2/1986/7 (March 1987) vol 5, 29
[379]–[380], quoted in Jones (n
Convention (No 169)
concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries
opened for signature 27 June
1989, 1650 UNTS 383
(entered into force
5 September 1991) art 1; Ben Saul,
Indigenous Peoples and Human Rights:
International and Regional Jurisprudence
(Hart Publishing, 2016) ch 1.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (112 KB)
PDF format (242 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter