URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith, Leigh; Levine, Pnina; Rohl, Brenda --- "Grades or Work Experience? Student Perceptions of the Relative Importance of Grades & Practice-Based Experience on Graduate Employment" [2025] WALawTRw 2; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 1
GRADES OR WORK EXPERIENCE?
STUDENT PERCEPTIONS OF THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF GRADES & PRACTICE-BASED
EXPERIENCE ON GRADUATE EMPLOYMENT
LEIGH SMITH, PNINA LEVINE & BRENDA ROHL
Which of academic performance or work experience is perceived by students
to be more important for graduate employment? The authors
surveyed student
participants in the Bachelor of Laws, Bachelor of Science and other
Science-related degrees at a Western Australian
university to investigate.
Participants were surveyed in relation to (a) factors related to academic
performance and work experience,
and (b) curricular work experience and
non-curricular work experience, in relation to their perceived importance to
employment outcomes.
Participants also engaged in a hypothetical job candidate
ranking exercise, ranking job candidates with varying academic performance
work experience for a graduate role. The findings show that while many law and
science participants perceived academic performance
to be important, law
participants placed greater importance on academic performance than science
participants did. Some participants
also appeared to be informed by their
perception of the views of industry. Therefore, academic staff and higher
education institutions
must ascertain and have regard to employer perceptions in
relation to
the relative importance of academic performance and work
experience.
I INTRODUCTION
The connection between attendance at university
classes and academic performance has been the subject of considerable research,
in Australia and
internationally.
Working while
studying is often suggested as a reason for student non-attendance and reduced
academic performance.
A related, but less-studied question arises; is
academic performance or work experience perceived as more important for graduate
by students? Such a question is important, in terms of outcomes for
students, and organisationally where ‘graduate employment
are used ‘to gauge institutional
Should academic
staff be emphasising to students the importance of class attendance and
participation, or should they be advising
students to take every possible
opportunity to gain work experience? Is the best approach a combination of the
two? These are the
questions that inform the present study, which is focused on
students’ perceptions of the importance of academic performance
experience across two undergraduate cohorts (law, primarily Bachelor of Laws,
and science, primarily Bachelor of Science)
at a Western Australian university.
This paper is structured as follows. In the next part, an overview of the
relevant literature is provided. The focus here is on studies
that examine
student perceptions with respect to graduate employability and/or employment
outcomes. In Part III, the research question
and aims are outlined, with the
former relating to whether academic performance or work experience is perceived
by students to be
of greater value in obtaining graduate employment. In Part IV,
the research methodology and participant profile are provided. The
current study
used a Qualtrics survey to capture the views of 128 law and science students at
Curtin University in Western Australia.
In Part V, the results of the study are
outlined and analysed, with a focus on the extent to which students view: (i)
academic performance
and work experience as important to obtaining graduate
employment and how, and why, they rank their relative importance (ii) there
be a distinction between the value of curricular and non-curricular work
experience to obtaining graduate employment, and (iii)
the differences between
prospective (hypothetical) job candidates as being relevant to potential
employers making decisions around
who to employ for a graduate position. Part VI
provides a brief commentary on the limitations of the study and opportunities
further research. Finally, the article concludes with a discussion of two
key implications from the study, (a) that students’
perceptions are
influenced by their encounters with industry and (b) that there appears to be a
disciplinary dimension to the relative
importance of grades and work experience,
namely that as a general proposition, law students tend to perceive grades as
more important
than science students.
II LITERATURE OVERVIEW
Employability is frequently discussed in the higher education
literature.
With higher education
funding now often linked to matters such as graduate employment
this attention is likely
to continue. Like others,
paper we adopt a definition of employability developed by Beverley
building upon the work of
Mantz Yorke.
Oliver defines
employability as follows:
Employability means that students and graduates can discern, acquire, adapt
and continually enhance the skills, understandings and
personal attributes that
make them more likely to find and create meaningful paid and unpaid work that
benefit themselves, the workforce,
the community and the
Employability can be distinguished from employment, specifically employment
with the latter often
focused on a student or graduate’s ability to obtain work within a
specified period after
graduation.
Despite their
differences, the two concepts of employability and employment are related, with
the latter often perceived to be indicative
However, it is not
necessarily the case that a student/graduate with high employability will have
positive employment outcomes (and
A range of activities are identified within the literature as helping to
improve students’ employability and employment
For example, Kinash et
al refer to ‘12 different types of strategies’ including, for
example, ‘capstone’
units, ‘careers advice’,
‘international exchange’, and relevantly to the present paper,
employment’ and ‘work
experience’.
Research shows that both employment and work-integrated learning can
positively affect student employment outcomes, however, there
‘potentially damaging effects of working full time in unrelated
The concept of
work-integrated learning within the higher education context consists of
activities designed to blend academic learning
and the development of
capabilities relevant to the
These exist on
something of a scale from, for example, an authentic assessment, such as a
letter to a client based on a real-life
factual scenario to curricular work
experience, such as an internship or placement
or clinical legal
education (legal education designed to mimic legal practise, usually through a
legal clinic overseen by a legal
practitioner), the impact of which has recently
been explored in the literature.
Notably, although there is considerable research on the different types of
activities aimed at improving students’ employability
and employment
outcomes, comparisons between them are
Kinash et al have
authored one of the few comparative pieces of the impact of various activities
on student employability.
identify four key stakeholders in the development of employability and the
promotion of employment outcomes, namely, ‘higher
personnel’, ‘employers’, ‘students’ and
‘graduates’, each of whom has a different
Importantly, according to
Jorre de St Jorre et al, the perceptions of students in this space are
underexplored,
albeit that they
do identify three studies which merit further discussion
The three studies
identified are those of (1) Tymon, (2) Qenani, MacDougall and Sexton, and (3)
the study by Kinash et al referred
Tymon’s study focused on business students in a UK
university.
Data collection took
place through a mixture of focus groups and
Four central questions
were asked, relating to (a) defining employability, (b) components of
employability, (c) the role of the university
in supporting employability, and
(d) the importance of
employability.
Interestingly,
one of Tymon’s key findings was that the student respondents defined
employability, more in reference to employment
outcomes, than broader
conceptualisations.
Importantly,
for the purposes of the present research, Tymon reflected on student perceptions
around academic performance, stating
that ‘[l]ess than 40% of first and
second year groups mentioned qualifications or grades as being connected to
employability,
whereas for employers a degree has almost become a
prerequisite.’
Qenani, MacDougall, and Sexton’s study involved engineering and science
students in the United States of America and took the
focused on matters
including student perceptions of
self-employability.
purposes of the present paper, two findings are worth noting (both of which are
also identified by Jorre de St Jorre, Elliot,
Johnson, and
The first is in
relation to undertaking an internship, with Qenani, MacDougall and Sexton
finding that ‘students who report
work experience gained through an
during their academic studies had an odds ratio of 2.482
meaning that as a result of an internship they were almost 2.5 times more
to feel highly confident of their
employability,’
that internships are an effective mechanism to boost a student’s
self-confidence. Second, academic performance was
also relevant, with ‘a
self-reported GPA of 3.00 and above ... result[ing] in a student being 1.64
times more likely to feel
highly confident of their
employability.’
while these results suggest that students perceive both internship and academic
performance as contributing to employability,
the higher confidence gained
through participation in an internship may suggest work experience activities,
such as an internship,
are more influential.
Given that the current research is concerned with the extent to which
students in law and science perceive academic performance and
work experience as
contributing to employment outcomes, the results of the studies of both Tymon,
and Qenani, MacDougall and Sexton
provide interesting points of potential
comparison. The third study, by Kinash et al is less directly relevant to the
present paper.
While it focuses on the use by students of a range of
‘employability strategies’ (twelve are identified, some of which
listed above) the role of academic performance receives limited
However, there is one
interesting observation, linked to the second of the three key areas the present
research explores, namely
curricular versus non-curricular work experience.
Kinash et al make the point that ‘[n]umerous project participants shared
their perception that part-time employment is rarely aligned with the
graduates’ future careers and overall is perceived to
take away from time
available to participate in strategies that authentically develop career
experience’.
This finding
suggests that there is a need for activities such as part-time employment to be
sufficiently connected to the student’s
projected career path, in order to
improve employability.
In their research, Jorre de St Jorre et al used data from a mixture of a
preliminary survey, focus groups and interviews to examine
‘understanding and priorities related to employment and
employability’ of 138 undergraduate science students across
universities.
Particularly
relevant for present purposes, ‘[a]lmost all students (96%) reported that
they thought about their employment
suggesting that
employment outcomes are an important concern for university students. Connected
to that, Jorre de St Jorre et al
found that ‘students were more focused on
employment than employability’, that is, finding work to support
was the priority, even over, in some cases, the relevance of that job
to their future career.
work experience was identified as important, participants distinguished between
discipline/career related work experience and
unrelated work experience, with
some perceiving the latter to be of limited
reflecting a similar
point of view to that identified by Kinash et al with respect to the
participants in their study.
Significantly, in the discussion of their results, Jorre de St Jorre et al
observe that ‘[w]ith the exception of students who
required particular
grades for further study, grades were not perceived as being particularly
influential ... as long as the grades
were sufficient to
This presents an
interesting contrast to other research, such as that of Qenani, MacDougall and
Sexton, which, as outlined above,
did find that academic performance could help
build a student’s self-confidence with respect to
employability.
Subsequent to the work of Jorre de St Jorre et al, there have been further
studies that have examined the relative benefits of different
activities to
employment.
However, these are
not focused on students’ perceptions of the relative importance of work
experience and academic performance
to employment outcomes for students, and so
will not be considered further.
III RESEARCH QUESTION AND AIMS
The research question guiding the present study is:
Which of academic performance or work experience is perceived by students to
be more important for graduate employment?
As can be seen from the above question, it is the student perspective that is
the focus of the data collection and analysis. Consequently,
the aims of this
study are to:
1. Understand and explore student perceptions on the relative importance of
(a) academic performance and (b) work experience for graduate
employment;
2. Investigate whether students perceive a difference in the value of (a)
curricular and (b) non-curricular work experience for graduate
employment;
3. Identify the implications of (1) and (2) for educators in the higher
education sector.
IV METHODOLOGY AND PARTICIPANT PROFILE
The data for this study was collected through a Qualtrics survey of
undergraduate students enrolled in law and science courses at
Curtin University
in Western Australia. A mixture of quantitative data (primarily Likert scales
and rankings) and qualitative data
(free text) was collected, along with
relevant demographic data. The cohort surveyed were Bachelor of Laws (LLB)
students and Science
students (primarily, but not exclusively, Bachelor of
Science students). These cohorts were selected because work experience (for
example, legal clerkships) is not specifically required for course completion,
as compared to other courses, such as
This study received approval from the Curtin University Human Research Ethics
Committee (approval number: HRE2023-0546). Potential
participants were fully
informed about the purpose of the survey, their rights as participants, and the
potential risks and benefits
associated with their participation. Measures to
ensure anonymity and confidentiality were assured. Additionally, any conflict of
interest and power differentials were considered and mitigated against.
A total of 128 students participated in the survey, although not every
participant answered every question. There were 47 Bachelor
of Laws (single
degree and double degree) participants (‘Law Participants’), 73
Bachelor of Science (single degree and
double degree) participants, and another
8 participants enrolled in other, science-related, degrees (‘Science
Participants’).
The vast majority (92%) of participants were studying full
time (44 Law Participants, 74 Science Participants). Eleven Science Participants
were international students. While no international LLB students participated,
this is unsurprising as most of this cohort at the
university is domestic.
Participants were at various stages of their degree (36 at 0-24%, 28 at
25-49%, 27 at 50-74%, and 37 at 75% or more completion). There
was a mixture of
Course Weighted Averages (3 between 0-49%, 12 between 50-59%, 39 between 60-69%,
51 between 70-79%, and 23 at 80%
or above). These figures are broken down
further in Table 1.
Table 1. Participant Course Completion and Course Weighted Averages
Approximate Completion (%)
Course Weighted Average (%)
Information on gender and age was also collected towards the end of the
survey, resulting in a reduced response rate. There were an
almost equal number
of female and male participants (34:33) with one non-binary respondent. While
there was some variation in age,
most participants (77%) were aged between
18-24. In the following discussion, the primary point of comparison is between
of Law Participants and Science Participants, not between the views of
other demographic groups within these courses.
V RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The following analysis of the results is organised into three key areas: (a)
factor rating and ranking, (b) a comparison of curricular
and non-curricular
work experience, and (c) the evaluation of hypothetical job candidates.
A Factor Rating/Ranking
Participants were asked to rate the importance (and then rank) nine factors
relating to academic performance, work experience, and
other matters, through
the following question:
How important do you think each of the factors listed below will be to a
prospective employer, when considering who to recruit for
There were 32 Law Participants and 51 Science Participants who responded to
this question. The results of the factor rating for Very
Important and Important
are extracted in Table 2 below.
Table 2. The Rating of Nine Factors perceived by Law Participants and
Science Participants as
Very Important
Law Participants Importance Percentage
Science Participants Importance Percentage
Importance Difference
Academic Performance
The amount and/or length of any legal or science-based work
The nature and/or tasks of any legal or science-based work experience
Work experience, not directly relevant to the legal or science-based
graduate position
The business (area of legal or scientific practice) of the host or employer
for the legal or science-based work experience)
Legal or science-based work experience within the hiring employer’s
Higher education provider (university)
The reputation of the host or employer for the legal or science-based work
Specific Unit(s) Studied
It is possible to make several observations about the data in Table 2. First,
speaking generally, Law Participants tended to view
the factors as more
important than Science Participants, with six of the factors having a higher
rating for Law Participants than
for Science Participants. Second, Law
Participants placed a greater importance on academic performance than Science
Participants,
with 87.5% of Law students rating it as Very Important or
Important, but only 68.6% of Science students giving it the same rating
it the factor with the greatest importance difference). Overall, however, this
aspect of the present research is more consistent
with the findings of Qenani,
MacDougall and Sexton,
academic performance is viewed as important by a majority of both Law
Participants and Science Participants, contrasted to
that of Jorre de St Jorre
et al who found it to be of limited
importance.
Noting that both
previous studies involved science students (and not law students), the present
findings suggest that there may be
a discipline influence on student
perceptions. Third, the highest rated factor for both Law Participants and
Science Participants
the nature and/or tasks of any legal or science-based
work experience undertaken
, suggesting that both law and science students
recognise the value that work-experience related to their career can provide.
and not shown in Table 2, when considering Very Important only it is
or science-based work experience within the hiring
employer’s workplace
, which is rated highest for both Law Participants
(68.8%) and Science Participants (58.8%).
Having rated the importance of each factor, students were then asked to rank
them, with Rank 1 as the most important factor. As with
the previous question,
32 Law Participants and 51 Science Participants responded here. Table 3 sets out
the three highest (or four
highest, where there is an equal split) factors for
Rank 1 and Rank 2.
Table 3. The Ranking of the Nine Factors (where Rank 1 is the most
important).
Law Participants
Science Participants
Academic performance (43.8%)
Legal or Science-based work-experience within the hiring employer’s
workplace (39.2%)
Second Highest
Legal or Science-based work-experience within the hiring employer’s
workplace (15.6%)
The nature and/or tasks of any legal or Science-based work experience
undertaken (17.6%)
Third Highest
The nature and/or tasks of any legal or Science-based work experience
undertaken (12.5%)
Academic Performance (11.8%)
The amount and/or length of any legal or Science-based work experience
Legal or Science-based work-experience within the hiring employer’s
workplace (31.3%)
The nature and/or tasks of any legal or Science-based work experience
undertaken (23.5%)
Second Highest
Specific unit studied (21.9%)
The amount and/or length of any legal or Science-based work experience
Third Highest
The amount and/or length of any legal or Science-based work experience
Academic performance (19.6%)
Legal or Science-based work-experience within the hiring employer’s
workplace (19.6%)
As can be seen from Table 3,
academic performance
single highest Rank 1 factor (43.8%) for Law Participants, while for Science
Participants, it was equal third (11.8%). Clearly,
therefore, Law Participants
perceive academic performance as more important to gaining graduate employment
when compared to Science
Participants. By contrast, for Science Participants,
legal or science-based work experience within the hiring employer’s
was the single highest Rank 1 factor (39.2%), compared to the
second highest Rank 1 factor for Law Participants (15.6%). More so than
Participants, Science Participants appear to perceive a benefit in seeking to
gain employment with an employer with whom they
have already worked. However,
looking at the ranking more holistically, it is notable that six of the nine
factors relate to work
experience in some way (excluding
performance
specific unit(s) studied
higher education
). When these are combined, 50% of Law Participants (n=16/32) and
80.4% of Science Participants (n=41/51) ranked a work experience
factor Rank 1.
While it is still clear that work experience is viewed more importantly by
Science Participants than Law Participants,
even for Law Participants, 50%
deemed an aspect of work experience the most important factor. The qualitative
data helps to shed
light on why this is the
Amongst the Law Participants who perceived academic performance to be more
important than work experience, ranking it first, three
main themes can be
identified from the qualitative data. First, there was a general perception of
the importance of academic performance.
For example:
I believe to even get past the initial stage - grades are vital. ... (Law
Academic performance is an objective indicator of the intelligence and
diligence of a potential employee. ... (Law student).
Importantly, the fact that they perceived academic performance to be the most
important did not mean that work experience was unimportant.
For example, the
second student quoted above went on to say:
... Legal experience is the second most important indicator because *almost*
anyone can study law but the majority will not be good
at practicing it or have
any passion for it. (Law student).
Second, Law Participants drew attention to their experience in seeking work,
and the views that they had developed through those processes.
For example:
Throughout my experience, my academic performance has always been the
baseline for my competitiveness. Throughout my interviews, relatively
importance was placed on my progression throughout my degree, and the narrative
that I was able to attach to my academic performance
throughout the degree. This
may partly be due to me having relatively limited legal experience, however, it
did feel like my practical
experiences were seen as a bit of a box to be ticked.
(Law student).
I left them in the order they appeared because that's what made the most
sense to me. Additionally, when speakers came to divulge
their experiences when
I was in first year, they stated that employers where scrutinising their
academic performance and questioned
them about it during interviews. Being that
law encourages a lot of networking, it seems to be a lot about who you know AND
you know. (Law student).
For students like these, the voice and perception of those in the legal
profession was particularly significant in the formulation
of their own views.
Interestingly, the voice of academic staff (the third theme) was viewed with a
degree of scepticism. For example:
It was explained by a lecturer in first year that we should focus on getting
good grades over working as that was most important thing
to employers - it now
appears to be quite dated advice. (Law student).
In first year a lecturer explained that we were better off studying than
working as it would detract from our grades, that has made
me think that the
importance in industry is placed on marks which may be incorrect. I have noticed
that the work experience students
have a good understanding of practical tasks
like legal letters. ... (Law student).
Comments such as these highlight the need for academic staff and higher
education institutions more broadly to understand what is
valued by industry
with respect to graduate employment. Engagement with industry could help inform
career-related advice provided
by academic staff to students.
While only 11.8% of Science Participants ranked academic performance Rank 1,
the reasons given broadly reflect those of the Law Participants
(ie, a general
perception that academic performance is more important and a perception that
employers value academic performance
above experience). For example:
I believe , Skill set is more Important than experience . I am from IT
background and with rapid changes in technology and frameworks,
catch-up with them. (Science student).
Academic performance would be key for the employers to choose candidates.
(Science student).
Given that Science Participants ranked
legal or science-based
work-experience within the hiring employer’s workplace
as the most
prominent Rank 1 factor, it is also useful to consider how they reached their
conclusion. Some made relatively general
observations about the value of work
experience. For example:
Work experience will trump anything for a employer, academic results are
almost a nonfactor once you have worked a couple jobs/positions
in the field.
(Science student).
I feel that relevant work experience is highly preferred over academic
achievements. (Science student).
Other Science Participants provided a greater level of detail, drawing
specific attention to the significance of having previously
worked for the
prospective employer:
Having work experience with the hiring employer gives you an extreme
advantage when applying, knowing people in the workforce will
almost always land
you the job over someone who doesn't even if you are slightly less qualified.
... (Science student).
Unless there were issues, I expect employers would preference people they
have already worked with as they have already formed a relationship.
they have already demonstrated some competency in the role either within the
business or another similar company, that would
be weighted higher than academic
performance, which does not always reflect performance in an actual workplace.
... (Science student).
The weight employers are perceived to place on work experience is reflected
in multiple responses:
In the mining industry, companies are desperate for geologists so the work is
plentiful. What determines your rank and ability to
be employed is due to the
amount of experience you have and not determined by academic performance. I have
a high weighted average
grade and have been turned down by companies because I
had no experience. I applied for a vacation program spot ... and got turned
for the role. ... As mining was my only experience with some transferable skills
to the oil and gas industry, I thought it would
be good to highlight those
skills to the interviewers, however I was told I talked too much about it.
Overall, I think employers
are seeking worker's with experience regarding the
nature of their business. (Science student).
As a recent graduate who went into the work force and has come back my
seniors and bosses at my work places all valued work experience
and specific
industry experience over everything else and lowkey pretty much said the
education system does nothing since they teach
you everything in the field
anyway and recent grads arent taught how to apply their knowledge / real world
skills.. which is why
ive ranked any sort of work experience above academics
..they also really didnt care where i studied..just that I had the degree
looked for. (Science student).
Law Participants who ranked discipline-related work experience with the
hiring employer first (ie, above academic performance) also
drew attention to
both the value of a prior work experience with the prospective employer and the
role of employer perceptions:
... I put experience within the employer's workplace #1 because it is the
only direct proof to an employer of work quality, the rest
are proxies. ... (Law
In my experience as someone who has both worked and studied in law since
2020, I feel that my workplace experience in law has been
what has given me
access to employment opportunities. I feel this way because when I get through
to job interviews for law clerk
and paralegal roles, I am asked far more about
my work experience in law than my academic experience and academic performance.
job applicant with real-world practical skills but mediocre grades will be
looked upon more favourably than one with an exceptional
academic record but a
lack of real-world experience. (Law student).
From previous experience I have heard multiple directors of law firms say
they prefer experience over grades. However students who
are achieving very low
grades would likely not be considered. (Law student).
The final student quotation above (noting it is from a law, not a science,
student) presents the notion of grades as a threshold,
that is, a minimum
required for serious consideration by a prospective employer, but beyond which
they are of limited utility. To
an extent, this echoes Jorre de St Jorre et
al’s findings discussed above (in that provided a student passes, grades
are generally
Arguably, however, the
most prevalent theme across the responses is that related to the voice of
industry. Both Law Participant and
Science Participant views as to the relative
importance of academic performance and work experience seem to be particularly
by what those in industry have told them, whether directly or indirectly.
B Curricular or Non-Curricular?
The second major area of investigation centred on the significance (if any)
of a distinction between curricular and non-curricular
work experience. Students
were asked:
Do you think it matters to a prospective employer whether the legal or
science-based work experience is undertaken as part of a course
(eg, internship
for credit) or not?
The results, provided by 32 Law students and 49 Science students, are set out
in Table 4.
Table 4. Law and Science student perceptions on whether it matters to
employers that work experience is undertaken as part of a course.
Law Participants (n=32)
Science Participants (n=49)
Interestingly, the difference in percentage of Law Participants and Science
Participants that responded
to the question (ie, that there is a
difference in curricular vs non-curricular work experience) was very small
(within 1%). For
these students, the dominant theme was the perception that
choosing to undertake work experience (rather than being required to undertake
it) showed character and commitment:
I think it is relatively important as work experience is always valuable,
however, showing that you have worked outside of your courses
parameters (able
to get a job on your own) shows great independence and ability. (Law
There's a big difference between enforced work experience versus work
experience of a students own initiative. If a student is willing
to seek work
experience with their own initiative, it shows interest to develop experience in
that respective field. This is a demonstration
of the applicants character.
(Science student).
responses had a greater degree of
divergence than the
response (3.9% for Maybe, 4.6% for No), the
differences were both under 5%. For the
responses, it was the outcome
of the work experience, not how it was obtained, that was the central
consideration:
I don't think it matters to a prospective employer whether work experience is
undertaken as a part of a course. I think it just matters
as to whether there
has been ANY work experience. ... (Law student).
Any work experience is good work experience, most employers don't care how
you got it but what you did during it and how well you
can demonstrate those
things in both the resume and interview. (Science student).
Within each discipline, it was the
response (40.6% Law
Participants, 36.7% Science Participants) that received the most votes. This
suggests that there is a degree
of uncertainty about the extent to which the
curricular vs non-curricular work experience is important. In addition, there is
difference in the
responses (a difference of
3.2% for Law Participants, in favour of Yes, and a difference of 2.1% for
Science Participants, in favour
of No), suggesting that this area is opportune
for additional feedback from employers and industry.
C Hypothetical Job Candidates
The third major area for investigation involved asking students to rank six
hypothetical job candidates, with a mixture of academic
performance and work
experience:
Consider the hypothetical job candidates below. Please rank them in order (by
dragging and dropping) of the likelihood of being recruited
by a prospective
employer for a graduate position (with one being the most likely). Where the
candidate has undertaken any work experience,
assume they have performed to a
satisfactory standard.
The six hypothetical job candidates were:
is a final year single degree student in your discipline.
They have a course weighted average of 70%. In addition to their academic
performance, they have undertaken one discipline-specific internship unit (with
a notable employer in your discipline).
is a final year single degree student in your discipline.
They have a course weighted average of 70%. In addition to their academic
performance, they have been employed on a part-time (one day per week) basis for
the last year with a notable employer in your discipline.
is a final year single degree student in your discipline.
They have a course weighted average of 70%. They have not undertaken any
discipline related work experience but have extensive work experience in an
unrelated field.
is a final year single degree student in your discipline.
They have a course weighted average of 85%. They have not undertaken any
experience.
is a final year single degree student in your discipline.
They have a course weighted average of 70%. In addition to their academic
performance, they have been previously employed by your firm/business on a
4-week summer project.
is a final year single degree student in your discipline.
They have a course weighted average of 60%. In addition to their academic
performance, they have worked in the discipline for five years on a part time
basis, with a leading employer.
As can be seen from the above description of each hypothetical job candidate,
there is a range in Course Weighted Average (60% to
85%) as well as in the
nature, duration, and type (curricular or non-curricular) of work experience.
Table 5 shows the results of
the ranking, focused on Rank 1 and Rank 2, as well
as Rank 6, with Rank 1 being the hypothetical job candidate most likely to be
recruited. There were 30 Law students and 42 Science students who responded to
this question.
Table 5. Law Participant and Science Participant rankings of hypothetical
job candidates
as to the likelihood of being recruited by a prospective
employer for a graduate position (where Rank 1 is the most likely).
Law Participants (n=30)
Science Participants (n=42)
Second Highest
Third Highest
Second Highest
Third Highest
Second Highest
Third Highest
Table 5 shows that Law Participants rated candidates K and M the highest.
Both are similar, with a 70% course weighted average. The
key distinctions
between the two are in the duration of the work experience and whether it was
with the employer in question or a
different, but notable, employer in the
field. Candidates K and M also featured highly in the Science
Participants’ rankings.
Consequently, the data would tend to suggest that
both Law Participants and Science Participants consider that a mixture of solid
academic performance and some relevant work experience is desirable. This notion
of balance is reflected in a number of the qualitative
responses to this
I ranked the candidates this way as I tried to find a balance between quality
and amount of work experience and grades. Overall, I
did place amount of work
experience higher than grades. (Law student).
I feel like they would want people with good knowledge of the discipline but
also relevant work experience where possible, I feel
like a balance of both
would be preferred over very good employment experience or very good grades.
(Law student).
Although academic performance is important, experience, particularly within
the field (and even more so with the specific business)
is likely more valuable
to employers since they may prioritise applicants that don’t need as much
training/hand holding and
are ready contributors to the business. (Science
A balanced good performance in uni and work experience in a related field is
the best. (Science student).
However, it is X and O that are arguably the most interesting. Despite being
the highest performing student academically (with a course
weighted average of
85%), X has no work experience. Law Participants and Science Participants
treated X very differently. For Law
Participants, X was rated 1
by 4, and 6
by 7. However, for Science
Participants, X was rated 1
by 19 (and 5
by 18). The Science Participants’
perception on X was clearly, therefore, overwhelmingly negative, whereas for
law, X drew
both strongly positive and negative views. O (with a course weighted
average of 60%), by contrast, was viewed very positively by
many Science
Participants, rated 1
by only 2. However, for Law Participants, the response to O was
very mixed, rated 1
by 3, and 6
by 8. Two points
can be made with respect to X and O. First, there are clearly some Law
Participants who view strong academic performance
as imperative, and able to
overcome a lack of work experience. That view is not shared by those Science
Participants. However, the
second point is that there are many Science
Participants who believe that a weaker academic performance can be overcome by
work experience. The Law Participant responses are far more mixed on
this point.
Significantly, Law Participants and Science Participants were united in their
treatment of S. While S had a decent, but not exceptional,
course weighted
average (70%), they did not have any discipline related work experience
(although they did have some work experience).
S was ranked 6
the most Law Participants and Science Participants, at 40% and 47.6%
respectively. S, therefore, reflects the risks identified
by Jackson and others
that work experience not clearly connected to a student’s discipline can
VI LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH
While the present research offers insight into student perceptions of the
relative importance of academic performance and practice-based
experience for
graduate employment, there are some limitations, which could help inform further
research in this space. First, the
qualitative data makes clear that
employer/industry voice is a key consideration in how students perceive the
relative importance
of academic performance and work experience. As part of the
broader research project, the research team developed and piloted an
survey instrument, with a view to wider distribution in the future. While the
number of responses from the pilot is too
small (five law and three science
employers, although not all completed every question) to fully draw out the
possible implications,
they do allude to the possibility that the student
perception of what employers’ value in making decisions around graduate
employment may not be entirely accurate. For example, five employers (three law
and two science) answered the hypothetical job candidate
question. Notably, four
of the five (two law, two science) ranked O last (the other law employer ranked
X last). Further, three law
employers indicated that a minimum course weighted
average for recruitment existed in their organisation (one between 60-69%, one
between 70-79%, and the other did not disclose the range), and two indicated no.
One science employer indicated they did (70-79%)
and one indicated no. Further
research is necessary to explore employer perceptions on matters relating to
graduate employment, to
better inform stakeholders. Second, the present study is
a point-in-time perspective. Further research could incorporate a longitudinal
component, measuring changes (if any) in student perceptions over time, looking
at the evolution of their views over the course of
their degree and into
graduate employment. Third, the present study was focused on a single
institution; there could be value in
a multi-institutional comparison. Finally,
the survey did not ask students what their own career aspirations were or if
a specific job in contemplation when undertaking the survey. Some
students may have been thinking about a particular type of position
completed the survey (for example, even within the legal industry there are
potentially a variety of graduate roles). Further
research could seek to
integrate each participant’s specific career aspirations with their
responses to broader questions around
their perceptions of grades and work
experience.
VII CONCLUSION
The present research has sought to build on the existing literature and
explore student perceptions on the relative importance of
both academic
performance and work experience on employment outcomes. Two main implications
can be drawn from the analysis. First,
many Law Participants and Science
Participants appear to view both academic performance and work experience as
important for graduate
employment outcomes. However, the results show that a
distinction may be able to be drawn between the perceptions of students in
different disciplines, as Law Participants appeared to place greater importance
on academic performance than Science Participants.
Whether such a disciplinary
distinction is present in the views of employers and industry is a matter for
further research. Second,
it is imperative that academic staff and higher
education institutions ascertain and have regard to student and employer
perceptions
of the relative importance of academic performance and work
experience. As seen above, some students regard the views of academic
a degree of hesitancy. Higher education institutions and their staff must
familiarise themselves with current industry
expectations, whether that be
through research, advice from advisory boards and similar bodies, or even
informal discussions with
industry contacts. Understanding what industry values
in a graduate employee can allow academic staff and higher education
institutions
to communicate more accurately to their students on the relative
merits of academic performance and work experience. Evidence-based
messaging, at
all stages of a student’s degree, could be used to better manage student
expectations and inform priorities.
Such insights could also help to further
shape the embedding of work-integrated learning in higher education.
Leigh Smith is a Lecturer at Curtin Law School, Faculty of
Business and Law, Curtin University. Pnina Levine is a Senior Lecturer
Law School, Faculty of Business and Law, Curtin University. Brenda Rohl is an
Associate Professor at the School of Molecular
and Life Sciences, Faculty of
Science and Engineering, Curtin University. This paper is an updated and
expanded version of a presentation
delivered at the Western Australian Teachers
of Law (WATOL) forum on
9 July 2024. The
authors would like to thank Dr Simon Allison, A/Prof Margo Brewer, and Kenyon
Lee for their contributions to the
broader research project, A/Prof Sonia Ferns
for her guidance, and the anonymous peer reviewer for their valuable feedback on
earlier draft. In addition, the authors wish to acknowledge the support of a
Curtin Academy / Learning, Innovation, and Teaching
Excellence Centre (LITEC)
Mentorship Circle grant.
See, eg, Louis Winnifred et al, ‘Teaching Psychology in
Australia: Does Class Attendance Matter for Performance’ (2016)
Australian Journal of Psychology
47; R Nazim Khan, ‘Attendance
Matters: Student Performance and Attitudes’ (2022) 30(4)
International
Journal of Innovation in Science and Mathematics Education
42; Siobhan Lucey
and Maria Grydaki, ‘University Attendance and Academic Performance:
Encouraging Student Engagement’
Scottish Journal of Political
Khan (n 1) 60; Caitlin Cassidy,
‘“The Death of Campus Life”: First Major Australian University
Dumps Face-to-Face
Lectures, Leaving Staff “Furious”’,
(Web Page, 13 September 2024)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2024/sep/13/adelaide-university-dumps-face-to-face-lectures>;
Jedidajah Otte, ‘“I See Little Point”: UK University Students
on Why Attendance has Plummeted’,
The Guardian
(Web Page, 28 May
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/article/2024/may/28/i-see-little-point-uk-university-students-on-why-attendance-has-plummeted>;
Denise Jackson, ‘The Relationship between Student Employment,
Employability-Building Activities and Graduate Outcomes’
(2024) 48(1)
Journal of Further and Higher Education
14, 14 citing Ralph Hall,
‘The Work-Study Relationship: Experiences of Full-Time University Students
Undertaking Part-Time
Employment (2010) 23(5)
Journal of Education and
Anna Rowe, Denise Jackson, and
Jenny Fleming, ‘Exploring University Student Engagement and Sense of
Belonging During Work-Integrated
Learning’ (2023) 75(3)
Vocational Education and Training
See, eg, Denise Jackson and
Anna Rowe, ‘Impact of Work-Integrated Learning and Co-Curricular
Activities on Graduate Labour
Force Outcomes’ (2023) 48(3)
Higher Education
490; Trina Jorre de St Jorre and Beverley Oliver,
‘Want Students to Engage? Contextualise Graduate Learning Outcomes and
for Employability’ (2018) 37(1)
Higher Education Research and
Development
44; Shelley Kinash et al, ‘Discrepant Stakeholder
Perspectives on Graduate Employability Strategies’ (2016) 35(5)
Education Research and Development
951; Alex Tymon, ‘The Student
Perspective on Employability’ (2013) 38(6)
Studies in Higher Education
Jackson (n 2) 15; Denise
Jackson and Ruth Bridgstock, ‘What Actually Works to Enhance Graduate
Employability? The Relative
Value of Curricular, Co-Curricular, and
Extra-Curricular Graduate Learning and Paid Work’ (2021) 81
Trina Jorre de St Jorre et al,
‘Science Students’ Conception of Factors that will Differentiate
them in the Graduate
Employment Market’ (2019) 10(1)
Teaching and Learning for Graduate Employability
Beverley Oliver,
‘Redefining Graduate Employability and Work-Integrated Learning: Proposals
for Effective Higher Education
in Disrupted Economies’ (2015) 6(1)
Journal of Teaching and Learning for Graduate Employability
Mantz Yorke,
Employability
in Higher Education: What It Is – What It is Not
(Report, Learning and
Employability Series 1, 2006) 8.
Oliver (n 7) 59.
Jackson and Rowe (n 4) 490;
Tymon (n 4) 842–3.
Kinash et al (n 4)
Jackson and Rowe (n 4) 490.
Jackson and Bridgstock (n 5)
725. Cf Jill Alexander and Carol Boothby, 'Stakeholder Perceptions of Clinical
Legal Education within
an Employability Context' (2018) 25(3)
International
Journal of Clinical Legal Education
53, 56, who have stated that
‘[b]eing employable is obviously a pre-requisite to being employed but not
all employable people
can transition to employment’.
Denise Jackson and Michael
Tomlinson, ‘The Relative Importance of Work Experience, Extra-Curricular
and University-Based Activities
on Student Employability’ (2022) 41(4)
Higher Education Research and Development
1119, 1120; Kinash et al (n 4).
Kinash et al (n 4)
Jackson (n 2) 27. See also
Jorre de St Jorre et al (n
Alexander and Boothby (n
Jackson and Bridgstock (n 5)
Kinash et al (n 4).
Jorre de St Jorre et al (n
Tymon (n 4); Eivis Qenani,
Neal MacDougall, Carol Sexton, ‘An Empirical Study of Self-Perceived
Employability: Improving the
Prospects for Student Employment Success in an
Uncertain Environment’ (2014) 15(3)
Active Learning in Higher
199; Kinash et al (n 4).
Tymon (n 4) 842.
Ibid 849–50.
Ibid 850 (citation
Qenani, MacDougall and
Sexton (n 25) 203.
Jorre de St Jorre (n 4)
Qenani, MacDougall and
Sexton (n 25) 207–8.
Kinash et al (n 4).
Jorre de St Jorre et al (n
Kinash et al (n 4) 959.
Jorre de St Jorre et al (n
Qenani, MacDougall and
Sexton (n 25) 208.
See, eg, Jackson (n 2);
Jackson and Bridgstock (n 5).
See, eg, the compulsory
practicum units in Curtin University’s Bachelor of Education (Primary
Education): Curtin University,
Bachelor of Education (Primary Education)
(Web Page, 2024)
<https://handbook.curtin.edu.au/courses/course-ug-bachelor-of-education-primary-education--b-edprv4>.
Qenani, MacDougall and
Sexton (n 25) 208.
Jorre de St Jorre (n 6)
Where student quotations
have been used, they are unedited and therefore may contain grammatical and
other errors.
Jorre de St Jorre (n 6)
Jackson (n 2) 27. See also:
Kinash et al (n 4) 959; Jorre de St Jorre et al (n 6) 34.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (265 KB)
PDF format (624 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter