URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ANZCompuLawJl/2022/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:13:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lee, Karen; Wilding, Derek --- "The ACCC s Proposed Digital Platform Ombuds Scheme: Does It Go Far Enough?" [2022] ANZCompuLawJl 8; (2022) 94 Computers & Law, Article 8
I BACKGROUND
II A NEW INDEPENDENT EXTERNAL OMBUDS SCHEME?
III AN EXPANDED TIO?
IV EXPANDED TIO IS PREFERABLE BUT MULTIPLE TYPES OF COMPLAINTS ARE LEFT WITHOUT ANY MEANS OF EXTERNAL RESOLUTION
THE ACCC’S PROPOSED DIGITAL PLATFORM OMBUDS SCHEME:
DOES IT GO FAR ENOUGH?
DEREK WILDING
A proposal by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission for the
establishment of a new Digital Platform Ombuds Scheme is
being considered by the
Australian government. Drawing on our research into options for digital platform
complaint handling, and
a round table consultation we held with industry,
government and consumers at the end of 2022, we support the proposal and also
that the existing Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman scheme could be
adapted for this purpose. Using a typology for digital platform
complaints that
we developed as part of our research, we observe that the proposed ombuds scheme
would cover only ‘transactional’
platforms, such as unmet contractual obligations. Recognising the likely
expansion of complaints
between end-users, and the fluidity of complaint types,
we argue for a more comprehensive approach that would address a broader range
complaints, coupled with the development of internal dispute resolution
In November 2022, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
recommended the creation of a new independent external
ombuds scheme to help
address the market power imbalance that exists between consumers and digital
Government is now deciding whether a new scheme is warranted or if an existing
body such as the Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman
(TIO) should undertake
‘any or all functions proposed for the new
Drawing on our research, report and round table consultation exploring
options for an external dispute resolution scheme for digital
we argue that, while an expanded TIO is preferable, the adoption of either
option would be a significant, positive step forward for
consumers. However,
with its narrow focus on what can be characterised as
‘transactional’ complaints that users make
against platforms, the
proposed scheme leaves consumers and citizens without an external avenue to
resolve complaints against platforms
that are more ‘social’ in
nature, as well as complaints that users make against each other (rather than
against the platform
itself). Attention needs be directed to the former in the
medium term (if not sooner) and to the latter in the medium to longer
I BACKGROUND
In its 2019 Digital Platforms Inquiry (DPI) Final Report, which included a
series of recommendations designed to address the market
power of some digital
platforms, the ACCC made two suggestions for improving the way platforms handle
complaints from customers.
Recommendation 22 proposed that the Australian Communications and Media
Authority (ACMA) develop standards that would apply to internal
resolution (‘IDR’), while Recommendation 23 proposed the
establishment of an ombuds scheme to deal with escalated
complaints under
external dispute resolution (‘EDR’). The ACCC suggested the TIO be
considered for the role, or if that
were not feasible, then a standalone ombuds
be established. The ACCC also said any ombuds scheme should be expected to
complaints relating to scam content, business users’ complaints
involving advertising campaigns and suspended business accounts,
but added the
ACMA should ‘consult broadly to identify all areas which could benefit
from the recommended ombudsman
The then Coalition government did not endorse the ACCC’s suggestion
concerning the ACMA, but it gave in-principle support to
Recommendations 22 and
23, proposing that the ACCC work with the major platforms on a pilot EDR scheme
that could inform any decision
to establish a Digital Platform
By 2021, the Department
of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications
commissioned some background research
into digital platform
complaints.
However, a pilot EDR
scheme with the major platforms was never developed.
In 2022, the ACCC repeated its call for the adoption of IDR standards and an
external ombuds scheme in a Discussion
and Interim Report No
relating to its Digital
Platform Services Inquiry. However, in Interim Report No 5, published in
November, the ACCC changed its thinking
role of an ombuds. Whereas previously it had suggested that the TIO could be
considered, the
ACCC concluded that ‘an industry-specific ombuds would be
preferable given that an existing body may not have the capability
and capacity
to undertake this
In addition,
although it suggested
further consideration should be given to the types
of disputes the ombuds should handle, the ACCC indicated the scheme would
be expected to resolve user complaints concerning the conduct of the
digital platforms involving customers’ unmet contractual
expectations (eg
decisions to suspend services or terminate their accounts) and/or infringement
of an amended Australian Consumer
Existing industry ombuds and regulators do not currently have jurisdiction to
resolve any of the complaints mentioned by the ACCC
in Interim Report No 5.
Consequently, if digital platform customers are to have recourse to EDR for
these complaints, a new independent
body will need to be created or the
functions of an existing body expanded. A key question is which option is best?
II A NEW INDEPENDENT
EXTERNAL OMBUDS SCHEME?
A new body would avoid some of the complexities, identified in our July 2022
involving modifications
to the constitutions and funding arrangements of existing
In the case of the TIO,
modifications would be needed to accommodate an expansion of its memberships to
digital platforms –
arguably enabling faster scheme set up and quicker
redress for consumers. In contrast, a new scheme would involve the creation of
brand new body and require this body to set up the kind of administrative
frameworks under which existing schemes operate. It would
also require resources
to educate consumers about the new scheme to ensure the scheme had some consumer
brand recognition –
recognition that existing schemes already enjoy.
Further, a new ombuds scheme might not be able to fully leverage the deep
and expertise of dispute resolution gained by existing schemes.
Existing regulators and schemes would need to be willing to work
with the new
stand-alone scheme. And given the possibility of some complaints made to the new
body raising additional matters that
fall within the jurisdiction of multiple
regulators and schemes, the development of new memoranda of understanding and
other administrative
arrangements between all potentially relevant parties would
III AN EXPANDED
In our July 2022 report, we also considered whether nine existing bodies and
regulators could potentially handle the types of complaints
identified by the
ACCC in its DPI Final Report.
However, our review of them suggested that the TIO was the only existing body
that could perform the functions the ACCC is now suggesting
should be performed
by a new ombuds scheme. This was not because of any perceived failings on the
part of the other bodies; rather,
the other bodies all have functions that
render them ill-equipped to take on user-to-platform transactional complaints,
or the addition
of those complaints would be likely to impede their existing
work. Moreover, the TIO itself acknowledged in its 2019 submission on
government’s response to the ACCC’s DPI Final Report that complaints
like the ones the ACCC highlighted in its DPSI
Report No 5 are a natural fit for
an expanded TIO.
This is because
the TIO currently administers a resolution scheme based on similar consumer
complaints about telecommunications service
An expanded TIO would have the advantages of reducing some of the
brand-generation and recognition costs and potential for consumer
likely to arise as a result of the creation of yet another external complaints
scheme. This is especially the case given
the TIO has reported that consumers
already contact it seeking resolution of digital platform
complaints.
Using the TIO would
also avoid the need to replicate existing administrative frameworks and
procedures and allow it to bring its
30 years of experience and successful
track-record with dispute resolution in the telecommunications sector to digital
However, existing regulators and schemes would need to be willing to continue
to work with an expanded TIO, requiring changes to their
memoranda of
understanding and other administrative arrangements to facilitate the smooth
operation of the scheme. In addition, the
TIO would need to agree to take on
this additional function and be adequately funded by government (at least in the
short term) to
acquire the necessary capabilities and capacities to perform this
IV EXPANDED TIO IS
PREFERABLE BUT MULTIPLE TYPES OF COMPLAINTS ARE LEFT WITHOUT ANY MEANS OF
EXTERNAL RESOLUTION
We agree with the ACCC that the body entrusted with resolving user complaints
involving unmet contractual expectations and potential
ACL infringement by the
digital platforms must have the capability and capacity to do so. But the ACCC
does not make it clear why
the TIO may not. The number of complaints involved is
likely to be very high, but without further information, and subject to adequate
funding of the TIO and swift adoption of any necessary amendments to the
Telecommunications (Consumer Protection and Service Standards) Act 1999
(Cth) and the TIO’s constitution, we do not see why the TIO could not
perform this additional function should it wish to, and
the other regulators and
schemes with which it currently works agree. Our preference therefore is for the
TIO to assume these new
responsibilities. However, as our analysis highlights,
adoption of a new digital platform ombuds scheme is an equally acceptable
A more important concern in our view is the limited remit of the proposed
independent external ombuds scheme (whether new or an expanded
point we illustrate below by reference to the typology of complaints developed
in our July 2022 report, which focused
on social media platforms and the leading
social media service in Australia –
We determined that complaints can be about the conduct of the social media
platforms themselves or about the conduct of third-party
users of those
platforms, including advertisers, sellers and users who post content. Further,
they can be distinguished as
social disputes
based on, for example,
harmful content one user posts about another, or complaints against a platform
for exposure to illegal content,
misinformation or other harmful material; or
transactional disputes
often involving unmet contractual expectations but
sometimes involving misuse of user data
Using these distinctions, complaints can be grouped into four categories:
• user-to-platform transactional complaints
• user-to-user transactional complaints
• user-to-platform social complaints
• user-to-user social complaints.
Table 1 below shows how we classified the various complaints involving social
media platforms using this typology.
Table 1. Types of complaints made about content and conduct
on digital platforms
The complaints listed in the table are not intended to be exhaustive and we
were and remain conscious that some topics of complaint
(eg, privacy breaches,
spam and unwelcome notifications of communications) could be allocated to
another category or more than one
category. It is also possible that a
user-to-user social complaint (eg, one about extremist content) could become a
user-to-platform
transactional complaint, if, for example, the user’s
account were suspended or cancelled as a result of the extremist content
account owner made a complaint. In addition, what may begin as a user-to-user
dispute may become a user-to-platform dispute
where one or more of the users
considers the platform has failed to fulfil its obligations (where they exist)
relating to the resolution
of user-to-user disputes.
Despite these qualifications, the typology allows us to highlight that the
examples of complaints cited by the ACCC in DPSI Report
No 5 are mostly
‘transactional disputes’. They largely encompass user-to-platform
complaints, but also include some user-to-user
complaints (eg, reporting and
removal of scams and fake reviews). Two important consequences flow from
1. There will be no external means of resolving many types of
user-to-platform social complaints that arise on social media platforms
ACCC’s proposed scheme were adopted: existing regulators and industry
schemes do not have jurisdiction over these types
of complaints. Examples of
such complaints include the failures of social media platforms to discharge
their obligations in relation
to: disinformation and misinformation (apart from
the narrow category of complaints under the Australian Code of Practice on
Disinformation
Misinformation
that amount to
failure to implement systems and processes); news content and breaches of
community standards in advertising content
(where the complaint is about how the
platform itself treats that content); election advertisements (except for the
narrow category
of actions covered by some electoral laws); censorship;
disclosure of confidential or protected information; and damage to reputation
(apart from the narrow class of actions against platforms that might succeed, at
great expense, via the law of defamation).
2. The proposed ombuds would have no jurisdiction to resolve user-to-user
complaints (social and transactional).
To overcome these weaknesses, attention should be directed in the medium term
(if not sooner) to how an independent external ombuds
(new or an expanded TIO)
could be modified to accommodate user-to-platform social complaints disputes.
This is especially important
given the possibility of user-to-platform
transactional complaints becoming user-to-platform social complaints (and vice
and user-to-user complaints becoming user-to-platform complaints (and
vice versa).
Consideration should also be given to how internal dispute resolution
standards could be used to encourage platforms to provide effective
resolving disputes between users (eg, online dispute resolution) over matters
that arise as a result of the use of the platform,
apart from the schemes
administered by Ad Standards and the Australian Press Council which provide a
forum for the resolution of
complaints about the content of advertising and
news. Social disputes are likely to increase; there is a strong public policy
for encouraging social media providers to fund easily accessible and
no-cost dispute mechanisms; and there is an additional community
courts – avoid the costs of defamation
litigation.
Senior Lecturer,
Faculty of Law, University of Technology Sydney.
Professor, Faculty of
Law, University of Technology Sydney and Co-Director, UTS Centre for Media
Transition.
Digital Platform
Services Inquiry: Interim Report No 5 – Regulatory Reform
Digital Platforms:
Government Consultation on ACCC’s Regulatory Reform Recommendations,
Consultation Paper
(December 2022) 9.
See Holly Raiche, Derek
Wilding, Karen Lee, and Anita Stuhmcke,
Platform Complaint Handling: Options for an External Dispute Resolution
(UTS Centre for Media Transition, 2022). See also UTS Centre for
Media Transition,
to ACCC Discussion Paper for Interim Report No. 5: Updating competition and
consumer law for digital platform services
, April 2022 and
to The Treasury, Digital Platforms: Government Consultation on ACCC’s
Regulatory Reform Recommendations
, 22 February 2023. The round table was
held at UTS on 7 December 2022.
Digital Platforms
Inquiry: Final Report
(June 2019) 37-38.
Australian Government,
Regulating in the Digital Age: Government Response and Implementation Roadmap
for the Digital Platforms Inquiry
(Policy Statement, December 2019) 13. On
13 October 2022, ACMA announced it would undertake research into digital
platform reports
and complaints over the next 12 months. ACMA, ‘ACMA
Releases 2022-23 Research Program’ (Media Release, 13 October 2022).
This research was commissioned
and completed in 2021 but was not published.
Digital Platform
Services Inquiry Discussion Paper for Interim Report No 5: Updating Competition
and Consumer Law for Digital Platform
(February 2022) 51.
Interim Report No 5
For information about the
ACCC’s proposal to amend the ACL, see ibid 64-71.
Raiche, Wilding, Lee and
Stuhmcke (n
‘purpose-built’ digital platform scheme might also facilitate
nimbleness and flexibility (eg, if the government decided
in the future to
expand the scheme to include user-to-platform social complaints). See further
They included the TIO,
eSafety, ACMA, the Digital Industry Group Inc (DIGI), the ACCC, the OAIC, the
Australian Small Business and
Family Enterprise Ombudsman, Ad Standards, the
Australian Press Council and other news standards organisations. See Raiche,
Lee and Stuhmcke (n
Telecommunications Industry
Submission from the Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman to the
Treasury’s Consultation on the Final Digital Platforms Inquiry
(September 2019) 18. The TIO confirmed its suitability in its submission to
Treasury on the ACCC’s recommendations. See TIO,
Submission to the
Commonwealth Department of the Treasury: Consultation on ACCC’s Regulatory
Reform Recommendations
(February 2023).
This was due to budgetary
considerations.
This categorisation draws on
the work of Ethan Katsh and Orna Rabinovich-Einy, ‘The Challenge of Social
and Anti-Social Media’
in Ethan Katsh and Orna Rabinovich-Einy,
Justice: Technology and the Internet of Disputes
(Oxford University Press,
2017) 109-130, 113. Katsh and Rabinovich-Einy limited their category of
‘social disputes’ to
user-to-user disputes; we have expanded this
category to include complaints that users might have against the platforms
themselves.
Digital Industry Group Inc,
Australian Code of Practice on Disinformation and Misinformation
December 2022). In June 2023 the government released an exposure draft of a
Communications Legislation Amendment (Combatting
Misinformation and
Disinformation) Bill 2023 which, if implemented, would give the ACMA powers to
register and enforce codes of practice
as well as to create its own standards.
One of the examples of matters that may be dealt with by codes and standards is
and procedures for receiving and handling reports and complaints
from end-users’ (see cl 33(3)(i)).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.96 MB)
PDF format (0.997 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter