URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/46.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barker, D --- "So You Want to be a Lawyer?" [2013] LegEdDig 46; (2013) 21(3) Legal Education Digest 51
BOOK REVIEW
So You Want to be a Lawyer?
Emeritus Professor David Barker AM
BOOK REVIEW
Want to be a Lawyer?
David Weisbrot
ACER Press, 2013, 246 pp
David Weisbrot could be regarded as being numbered among a very limited
number of persons worthy of being considered for the title
of Guru of Australian
Legal Education. Certainly his experience of legal education embraces nearly
four decades of being a law academic
during which time he has served not only as
a Dean or Professor of Law, but also as a member of both state and national law
commissions, culminating in becoming the longest serving President of the
Australian Law Reform Commission. His legal writings also
embrace a similar
period of time. It was inevitable therefore that at some time a publisher would
approach him to become the author
of an advisory book for potential future
Australian lawyers. There are, of course, already books of similar nature
available, particularly
the well-known Glanville Williams’
Learning the
, and Phillip Kenny’s
Studying Law
. However these are both
primarily directed towards future United Kingdom lawyers, so that
Weisbrot’s text brings an Australian
flavour to the genre with such advice
being described as: ‘a guide for current and prospective students in
Australia.’
The text is enhanced at the very beginning with a foreword by the Hon Michael
Kirby, a former Justice of the High Court of Australia,
also a well-known
commentator himself on legal education. His foreword contains some poignant
comments with regard to serious problems
being faced by current law students
which were not in existence during his time when he was studying at law school.
These include
the high cost of legal education, scarcity of legal positions and
the high level of stress and depression in the legal profession.
As Kirby points
out this is not mentioned to deter young people from studying law but to
encourage them to take the advice offered
by David Weisbrot in his book.
The text by Weisbrot adopts a similar style by first of all introducing
potential law students to the type of attitude that they will
receive from
colleagues when they announce that they intend to become lawyers. In fact it is
unusual for any book, let alone one
devoted to introducing a student to the
legal profession, to open its first section (this is the title by which the
author calls
his chapters) with a host of lawyer jokes. This reviewer thought
that he had heard or read most of them, but the author transcends
field from Dickens to the Bible and then crosses over to evidence from
contemporary popular culture such as the films
Carlito’s Way The Firm
The Devil’s Advocate
However he does manage to prick the
urban myth that lawyers come just above politicians, used car salesmen and real
estate agents
in public esteem by producing evidence that in fact lawyers are
rated by the Australian public in the middle of such rankings. What
illuminating for the embryonic lawyers are the good reasons given as to why one
should study law as compared to the reasons for
not studying law.
As mentioned in the opening of this review, Professor Weisbrot is regarded as
leading exponent of legal education and this comes to
the fore in the second
section of the book on educating lawyers. Anyone wishing to know more regarding
the evolution of legal education
in Australia would be well advised to peruse
this part of the text, which in a few pages transcribes the whole of the history
Australian legal education. It then moves on to introduce the reader to
current developments and thinking relating to study options
available with
respect to undergraduate and postgraduate degrees, such as modes of study
– and whether these should be online,
face-to face or distance. This also
includes an examination of the possibilities as to how the student might develop
his or her professional
skills and the advantages of undertaking a capstone
project incorporating all prior learning and experience in the law which they
may have acquired up until this point in their legal studies.
It could be questioned as to whether it was really necessary to include the
third section which is devoted exclusively to descriptions
by the 37 law schools
themselves of their law degree programmes and focusing on what they consider
makes their own law school distinctive.
As the author admits these entries, with
the exception of three have been minimally edited, and then only with respect to
not content. In its favour it could be argued that this avoids a
potential law school applicant having to search thirty seven individual
or the available printed material for this information but the problem is that
such printed material quickly becomes very
out dated and the student would still
need to go directly to the particular law schools’ websites anyway.
However any criticism
of these entries is more than outweighed by the following
section four which contains a most revealing checklist for evaluating law
schools-and decision-making. This is as good a reason as any for acquiring the
book. In approximately 16 pages or so of this section,
Weisbrot explores the
psyche of what a law school should be – the most telling paragraph of all
Some law schools are happy places; some sadly, are not. Some are
student-centred with a high degree of concern about teaching and
pastoral care;
others are staff and research focused. Some are very collegial; others are all
students in decision-making in a meaningful
way; others only pay lip-service to the concept. Some campuses are vibrant and
others have little life, or at least the students choose to find their
fun elsewhere.
It is hoped that our future law student is able to assimilate this
information regarding his or her choice before selecting a law
school rather
than to discover too late that it incorporates all the downsides canvassed by
the author in this extract from his book!
Section five is devoted to the author’s view of what life is like as a
law student. Again, as in the previous section, it reveals
Weisbrot as a keen
observer of human nature and of what makes a law school an enjoyable experience
for all involved with it, particularly
its law students. In this regard I found
his comments under the title: ‘
Who are our teachers?
illuminating. Although most Australian law academics are aware of the
author’s predilection for more clinical opportunities
for law students and
the benefits which would ensue for the law school experience, he acknowledges
how this will never eventuate
in Australia, both for historical or funding
reasons. Nevertheless he sees the only advantage which might arise in this
respect from
the increasingly casualisation of the academic workforce in
Australia as being the introduction of current or former practitioners
occasional retired judge, thus bringing a more practical perspective to the
teaching at their law school.
In the sixth and final section there is an exploration of careers for law
graduates and Weisbrot gives an interesting perspective
on the often clarion
calls of there being too many law students. With respect to this oft quoted
criticism of the growth in the numbers
of students entering legal education, he
offers an interesting exposition of the demographics of a large and growing
legal service
sector, again expressing a well-informed account of the historical
origins of the development of the legal profession in Australia.
This part of
the book is also extremely informative for the general reader with regard to the
development of law practices into mega-firms
and multi-disciplinary
partnerships, for some their incorporation and listing on the Australian
Securities Exchange, together with
the influences of globalisation and
information and communications technology. This does not mean that Weisbrot
neglects describing
the possibilities of the more conventional career choices in
the law, such as those offered by small and medium sized law firms,
the Bar and
law teaching. This description culminates in a review of the requirements for
admission to practise law including not
only the basic education requirements,
but the necessity for undertaking practical legal training for solicitors and
additionally
undergoing both the Bar Practice Course and the Barristers Reading
Programme, as well as sitting for the Bar Examination, if wishing
to practise at
The author concludes his book with a short review of the changing subject
matter of law expressing the view that:
Thirty years from now, new and
exciting areas of legal practice will emerge that we cannot yet imagine.
In a way this phrase reflects the nature of the content of David
Weisbrot’s text. It is a well written account of what law students
know when embarking on their studies and the challenges which they will face,
both in their choice and involvement with their
law schools and subsequent
selection of their careers, whether in or outside the law. All this is
communicated with a sense of the
history of the law and more than a trace of
humour to retain the readers’ interest throughout the book. This is
certainly a
recommended read, both for the potential law student and all those
involved with the law.
Emeritus Professor David Barker AM
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (377 KB)
PDF format (1.51 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter