URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/LegEdDig/2013/31.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:13:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Barker, D --- "Tomorrow's lawyers: an introduction to your future" [2013] LegEdDig 31; (2013) 21(2) Legal Education Digest 52
Tomorrow’s lawyers: an introduction to your future
BOOK REVIEW
Tomorrow’s lawyers: an introduction to your future
Richard Susskind
Oxford University Press, 2013, 180 pp
Richard Susskind needs no introduction as a legal author who is always
looking into the future of all aspects of the law, even though
one of his most
successful books was entitled:
The End of Lawyers?
However there is no doubt that any new text by Susskind has the ability to
create a great deal of interest and will be of particular
concern to younger
lawyers for, as the author writes in his Preface, it was: ‘originally
conceived as a guide to the future
for the next generation of lawyers’. In
fact it his intention to: ‘encourage wider discussion of the forces at
their likely impact.’
The book is divided into three main parts with Part One reiterating the
authors’ views as expressed in his previous books’
Future of Law
Transforming the Law
(2000) and his most recent
mentioned above –
The End of Lawyers?
Part Two is devoted to what the author describes as the new legal landscape,
particularly his views on the future for law firms and
the challenges facing the
legal profession, whilst Part Three focuses more specifically on the prospects
for young lawyers.
In Part One the author covers the issues which many in the legal community
would agree are the main indicators of how the legal market
is changing. In fact
most readers would accept that the many topics listed by Susskind in Part One
are predictable. These include
in the first chapter those forces which in his
view are the main drivers of change in the legal market, such as the challenge
‘more-for-less’, meaning greater efficiencies in the use of staff
and services, liberalisation and the more efficient
use of information
technology. With regard to the latter he makes the telling point that one of the
problems is that currently there
is: ‘no finishing line for the IT and the
Internet’ with innumerable new applications emerging on a daily basis.
chapters in Part One incorporate suggestions for meeting the
challenges enumerated in the opening chapter. These include recommendations
both reducing fees and consequentially costs. With respect to fees Susskind does
not try and avoid the problem of hourly billing
but suggests alternative fee
arrangements. These include an innovative proposal for the introduction of a
collaboration strategy
whereby clients should come together and share the costs
of certain legal services. Also within Part One the author, in using the
description of ‘Commoditizing the Law’, endeavours to illustrate how
legal services have developed through five main
stages to attain greater
efficiency. This evolution is taken further with suggestions that it can be
decomposed and sourced in new
and different ways culminating with a distinction
being drawn between sustaining and disruptive technologies.
In Part Two, Susskind endeavours to predict the future for law firms under
the description of: ‘The New Landscape’. In
this respect he
recognises that the question of adopting alternative methods of working might
not be the objective for all law firms
and here he considers that there will
still be a global elite, approximately world-wide 20 in number, who because of
their reputation
will be able to carry on as they have in the past. However,
even with changed work practices, the author does not hold out much hope
continuation of the small high-street law practice beyond 2020. He endeavours to
draw a similar comparison between the future
prospects for exceptional senior
trial lawyers whom he considers will still retain their reputation and
employment and the remainder
of the bar such as junior civil trial lawyers who
might need to rethink their future by engaging in virtual hearings and Online
Resolution (ODR). His remit for change includes the challenges facing
new partners in law firms, the shifting role of in-house lawyers
and the need
for a more collaborative spirit between in-house lawyers and their external law
The timing of these predicted changes is obviously all important. The author
expects that there will be an incremental revolution
taking place which, in his
view, could proceed in three stages, that of (1) Denial, (2) Re-sourcing and (3)
Disruption, the latter
involving intelligent discovery, automated document
production and an electronic legal marketplace. The remainder of Part Two deals
with a visionary outlook with respect to the modernisation of the courts system,
embracing IT and Virtual Courts incorporating ODR.
Of particular interest to readers of a journal focused on legal education is
Part Three of the book entitled ‘Prospects for
Young Lawyers’.
Within this section of the text the author expresses his view that conventional
lawyers, whilst having a less
prominent role in society, will have the
opportunity to engage in important new forms of legal service. Susskind
distinguishes between
what he describes as ‘traditional lawyers’ of
whom he considers there will be less of a need for in the future, and those
lawyers ‘who are sufficiently flexible, open-minded, and entrepreneurial
to adapt to changing market conditions.’ With
regard to the latter group
he typifies them with such descriptions as, ‘The Enhanced
Practitioner’, ‘The Legal
Knowledge Engineer’, ‘The
Legal Technologist’, ‘The Legal Hybrid’, ‘The Legal
Process Analyst’,
‘The Legal Project Manager’, ‘The ODR
Practitioner’ and ‘The Legal Management Consultant’. Each
these roles is carefully analysed and, as the author states, that despite not
being what law students have in mind when they are
embarking on their legal
studies at law school they will not only provide an intellectually stimulating
and socially significant
occupation, but at the same time will open up a rich
and exciting new set of career opportunities.
Whilst Susskind accepts that many readers will regard his list of projected
new law jobs as rather fanciful, he draws attention to
the fact that many of
these new roles will be made available by a new range of employers working in
different types of legal business.
He is also willing to indulge in a wide range
of prophetic statements as to what might be the major employers of practising
outside the conventional law partnerships. In this respect he foretells
the return of the major global accounting firms having another
foray into the
legal profession. He also regards the major legal publishers as future major
employers together with what he describes
as the ‘Legal Know-how
Providers’ such as the English-based Practical Law Company (PLC),
‘Legal Process Outsourcers’,
‘High Street Businesses’
such as banks already designated in an earlier chapter as ‘Alternative
Business Structures’
(ABS) together with ‘Legal Leasing Agencies and
‘Online Service Providers’. Also in this list and worthy of more
detailed scrutiny is his view of what will be achieved by what he describes as
the ‘New-Look Law Firms’ such as ‘Clearspire’
United States and ‘Radiantlaw’ and ‘Riverview Law’ in
the United Kingdom. These have jettisoned their
old business models and
introduced flexible working practices to ensure that they can charge their
clients less but still be profitable.
The view is expressed that although these
firms will not be offering young lawyers conventional law career paths they will
nevertheless
be making opportunities for an entrepreneurial future for
innovative lawyers with the provision of a more flexible and respectful
A major focus of Part Three is devoted to the future training of lawyers or
to use the words of the author: ‘what are we training
young lawyers to
become?’ With respect to this question the text is concerned not with the
jettisoning of core subjects but
more for providing aspiring lawyers with
options ‘to study current and future trends in legal services’ and
learn some key 21
century legal skills to support future
law jobs’. The author provides examples of world-wide law schools who have
innovative teaching methods which take account of future trends in
legal practice. Although he does not offer a definitive response
to the question
of whether a potential law student should study another discipline at
undergraduate level before undertaking a law
degree, he does acknowledge that
there are strong arguments for following such a course of action before
embarking on a legal career.
(This reviewer is concerned that non-Australian
legal authors tend to ignore the successful practice in Australian tertiary
institutions
of law students undertaking combined degrees which can incorporate
such combinations as law and business, law and computer science
and law and
international studies.)
In the concluding chapters dealing with the training of young lawyers in the
future the author stresses the importance of the re-thinking
of legal training.
In this respect he advocates three basic building blocks whereby young lawyers
undertake some variant of the apprenticeship
model, that when significant bodies
of work are sourced beyond the firm, young lawyers should be able to undertake
samples of this
work and lastly, that young lawyers should benefit from existing
and emerging techniques of e-learning. The author also expands on
his experience
of reviews which he has carried out within the College of Law in England with
regard to e-learning and more widely
in other law schools that of simulated
legal practice.
There is also a chapter devoted to the questions which Susskind advises young
lawyers should ask of their future employers when at
the close of a job
interview the interviewer asks: ‘Do you have anything you would like to
ask us?’ Suffice it to say
that the advice is that whilst there is a wide
range of suggested questions, interviewees should be selective as to how they
by the choice and length of their questions!
In the concluding chapter the author poses the question as to the nature of
the benefits which clients seek when they instruct their
lawyers and how will
this question change in the future? Susskind repeats the view which he expressed
in 1996 in one of his earlier
The Future of
a shift in the legal paradigm whereby legal services will move to a
‘one-to-many, packaged, internet-based information
In the opinion of this reviewer this book will not disappoint the reader. It
is, like many of the author’s previous titles,
a challenging book which
will stimulate both by its questions and also by its innovative and though
provoking answers to some of
the demands placed on today’s legal
Emeritus Professor David Barker AM
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (50.6 KB)
PDF format (2.09 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter