URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJl/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:44:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Billington, Lisa N --- "'They Want to Suffocate Me, but I Will Not Allow It': Indigenous Resistance and Incarceration in Kanaky (New Caledonia)" [2025] UNSWLawJl 18; (2025) 48(2) UNSW Law Journal 551
THEY WANT TO SUFFOCATE ME, BUT I WILL NOT ALLOW
’: INDIGENOUS RESISTANCE AND INCARCERATION IN KANAKY (NEW
LISA N BILLINGTON*
During 2024, France embarked on a project to unilaterally reconstruct the
electoral roll in Kanaky (New Caledonia) in favour of French
colonial interests.
The decision represented the most recent move in a long history of French
efforts to undermine Kanaky’s
Indigenous-led independence movement. When
Indigenous Kanak resisted, the recruitment of colonial criminal law into the
the French colonial state was both immediate and comprehensive.
Characterising Kanak resistance as an unprecedented insurrection,
declared a state of emergency. Breaches of this French-declared state of
emergency were punishable under French-administered
criminal law and enforced by
thousands of French-deployed law enforcement personnel. Drawing on recent
scholarship and on eyewitness
reports from Indigenous Kanak leaders, activists
and advocates, this article focuses on the period between May and September 2024
to isolate and analyse how criminal law is being deployed by the French colonial
state as a frontline mechanism to pursue Kanak erasure.
I INTRODUCTION
On 12 December 2021, French President Emmanuel Macron declared:
‘Tonight France is more beautiful because New Caledonia has
stay part of it’.
referring to the result of the third of three independence votes which had taken
place in the French sui generis collectivity
earlier that day. The result
appeared unequivocal: when asked ‘Do you want New Caledonia to accede to
full sovereignty and
become independent?’, 96.5% of valid ballots voted
At the time, many
nations, including Australia, praised both the openness of France to New
Caledonian independence, and the French
Government’s facilitation of a
peaceful referendum. English-language media reports and government statements on
the referendum
result largely referred to the archipelago by translating the
Nouvelle-Calédonie
as ‘New Caledonia’.
Throughout the remainder of this article, however, the archipelago will be
referred to as ‘Kanaky’.
The reasons for this will become clear
Fast forward almost three years to 24 September 2024. It is
‘Citizenship Day’ in Kanaky: an annual ‘celebration’
marking French annexation of the archipelago’s largest island in
Over recent months, France
has deployed more than 6,000 French law enforcement personnel to Kanaky under
the guise of peace and security.
Protests have been breaking out across the islands, particularly in and around
the capital, Nouméa.
Prime Minister Gabriel Attal has characterised the French deployment as a
‘massive means to restore
Many of these
personnel are armed with heavy
With a total population
of around 270,000,
in Kanaky there
is now at least one law enforcement official for every 45 people on the islands.
Further, these officers are not
distributing their so-called
‘peacekeeping’ functions evenly throughout the archipelago –
their presence is concentrated
in areas where Kanaky’s decolonisation and
independence are the most hotly
These are also some of
the areas of Kanaky with high population concentrations of Kanaky’s
Indigenous peoples: Kanak.
Speaking of France’s violent repression of Kanak protests, head of the
Young Kanaks Movement Daniel Wea testified: ‘Kanaks
want to declare to the
world: “I exist as a people. They want to suffocate me, but I will not
allow it.”’
Kanak leaders and activists have been calling urgently and repeatedly for the
global community to pay attention, to mobilise, and
to stand in solidarity with
Kanak peoples.
One Kanak group
summarises: ‘Our civilisation is in danger. This is a distress signal that
we are sending out to you. We are
strong, yes, as our history shows, but we are
also in mourning, stunned, overwhelmed
This article honours
and magnifies these calls in the Australian context. Kanak representatives are
calling for the world to pay
attention and, as one of Kanaky’s nearest
neighbours in the Pacific, Australians must heed their call.
The objective of colonialism is always Indigenous
Mohawk philosopher and political strategist Taiaiake Alfred and Cherokee scholar
Jeff Corntassel have observed
that to maintain this central objective across
shifting landscapes of time and space, colonialism itself has developed an
shapeshifting:
Contemporary Settlers follow the mandate provided for them by their imperial
forefathers’ colonial legacy, not by attempting
to eradicate the physical
signs of Indigenous peoples as human bodies, but by trying to eradicate their
through the erasure of the histories and geographies
that provide the foundation for Indigenous cultural identities and sense of
Colonial erasure may be
Colonial erasure may
: that is, the legal construction, deconstruction and
reconstruction of Indigenous peoplehood on terms dictated by (and biased toward
the interests of) colonial
Whatever form it takes,
Indigenous erasure remains the unquenchable objective of colonial states. This
article focuses on one of
colonial erasure’s many
the face of criminal law.
The colonial power dynamics embedded in criminal law have been subject to
increasing scholarly scrutiny over recent decades. In his
counter-colonial criminology, decolonial criminologist Biko Agozino identifies
criminology as an
enterprise:
‘imprisonment
with or without walls, a widening of the net of
incarceration’.
scholar Stephen Toth has referred to this as the ‘reciprocally dependent
relationship’
colonialism and carceralism. Understood, as critical Ngati Porou Māori
scholar Juan Tauri observes, as ‘one of
the principal colonial projects of
the contemporary settler-colonial
disproportionate interventions and impacts of colonial ‘criminal
justice’ on Indigenous peoples becomes an entirely
predictable phenomenon.
Indigenous hyperincarceration, for example – such a long recognised
phenomenon in Australia –
can be understood for what it is: not an
anomaly, but a predictable corollary of the colonial state’s desire for
erasure. Writing of the colonial carceral project in Canada, critical
scholar Efrat Arbel summarises:
Indigenous mass imprisonment is neither anomalous nor transitory. Rather,
like colonialism itself, it is entrenched in the fabric
of the Canadian legal
system. There is nothing extraordinary about the steadily rising rates of
Indigenous incarceration; they are
as predictable and fixed as the colonial
structures that produce
Western criminological discourse offers a veneer of so-called
‘justice’ for the colonialist ideal of Indigenous erasure.
true in Australia, as it is in Kanaky.
Frantz Fanon argues that contemporary colonialism’s frontiers are
defined by military barracks and police
policeman and the soldier ... are the official, instituted go-betweens, the
spokesmen of the settler and his rule
oppression’.
This article
scrutinises this frontier in contemporary Kanaky. Focusing on the period between
May and September 2024, this article
identifies and examines the ways criminal
law is being deployed by the French colonial state as a frontline mechanism to
pursue Kanak
Nic Maclellan, Isabelle Leblic, Isabelle Merle and Adrian Muckle have written
critically and comprehensively of the colonial history
of Kanaky, from its
proclamation as a ‘French possession’ by French Rear Admiral Auguste
Febvrier-Despointes in 1853
through to the institution of the
Kowasch, Simon PJ Batterbury, Séverine Bouard and Eddie Wayoune Wadrawane
have made valuable contributions to English-language
scholarship on the more
recent history of Kanaky, particularly in relation to geopolitics and the mining
and military interests enmeshed
with France’s presence in the
Others, like Denise
Fisher and Anaïs Duong-Pedica, have examined broader thematic narratives
around France’s relationship
with its colonial outposts generally, and
with Kanak peoples specifically.
This article builds on the research of these scholars, and others, to scrutinise
how colonial power dynamics are embedded in Kanaky’s
French-administered
‘criminal justice’ system, continually ‘shapeshifting’,
as Alfred and Corntassel
to maintain
France’s colonial project in Kanaky across time and space.
The remainder of this article is presented in three parts. Part II situates
the 2024 attempts by France to (yet again) erase Kanak
identity and sovereignty
within the wider context of Kanaky’s colonisation and, in particular, the
recent so-called ‘independence
referenda’. The purpose of this
section is to orient Australian readers who may be unfamiliar with colonial
history and contemporary
colonial practice in one of our nearest Pacific
neighbours. Part II also provides the context of the current so-called
unrest’ and the colonial power dynamics which underlie the
accelerating criminalisation of Kanak resistance by the French colonial
Building on this background, Part III scrutinises the deployment of
‘criminal justice’ by France as an instrument
of the colonial
project in the period between May 2024 (when the French National Assembly
adopted a bill which would introduce voter
registration changes in favour of the
settler population in Kanaky)
and ‘Citizenship Day’ in September 2024 (when the National Council
of Kanak High Chiefs unilaterally declared Kanaky’s
independence from
Drawing on recent
scholarship and on eyewitness reports from Indigenous Kanak leaders, activists
and advocates, this section examines
the weaponisation of France’s
‘White Justice’ (‘
Justice des
against Kanak
peoples to repress what French authorities have referred to as an unprecedented
Kanak insurrection.
A clear arc
of colonial oppression emerges from this analysis; the entire sequence bears
the manner by which France, through its colonial administration, deploys a
repressive security arsenal that on the one hand protects
the settlers on the
land and their reactionary militias, and on the other, attempts to destroy the
country’s Kanak independence
‘Imprisonment and incarceration’, suggests Samidoun Paris
Banlieue, are the ‘weapon of choice in this overall colonial
As analysed
below, this is borne out by the evidence: between May and September 2024 alone,
the equivalent of 2% of the Kanak population
in Kanaky were
This article concludes
by looking ahead to identify how the contours of coloniality in Kanaky are again
‘shapeshifting’
in order to maintain the French colonial objective:
Kanak erasure.
II CONTEXTUALISING CRIMINAL LAW IN KANAKY
Kanaky is located less than 1,500 kilometres off the coast of Queensland.
Kanaky’s largest (and best-known) island, also called
New Caledonia or
Grande Terre, is just under 600 square kilometres – around a quarter of
the size of the Australian Capital
Territory (‘ACT’). Common themes
emerge from the colonial histories of Australia and Kanaky. Although France
annexure of Grand Terre in 1853, it was Lieutenant James Cook (who
commanded the
on its first incursion onto Dharawal Country,
Australia) who named Kanaky ‘New Caledonia’ – a reference to
Scottish homeland.
as Australia, was targeted by imperial powers as a site of penal colonisation.
Indeed, it was Britain’s ‘Botany
Experiment’
which inspired
France’s penal colonisation of
fictitious assertions
of terra nullius
were employed to declare Kanaky a possession of the
imperial power.
Australia, Indigenous hyperincarceration is an intractable feature of
Kanaky’s prisons.
Recent events in Kanaky must be understood against the backdrop of colonial
French presence in the archipelago. The recent independence
votes are an
outworking of the commitment made by France in the 1998
. The agreement was signed by representatives of France, the
Rassemblement pour la Calédonie dans la Caledonia
’), who wished to remain a part
of France, and the
Front de Libération Nationale Kanak et
’), who sought Kanaky’s
independence. The
Nouméa Accord
followed years of heated,
sometimes violent, disagreement between pro-independence and anti-independence
groups in the archipelago,
France intentionally and repeatedly moved to undermine both Kanak rights and
Kanaky’s independence movement. One of the
most infamous examples in
recent history, and one which led directly to the
Nouméa Accord
negotiations, was the
In the late 1980s, the French Government declared it would hold an
independence referendum in Kanaky. At the same time, France insisted
equality demanded all people who had lived in Kanaky for more than three years
be included in the electoral
These assertions followed
decades of concerted efforts by the French Government to encourage ‘mass
immigration of Metropolitan
archipelago in order to maintain and improve the so-called ‘demographic
ratio between
communities’.
control of the electoral roll, therefore, would have ensured a victory for
France and the loyalist movement. The pro-independence
the referendum as a
In the months following the sham referendum, the French Government banned
protest demonstrations in Kanaky and established a ‘highly
visible police
and military presence’.
More than 8,000 French military officers and police were deployed across the
archipelago, and peaceful demonstrations were violently
dispersed by riot
At the urging of
representatives, the French Government declared the
pro-independence
terrorists.
Kanak independence
leaders were arrested and forcibly deported from Kanaky to France to face the
‘criminal justice’ system
In the midst of the
crisis, a group of Kanak independence activists tried to take over a police
station in Ouvéa; during the
attempt, three French military police were
killed and another 23 were taken hostage.
The Ouvea crisis led to a major military mobilisation on the island and the
torture and maltreatment of villagers to find the location
of the hostages.
Djubelli Wea, a Protestant theology student, pastor and independence activist in
Gossanah, was dragged from his
sick bed, questioned about the location of the
hostages and tied to a tree. His father, beaten by French troops, later
Two weeks of negotiation between those holding the hostages, the
, and the French Government secured the hostages’ release.
However, wishing to deter future ‘insurrections’, the
Government launched
On 5 May 1988, the French government launched a military attack, with the
storming of the cave [where the hostages had been held]
by navy commandos,
members of the
action service of the DGSE [
Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure
French Secret Service] ... and elite police units ... Nineteen Kanak activists
were killed, with at least three executed after
surrendering. Two French
soldiers also died in the attack. The Kanak leader, Alphonse Dianou, a former
theology student, was shot
in his knee during capture, and left to die.
Twenty-nine other men from around Ouvea, including Djubelli Wea, were arrested
and transported
All the elements of the colonial playbook so clearly present in these events
reprise in Part III of this article, when examining the
most recent so-called
‘independence votes’ in Kanaky, and the events which have
Nouméa Accord
emerged against this sociopolitical colonial
backdrop. The
Ouvéa Massacre
provided the final catalyst for a
series of accords between the French Government and
representatives – agreements which would ultimately culminate in the
Nouméa Accord
and provide the framework for the independence votes
which have been taking place in Kanaky over recent years. A deeply political
document, in some ways the
Nouméa Accord
epitomises what
Aboriginal legal scholar of the Tanganekald, Meintangk and Boandik peoples Irene
Watson has referred to as colonialism’s
‘illusion of
recognition’:
‘giving with one hand and taking with the
The World March of
Women cogently summarise:
France, historically a colonial empire, has not completed a single peaceful
decolonial process. Today, faced with the rapidity and
intensity of colonial
repression, we now see that the entire process, including the
, was a fundamentally hypocritical colonial manoeuvre aiming to
extinguish Kanak revolt. It was a process of pacification aiming to
serve their
interests and further the process of settler
colonialism.
Nouméa Accord
acknowledges the ‘dark side of
the colonial period’, it simultaneously insists French colonial presence
in the region
is ‘not entirely devoid of
Nouméa Accord
states that ‘treaties signed with the
customary authorities in 1854 and subsequent years did not constitute
well-balanced agreements’
but were ‘unilateral
yet (erroneously)
asserts that France taking possession of Grande Terre was ‘in accordance
with the conditions of international
law recognized at that time by the nations
of Europe and the
(As the British
did in Australia,
France falsely
asserted the doctrine of terra nullius
to claim Kanaky as ‘land
belonging to no one’.)
Nouméa Accord
notes the violent French repression of Kanak
resistance,
yet insists that
‘new relations with France’ and a ‘common destiny’ with
non-Kanak peoples who have ‘acquired
the legitimate right to live’
on confiscated Kanak lands is the pathway
‘The time for
colonization was in the past. The present is the time for sharing and
realignment. The future should be the time
for expressing an identity in a
common destiny.’
of Kanak sovereignty, self-determination, independence and freedom are wholly
absent from the
Nouméa Accord
In addition to its preambular provisions, the
Nouméa Accord
outlined concrete changes to the original pathway to Kanaky’s
independence from France, which had been laid out in earlier
agreements.
purported to herald a new, 20-year ‘transition to
sovereignty’
period during
which a ‘citizenship of New Caledonia’ would be
‘Caledonian’ identity is distinct from that of Kanak peoples;
indeed, the text of the agreement requires
Kanaky’s possible futures be grounded in the ‘common destiny’
of the settler population and Kanak. This ‘transition
sovereignty’ period concluded in 2018 with the undertaking of the first of
three independence consultations. These continue
to be popularly referred to in
English-language media as ‘referenda’. However, it is noteworthy
(and France has stressed),
that this series of votes were ‘independence
consultations’ rather than referenda: that is, the declaration of
independence would still need be an act of the French Parliament,
even where votes for Kanaky’s independence from France surpassed
required 50%.
The first consultation was held on 4 November 2018, the second on 4 October
2020, and the third on 12 December 2021. The trajectory
of the consultations was
a positive one for the pro-independence movement in Kanaky. A 50%
‘Yes’ vote in any one of the
three consultations would be the
catalyst for an irreversible transfer of sovereign powers from France to Kanaky.
In the first consultation
in 2018, 43.3% of voters were in favour of
Kanaky’s independence from France; in 2020, that figure rose to
With the votes planned at
2-year intervals, the third and final independence vote was scheduled to take
place in November 2022. This
timeline, however, was not to France’s
In May 2021, barely six months after the previous independence vote, France
developed and strategically disseminated a confidential
paper highlighting the
consequences of Kanaky voting to become
independent.
In mid-2021, France
also invited selected political representatives from Kanaky to a meeting in
France to lay out the consequences
for the archipelago in the event of voting
‘Yes’ to independence from
While the tone of the
Nouméa Accord
had positioned France as an impartial arbiter
between the
, the ‘Discussion Paper’
under review was clearly skewed in favour of the interests of the French
colonial state maintaining
control over Kanaky. More than three quarters of the
report was dedicated to reinforcing any potential negative impacts of Kanaky
voting ‘Yes’ to
independence.
Following the meeting, France’s then-Minister of the Overseas
Sébastien Lecornu announced that France had unilaterally
determined it
would hold the third independence consultation almost a year early, in December
2021. The move delighted French loyalists,
who were hoping to undermine the
momentum of the independence
Speaking of the decision,
Lecornu acknowledged: ‘This date is not the subject of a consensus ...
It’s not an agreement.
It’s an initiative that we are taking within
the strict framework of the powers of the French
Writing for the
French newspaper
a group of experts in ‘Caledonian’
history and society described France’s move as not only a political and
mistake, but a step
The full impact of
this ‘backward step’ was exacerbated in September 2021, when the
COVID-19 Delta variant arrived on
Kanaky’s shores.
Kanaky’s health protocols were largely successful in containing
outbreaks of COVID-19 in Kanaky during 2020. The first case
of COVID-19 in
Kanaky was recorded by health authorities on 18 March 2020 in a couple arriving
in Kanaky from France. Barely two
weeks and just 18 cases later (14 imported
cases, two flight attendants, and two close contacts), the last case of COVID-19
was recorded
on 4 April 2020.
This situation largely remained until the first recorded community case of
COVID-19 was identified in Kanaky on 6 September 2021.
The disaster which
followed has been compared to a fatal plane
Between 6 September and the third independence consultation on 12 December,
more than 12,000 COVID cases were recorded in
COVID-related death
rates soared, disproportionately impacting Kanak
communities:
Figure 1: Comparing the 7-day rolling average of deaths from COVID-19, per
1,000,000 people for the period between the second and
third independence
referenda in Kanaky (France, Kanaky,
The Kanak Customary Senate (
Sénat Coutumier
established under the
– declared an
official 1-year Kanak customary mourning period, commencing on 6 September
The protests of Kanak peoples, their allies, and their legal and political
representatives against France continuing to pursue the
third independence
consultation in the midst of a health disaster in Kanaky were ignored by
In late 2021, lawyer
Vincent Brengarth made submissions to the French Council of State (
) on behalf of 149 largely Kanak
applicants,
arguing the third
consultation was fundamentally flawed and did not adhere to the principles of
freedom of expression and equal suffrage
prescribed by French
The applicants sought a
postponement of the consultation until October 2022, after the officially
declared 12-month period of Kanak
mourning had
The Council of State
– the French colonial state’s highest administrative court –
refused. Writing later of the
court’s decision, Brengarth identified the
same ‘illusion of
recognition’
so cogently
described by Watson: the incredible paradox (‘
l’incroyable
French colonial state, on the one hand expressing support for the rights of
Indigenous peoples, and on the other, undertaking
an independence vote in a
manner which not only fundamentally undermined the rights of Kanak peoples, but
Kanak non-participation. Speaking of the third consultation,
Kanak student and pro-independence decolonial feminist Marylou Mahe reflected:
‘I have the impression that my culture is being ignored, that my Kanak
identity is being denied. We are being set back more
than 30 years, to a time
when our voice did not count. It is as if we do not
At the height of the COVID-19 pandemic in Kanaky and during a period of
cultural mourning for Kanak peoples, France conducted its
unilaterally declared
consultation on Kanaky’s independence. The Pacific Islands Forum, whose
presence as an observer of the
consultation was welcomed by both the French and
New Caledonian Governments, observed that:
[T]he referendum was not carried out in the spirit of the
, which empowers the status of Kanak identity and custom in New
Caledonia and France. The Committee was regretful that key principles
Accord such as fellowship, humility and consensus building, which had guided
relatively peaceful and consensual exchanges
between the parties for over two
decades, had regressed. The Committee does not believe that the result
accurately reflects the will
of registered voters. It was a referendum on
self-determination that took place
the majority of first peoples
of New Caledonia and their
supporters.
Further, the Pacific Islands Forum decried the overwhelming reinforcement of
French law enforcement, both in the lead up to the consultation
and at polling
places on 12 December. Recalling Kanaky has a total population of around 270,000
more than 1,800
additional French law enforcement personnel were sent to the archipelago to
supplement the security forces already
This included police,
équipes régionales d’intervention et de
(units specialised to respond to penitentiary
issues), French military personnel,
(French military police),
Formations Militaires de la Sécurité Civile
military personnel trained in responding to natural and technological
disasters).
Observers reported
that in Kanaky’s capital, Nouméa, French law enforcement personnel
‘equipped with firearms
[were] stationed at all major entry points into
the city in what seemed [like a] deliberate [effort] to dissuade any attempt at
Military vehicles were also parked in plain sight, or patrolling the streets
of Nouméa. The Committee observed a police unit
stopping a vehicle to
remove a Kanak flag it was flying.
Members of the Committee have seldom witnessed such a display of armed force
during a referendum/election, and heard from its consultations
that people were
scared. While the Committee acknowledges that safety is a priority and that
visibility of security personnel can
be a deterrent to violence, the presence of
state coercive forces carries with it the potential to intimidate. ... The
believes that such displays of force will be counterproductive in the
post-referendum period and should be minimised or avoided
altogether.
On 12 December 2021, the third French-administered independence consultation
took place in Kanaky. The abstention rate was high: more
than half of voters in
Kanaky (56.13%) abstained from voting in the final consultation compared with a
14.31% abstention rate in
the previous consultation in 2020, and an abstention
rate of 18.99% for the first consultation in
Most voters were French
loyalists. When asked ‘Do you want New Caledonia to accede to full
sovereignty and become independent?’,
96.5% of valid ballots voted
evening, Macron triumphantly declared that New Caledonia had decided to stay
part of France.
The measures
used to secure this result – a result so profoundly in French interests
– reprise with the French colonial
playbook. It is France’s
perpetual duplicity in relations with Kanak peoples, both during and following
the 12 December ‘consultation’,
which are the direct cause of the
events of 2024.
III COLONIAL CRIMINAL LAW IN KANAKY: PAST AND
That colonial criminal law has been deployed in Kanaky’s past to
physically and legally erase Kanak peoples is
indisputable.
‘shapeshifting’
nature of colonialism, tracing the recruitment of criminal law into the colonial
project in some jurisdictions can present challenges.
The coloniality of French
criminal law in Kanaky, however, is enmeshed in the very fabric of French
presence in the region.
By the mid-1800s, France’s attempts at penal colonisation in other
parts of the world were failing. Transforming Kanaky into
a penal colony
promised France not only much-needed labour on the archipelago, but also the
‘conquering
required to
minoritise and overwhelm the Kanak
population.
Toth, in his
scholarship on France’s use of penal colonisation in Kanaky, notes that
convicts sent to Kanaky were ‘agent[s]
in the service of France’s
larger colonial project. Through his labour he would pay his debt to the mother
country while simultaneously
increasing the domain of her
Indeed, French
naval officer Captain Charles Guillain (who was destined to become
Kanaky’s first Governor), argued that the
only way Kanaky could be of any
value to France would be through the archipelago’s transformation into a
penal colony.
The earliest French-administered census in Kanaky recorded just 432 persons
of European descent.
time, there were estimated to be at least 50,000 Kanak in
By the turn of the
century, France had shipped more than 30,000 convicts and political exiles to
the islands.
By this time,
Kanaky was being described as ‘the Land of the Chain, of the Lash, and the
Guillotine, a hell upon earth, a paradise
of Nature transformed by despotism
into an inferno of crime and cruelty, and, above all ... the Land of
Banishment’.
Initially a repository for France’s convict colonists
forçats-colons
Kanaky’s penal settlements soon began to overflow with Kanak peoples. In
entered into force in Kanaky, introducing to
the archipelago a French-developed, French-administered and French-enforced
exception’.
to Kanak. It criminalised Kanak
leaving their French-delineated ‘reserve’ lands, introduced
Kanak-specific taxes, empowered
colonial administrators to appoint
‘chiefs’ of French-delineated, ‘legally
fictitious’
, and required Kanak to provide labour for the colonial
For infractions,
‘administrators could impose fines (of up to 100 francs) and prison
sentences (of up to 15 days) without recourse
to the civil or common law
remained in place in Kanaky until
It was one of the most
important elements in the French colonial administration of Kanak peoples over
almost a century of colonial
aggression. The
simultaneously vested judicial and administrative power in colonial
administrators, criminalising multiple, overlapping elements
sovereignty, identity and resistance. The regime sanctioned ‘swift
punishments for any challenge, real or perceived,
to their personal authority
[that of colonial administrators] and that of the colonial
Tauri’s assertion that colonial ‘criminal justice’ systems are
also ‘one of the principal colonial
projects of the
contemporary
settler-colonial
unsurprising this colonial-carceral reciprocity persists beyond these annals of
Most (if not all) Australians are aware of the disproportionate impact of
Anglo-Australian criminal law on Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples.
Since the 1980s, when the
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in
Royal Commission
’) was convened, Indigenous
hyperincarceration has been recognised as an intractable feature of the
Anglo-Australian ‘criminal
justice’ system. The levels of Indigenous
hyperincarceration, which were so shocking to the public in 1991 when the
Royal Commission
tabled its report in Parliament, are dwarfed by
today’s statistics. In 1999, Australian Corrective Services reported that
Indigenous incarceration rate at the turn of the century was 1,790 per
100,000 of the adult Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
population.
Now, a quarter of
a century later, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are incarcerated
at a rate of 2,651 per 100,000 Indigenous
adults – almost 13 times the
national prison population
As familiar as
Australians may be with such statistics, few of us are as familiar with the ways
this colonial-carceral reciprocity
manifests beyond Australia’s
Even before the events of 2024, Kanak people were profoundly overrepresented
in Kanaky’s French-administered ‘criminal
Kanak represent 41.2%
of Kanaky’s total
population,
yet between 90
and 95% of the prison
population,
and up to 99% of
the youth detainee
population.
prison population rate is almost double that of
despite crime rates
being comparable:
While the crime rate in New Caledonia is no higher than in France, the rate
of convictions is higher, according to prison authorities,
indicating a
troubling tendency by the judiciary in New Caledonia to incarcerate offenders at
a higher rate or impose harsher
Prison conditions in Kanaky have also long been the subject of international
condemnation. Up until 2023, Kanaky had one institutional
(East Camp). For decades,
has been the ‘shame of
the Republic’.
Self-harm is endemic among Kanak detainees, and suicides are not
The father of one
Kanak prisoner who died by suicide denounced the racism entrenched in
Kanaky’s so-called ‘criminal
justice’ system and its inherent
opposition to ‘
‘tribal life’.
Yengo v France
case decided in 2015 before the European Court of
Human Rights drew international attention to the degrading conditions of
: overcrowding, toilet facilities embedded in the floors of showers,
sewerage which would overflow the shower on a regular basis and
inmates’ mattresses.
The 2019 report from the
Contrôleur Général des Lieux de
Privation de Liberté
(Chief Inspector of Places of Deprivation of
Liberty) found the conditions in
remained ‘precarious,
degraded and
unhealthy’:
Two-thirds of the cells in the institution are made up of [shipping]
containers occupied by more than 330 people. Throughout the prison
complex, the
cell windows are screened, providing little visibility or natural light, while
the lack of ventilation causes extreme
heat. Hygiene is unsatisfactory, sheets
are changed only once a month at best, most often every two months, and some
prisoners do
not have access to washing machines for their personal laundry. ...
In the remand wing, there are regular sewage backups, there is
no system to
ensure privacy in the sanitary facilities, and the cells are always dark. The
minors’ wing, due to lack of upkeep,
offers undignified detention
conditions with unhygienic sanitary facilities and degraded partitions. ...
These degrading detention
conditions are aggravated by prison overcrowding. On
the day of the inspection, 90 people were sleeping on mattresses on the floor.
In the remand wing, out of 35 cells, which were nonetheless equipped with bunk
beds, 12 had one mattress on the floor and 21 had
two. While the legislation
provides for individual cells for persons imprisoned in mixed institutions, as
is applied in metropolitan
France, all the cells in the detention centre wings
and the pre-release wing are double cells; in the open detention centre,
of the cells have a mattress on the floor. In addition, the times
spent in cells are particularly long. People are kept in overcrowded
5 pm to 7 am, i.e. for 14 hours, which exceeds the maximum time provided for by
the regulations. In the absence of cultural
activities, training or employment,
prisoners are also kept in cells for a large part of the day, even for up to 22
In his 2011
Report on the Situation of Kanak People in New Caledonia,
, then-Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples James
Anaya observed that in Kanaky, there are ‘no Kanak lawyers,
police chiefs’.
this situation largely
it is unsurprising
Kanak prisoners report a profound sense of being under the thumb of French
authorities.
Such was the
situation prior to the commencement of the 2024 ‘civil unrest’. In
April 2024, Kanaky’s prisons warehoused
population rate of 199 per
With an official
capacity of 390 persons, the prison occupancy rate in Kanaky was already at
In May 2024, that
On 15 May 2024, in the early hours of the morning and thousands of kilometres
away from Kanaky in Metropolitan France, the French
Parliament’s Lower
House (the French National Assembly) voted to impose changes to voter
registration criteria in Kanaky in
favour of the French settler
population. If successfully implemented, this legislation – combined with
other French initiatives secreted in the ‘Martyr’
(sometimes dubbed
effectively dismantle key protections for Kanak peoples guaranteed by the
Nouméa Accord
As the United Nations Experts on the Rights of Kanak Indigenous People in the
Non-Self-Governing Territory of New Caledonia and the
In all such processes, the basic rights to participation, consultation and
free, prior and informed consent of the Kanak Indigenous
People and customary
institutions clearly have not been respected. In addition, the attempt to
dismantle the
Nouméa Accord
, an Accord which brought back peace
after years of bloody conflict during which more than 90 people died, undermines
the integrity
of the overall decolonization
As noted in Part II of this article, the colonial strategy to redraw the
lines of democracy in Kanaky to favour French colonial interests
is hardly new.
Again in 2024, the composition of Kanaky’s electoral roll was firmly in
the sights of the French colonial state:
the French National Assembly voted
351:153 in favour of amending
Constitution
du 4 Octobre 1958
Constitution
of 4 October 1958) to unfreeze the electoral rolls in Kanaky
and enable the reconstitution of the electorate in favour of French
interests. Again, Kanak resisted.
There are conflicting reports of events in Kanaky, both leading up to and
following the French National Assembly vote in 2024. That
France deployed a
massive military presence to the archipelago is undisputed. That Kanak were
protesting France’s latest attempts
to ‘recolonise’ Kanaky is
also clear. That violence ensued is undisputed. France characterised Kanak
protests and resistance
as an unprecedented
insurrection.
The recruitment
of colonial criminal law to serve the shapeshifting interests of the colonial
project in Kanaky was immediate, overt
comprehensive.
France declared a state of
Movements were
restricted, curfews imposed and gatherings
prohibited:
The state of emergency allowed for exceptional measures such as searches
without the intervention of the public prosecutor, and house
arrests when the
state of emergency came into force. ... The government justified this measure on
the basis of the ‘theory
of exceptional circumstances’, which allows
derogations from the law in times of
As France prepared to welcome the world to the 2024 Olympics, French
authorities closed Kanaky’s only international airport,
La Tontouta, and
banned TikTok, claiming protesters were using the platform to organise
Breaches of the French-declared state of emergency conditions were punishable
under French-administered criminal law and enforced
by French-deployed police
and military personnel. The impact on Kanak was immediate. In April 2024, prior
to the state of emergency
coming into effect, the entire prison population of
Kanaky was 587 persons (largely
On the first day of
the state of emergency alone, then-French High Commissioner of the Republic in
New Caledonia Louis Le Franc reported
that 36 people had been
Over the following
24 hours, 130 protestors were arrested and dozens more taken into
By mid-September,
more than 2,343 Kanak had been arrested – the equivalent of 2%
the Kanak population.
– already over capacity –
overflowed.
More than 60
Kanak leaders were transferred from Kanaky to France to face the ‘criminal
justice’ system there,
sometimes without the knowledge of the detainees’ families and without the
consent of the detainees.
In the opening days of the French-declared state of emergency, then-French
Minister of (so-called) Justice, Éric Dupond-Moretti,
confidential circular urging Kanaky’s public prosecutor’s office to
take the strongest possible action and seek
the heaviest available penalties for
offences committed under the state of
The Minister also
called for the deployment of criminal investigation in administrative contexts,
such as house arrests.
Dupond-Moretti’s circular, issued on 17 May 2024, was identified by the
Kanak Customary Senate as marking France’s formal
‘judicialisation
and criminalisation’
the 2024 conflict between Kanak and the French colonial state.
France has perpetuated ‘massive and systematic
violations’
rights of Kanak peoples, not only in 2024, but throughout the generations prior
to the current crisis. The French colonial
state remains, in Leblic’s
words, ‘imperturbably paternalistic and
colonialist’.
France yet again attempted Kanak
legal erasure
through the constitutional
construction, deconstruction and reconstruction of Kanak peoplehood in Kanaky;
the colonial state then
criminalised those who resisted.
Physical erasure
of Kanak also remains part of the 2024 colonial
arsenal. The multi-pronged assault on Kanak people and peoplehood by the French
state has been described as a combination of
destruction
destruction.
reports from United Nations experts that 500 Kanak people have been subject to
enforced disappearances over the course
By 12 September 2024,
barely four months after the French National Assembly’s efforts to
constitutionally enshrine the acceleration
of Kanak minoritisation in
the Kanak Customary
Senate confirmed French police and military personnel have been responsible
1. 169 injured Kanak people, including 11 life-threatening injuries, 24 shot
in the head, four flash-ball injuries (a controversial
LBD40 rubber bullet used
by French riot police);
2. At least six Kanak men killed, including: Jybril Salo, Dany Tidjite, Josh
Poulawa, Lionel Paita (grandson of the Grand Chief of
Païta, shot in the
head by someone alleging to be a plain-clothes French military police officer),
Johan Kaidine and Samuel
3. The gang rape of a young Kanak woman by five personnel attired in black
emergency uniforms and bullet proof vests;
4. The execution of Victorin Wamytan (nephew of senior pro-independence
leader and High Chief of St Louis, Roch Wamytan) by an elite
French military
police sniper;
5. The execution of Marco Caco by French military
In its concluding observations on France’s sixth period report to the
United Nations Human Rights Committee in relation to the
International
Covenant on Civil and Political
the Committee
noted its grave concerns over the allegations of excessive use of force in
Kanaky since the declaration of the state
extensive reports
of ‘police violence, extrajudicial killings and/or executions and ...
alleged rapes of
The [Human Rights] Committee is gravely concerned about allegations
concerning the excessive use of force by the law enforcement authorities
Caledonia since the outbreak, in May 2024, of demonstrations and incidents in
response to the constitutional bill that would
modify voting lists in the
territory. Some events are reported to have turned violent; a number of
individuals, including around
10 members of the Kanak community and two
gendarmes, lost their lives, while hundreds of others were injured ...
The State party should ensure that all alleged cases of excessive use of
force by the law enforcement and security forces during the
demonstrations and
incidents that have taken place in New Caledonia since May 2024 are promptly,
impartially and effectively investigated,
that the perpetrators of crimes and
offences committed in the context of these events are prosecuted and, if found
guilty, punished
with penalties commensurate with the gravity of their acts, and
that victims receive full
reparations.
The physical injuries and fatalities effected by French police and military
personnel are
in addition
to those carried out by French loyalist
militias. Although the use of weapons was banned in Kanaky under the state of
emergency measures,
the Kanak Customary Senate has confirmed at least two Kanak
– 17-year-old Nassaié Daouka and Chrétien Neregote
were both killed by armed European civilians. On 4 June 2024, a Kanak police
officer was beaten by a loyalist
Right wing loyalist
Gil Brial, Vice-President of Kanaky’s Southern Province, was reportedly
present at the scene.
Eyewitness reports on the actions of these loyalist militias are chilling.
Noteworthy from these reports is that
who violate the provisions
of French-imposed criminal laws in Kanaky, yet act in alignment with the
repressive interests of the French
colonial state, escape criminal
punishment.
Judicial officers
in Kanaky have reported the disappearance of the rule of law as French
authorities give groups of armed residents
of European origin in Kanaky a
‘blank cheque’ (‘
blanc-seing
’) when it comes to
violence against Kanak.
French colonial state is, as the Kanak Customary Senate identifies, co-authoring
representatives characterise the existence and actions of these loyalist
militias as
‘self-defence’,
describing them as ‘protection
residents ‘taking charge of their own security by forming
In contrast,
Kanak resistance of colonial erasure is characterised today, as it has been
throughout history, as revolt and
insurrection
to peace and security which justifies repression (in the words of then-High
Commissioner Le Franc)
This is the
fundamental hypocrisy of the French colonial state as it criminalises Indigenous
resistance and ignores not only ‘crimes
imperialism’
violence, but the violence of any who share the colonial state’s
objective: Indigenous erasure.
IV CONCLUSION: RESISTING COLONIAL SUFFOCATION IN THE
From invasion, to
, to repression, to accord, to
‘consultation’, to suffocation. While the faces of French
colonialism in Kanaky are continually
shapeshifting, the objective of the French
colonial state remains stagnant. The same ‘imperialist
which drove the
hoisting of the
over Kanak lands in 1853 continues to drive
French engagement with Kanak today. Kanak erasure – legal and physical
As I have argued elsewhere, colonial gaols are repositories of colonial
In February 2024, just
prior to the commencement of the French Constitutional amendment vote on the
composition of Kanaky’s
electoral roll, France announced it would be
making its single largest public investment in Kanaky’s history. The
destination
for this largesse is the development of a new, €500 million
prison facility for 600
In addition to the
notoriously overcrowded
facilities and the new, 120-person
prison opened in
in 2023, completion of this new prison will
increase Kanaky’s official penitentiary capacity to 1,110 people (or 1,307
including the overcrowding already happening in
Construction is slated to commence in
Considering that
between 90% and 100% of prisoners in Kanaky were Kanak
events of 2024, this signal of French intentions in the archipelago is
Agozino urges criminologists to make the effort to go beyond ‘pick
pockets and street criminals’ and ‘see the big
picture of the
greatest organized crime that there ever was, the crimes of
imperialism’.
1886 and 1946, the
constituted a French-developed,
French-administered and French-enforced ‘regime of
and a profound and sustained violation of the rights of Kanak. While the
has lapsed into history, it remains the forerunner of
the contemporary weaponisation of French ‘criminal justice’ in
of Kanak erasure. The declaration and maintenance of a prolonged state
of emergency in Kanaky in 2024, and the accelerated criminalisation
which the institution of these ‘exceptional measures’ has
facilitated, are likewise a French-developed, French-administered
French-enforced ‘regime of
‘exceptional measures’ which persist into
Furthermore, the accelerated criminalisation of Kanak in Kanaky during 2024
is likely to have profound and ongoing ramifications for
Kanak political
representation, and Kanaky’s independence, as long as France remains at
the helm of Kanaky’s laws and
institutions. French law allows the French
High Commissioner of the Republic in New Caledonia to declare political
representatives
and candidates to be ineligible to hold office on the basis of
criminal prosecution.
many Kanak leaders arrested over the course of 2024 alone, the full repressive
force of colonial criminal law on Kanak political
representation in the months
and years ahead is yet to be seen.
As Kanak continue to resist France’s ‘imperialist
into 2025 and
beyond, hope remains:
One immutable law of history is that no empire is forever. Empires rise and
empires fall precisely because empires are undemocratic
and so no amount of
force, threat, intellectual deceit or bribery with economic power could sustain
an empire forever. Sooner or
later, the anti-imperialist forces would win ...
the war of the trenches conceptually, institutionally and
In 2024, Kanak have reminded the world of their sustained resilience against
a powerful imperial force. They have also issued renewed
calls for solidarity
and resistance:
Kanaky needs solidarity when Kanaks are being shot by militias, the police
and the military, but it also needs solidarity during the
everyday colonial
‘normality,’ while the racist policies and practices of France and
anti-independence political leaders
suffocate the Kanak
Kanak representative Wea has testified that although France ‘want to
suffocate’ Kanak peoples, Kanak ‘
will not allow
international community must not allow it either.
* Lecturer, University of Technology Sydney. All translations are by the
author, except where otherwise indicated.
‘“Tonight France Is More Beautiful”: Macron
Hails New Caledonia’s Rejection of Independence’,
(online, 12 December 2021)
<https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/20211212-new-caledonia-rejects-independence-from-france-in-referendum-boycotted-by-separatist-camp-partial-results>
(‘Macron Hails New Caledonia’s Rejection of
Independence’).
Pacific Islands Forum,
Ministerial Committee to New Caledonia Report on the 2021 New Caledonia
Independence Referendum
(Report, 2 February 2022) 1 [4]–[5]
Ministerial Committee to New Caledonia Report
David Chappell,
Awakening: The Rise of Nationalism in New Caledonia
(University of
Hawaiʻi Press, 2013) 24.
Charlotte Antoine-Perron,
‘New Caledonia Marks Anniversary of French Colonization with Tight
Security and Simmering Tensions’,
Associated Press
(online, 25
September 2024)
<https://apnews.com/article/france-new-caledonia-colonisation-anniversary-1f5102f1390a469ab4d01da4a3bb844a>.
Dubravka Voloder and Jenny Cai,
‘France Declares a State of Emergency in New Caledonia, 500 Police Sent to
Quash Deadly Riots’,
(online, 16 May 2024)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2024-05-16/france-declares-state-of-emergency-on-new-caledonia-amid-riots/103853654>;
‘France to Declare State of Emergency in New Caledonia as Unrest Turns
(online, 15 May 2024)
<https://www.france24.com/en/asia-pacific/20240515-dozens-arrested-in-new-caledonia-constitutional-reform-unrest>.
Voloder and Cai (n 5).
Margot Staunton, ‘France
Sends Armoured Vehicles with Machine Gun Capability to New Caledonia’,
Radio New Zealand
(online, 4 June 2024)
<https://www.rnz.co.nz/international/pacific-news/518600/france-sends-armoured-vehicles-with-machine-gun-capability-to-new-caledonia>;
Roselyne Makalu and Anaïs Duong-Pedica, ‘Decolonizing Kanaky in Our
Sea of Islands’ (2024) 55
Funambulist
Institut de la Statistique et
des Études Économiques Nouvelle-Calédonie [Institute of
Statistics and Economic
Studies (New Caledonia)], ‘Recensement de la
Population 2019 en Nouvelle-Calédonie’ [Population Census: New
2019] (Spreadsheet, 2019)
<https://www.isee.nc/component/phocadownload/category/193-recensement?download=1980:rp2019-population-menages-logement-province>
(‘2019 Population Census’).
Ministerial Committee to New
Caledonia Report
(n 2) 10–11 [52]–[56].
The term ‘Kanak’
is used by Indigenous peoples in Kanaky to distinguish themselves from
’ (French settler colonists and their descendants):
see Anaïs Duong-Pedica, ‘Unsettling “We’re All
Mixed-Race”:
/Colonial Futurity, Settler Colonialism
and the Countering of Kanak Sovereignty’ (2022) 25(3)
International
Journal of Francophone Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1386/ijfs_00051_1> (‘Unsettling
“We’re All Mixed-Race”’).
Esra Taşkın,
‘Granting Voting Rights to Settlers in New Caledonia “Life-or-Death
Matter,” Says Kanak
Movement Leader’,
Anadolu Agency
29 May 2024)
<https://www.aa.com.tr/en/europe/granting-voting-rights-to-settlers-in-new-caledonia-life-or-death-matter-says-kanak-movement-leader/3234452>.
Makalu and Duong-Pedica (n
7); Customary Senate of New Caledonia,
Summary of Violations and
Recommendations: Human Rights Situation on the Territory of New
Caledonia/Kanaky
(Interim Report, 13 September 2024) (‘
World March of Women –
Kanaky, ‘Letter to Our Sisters in the World March of Women and All Over
the World’ (Letter,
4 June 2024) 5, on file with author (‘World
March of Women Letter’). See also World March of Women, ‘Stop the
International Call for Kanaky’ (Webinar, 5 July 2024)
<https://marchemondiale.org/2024/07/01/stop-the-genocide-international-call-for-kanaky-webinar/>.
Taiaiake Alfred and Jeff
Corntassel, ‘Being Indigenous: Resurgences against Contemporary
Colonialism’ (2005) 40(4)
Government and Opposition
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2005.00166.x>.
Chris Cunneen and Juan
Indigenous Criminology
(Policy Press, 2016) 28
<https://doi.org/10.46692/9781447321781>.
Alfred and Corntassel (n 14)
Ibid 598 (emphasis
Stephen James Minton (ed),
Residential Schools and Indigenous Peoples: From Genocide via Education to
the Possibilities for Processes of Truth, Restitution,
Reconciliation, and
Reclamation
(Routledge, 2021) <https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429463044>;
Bonnie St Charles, ‘You’re on Native Land: The Genocide
Convention,
Cultural Genocide, and Prevention of Indigenous Land Takings’
(2020) 21(1)
Chicago Journal of International Law
; Maria Giannacopoulos,
‘White Law/Black Deaths: Nomocide and the Foundational Absence of Consent
in Australian Law’
(2020) 46(2)
Australian Feminist Law Journal
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13200968.2021.1959994>; Irene Watson,
Aboriginal Peoples, Colonialism and International Law: Raw Law
(Routledge, 2015) <https://doi.org/10.1080/07329113.2015.1016258>; Patrick
Wolfe, ‘Settler Colonialism and the Elimination
of the Native’
(2006) 8(4)
Journal of Genocide
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14623520601056240>; Alan Berman, ‘Future
Kanak Independence in New Caledonia: Reality or
(1998) 34(2)
Stanford Journal of International Law
, 287 (‘Future Kanak
Independence’); Hurst Hannum, ‘New Developments in Indigenous
Virginia Journal of International Law
Alfred and Corntassel (n
Ibid 601–5.
Biko Agozino,
‘Imperialism, Crime and Criminology: Toward the Decolonisation of
Criminology’
Crime, Law and Social Change
<https://doi.org/10.1023/b:cris.0000025766.99876.4c>.
Stephen A Toth,
‘Colonisation or Incarceration? The Changing Role of the French Penal
Fin‐de‐Siecle
New Caledonia’ (1999) 34(1)
Journal of Pacific History
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00223349908572891>.
Juan Tauri, ‘The
Plastic Shamans of Restorative Justice’ in Chris Cunneen et al (eds),
The Routledge International Handbook on Decolonizing Justice
(Routledge,
2023) 43, 52 <https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003176619.
Efrat Arbel,
‘Rethinking the “Crisis” of Indigenous Mass
Imprisonment’
(2019) 34(3)
Canadian Journal of Law and Society
438–9 <https://doi.org/10.1017/cls.2019.37>.
Frantz Fanon,
Wretched of the Earth
, tr Constance Farrington (Grove Press, 1963) 38.
See, eg, Isabelle Merle and
Adrian Muckle,
The Indigénat and France’s Empire in New
Caledonia: Origins, Practices and Legacies
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2022)
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-99033-6>; Isabelle Leblic,
‘Sovereignty and Coloniality
in the French‐Speaking Pacific: A
Reflection on the Case of New Caledonia, 1980–2021’
(2022) 92(1)
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ocea.5335> (‘Sovereignty
and Coloniality’); Adrian Muckle, ‘Contesting Colonial
Violence in
New Caledonia’ in Philip Dwyer and Amanda Nettelbeck (eds),
Colonialism and Empire in the Modern World
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2018) 221;
Isabelle Leblic, ‘Naming in Kanak Groups: Names, Relations, and Personal
Identity among the
Paicî Kanak (Ponerihouen, New Caledonia)’ (2016)
Pacific Studies
54; Adrian Muckle, ‘Troublesome
Chiefs and Disorderly Subjects: The
and the Internment
of Kanak in New Caledonia (1887–1928)’ (2010) 11
French Colonial
131 <https://doi.org/10.1353/fch.0.0024> (‘Troublesome
Chiefs and Disorderly Subjects’); Isabelle Leblic,
‘Présentation:
Nouvelle-Calédonie, 150 Ans après la
Prise de Possession’ [Presentation: New Caledonia, 150 Years after Taking
Possession] [2003] (117)
Journal de la Société des
[Journal of the Oceanists Society] 135
<https://doi.org/10.4000/jso.1242>; Nic Maclellan and Jean Chesneaux,
After Moruroa: France in the South Pacific
(Ocean Press, 1998).
See, eg, Matthias Kowasch
and Simon PJ Batterbury (eds),
Geographies of New Caledonia-Kanaky:
Environments, Politics and Cultures
(Springer, 2024)
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-49140-5>; Matthias Kowasch et al,
‘The Third Independence Referendum
in New Caledonia: A Fallback to
Colonialism?’ [2022] (57)
Pacific Geographies
<https://doi.org/10.23791/571115>; Simon PJ Batterbury, Matthias Kowasch
and Séverine Bouard, ‘The Geopolitical
Ecology of New Caledonia:
Territorial Re-ordering, Mining, and Indigenous Economic Development’
(2020) 27(1)
Journal of Political Ecology
<https://doi.org/10.2458/v27i1.23812>.
See, eg, Anaïs
Duong-Pedica, ‘Thinking Kanaky Decolonially’ (2021) 20(2)
Journal of Social Sciences
141; Anaïs Duong-Pedica, ‘Mixed-Race
Kanak in “A World Cut in Two”: Contemporary Experiences in
Caledonia’ (2023) 2(1)
Journal of Critical Mixed Race
http://doi.org/10.5070/C82161755
(‘A World Cut in
Two’); Duong-Pedica, ‘Unsettling “We’re All
Mixed-Race”’ (n 10); Denise
France in the South Pacific:
Power and Politics
(ANU E Press, 2013) (‘
’); Denise Fisher, ‘The Crowded and Complex Pacific:
Lessons from France’s Pacific Experience’ (2020) 16(1)
37; Denise Fisher, ‘New Caledonia’s Independence
Referendum: Re-defining the Future’ (2019) 54(2)
Journal of Pacific
202 <https://doi.org/10.1080/00223344.2019.1600647>.
Alfred and Corntassel (n 14)
José Francisco
Cali-Tzay et al, ‘Statement of the United Nations Experts on the Rights of
Kanak Indigenous People in
the Non-self-governing Territory of New Caledonia and
Nouméa Accord
’ (Statement, 20 August 2024) 3.
‘Kanak Chiefs Proclaim
Sovereignty over New Caledonia’s Ancestral Lands’,
Radio France
Internationale
(online, 26 September 2024)
<https://www.rfi.fr/en/france/20240926-kanak-chiefs-proclaim-sovereignty-over-new-caledonia-s-ancestral-lands>.
Chantal Deltenre,
Est: Journal d’une Ethnologue dans une Prison de Kanaky
Nouvelle-Calédonie
[Camp Est: Diary of an Ethnologist in a Prison in
Kanaky, New Caledonia] (Anacharsis Éditions, 2022) 115.
‘Nouvelle-Calédonie:
Emmanuel Macron Demande le Retrait des Barrages “dans les Heures qui
Viennent” Afin
de Lever l’État d’Urgence’ [New
Caledonia: Emmanuel Macron Calls for the Removal of Roadblocks “in
Coming Hours” in Order to Lift the State of Emergency],
[The Dispatch] (online, 23 May 2024) 8:17am
<https://www.ladepeche.fr/2024/05/23/direct-nouvelle-caledonie-emmanuel-macron-demande-le-retour-a-la-paix-mais-aussi-au-dialogue-apres-les-emeutes-11968460.php>
(‘Calls for Removal of Roadblocks’).
Samidoun Paris Banlieue,
‘From Kanaky to Palestine, Resistance to Colonial Incarceration’,
Samidoun: Palestinian Prisoner Solidarity Network
(online, 19 July 2024)
<https://samidoun.net/2024/07/from-kanaky-to-palestine-resistance-to-colonial-incarceration/>
Kanaky to Palestine’).
Summary of Violations
James Cook,
‘Cook’s Journal: Daily Entries’ (Archival Journal, 29 April
http://southseas.nla.gov.au/journals/cook/17700429.html
LF Fitzhardinge, ‘Some
“First Fleet” Reviews’ (1959) 9(33)
Historical Studies:
Australia and New Zealand
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10314615908595154>.
See, eg, Colin Forster,
France and Botany Bay: The Lure of a Penal Colony
(Melbourne University
Press, 1996) ch 1; Louis-José Barbançon,
L’Archipel des
Forçats: Histoire du Bagne de Nouvelle-Calédonie
(1863–1931)
[The Convicts’ Archipelago: History of the Penal
Colony of New Caledonia (1863–1931)] (Presses Universitaires du
Septentrion
[University Press of the North], 2003) bk 1 ch 1
Mabo v Queensland (No
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Alan Berman, ‘The
Noumea Accords: Emancipation or Colonial Harness’
(2001) 36(2)
International Law Journal
, 283 (‘Emancipation or Colonial
Deltenre (n 34) 34, 102;
Yoram Mouchenik et al, ‘Quelle Prise en Charge pour les Populations
Autochtones du Pacifique sous
Main de Justice?’ [What Support is Available
for the Indigenous Peoples of the Pacific in the Hands of Justice?] (Research
Paper No 54, Cahiers d’Etudes Pénitentiaires et Criminologiques
[Penitentiary and Criminological Study Notebooks], March
See Jean-Marie Tjibaou,
, tr Helen Fraser and John Trotter (Pandanus Books, 2005); Berman,
‘Future Kanak Independence’ (n 18).
Berman, ‘Future Kanak
Independence’ (n 18) 322.
Tate Augusta LeFevre,
‘Creating Kanaky: Indigeneity, Youth and the Cultural Politics of the
Possible’ (PhD Thesis, New
York University, 2013) 79–80, discussing
a letter written by French Prime Minister Pierre Messmer.
Berman, ‘Future Kanak
Independence’ (n 18) 322.
Maclellan and Chesneaux (n
28) 162, 165.
Alban Bensa and Eric
Wittersheim, ‘Jean Guiart and New Caledonia: A Drama of
Misrepresentation’ (1998) 33(2)
Journal of Pacific History
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00223349808572871>.
Denise Fisher, ‘New
Caledonia: France’s Way or the Pacific Way?’,
The Interpreter
(online, 26 June 2024)
<https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/new-caledonia-france-s-way-or-pacific-way>.
Maclellan and Chesneaux (n
LeFevre (n 47) 90.
Maclellan and Chesneaux (n
Watson (n 18) 94.
‘World March of Women
Letter’ (n 13) 6.
Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
New Caledonia: Working
Paper Prepared by the Secretariat
, UN Doc A/AC.109/2114 (3 June 1998) annex
Preamble para 3 (‘
Working Paper
Ibid annex Preamble para
Duong-Pedica, ‘A World
Cut in Two’ (n 30) 75.
Working Paper
annex Preamble para 3.
Ibid annex Preamble paras
Ibid annex Preamble para
See ibid 2–7 [6],
Ibid annex Preamble para
Ministère des
Outre-Mer [Ministry of the Overseas], ‘Discussions sur l’Avenir
Institutionnel de la Nouvelle Calédonie:
Les Conséquences Du
« Oui » et du « Non »’ [Discussions on the
Institutional Future of New Caledonia:
The Consequences of “Yes” and
“No”] (Discussion Paper) 5 (‘Discussions on the Institutional
of New Caledonia’).
Kowasch et al (n 29) 11.
‘Discussions on the
Institutional Future of New Caledonia’ (n 71).
Denise Fisher, ‘France
Precipitates Abrupt End to the Nouméa Accord’,
(Blog Post, 20 July 2021)
<https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/france-precipitates-abrupt-end-to-noumea-accord-in-new-caledonia/>;
Denise Fisher, ‘New Caledonian Independence Leaders Challenge France Over
Final Referendum Date’,
The Strategist
(Blog Post, 22 October 2021)
<https://www.aspistrategist.org.au/new-caledonian-independence-leaders-challenge-france-over-final-referendum-date/>.
Leblic, ‘Sovereignty
and Coloniality’ (n 28) 125;
Ministerial Committee to New Caledonia
Leblic, ‘Sovereignty
and Coloniality’ (n 28) 115.
Translated in Nic Maclennan,
‘Third Time Lucky in New Caledonia?’,
Inside Story
15 June 2021)
<https://insidestory.org.au/third-time-lucky-in-new-caledonia/>, citing
Eline Ulysse, ‘Nouvelle-Calédonie:
Le Troisième
Référendum d'Autodétermination Aura Lieu le 12
Décembre 2021’ [New Caledonia:
Third Self-Determination Referendum
to Take Place on 12 December, 2021],
Outremers 360°
(online, 2 June
<https://outremers360.com/bassin-pacifique-appli/nouvelle-caledonie-le-troisieme-referendum-dautodetermination-aura-lieu-le-12-decembre-2021>,
reporting on a speech delivered by Sébastien Lecornu.
Collectif de
Spécialistes de l’Histoire et de la Société
Calédoniennes [Collective of Experts in
Caledonian History and Society],
‘Respectons le Deuil Kanak, Reportons le Référendum en
Nouvelle-Calédonie’
[Let’s Respect Kanak Mourning,
Let’s Postpone the Referendum in New Caledonia],
23 November 2021)
<https://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2021/11/23/respectons-le-deuil-kanak-reportons-le-referendum-en-nouvelle-caledonie_6103237_3232.html>.
Jad Kerbaj et al,
‘COVID-19: The New Caledonia Experience’ (2020) 71(16)
Infectious Diseases
<https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa600>.
Kowasch et al (n 29) 19.
Ministerial Committee to
New Caledonia Report
(n 2) 3 [16].
Ibid 1 [6].
Edouard Mathieu et al,
‘Coronavirus (COVID-19) Deaths’,
Our World in Data
2020) <https://ourworldindata.org/covid-deaths>.
Working Paper
annex Preamble para 5.
Ministerial Committee to
New Caledonia Report
(n 2) 7 [32].
Vincent Brengarth,
‘Nouvelle-Calédonie: Quand le Conseil d’État Rejoint
la Réticence du Gouvernement
à La Pleine
Souveraineté’ [New Caledonia: When the Council of State Joined the
Government’s Reticence toward
Full Sovereignty] [2022] (May)
Droits de l’Homme
[Human Rights Review] 1, 3 [8].
Ibid 3 [8].
Watson (n 18) 94.
Brengarth (n 87) 5 [19].
Marylou Mahe,
‘Opinion: The New Caledonian Independence Referendum Is
Undemocratic’,
Radio New Zealand
(online, 11 December 2021)
<https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/pacific/457720/opinion-the-new-caledonian-independence-referendum-is-undemocratic>.
Ministerial Committee to
New Caledonia Report
(n 2) 1–2 [6] (emphasis in original).
‘2019 Population
Census’ (n 8).
Ministerial Committee to
New Caledonia Report
(n 2) 10 [52]; Nic Maclellan, ‘To Vote or Not to
Vote? Debating a New Caledonia Referendum Delay’,
Islands Business
(online, 19 October 2021)
<https://islandsbusiness.com/news-break/new-caledonia-referendum/>.
Ministerial Committee to
New Caledonia Report
(n 2) 10 [52].
Ibid 11 [54].
Ibid 11 [54]–[56].
Summary of Violations
Ministerial Committee
to New Caledonia Report
(n 2) 1 [5].
‘Macron Hails New
Caledonia’s Rejection of Independence’ (n 1).
See ‘Summary of
Violations’ in
Summary of Violations
(n 12). See also at 10.
See Part I above.
See Alfred and Corntassel
Lisa N Billington,
‘A Response to Colonial Carceral Control: Conceptualising a Decolonial
Approach to Self-Determination’
(PhD Thesis, University of Technology
Sydney, 2022) 81–99 <https://doi.org//10453/172014>.
Biko Agozino,
Counter-Colonial Criminology: A Critique of Imperialist Reason
Press, 2003) 35
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt18fsbt7
Counter-Colonial Criminology
See Barbançon (n
41) bk 1 ch 2 [82]–[94].
Toth (n 23) 59.
See Barbançon (n
41) bk 1 ch 2 [88].
Isabelle Merle and Marine
Coquet, ‘The Penal World in the French Empire: A Comparative Study of
French Transportation and Its
Legacy in Guyana and New Caledonia’ (2019)
Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03086534.2019.1605706>.
George Chetwynd Griffith,
In an Unknown Prison Land: An Account of Convicts and Colonists in New
Caledonia with Jottings Out and Home
(Hutchinson & Co, 1901) 83.
Clare Anderson,
‘Introduction: A Global History of Convicts and Penal Colonies’ in
Clare Anderson (ed),
A Global History of Convicts and Penal Colonies
(Bloomsbury Publishing, 2018) 8.
Gregory Mann, ‘What
? The “Empire of Law” in French West
(2009) 50(3)
Journal of African History
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021853709990090>.
‘Emancipation or Colonial Harness’ (n 43) 279.
‘Troublesome Chiefs and Disorderly Subjects’ (n 28) 132.
See Merle and Muckle (n
Mann (n 115) 334.
Tauri (n 24) 52 (emphasis
Australian Bureau of
Statistics,
Corrective Services, Australia, September Quarter 1999
(Catalogue No 4512.0, 21 December 1999) 5
<https://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/4512.0Sep%201999?OpenDocument>.
‘Corrective
Services, Australia: June Quarter 2024’,
Australian Bureau of
(Web Page, 19 September 2024)
<https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime-and-justice/corrective-services-australia/jun-quarter-2024>.
See, eg, Lisa N
Billington, ‘Colonial Goals through Colonial Gaols: The Imperative of
Indigenous Self-Centred Self-Determination
for Indigenous Decarceration’
(2024) 27(1)
Law Text Culture
<https://doi.org/10.14453/ltc.500>
(‘Colonial Goals through Colonial Gaols’).
See, eg, James Anaya,
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples: The
Situation of Kanak People in New Caledonia, France
, UN Doc A/HRC/18/35/Add.6
(23 November 2011) 14 [49] (‘
Report of the Special
’); Congrès Populaire Coutumier Kanak [Kanak
Customary People’s Congress],
Rapport et Recommandation au Conseil des
Droits de l’Homme en Prévision de l’Examen Périodique
de la France
[Report and Recommendation to the Human Rights
Council in Anticipation of the Universal Periodic Review of France] (Report,
‘Une Mosaïque
Pluriethnique’ [A Multi-Ethnic Mosaic],
Institut de la Statistique et
des Études Économiques Nouvelle-Calédonie
[Institute of
Statistics and Economic Studies (New Caledonia)] (Web Page, 2019)
<https://www.isee.nc/population/recensement/communautes>.
Mouchenik et al (n 44) 2;
Deltenre (n 34) 34, 102.
Report of the Special
(n 125) 16 [58].
Helen Fair and Roy
World Prison Population List: Fourteenth Edition
(Report, 2024)
Report of the Special
(n 125) 16 [58]. See also
Summary of Violations
‘The State Invests
82 Million Dollars in a Prison’,
The French Pacific Journal
(online, 24 February 2024)
<https://www.pacific-journal.com/area/the-state-invests-82-million-dollars-in-a-prison/>.
See, eg, Deltenre (n
Yengo v France
(European Court of Human Rights, Chamber, Application No 50494/12, 21 May 2015)
Adeline Hazan,
Contrôleur Général des Lieux de Privation de Liberté:
2019 Annual Report
[Chief Inspector of Places of Deprivation of Liberty:
2019 Annual Report] (Report, 2019) 72.
Report of the Special
(n 125) 15–16 [56].
Deltenre (n 34) 141.
Fair and Walmsley (n 129)
‘New Caledonia
World Prison Brief
(Web Page, 1 April 2025)
<https://www.prisonstudies.org/country/new-caledonia-france>.
Corinne David-Ives,
‘Ataï’s Return to New Caledonia: Reconciliation Politics and
the Embarrassing Legacy of Colonial
Anthropology’ (2017) 5(2)
of New Zealand and Pacific Studies
<https://doi.org/10.1386/nzps.5.2.175_1>.
See Francoise Tromeur,
‘Avenir Institutionnel: NC la 1ère Dévoile le Projet
d’Accord Proposé par
l’Etat dans le Document
“Martyr”’ [Institutional Future: NC the 1
the Draft Agreement Proposed by the State in the “Martyr” Document],
(online, 14 September 2023)
<https://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/nouvellecaledonie/avenir-institutionnel-nc-la-1ere-devoile-le-projet-d-accord-propose-par-l-etat-dans-le-document-martyr-1428092.html>.
Cali-Tzay et al (n 32)
‘Calls for Removal
of Roadblocks’ (n 35) 8:17am.
‘Nouvelle-Calédonie: Ce que Contient la “Circulaire
Pénale” Envoyée par Éric Dupond-Moretti’
Caledonia: What is in the “Penal Circular” Sent by Éric
Dupond-Moretti],
(online, 17 May 2024)
<https://www.francetvinfo.fr/france/nouvelle-caledonie/info-franceinfo-nouvelle-caledonie-ce-que-contient-la-circulaire-penale-envoyee-par-eric-dupond-moretti_6549659.html>
(‘Penal Circular’).
Haut-Commissariat de la
République en Nouvelle-Calédonie [High Commission of the Republic
in New Caledonia], ‘Point
de Situation Sur Les Graves Troubles à
l’Ordre Public’ [Update on Serious Public Order Disturbances] (Press
14 May 2024)
<https://www.nouvelle-caledonie.gouv.fr/Actualites/Point-de-situation-sur-les-graves-troubles-a-l-ordre-public>
(‘Update on Serious Public Order Disturbances’).
135 HC/CAB/DSS/BSI
14 Mai 2024
portant Réglementation
Temporaire relative au Rassemblement et à la Circulation des Personnes
sur la Voie Publique
et dans les Lieux Publics des Communes du Grand
[Order No 135 HC/CAB/DSS/BSI of 14 May 2024 Establishing
Temporary Regulations on the Gathering and Movement of People on Public Highways
and in Public Places in the Municipalities of Greater Nouméa] (New
Caledonia).
See ‘From Kanaky to
Palestine’ (n 36).
Fair and Walmsley (n
‘Update on Serious
Public Order Disturbances’ (n 150).
Haut-Commissariat de la
République en Nouvelle-Calédonie [High Commission of the Republic
in New Caledonia], ‘Point
de Situation n° 3 sur les Graves Troubles
à l’Ordre Public’ [Update No 3 on Serious Public Order
Disturbances]
(Press Release, 15 May 2024)
<https://www.nouvelle-caledonie.gouv.fr/Actualites/Point-de-situation-n-3-sur-les-graves-troubles-a-l-ordre-public>.
See ‘Summary in
Figures’ in
Summary of Violations
Ibid 23. See also Barbara
Surk, ‘New Caledonia Indigenous Independence Leader Transferred to
Mainland France for Pretrial Detention’,
The Associated Press
(online, 24 June 2024)
<https://apnews.com/article/new-caledonia-france-independence-kanak-activists-custody-5df9580a2ec652bee8bbaa9970d2cbe1>.
Circular’ (n 149).
‘Sovereignty and Coloniality’ (n 28) 122.
‘World March of
Women Letter’ (n 13) 10.
Cali-Tzay et al (n 32)
Makalu and Duong-Pedica
See ‘Summary in
Figures’ in
Summary of Violations
(n 12); Nic Maclellan,
‘Deaths at Saint Louis Overshadow Anniversary of French
Colonisation’,
Islands Business
(online, 23 September 2024)
<https://islandsbusiness.com/news-break/deaths-at-saint-louis-overshadow-anniversary-of-french-colonisation/>;
International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
, opened for signature 19 December
1966, 999 UNTS 171
(entered into force 23 March 1976).
Human Rights Committee,
Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of France
CCPR/C/FRA/CO/6 (3 December 2024) 12 [48]–[49] (‘
Observations
Observations
(n 171) 12 [48]–[49].
‘Un Jeune Policier
Passé à Tabac Par Des Voisins Vigilants Dans Le Quartier de
Tuband, à Nouméa’
[A Young Police Officer Beaten by Vigilant
Neighbours in the Tuband District of Nouméa],
4 June 2024)
<https://la1ere.francetvinfo.fr/nouvellecaledonie/province-sud/noumea/un-jeune-policier-passe-a-tabac-par-des-voisins-vigilants-dans-le-quartier-de-tuband-a-noumea-1493840.html>.
(n 12) 21–2.
Pascale Pascariello,
‘Lors Des Révoltes En Nouvelle-Calédonie, Des Habitants
Armés Ont Été
Soutenus Par La Police’ [During the
Revolts in New Caledonia, Armed Residents Were Supported by the Police],
(online, 29 May 2024)
<https://www.mediapart.fr/journal/france/290524/lors-des-revoltes-en-nouvelle-caledonie-des-habitants-armes-ont-ete-soutenus-par-la-police>;
See ‘Summary in
Figures’ in
Summary of Violations
‘Émeutes en
Nouvelle-Calédonie: Un Nouveau Conseil de Défense Ce Lundi pour
“Rétablir l’ordre”’
[Riots in New Caledonia: A
New Defence Council This Monday to “Restore Order”],
Ouest-France
[West-France] (online, 20 May 2024)
<https://www.ouest-france.fr/monde/nouvelle-caledonie/nouvelle-caledonie-nouveau-conseil-de-defense-lundi-a-18h30-letat-veut-retablir-lordre-aaaa8d7c-161c-11ef-a482-9d66515b057a>
(‘Riots in New Caledonia’).
See ‘Calls for
Removal of Roadblocks’ (n 35) 8:17am; LeFevre (n 47); Muckle,
‘Troublesome Chiefs and Disorderly
Subjects’ (n 28); Berman,
‘Emancipation or Colonial Harness’ (n 43); Linda Latham,
‘Revolt Re-examined: The
1878 Insurrection in New Caledonia’ (1975)
Journal of Pacific History
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00223347508572278>.
‘Riots in New
Caledonia’ (n 180).
Biko Agozino,
‘Editorial: What Is Criminology? A Control-Freak Discipline!’ (2010)
African Journal of Criminology and Justice Studies
(‘What Is Criminology?’).
Counter-Colonial Criminology
(n 106) 35.
See Billington,
‘Colonial Goals through Colonial Gaols’ (n 124).
Dupond-Morett, ‘Plan 15 000 Places de Prison: Inauguration du Centre de
Détention de Koné’
[Plan for 15,000 Prison Places:
Inauguration of the Koné Detention Centre] (Press Release, 23 February
<https://www.justice.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/2024-02/CP%20-%20Inauguration%20du%20centre%20de%20d%C3%A9tention%20de%20Kon%C3%A9%20en%20Nouvelle-Cal%C3%A9donie%20-%2023.02.2024.pdf>.
Agozino, ‘What Is
Criminology?’ (n 184) xiii (citations omitted).
Mann (n 115) 333.
Haut-Commissariat de la République en Nouvelle-Calédonie [High
Commission of the Republic in New Caledonia],
‘Mesures de Police
Administrative’ [Administrative Police Measures],
Haut-Commissariat de
la République en Nouvelle-Calédonie
[High Commission of the
Republic in New Caledonia] (online, 4 February 2025)
<https://www.nouvelle-caledonie.gouv.fr/Actualites/Mesures-de-police-administrative10>.
Loi n° 99-209
Organique du 19 mars 1999 Relative à la Nouvelle-Calédonie
[Organic Law No 99-209 of 19 March 1999 Relating to New Caledonia] (France) JO,
21 March 1999, art 195.
Agozino, ‘What Is
Criminology?’ (n 184) xi.
Makalu and Duong-Pedica
Taşkın (n 11)
(emphasis added).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (378 KB)
PDF format (431 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter