URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/UNSWLawJlF/2020/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:45:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Murphy, Julian R --- "A Precarious High Cannabis Decriminalisation, Authorisation And Federalism" [2020] UNSWLawJlF 2; (2020) UNSW Law Journal Forum No 2
I INTRODUCTION
II THE NEW LAW
B Legal Effect
III A DEFENCE TO FEDERAL PROSECUTION?
A Justification or Excuse by or under a Law – Legislative History and Textual Considerations
B Justification or Excuse by or under a Law – Case Law and Commentary
C Conclusion as to Interaction of ACT and Federal Law
D Practical Consequences
IV FEDERALISM IMPLICATIONS
V CONCLUSION
A PRECARIOUS HIGH – CANNABIS DECRIMINALISATION,
AUTHORISATION AND FEDERALISM
JULIAN R MURPHY*
I INTRODUCTION
On 31 January 2020, the cultivation and possession of small amounts of
cannabis became legal under the law of the Australian Capital
(‘ACT’) with the coming into effect of the
Drugs of Dependence
(Personal Cannabis Use) Amendment Act 2019
(ACT). This appeared to be a
significant milestone in Australia’s regulation of personal drug use. As
had already occurred
the ACT appeared to
be breaking new ground in harm minimisation drug policies while the rest of
Australia watched on. The new ACT
law could have been a paradigm example of
laboratory federalism, whereby a small jurisdiction experiments with laws and
that are not yet palatable or feasible elsewhere in the
It seems unlikely,
however, that the story will be that simple. The federal Attorney-General
Christian Porter has said that the new
ACT law does not provide a defence to the
cannabis possession
Porter has pointedly
remarked that he expects the Australian Federal Police (‘AFP’) to
continue enforcing the federal
Accordingly, ACT residents
growing or possessing small amounts of cannabis run the risk of federal
prosecution. This situation is
unsatisfactory and untenable for a number of
reasons, but particularly because of the way the Damoclean sword of federal
prosecution
is being used to deter conduct that has been decriminalised by the
democratic processes of the ACT.
In order to understand the present situation, it is helpful to first know a
bit more about the context in which the new ACT law was
passed and its precise
legal operation (Part II). Then it will be possible to assess whether the new
law does in fact provide an
effective defence to the federal cannabis possession
offence (Part III) and to briefly discuss the federalist values at stake (Part
IV). Ultimately, it will be suggested that the ACT should be able to formulate
its own criminal laws and policies, free from the
threat of federal
intervention.
II THE NEW LAW
As early as 1926, federal law banned the import and export of cannabis into
However, it has always
been primarily left to the states and territories to regulate cannabis
possession, cultivation and supply
within their
As at the turn of the
century, all states and territories penalised cannabis
possession and cultivation. However the ACT, South Australia and the Northern
Territory had civil fine schemes for low-level
the federal Parliament
introduced a suite of drug offences into the
Criminal Code Act 1995
Criminal Code
’), partly motivated by the desire to
give effect to the
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances
vast majority of the federal offences relate to commercial import, export,
supply, manufacture and cultivation, however there
is also a single offence in
section 308.1 that captures possession of all sorts of ‘controlled
of which cannabis
In recent decades societal views toward cannabis have liberalised and
government policies have followed suit, initially in the field
of medicinal
cannabis. When surveying this trend, it is important to be cognisant of the
distinction between decriminalisation and
legalisation. Decriminalisation
involves removing criminal sanctions for cannabis use, possession and,
sometimes, cultivation without
creating a legal means to obtain the drug;
legalisation involves proactive legislation to permit particular uses of
In 2014, polls
indicated that two thirds of Australians supported the legalisation of medicinal
Relatively shortly
thereafter, in early 2016, the Commonwealth and Victoria legalised cannabis use
for medicinal purposes.
public’s views on recreational cannabis use are also tending away from
criminalisation and towards legalisation. A 2016
survey by the Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare found that 74% of Australians over the age of 14
did not support the possession
of cannabis being a criminal
The number of
Australians in favour of legalisation is growing, although still a minority
nationwide (42% in 2019).
Internationally, there has also been a steady trend away from criminalisation
and toward legalisation. Recreational cannabis has
been legalised in 11 states
and the District of Columbia in the United
Cannabis is also legal
for recreational use in Canada, Georgia, South Africa and
Closer to home, New
Zealand will vote in a referendum on cannabis legalisation on 19 September
In light of the global and domestic trend in public opinion away from
criminalisation and toward legalisation, it was inevitable
that the issue would
be taken up by progressive lawmakers in Australia. Unsurprisingly, and
consistently with the model of laboratory
federalism described
this occurred most
decisively in the ACT, which ranks first among Australian states and territories
in support for cannabis legalisation,
and equal first for reported cannabis use
within regular drug using
populations.
In the ACT a
private member’s Bill was introduced in 2018 to decriminalise cannabis.
The Bill went through a number of changes
before it was ultimately passed in
September 2019 and came into effect on 31 January 2020.
B Legal Effect
The legal interaction of the new ACT law and the federal
Criminal Code
is controversial (and will be considered in the next section), however the
effect of the new law within the ACT’s legal landscape
is straightforward.
Essentially, the new ACT law provides a
to the existing
low-level cultivation and possession offences – which relate to
cultivation of two plants or less and possession
of 50 grams or less – by
stating that each offence ‘does not apply’ to adults who possess or
cultivate the cannabis
Limits and protections have
been built into the new law. Children are not affected by the recent
decriminalisation, accordingly all
pre-existing criminal offences continue to
apply to children (including, most relevantly, possession of 50 grams or less or
cultivation
of two plants or
Children are also
protected by new criminal offences of storing cannabis within the reach of a
child and exposing a child to cannabis
It is an offence to
smoke cannabis in public,
also an offence to cultivate cannabis in a place accessible to the public (or a
place where more than four plants are being
It remains an offence to
grow cannabis artificially (ie,
hydroponically).
Perhaps most
significantly, it remains an offence to supply cannabis to another
III A DEFENCE TO FEDERAL PROSECUTION?
As was adverted to above, the federal
Criminal Code
provision – section 308.1 – criminalising the possession of a whole
host of drugs, including
That provision applies
in the ACT and presents an obvious hurdle to the ACT’s decriminalisation
project. However, the federal
Criminal Code
also includes an unusual
– section 313.1
– allowing the states and territories to makes laws that would justify or
excuse a person from federal
criminal liability for conduct within the state or
territory. Section 313.1 relevantly provides:
Defence – conduct justified or excused by or under a law of a State
or Territory
This Part [Part 9.1 – Serious drug offences] ... does not apply in
relation to conduct if:
(a) a person engages in the conduct in a State or Territory; and
(b) the conduct is
justified or excused by or under a law
State or Territory. (emphasis added)
In order to engage section 313.1, the state or territory must justify or
excuse the relevant conduct ‘by or under a law’.
In attempting to
take advantage of this provision, and provide persons in the ACT with a shield
against federal prosecution, the
new ACT law does not explicitly state that
low-level cannabis possession is
justified or excused
. Rather, as was
explained above, the new ACT law retains the low-level cultivation and
possession offences – which relate to
cultivation of two plants or less
and possession of 50 grams or less – but states that each of those ACT
offences ‘does
not apply’ to adults who possess or cultivate
cannabis within the ACT.
‘does not apply’ phraseology was clearly intended to operate as a
defence under ACT law, as indicated by the fact
that the defendant bears an
evidential burden if they intend to rely on the
When the ACT passed
the new law, it was initially thought that the defence was a
‘justification or excuse by or under a law’
of the ACT, thus
engaging the section 313.1 defence to federal prosecution. However, this soon
became a matter of confusion and controversy.
The ACT Attorney-General Gordon Ramsay said that there had been
‘engagement with the commonwealth, the AFP and legal advisers’
before asserting that ‘the ACT’s legislation attempts to provide a
clear and specific legal defence to an adult who possesses
small amounts of
cannabis in the ACT but who is prosecuted under the commonwealth
Confidence in the
existence of the defence appears to have been based on a letter from the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions
(‘CDPP’) Sarah
McNaughton SC, who initially wrote to the ACT government advising of the
the CDPP withdrew that advice in another letter a week later, in which it was
acknowledged that there were ‘legal
complexities that had not initially
been appreciated’.
Shadow Attorney-General Jeremy Hanson claimed that the legislation remained
‘ambiguous and unclear’ and that
there was a ‘conflict with
federal law’.
the federal Attorney-General Christian Porter has said that the ACT law does not
successfully provide a defence to the
federal cannabis possession offence and
that he expects the AFP to continue to enforce federal
As will be explained below,
Porter is likely correct that the new ACT law does not effectively engage the
section 313.1 defence to
federal prosecution.
A Justification or Excuse by or under a Law –
Legislative History and Textual Considerations
Whether or not the new ACT law provides an effective defence to federal
prosecution turns, in large part, on the meaning of the words
or excused by or under a law’ in section 313.1 of the federal
. The concept of
justification or excuse by or under a law
used elsewhere in the federal
In order to appreciate
the work that this concept does in the statute, it is helpful to know something
The first significant step towards federal codification of the criminal law
was the work, between 1987 and 1991, of the
Review of Commonwealth Criminal
chaired by Sir Harry Gibbs (‘Review Committee’) after he
completed his tenure as Chief Justice of the High Court. The
Committee’s draft Bill included a number of discrete defences and,
‘for the sake of
completeness’,
‘lawful authority’ provision which read: ‘A person is not
guilty of an offence if the relevant act is
required or authorised by a law of
the Commonwealth’.
made clear by the drafters that ‘lawful authority’ was intended to
cover concepts that might also be described
as justifications or
The intention was to
define those defences that were capable of being closely defined but to include
a ‘lawful authority’
defence to leave open defences not defined in,
or abrogated by, the Bill.
Review Committee’s recommendations were not immediately acted upon,
however they energised the debate about the need for
Subsequently, the Standing
Committee of Attorneys-General created a Criminal Law Officers Committee. That
committee produced a discussion
draft and a final code in 1992 both of which,
without explanation, omitted a general ‘lawful authority’
Accordingly, when the
Criminal Code
was enacted in 1995 it did not include a general
‘lawful authority’ defence.
The omission of a general ‘lawful authority’ defence was
discussed by the renamed Model Criminal Code Officers Committee
in 1996, when
the Committee reported: ‘The Committee has decided, after a thorough
review of this area, that it is desirable
to have a defence of, in essence,
acting with lawful
authority’.
recommendation was reiterated in a 1998 report by the same
Parliament acted on
that recommendation in 2000, amending the federal
Criminal Code
introduce section 10.5 – headed ‘Lawful authority’ –
which provided: ‘A person is not criminally
responsible for an offence if
the conduct constituting the offence is justified or excused by or under a
[federal] law’.
the first use of the concept of
justification or excuse by or under a law
in the federal
Criminal Code
. The explanatory memorandum stated that the
intention was to codify a ‘longstanding
and provided an
example of a situation in which it was envisaged section 10.5 would be engaged:
[A] law enforcement officer is
authorised by law
to physically
restrain a person and does so within the scope of his or her authority ... The
main thing to keep in mind here is that
the defence will not apply if there is
justification or excuse provided for by another
The heading and drafting history of section 10.5, as well as the italicised
words in the quoted section of the explanatory memorandum,
suggest that the
justification or excuse by or under a law
in section 10.5
lawful authorisation
. In fact, the Review Committee explained
that ‘[t]here is no reason to perpetuate the distinction drawn by the
Codes between
authorisation, justification and
Committee’s comments in this regard should be approached with some
caution. After all, by referring to both justifications
and excuses, section
10.5 recognises that other laws will continue to be drafted as either
justifications or excuses,
thus the distinction will continue to have some descriptive
More important, however,
and consistent with the thrust of the Review Committee’s observations, is
the fact that, properly
understood, both justification and excuse entail some
degree of lawful authorisation (even if, in the case of excuses, that
authorisation
is only partial, limited or contingent). It is to this shared
quality of lawful authorisation that section 10.5 latches. But what
the idea of
lawful authorisation
shed on the concept of
justification
or excuse by or under a law
? That question is best answered by reference to
ordinary meaning and authority.
It is well settled that, wherever possible, the words of criminal codes are
to be given their ordinary
With that in mind, it
is worth noting that, in their relevant sense, the terms ‘by’ and
‘under’ ordinarily
mean ‘pursuant to’ or ‘in
accordance with’.
ordinary meaning of ‘by’ and ‘under’ in the concept of
justification or excuse by or under a law
thus helpfully draws attention
to the fact that
positive authorisation
is required, not merely the
absence of prohibition. This is a distinction that the High Court has previously
recognised when, in a
slightly different context, it emphasised the difference
between conduct that is lawful because it is ‘not forbidden’
conduct that is lawful because it is ‘positively authorised by
Section 10.5 is, as
we have seen from the text and legislative history, concerned with conduct that
lawfully authorised
. Thus, section 10.5 would appear to be concerned
with the second category of conduct identified by the High Court, namely,
positively authorised by law
, rather than conduct that is
merely not forbidden.
The fact that the authorisation for the purposes of section 10.5 can be
a law admittedly
allows for ‘means of authorisation other than ... [by] specific
provisions’.
It may well
be that the term ‘under’ ‘recognises that the authorisation
may be indirect or implied, rather than
As will be seen
below, conduct might be indirectly authorised where it is the subject of a
permit issued pursuant to a statutory
scheme or it is done to comply with a
direction made under a statutory
However, that does
not detract from the requirement that there be some positive
authorisation.
If one accepts the above understanding of
justification or excuse by or
under a law
in section 10.5 of the federal
Criminal Code
question is whether that same meaning holds true for the same words in section
313.1, which were introduced five years
The presumption that words
are used consistently throughout a statute may be rebutted by contrary
indication.
The only possible
contrary indication might be that in section 313.1 the concept of
justification or excuse by or under a law
does not appear under a
sub-heading of ‘lawful authority’, as it does in section 10.5.
However, that difference appears
to be of no moment in light of a statutory note
appearing after section 313.1. That note provides:
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence against this Part [Part
9.1 – Serious drug offences] if the person’s
conduct is justified or
excused by or under another Commonwealth law (see section 10.5). In 2005,
Commonwealth laws that authorised
importation, possession or use of controlled
drugs ... included the
Customs Act 1901
Narcotic Drugs Act
Crimes Act 1914
This note is significant for two reasons. First, the interchangeable and
uncritical use of ‘justified or excused by or under
[a law]’ and
‘authorised’, and the reference to section 10.5, suggest that the
terms have the same meaning in section
313.1 as they do in section 10.5. Thus,
it appears that section 313.1 is intended to provide a defence for conduct
authorised by
or under state and territory laws in exactly the same way that
section 10.5 provides a defence for conduct authorised by or under
federal laws.
Secondly, the reference to the three Commonwealth statutes supports the
intuition that the concept of
justification or excuse by or under a law
whether it be in sections 10.5 or 313.1, requires positive authorisation. This
support derives from the fact that each of the
Customs Act 1901
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
(Cth) and the
Crimes Act 1914
contain provisions that positively authorise the possession of
Finally, the above reading is consistent with the explanatory memorandum
attending the introduction of section 313.1, which provided:
The serious drug offences in proposed
are designed to target the
illicit drug trade. Accordingly, defences are required to recognise the many
legitimate uses of controlled
substances in our community. Many of these
legitimate uses are
through State and Territory licensing or
permit schemes established under health, industrial or other
preserves the operation of those State and
Territory schemes.
The italicised words, particularly the reference to
authorisation
further confirms the idea that the concept of
justification or excuse by
or under a law
in section 313.1 was intended to mirror that in section 10.5,
namely, it was intended to be engaged where conduct is positively authorised,
rather than where conduct is not merely forbidden.
B Justification or Excuse by or under a Law –
Case Law and Commentary
There is very limited case law and commentary on the federal
justification or excuse by or under a
One of the only publicly available cases touching upon the topic is
Denlay v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
In that case, the Federal Court held that section 10.5 provided a defence for
federal tax officers because those officers were acting
pursuant to an
independent statutory power that ‘makes lawful that which would otherwise
be unlawful’.
reference to an independent statutory power engaging section 10.5 in
is consistent with the idea that conduct will be
justified or
excused by or under a law
only if it is
positively authorised
than merely not forbidden.
Given the dearth of case law, it is unsurprising that the two comprehensive
scholarly works on federal criminal law do not dwell
long on this topic. Troy
Commonwealth Criminal Law
is essentially silent on the
Stephen Odgers’
Principles of Federal Criminal Law
an example of a
justification
by or under a law
section 15KN
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth), which states:
Protection from criminal liability – officers from issuing
The chief officer, or an officer, of an issuing agency who does something
that, apart from this section, would be a Commonwealth offence
or an offence
against a law of a State or Territory, is not criminally responsible for the
offence if the thing is done to comply
with a request under
section 15KI
direction under 15KL.
Section 15KN
provides ‘protection’ for conduct that is done to
comply with a statutory request or direction. This presents as a form
indirect statutory authorisation and suggests that, for Odgers at least, conduct
will not be justified by or under a law merely
because it is not forbidden.
Odgers also provides an example of an excuse by or under a law – section
105.21(3) of the federal
That provision is an
example of more direct positive authorisation in that it creates a statutory
‘reasonable excuse’
defence for conduct that would otherwise be
criminal. Both of Odgers’ examples have been judicially cited with
apparent approval,
albeit without close
consideration.
A similar view appears to have been reached by Ian Leader-Elliott in
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners
, jointly prepared by
the Commonwealth Attorney-General’s Department and the Australian
Institute of Judicial Administration.
That document provides examples of what
might amount to a justification or excuse by or under a law, including:
‘provisions
which confer investigatory powers on police and other
officials, and permits for the import or manufacture of weapons, explosives
The first of these
examples – statutory investigatory powers – describes the way in
which positive authorisation can
The second of
these examples – permits issued pursuant to a statutory scheme –
describes the way in which positive authorisation
departing from a requirement for positive authorisation, Leader-Elliot’s
analysis thus helpfully draws out the distinction,
discussed earlier, between
justification or excuse
a law and justification or excuse
C Conclusion as to Interaction of ACT and Federal
The above analysis has suggested that, in order to engage the section 313.1
defence to federal prosecution, state or territory law
conduct. Unfortunately for proponents of the new ACT law, it does
not go so far, instead serving merely to demarcate certain conduct
A helpful analogy can be drawn to the way two parents might regulate their
child’s play in a backyard that is entirely occupied
by a chicken coop and
a vegetable patch. The parents agree that each has an independent power to
prohibit their child from entering
a particular part of the yard but,
importantly, if one parent authorises conduct then that authorisation provides a
defence for behaviour
that would otherwise breach
parent’s prohibitions. Assume parent A prohibits the child from
entering any part of the yard. The only way for parent B to
protect the
child’s play in the vegetable patch from being in breach of Parent
A’s prohibition would be for parent B
to authorise the child to enter the
vegetable patch. It will not be enough for parent B to prohibit play only in the
chicken coop
(saying nothing about the vegetable patch), because such a rule
would not positively authorise play in the vegetable patch.
For present purposes, the Commonwealth can be likened to parent A and the ACT
to parent B. The Commonwealth prohibits all cannabis
possession and cultivation
whereas the ACT has rolled back its prohibitions such that low-level cannabis
possession and cultivation
is not forbidden. But the ACT has not
the possession or cultivation of cannabis.
There are at least two ways that the ACT Parliament could have positively
authorised cannabis possession and cultivation so as to
successfully engage the
defence to federal prosecution in section 313.1. First, the ACT could have
created a statutory permit or
licencing scheme, of the sort referred to in the
explanatory memorandum to section
Alternatively, the ACT
could have passed a provision positively authorising low-level cannabis
possession and cultivation, rather
than merely effecting a statutory
non-prohibition. An example of such a provision is provided in the appendix to
this article and
designedly uses the following statutory phrases:
‘protection from criminal liability’, ‘not criminally
responsible’
and ‘authorisation, justification or excuse’. The
first phrase is used because it appears in Odgers’ example, which
apparently approved in
Baker v Chief of the
The second phrase is
used because it also appears in Odgers’ judicially approved example, and
constitutes a well-recognised
formulation of statutory
The explicit inclusion
of the words ‘authorisation, justification or excuse’ is recommended
to avoid the possibility
that the provision will operate merely as a
non-prohibition, rather than a positive authorisation.
D Practical Consequences
The upshot of the above analysis is that, technically, persons possessing or
cultivating small amounts of cannabis in the ACT could
be charged, prosecuted
and found guilty of an offence against section 308.1 of the federal
In practice, however,
it seems unlikely that the ACT Police or the AFP will be targeting personal
cannabis use in the ACT. The ACT
Police have said as much when Chief Police
Officer Ray Johnson indicated that they will be working to give ‘best
legislation.
As to the AFP, it
is to be recalled that the ACT Attorney-General apparently engaged with the AFP
prior to the passage of the new
legislation.
Even if the ACT Police or AFP referred a matter to the CDPP it seems unlikely
that the case would be prosecuted. The CDPP guidelines
with respect to federal
drug offences acknowledge, by quoting from the relevant explanatory memorandum,
that those offences are ‘principally
targeted at organised illicit drug
traders and commercially motivated drug
Unsurprisingly,
this means that low-level possession offences are exceedingly rarely prosecuted
under federal law, whether the controlled
drug is cannabis or another prescribed
drug (such as heroin, cocaine, methamphetamine and pseudoephedrine). In fact, it
appears that
over a recent five-year period only
three people
sentenced in higher courts across Australia for possessing less than a
marketable quantity of
controlled drug contrary to section 308.1(1)
of the federal
It is thus safe to
assume that ACT residents possessing and cultivating small amounts of cannabis
for personal use are unlikely to
be deemed appropriate targets for federal
prosecution.
IV FEDERALISM IMPLICATIONS
Criminal law has historically been left to the states and territories,
primarily as a result of the omission of criminal law from
the federal
legislative powers in section 51 of the
Constitution
than follow Canada, where criminal law is a federal matter, the framers of the
Constitution
considered that criminal law should remain the
province of the states (as it is in Switzerland and the United
There were good reasons
for this. Australian states and territories ‘take often quite different
views on the criminality to
be ascribed to certain
One would expect
the differences in these views to be most pronounced when the criminal law or
policy in question is especially liberal
or especially punitive; recreational
drug use is one such issue. Recent nationwide debates about pill testing, safe
injecting rooms
and drug decriminalisation have revealed a diversity of opinions
emanating from different corners of the
A well-functioning
federal system should be able to accommodate the coexistence of such views and,
over the longer term, should allow
for their practical outworking through the
state-by-state democratic
For the most part,
this appears to be happening, as indicated by a recent academic survey
documenting the many ‘important variations’
that are comfortably
accommodated with Australia’s patchwork of drug
In the present case, it is clear that the ACT Parliament aimed to
decriminalise personal cannabis use and provide a defence to federal
prosecution. Admittedly, that aim does not appear to have been perfectly
executed. However, it would be constitutionally unbecoming
of the federal
government to take advantage of the new ACT law’s deficiencies to impose
federal policies on a jurisdiction
which has clearly, and democratically,
expressed a preference for an alternative policy. Far better for the federal
government to
acknowledge the constitutional values at stake, particularly the
prerogative of states and territories to determine what conduct
to criminalise
within their borders and how it should be punished (if at all). In deference to
these considerations, federal agencies
should refrain from investigating and
prosecuting low-level federal cannabis possession offences in the ACT. This
would be an entirely
appropriate exercise of the executive’s prosecutorial
discretion, a discretion that has long been informed by important public
considerations such as those identified above.
V CONCLUSION
The new ACT laws are to be reviewed after three years of
It is recommended
that at that review, if not before, the ACT consider putting its policy
objectives on a surer footing, by passing
legislation – perhaps a permit
or licencing scheme or a provision like that in the appendix to this article
– that positively
authorises the possession and cultivation of small
amounts of cannabis. At present, it appears doubtful that ACT law provides any
effective defence to federal prosecution. Nevertheless, as has been argued
above, there are good reasons rooted in our constitutional
structure for the
federal government to refrain from intervening in the ACT’s cannabis
regulation, whatever its shortcomings
might be. The very existence of section
313.1 indicates that federal drug offences were drafted on the understanding
that there would
be exceptions based on state and territory law, so the
recommendation advanced here would simply bring the ACT and federal laws into
more harmonious operation.
Protection from criminal liability – authorisation, justification or
excuse for possession or cultivation of cannabis
(1) A person who possesses or cultivates cannabis in such a way that, apart
from this section, would be an offence against the law
of the Territory or Part
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth), is not criminally responsible
for the offence if:
(a) in the case of a person who possesses cannabis–
(i) the amount of dried cannabis possessed is 50 grams or less; or
(ii) the amount of cannabis that is not dried cannabis is 150 grams or
(b) in the case of a person who cultivates cannabis–
(i) the amount of cannabis cultivated is 2 plants or less; and
(ii) the plants are cultivated in a place that is not lawfully accessible to
the public; and
(iii) either:
a. 4 cannabis plants or less are being cultivated at the premises;
b. if more than 4 cannabis plants are being cultivated at the
i. the person lived at the premises when cultivating the cannabis; and
ii. the person was not aware, and could not reasonably have been expected to
be aware, that more than 4 cannabis plants were being
cultivated at the
(2) The defendant has an evidential burden in relation to the matters mention
in section (1).
* PhD candidate, School of Law, University of Melbourne. Thanks to Jeremy
Gans for helpful comments and to Will Partlett for collaborating
on earlier work
on this subject. See Julian R Murphy and William Partlett,
A Precarious High’,
(online, 9 February 2020)
<https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/a-precarious-high>.
1 Paul Karp, ‘ACT Pushes for National Pill-Testing after Study Finds
It Encouraged People to Ditch Unsafe Drugs’,
The Guardian
10 December 2019)
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2019/dec/10/act-pushes-for-national-pill-testing-after-study-finds-it-encouraged-people-to-ditch-unsafe-drugs>.
‘It is one of the happy incidents
of the federal system that a single courageous State may, if its citizens
choose, serve
as a laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments
without risk to the rest of the country’:
New State Ice Co v
, 311 (Brandeis J) (1932).
Conversation with Christian
Porter (Gareth Parker, 6PR Mornings with Gareth Parker, 26 September 2019)
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/media/transcripts/6pr-mornings-gareth-parker-26-september-2019>.
Commonwealth,
, No 115, 25
November 1926. This gazette contains
Customs Proclamation Nos 134 and 135
made under the
Customs Act 1901
Maurice Rickard, ‘Reforming the Old
and Refining the New: A Critical Overview of Australian Approaches to
(Research Paper No 6, Parliamentary Library, Parliament of
Australia, 10 October 2001) 6.
Law and Justice Legislation Amendment
(Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Act 2005
See Explanatory Memorandum,
Justice Legislation Amendment (Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Bill
(Cth) 6, referring to the
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
, opened for signature 20 December
1582 UNTS 95
(entered into force 11 November 1990).
It is worth noting that the original
draft of the federal drug offence provisions did not include a possession
offence. See Model
Criminal Code Officers Committee,
Model Criminal Code:
Serious Drug Offences
(Report, October 1998) 428–48. While a
possession offence found its way into the final legislation, it appears that
authorities very rarely prosecute cannabis possession: Pierrette Mizzi,
Zeinab Baghizadeh and Patrizia Poletti, ‘Sentencing
Commonwealth Drug
Offenders’ (Research Monograph No 38, Judicial Commission of New South
Wales, June 2014) 77, 119.
Criminal Code Regulations 2019
(Cth) sch 1.
Ross Coomber et al,
Key Concepts in
Drugs and Society
(SAGE Publications, 2013) 192–3. Note, however, that
the authors prefer the language of ‘partial decriminalisation’
‘legal regulation’.
Henrietta Cook and Bridie Smith,
‘Majority of Australians Support Medical Marijuana’,
(online, 23 July 2014)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/majority-of-australians-support-medical-marijuana-20140723-zw56k.html>.
Narcotic Drugs Amendment Act
Access to Medicinal Cannabis Act 2016
Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare, ‘National Drug Strategy Household Survey 2016: Detailed
Findings’ (Drug
Statistics Series No 31, 2017) 128; Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare, ‘National Drug Strategy Household Survey 2016:
Detailed Findings’ (Perceptions and Policy Support Chapter 9,
Supplementary Data Tables, September 2017) table 9.18
https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/illicit-use-of-drugs/2016-ndshs-detailed/data#page2>.
Roy Morgan, ‘A Growing Number of
Australians Want Marijuana Legalised’ (Press Release Finding No 8162, 14
October 2019).
Audrey McNamara, ‘These States
Now Have Legal Weed, and Which States Could Follow Suit in 2020’,
(online, 1 January 2020)
<https://www.cbsnews.com/news/where-is-marijuana-legal-in-2020-illinois-joins-10-other-states-legalizing-recreational-pot-2020-01-01/>.
‘Countries Where Weed Is Illegal
World Population Review
(Web Page, 28 September 2019)
http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/countries-where-weed-is-illegal/
‘Cannabis Legalisation and
Control Referendum: Your Guide to the 2020 Referendum’,
New Zealand
<https://www.referendum.govt.nz/cannabis/index.html>.
See above n 2 and accompanying
Morgan (n 16); Amy Peacock et al,
‘Australian Drug Trends 2019: Key Findings from the National Illicit Drug
Reporting System
(IDRS) Interviews’ (Findings, National Drug and Alcohol
Research Centre, 2019) 44.
This article uses the word
‘defence’ in a general sense. Jeremy Gans has said that the
, while ubiquitous in criminal law, is
imprecise’: Jeremy Gans,
Modern Criminal Law of Australia
(Cambridge University Press, 2
ed, 2016) 372 [10.3] (emphasis in
original). If a more specific description were necessary, the words
‘exception’ and
‘exemption’ arguably better describe the
operation of the ‘does not apply’ phraseology in the
Dependence Act 1989
sections 162(2)
‘Exception’ and ‘exemption’ also have some currency in
Australian Capital Territory (‘ACT’)
legislation as distinct
concepts from justification or excuse: see
Criminal Code 2002
Drugs of Dependence Act 1989
s 171AB(1).
ss 171AAA(1)
Criminal Code 2002
618(2)(b), (3)(a).
Drugs of Dependence Act 1989
It should be noted that there is also
a federal offence of cultivating cannabis, however it only criminalises
cultivation ‘for
a commercial purpose’, so there is no real tension
with the ACT’s legalisation of personal cannabis cultivation: see
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) s 303.6.
This article describes section 313.1
as a potential ‘defence’ because that is the language of the
provision heading.
Cf Spigelman CJ’s comments in
[2005] NSWCCA 440
65 NSWLR 75
, 80 [28] suggesting that the label ‘defence’ may not be
appropriate for concepts of ‘justification and excuse’
under section
10.5 of the federal
Criminal Code
Drugs of Dependence Act 1989
The defendant must prove that they are
18 years or older and that the cannabis possession or cultivation occurred
within the ACT:
see the statutory notes following
Drugs of Dependence Act
(4). These notes refer to
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT) s 58, which relates to evidential burdens.
Australian Capital Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 25 September 2019,
3810–11 (Gordon Ramsay, Attorney-General).
Tom Lowrey, ‘ACT Legalises
Personal Cannabis Use, Becoming First Australian Jurisdiction to Do So’,
(online, 25 September 2019)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-09-25/act-first-jurisdiction-to-legalise-personal-cannabis-use/11530104>.
Australian Capital Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 25 September 2019, 3812
(Jeremy Hanson, Shadow Attorney-General).
Conversation with Christian Porter (n
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 10.5, 361.4.
This article focuses on the history of
the concept of
justification or excuse by or under a law
in the federal
Criminal Code
. For a more general overview of the drafting history see
Matthew Goode, ‘The Model Criminal Code Project’
(1997) 5(4)
Australian Law Librarian
Attorney-General’s Department,
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law – Principles of Criminal
Responsibility and Other Matters
(Interim Report, July 1990) 158 [13.18]
Review of Commonwealth Criminal Law
Ibid pt IX div 10.
Ibid 124 [11.6].
Ibid 125 [11.9].
See MR Goode, ‘Constructing
Criminal Law Reform and the Model Criminal Code’
(2002) 26(3)
Law Journal
Criminal Law Officers Committee of the
Standing Committee of Attorneys-General, ‘Model Criminal Code: General
Principles of
Criminal Responsibility’ (Discussion Draft, July 1992);
Criminal Law Officers Committee of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General,
Model Criminal Code: General Principles of Criminal Responsibility
Report, December 1992).
Model Criminal Code Officers
Committee, ‘Model Criminal Code: Non-Fatal Offences against the
(Discussion Paper, August 1996)
118. The Committee
recommended the following provision:
‘Lawful authority
A person is not criminally responsible for an offence if the person’s
conduct constituting the offence is justified or excused
by any Act or other
Model Criminal Code Officers
Model Criminal Code: Non-Fatal Offences against the Person
(Final Report, September 1998) 139.
Criminal Code Amendment (Theft,
Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Act 2000
(Cth) sch 1 s 7.
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code
Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences) Bill 1999 (Cth) 16
Ibid (emphasis added).
Review of Commonwealth Criminal
(n 41) 124 [11.6].
For a recent discussion of the
distinction between justification and excuse retained in some state and
territory criminal codes,
Pickett v Western Australia
[2020] HCA 20
[83], [98]–[107] (Nettle J).
For further discussion of the
theoretical difference between justification and excuse see George P Fletcher,
Rethinking Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2000) 759; John C
Justification and Excuse in the Criminal Law
(Stevens and Sons,
1989) ch 1;
John Gardner,
Offences and Defences: Selected Essays in the Philosophy of Criminal Law
(Oxford University Press, 2007) chs 5, 6.
Brennan v The King
[1936] HCA 24
, 263 (Dixon and Evatt JJ).
See the discussion of the ordinary
meaning of ‘by’ and ‘under’, together with relevant
dictionary references,
[2001] WASCA 391
(2001) 25 WAR 77
, 85 [23]–[26]
(Malcolm CJ). See also
Scott v Enfield City
(1982) 49 LGRA 301
Taikato v The Queen
[1996] HCA 28
, 460 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ). See also Gans (n 22)
374–9 [10.3.1].
Note that the word ‘under’
was not contained in section 10.5 when the Bill was first introduced to
Parliament. It was
only added to avoid ‘unduly restrictive
interpretation’ and to bring the provision in line with the latest version
the Model Criminal Code: Supplementary Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code
Amendment (Theft, Fraud, Bribery and Related Offences)
Bill 2000 (Cth) 2
Ian Leader-Elliott, ‘The
Commonwealth Criminal Code: A Guide for Practitioners’ (Commonwealth
Attorney-General’s
Department and Australian Institute of Judicial
Administration, 2002) 233, quoted with apparent approval in
Baker v Chief of
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(2017) 319 FLR 62
, 72 [58] (Tracey, Brereton and Hiley JJ).
Note, however, that written
administrative ‘instructions’ issued pursuant to a general statutory
power may not be sufficient
to authorise conduct if those instructions
‘are, in effect, aspirational statements of policy’:
Chief of the Army
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(2017) 319 FLR 62
, 72–3 [65]–[69] (Tracey,
Brereton and Hiley JJ).
For a discussion of the way in which
positive authorisation can be implied, see
Taikato v The Queen
[1996] HCA 28
, 462–3 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ).
Law and Legislation Amendment
(Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Act 2005
Registrar of Titles (WA) v Franzon
[1975] HCA 41
(1975) 132 CLR 611
, 618 (Mason J). See also Dennis C Pearce,
Interpretation in Australia
(LexisNexis Butterworths, 9
2019) 141–2 [4.6]–[4.7].
Customs Act 1901
Narcotic Drugs Act 1967
(Cth) ch 2;
Crimes Act 1914
–(3A). Note, however, that it is arguable that the last two cited
provisions of the
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) structurally resemble the
attempted ACT defences, particularly
Drugs of Dependence Act 1989
Explanatory Memorandum,
Justice Legislation Amendment (Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Bill
(Cth) 100 (emphasis added).
(2010) 81 ATR 644.
Ibid 675–7 [89]–[95]
(Logan J). Note that this issue was not considered on appeal:
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2011] FCAFC 63
(2011) 193 FCR 412.
Troy Anderson,
Commonwealth
Criminal Law
(Federation Press, 2
ed, 2018) 53 [2.7.16],
216–17 [7.13.1]. It should also be noted that section 313.1 is reproduced,
but not discussed in detail,
in Peter Zahra and Courtney Young,
Arden’s Drug Laws in New South Wales
(Federation Press, 3
ed, 2014) 331.
Stephen Odgers,
Principles of
Federal Criminal Law
(Thomson Reuters, 4
ed, 2019) 157
[10.5.100].
With due respect to Odgers, it is
suggested that section 15KN would be better understood as an excuse by or under
law, rather than
a justification. The words ‘is not criminally
responsible’ in the provision are typical of statutory excuse provisions.
[1990] 1 Qd 64, 68 (Thomas J), quoted with approval in
Pickett v Western Australia
[2020] HCA 20
, [104] (Nettle J).
Odgers (n 70) 157 [10.5.100].
Baker v Chief of the Army
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(2017) 319 FLR 62
, 73 [70]–[71] (Tracey, Brereton and Hiley JJ).
Leader-Elliott (n 60) 233, quoted with
apparent approval in
Baker v Chief of the Army
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(2017) 319 FLR 62
(Tracey, Brereton and Hiley JJ).
See also the reference to ‘a law
enforcement officer [who] is authorised by law to physically restrain a
Explanatory Memorandum, Criminal Code Amendment (Theft, Fraud,
Bribery and Related Offences) Bill 1999 (Cth) 16 [11].
See also the reference to ‘State
and Territory licensing or permit schemes established under ... regulatory
in Explanatory Memorandum,
Law and Justice Legislation Amendment
(Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Bill 2005
Explanatory Memorandum,
Justice Legislation Amendment (Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Bill
Odgers (n 70) 157 [10.5.100];
v Chief of the Army
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(2017) 319 FLR 62
, 73 [70] (Tracey, Brereton and Hiley
[1990] 1 Qd 64, 68
(Thomas J), quoted with approval in
Pickett v Western Australia
, [104] (Nettle J).
For completeness, it should be noted
that, if the above analysis is correct with respect to justification or excuse
by or under
a law, it may not prevent a person charged with the federal
possession offence relying on a reasonable but mistaken belief that the
justified or excused their conduct: see
Criminal Code
(Cth) s 313.2. Whether or not section 313.2 could be relied upon would
depend on whether that provision, properly interpreted, is
limited to mistakes
as to facts, or whether it extends to mistakes as to legal effects or the
operation of law. The examples of administrative
and technical errors in drug
licencing schemes discussed in the relevant Explanatory Memorandum suggest that
the provision may be
limited to the former: see Explanatory Memorandum,
Justice Legislation Amendment (Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures) Bill
(Cth) 100–1.
Lowrey (n 35).
Australian Capital Territory,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 25 September 2019, 3810
(Gordon Ramsay, Attorney-General).
David Adsett and Scott Bruckard,
Charging Guidelines for Serious Drug Offences under Part 9.1 of the Criminal
(Guidelines, 16 September 2014) 2, quoting Explanatory Memorandum, Law
and Justice Amendment (Serious Drug Offences and Other Measures)
Bill 2005 (Cth)
Mizzi, Baghizadeh and Poletti (n 10)
For reference to the Canadian, Swiss
and American models in framing-era literature see Thomas C Just,
Facts Connected with Federation
(Mercury Office, 1891) 96;
Howard Willoughby,
Australian Federation: Its Aims and Its Possibilities
McDougall, 1891) 32, 132.
Strickland (A pseudonym) v DPP
[2018] HCA 53
(2018) 93 ALJR 1
, 40 [199] (Gordon J).
For an illustrative sampling of
geographically diverse views on pill testing, see the politicians quoted in
Amanda Lyons, ‘State
of Play: For and Against Pill Testing’,
(online, 7 January 2019)
<https://www1.racgp.org.au/newsgp/professional/state-of-play-for-and-against-pill-testing>.
Incidentally, this appears to be what
is happening in the United States, where federal cannabis offences have not
deterred an increasing
number of states from legalising personal cannabis
possession: see Julian R Murphy, ‘Marijuana, Strawberries and Hot Air
The Expressive Function of Federal Criminal Law’
(2019) 30(2)
Public Law Review
Caitlin Hughes et al, ‘Criminal
Justice Responses Relating to Personal Use and Possession of Illicit Drugs: The
Reach of Australian
Drug Diversion Programs and Barriers and Facilitators to
Expansion’ (Monograph No 27, National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre,
2019) 19 [4.4].
Drugs of Dependence Act 1989
(ACT) s 205A(1).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (168 KB)
PDF format (807 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter