URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WALawTRw/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blake, Meredith; Yang, Kenny --- "Enhancing Legal Education Through a Short-Term Overseas Study Tour: A Case Study of Uwa Law School's Singapore Study Tour" [2025] WALawTRw 6; (2025) 3 The Western Australian Law Teachers' Review 72
ENHANCING LEGAL EDUCATION
THROUGH A SHORT-TERM OVERSEAS STUDY TOUR: A CASE STUDY OF UWA LAW SCHOOL’S
SINGAPORE STUDY TOUR
MEREDITH BLAKE & KENNY YANG
In an increasingly globalised legal profession, international exposure is
essential for developing adaptable and culturally aware
lawyers. This article
examines the University of Western Australia's short-term law study tour to
Singapore, a program designed to
integrate theoretical knowledge with practical
legal experiences in a cross-cultural context. Conducted over five days, the
provided Juris Doctor students with an immersive educational opportunity,
combining seminars by academic and professional experts
with site visits to key
legal institutions. The curriculum covered diverse topics, from Singapore's
legal history to international
arbitration and employment law, fostering a
comprehensive understanding of the Singaporean legal system. Assessments
emphasised reflective
learning and active participation, enhancing critical
thinking and professional skills. Student feedback highlighted the program's
effectiveness in deepening legal knowledge and boosting cultural adaptability.
This case study demonstrates the transformative potential
of short-term
international study tours, offering valuable insights for other institutions
seeking to enrich legal education through
global engagement.
I INTRODUCTION
In the context of an increasingly globalised
legal field, understanding diverse legal systems and practices is crucial for
new lawyers.
Recognising this need, the University of Western Australia’s
(‘UWA’) Law School introduced a short-term study tour
to Singapore
in 2023, aiming to provide its Juris Doctor students with critical international
exposure and practical experiences.
Designed to integrate theoretical knowledge
with practical legal experiences across cultures, the tour aimed to expand
perspectives on global legal practices and enhance their employability
The short-term study tour to Singapore first took place across five days from
4 December to 7 December 2023, 9am to 5pm and was structured
as an intensive
summer law elective, offering students the opportunity to complete an optional
unit (worth 6 credit points, which
is the usual number of credit points for a
unit at UWA) towards their law degree. The tour's timing and duration were
chosen to maximise
learning while minimising disruption to the regular academic
schedule, making it an attractive elective for law students seeking
their understanding and exposure to international legal environments.
The tour featured a series of seminars focusing on selected topics in
Singaporean law. These sessions were delivered by a mix of local
including academics from various universities and practicing legal
professionals, aiming to provide students with a comprehensive
understanding
from both theoretical and practical perspectives. Throughout the tour, students
were accompanied by two UWA academic
staff members who provided guidance and
support, promoting it as a UWA law school cohort experience.
II IMPORTANCE OF INTERNATIONAL EXPOSURE
There is a growing body of scholarship which attests to the value of study
abroad experiences. The notion of global citizenship has
been a significant
factor in driving the popularity of such
experiences,
with this being
associated with increased employment
opportunities.
research shows that even brief periods spent abroad significantly enhance
students’ cultural adaptability compared
to their peers who do not study
abroad – this adaptability is increasingly valued in today’s
globalised work settings
where understanding and navigating multicultural
environments are key professional
There is objective
evidence that:
Graduates who have studied abroad, even for a short period of time, in a
culture significantly different to one’s own, are more
adaptable, aware and able to work more effectively in multicultural work
environments than students without this experience.
A number of scholars at tertiary institutions from various countries have
evaluated their own short-term study abroad programmes.
These have largely
focused on the students’ own reported experience of the programmes. These
studies support this objective
evidence in that students themselves identify
their increased appreciation of cultural diversity, and connect this with the
development
of transferable skills, and an increased interest in social
particularly noted the increased student group cohesion and motivation to learn
which characterised the short study abroad
experience.
have identified the benefits associated with increased confidence from
‘pushing the boundaries’, ‘enhanced
cultural understanding,
improved interpersonal skills and the perception that career goals, particularly
in relation to working overseas,
clarified.’
While semester-long study abroad exchanges are a common offering in tertiary
institutions (including at UWA),
the evidence indicates that Australian students appear to favour short-term
tours over semester-long exchanges, particularly in
short-term engagements, though concise, are packed with intensive learning
experiences that often match or exceed the cultural
immersion and professional
benefits gleaned from longer
is evidence that these general benefits also benefit the law student as a future
legal practice is intricately linked with international laws and global issues,
necessitating a broad, adaptable legal education.
Exposure to foreign legal
systems enriches students' legal understanding and prepares them for
cross-border legal challenges. Short-term
study tours are particularly effective
in this context, offering immersive experiences that traditional classroom
settings cannot
Recognising the critical role of international educational experiences in
enhancing regional relationships and competencies, the Australian
introduced the New Colombo Plan (‘NCP’) Mobility Grants in 2014 with
up to AUD$40 million in funding for the
2023–24 financial
The strategic objective
of the NCP is to strengthen Australia’s regional standing by building a
diverse cohort of Australian
alumni with deeper Indo-Pacific knowledge,
capability and
connections.
It aims to ‘lift knowledge in Australia of the Indo-Pacific’ through
structured short-term study tours and internships
ranging from two weeks to two
The NCP has regional and access limitations (it is currently only available to
undergraduate students) but it has proven a significant
incentive for the
introduction of tertiary study tours and since its inception in 2014 to 2024,
the program has supported more than
50,000 students to participate in overseas
study, work placements, or research experiences in the Indo-Pacific
A number of considerations informed the development of this article. One of
these was the limited amount of scholarship examining
Australian study tours.
Our search of the literature revealed a handful of articles, and, while these
were of assistance in identifying
the general benefits of study tours, none of
these involved law students. We are aware of a number of study tours which are
Australian law schools (detailed below) but it appears there are no
existing published written accounts of these. This is worth noting
point made in one paper:
Studying abroad is often represented in the literature as delivering a
transformative impact for all students, regardless of their
specific academic
programme. While this may be true, it frames the benefits of studying abroad as
being generic and supplementary
to any discipline-specific
curriculum.
It is therefore, we believe, a valuable addition to the literature to have a
detailed description of a discipline-specific offering,
particularly where that
particular discipline has not featured in the narrative.
A second consideration was the fact that the law degree at UWA is studied at
a postgraduate level. The law school has adopted the
Northern American model
– the Juris Doctor – as its’ qualifying law degree.
Consequently, there is a strong vocational
focus for most of these students,
with the majority of them seeking a career in the legal
In this context, students'
perceptions of how a unit adds value to their career aspirations are
significant. Very recent research
found that 89% of participants in an overseas
stint under the NCP indicated that the experience was useful for their
The need to derive value from
the degree is all the more significant for UWA Juris Doctor students –
both because of the fact
this is a second degree, and because, as postgraduate
students, the NCP is not available as a funding source.
The authors surveyed the short study tour landscape of Australian law schools
in an attempt to identify the type of offerings which
are available to students.
These are set out in Annexure A at the end of this
Our research indicated that most of
these are targeted at undergraduates (which presumably is incentivised by the
NCP). Some of the
offerings are also towards a specific field or legal topic
rather than a study tour encompassing a general immersion of various aspects
the host country’s laws and legal system. The remaining law schools which
do appear to offer a more general study tour are
set out in Table 1 below.
Table 1. Australian Law School General Study Tours
Topic/ Course
Destination
Curtin University
Ghent Summer Progra
The program is aimed at students keen on acquiring knowledge and credits in
international and European law, and generally at participants
eager to gain
expertise about the increasingly international world of law and business.
Swinburne University of Technology
Law, Governance and Culture Study
An immersive introduction into Vietnam’s legal culture and its
Law, Governance and Culture Study
An immersive introduction into Indonesia’s legal culture and its
Murdoch University
India Immersion Progra
An introduction to India’s diverse regulatory, business and social
impact landscape.
Sydney University
Shanghai Winter School
An intensive three-week introduction to Chinese laws and legal systems,
while experiencing life in Shanghai.
Indian Immersion Program
Seminars, lectures, presentations and field visits with leading scholars,
legal practitioners and law students in India.
Southeast Asia Field School
An intensive two-week course, taught in English, students visit Malaysia
and Indonesia for one week each.
Kyoto and Tokyo Seminars
The Kyoto and Tokyo seminars offer a unique opportunity to study Japanese
Law on an intensive basis in global and socio-economic context.
Sydney Law School in Europe
A selected range of elective units of study in prestigious locations in
University of New South Wales
US Legal System
The course will focus principally on the study of the federal and state
legal systems within the United States of America.
Chinese Legal Syste
This is a two-week intensive course held in Shanghai each year. It provides
an introduction into the legal system of the People's
Republic of China with
particular reference to modern developments in commercial law and other
important legal areas.
China International Business and Economic
This course provides an introduction to the legal system of the People's
Republic of China. Emphasis is placed on modern developments
commercial law, international business and economic law, and other important
legal areas.
Pacific Islands Laws in
An introduction to the merging legal systems of the Pacific Islands states,
including issues of constitutional development, the recognition
and application
of customary law, modern and traditional legal institutions, land tenure
regimes, personal law, and the legal recognition
of economic activity, such as
international trade, foreign investments and national resources projects.
Australian National University
Bhutan Summer Schoo
Special exposure to unique aspects of Bhutanese society and its legal
system through field trips to Thimphu, the capital city, and
Punakha, the
previous seat of government
University of Wollongong
Legal Study Tour in
Comparative Law: The program will include lectures on a variety of topics
such as Thai Business Law, Thai Public Law, and International
Law and the Thai
Legal System, alongside firm and court visits, engagement with local students,
and sightseeing excursions.
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
Business and Law Beyond
Focus on business and legal global issues
It should be noted that it is sometimes difficult to discern whether these
are true study tours in the sense of a collective student
cohort experience of
an intensive course, or an overseas study experience which is open to individual
students from these institutions
to apply to. It is the former experience which
the UWA Law School study tour sought to embody. Despite the plethora of options
there appears to be an absence of literature on how to organise such
a program and the pedagogical considerations in doing so. This
article therefore
hopes to provide one for the benefit of future course coordinators.
III SELECTION: LOCATION, INSTITUTION &
The decision to select Singapore for this study tour was based on a number of
practical reasons. Firstly, UWA Law School has a number
of alumni in Singapore,
and we also as academics, enjoy professional relationships with colleagues from
two Singapore law schools.
A recent UWA alumni also held adjunct academic
positions in Singapore and was familiar with the academic legal community there.
such there was an institutional connection to this country which we felt
would be of assistance in organising speakers and events.
Secondly, Singapore is
a key international trading and legal hub, with many global companies
establishing their regional headquarters
in the city. It is also a leading
centre for arbitration, with a high volume of international disputes being
resolved through its
renowned arbitration
institutions
A unique opportunity
therefore existed to expose students to this global perspective. Thirdly, with
this being the first study tour
to be offered to our students for many years, we
were conscious that this represented a destination which made financial sense,
which would not involve the serious body clock adjustments which travelling
from Western Australia often presents. Put simply, the
geographical proximity
and the institutional connections presented this as an obvious option. The
organisers were also reassured
by the reputation of Singapore as a very safe
place of travel as well as the familiarity which this destination represents for
Western Australians.
We deliberately included a diverse mix of university academics and legal
practitioners as speakers for the course with the aim of
combining the provision
of theoretical knowledge with practical skills training. In doing this we were
particularly conscious of
the insights that could be provided by Singaporean
legal practitioners from international law firms with a presence in Australia
and Australian practitioners based in their Singapore offices, crucial for
understanding the real-world application of legal concepts.
The selection of Singapore Management University (SMU) as the preferred host
university for the study tour was informed by its advantageous
location within
the city's central district. This distinguishes it from its counterparts –
National University of Singapore,
Nanyang Technological University, and
Singapore University of Social Sciences – whose campuses are situated
relatively farther
from the city centre. The benefits of proximity to the
teaching venue and to the commercial and professional infrastructure of
was an important consideration, particularly having regard to this
being the first offering of this study tour. Essentially, the
organisers were
aiming to maximise convenience given the inevitable unknowns which would
IV CURRICULUM DESIGN
The curriculum for the short-term study tour is set out in Table 2 below. It
was designed to provide Australian law students with
a foundational
understanding of the Singaporean legal system and its historical underpinnings,
particularly its roots in common law.
Table 2. Singapore Study Tour Curriculum
Singapore Legal History
The Singapore Legal System
The Civil Justice System
Cross-Jurisdictional Issues in Banking & Finance
Cross-Jurisdictional Arbitration Work
Arbitration in Singapore
Mediation in Singapore
Employment Law in Singapore
Criminal Law & Procedure
Criminology: Perspectives from Singapore
Tour of the State Courts
Group Presentations
Total Contact Hours
V DESIGN CHALLENGES
From the perspective of a local academic or legal practitioner in Singapore
tasked with delivering a substantive, specialised lecture
on complex topics
typically taught over a semester to second or third-year postgraduate law
students from Western Australia, condensing
the curriculum into a two to
three-hour session presented significant challenges. Some of these challenges
are familiar to those
who have been involved in the co-ordinating and teaching
of intensive units. These include the depth versus breadth of material trade-off
in relation to achieving a coherent narrative in a compressed timeframe. That
compression also has implications for the capacity
to enhance and assess
students’ comprehension of the material.
An overseas learning experience raises particular challenges outside of those
typically experienced in standard domestically based
intensive units. For
example, this study tour raised the issue of lecturers needing to ensure that
the material taught was accessible
to students who do not have a background in
the specific area of Singaporean law being taught, without oversimplifying
complex legal
concepts. The organisers addressed this by encouraging presenters
to use clear, jargon-free language and progressively build up from
concepts, as well as relating complex ideas to familiar concepts in the
students' primary law curriculum to aid understanding.
Perhaps even more challenging was the need for cultural and jurisdictional
contextualisation. Law is deeply intertwined with the local
culture and specific
legal framework of a country. Students from another jurisdiction may not have
the contextual background that
local students possess, which can be a barrier to
understanding specific legal principles and practices. The organisers took steps
to address this through the incorporation of an overview of Singapore’s
legal system, culture, and the political and social
context affecting its law
(Day One). We hoped that this setting would provide students with a framework to
understand how and why
certain legal principles operate differently in Singapore
compared to the Australian context.
While teaching in intensive mode is neither new nor uncommon in Australian
law schools
a significant challenge lies in
balancing a sufficient number of contact hours to ensure comprehensive coverage
of material, against
the risk of student fatigue inherent in such a condensed
delivery model. One key consideration was to ensure sufficient time for
preparation and reflection before and in-between
Preparation included perusal of the
reading materials for each topic. Reflection is an important part of the
learning process
and students were expected
to spend time after class completing the ‘Reflective Journal Entries and
Group Presentation’
assessment weighted at 30%. A total of 30 hours of
before or after class, making a total of 40 hours of study across the
week. This aligned with the contact hours for intensive units
offered at other
universities
VI TOPIC SELECTION
The selection of topics for the initial days, specifically ‘Singapore
Legal History’ and ‘The Singapore Legal System’
strategically set the stage for more complex discussions. By establishing this
foundational knowledge early in the program,
it was anticipated that students
would be better equipped to grasp the nuances of subsequent topics, leveraging
their initial learning
as a contextual base for exploring specific legal
practices and principles unique to Singapore. The following additional subjects
chosen for exploration reflect more unique aspects of Singapore’s legal
landscape and also issues which we considered would
be of interest to law
students in Australia:
A Singapore Criminal Law & Procedure
Singapore is globally noted for its rigorous legal framework, which includes
distinct practices such as the absence of jury trials,
the implementation of
mandatory death penalties for certain offences, and significant restrictions on
immediate access to counsel.
This topic aimed to highlight the critical legal
and procedural approaches which distinguish Singaporean criminal law from
practices. Another interesting point of comparison, and one that
offers a bridge between the two legal systems despite their differences,
use of a Criminal Code in both Singapore and several states within
In this respect both
legal systems represent the codification of criminal offences and penalties in a
comprehensive legislative document
— Singapore’s Penal Code and the
various Criminal Codes operative in Australian states, particularly the Codes in
and Western Australia which are the dominant sources of criminal law
in those jurisdictions
B International Arbitration/Mediation
Singapore's status as a preeminent hub for arbitration and mediation made
these topics ideal for providing students with practical
insights into the
mechanics and strategic advantages of resolving disputes through these
alternative dispute resolution methods.
Singapore has meticulously cultivated
its reputation as a leading centre for international arbitration, characterised
by its strategic
geographical location, political stability, robust legal
framework, and the presence of the Singapore International Arbitration
The seminar on arbitration
envisaged offering students insights into arbitration in Singapore as well as
recent investor-state arbitration
Singapore's ascension as a centre for mediation was solidified with the
adoption of the Singapore Convention on Mediation, formally
known as the United
Nations Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from
Mediation. This convention, the negotiation
and signing of which were
significantly influenced by Singapore, marked a pivotal development in
international commercial dispute
By providing a uniform
and efficient framework for the enforcement of mediated settlements, the
Convention enhances the viability
of mediation as an alternative to litigation
and arbitration. This topic had the promise of offering important insights into
international legal frameworks informing and enforcing mediation
settlements.
C Cross-Jurisdictional Issues in Banking & Finance
Singapore's standing as a global commercial hub underscored the importance of
including a topic on Cross-Jurisdictional Issues in
Banking & Finance Law in
the study tour curriculum. This focus not only reflects the city-state’s
pivotal role in international
finance but also addresses the complex legal
challenges that arise in multi-jurisdictional financial operations. The diverse
subsets, including ship finance, trade finance, project finance, and
acquisition finance, all necessitate a thorough understanding
of cross-border
legal matters. These include the complexities of taking security, obtaining and
evaluating legal opinions, verifying
corporate authorities, and the strategic
engagement with local counsel
organisers of the tour were of the view that the opportunity for students to
address these issues would prepare them for future
interactions with Singapore's
sophisticated financial services sector and equip them with the insights needed
to navigate the legal
challenges inherent in transnational financial
transactions.
D Employment Law
A focus on this area of law within the study tour was regarded as offering
students insights into how employment relationships are
regulated and
adjudicated in Singapore as a comparator to other jurisdictions. The topic was
developed to cover: (a) restraint of
trade clauses, (b) the tests used to
determine whether an individual is classified as an employee or independent
contractor, and
(c) the legal framework surrounding wrongful dismissal, with an
emphasis on how Singapore’s approach to these aspects of employment
diverges from Australian practices. This topic aimed to give students important
insights into the reality of working life in
Singapore and offered important
points of comparing the law regulating employee conditions between the
E Civil Justice Systems
This session aimed to explore recent judicial decisions which resonate within
the common law jurisdiction, fostering a comparative
understanding of legal
evolutions in response to global and technological changes. The topic sought to
cover significant cases such
I-Admin (Singapore) Pte Ltd v Hong Ying Ting
[2020] 1 SLR 1130
, which revisits established doctrines of breach of
confidence previously set out in
Coco v AN Clark (Engineers) Ltd
The exploration of
Quoine Pte Ltd v B2C2 Ltd
[2020] 2 SLR 20
identified as important to introduce students to the impacts of technology on
traditional legal concepts such as unilateral mistakes,
while the discussion of
[2022] 5 SLR 273 is significant in addressing the emerging
domain of cryptocurrency within the legal designation of property capable
being subjected to a freezing order. While these are decisions of the
Singaporean courts, they offer an insightful approach to
how Australian courts
might address similar issues, and ultimately demonstrate the value which an
international study tour can offer
for postgraduate law students who are looking
to practice in a global environment.
VII ASSESSMENT
Assessment has been described as ‘a process for employing
systematically collected information to improve the learning experience
One of the main
criticisms directed at law school assessments is that they do not prepare
students for legal practice
particular, it has been claimed that law schools do not foster the development
of practical skills
Having said
this, there has been push back against the use of the term ‘skills’
as being ‘less helpful in denoting
competencies in required
A preference for the
term ‘tasks’ has been advocated on the basis that it is more
‘likely to be behaviourally anchored
in instruction and curriculum
Noting these general points, the organisers were particularly keen to focus
on setting tasks which connected with the global aspect
of legal practice, while
still conforming with requirements of academic rigour. In developing assessment
for this study tour unit,
the organisers were of the view that assessment of
participation would be an important aspect of this experience, given that this
can be a key indicator of active learning and engagement, contributing to the
development of critical thinking. The fact that all
students would be in the
same learning space and in person suggested that this would provide an optimal
environment for this form
of assessment. Participation was accorded a 20%
weighting of the overall mark, with the aim of assessing students based on their
active involvement during the classes held from December 4th to 7 December
Criteria included
punctuality, readiness with assigned readings, proactive participation in
discussions (both speaking and listening),
and the quality of contributions
during class activities.
The second aspect of the assessment was described as ‘Reflective
Journal Entries and Group Presentation’,
weighted at 30%.
Reflective practices have been attributed to bringing benefits to learning
including ‘promoting critical thinking,
deepening understanding, enhancing
problem solving skills and facilitating personal growth by building resilience
and creativity’
argues that while reflective practice has historically been peripherally
regarded in legal education, it does have ‘transformative
in this context, particularly in connection with the fostering of critical
thinking. She notes in particular how
reflective thinking can contribute towards
the development of resilience, a characteristic of significant worth in legal
Sheppick’s article focuses on a vocational postgraduate law
course in which she identifies, relevantly for the purposes of
this article, the
importance of reflection in relation to the students’ future careers in
legal practice. As she states, the
introduction of reflection into that course
was largely due to its ‘alignment with the ever-evolving demands of the
legal profession’
Reflection seemed particularly important for an international study tour given
the evidence that in order to ‘become aware
of diversity and power issues,
learners require a form of discourse, reflective dialogue, that enables them to
breach the “settled”
paradigms of their
Students were required to submit two written journal entries that captured
their reflections and learning points from the sessions
attended. These entries
were due on specific dates following the sessions they covered. Subsequently,
these reflections contributed
to a group presentation, with the aim of students
collectively discussing and presenting their learning outcomes from the entire
tour, assessing their ability to synthesise individual reflections into a
cohesive group perspective. The potential benefits of group
presentations have
been identified as fostering greater class interaction and participation,
sparking increased interest in learning,
introducing perspectives that might not
otherwise be addressed, and enhancing communication and presentation
Students can acquire
knowledge from their own research and that of their peers, while also learning
from observing the strengths
and weaknesses of other presenters to refine their
own communication and presentation
The final piece of assessment was a ‘Research Essay’ (weighted at
50%). A number of specific topics were released at the
end of the tour, with the
aim of allowing students to delve deeper into particular areas of interest
highlighted during their study
in Singapore. The research paper was originally
designed to help students refine their research skills and practice
incorporating
sources into a thorough, often argument-based,
This involves finding academic sources
from various mediums, conducting cross-jurisdictional research, and critically
comparing and
assessing different perspectives and legal frameworks.
VIII STUDENT FEEDBACK
From the outset the feedback received from students was overwhelmingly
positive. For example, after the first session (historical
aspects), many
students expressed their interest in learning how Singapore’s colonial
history has informed the development
of its legal system. This enthusiasm for
the curriculum continued with the sessions on international commercial
negotiation and arbitration
being particularly popular, although all sessions
were characterised by excellent participation and cohesion. Some unsolicited
on the tour noted the quality of the speakers and the content:
The speakers were world class. Day one opened with Dr Tan’s lecture on
Singapore’s founding’s, as well as connection
to David Marshall, one
of the most prolific lawyers in Singapore history. The other speakers provided a
diverse range of lectures
from criminal and corporate law, to modern and
technology related law, to social issues and related engaging discussions. I was
impressed with both the depth and breadth we covered in a one-week period
without feeling overwhelmed.
Another student found the exclusively hosted visit to the Supreme Court on
the final day of the tour a highlight:
Getting to visit the Supreme Court of Singapore and subsequently getting to
sit in the judge’s chair was an absolute highlight
for me. Not just of the
trip, but my entire time in the JD
IX CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the University of Western Australia's short-term study tour to
Singapore exemplifies the value of an immersive exposure
to another legal system
in preparing future lawyers for a globalised legal environment. By integrating
theoretical learning with
practical experiences, the program not only enhanced
students' understanding of the Singaporean legal system but also fostered
skills such as cultural adaptability, legal analysis, and
cross-jurisdictional competence. The overwhelmingly positive student feedback
underscores the tour's success in offering transformative educational
experiences and professional insights. This case study highlights
the potential
for other institutions to replicate and adapt similar programs, contributing to
the broader goal of equipping law graduates
with the knowledge and skills
necessary to navigate complex global legal landscapes.
Annexure A: List of Australian Law Schools with Overseas Study
Topic/ Course
Destination
Specialised or
Curtin University
Ghent Summer Progra
The program is aimed at students keen on acquiring knowledge and credits in
international and European law, and generally at participants
eager to gain
expertise about the increasingly international world of law and business.
Swinburne University of Technology
Law, Governance and Culture Study
An immersive introduction into Vietnam’s legal culture and its
Law, Governance and Culture Study
An immersive introduction into Indonesia’s legal culture and its
Murdoch University
International Human Rights
Three units – (1) Refugee Law, (2) Legal Protection of International
Human Rights, (3) International Human Rights Organisations.
Switzerland
Specialised
European Summer Law
Three units – (1) International Trade Law, (2) Comparative Law, (3)
European Union Law.
Specialised
Foreign Trade & Customs
Three units – (1) International Taxation and/or Export Control &
Customs Law, (2) International Trade, (3) International
work placement.
Specialised
India Immersion Progra
An introduction to India’s diverse regulatory, business and social
impact landscape.
Sydney Universit
Shanghai Winter School
An intensive three-week introduction to Chinese laws and legal systems,
while experiencing life in Shanghai.
Indian Immersion Program
Seminars, lectures, presentations and field visits with leading scholars,
legal practitioners and law students in India.
Southeast Asia Field School
An intensive two-week course, taught in English, students visit Malaysia
and Indonesia for one week each.
Himalayan Field School
Conducted over two weeks in Nepal, this unit explores the fascinating and
difficult problems of development and human rights confronting
a developing
Specialised
Kyoto and Tokyo Seminars
The Kyoto and Tokyo seminars offer a unique opportunity to study Japanese
Law on an intensive basis in global and socio-economic context.
Sydney Law School in Europe
A selected range of elective units of study in prestigious locations in
Climate and Environmental Law in the Pacific
This program focusses on land, resources, climate and environmental law
issues in the Pacific.
Specialised
Philosophy of Law
A Jurisprudence unit of study offered by Sydney Law School, taught at the
historic Humboldt University Law School.
Specialised
Principles of Oil and Gas Law
Examining the distinctive legal issues presented by oil and gas exploration
and production and examining the legal and regulatory
responses of oil producing
Specialised
Media Law: Comparative Perspectives
The course features guest lectures by leading British and European
academics and practitioners specialising in media law.
United Kingdom
Specialised
Advanced Obligations and Remedies
The aim of this unit is to explore contentious issues arising in the law of
civil obligations and remedies in a broad legal context.
It will build on the
fundamentals in the areas of torts, contracts and equity, from a comparative
perspective.
United Kingdom
Specialised
University of New South Wales
US Legal System
The course will focus principally on the study of the federal and state
legal systems within the United States of America.
Chinese Legal Syste
This is a two-week intensive course held in Shanghai each year. It provides
an introduction into the legal system of the People's
Republic of China with
particular reference to modern developments in commercial law and other
important legal areas.
China International Business and Economic
This course provides an introduction to the legal system of the People's
Republic of China. Emphasis is placed on modern developments
commercial law, international business and economic law, and other important
legal areas.
Law and Technology: Comparative Perspectives in
This course will explore the interaction between law and modern technology.
It will introduce students to the potentially problematic
relationship between
legal rules and technological change, and then begin to explore real substantive
problems at the interface between
Switzerland
Specialised
Women and Gender Law in Pune,
This course considers the role of the law in creating and perpetuating
gender inequalities
Specialised
Child Rights Comparative Clinical Program in Goa,
The purpose of the program will be to expose students from both
institutions to new legal, political and cultural paradigms through
the prism of
international and comparative perspectives on children’s rights and family
Specialised
Pacific Islands Laws in
An introduction to the merging legal systems of the Pacific Islands states,
including issues of constitutional development, the recognition
and application
of customary law, modern and traditional legal institutions, land tenure
regimes, personal law, and the legal recognition
of economic activity, such as
international trade, foreign investments and national resources projects.
Australian National University
Bhutan Summer Schoo
Special exposure to unique aspects of Bhutanese society and its legal
system through field trips to Thimphu, the capital city, and
Punakha, the
previous seat of government
Australian Catholic University
Endeavour EU study tou
Two units: (1) Law, Religion and Society, (2) Human Rights Advocacy
Specialised
University of Wollongong
Legal Study Tour in
Comparative Law: The program will include lectures on a variety of topics
such as Thai Business Law, Thai Public Law, and International
Law and the Thai
Legal System, alongside firm and court visits, engagement with local students,
and sightseeing excursions.
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
Centre for Innovative Justice Study
Exposes students to Courts, programs and the people who run them
New Zealand
Specialised
Business and Law Beyond
Focus on business and legal global issues
Monash University
Monash Law International Study Programs –
A range of potential units: (1) Global issues in criminal law and justice,
(2) lobal issues in international trade and finance, (3)
Global issues in human
rights and public law, (4) lobal issues in private and commercial law, (5)
International Trade Law
Specialised
Monash Law International Study Programs -
Two units: (1) Public International Law, (2) Environmental issues in
Specialised
Melbourne University
Indigenous Law in Aotearoa and
The subject aims to equip students with expert knowledge on current
Indigenous legal issues in Aotearoa and Australia, including contemporary
debates and the influence of Indigenous law in settler legal systems.
New Zealand
Specialised
Law and Legal Practice in
The aim of this subject is to provide students with an enhanced
understanding of law and legal practice in an Asian jurisdiction through
intensive seminars, supervision of a research project on an Asian jurisdiction,
and legal experience in an approved role in an Asia-based
Not specified
Professor Meredith Blake is a
Professor and Director of International Partnerships and Exchange at the UWA Law
School, The University
of Western Australia. Dr Kenny Yang is an Honorary Fellow
at the UWA Law School, The University of Western Australia.
Nicole Gullekson et al,
'Examining Intercultural Growth for Business Students in Short-Term Study Abroad
Programs: Too Good to Be
True?' (2011) 22(2)
Journal of Teaching in
International Business
Giorgio Di Pietro, 'Do
Study Abroad Programs Enhance the Employability of Graduates?' (2015) 10(2)
Education Finance and Policy
223. See also Davina Potts,
Outcomes of
Learning Abroad Programs
(2014, Universities Australia) 14 for the benefits
of a study abroad stint.
Larry Braskamp, David
Braskamp and Kelly Merrill, 'Assessing Progress in Global Learning and
Development of Students with Education
Abroad Experiences' (2009) 18
Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad
Lisa Scharoun, 'Short-term
Study Tours as a Driver for Increasing Domestic Student Mobility in Order to
Generate Global Work-Ready
Students and Cultural Exchange in Asia Pacific'
(2015) 20(2-3)
Perspectives: Policy and Practice in Higher Education
The Guardian
, 'Students Struggle to Find Jobs After Graduation' (16
October 2008)
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/oct/16/students-highereducation>.
Karen Bell and A W
Anscombe, 'International Field Experience in Social Work: Outcomes of a
Short-Term Study Abroad Programme to India'
(2013) 32(8)
Social Work
Education: The International Journal
Tracey Bretag,
‘“Pushing the Boundaries”: Participant Motivation and
Self-Reported Benefits of Short-Term International
Study Tours’ (2015)
Innovations in Education and Teaching International
Semester-long exchange is a
relatively popular option at UWA with approximately 300-350 undergraduate and
postgraduate coursework
degree students undertaking this in 2024 – about
75% of pre-COVID levels (information provided by Global Engagement Office,
‘Australian Outbound Student Mobility Snapshot’ (2015)
Strategy, Policy and Research in Higher Education
https://www.spre.com.au/download/MobilitySnapshot1308.pdf
Australian Universities International Directors’ Forum (AUIDF) Report
(2024) which indicated that in 2023 38% of Australian
students participated in
faculty-led study tours, compared to 19% participating in semester long exchange
programmes.
Geyer, Jenni Putz and Kaustav Misra, ‘The Effect of Short-Term Study
Abroad Experience on American Students’ Leadership
Skills and Career
Aspirations’, (2017) 31(7)
International Journal of Educational
Kaiser-Jarvis, 'Preparing Students for Global Practice: Developing Competencies
and Providing Guidance' (2018) 67(4)
Journal of Legal Education
Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade,
Mobility Program – 2024 Round Guidelines
<https://www.dfat.gov.au/people-people/mobility-program-2024-round-guidelines#amount>.
Tran, Huyen Bui and Diep Nguyen,
Australian Student Mobility to the
Indo-Pacific Region through the New Colombo Plan: Summary of Key Findings
<https://ncpproject.org/publications/>.
Steve Nerlich,
Evaluative Framework for Studying Abroad
(PhD Thesis, Australian National
University, 2020) 166.
Evident from yearly surveys undertaken of graduating Juris Doctor
This is not aligned with the view
emerging in recent years conceptualising law degrees as the ‘new arts
see Financial Review, Feb 14, 2014 and comments by the
then president of the Law Institute of Victoria Geoff Bowyer in 2014.
Tran, Bui and Nguyen (n
Information has been obtained from university websites as of 9
December 2024
A course will only be included
if there is indication that it is still on offer and there are details on the
location of the overseas
study tour.
Curtin University,
mer Program
https://www.curtin.edu.au/students/experience/global/study-tours/ghent-summer-program/>.
ne University of
Technology,
Vietnam Law, Governance and Culture Tour
<https://www.swinburne.edu.au/life-at-swinburne/study-abroad-exchange/study-tours/law-governance-and-culture-tour/>.
ne University of
Technology,
Law, Governance and Culture study tour in Indonesia
https://www.swinburne.edu.au/life-at-swinburne/study-abroad-exchange/study-tours/indonesia-law-governance-culture/>.
Murdoch University,
mersion Program
<https://www.murdoch.edu.au/schools/law-and-criminology/study/international-programs/india-immersion-program>.
ity of New South
Handbook 2024, US Legal Systems (Berkeley)
<https://www.unsw.edu.au/law-justice/student-life/international-opportunities/overseas-electives>.
University of New South Wales,
Handbook 2024, Chinese Legal
<https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3123>.
University of Ne
Handbook 2024, China International Business and Economic Law
https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3345>.
University of New South
Handbook 2024, Pacific Islands Laws
<https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3541>.
ian National
University,
Bhutan Summer School - Jigme Singye Wangchuck (JSW) School of Law
<https://law.anu.edu.au/bhutan-summer-school-jigme-singye-wangchuck-jsw-school-law>.
University of Wollongong,
y Tour in Thailand
https://www.uow.edu.au/business-law/current-students/study-exchange-and-overseas-opportunities/faculty-led-studytours/#:~:text=Legal%20Study%20Tour%20in%20Thailand&text=The%20program%20will%20include%20lectures,local%20students%2C%20and%20sightseeing%20excursions>.
Royal Melbourne In
Technology,
Study Tours
https://www.rmit.edu.au/about/schools-colleges/college-of-business-and-law/international/global-opportunities/study-tours>.
Elizabeth MacArthur, ‘Regulatory Competition and the Growth
of International Arbitration in Singapore’ (2018) 23
Matthew Erie, 'The New Legal Hubs: The Emergent Landscape of International
Commercial Dispute Resolution' (2019) 59(3)
Virginia Journal of International
‘Attributes of High Quality
Intensive Course’ (2003) 97
New Directions for Adult and Continuing
29, 29–38; Raymond Wlodkowski, ‘Accelerated Learning
in Colleges and Universities’ (2003) 97
New Directions for Adult and
Continuing Education
5; Martin Davis, ‘Intensive Teaching Formats: A
Review’ (2006) 16(1)
Issues in Educational Research
Sally Male et al,
Intensive Mode Teaching Guide
(University of Western Australia, 2016)
‘Unveiling the Benefits of
Reflective Learning in Professional Legal Practice’ (2024) 31(2)
International Journal of the Legal Profession
For example, the University of Melbourne’s minimum class
falls between
24 and 36 hours – see
University of Melbourne, Subject Delivery
<https://law
unimelb.edu.au/students/masters/studies/subject-delivery>,
whereas the University of Sydney indicates 26 hours of lectures –
University of Sydney,
Study Options
https://www.sydney.edu.au/law/study-law/continuing-professional-development/study-options.html>.
Western Australia’s Criminal Code (
Criminal Code Act
Compilation Act 1913
(WA)) is based on the Queensland Griffith Criminal Code
Criminal Code Act 1899
Criminal Code (WA) (Schedule to
Criminal Code Act Compilation
(WA) and Criminal Code (Qld) (schedule 1 to
Criminal Code Act
Matthew Erie, 'The New Legal Hubs: The Emergent Landscape of
International Commercial Dispute Resolution' (2019) 59(3)
Virginia Journal of
International Law
Joséphine Hage Chahine et al, 'The Acceleration of the
Development of International Business Mediation after the Singapore
Convention'
(2021) 32(4)
European Business Law Review
Nadja Alexander and Shouyu Chong, 'Leading the Way for the
Recognition and Enforcement of International Mediated Settlement Agreements:
Singapore Convention on Mediation Act 2020
' (2022) 34(1)
Singapore Academy of
Law Journal
Ibid 88 citing Ethan Bronner,
A Call for Drastic Changes in Educating
New York Times
(New York, 10 February 2013).
Ruth Jones, ‘Assessment and Legal Education: What is
Assessment and What the # Does it Have to Do with the Challenges Facing
McGeorge Law
G Camilli et al,
Perception of Tasks Relevant to Academic Success in the First Year of Law
School: A Longitudinal Analysis’ (2022) 32(1)
Legal Education
Kathleen Czekanski and Zane Robinson Wolf, ‘Encouraging and
Evaluating Class Participation’ (2013) 10 (1)
Journal of University
Teaching & Practice
1; Jay Howard and Amanda Henney, ‘Student
Participation and Instructor Gender in the Mixed-Age College Classroom’
Journal of Higher Education
384; John Bean and Dean
Peterson, ‘Grading classroom Participation (1998) 74
New Directions for
33; Antonina Balas, ‘Using Participation to Assess Students'
Knowledge’ (2000) 48(4)
College Teaching
Sheppick (n 34) 208
Judith McNamara and Rachael Field, ‘Designing for
Reflective Practice in Legal Education’ (2007) 2(1)
Journal of Learning
66, 67, citing Anne Brockbank and Ian McGill,
Facilitating
Reflective Learning in Higher Education
(Open University Press,
Tulay Girard et al, ‘An Exploratory Study of Class
Presentations and Peer Evaluations: Do Students Perceive the Benefits?’
(2011) 15(1)
Academy of Educational Leadership Journal
Rebecca Moore Howard and Sandra Jamieson, ‘Researched
Writing’ in Gary Tate et al (eds), A
Guide to Composition Pedagogies
(Oxford University Press, 2
ed, 2014); Tom Cate and Linda
Dynan, ‘A Guide to Composition Pedagogies’ (2010) 29
Applied Economics and Policy
Written student comment to
tour organisers.
Written student comment to tour
Denoting focus on a
ised legal field or a general law
study tour.
Curtin University,
mer Program
https://www.curtin.edu.au/students/experience/global/study-tours/ghent-summer-program/>.
ne University of
Technology,
Vietnam Law, Governance and Culture Tour
<https://www.swinburne.edu.au/life-at-swinburne/study-abroad-exchange/study-tours/law-governance-and-culture-tour/>.
ne University of
Technology,
Law, Governance and Culture study tour in Indonesia
https://www.swinburne.edu.au/life-at-swinburne/study-abroad-exchange/study-tours/indonesia-law-governance-culture/>.
Murdoch University,
International Human Rights Program
<https://www.murdoch.edu.au/schools/law-and-criminology/study/international-programs/international-human-rights-program>.
Murdoch University,
mer Law Program
https://www.murdoch.edu.au/schools/law-and-criminology/study/international-programs/european-summer-law-program>.
Murdoch University,
Foreign Trade & Customs Law
<https://www.murdoch.edu.au/schools/law-and-criminology/study/international-programs/german-foreign-trade-customs-law-program>.
Murdoch University,
mersion Program
<https://www.murdoch.edu.au/schools/law-and-criminology/study/international-programs/india-immersion-program>.
dney University,
Offshore Study Opportunities
https://www.sydney.edu.au/law/study-law/international-opportunities/offshore-study-opportunities.html#:~:text=Shanghai%20Winter%20School,while%20experiencing%20life%20in%20Shanghai>.
ity of New South
Handbook 2024, US Legal Systems (Berkeley)
<https://www.unsw.edu.au/law-justice/student-life/international-opportunities/overseas-electives>.
University of New South Wales,
Handbook 2024, Chinese Legal
<https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3123>.
University of Ne
Handbook 2024, China International Business and Economic Law
https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3345>.
University of New Sout
Law and Technology: Comparative Perspectives
https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3346>.
University of New South
Women and Gender
https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3445>.
University of New South
Child Rights Comparative Clinical
https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3549>.
https://handbook.unsw.edu.au/undergraduate/courses/2025/LAWS3541
ian National
University,
Bhutan Summer School - Jigme Singye Wangchuck (JSW) School of Law
<https://law.anu.edu.au/bhutan-summer-school-jigme-singye-wangchuck-jsw-school-law>.
alian Catholic
University,
Study Law Overseas
https://www.acu.edu.au/study-at-acu/study-overseas/study-tours-and-short-programs/study-law-overseas>.
University of Wollongong,
y Tour in Thailand
https://www.uow.edu.au/business-law/current-students/study-exchange-and-overseas-opportunities/faculty-led-studytours/#:~:text=Legal%20Study%20Tour%20in%20Thailand&text=The%20program%20will%20include%20lectures,local%20students%2C%20and%20sightseeing%20excursions>.
Royal Melbou
ne Institute of
Technology,
Centre for Innovative Justice Study Tour
https://cij.org.au/students/study-tour/>.
Royal Melbourne In
Technology,
Study Tours
https://www.rmit.edu.au/about/schools-colleges/college-of-business-and-law/international/global-opportunities/study-tours>.
nash University,
Global Campus Intensive in Italy
<https://www.monash.edu/study-abroad/outbound/monash-led-programs/monash-global-campus-intensives/mgcis-in-italy>.
sh University,
Global Campus Intensive in Malaysia
https://www.monash.edu/study-abroad/outbound/monash-led-programs/monash-global-campus-intensives/mgcis-in-malaysia>.
Melbourne University,
l and Interstate Subjects
<https://law.unimelb.edu.au/students/jd/enrichment/global-learning-opportunities/global-subjects#LAWS90214>.
Melbourne University,
l and Interstate Subjects
<Melbourne University, Global and Interstate Subjects
<https://law.unimelb.edu.au/students/jd/enrichment/global-learning-opportunities/global-subjects#LAWS90214>.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (351 KB)
PDF format (626 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter