URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/ALRCRefJl/2009/33.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:12:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pippen, Deborah --- "Security of tenure: Tenancy law reform" [2009] ALRCRefJl 33; (2009) 94 Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 20
Reform Issue 94 Summer 2009
This article appears on pages 20–23 of the original
Security of Tenure
Tenancy law reform
By Deborah Pippen*
At a national level, much has been made recently of expanding access to
affordable housing (including private rental housing), increasing
public and community housing and improving access to supported and emergency
accommodation.
All of these developments are needed and not without their controversies,
even down to the definition of ‘affordable housing’.
However, the
obvious problem that persists and has not been examined at the national level is
the glaring inequity of people’s
housing experiences in relation to
housing rights and protection. The right to housing requires governments to
recognise that all
people have a right to secure, safe, affordable, appropriate
housing—regardless of whether they own their housing; are paying
mortgage holder to one day own it; or are paying some form of rent. Furthermore,
this right must be protected. But this right is
not adequately protected in
Australia. This article highlights the key issues addressing housing rights in
terms of residential tenancy
legislation.
Renter households
Renter households are those households that pay rent to live in a dwelling;
this encompasses all forms of accommodation. When considering
accommodation it is important to recognise that this is not an insignificant
part of the population. In 2006, 28.5% (2,063,947)
of Australian households were
in some form of rental accommodation with more than 1.7 million households
renting from private landlords
and 369,000 households renting from
state/territory housing authorities. A further 147,000 households (2% of all
households) were
renting from other landlords such as employers (including the
Defence Housing Authority).
Residential tenancy legislation is under the jurisdiction of the states and
territories. The history of the development of tenancy
legislation in Australia
demonstrates the status of tenants. As noted in an Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute Positioning
The various landlord-tenant laws in Australia were all originally inherited from
the same source: the English law of the early 19th
century. Government’s
main concern at the time was protecting legitimate rights to ownership and
possession. Thus when Australia
adapted English residential tenancy law for
domestic use it was heavily weighted in the landlords favour. It was not until
that Australian tenancy laws were reviewed in the context of housing
conditions and outcomes.
... there is a heavy reliance on tenancy law to provide equity in
landlord-tenant relations in Australia ... Tenancy protection in
Australia today
is based on principles of basic health-related housing standards, minimum notice
periods for ‘no cause’
eviction, and limits on the frequency of rent
increases ... Residential tenancy law in Australia has invariably sought to
the interests of tenants and landlords’ rather than to
provide strong rental consumer protection ... Consequently, arguments
broader legal protections have been limited, and arguably contemporary
residential tenancy law is still weighted in the landlord’s
The need for
national consistency in residential tenancy legislation to ensure minimum
standards is by no means new. In 2004, in its
overview of tenancy law across the
country, the National Association of Tenants’ Organisations (NATO)
recommended the development
of national minimum standards for residential
tenancy legislation.
reiterated NATO’s position in 1997, which in turn was a response to a 1995
report prepared for the Commonwealth Department
of Housing and Regional
Development.
These reports
demonstrated the disparity between states and territories in terms of levels of
protection of basic rights to accommodation
and access to dispute resolution
mechanisms. The most glaring differences were—and continue to
be—protection of people
in forms of rental accommodation other than
private rental and security of
These two fundamental
elements affect what other rights tenants might have and whether they are in the
position to assert those rights.
The table below demonstrates the level of
disparity, with an overview of legislative coverage across the country as well
as the level
of security of
Australian Capital Territory New South Wales Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory
New South Wales
Northern Territory
Covers all residential tenancy agreements (public and private tenants).
Some coverage of all other tenures including caravan parks,
boarders and
lodgers, student accommodation. Known as occupants.
No cause termination: 26 weeks (182 days) for tenants. Limit doesn’t
apply to occupants.
Covers all residential tenancy agreements (public and private tenants).
Does not cover: caravan parks, boarders and lodgers, some
other classes of
No cause termination: 60 days. 14 days at the end of the fixed term.
Covers all residential tenancy agreements (public and private tenants).
Does not cover: caravan parks, or boarding houses where less
than 3 boarders,
holiday, emergency or charitable accommodation.
No cause termination: 42 days.
Covers all private residential tenancy agreements (including long term
caravan park residents). Separate legislation covers residential
services such
as boarding houses. Does not cover some other classes of tenure.
No cause termination: 60 days.
South Australia
Western Australia
Covers private and community housing residential tenancy agreements. Only
certain parts of the Act apply to public housing residential
tenancy agreement.
Does not cover some other classes of dwelling. Includes boarders and lodgers.
Residents of caravan parks are not
No cause termination: 90 days.
Covers all residential tenancy agreements. Does not cover some other
classes of dwelling. Some caravan park residents may be covered.
No cause termination: only at end of a fixed term lease. Anywhere between
14 and 28 days.
Covers all residential tenancy agreements plus rooming house residents.
Some long-term caravan park residents are covered.
Does not cover short-term caravan park residents and other classes of
residencies.
No cause termination: 120 days.
Covers all residential tenancy agreements (public, private and caravan
park). Does not cover boarders and lodgers, or some other classes
of dwelling
such as nursing homes or hotels. Does not cover tenancies of less than 90
No cause termination: 60 days.
It is notable that there are single examples of both universal coverage of
residential tenancy legislation (in the ACT) and very limited
use of no grounds
termination (in Tasmania). While there are issues with the practicalities of
both of these elements in both jurisdictions,
their existence would seem to
indicate that such legislation is not detrimental to housing markets. However,
the wide disparity across
all jurisdictions does highlight the very different
housing experiences across the country.
In the United Nations Special Rapporteur’s report on adequate housing
as a component of the right to an adequate standard of
living, the lack of
consistent legislation was noted as a weakness in implementing and monitoring
the right to adequate housing.
The report also noted that,
legislation gives little regard to the rights of tenants. Tenancy laws and
anti-discrimination acts are difficult to use due to the
pressure of the market
and the existence of ‘black-list’ databases. Other [laws], such as
the anti-social behaviour amendments
Residential Tenancies Act
(NT), complicate the
The Special
Rapporteur also observed that legislation in most states and territories allows
‘landlords to freely evict
The lack of any significant and consistent changes in tenancy legislation
across the country as a whole is a clear indication that
national leadership is
needed to ensure that Australia meets its human rights obligations, as noted
above. To date, federal Government
involvement has been limited to an initial
investigation culminating in the 1995 report for the Commonwealth Department of
and Regional Development.
Currently the federal Government has limited its national rental housing policy
considerations to affordability issues and public
and community housing.
References to general tenancy rights have been limited to recommendations in the
White Paper on Homelessness
investigate the impact of lack of security of tenure and tenancy
implications of lack of security of tenure.
Consistent legislation can be achieved by adopting national minimum standards
such as those detailed in the National Affordable Housing
Agreement (NAHA),
which currently lists as an aspirational objective that all ‘Australians
have access to affordable, safe
and sustainable housing that contributes to
social and economic
participation’.
there is no reference to security of tenure. A basic element of such standards
should be a clear commitment to universal
coverage of tenancy legislation and
security of tenure.
People who rent their homes without the coverage of tenancy legislation
include those in educational, institutional, boarding and
lodging, supported
accommodation and nursing home accommodation. Often they are more prone to
unjust treatment during their tenancy
and generally have very limited resources
and options for alternative accommodation. Without such protection these tenants
have little
to no recourse to legal dispute resolution mechanisms when there are
problems—ranging from the need for urgent repairs, to
harassment and
ultimately eviction. Where there are legal remedies available via the formal
court system, this is obviously well
out of the reach of many because of
limitations on their financial and other resources. As noted in NATO’s
Leaking Roofs
It is essential that all tenants who have been granted the right to occupy
residential premises as their principal place of residence
be protected by
legislation.
relation to what housing rights are protected by tenancy legislation, security
of tenure is fundamental. It has been described
by the Centre on Housing Rights
and Evictions (COHRE) as ‘one of the indispensable pillars of the right to
adequate housing’.
is linked to many other aspects of a person’s experiences of home and,
therefore, life. When a person feels secure where
they live, they are more
likely to actively participate in the community because they feel part of that
community. They are more
likely to take an opportunity to improve their homes,
confident that they will not then have to leave until they wish to, or there
a clear and reasonable basis to do so, with the possibility of an independent
arbiter if there is a dispute. On a more individual
level, they are more likely
to have positive experiences in terms of participating in work and education;
have better health outcomes
in relation to stress related problems; and even be
more likely to undertake long-term planning. They are also more likely to assert
other rights, without fear of the ultimate retribution of losing their home. As
also noted by COHRE, ‘without security of tenure,
the full enjoyment of
housing rights is not possible, and forced eviction can become a real and
perpetual threat’.
While there are many issues that are crucial to a person living in rental
accommodation enjoying the same level of housing rights
as those in other
tenures, security of tenure must be the starting point for tenancy law
* Deborah Pippen is the Executive Officer of the Tenants’ Union
ACT. She has spent all her working life in the community sector,
with the vast
majority of time spent in housing and tenancy related roles.
Australian Bureau of Statistics,
Australian Social Trends, 2008 – Renter Households
<www.abs.gov.au/> at 14 September 2009.
T Seelig and A Morris,
Motivations of
Investors in the Private Rental Market
, Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute, Positioning
Paper No 87 (2006), 9.
H Blunden, C Martin and the National
Association of Tenants’ Organisations,
Leaking Roofs—Australian
Tenancy Law
R Kennedy, P See and P Sutherland,
Minimum Legislative Standards for Residential Tenancies in Australia
Commonwealth Department of
Housing and Regional Development (1995).
Tenancies are terminated only where
grounds exist as prescribed by legislation; appropriate notice is served and a
Tribunal determines
that ending the tenancy is justified.
H Blunden, C Martin and the National
Association of Tenants’ Organisations,
Leaking Roofs—Australian
Tenancy Law
(2004), 18.
UN Human Rights Council,
Report of the
Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing as a Component of the Right to an
Adequate Standard of Living
, Miloon Kothari, Mission to Australia, 11 May
2007, A/HRC/4/18/Add.2.
R Kennedy, P See and P Sutherland,
Minimum Legislative Standards for Residential Tenancies in Australia
Commonwealth Department of
Housing and Regional Development (1995).
Department of Families, Housing,
Community Services and Indigenous Affairs,
The Road Home: A National Approach
Reducing Homelessness
Council of Australian Governments,
Intergovernmental Agreement on Federal Financial Relations, Schedule F
– National Affordable Housing Agreement
<www.coag.gov.au >, at
30 September 2009.
H Blunden, C Martin and the National
Association of Tenants’ Organisations,
Leaking Roofs—Australian
Tenancy Law
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions
website <www.cohre.org/view_page.php?page_id=89>, at 30 September
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.59 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter