URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/FedJSchol/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:57:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rares, Justice Steven --- "17 Years in the Judicial Sea: A voyage through my experiences as an admiralty and maritime judge" (FCA) [2023] FedJSchol 5
And the very object of making the bill of lading in parts would be baffled unless the delivery of one part of the bill of lading,
duly assigned, had the same effect as the delivery of all the parts would have had.
Lord Blackburn observed that he had never been able to learn why merchants and shipowners continued the practice of making out a bill
of lading in parts. That remains the case today. But, he said that so long as the practice continued it was of vast importance not
to unsettle the principles which had already been settled.
Another issue was whether the carrier breached its obligation under Art 3(2) of the Rules to aEURoeproperly and carefully load, handle,
stow, carry, keep, care for and dischargeaEUR the oil. The carrier sought to rely on the exemption in Art 4(2)(l) that the damage
resulted from the act or omission of the shipper, whose representative at discharge did not stop the discharge operation soon enough
after noticing that the oil had been contaminated. The cause of the contamination was that caustic soda intakes on the ship had mixed
with the oil while it passed through the lines or pumps. However, the carrier had a compound obligation under Art 3(2) both to exercise
reasonable care in the discharge of goods and have a sound system for their discharge. I found that:
At the end of the day, the question of whether a carrier can rely upon an immunity under Art IV r 2 must be answered by reference
to all the circumstances of a particular case aEUR| Where the facts disclose that a loss was caused by the concurrent effects of
an excepted and non-excepted circumstance, the carrier remains liable. The carrier will only escape liability if it proves that the
loss or damage was caused by an excepted circumstance alone.
The question of the scope and application of the exceptions in Art 4(2) remains a live issue in maritime courts around the world.
In 2021, the UK Supreme Court, in
held that the Art 4(2) exceptions could not be relied upon to excuse a breach of the seaworthiness due diligence obligation in Art
3(1), a position which accords with previous
obiter dicta
of McHugh J in
Bunga Seroja
. It remains to be seen if there is any aEUR~wind in the sailsaEURtm of this issue under Australian law today.
Pipelines, pilots and the bitter end
In 2009, I heard a limitation action under the
Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims Act 1989
(Cth) brought by the owners of
, a two-year-old Panamax fully loaded container ship, against Esso Australia, BHP and others with claims arising from her rupturing
the high pressure gas pipeline extending from Mordialloc to Altona under Port Phillip Bay. The pipeline was 10 inches in diameter
and buried three metres below the seabed. Esso and BHP pleaded that the owners were not entitled to limit their liability under the
Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims
as amended and given force of law here, to the value of the ship (about $24.5 million) calculated in accordance with the Convention
limitation formula. Rather, they contended that there were four distinct occasions, each of which gave rise to a separate Convention
claim under Arts 6(1) and 7.
I formulated and applied the following the test:
whether one occasion is distinct from another will depend upon whether the causes of the claims that arise from each act, neglect
or default are sufficiently discrete that, as a matter of commonsense, they can be said to be distinct from one another.
The case had a number of memorable moments. The events occurred on a Saturday afternoon in December 2008. Pilotage is compulsory in
Port Phillip Bay. As often occurs in such cases, the pilot turned out to be more of a problem than a solution. A force 8 or 9 gale
was raging. There were waves of between 2 and 2.5 metres in the growing storm conditions. The pilot had brought the ship into the
anchorage and directed the experienced Chinese master to drop the anchor and stop the engine, but he left on the pilot boat before
the ship came up to the anchor. She was then about 0.6 nautical miles south west of the pipeline and the wind was blowing the ship
in its direction. That was the pilotaEURtms first mistake. Soon after his departure, the master noticed, as the normal anchoring
process was occurring, that something was wrong and the anchor was dragging. He knew of the location of the pipeline and where the
ship would be carried by the wind if it continued to drag. After about 15 minutes, at about 3pm, he radioed harbour control and sought
permission to heave the anchor and re-anchor further away from the pipeline because of the danger. Harbour control could see on its
radar what was happening but refused the masteraEURtms request, told him he could not move the ship without a pilot and to stand
by until one arrived. By then, the pilot was 40 to 45 minutes away.
Within a few minutes, the pilot radioed harbour control to confirm what the master had been saying, namely that the shipaEURtms stern
appeared to be over the pipeline and dragging the anchor closer to it. At about this time, the penny dropped and harbour control
realised that this was a aEURoedramaaEUR. But it waited a total of 25 minutes after the masteraEURtms request to heave anchor, and
the obvious evidence on its AIS screen that the ship was moving directly towards the pipeline, before giving him permission to use
the engine and move her about a mile forward. The pilot was then at least 30 minutes away and the weather was worsening. When the
master ordered the anchor to be heaved, there were about 5 shackles in the water. During the next 15 minutes, as the weather continued
to worsen, the master had considerable difficulty, having to constantly reposition the ship to assist in the retrieval of the anchor.
During this time, only about 3 of 5 shackles had been winched onboard.
At about 3:45pm, the anchor struck the pipeline with a powerful force, causing it to ovalise. One of the experts pointed out, when
we all were standing in the well of the Court, the point on the piece of exhibited pipe where the impact occurred. The ship pulled
the pipeline out of the seabed and bent it toward north east. This arrested the shipaEURtms movement, although, because of the foul
weather conditions, this was not apparent on the bridge or AIS. If things had stopped there, only about 102 metres of pipeline would
have needed replacement. But thereaEURtms more.
I found that the first distinct occasion occurred when the anchor fouled the pipeline.
At 3:48pm, the pilot, who was still en route, directed the master to leave what, he thought, was the remaining shackle of the cable
(or anchor chain) out of the water because the boson at the focaEURtmsle had told him that the cable was drawn across the bow to
port at about 10 oaEURtmclock. However, at this point, the windlass (or winch used to heave the anchor) stopped working. The cable
began playing out fast and the bosun instinctively applied the brake to stop this continuing. The windlass was broken and the bosun
then noticed an oil spill on the focaEURtmsle deck. At the same time, the master concluded that the anchor either had fouled the
pipeline or was holding on the seabed. The chief officer ordered the crew to clean up the oil to make the deck safe and prevent pollution.
By about 4.05pm, the pilot arrived back on the ship and had returned to the bridge. Earlier, as he approached on the pilot boat, he
had seen oil on the focaEURtmsle deck. The pilot told the master that he should cut the cable either using a kenter shackle or with
a gas axe (i.e., an oxyacetylene torch). Although one of the nautical experts disagreed, the latter was not a good idea given that
there was flammable oil on the deck. No one on the bridge suggested letting the anchor cable go from the bitter end. That, I learnt
from the three expert mariners, is the nautical term for the mechanism to quickly release the anchor cable from its attachment to
the ship to avert danger from the vessel being held by the anchor to its position.
While the master sought instructions from the owners about jettisoning the anchor, the pilot did a miscalculation of the shipaEURtms
and anchoraEURtms positions. He told the master that she could move safely ahead because he had plotted the anchor as being on the
seabed north of the pipeline. At 4:20pm, the pilot advised the master that the engine be ordered to go dead slow ahead. The master,
hesitantly, thought that the pilot had seen the direction of the cable as he approached on the pilot boat and, given his local knowledge,
knew what he was doing. The pilot, however, simply assumed that because he had seen the cable leading "pretty much aheadaEUR, the
anchor was clear and ahead of the pipeline and not fouled onto it. So the engine was put ahead and the ship travelled to the south
south west for about 1.5 minutes until the master saw gas bubbling to the surface off the starboard bow. That is when the next penny
dropped. The master immediately ordered the crew to put out all cigarettes and sources of flame.
The ahead engine movement had caused the pipeline to rupture. I found this was the second distinct occasion because, prior to the
ship going ahead in accordance with the pilotaEURtms second misguided piece of advice to the master, the pipeline had remained intact.
However, the drama did not end there. About six minutes after the rupture, the pilot advised the master to go slow astern to get the
ship away from the danger posed by the escaping gas. Both the master and the pilot were aware of the possibility that going astern
might cause the anchor to re-engage with the pipeline. In the event, their fears were realised and the anchor somehow engaged with
the Mordialloc side of the fractured pipeline and pulled up between 10% and 20% more pipe that needed replacement. In total, 156.58m
of pipeline was replaced at a cost of over $70 million. I found that this was not a distinct occasion but was inseparably connected
to and part of the circumstances of the rupture and its consequences.
The master graphically exclaimed at one point in his cross-examination, when chided about his evidence that he did not remember why
he ordered every engine movement over about 1.5 hours from when the anchor dropped: aEURoeI want to forget it all, although I couldnaEURtmt.
But I donaEURtmt want to rememberaEUR. I believed him.
An amusing cross-examination of the two nautical experts called by BHP and Esso occurred about their disagreement as to what the master
should have after the fouling, one saying he should have manoeuvred the ship using the engine and the other said the contrary, culminating
in this exchange, which was a cross-examineraEURtms dream:
Now, Captains, I will put this to you, Captain Cole, first. The difference of opinion that you two have, based on the same assumptions
of fact, and after all these years of experience that youaEURtmve got reflects, does it not, the fact that in an emergency situation
two people applying seamanlike principles can reach different conclusions about the appropriate course of action?
CAPT COLE: Mr Scott, yes.
MR SCOTT: And Captain Dwyer, you also - - -
CAPT DWYER: I agree.aEUR
What suffices to arrest and release a ship
Sailing away to other cases, the ship arrest of the
Huang Shan Hai
led to a person known as aEUR~the Rares whispereraEURtm (being the sobriquet that I learnt applied to the now Stewart J at his swearing
in ceremony) opposing a shipowneraEURtms proposal of having only a single surety for a bail bond rather than two as prescribed in
r 54(2) of the
Admiralty Rules 1989
. The allegedly insufficient surety was the Bank of China. Cosco, the owners of the arrested vessel, sought dispensation from the
requirement of r 54(2) for a bail bond to have two sureties. I was not persuaded that the Bank, whose audited balance sheet showed
a net equity in 2010 of over USD100 billion, would default.
In another case involving the intricacies of an arrest of
Xin Tai Hai
, I found that a plaintiffaEURtms affidavit in support of the issue of an arrest warrant had only to disclose the matters expressly
stipulated in the
Admiralty Rules
. I found that, even though an application for the issue of an arrest warrant is made
, unlike an
application in equity or an application under the then current English Rules for arrest, the plaintiff does not have to make full
and frank disclosure of all material facts. The question arose in that case because the plaintiff had not disclosed that it had begun
or was about to being proceedings in respect of the same collision in China.
SeafarersaEURtm liens
The redoubtable Timothy Visscher pursued his former employer
Shipping (Australia) Pty Ltd, in various fora, including the High Court and the Federal Court, for what he claimed was due as a result
of his constructive dismissal by it demoting him from chief officer to second mate. In his Federal Court proceeding, he claimed that,
under ss 75 and 78 of the
Navigation Act 1912
(Cth), Teekay owed him double wages until it paid him in full all that he was owed after his discharge on his final voyage. He brought
two separate appeals, the first to reinstate his proceeding after it had been summarily dismissed and the second, after a final hearing,
in which he received a lot less than he sought.
SeafarersaEURtm wages and liens formed a recurring theme. In between Mr VisscheraEURtms appeals came the first of another two appeals.
In the first,
Ship Hako Endeavour v Programmed Total Marine Services Pty Ltd
, Siopis, Buchanan JJ and I had to determine,
, the nature of a demise charter of a ship and,
, whether a person who had paid the crewaEURtms wages could be subrogated to their maritime lien under
Admiralty Act
. We held that once the crewaEURtms claim was paid, the maritime lien ceased to exist. The second of the two appeals decided that
the supplier of the crew could not claim against the demise charterers for their wages after the termination of the deed under which
it provided their services.
The aEUR~Damp BiscuitaEURtm case
I have had several brushes with the
and the Australian Rules. The term aEURoesea carriage documentaEUR is unlikely to be immediately familiar to a maritime lawyer from
any jurisdiction other than Australia. aEURoeSea carriage documentaEUR is defined in Art 1(1) of the Australian Rules to mean a bill
of lading, a negotiable document of title that is similar to a bill of lading and that contains or evidences a contract of carriage
of goods by sea, a non-negotiable bill of lading, or a non-negotiable document such as a sea waybill.
In what has come to be known as the aEUR~Damp BiscuitaEURtm case, due to the frustratingly Dutch character of the appellantaEURtms
name, Mansfield, Buchanan JJ and I had to consider the meaning of aEURoesea carriage documentaEUR as used in s 11 of
. At the time of the decision, s 11(1)(a) of
provided that aEURoeall parties to a sea carriage documentaEUR for outbound carriage from Australia were aEURoetaken to have intended
to contract according to the laws in force at the place of shipmentaEUR, being Australia., and s 11(2) provided:
(2) An agreement (whether made in Australia or elsewhere) has no effect so far as it purports to:
(b) preclude or limit the jurisdiction of a court of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory in respect of a bill of lading or
a document mentioned in subsection (1)
Next, s 11(3) clarified that the s 11 did not invalidate an agreement to arbitrate so long as the arbitration was in Australia, as
opposed to any other jurisdiction. Of course, the cumulative effect of these provisions made it compulsory for there to be either
arbitration or proceedings in an Australian court in respect of transactions governed by sea carriage documents for outbound carriage
from Australia.
The issue in the Damp Biscuit case was whether the voyage charter between the parties, for the carriage of coal from Australia to
China, amounted to a sea carriage document, rendering the foreign arbitration clause in the charter party invalid by force of s 11
It is immediately obvious that, if the provisions of
were found to apply to charterparties that governed outbound voyages from Australia, the effect would not be friendly to international
trade. As I said in that case:
Over 10% of the worldaEURtms trade by volume comes into or leaves Australia by sea. Much of that trade is carried by ships under charters
that, as an ordinary incident of the shipping industry, will contain international arbitration clauses that were freely negotiated
by sophisticated, professional parties. Those parties could bargain at arms length for the terms of their charterparties, including
for resolution of disputes arising under them. They would not have anticipated that their agreement for international arbitration
had been eliminated aEURoeby a sidewindaEUR involving the combination of the ship carrying cargo from Australia overseas and s 11
Mansfield J and I allowed the appeal. I noted that the object of s 11 of
was to protect aEURoethe interests of Australian shippers and consignees from being forced contractually to litigate or arbitrate
outside AustraliaaEUR. I found that purpose did aEURoenot extend to protection of charterers or shipowners from the consequences
of enforcement of their freely negotiated charterparties subjecting them to the well recognised and usual mechanism of international
arbitration in their chosen venueaEUR.
Section 11 of
continues to be a source of judicial, academic, and legislative controversy. In 2022, the pithily named Commonwealth Department of
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts instigated a review into s 11 and invited submissions
from the public about potential amendments to it. One of the concerns raised in the discussion paper was the definition of aEURoesea
carriage documentaEUR. The paper stated:
Some stakeholders have raised concerns about the lack of an explicit definition for the term aEUR~sea carriage documentaEURtm in the
text of the Act itself. They argue the court decisions have only increased confusion over what a aEUR~sea carriage documentaEURtm
may encompass, with judges interpreting the definition of the term in the amended Hague Rules differently. They maintain it is desirable
for industry to have confidence and certainty as to what documents are considered by section 11 of COGSA.
It is undoubtedly desirable for industry to have confidence and certainty about what documents are captured by the Act. Hopefully,
the results of the DepartmentaEURtms review and any subsequent amendments to
create greater confidence and certainty than now exists, although a more cynical maritime practitioner might merely see the potential
for more interesting litigation like the Damp Biscuits case. Indeed, last week the Full Court reserved its decision in the
Dijksgracht
appeal that again traversed those troubled waters.
Obviously, a standout decision in my judicial career was that of the Full Court in
Sam Hawk v Reiter Petroleum
. That grappled with the issue of what foreign maritime liens are recognised and enforceable under Australian law.
had been time chartered to Egyptian Bulk Carriers, under terms which obliged the time charterer to bunker the vessel and to pay for
all bunkers. The charterer contracted with
Petroleum to supply bunkers upon the vesselaEURtms arrival in Istanbul. The bunker supply contract gave Reiter a right to assert
a maritime lien wherever it found the vessel and that the law of the United States would apply to determine the existence of such
a lien, regardless of where proceedings were instituted. As is well known, United StatesaEURtm maritime law gives a necessaries supplier
a maritime lien over a ship regardless of whether the supply was made to her owners or demise charterers or persons who had no title
to, or possession of, the ship such as time or voyage charterers.
After charterer failed to pay for the bunkers, Reiter demanded payment from the owners of
. In 2014, Reiter arrested the vessel in Australia based on two separate claims, namely,
, a general maritime claim pursuant to
Admiralty Act
, for which the owner was the relevant person, and
, a maritime lien pursuant to
The primary judge found that the Court had jurisdiction under
in respect of ReiteraEURtms claims because,
, a maritime lien for necessaries was recognised in United StatesaEURtm law and,
, the existence of a maritime lien created a substantive right that was independent from the
. Accordingly, his Honour declined the ownersaEURtm request for summary dismissal.
The main issue in the appeal to the Full Court was whether Australian law recognises a foreign maritime lien as enforceable despite
it not being one of those categories provided in
Admiralty Act
alleged that liens other than those in
were not enforceable here, and therefore that an Australian court did not have jurisdiction to hear ReiteraEURtms claims.
Much of the argument in the Full Court, as before the primary judge, turned on the correctness or otherwise of the majority judgment
of the Privy Council in
The Halcyon Isle
. There, Lords Diplock, Elwyn-Jones and Lane classified the right to a maritime lien created by United StatesaEURtm law for a ship
repaired there as procedural, not substantive. They held that this meant that, even if a maritime lien were conferred by the
(also known as the
) it would only be enforceable in an English court (because the law of Singapore as the place of arrest was the same as that of England)
if it could be characterised as having the same legal effect under English law (being the
) including treating the priority of such a claim as a right of the same nature under the
. The minority, Lords Salmon and Scarman, preferred to treat the right to proceed
on a maritime lien as a substantive right, with the result that they held that the English courts would recognise the right in the
character created by the
lex causae.
That would give the foreign lien the same priority and consequences as if it were a right of the same nature that had arisen in the
appeal, I gave the Dethridge Address to the 2013 MLAANZ annual conference entitled
The Far from Halcyon Isle: Maritime liens, renvoi and conflicts of law
. It is not without a small amount of irony that I recall telling the conference (which I am sure some of those here today attended)
One day a court here will have to make the intellectually challenging choice as to whether Australian law will accord recognition
to a foreign maritime lien that is outside the nature of those liens referred to in
Admiralty Act
. That is an area between the majority and minority opinions in
The Halcyon Isle
that the Australian Law Reform Commission deliberately left open. And this issue will no doubt arise again when a cross-border insolvency
is recognised here under the
Cross-Border Insolvency Act 2008
(Cth) and it affects the arrest of a ship on a maritime lien.
In the end, that intellectually challenging choice was settled, at least at the intermediate appellate level in
obiter dicta
The other four judges, Allsop CJ and Edelman J for whom the reasoning was part of their ratio, and Kenny and Besanko JJ agreeing
, followed Lord DiplockaEURtms conclusions on similar (although not identical, but much, as Professor Martin Davies correctly describes,
aEURoebetter reasonedaEUR) bases.
However, the unanimous ratio of the Full Court was that Reiter could not rely on its contractual or maritime lien claims because the
was Turkish, where the bunkers had been supplied. As a result, no US based claim could arise under Turkish law. That was because,
, the owners were not a relevant person under Australian law for such a claim since the time charterer had contracted with Reiter
in Turkey for the supply of the bunkers at Istanbul and,
, (in the absence of evidence) Turkish law was presumed to be the same as Australian law, so that those circumstances could not create
a general maritime claim enforceable
. On the more interesting issue of whether foreign maritime liens could be recognised under Australian law, Allsop CJ and Edelman
J said that a foreign right will be recognised as a maritime lien under
Admiralty Act
if: (1) the
, as identified, recognises such a right; and (2) that right is characterised as, or is closely analogous to, a maritime lien that
(which for a claim under
Admiralty Act
will be Australian law) recognised. Kenny and Besanko JJ said,
, that they preferred this reasoning but did not need to decide whether it should be applied because it did not arise on the facts.
view, based on the history of the maritime lien, together with commercial and international policy considerations, I concluded that
aEURoea claim on a maritime lien that is properly so characterised under the law of the place where it attached, ordinarily, will
be maintainable under
Admiralty Act
even though no such maritime lien would attach if the same events had occurred in AustraliaaEUR.
Ship arrests and cross-border insolvency
One important remedy for a maritime creditor is the maritime lien aEUR" as I explained in
The principles of Australian maritime law, as well as those of the laws of most maritime nations recognise that the injured party
can assert that a maritime lien or privilege or claim also attaches to the ship at the moment of the damage and that this lien, privilege
or claim can be asserted in proceedings regardless of any subsequent change of ownership.
The lien travels around the world with the vessel, like a barnacle on its hull, and can only be aEUR~cleanedaEURtm convincingly by
a judicial sale. Hopefully, the issue of how judicial sales will be effected and recognised will soon attain a greater degree of
international harmony following the adoption by the General Assembly of
the United Nations Convention on the International Effects of the Judicial Sales of Ships
Following Buchanan JaEURtms decision in
Yu v STX Pan Ocean Company
, the Court issued a practice note on cross-border insolvency. This requires an application under the
Cross-Border Insolvency Act
which aEURoerelates to an owner of a ship or ships engaged in any commercial tradeaEUR, to be brought the CourtaEURtms attention
before or at the time the application is filed, together with a copy of Buchanan JaEURtms reasons in
. In accordance with the CourtaEURtms usual processes, the application will then be referred to an appropriate Admiralty and maritime
judge who will have a proper appreciation of the issues at stake in both Admiralty and commercial law contexts.
Of course, recognition of oneaEURtms claim in the forum is a substantive hurdle facing a creditor in the context of cross-border insolvencies
involving shipowners. In both
Kim v Daebo International Shipping Co Ltd
Hur v Samsum Logix Corporation
, I considered the interaction between actions
and Art 20 of the
Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency
which, is given force of law by the
Cross-Border Insolvency Act 2008
(Cth). The model law provides for a stay of the commencement or continuation of individual actions concerning the debtoraEURtms assets
or liabilities where there is already an insolvency proceeding in a foreign jurisdiction.
, I noted that:
It may be thought unlikely that the Model Law was understood or intended by either its creators or by the Parliament when giving it
the force of law in Australia under
Cross-Border Insolvency Act
, to supervene or impliedly repeal the domestic statutory remedies provided in States Parties, including those in AustraliaaEURtms
Admiralty Act
, in respect of maritime creditorsaEURtm rights to proceed in rem on a secured or proprietary claim that pre-existed any interim or
final orders recognising a foreign proceeding under Arts 19 or 20 of the Model Law.
I provided the following example in
It will be of little comfort to an unpaid shipaEURtms crew to be told that they can prove against their defaulting employer in a foreign
country in foreign main proceedings if they wish, but, by the operation of the stay in Art 20(2), they have been denied the right
to exercise their security interest consisting of their maritime lien, recognised almost universally in the maritime law of nations
as protecting their right to be paid their wages: see
Admiralty Act
. The fact that they are unpaid and are on a ship from which, if penniless, they cannot escape is a very good reason to ensure that
however else the automatic stay in Art 20(2) of the Model Law operates, claims to such maritime liens are protected and immediately
enforceable without any requirement for prior leave to be sought. If the stay in Art 20(2) were construed to preclude members of
a shipaEURtms unpaid crew from exercising their maritime lien by arresting or attaching the ship when she reached port, the consequence
might be the de facto forced labour or enslavement of the crew until the ship finally reached the crewaEURtms or shipaEURtms home
Thor Commander
Another interesting case concerned
Thor Commander
. The plaintiff, Mount Isa Mines, had entered into a voyage charter for
Thor Commander
from the Chilean port of Angamos to Townsville with cargo of 3,044 bundles of copper anodes that it owned. In January 2015 the vessel
suffered a main engine breakdown in the Coral Sea, following which she began drifting towards the Great Barrier Reef. Her owners
arranged for a tug to depart from Townsville to assist her, but both the vessel's master and the Australian Maritime Safety Authority
) were uncertain whether the tug would arrive in time to prevent
Thor Commander
from drifting onto the Reef.
Due to this concern, AMSA issued a pan-pan notification requesting that all vessels within 10 hours of
Thor Commander
be available to provide immediate assistance.
responded and by the afternoon she had deviated 61.5 nautical miles from her voyage to provide assistance to
Thor Commander
. At this point, AMSA issued a direction pursuant to
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981
(Cth) that required
Thor Commander
to accept such a tow.
successfully towed
Thor Commander
away from the danger of her ongoing drift towards the Reef. Following this, the cargo owner of the copper anodes, Mount Isa Mines,
through its insurers paid
USD1 million in settlement of its salvage liability.
Thor Commander
claimed general average in respect of this and for certain transhipment costs.
This rescue gave rise to a number of legal issues which I had to resolve, including, among others: the cause of
Thor CommanderaEURtms
main engine breakdown, whether she was in need of salvage and whether the salvage settlement reached with the insurer was reasonable.
One of the witnesses was Vladimir Smirnov. His evidence was particularly memorable. He was the technical superintendent for MarShip
who managed the ship and was responsible for her maintenance. Mr Smirnov gave his evidence via videolink from Germany, due to his
difficulty obtaining a visa, which persisted despite my making an order that he attend in person. Mr Smirnov had a number of fiery
exchanges with Mount Isa MineaEURtms counsel, Greg Nell SC, about the quality of the Rolls Royce fuel injection valves, the lack
of maintenance for which was at the centre of the issue as to the cause of the engine breakdown. In one exchange, Mr Smirnov asserted
that the quality of [aEURoethe] derivative nozzle element is absolutely shitaEUR (T501).
I found that what Mr Smirnov said aEURoecould not be taken at face valueaEUR, and that he had been aEURoeparty to the fabrication
of maintenance records for
Thor CommanderaEURtms
oil filtersaEUR. This contributed to my ultimate finding that
Thor Commander
was unseaworthy due to a faulty fuel injector nozzle, and that MarShip had failed to exercise due diligence before and at the commencement
of the voyage.
As to the salvage issues, I found that at the time
Thor Commander
accepted the tow, 'no reasonable person in charge of [her] aEUR| would have refused that assistance if it were offered to that person
upon condition of paying a salvage award'. She was clearly in danger, aEURoedrifting at the mercy of the elements in a direction
towards reefsaEUR. This scenario, where AMSA had compelled the
to render salvage services, fell squarely within the line of authority beginning with
The Beaverford
, which holds that compliance with a statutory duty to render assistance does not change the voluntary character of the salvage services
rendered. Cases where the salvor is under a statutory obligation to render assistance can be differentiated from cases where the
salvor is under another pre-existing duty, such as a contractual obligation, because the former 'is not enforceable against the salvor
by the ship in danger, but by a governmental authority'.
Despite the voluntariness of
aEURtms actions not being contentious, I remarked in the judgment, in
obiter dicta
[T]he definition of salvage operations in s 14(1) of the
Navigation Act
does not create a precondition that the salvor be a volunteer
[N]either the definition of salvage operations in the
Navigation Act
nor the articles of the 1989 Convention to which reg 17 of the
Navigation Regulation
gives force of law in Australia qualify the character of aEURoesalvage operationsaEUR as being only voluntary aEUR| The motivating
reason for an act or activity, whether voluntary or done under statutory or official compulsion, does not change its character.
These comments seem to have caused some minor controversy; for example, Dr Michael White OAM and Justice SC Derrington informed me
Australian Maritime Law
that my comments had aEUR~thrown into doubtaEURtm the traditional principle that voluntariness was a requirement of salvage, and
Damien Cremean also criticised the comments in an article in the Australian Law Journal.
Not content with having lost the case, senior counsel for the vessel interests in the proceeding, now Stewart J, gave a speech to
MLAANZ in July 2019 principally centred around my
obiter dicta
on the salvage issue. His Honour disagreed with me that voluntariness may not be a requirement of salvage at Australian law, commenting,
rather ominously, that my statement in
Thor Commander
with regard to voluntariness aEURoeshould not be taken as the last word on the subject in AustraliaaEUR.
As I approach the end of my time on the bench, navigating the judicial sea, there may come a time for his Honour or another Admiralty
and maritime judge to take up this challenge.
Thank you again for the support you have given the Court and me over my time as a judge.
A judge of the Federal Court of Australia, an additional judge of the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory, and a judge
of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island. The author acknowledges the assistance of his associate, Laura Heit, in the preparation of
this speech. The errors are the authoraEURtms alone. This speech was delivered in a similar form as the keynote address to the MLAANZ
NSW Branch 2023 Mini Conference on 28 February 2023.
Pan Australia Shipping Pty Ltd v The Ship aEUR~ComandateaEURtm (No 2)
[2006] FCA 1112
234 ALR 483.
Comandate Marine Corp v The Ship aEUR~Boomerang IaEURtm
(2006) 151 FCR 403.
Republic of India v India Steamship Co Ltd (No 2)
[1997] UKHL 40
[1998] AC 878.
Hi-Fert Pty Ltd v Kiukiang Maritime Carriers Inc (No 5)
[1998] FCA 1485
(1998) 90 FCR 1.
Comandate Marine Corp v Pan Australia Shipping Pty Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 192
(2006) 157 FCR 45.
[2022] FCAFC 171
295 FCR 81.
C V Sheepvaartonderneming Ankergracht v Stemcor (A/sia) Pty Ltd
(2007) 160 FCR 342.
[2007] FCA 2014
(2007) 245 ALR 125.
(1794) 5 TR 673
(1882) 7 App Cas 591
7 App Cas at 604.
7 App Cas at 605.
245 ALR at [78].
245 ALR at [93].
Alize 1954 and CMA CGM SA v Allianz Elementary Versicherungs AG & Ors
[2021] UKSC 51
; 2 LloydaEURtms Rep 613.
Great China Metal Industries Co Ltd v Malaysian International Shipping Corporation Berhad ('MV Bunga Seroja')
[1998] HCA 65
(1998) 196 CLR 161
Strong Wise Limited v Esso Australia Resources Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 240
185 FCR 149
Navios International Inc v The Ship aEURoeHuang Shan HaiaEUR
[2011] FCA 895
(2011) 194 FCR 468.
Atlasnavios Navegacao LDA v The Ship aEURoeXin Tai HaiaEUR (No 2)
[2012] FCA 1497
(2012) 215 FCR 265.
Visscher v Teekay Shipping (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 137
198 FCR 575.
Visscher v Teekay Shipping (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 5
219 FCR 168
[2013] FCAFC 21
211 FCR 369
Programmed Total Marine Services Pty Ltd v Ships aEURoeHako EndeavouraEUR, aEURoeHako ExcelaEUR and aEURoeHako EsteemaEUR
[2014] FCAFC 134
229 FCR 563.
Dampskibsselskabet Norden A/S v Gladstone Civil Pty Ltd
[2013] FCAFC 107
216 FCR 469.
Dampskibsselskabet
216 FCR at 489 [66].
See https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/have-your-say/review-section-11-carriage-goods-sea-act-1991.
Available at https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/department/media/publications/carriage-goods-sea-act-1991-potential-amendments-section-11.
Poralu Marine Australia Pty Ltd v MV Dijksgracht
[2023] FCAFC 147.
The Ship aEURoeSam HawkaEUR v Reiter Petroleum Inc
[2016] FCAFC 26
246 FCR 337.
[1981] AC 221.
246 FCR at 405 [283].
246 FCR at 438 [430].
246 FCR at 427 [378].
[2013] FCA 680
223 FCR 189.
Cross-Border Insolvency Practice Note: Cooperation with Foreign Courts or Foreign Representatives
(GPN-XBDR).
[2015] FCA 684
232 FCR 275.
[2015] FCA 1154.
For those who are interested, I have previously addressed the issues arising from cross-border insolvencies in a shipping context
more fulsomely in a paper presented at the BITaEURtms 2017 Annual World Congress of Ocean in Shenzhen, China:
Ship Arrests, Maritime Liens and Cross-Border Insolvency
[2015] FCA 684
232 FCR 275
[2015] FCA 1154
Mount Isa Mines v Ship aEUR~Thor CommanderaEURtm
(2018) 263 FCR 1814.
[1938] AC 136.
Thor Commander
Ibid [249].
Ibid [274] and [348].
Damien Cremean, aEUR~Salvage and VoluntarinessaEURtm
(2020) 94 Australian Law Journal 665.
Related Links
Was this page useful?
What did you like about it?
How can we make it better?
* This online submission is protected by captcha
Can't read the security key?
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter