URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/PrivLawPRpr/2006/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:30:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Greenleaf, Graham; McLeish, Robin --- "The rule of law and surveillance in Hong Kong" [2006] PrivLawPRpr 8; (2006) 11(8) Privacy Law and Policy Reporter 227
The Rule Of Law And Surveillance In Hong Kong
The rule of law and surveillance in Hong Kong
Graham Greenleaf and Robin McLeish
This article was first published by UK based Privacy Laws and Business
(http://www.privacylaws.com/) and is reproduced here with their
permission.
In 2005 a constitutional right to privacy, coupled with Hong Kong’s
common law Courts upholding the rule of law, has unexpectedly
resulted in a
major challenge to the surveillance practices of the Hong Kong SAR
government’s law enforcement bodies.
Long-standing legislative provisions (in Hong Kong’s
Telecommunications Ordinance
Cap. 106) prohibit unauthorised interference
with a telecommunication installation in order to intercept a message (s27). On
hand, they also empower the Chief Executive to authorise the
interception of messages transmitted by telecommunication if he considers
the public interest so requires (s33).
In 1996, the Hong Kong Law Reform Commission (LRC) concluded in its
on Privacy: Regulating the Interception of Communications
(para 3.45). that
this legislation did not give “an adequate indication of the circumstances
in which, and the conditions on
which, interceptions may be authorised.”
Hence, they do not provide sufficient protection against unlawful or arbitrary
interference
with the individual’s right to privacy and freedom of
communication as required by Article 17 of the
International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), which was enacted locally in Article 14
Bill of Rights Ordinance
(BORO). The ICCPR was subsequently
entrenched in Hong Kong law by its ‘mini-constitution’, the Basic
Law (Article 39),
which also requires ‘legal procedures’ to sanction
any interferences with such rights (Article 30).
The LRC recommended that the existing powers of authorization for the
interception of communications be replaced by a judicial warrant
system (see
Report, Chapter 6). It also recommended the establishment of a supervisory
authority, with the appointee to be an existing
or former Court of Appeal judge,
to review the issuing of warrants authorising interceptions and to investigate
complaints of contraventions
of the relevant statutory requirements (Chapter
In response, the government published draft legislation for consultation in
early 1997 that embodied much of what had been recommended.
When it became clear
that the government did not intend to bring forward such legislation for
enactment before the ‘handover’
of sovereignty to the People’s
Republic of China (PRC), a private member’s bill (i.e. non-government
bill) was introduced
into the legislature that provided for the judicial warrant
system as proposed.
The bill was passed and signed into law by the
then-Governor on the last day before the ‘handover’ as the
Interception of Communications Ordinance
(Cap. 532). However, its
provisions have never been brought into force by the post-‘handover’
government, which claims
that they would ‘severely hinder’ law
enforcement
The current crisis
Other covert surveillance activities, such as the use of recording devices
etc. not involving the interception of messages transmitted
telecommunications, are not the subject of any legislative control or
authorization, and that is where the government’s
most immediate problem
The lack of any statutory system of authorisation of such surveillance
resulted in a court ruling in April 2005 that the use of covert
surveillance
devices by a law enforcement body (ICAC, the Independent Commission Against
Corruption) was a breach of Article 30 of
the Basic Law because its requirement
for ‘legal procedures’ to sanction their use had not been
The Judge observed that if the agency continued such practices
without some legislative basis it might well be held to be acting
in bad faith
(which would result in evidence obtained by such means being excluded) unless
and until his ruling on their legality
was overturned.
A similar ruling was made in a subsequent case involving the covert recording
by ICAC of a conversation between a defendant and his
that case a permanent stay of criminal proceedings was ordered because the
recording of a conversation between one of the defendants
and his lawyer was
found to be a ‘cynical and flagrant infringement of [the] right to legal
professional privilege’,
which rendered a fair trial impossible.
The government’s response to these rulings was to issue an
‘Executive Order’
in August 2005 that made provision for
the ‘authorisation’ by senior officers designated by any head of
department of
the government of covert surveillance for law enforcement
investigations or operations.
Under the Order, to carry out covert surveillance, a law enforcement officer
must make an application to an authorising officer in
accordance with the
specified procedures. The authorising officers designated by a head of
department and must be senior officers
at or above the rank of senior
superintendent of police or equivalent. He or she must be satisfied with a set
of prescribed conditions
before authorising covert surveillance. The government
claims the Order provides various safeguards including mandatory internal
guidelines and a mechanism for the regular review of authorisations. No judicial
oversight is involved.
The government stated that the order was an interim measure pending
legislation but contended, nevertheless, that it created ‘legal
procedures’ for the authorisation of covert surveillance as required by
Article 30 of the Basic Law. Critics of the move rejected
this reasoning and
characterised it as one that undermined the rule of law because it by-passed the
legislative process.
The underlying problem faced by the government in introducing legislation,
even when it is minded to do so, is that it may not be
able to ensure that the
legislation it introduces will be passed, or passed in a form it finds
acceptable, by the legislature (the
Legislative Council or LegCo). The executive
is not formed from the legislature. Neither, being appointed, does it command
the legitimacy
that is conferred by being elected.
As a result, the
executive regularly encounters difficulty in persuading a majority of the
legislature to support its legislative
The response of the government has been to avoid legislating in potentially
controversial areas. The Interception of Communications
Ordinance that was
passed before the ‘handover’, but has not been brought into effect
following it, is a case in point.
If the Ordinance would unduly hinder law
enforcement as claimed, the obvious solution would be to amend it prior to
bringing it into
force or replace it with an entirely new ordinance. However,
the government has taken neither step in the eight years following its
Possible future developments
While the Basic Law provides for Hong Kong to have a high degree of autonomy,
the reality is that the Central People’s Government
is sovereign. Whatever
the formal position on Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy may be as
provided for in the Basic Law,
the CPG’s possible reaction to actions
taken by the Hong Kong administration is bound to be a factor in its
decision-making
process. This may provide some explanation for the Hong
Kong’s government’s reluctance to legislate on such matters as
interception of communications.
There is no realistic prospect of a private member’s bill containing
legislative initiatives in the area of privacy being introduced
legislature as occurred before the ‘handover’ with the Interception
of Communications Ordinance. This is because
the consent of the Chief Executive
is now required for any bill relating to government policy (Article 74 of the
Basic Law). This
effectively gives the Chief Executive a veto over the
introduction of such legislation.
Unless legislation to replace the Executive Order is enacted soon the issue
is likely to be played out further in the Courts when
a future case tests the
question of whether the Executive Order does in fact provide the created
‘legal procedures’ required
by the Basic Law. If the matter goes as
far as the Court of Final Appeal and results in a finding adverse to the
government, a constitutional
crisis could result if the government referred the
matter to the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress of the
PRC for ‘interpretation’ under Article 158 of the Basic Law.
In the meantime, maverick legislator, ‘Long-hair’ Leung Kwok
Hung, has commenced judicial review proceedings challenging
the executive order
and the failure to appoint a day for the coming into force of the Interception
of Communications Ordinance
. Whether he even has standing before a
court to pursue such a case remains to be seen.
Graham Greenleaf is Professor of Law, University of New South Wales and
PL&B Asia-Pacific Editor
Robin McLeish is a Barrister in Hong Kong and former Deputy Privacy
Commissioner, Hong Kong.
The bill did not, however, provide for the establishment of any
supervisory authority as this would have created a charge on public
which would have required government agreement for the bill to go forward.
Secretary of Security quoted in
South China Morning Post
13 August 2005.3 DCCC 689 of 2004 (unreported judgment of H.H. Judge Sweeney of
22 April 2005).
DCCC 687 of 2004 (unreported judgment of Deputy Judge Livesey of
5 July 2005),
Pursuant to Article48(4) of the Basic Law. The only other such
order to date was issued to replace the civil service regulations
pre-‘Handover’ government..
The Enforcement (Covert Surveillance) Order (S.S. No. 5 to
Gazette No. 31/2005).
The Chief Executive is appointed by the Central People’s
Government following election by a 400 member selection committee
(Article???????????????????45 and Annex 1 of the Basic Law) and the members of
his ‘cabinet’, the Executive Council,
are appointed by him
(Article?????55).
The fact that this case was pending in the courts was one reason
given in a ruling in another case, HKSAR v. Mo Yuk-Ping &
Ors (unreported
judgment of H.H. Judge Wright of 23 August 2005), for not handing down a
decision on the constitutionality of the
provisions empowering the Chief
Executive to authorize the interception of telecommunications.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter