URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/WAStuLawRw/2023/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:58:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gallagher, Benjamin --- "Barking Up the Wrong Tree? a Comparative Analysis of Puppy Farming Legislation in Western Australia" [2023] WAStuLawRw 3; (2023) 6 Western Australian Student Law Review 25
BARKING UP THE WRONG TREE?
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF PUPPY FARMING LEGISLATION IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
BARKING UP THE WRONG TREE?
A COMPARATIVE
ANALYSIS OF PUPPY FARMING LEGISLATION IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
BENJAMIN GALLAGHER*
ANIMAL LAW—PUPPY FARMING—
DOG AMENDMENT (STOP
PUPPY FARMING) ACT 2021
(WA)—DOG BREEDING—
DOMESTIC ANIMALS
(VIC)—PET SHOPS—E-COMMERCE
The practice of puppy farming is a prevalent issue in Western Australia.
As a response, the recent Dog Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming)
Act 2021 (WA) was
enacted to attempt to curb the prevalence of puppy farming in Western Australia.
This article compares the recent
Western Australian legislative amendments with
the existing anti-puppy farming laws contained in the expansive
Domestic Animals
The Dog Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming) Act 2021 (WA) makes several
important strides in the regulation of dog breeding and the sale
of dogs in pet
shops. Notable inclusions are the requirement that dogs be sterilised, the
requirement for approval to breed a dog,
the creation of a centralised
registration system, the shift from pet shops to adoption centres, and the
drafting of standards and
guidelines pertaining to dogs. Looking towards the
future, further amendments may be required in Western Australia to address a
e-commerce-based pet trade which remains underregulated.
I INTRODUCTION
Australia is a nation of dog
Over half of all Australian
households have a companion animal, with 40% owning at least one
Australia’s canine
captivation was further demonstrated in the throes of the COVID-19 pandemic,
with consumer demand for pet
skyrocketing.
Rising demand has
coincided with an increase in unethical and unsafe puppy farming breeding
practices, wherein dogs are raised in
squalid conditions to maximise supply and
minimise costs.
In 2016, Victoria implemented world first stringent anti-puppy farming laws
by amending the
Domestic Animals Act 1994
’) with the
Domestic Animals Amendment (Puppy Farms and Pet
Shops) Act 2017
the enactment of the
Dog Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming) Act 2021
Western Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
contained the first dedicated anti-puppy farming legislative provisions in
In the leadup to the 2017 Western Australian state election, the Western
Australian branch of the Australian Labor Party in opposition,
led by Mark
McGowan, promised that if they were elected to power, laws would be introduced
to end puppy farming in Western
Following a successful
election campaign for the McGowan Labor Government, the Department of Local
Government, Sport and Cultural
Industries (the ‘DLGSCI’) began the
process of drafting the
Dog Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming) Bill 2020
publishing a consultation report in December 2018 (the ‘Consultation
After initially
failing to progress past the Legislative Council of the Parliament of Western
Australia, the puppy farming reforms
were re-tabled on 2 June 2021 as the
Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming) Bill 2021
(WA) (the ‘Western Australian
After passing through
both chambers of the Parliament of Western Australia, the Western Australian
Bill received Royal Assent on
22 December 2021, thereby becoming the
Western Australian
This article aims to compare the nascent
Western Australian Amendments
with the more mature
Victorian Act
to determine the efficacy of the
Western Australian Amendments
in combating puppy farming practices. This
article begins by describing the context that led to the introduction of the
Western Australian Amendments
and why the legal framework in Western
Australia prior to the
Western Australian Amendments
was inadequate. This
article then dissects and compares the major features of the
Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
with regard to puppy
farming. Finally, this article discusses the potential for further legislative
amendments in Western Australia
to address an emerging e-commerce-based pet
II BACKGROUND OF THE
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN AMENDMENTS
The Practice of ‘Puppy Farming’
The overwhelming smell is always the first to hit you. Next it is the sound;
twenty-five to forty wire mesh cages, many containing
multiple puppies, line the
walls of this Conshohocken, Pennsylvania pet store. The cages have drip pans
underneath, which are supposed
to allow for easy clean-up of waste, but the
puppies are still covered in their own excrement and
The above testimony gives only a brief glimpse into the cruel world of puppy
farming. Before proceeding further, a pressing question
must first be discussed:
what is ‘puppy farming’? No standard definition exists for the terms
‘puppy farm’,
‘puppy farming’ or ‘puppy
mill’. However, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
‘RSPCA’) defines a puppy farm as ‘an intensive dog
breeding facility that is operated under inadequate conditions
that fail to meet
the dogs’ behavioural, social and/or physiological
The Consultation
Report defines a puppy farm more broadly as ‘any dog breeding facility,
big or small, which does not meet
the welfare needs of the dogs bred and raised
In a puppy farm, dogs—both the mother and the puppies—have an
extremely poor quality of life. The RSPCA notes that most
puppy farms are
‘ad hoc’; there is no structured facility plan for animal
Many puppy farms
house animals in ‘filthy, unhygienic conditions’ and
‘permanently confine dogs in barren cages’
which fail to meet
acceptable animal welfare
The effects of a puppy farm on a dog are significant. The common features of
a puppy farm—overcrowding, confinement, unsanitary
conditions,
indiscriminate husbandry, poor facilities and a lack of basic care, veterinary
care and socialisation—are all associated
with contributing to a poor
ongoing quality of life for the afflicted
Puppies born into puppy
farms can suffer from severe physical and psychological
complications.
As puppy farmers
frequently do not take into account a breeding animal’s genetic
background, the chances of passing on inherited
conditions such as retinal
atrophy, hip dysplasia or corneal dystrophy to puppies is
The modern conception of the puppy farm arose in the post-Second World War
United States of America (‘USA’) where large
commercial-scale
breeding operations were established to mass-produce dogs for sale in pet
Over time, the scale of
this iniquitous industry increased exponentially. For example, in 1999, there
were an estimated 5,000 puppy
farms operating in the
In 2021, the number of
puppy farms in the USA has doubled to
Puppy farming is not an issue confined to the USA. In the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, a female King Charles
Cavalier Spaniel named
Lucy died in 2016 after being severely mistreated at a Welsh puppy
Moving to Western
Australia, there was notably the case of Strawberry the Boxer. Strawberry gave
birth to three puppies on a New
South Wales puppy farm but failed to deliver the
rest of her litter. Instead of taking her to a veterinary surgeon for an
Caesarean section, the puppy farm owner nudged Strawberry with his
boot and joked, ‘Are you dead
Strawberry would
later die, whilst two of her puppies were sold to a Western Australian pet
With cases such as Strawberry’s drawing the ire of the Western
Australian public,
the Western
Australian Bill was introduced following concerns from the McGowan Labor
Government over the connection between puppy
farming and animal
Australian Amendments
sought to end puppy farming in Western Australia
through the creation of a new system of ethical dog breeding which requires
to give adequate consideration to the needs of dogs before they are
It was also hoped that the
Western Australian Amendments
would increase consumer confidence in the
pet breeding industry by ensuring dogs are bred in acceptable conditions,
reducing the risk
of puppies developing a range of behavioural or health issues
that can be attributed to puppy
Whilst the ostensible focus of the
Western Australian Amendments
puppy farming, it is notable that the term ‘puppy farm’ is not used.
The term ‘puppy farm’ was omitted
to acknowledge that puppy farming
can encompass a broad range of unethical dog breeding practices that can
negatively affect the
health and wellbeing of
Thus, the human population is in a frenzy for pets, more pets, exotic pets,
and purebred pets. Pet shops proliferate, as do the puppy-mills
and the backyard
Pet shops are a staple of the pet (and more specifically, dog) breeding
industry. As puppy farming practices have come under greater
scrutiny in recent
years, so too have pet shops which are allegedly connected with puppy
It should be noted that this article by no means seeks to critique the
institution of the ‘pet shop’. Indeed, some pet
shops exclusively
source dogs from sustainable, non-puppy farming
There is also industry
evidence in the USA
suggesting that
large-scale pet shops and breeders could be better resourced to ensure the
welfare of dogs in their care and have
the ability to take an active
‘hands-on’ role in both the breeding and supply of dogs.
However, a number of pet shops do rely on puppy farms for a steady supply of
dogs. In 2009, the Humane Society of the United States
estimated that one-third
of pet shops in the USA sell puppies originating from puppy
Data concerning Australia
paints a similarly bleak picture. Statistical analysis by the Australian
National Kennel Council (the ‘ANKC’),
the peak representative kennel
club in Australia, estimates that only around 15% of all puppies in Australia
are sold through breeders
registered with the
Dogs which are bred at
puppy farms are not registered with dog breeding organisations such as the ANKC,
as dog breeding organisations
require affiliated breeders to adhere to strict
breeding and animal welfare guidelines before a dog can be
registered.
While there are few
statistics on how many dogs sold through pet shops are sourced from puppy farms,
the RSPCA notes that the sale
of dogs to pet shops are one of the primary
mediums by which puppy farmers sell puppy-farmed
Further, it is notoriously difficult for consumers to discern whether a puppy
has originated from a puppy
Many consumers will not be
afforded the opportunity to visit the location where a puppy was born, meet the
puppy’s mother and
father, or ensure that the breeder provides a high
standard of care for their dogs.
Likewise, many pet shop operators are also in the dark about the conditions of
the location from which their puppies originate. In
some cases, pet shop owners
are only able to provide consumers with a mere picture of a puppy’s mother
and father.
In response to the faciliatory roles that pet shops can play in further
propagating puppy farming—including where such facilitation
is performed
unwittingly—the
Western Australian Amendments
fundamentally restructure the way in which pet shops operate in Western
Australia to eliminate the involvement of puppy
farming and to promote the sale
of unwanted or abandoned
Criminal Offences
Prior to the
Western Australian Amendments
, prosecuting an individual
in Western Australia for participating in puppy farming was a difficult
endeavour. Whilst there were no
laws specifically prohibiting puppy farming
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(WA), which
provides that a person must not be cruel to an animal, may provide a cause of
action against puppy farming.
, cruelty towards an animal includes if the
(a) tortures, mutilates, maliciously beats or wounds,
abuses, torments, or
otherwise ill-treats
, the animal; or
in any other way causes the animal unnecessary harm.
(emphasis added.)
Furthermore,
states that a person in charge of an animal is
cruel to an animal if the
(b) is confined, restrained or caught in a manner that –
(i) is prescribed; or
(ii) causes, or is likely to cause, it unnecessary harm;
(d) is not provided with proper and sufficient food or water; or
(e) is not provided with such shelter, shade or other protection from the
elements as is reasonably necessary to ensure its welfare,
safety and health;
(f) is abandoned, whether at the place where it is normally kept or
elsewhere; or
(h) suffers harm which could be alleviated by the taking of reasonable steps
In order to determine that a person has been cruel to an animal where the
animal suffers harm which could have been alleviated by
the taking of reasonable
steps under
, the prosecution must satisfy a tripartite
1. the accused was in charge of the relevant animal;
2. the relevant animal suffered harm; and
3. the harm suffered by the relevant animal could have been alleviated by the
taking of ‘reasonable steps’.
An accused charged with an offence under
will not be able to
escape liability by merely displaying that they took ‘some steps’ to
alleviate the harm suffered
by the relevant
‘harm’ is defined under
Animal Welfare Act
(WA) as including injury, pain and distress evidenced by severe,
abnormal physiological or behavioural
Ultimately, it has been noted that the enforcement of animal cruelty-related
provisions and offences against puppy farms is extremely
difficult, with the
rates of successful prosecutions resulting from animal cruelty complaints in
Australia being ‘very
Puppy farms are
usually hidden from public view in isolated or remote areas and infrequently
allow prospective buyers on-site, preferring
instead to sell puppies online, to
pet shops, or through façade false house ‘shop
Civil Remedies
One of the most common reasons a dog will be purchased from a puppy farm is
to become a pet ‘companion
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), the term ‘goods’ is
defined to include animals.
follows that a consumer who purchases a puppy from a puppy farm that is found to
have an undisclosed physiological or psychological
issue may seek redress under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2
Australian Consumer Law
’) for misleading or deceptive
or a failure to adhere
to consumer guarantees.
example, in
Commissioner for Consumer Protection v
four consumers
were entitled to compensation after being sold puppies infected with
parvovirus.
The breeder had
previously signed an enforceable undertaking under
Australian Consumer Law
to have all puppies tested by a veterinarian,
wormed and vaccinated.
facts, this enforceable undertaking had been
Whilst the provisions of the
Australian Consumer Law
individual consumers in a transaction, it does little to stop puppy farming
practices at large. Moreover, where a consumer
seeks to return a
‘defective’ puppy or obtain a replacement puppy, they are arguably
propagating the occurrence of puppy
farming by encouraging puppy farmers to
foster more litters to produce replacement puppies.
III OVERVIEW OF THE
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN AMENDMENTS
The legislative reforms contained in the
Western Australian Amendments
that are aimed at eliminating puppy farming practices relevantly amend the
Dog Act 1976
(WA). These amendments can be delineated into five
categories:
1. sterilisation amendments;
2. breeding approval amendments;
3. registration amendments;
4. pet shop amendments; and
5. standards and guidelines.
Each of these categories of amendments will be considered below.
Sterilisation Amendments
Western Australian Amendments
introduce a requirement that all
dogs be sterilised by 2 years of age unless
By implementing
mandatory dog sterilisation, the
Western Australian Amendments
address the uncontrolled breeding of dogs in Western Australia through the
prevention of unwanted or unplanned dog
pregnancies.
A dog may be exempted from mandatory sterilisation for a number of reasons,
including where a vet provides a certificate exempting
the dog on health or
welfare grounds,
owned by a person who has been granted an approval to breed the
or where the dog is a
livestock working dog.
sterilisation requirement is not retrospective; dogs that were registered with a
local government area (‘LGA’) or
that were owned by a person at the
commencement of the sterilisation amendments will not be required to undergo
sterilisation.
However, the
implementation of the
Western Australian Amendments
will be such that
owners of unsterilised dogs will only be able to register their dogs annually,
as opposed to sterilised dogs being
able to be registered annually, tri-annually
or for the dog’s
Breeding Approval Amendments
Western Australian Amendments
also introduce a requirement that a
person obtain a one‑off approval from a relevant LGA to breed a
An LGA may refuse to grant
an approval to breed on a number of grounds, including where the applicant is
where the applicant is
a ‘convicted
applicant lacks the sufficient facilities to breed dogs in accordance with the
requirements of any relevant written
or where the applicant is
not a fit and proper person to breed
Circumstances where an LGA
may refuse to grant an approval to breed may also be
prescribed.
An approval to breed will be subject to any conditions specified in the
approval that the LGA considers necessary or desirable to
At any time, the
conditions of an approval to breed may be amended or revoked, or new conditions
may be imposed, by written notice
to the approval
An approval to breed can be cancelled on the request of the approval
An approval to breed can
also be cancelled where the LGA is satisfied that the approval holder is a
person to whom the LGA could
refuse to grant an approval to breed based upon the
grounds listed in s 26J(2),
that the approval holder has failed to comply with a condition of the approval
or that the person has
failed to comply with the
Dog Act 1976
Animal Welfare Act 2002
By implementing a system of approvals to breed, the McGowan Labor Government
does not seek to stop dog breeding in Western
Instead, the approval
to breed system adds a layer of regulation to a space where there previously was
none. The application process
for an approval to breed allows LGAs to ascertain
a variety of details about the suitability and fitness of a prospective breeder,
including whether they have they breached any relevant laws or whether they have
the necessary facilities for dog
Registration Amendments
Western Australian Amendments
radically alter the existing system
for registering dogs by creating a centralised registration system
(‘CRS’). The CRS
will create a state-wide dog registration database
to replace the separate registration systems of Western Australia’s 139
Western Australian
require that the CEO of the DLGSCI establish and maintain the
The DLGSCI CEO and each LGA
is to record prescribed information in the CRS and must ensure that the recorded
information is accurate
The McGowan Labor Government aims for the CRS to become a central point for
the collection of information about dog registrations
and dog breeders. This
information can then be shared across LGAs to assist authorities with
enforcement and to help consumers make
informed choices about where they source
a puppy from.
At the time of
writing this article, the McGowan Labor Government has issued a request for
information for the procurement of a CRS
on the Tenders WA
It is expected that the
CRS will be operational in
Pet Shop Amendments
Western Australian Amendments
introduce new laws to govern both
the operation of Western Australian pet shops, and how Western Australian pet
shops source their
supply of dogs. Under the
Western Australian
, a ‘pet shop’ is a shop at, in or from which a
relevant pet shop business is
A ‘relevant pet
shop business’ is a business, or part of a business, that is conducted at,
in or from a shop and involves
the supply of, or offering to supply,
To operate a relevant pet shop business under the
Dog Act 1976
Western Australian Amendments
require that a person obtain a pet shop
approval from the relevant LGA.
On receiving a pet shop application, an LGA can grant or refuse to grant a pet
shop approval.
The pet shop
approval must be renewed yearly through reapplication by the pet shop approval
holder to the relevant LGA.
receiving an application for the renewal of a pet shop approval, the LGA can
renew or refuse to renew the pet shop
An LGA may refuse to grant or renew a pet shop approval where the applicant
is a convicted person,
the applicant lacks the sufficient facilities to keep dogs for the purposes of a
relevant pet shop business in accordance
with the requirements of any relevant
written law.
An LGA can also
refuse to grant or renew a pet shop approval if the approval holder has failed
to comply with a condition imposed
by an LGA on the
Further, an LGA can
also refuse to grant or renew a pet shop approval where the approval holder has
failed to comply with a requirement
Dog Act 1976
(WA) or the
Animal Welfare Act 2002
Finally, an LGA can
refuse to grant or renew a pet shop approval where there has been a
contravention of the
Dog Act 1976
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(WA) in relation to either the relevant pet shop business conducted by the
approval holder, or the pet shop to which approval
An LGA also has the
ability to cancel an existing pet shop approval on similar
Western Australian Amendments
do not stop at merely creating a
legislative framework around the running of a pet shop, but rather require all
pet shop businesses
to only supply dogs sourced from a person who holds a
‘dog supply
A dog supply
approval will only be granted to persons conducting animal refuge operations or
dog management facilities.
effect of this legislative reform is extreme: only stray, abandoned, seized or
surrendered dogs that are kept in a refuge or
a dog management facility may be
sold in pet shops;
no room for the supply of puppy-farmed
As put by the Hon David
Templeman, the introduction of the dog supply approval will see pet shops
transformed into adoption
Standards and Guidelines
Concurrently with the development of the Western Australian Bill, the
Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (the
‘DPIRD’) began the process of formulating Standards and Guidelines
for the Health and Welfare of Dogs in Western Australia
Standards and
Guidelines’).
The Dog Standards and Guidelines were developed in consultation with numerous
industry stakeholders,
aim to reflect a recognition by the McGowan Labor Government of the value of
animal welfare to the community and appropriate
standards of
The Dog Standards and Guidelines include both ‘standards’ and
‘guidelines’. Standards are minimum requirements
for the basic
welfare of dogs that will be enforceable under subsidiary
legislation.
Guidelines are
recommended practices that should be followed to achieve desirable animal
welfare outcomes.
standards, the guidelines are not enforceable, but were formulated to encourage
a higher level of welfare for dogs in
the Western Australian
A number of standards and guidelines directly address dog breeding practices.
For example, standard 15.2 prescribes how often a dog
A breeder must not use a bitch to produce more than:
(a) two litters in any eighteen month period; and
(b) five litters before the dog is retired from breeding.
Guideline 15.4 then expands on standard 15.2 by recommending that dogs which
have or carry inherited disorders should not be bred
to ensure the welfare of
Dogs which have or carry inherited disorders:
(a) with a high chance of inheritance; or
(b) with a low chance of inheritance, but which may severely compromise an
animal’s health or welfare;
should not be used for breeding.
The DPIRD has noted that the regulation of the Dog Standards and Guidelines,
as well as a series of regulations pertaining to dogs
to accompany the
Welfare Act 2002
(WA), is currently being
progressed.
IV COMPARISON WITH THE VICTORIAN APPROACH
Background of the Victorian Approach
Western Australian Amendments
, the only other Australian
20 December 2017, the
Domestic Animals Amendment (Puppy Farms and Pet Shops)
(Vic) (the ‘Victorian Bill’) received Royal Assent, with
the Hon Jaala Pulford promising that these amendments to the
Victorian Act
would stamp out puppy farms, reform pet shops in Victoria, and improve the
traceability of online sales of
Since its passage, the anti-puppy farming amendments to the
Victorian Act
have been lauded as a shift in the right direction, with journalist Calla
Wahlquist commenting that the amendments are ‘the
most effective tool yet
in stamping out the [puppy]
This makes the
Victorian Act
a valuable extant example of functional anti-puppy farming
legislation that the recent
Western Australian Amendments
can be compared
with. An argument can even be made that if the
Western Australian Amendments
implement similar measures to the successful
Victorian Act
Western Australian Amendments
will also form an effective tool in
eradicating puppy farming in Western Australia.
However, it is important to note that the approach adopted by the
Victorian Act
is not a panacea for puppy farming; contemporary evidence
suggests puppy farming is still an ongoing issue in
Academic Dr Clare
Brealey has noted that definitional issues plague the debate around puppy
As will be discussed
Victorian Act
imposes a blanket cap of 50 fertile female dogs
for commercial dog breeders, and yet many dog breeding businesses impacted by
cap are not puppy farms in the sense that they would not be considered
‘intensive dog breeding facilit[ies]’ that ‘fail
to meet the
dog’s behavioural, social and/or physiological
survey data collected by Dr Brealey suggests that the wider community lacks a
nuanced understanding of ‘ethical’
breeding and the
‘responsible’ purchase of dogs, leading to the continued purchasing
of puppy farmed dogs and a nullification
of the anti-puppy farming intentions of
Victorian Act
Victorian Approach to Dog Sterilisation
Western Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
does not mandate the sterilisation of dogs. However, a Victorian LGA retains
the discretion to refuse to register a dog unless the
sterilised.
Concurrently, if
an owner fails to register their dog, they may be subject to a
The interplay between
these provisions creates a de facto
dog sterilisation mandate in
Victorian LGAs that refuses to register unsterilised dogs. Like in the
Western Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
provides several
categories of exemption from
sterilisation.
The sterilisation of dogs has been recognised as vital in stopping
uncontrolled dog breeding to reduce the number of unwanted and
Australian Amendments
, which mandate sterilisation, are arguably more
stringent than
Victorian Act
in reducing uncontrolled dog breeding. By
mandating dog sterilisation, the
Western Australian Amendments
the population of fertile dogs in Western Australia to those dogs owned by a
person holding an approval to breed, and to
those dogs covered by an exemption
from sterilisation. Any prospective dog breeders will be forced to seek an
approval to breed,
wherein an LGA can then scrutinise the suitability of the
available facilities and the fitness of the owner to breed dogs so to prevent
puppy farming practices.
Victorian Approach to Dog Breeding
Victorian Act
does not implement a system of approvals to breed
dogs as the
Western Australian Amendments
do. Instead, the
defines four distinct classes of breeders, each attracting various
levels of regulation:
1. microbreeders;
2. three to 10 breeders;
3. commercial dog breeders; and
4. recreational breeders.
The term ‘microbreeder’ encompasses persons who breed dogs to
sell, are not a member of an applicable
organisation,
and who have no
more than two fertile female
Microbreeders are not
required to register as a domestic animal breeder (‘DAB’) with their
LGA. The category three to
10 breeders encompasses persons who have three to 10
fertile female dogs and are not a member of an applicable
organisation.
Three to 10
breeders are required to register with their LGA as a DAB, and must comply with
any relevant business codes of practice
Commercial dog breeders encompass persons holding an approval allowing them to
own up to 50 fertile female
All commercial dog
breeders must apply to the Victorian Minister for Agriculture for a commercial
dog breeder approval, register
with their local governments as a DAB, and comply
with any relevant BCOPs.
Finally, recreational breeders encompass persons who are members of an
applicable organisation and who own up to 10 fertile female
Recreational breeders
do not need to register as a DAB, but they must comply with the rules and codes
of their applicable organisation
in order to maintain membership with the
organisation.
Victorian Act
should be lauded for its recognition of the unique
regulatory needs of the differing classes of breeders. For example, it is
that registered breeders can be permitted to act with less regulatory
scrutiny as they are already subject to the rules and codes
of an applicable
organisation. Conversely, there is an argument to be made that large-scale
commercial breeding operations, where
dogs are bred and sold under a business
model for profit, should attract greater regulatory attention.
Western Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
take a breeder-focused approach to the regulation of dog breeding, given the
consideration of whether the applicant is a suitable
person to breed dogs. For
example, under the
Western Australian Amendments
the relevant LGA will
examine whether an applicant has sufficient facilities for dog
The system of
approvals to breed dogs
Western Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
both involve one-off approvals. The
Victorian Act
can be distinguished in that it places a limit on the
number of fertile female dogs that a person can own under a dog breeding
Theoretically, the number of dogs that can be owned and bred under a
dog breeding approval issued under the
Western Australian Amendments
The limit on the number of owned fertile female dogs imposed by the
Victorian Act
does not necessarily make the
Victorian Act
effective than the
Western Australian Amendments
in stopping puppy
farming. For one, there is no major scientific evidence to support an
‘ideal number’ of fertile animals
to maximise welfare when keeping
fertile animals.
Furthermore,
there is little evidence that scale is an issue in animal welfare when breeding
A survey conducted on
dog owners suggested that the majority of dog owners may support commercial
breeding operations where the welfare
of the breeding dogs is
Testimonial evidence
was also presented to an inquiry into the Victorian Bill that suggested the
larger the scale of breeding operation,
the more resources a breeder will have
at their disposal to ensure the welfare of their breeding
Victorian Approach to Dog Registration
Victorian Act
establishes a centralised Pet Exchange Register
(‘PER’) with functionality similar to the Western Australian CRS.
DABs, microbreeders, recreational breeders and members of the public who
supply dogs must be registered on the PER and will receive
a unique source
number (‘USN’).
Relevant governmental departments and LGAs will then be able to access the PER
to help determine the compliance of a breeder with
When attempting to
purchase an animal, consumers can access limited information from the PER,
including the USN of the owner of an
animal, the LGA where the owner of the
animal is located, and the registration number of the premises on which a DAB is
being conducted.
If the owner
is a recreational breeder, information on the owner’s applicable
organisation membership can also be
Victorian Approach to Pet Shops
Similar to the
Western Australian Amendments
makes it an offence for persons to supply dogs which are not from a
registered pound, animal shelter, or enrolled foster carer to
It is also an offence
for pet shops to sell or give away dogs which are not from a registered pound,
animal shelter, or enrolled
The effect of these
provisions is that registered breeders will only be able to supply animals
directly to the public, such as through
the internet. All online advertisements
for the sale of dogs must include the animal’s microchip number and the
PER-affiliated
person selling the dog and the publisher of the advertisement are liable under
Victorian Act
for a non‑compliant
advertisement.
amendments, like the introduction of the USN, address a growing e‑commerce
market that is absent from the
Western Australian Amendments
Victorian Act
classes puppy brokers, being persons who act as an
intermediary between a breeder and a consumer (including where that consumer is
interstate), as falling within the definition of a
The position of an
animal foster carer is also acknowledged in the
Victorian Act
‘foster care’ defined as the short-term care of stray, abandoned, or
unwanted dogs on a singular premises for the
purpose of eventually rehoming
those animals.
Foster carers
may collaborate with LGAs under a foster carer scheme, entitling foster carers
to reduced registration rates and access
to pet shops to rehome
V THE RISE OF E-COMMERCE?
One facet of the
Western Australian Amendments
deserving of scrutiny
is the failure to regulate the sale of dogs online. According to the Pet
Industry Association of Australia,
pet shops account for less than 10% of all
puppies sold.
record numbers of pets are being bought through the internet, with recent
evidence from Europe suggesting that 57% of
European consumers are moving online
to purchase new companion
While there is
currently insufficient research on the exact percentage of Australians who
choose to purchase companion animals
it is thought to be a
booming market that has only been exacerbated by the COVID-19
Western Australian Amendments
sparsely address the rise in online
sales and advertisements of dogs, despite this being recognised as a potential
area for unregulated
animal-related commerce since
Australian Amendments
, the online trading of dogs is permitted, with the
only requirements being that the owner lists their ‘dog owner
if they have one, as well as any future prescribed
information.
This potentially
allows puppy farmers in states where puppy farming is legal to supply their dogs
to Western Australians through
sales on online marketplaces, completely
frustrating the underlying anti-puppy farming aims of the
Western Australian
Amendments.
To stop the growth of puppy farming through online means, further amendments
Dog Act 1976
(WA) to complement the
Western Australian
should be considered. Similar to what is required under law in
Victoria, all online advertisements should be required to include a
microchip and unique registration source number as recorded on the
Information on the
breeder, including the LGA from which they operate and any past violations of
Dog Act 1976
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(WA) or any other
similar legislation could also be required to be listed. This will enable
consumers to gain an understanding of
the history and breeding origin of the
dog. In conjunction with providing consumers with the tools to inspect the
origins of a dog
advertised for sale online, the Western Australian Government
could also introduce an enforcement program to closely monitor online
marketplaces for users who are posting non-compliant
advertisements.
VI CONCLUSION
If [humanity] is to not stifle his human feelings, he must practice kindness
towards animals, for he who is cruel to animals becomes
hard also in his
dealings with men.
It is early days to be judging the
Western Australian Amendments
some of the provisions are yet to come into effect. Prima facie, the amendments
appear to be a step in the right direction on
the path towards eliminating puppy
farming. The implementation of mandatory sterilisations for dogs by the age of
2, an approval
scheme for breeding, and the introduction of a CRS brings much
needed regulation to the dog and cat breeding industries of Western
Moreover, the advent of the pet shop approval and the requirement that pet shops
only sell stray, abandoned, seized, or
surrendered dogs will cut off a lucrative
avenue through which puppy farms can supply and sell dogs to consumers.
However, there are concerns regarding the rising role e-commerce can play in
the purchasing of puppy-farmed dogs which are not addressed
Australian Amendments
. In the second reading speech of the Western
Australian Bill, the Hon John Carey acknowledged that even with the
Australian Amendments
, consumers ‘still run the risk of dealing with a
puppy farmer if they buy dogs online or
interstate’.
Victoria, even with the
Victorian Act
banning puppy farming practices and
requiring a valid USN to be listed in online advertisements for dogs, many puppy
farmers have
simply moved their operations north to New South Wales where they
continue to post advertisements that are non-compliant with the
However, with problems come opportunities. The Hon John Carey also noted that
Western Australian Amendments
contain a review clause so that after
five years of operation, the incumbent government ‘can take a step back
and consider whether
any improvements need to be
The government
of the day should take advantage of this opportunity for review to consider
implementing amendments to address a growing
e-commerce market, such as
requiring that online listings for dogs include the dog’s microchip and
unique registration source
number as recorded on the CRS, as well as information
on the breeder, including the LGA from which they operate and any past
Dog Act 1976
Animal Welfare Act 2002
or any other similar legislation. By analysing the efficacy of the
Western Australian Amendments
, future amendments to the
Dog Act 1976
(WA) can take further effective and constructive steps in
the campaign against puppy farming practices in Western Australia.
* Fourth-year Bachelor of Laws (LLB) student, Murdoch University, Western
Australia. All opinions and views expressed in this article
are my own, and do
not constitute legal advice. Any errors or omissions contained in this article
are my responsibility.
† This article is dedicated to Sandra Pallier. A registered breeder of
Bichon Frise dogs, Sandra has enriched my life through
her educational wisdom on
all-things canine and the provision of two gorgeous puppies, Daisi and
Although the
Dog Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming) Act 2021
Western Australian Amendments
with respect to dogs and cats, this article is strictly confined to amendments
pertaining to dogs.
Animal Medicines Australia,
Pets in Australia: A National Survey of Pets and People
(Report, 22 October 2019) 6.
Emma Wynne, ‘Dog Lovers
Find Prices Rise Steeply Amid COVID-Fuelled Demand’,
(online, 20 May 2021)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-05-20/dog-prices-rise-under-covid-fuelled-demand/100150562>.
Erin Pearson, ‘Illegal
Pet Sales Rise as Lockdown Adoption Boom Clears Shelters’,
(online, 9 September 2021)
<https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/illegal-pet-sales-rise-as-lockdown-adoption-boom-clears-shelters-20210907-p58pg9.html>.
Clare Brealey,
‘Victoria’s Puppy Farms and Pet Shop Laws a World First: But
Questions About “Ethical” Breeding
Conversation
(online, 2 July 2018)
<https://theconversation.com/victorias-puppy-farms-and-pet-shop-laws-a-world-first-but-questions-about-ethical-breeding-remain-98947>
(‘Victoria’s Puppy Farms’).
‘Legislation in Each
Oscar’s Law
<https://www.oscarslaw.org/legislation-in-each-state.htm>
Oscar’s Law
Emily Piesse, ‘Ban on WA
Puppy Farms Moves a Step Closer as Government Releases Plan for Public
(online, 4 May 2018)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-05-04/puppy-farm-ban-plan-opens-for-public-comment/9727048>.
See Department of Local
Government, Sport and Cultural Industries (WA), ‘
Stop Puppy Farming:
Consultation Report
’ (Consultation Report, December 2018)
Consultation Report
See Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 2 June 2021,
1167b–1168a (John Carey, Minister for Local Government) (‘Second
Reading Speech’).
Government House (WA),
‘Message No 32 from the Governor, dated 22 December 2021’ (Media
Release, 22 December 2021).
Melissa Towsey,
‘Something Stinks: The Need for Environmental Regulation of Puppy
(2010) 21(1)
Villanova Environmental Law Journal
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 19 February 2020, 774c
(David Templeman, Minister for Local Government) (‘2020 Second Reading
citing ‘What is a Puppy Farm’,
Page, 30 April 2019)
<https://kb.rspca.org.au/knowledge-base/what-is-a-puppy-farm/>.
Consultation Report
‘Puppy Farms’,
(Discussion Paper, January 2010) 1.
Ibid 3, citing Humane
Society of the United States, ‘Puppy Mills: Dark, Hopeless Places’
(Media Release, 4 September
Puppy Farms (n 14) 5,
citing generally Paul D McGreevy and Frank W Nicholas, ‘Some Practical
Solutions to Welfare Problems
in Dog Breeding’ (1999) 8(4)
Jack McClintock, ‘Not
Fit for a Dog’ (September 1992)
36. See also Towsey (n 11)
Larry Shook,
Report: How to Select a Healthy, Happy Dog
(Ballantine Books, 1
ed, 1995) 56.
‘Puppy Mills: Facts
and Figures’,
The Humane Society of the United States
(Fact Sheet,
January 2021)
<https://www.humanesociety.org/sites/default/files/docs/puppy-mills-facts-and-figures.pdf>.
‘Lucy’s Law:
Puppy Farm Ban Set to Be Confirmed’,
(Web Page, 13 May 2019)
<https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-48249333>.
Aja Styles, ‘Puppy
Farm Sting: Strawberry the Boxer Left to Rot While Her Puppies Were Sold to
Claremont Pet Shop’,
(online, 22 September 2020)
<https://www.watoday.com.au/national/western-australia/puppy-farm-sting-strawberry-the-boxer-left-to-rot-while-her-puppies-were-sold-to-claremont-pet-shop-20200916-p55wc1.html>.
Courtney Bembridge and
Irena Ceranic, ‘Perth Pet Store Hits Back Over Puppy Farm Claims’,
(online, 29 June 2015)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-29/perth-pet-store-hits-back-over-puppy-farm-claims/6579578#:~:text=The%20owners%20of%20a%20Perth,protest%20erupted%20outside%20their%20store.>.
Second Reading Speech (n 9)
1167b (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
Western Australia,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Council, 18 August 2021, 2990b
(Stephen Dawson, Minister for Mental Health).
Second Reading Speech (n 9)
1167b (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
Ibid 1167b (John Carey,
Minister for Local Government).
An Unnatural
Order: Uncovering the Roots of Our Domination of Nature and Each Other
(Simon & Schuster, 1
ed, 1993) 259.
See, eg, Brendan Foster,
‘Inglewood Pet Store Embroiled in More Puppy Farm Allegations’,
(online, 8 July 2015)
<https://www.watoday.com.au/national/western-australia/petlovers-allege-inglewood-pet-store-is-selling-puppy-farm-animals-20150708-gi7xpx.html#:~:text=Mt%20Lawley%20Pets%20%26%20Puppies%20co%2Downer%20Chris%20Emory%20said%20he,from%2C%20was%20a%20puppy%20farm.>;
Tom Minear, ‘Puppy Farm Run by Peace Family at Pyramid Hill Damned By
Court, RSPCA and Their Own Lawyer’,
(online, 20 August
<https://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/law-order/puppy-farm-run-by-peace-family-at-pyramid-hill-damned-by-court-rspca-and-their-own-lawyer/news-story/0e913c2ef15dc8d4e4b2b094f9019da0>.
See, eg, Humane Society of
the United States, ‘Pet Stores in 35 States Pledge to Protect
Puppies’ (Media Release, 22
December 2009) (‘Pledge to
Merchants: Inside the Big Business of Breeders, Pet Stores, and Rescuers
(Simon & Schuster, 1
ed, 2016) ch 6. It should be noted that
the company that this book focuses on, Hunte Corporation, is now defunct and had
been the subject of numerous allegations and litigation regarding the
mistreatment of dogs in their care. See, eg,
Martinelli v Petland Inc
274 FRD 658 (D Ariz, 2011).
Evidence to Standing
Committee on the Economy and Infrastructure, Parliament of Victoria, Melbourne,
15 November 2016, 4–5
(Matt Hams, Banksia Park Puppies), 16–18, 27
(Mark Fraser, Pet Industry Association of Australia) (‘Standing Committee
Pledge to Protect (n
‘A Forensic View of
Puppy Breeding in Australia’,
Australian National Kennel Council
(Presentation, 2017) 4.
See, eg, ‘Guidelines
for Breeders’,
Australian National Kennel Council
(Association
Guidelines, May 2004).
Puppy Farms (n 14) 11.
Ibid 2, 11.
Styles (n 23).
Second Reading Speech (n 9)
1168a (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
Animal Welfare Act 2002
Anderson v Moore
[2007] WASC 135
, [52] (Jenkins J).
Ibid [53] (Jenkins J).
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(definition of ‘harm’).
Annabel Markham,
‘Animal Cruelty Sentencing’ in Peter Sankoff and Steven White (eds),
Animal Law in Australasia: A New Dialogue
(Federation Press,
ed, 2009) 291, 292.
Puppy Farms (n 14) 2.
Deborah Cao,
in Australia
(Thomson Reuters, 2
ed, 2015) 159. In some
Companion Animals Act 1998
(WA). In Western Australia,
legislation addressing specific species of companion animals is devolved into
separate legislative instruments:
Dog Act 1976
Competition and Consumer
(definition of ‘goods’).
See, eg, ibid sch 2 ch 2
, which provides a general protection against misleading or deceptive
See, eg, ibid sch 2 ch 3
, which provides consumer guarantees relating to the supply of goods.
[2012] WASC 206.
Ibid [27]–[50] (Beech
Ibid [51] (Beech J).
Western Australian
(n 1) s 23 cl 26E(1).
2020 Second Reading Speech
(n 12) 774c (David Templeman, Minister for Local Government).
Western Australian
(n 1) s 23 cl 26E(3)(b).
Ibid s 23 cl 26E(3)(c).
Ibid s 23 cl 26E(3)(e).
Ibid s 23 cl 26E(3)(a).
See Second Reading Speech
(n 9) 1167b (John Carey, Minister for Local Government). See also Explanatory
Memorandum,
Dog Amendment (Stop Puppy Farming) Bill 2021
(‘Explanatory Memorandum’).
Western Australian
(n 1) s 23 cl 26I.
Ibid s 23 cl 26J(2)(a).
Ibid s 23 cl 26J(2)(b). The
term ‘convicted person’ is defined as a person who has, within the
previous five years,
been convicted of an offence against the
Dog Act 1976
Cat Act 2011
Animal Welfare Act 2002
or a law of the Commonwealth, another State or a Territory that is substantially
similar to an offence contained in the aforenoted
Western Australian
legislation. See ibid
Western Australian
cl 26J(2)(c). The Standards and Guidelines for the
Health and Welfare of Dogs in Western Australia are likely to become regulations
Animal Welfare Act 2002
(WA) in the near future, meaning that
an approval to breed could be refused by a local government for failure to
adhere to any standards
pertaining to dog breeding.
Western Australian
cl 26J(2)(d).
cl 26J(2)(e).
Second Reading Speech (n 9)
1167b (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
Second Reading Speech (n 9)
1167b (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
John Carey (Minister for
Local Government), ‘Taking the Lead to End Puppy Farming’ (Media
Release, 27 September 2022).
Western Australian
See Second Reading Speech
(n 9) 1168a (John Carey, Minister for Local Government). See also Explanatory
Memorandum (n 65) 2.
Carey (n 80).
Carey (n 80).
Western Australian
(definition of ‘pet shop’).
(definition of
‘relevant pet shop business’).
cl 38D(1)(a).
cl 38D(1)(b).
cl 38D(2)(a).
cl 38D(1)(c).
cls 38D(2)(b),
cls 38D(2)(b),
cls 38D(2)(b),
relevant pet shop business must also keep prescribed records relating to the
source of each dog kept, supplied, or offered
for supply in the course of
business: see ibid
Western Australian
Second Reading Speech (n
9) 1167b–1168b (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
2020 Second Reading
Speech (n 12) 774c (David Templeman, Minister for Local Government).
See ‘Standards and
Guidelines for the Health and Welfare of Dogs in WA’,
Department of
Primary Industries and Regional Development (WA)
<https://www.agric.wa.gov.au/animalwelfare/standards-and-guidelines-health-and-welfare-dogs-wa>
(‘Dog Standards
and Guidelines’).
Major stakeholders
consulted include the RSPCA, the Australian Veterinary Association, Murdoch
University School of Veterinary and
Life Sciences and Dogs West: see Department
of Local Government, Sport and Cultural Industries (WA), ‘Consultation
Report: Draft Standards and Guidelines for the Health and Welfare of
Dogs in Western Australia’ (Consultation Report, 2019)
6 (‘Standards
Consultation Report’).
Dog Standards and
Guidelines (n 103) standard 15.2.
Ibid guideline 15.4.
Premier of Victoria,
‘Getting It Done: Stamping Out Puppy Farms’ (Media Release, 28
November 2017).
Calla Wahlquist,
‘Ending the Disgrace of Puppy Farms: Are Victoria’s New Laws the
Right Approach?’,
The Guardian
(online, 18 December 2017)
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/dec/18/ending-puppy-farms-are-victorias-new-laws-the-right-approach>.
Oscar’s Law
See, eg, Hagar Cohen,
‘Puppy Broker Banned from Selling Animals for Three Years Continued
Trading Illegally’,
(online, 10 March 2022)
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2022-03-10/puppy-broker-banned-from-selling-pets-continued-to-operate/100894396#:~:text=Puppy%20broker%20banned%20from%20selling%20animals%20for%20three%20years%20continued%20trading%20illegally,-7.30&text=A%20puppy%20broker%20banned%20from,nose%20of%20Victoria's%20enforcement%20agencies.>.
Victoria’s Puppy Farms (n 5). See also Clare Brealey, ‘The Politics
of Dogs in Victoria: Breed, Breeding Practices
& “Ethical”
Acquisition’ (PhD Thesis, LaTrobe University, August 2021) <
https://opal
.latrobe.edu.au/articles/thesis/The_Politics_of_Dogs_in_Victoria_Breed_Breeding_Practices_Ethical_Acquisition/17204081>
Victoria’s Puppy Farms (n 5), citing What is a Puppy Farm (n 12).
For example, consumers
may assume that pedigree dog breeds are inherently healthier pets, and that
rescue dogs should be avoided
as they are difficult to assimilate into a new
family: see Brealey, Politics of Dogs (n 115) 66, 75–6.
Domestic Animals Act
s 10A(1)(a)
Victorian Act
’). Note that dogs
deemed to be dangerous and restricted breed dogs cannot be registered with an
LGA unless they are sterilised:
see s 10A(4).
Ibid s 10(1) specifies
that an owner with an unregistered dog or cat over three months old will receive
20 penalty units.
See ibid s 10B(1).
See, eg, ‘Pet
Sterilisation Program’,
<https://www.rspcawa.org.au/pet-sterilisation-program>.
An applicable
organisation is a membership-restricted breeding association. Each applicable
organisation will have professional
codes of practice which bind members: see,
eg, ‘Code of Practice’,
Dogs Victoria
<https://dogsvictoria.org.au/members/members-area/members-resources/code-of-practice/>.
Victorian Act
118) s 3(1) (definition of ‘microbreeder’).
Ibid s 44B(1).
Ibid ss 46,
63–63A. See, eg, Department of Economic Development, Jobs, Transport and
Resources (Vic),
Code of Practice for the Operation of Breeding and Rearing
(Code of Practice, June 2018).
Victorian Act
118) s 58AF.
Ibid ss 58AA,
Ibid s 3(1).
Australian Amendments
(n 1) s 23 cl 26J(2)(c).
See ibid s 23 cl 26I.
The delegated legislation of an LGA may limit the number of dogs that can be
kept at a singular property.
For example, the City of Melville limits the number
of dogs a person may keep on a premises within the City of Melville to two dogs
over the age of three months and the offspring of those dogs under that age,
unless an exemption to the limitation on the number
of dogs kept is granted: see
Western Australia,
Western Australian Government Gazette
, No 141, 11
August 2021, 3463.
Standing Committee
Inquiry (n 34) 27 (Mark Fraser, Pet Industry Association of Australia).
See Simone Anita
Blackman, ‘The Role and Effectiveness of Regulation of Dog Breeding in
Australia’ (PhD Thesis, University
of Tasmania, December 2017)
<https://eprints.utas.edu.au/31435/1/Bingham_whole_thesis.pdf>
269–71, 282–4.
Standing Committee
Inquiry (n 34) 4–5 (Matt Hams, Banksia Park Puppies).
Victorian Act
118) ss 68M, 68X–67ZB.
Ibid s 68U(1); Victoria,
Parliamentary Debates
, Legislative Assembly, 12 October 2016, 3763
(Jacinta Allan, Minister for Public Transport).
If consent is given by
the DAB proprietor or foster carer further information on the name of the
relevant person or body, their
telephone number and their email address may be
given to inquiring consumers: see
Victorian Act
(n 118) ss 68U(2)(a),
68(2)(b), 68(2)(d).
If consent is given by
the recreational breeder further information on the name of the relevant person
or body, their telephone
number and their email address may be given to
inquiring consumers: see ibid s 68U(2)(c).
Ibid ss 63AAA,
Ibid ss 63AAA,
Ibid s 12B.
Ibid s 12C.
The definition of
domestic animal business in the
Victorian Act
encompasses puppy and
kitten brokerage practices by including enterprises which rear or keep dogs or
cats for profit, sale, or a fee:
see ibid s 3(1) (definition of ‘domestic
animal business’).
Ibid s 3(1) (definition
of ‘foster care’).
Ibid ss 15(4)(e),
15(4)(f), 63AAA, 68C.
Standing Committee on
the Economy and Infrastructure, Parliament of Victoria,
Inquiry into the
Domestic Animals Amendment (Puppy Farms and Pet Shops) Bill 2016
Transcript, 15 November 2016) 16.
See generally EU Dog
& Cat Alliance,
Online Pet Sales in the EU: What’s the Cost?
(Report, 18 June 2020).
Ana Goncalves Costa et
al, ‘Regulatory Compliance in Online Dog Advertisements in
Australia’ (2020) 10(3)
Pearson (n 4).
Goncalves Costa et al (n
Western Australian
(n 1) s 23 cl 26H.
Victorian Act
(n 118) ss 68M, 68X–67ZB.
Goncalves Costa et al (n
Immanuel Kant,
Lectures on Ethics
, ed Jerome Schneewind, tr Peter Heath (Cambridge
University Press, 1997) 212.
Second Reading Speech (n
9) 1168a (John Carey, Minister for Local Government).
Caitlin Fitzsimmons,
‘Dog Fight: The Battle Over a Bill to Stamp Out Intensive Puppy
The Sydney Morning Herald
(online, 27 March 2022)
<https://www.smh.com.au/politics/nsw/dog-fight-the-battle-over-a-bill-to-stamp-out-intensive-puppy-mills-20220322-p5a6ru.html>.
Second Reading Speech (n
9) 1168a (John Carey, Minister for Local Government). See also
Australian Amendments
(n 1) s 43 cl 54J.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (311 KB)
PDF format (470 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter