URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/journals/IntJlCrimJustSocDem/2025/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:02:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Garofalo, Matteo --- "Singular Purpose: Calculating the Degree of Ethno-Religious Over-Representation in the US No-Fly List" [2025] IntJlCrimJustSocDem 22; (2025) 14(3) International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy 1
Singular Purpose:
Calculating the Degree of Ethno-Religious Over-representation in the
US No-Fly List
Matteo Garofalo
University of Maryland, United States
9/11, Islam; racial discrimination; religious
discrimination; Terrorist Screening Center; US No-Fly List.
Introduction
US No-Fly List, while inherently linked to the 9/11 terrorist attacks, remains a
pertinent issue more than two decades after its
creation. Alongside topics such
as the Patriot Act and the Guantanamo Bay detention facility, the No-Fly List
seems to represent
a permanent change to the American legal and political
landscape, having remained in place long after the exigencies that birthed
are no longer of significant public concern. As a result of this permanence,
critiques made of the List 20 years ago remain relevant
and are accentuated as
new information is slowly released over time.
One of the most common critiques of the No-Fly List is that it
disproportionately targets individuals of Arab, Middle-Eastern and
ethno-religious identity (ACLU 2021; Nagra and Maurutto 2020; Roe 2019). In the
absence of direct data from the No-Fly list,
substantiating these claims becomes
difficult. However, since the List’s inception in 2001, a small handful of
data leaks have
occurred, providing limited tools to the public with which to
either critique or defend the List. The most recent and significant
leaks occurred in 2023 (Crimew 2023) and provides academics with the most
complete glimpse yet into the contents of the
List. With this data, it is
possible to provide key insights that may be of value in the ongoing national
discussion surrounding
the No-Fly List and its merits.
History of the No-Fly List
Prior to the events of 9/11, it has been reported that the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) maintained a list of 16 individuals
who were not permitted
to fly on commercial aviation. However, the full nature and structure of this
list is not well-known to the
public (Donohue 2008). What is known today as the
U.S. No-Fly List is a database administered by the Terrorist Screening Center
an executive office multi-agency organisation run jointly by the FBI, the
Department of State, the Department of Justice, the Department
of Homeland
Security, the Department of Defense and the US Postal Service. The TSC is
organised under the FBI National Security Branch
and is commanded by FBI
Executive Assistant Director Larissa L. Knapp (FBI 2023). The Transportation
Security Administration (TSA)
and major airlines are provided limited access to
the No-Fly List to prevent those listed in the database from accessing
air travel. Those listed in the No-Fly List database are not notified
of their inclusion and are not provided with an official channel
to challenge it
(Sharkey 2008).
The No-Fly List is a separate database from the reportedly larger and less
restrictive Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB), also administered
by the TSC,
although names from the TSDB are used to populate the No-Fly List (US Department
of Justice 2007). On 19 July 2021, security
Researcher Volodymyr
‘Bob’ Diachenko uncovered a security flaw that allowed him to access
the full TSDB. Diachenko did
not share data from the TSDB with any third parties
and instead reported the security vulnerability to the Department of Homeland
Security, which subsequently closed it (Diachenko 2021).
The only significant leak of the No-Fly List prior to 2023 occurred in 2006
when the producers of the CBS program
received a then-current
copy of the List from a third-party organisation referred to as the National
Security News Service. Neither
CBS nor the National Security News Service
published the contents of the List publicly, although CBS did divulge limited
information.
Notably, the leak confirmed that the names of approximately 44,000
individuals were present on the List at that time (Croft 2006).
limited releases of information, both academic researchers and the broader
public have remained significantly constrained
in their ability to analyse the
No-Fly List. Interested parties would have to wait until 2023 to gain access to
anything resembling
the complete database.
Maia Arson Crimew Hacking Event
The individual known as Maia Arson Crimew was born as Tillie Kottmann on
7August 1999 in Lucerne, Switzerland. Kottmann/Crimew has
expressed on its
website a desire to be referred to by ‘it’ pronouns (Crimew 2021),
so this article will interchangeably
refer to it by its preferred terms as
either ‘Maia Arson Crimew’ or ‘it’.
Crimew is a well-known figure among hacking and cybersecurity circles. It has
either taken credit for or been attributed to hacks
from several major
multinational corporations, including Nintendo, Intel, Nissan and Verkada
(Harwell 2021). In March 2021, Crimew
was indicted by a US grand jury for its
role in several of these hacking events and arrested by Swiss police at the
behest of US
authorities, who subsequently seized many of Crimew’s
physical and digital assets. Swiss authorities ultimately chose to neither
extradite Crimew to the United States nor prosecute it under Swiss law, leading
to Crimew’s release from detention with charges
against it dropped (Rusch
On 19 January 2023, Crimew gained access to a version of the US No-Fly List
dated 2019. This version of the List belonged to US regional
airline CommuteAir
and was discovered by Crimew while searching for unsecured databases on the
Amazon Web Services cloud computing
platform. Crimew noted what it believed to
be an explicitly ethnic character to the No-Fly List, stating that
crazy to me how big that database is and yet there is
(sic) still very clear trends towards almost exclusively Arabic and Russian
sounding names throughout the million entries’ (Crimew 2023).
Crimew did not release this copy of the No-Fly List to the general public,
but instead provided it to the third-party organisation
Distributed Denial of
Secrets (DDoSecrets) with instructions that the List be provided to
“journalist(s), researcher(s), or
other part(ies) with legitimate
interest” (Crimew 2023). This paper is written using a copy of the
partially redated 2019 No-Fly
List provided by DDoSecrets (2023).
Academic Context
Prior Literature
The No-Fly List features occasionally in peer-reviewed studies and other
academic literature. Much of this literature focuses on legal
and constitutional
issues surrounding the List, with some focusing on issues of demographic
discrimination. Florence (2006) argues
that the No-Fly List illegally
circumvents the due process rights of individuals listed on it. Moreover,
Florence contends that the
removal of these due process rights is particularly
egregious due to the lack of tools (if they exist at all) available for
individuals
to discover whether they are on the List and have their names
removed. Hamner (2009) extrapolates how the case of
Ibrahim v. Department of
opens the doors for potential legal challenges to the
No-Fly List. Creta (2016) largely reinforces the findings of Florence (2006).
Furthermore, Creta emphasises potential constitutional challenges against the
No-Fly List, as well as a lack of systems for redress.
The primary academic literature that specifically addresses issues of
ethno-religious discrimination in the No-Fly List is Nagra and
Maurutto (2020).
This article collects testimony from Muslim community leaders in Canada,
expressing anecdotal evidence of ethno-religious
discrimination faced by
community members regarding the Canadian No-Fly List. According to documents
obtained by
The Guardian
, Canadian border crossings and airports prevent
access using a large database of names provided by US authorities. This database
appears to be either the US No-Fly List or the TSDB (Ling 2018). Therefore,
accusations of ethno-religious discrimination made by
Canadian Muslims should be
seen as nearly – if not entirely – equivalent to those made by US
Muslims. Nagra and Maurutto
(2020) report a consistent belief among study
participants that their ethno-religious community is overrepresented in the
Canadian/US
No-Fly List and that the presence of community members on this
list leads to negative economic and social impacts.
Legal Challenges
The work of journalistic, legal and advocacy organisations concerning the
No-Fly List is heavily focused on issues of ethno-religious
discrimination.
Notably, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) has charged that the No-Fly
List is explicitly racial in nature,
stating that ‘lists like these fail
to make us safer, lack procedural protections for the rights of those listed,
and disproportionately
target people of color’ (Roe 2019). For these
reasons and others, the ACLU has been active in legal attacks against the No-Fly
List, such as its funding of the 2019 case
Kashem et al. v. Barr et al.
which led to limited redress concerning plaintiffs’ requests for
notification of their placement on the List (ACLU 2021).
The partial success of
Kashem at al.
came in the wake of 2018’s
Baz v. U.S. Department
of Homeland Security
, which argued on similar grounds but was dismissed for
lack of standing (Nichols 2019).
The single most successful legal action against the No-Fly List thus far has
been 2020’s
Tanzin v. Tanvir
(Justia Law 2020). In this case, three
petitioners (whose names have been sealed by the court) alleged that the FBI
threatened to
place their names on the No-Fly List if they refused to act as
confidential informants against their Islamic communities. The men
refused and
the FBI followed through on its threat in 2013. The US Supreme Court ultimately
ruled in favour of the petitioners, determining
that the FBI had violated the
Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (Justia Law 2020). While the
petitioners received monetary
damages in their case, it remains to be seen
whether and to what extent this ruling will impact the No-Fly List in the
Legal and Ethical Considerations for the Use of Hacked Data
The use of hacked data by this article may raise important concerns among
readers regarding legality and ethics. Although this author
stands by the use of
such data, he welcomes discussion on its merits. As this author is a US citizen
and is using US government materials
hacked from a US corporation, the legality
of this article is determined by US court precedent. While several higher court
and Supreme
Court cases have addressed this topic, the most frequently cited is
Bartnicki v. Vopper
(Justia Law
2019), which broadly upheld First Amendment freedoms regarding the publication
of illegally seized information. Under
the precedent set by
individuals and organisations may publish information that was originally
obtained illegally by a third party so long as three criteria
are met: 1) the
publisher played no role in the illegal acquisition; 2) the publisher received
the information lawfully;, and 3)
the information relates to a matter of public
concern (Justia Law 2019). This author contends that all three criteria have
here. This author was not involved in the No-Fly List’s
acquisition and he obtained it through legal means.
This author also holds the firm belief that publishing data from the List is
of significant public concern. While this article is
not the first to raise
questions of ethno-religious discrimination in the No-Fly List, it is the first
to offer empirical, primary
source evidence supporting such claims. Providing
such evidence would be impossible without use of the hacked data. This data may
provide support for individuals bringing lawsuits related to the List in the
have done previously. These data may
be of use to academic researchers on a wide range of topics, from government
policy and surveillance
to anti-terrorism techniques and civil liberties. They
may be valuable for civil rights campaigners seeking to challenge the existence
of the List, or they may alternatively be valuable for supporters of the
Terrorism Screening Center to build arguments in favour
of the List. In short,
there are many parties who may be impacted positively by the publication of this
data, so the ‘public
concern’ criteria of
Bartnicki v. Vopper
While the legality of using this data can be ruled on conclusively, the
morality of doing so is a much more subjective topic. A fair
amount has been
written by academics on this issue, with two notable examples being Ienca and
Vayena (2021) and Boustead and Herr
(2020). While the exact arguments laid out
in these two articles differ, they ultimately reach similar conclusions that the
publication
of hacked or leaked data is morally permissible by academics so long
as: 1) there exists a compelling public concern, and 2) efforts
by the publisher to minimise harm that may be done to individuals by the
publication. This author has already addressed
the question of public concern,
and efforts have been made by this author to protect individuals whose names are
found on the List.
First, this article does not publish the full No-Fly List
dataset; researchers who are interested in obtaining it are directed to
DDoSecrets, where they may acquire it legally. Second, the small handful of
individuals mentioned by this article (Darren Anthony
Byrnes, Azar Amani and so
on) are public figures and acknowledged terrorists. In light of these measures,
this author feels that
the moral standard for publishing data from the No-Fly
List has been met.
Content of the No-Fly List
The copy of the US No-Fly List provided by DDoSecrets for use in this article
is not fully complete or current, but it is the most
extensive version of the
List that has yet been made available to public researchers (DDoSecrets 2023).
The List is dated as a 2019
version, although no month or day is stated. In
total, the database includes 1,048,575 entries. It should be noted that one
does not indicate one individual, but rather one potential name or
pseudonym. Seemingly, every individual included in the database
has several
alternate names listed, including prior names and alternate spellings. For
example, the well-known Russian arms dealer
Viktor Bout has approximately 70
entries encompassing alternate names. As a result, it cannot be stated with
certainty exactly how
many individuals are found on the List. Based on the
frequency of alternate names, this article estimates that the number of
individuals
on the List is in the vicinity of 80,000–120,000. This
estimate is in line with statements made by US Senator Diane Feinstein,
revealed on 23 June 2016 that the No-Fly List contained 81,000 individuals at
that point in time (Feinstein 2016).
In the same statement, Feinstein claimed that
only 1,000 of the 81,000 individuals in the database were US citizens (Feinstein
Frustratingly, the contents of the List appear to be partially redacted
in such a way that it is impossible to test Feinstein’s
claim. The list as
provided contains 11 columns: ID, CLEARED, LASTNAME, FIRSTNAME, MIDDLENAME,
and MISC. Of these categories,
data are only included for ID, first name, last name, and date of birth.
Therefore, researchers cannot
directly determine the citizenship of a listed
name, nor their place of birth or passport country of issue. In direct
correspondence
with the author of this article, DDoSecrets claimed the redaction
was not made by either Crimew or DDoSecrets; rather, the organisation
that the redaction was completed either by CommuteAir or by the TSC prior to
providing the List to CommuteAir.
Methodology
As it is the intention of this article to analyse potential ethno-religious
discrimination in the No-Fly List, the redaction of place
of birth and
citizenship data presents methodological difficulties. The data as presented
provides only limited options for classifying
entrants into ethno-religious
categories. In light of this limitation, this article utilises a more
time-consuming – and ultimately
less accurate – methodology to
categorise names found in the No-Fly List. For the small number of names that
correlate to well-known
public figures, ethno-religious identity is determined
based on information known about the individual. For the names that do not
this standard (the vast majority of those on the List), ethno-religious identity
is determined based on the historical/linguistic
identity of the name. For
instance, the last name ‘Al Juburi’ is historically/linguistically
derived from the Jubur tribe
of Iraq. Therefore, instances of ‘Al
Juburi’ or alternate spellings of this name are counted by this article as
to the ‘Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern’ ethno-religious
categorisation. These categorisations may be prone to human error
as they were
conducted ‘by hand’ without the use of an algorithm or specialised
software. The categorisations were completed
– rather laboriously –
by this article’s author alone, although he encourages future researchers
to work collaboratively
if conducting similar work.
This article sorts names in the No-Fly List into one of seven ethno-religious
categories: Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern, African,
East Asian, Subcontinent
Asian, Western European, Russian/Eastern European and Latin American. These
categories – like the
methodology of this paper – are imperfect but
represent the best available method of research in light of redacted No-Fly List
Likewise, the terminology ‘ethno-religious’ is imperfect but is
used deliberately by this article to best capture the
exigencies of the data.
While many of the names on the List can be categorised by ties to ethnicities or
locations, many are instead
tied to religious affiliation, namely Islam. For
instance, the single most common name on the List is Muhammad (including
spellings such as Mohammed and Mohammad). This speaks to the common
misunderstanding in American culture that Arab or Middle Eastern
peoples are
inherently Islamic and that Muslims are inherently of Middle Eastern origin (PBS
2002). So prevalent is this perception
that the literature surrounding the
No-Fly List often describes alleged discrimination within the List
interchangeably in either
ethnic or religious terms (Roe 2019). Therefore, to
account for the broadest possible interpretation of discrimination, this article
sorts all names of Islamic, Arab, Turkish, Saudi, Persian or other Middle
Eastern origin into the intentionally broad ethno-religious
category of
‘Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern’. This decision is practical in
light of Islam’s significant presence
in the Middle East, but it is
particularly practical in light of the nature of the No-Fly List, which is
alleged to target Islamic
terrorism specifically. A preliminary investigation of
the most publicly known names on the List found that all the most significant
names of non-Islamic Middle Eastern heritage correlate with individuals
identified as Islamic terrorists.
However, it must be noted that Islam is not a religion that is inherently
tied to race/ethnicity, and that individuals of all genealogical
backgrounds are
capable of converting. Often these converts will adopt Islamic names to
represent their faith. For instance, British-born
al-Shabab terrorist Darren
Anthony Byrnes is included in the No-Fly List under alternate names ‘Assim
Byrnes’, ‘Aleem
Byrnes’ and ‘Aymah Byrnes’. By
including all Islamic or Middle Eastern names in one category, this article
to most accurately establish the degree to which discrimination exists
towards either group in the No-Fly List.
Demographics of the No-Fly List
This article can confirm the belief of Maia Arson Crimew that the No-Fly List
trends ‘towards almost exclusively Arabic sounding
names’. The top
20 most frequently found last names in the dataset can all be categorised as
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern,
as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Top 20 most common last names on the No-Fly List
Al Shammari
The distribution of names on the No-Fly List based on ethno-religious origin
is shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Ethno-religious breakdown of names on the No-Fly List
Ethno-religious category
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
Subcontinent Asian
Western European
Russian/Eastern European
Latin American
The distribution of ages within the No-Fly List is shown in Table 3.
Table 3. No-Fly List age statistics
Date of birth
Age as of 2019
The oldest individual listed in the database is Azar Amani, born 8 June 1910.
Given that public information cannot be found for a
terrorist suspect by this
name – and given that this individual would have been 109 years old as of
2019 – this entry
likely reflects a pseudonym.
The youngest individual listed in the database is Quodama Ahram Perez, born
25 January 2009, making him 10 years old as of 2019. Quodama
Ahram Perez appears
to be either a pseudonym for – or perhaps even a child of – Islamic
State member Muhammad Ahram Pérez.
If the name Quodama does in fact refer
to the son of Muhammad, it would make him the third generation in his family to
be included
on the No-Fly List, which also includes his grandfather Abdelah
Ahram (Puentes 2017).
Degrees of Over- and Under-representation: Federal Statistics
Racial and ethnic categories within the US Census are quite wide and tend to
be imperfect at capturing the heritage of respondents,
as even the US Census
Bureau will admit (US Census Bureau 2021). This presents particular difficulties
in assessing issues of over-
and under-representation for those within the
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern category, as no well-defined option exists that
them at a national level. The Census instructs individuals in this
category to place themselves under the ‘white’ classification
Census Bureau 2021), so when discussing federal statistics, this article will
utilise categories as laid out in in Table 4 (US
Census Bureau 2022).
Conversion key between Census and study categories
Census category
Study categories
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
Western European
Russian/Eastern European
Black or African American
Subcontinent Asian
Hispanic, Latino or Spanish
Latin American
Note that the Census categories of ‘American Indian or Alaska
Native’ and ‘Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander’
been removed from calculations as there appear to be no names on the No-Fly List
with ethno-linguistic origins from either group.
Additionally, the Census
categories of ‘Other’ and ‘Two or More Races’ have been
removed due to an inability
to accurately match these categories to the No-Fly
List data. The category ‘Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish’ is treated
the Census as a category separate from race but it will be treated as equitable
to the study’s category of ‘Latin
Bearing in mind these classifications, this article finds that the category
of ‘White’, which contains those classified
Islamic/Middle Eastern, is significantly over-represented within the No-Fly List
compared with their percentage of the
US population. Moreover, this degree of
over-representation is due exclusively to the presence of Broadly Islamic/Middle
names within the category, rather than names of Western or Eastern
European descent. All other racial categories are significantly
under-represented in the No-Fly List, most significantly those names of African
descent. This discrepancy is likely the result of
African Americans largely
utilising names of European, rather than African, descent and the population of
native-born African Americans
exceeding the population of African-born
individuals in the United States. The full degree of general population over-
and under-representation
is shown in Table 5.
Table 5. US population vs No-Fly List names
% of population
% of No-Fly List
Degree of representation
60.40% over-represented
Black or African American
84,799.59% under-represented
3,329.34% under-represented
Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish
672.90% under-represented
Of course, over- or under-representation within a dataset measured against
the total population is not inherently an indicator of
bias or discrimination.
Indeed, very few datasets are perfectly balanced compared with the wider
population, as groups naturally
display differences. Rather, this significant
disparity between the No-Fly List and the general population is an indication
the No-Fly List likely is not meant to be equally representative, but
instead is meant to serve as a counter-terrorism tool. If certain
categories of
people engage in terrorism more frequently than their percentage of the broader
population, then the No-Fly List may
not feature genuine over-representation for
these groups.
The US federal government does not maintain a singular, publicly accessible
closest that can be
found to such a database is the FBI Unified Crime Report (UCR), which compiles
an extensive list of all crimes
– especially violent crimes –
reported by local, state and federal law enforcement agencies for any given
year. Violent
crime is not directly equitable to terrorism but, given the
breadth of the Unified Crime Report and given that both are administered
FBI, it may be valuable to compare degrees of ethic representation between the
UCR and the No-Fly List. The values in Table
6 are calculated using the
combination of UCR values for Murder and Non-Murder Violent Crime for which the
race of the offender is
known. The data is of 2018, the last full year prior to
the 2019 dated version of the No-Fly List (Federal Bureau of Investigations
2019; US Department of Justice 2021).
Table 6. Violent crime rate vs No-Fly List names
% of violent criminals
% of No-Fly List
Degree of representation
112.53% over-represented
Black or African American
222,907.35% under-represented
1,607.91% under-represented
Hispanic, Latino or Spanish
590.00% under-represented
Similar results are seen when comparing the No-Fly List to both the general
population and the population of violent criminals. ‘White’
(inclusive of Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern) is significantly over-represented,
while all other ethnic groups are significantly
under-represented. The degree of
over-representation for the ‘White’ category is noticeably higher
here, caused by the
relatively low share of criminality for this population
compared with their percentage of the population. Much like the general
values, it is important to note that the ‘White’ category
cannot be broken down between those of European and Middle
Eastern ancestry, and
the ‘Black’ category is difficult to compare with the No-Fly List
due to the limited nature of
Degrees of Over- and Under-representation: Terrorism
The use of federal statistics is valuable insofar as datasets like the US.
Census and UCR are large and well maintained. However,
neither database can
address the key question of whether Muslims and/or those of Middle Eastern
descent are overrepresented in the
No-Fly List relative to their propensity to
engage in terrorism. To determine this, the most comprehensive publicly
available tool
is the University of Maryland’s Global Terrorism Database
(GTD). The GTD lists 209,707 terrorist attacks globally since 1970.
3,121 have been recorded in the United States, of which 694 have taken place on
or since 10 September 2001. The GDT is
designed to be intentionally broad in an
effort to be inclusive of a wide range of definitions of terrorism (University
of Maryland
2023). For the purposes of this article, the definition of terrorism
will be more narrowly defined, and must include all the following
1) The attack must have been committed by a non-state actor.
2) The attack must feature a clear social/political intention.
3) The attack must feature clear intent to instil terror or harm to one or
more groups or to society at large, rather than being narrowly
aimed against an
individual.
4) The ethno-religious status of the perpetrator(s) must be known.
Inclusive of these factors, the GTD lists a total of 206 terrorist attacks
that have occurred in the United States since 10 September
2001. Thankfully
– unlike federal statistics – GTD data can be broken down in a way
that more closely matches the ethno-religious
categories of this article. This
allows researchers to separate individuals of Islamic/Broadly Middle Eastern
heritage from the overly
broad Census category of ‘White’. For the
purposes of GTD data, the categories of Western European and Russian/Eastern
European have been combined as ‘White’. Additionally, the categories
of ‘East Asian’ and ‘Subcontinent
Asian’ have been
combined as ‘Asian’. The number of terrorist attacks attributable to
each ethno-religious group
can be seen in Table 7 and the comparison of
frequency between the GTD and No-Fly List Data can be seen in Table 8.
Table 7. US terror attacks since 10 September 2001 by ethno-religious
identity of perpetrator(s)
Ethno-religious identity
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
African/African American
Latin American
Table 8. Percentage of terrorist attack perpetrators since 10 September
2001 vs No-Fly List names
% of terrorists
% of No-Fly List
Degree of Representation
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
319.50% over-represented
1,439.30% under-represented
African/African American
71,684.38% under-represented
1,538.21% under-represented
Latin American
243.99% under-represented
As shown in Table 8, individuals of Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern heritage
have committed 22.33 per cent of terrorist attacks in
the United States
since 10 September 2001. This value is higher than their percentage of the
general population, meaning that members
of this group commit terrorism at a
disproportionately high rate. However, the percentage of the No-Fly List that is
Broadly Islamic/Middle
Eastern (93.67%) is significantly larger than the
percentage of US terrorist attacks committed by Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
peoples (22.33%). Therefore, members of this group are over-represented on the
No-Fly List relative to their likelihood of committing
terrorist attacks. By
contrast, all other ethno-religious categories are under-represented on the
No-Fly List to a significant degree.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the
No-Fly List includes different ethnicities in proportion to the terrorist threat
pose. If a defender of the Terrorist Screening Center and its policies
were to argue that the large number of Broadly Islamic/Middle
Eastern names on
the No-Fly List is justified by the group’s propensity to commit terrorist
acts, the data would not support
this conclusion. If the purpose of the List
were to accurately track potential/active terrorists, then it has failed to do
However, as the exact purpose of the No-Fly List has never been conveyed by
US authorities, there is room to question whether tracking
potential/active
terrorists by raw numbers is in fact the intention of the List. One alternate
explanation might be that the List
places more significant weight on tracking
individuals and groups based on the severity of their terrorist attacks rather
than simply
the number of attacks in which they engage. If terrorist attacks
committed by Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern peoples are on average
more lethal,
then the No-Fly List may not over-represent them in a discriminatory way. To
determine this, the GTD data are used to
chart the number of people killed in
terrorist attacks perpetuated by individuals of different ethno-religious
categories, as not
all terrorist attacks result in fatalities. Of the
206 attacks included in this study, the vast majority feature either zero
death (excluding the perpetrator), and only a small fraction feature
death totals exceeding 10.
This test of the data is run in two sets. The first set – demonstrated
in Table 9 – excludes the Al-Qaeda terrorist attacks
that occurred on 11
September 2001. The second set – demonstrated in Table 10 – includes
these attacks. The reason for
this separation is due to the nature of the 9/11
attacks as inordinately large outliers to the data. For reference, the three
terrorist attacks killed an average of 987 people each, while the fourth
most lethal attack in the dataset (the Pulse Nightclub Shooting)
killed 49. (The
more lethal 2017 Las Vegas Shooting is not counted in this dataset as
authorities never identified any social/political
intentions related to the
Table 9. Number killed in terrorist attacks by category of perpetrator
(not including 9/11) vs No-Fly List names
% of terrorists
% of No-Fly List
Degree of Representation
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
110.57% over-represented
100.66% under-represented
African/African American
53,570.80% under-represented
633.24% under-represented
Latin American
154.47% under-represented
Table 10. Number killed in terrorist attacks by category of perpetrator
(including 9/11) vs No-Fly List names
% of terrorists
% of No-Fly List
Degree of representation
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
1.98% under-represented
11.95% over-represented
African/African American
4,220.61% Under-represented
69.41% over-represented
Latin American
388.15% over-represented
As seen in Table 9, those in the Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern category have
a relatively high degree of lethality when committing
terror attacks. Excluding
9/11, terrorists in this category have killed 44.49 per cent of US terror
victims while having committed
‘only’ 22.33 per cent of terror
attacks. This means that terror attacks by those of Broadly Islamic/Middle
Eastern origin
are more lethal on average than those committed by White,
African/African American, Asian or Latin American terrorists in the United
States. However – crucially – this high level of lethality is still
not commensurate with the group’s representation
on the No-Fly List. When
accounting for the lethality of terrorist attacks
9/11, Broadly
Islamic/Middle Eastern peoples are placed on the No-Fly List at a rate that is
still orders of magnitude above what
is appropriate given their lethality. This
finding continues to imply that members of this group have been unduly targeted
However, this conclusion changes when discussing the lethality of attacks
since September 2001,
inclusive of
the 9/11 attacks. So significant was
the death toll of the 9/11 attacks that – for the first and only time
in this article –
Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern peoples are actually
under-represented in the No-Fly List. Under these conditions, the percentage
deaths caused by terror attacks committed by Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern
peoples in the United States is roughly equal to the
presence of these peoples
on the No-Fly List. Thus, proponents of the List could argue that the high
presence of Broadly Islamic/Middle
Eastern peoples is justified under this
single, particularly narrow interpretation of the List’s purpose. Of
course, making
this argument would require seeing the 9/11 attacks not as
outliers but instead as a fair indicator of the lethality of Islamic terror.
Conclusions
Ethno-Religious Over- and Under-representation on the No-Fly
Upon releasing the 2019 No-Fly List to press and researchers, Maia Arson
Crimew stated that the List contains ‘very clear trends
towards almost
exclusively Arabic and Russian sounding names’ (Crimew 2023). While this
article finds that ‘Russian sounding
names’ are the third largest
category in the No-Fly List, their representation is still relatively low, at
only 1.313 per cent.
By contrast, there exists a tremendous gulf between
the representation of ‘Arab sounding names’ and those in any other
category. Names of Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern origin account for an
overwhelming 93.674 per cent of the database.
The question must then be asked: is there truth to the claims made by
academics and civil society organisations that the No-Fly List
discriminates
against Muslims and people of Middle Eastern origin? Rather than looking at the
presence of this group in terms of
raw numbers, answering this question instead
requires comparing their prevalence to other factors in order to tease out
whether they
are over-represented, to what degree they are over-represented and
in what circumstances they are over-represented. The analysis
of this article
finds the following:
• The combined category of White/Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern is
over-represented on the No-Fly List relative to its proportion
population by 60.40 per cent.
• The combined category of White/Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern is
over-represented on the No-Fly List relative to its proportion
criminals by 112.53 per cent.
• The category of Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern is over-represented on
the No-Fly List relative to its proportion of terror
attack perpetrators in the
United States by 319.50 per cent.
• Discounting the 9/11 attacks, the category of Broadly Islamic/Middle
Eastern is over-represented on the No-Fly List relative
to the number of victims
killed in terror attacks committed by this group by 110.57 per cent.
• Including the 9/11 attacks, the category of Broadly Islamic/Middle
Eastern is under-represented on the No-Fly List relative
to the number of
victims killed in terror attacks committed by this group by 1.98 per cent.
Singular Purpose
In the absence of these findings, a wide range of answers can be given to the
question ‘What is the purpose of the US No-Fly
List?’ Highly placed
proponents of the program – such as Senator Diane Feinstein – have
argued that its purpose
it to protect against current and future terrorists
living in the United States. In Mrs Feinstein’s words, “It’s
clear we’re facing a new kind of attacker, who’s already here, able
to hide in plain sight, and we need to think about
new defenses ... the no-fly
list itself is one of our best lines of defense’ (Shane 2010). With access
to data from the List,
however, Mrs Feinstein’s conclusion appears likely
to be incorrect. Were the purpose of the No-Fly List to accurately guard
domestic terrorists, then the proportion of Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern names
would be decreased by 319.50 per cent and
the proportion of White,
African/African American, Asian and Latin American names would be increased by
1,439.30 per cent, 71,684.38
per cent, 1,538.21 per cent and 243.99 per cent
respectively.
These findings may not support the List’s advocates, but they also do
not necessarily support the List’s detractors. For
instance, the ACLU has
fought the No-Fly List on the grounds that it ‘disproportionately target
people of color’ (Roe
2019). Were this statement true, then the List would
not so significantly under-represent individuals of African/African American,
Asian or Latin American heritage. Indeed, under nearly every measure, the degree
of under-representation is greater among people
of color than it is among Whites
(excluding the Broadly Islamic/Middle Eastern category).
Based on this data, it can be determined that the No-Fly List does not
accurately reflect US population statistics, nor the likelihood
ethno-religious groups will commit violent crimes, nor the likelihood that
ethno-religious groups will commit terrorist attacks,
nor the average lethality
of terrorist attacks committed by different ethno-religious groups. This author
actively encourages further
research on this topic to discover other possible
explanations, but in the context of this analysis, only one explanation for the
purpose of the No-Fly List appears likely.
The only measure by which the composition of the No-Fly List approximates
reality is that of average lethality of terror attacks committed
by different
ethno-religious groups,
inclusive of
the 9/11 attacks. In short, when
asking the question ‘What is the purpose of the U.S. No-Fly List’,
the most obvious
answer is also the most accurate: the No-Fly List is a direct
reaction to the 9/11 attacks. The contents of the No-Fly List only
make sense if
one assumes that the massive death toll of the 9/11 attacks and the
ethno-religious origins of the attackers are the
new norm of terrorism, rather
than a unique outlier. If the trends of US terror attacks post-9/11 indeed
continued this astronomical
level of lethality caused by Islamic terrorism, then
the No-Fly List would accurately reflect reality and would be a useful national
security tool. Therefore, it is the belief of this author that the US No-Fly
List was created with only a singular purpose in mind:
as a tool to counter not
terrorism broadly, but exclusively 9/11-style Islamic terrorism.
Unfortunately for the TSC – and for those wrongly placed on the List
– two decades later, the existing data do not support
the validity of this
singular purpose. When observing US terror attacks following 9/11, no attack has
ever approached anything even
remotely near the death toll of that day. The
combined death total of all US terror attacks since 9/11 under the definition
in this article is 263, equal to only 8.75 per cent of the death
total of the 9/11 attacks alone. The 9/11 attacks represent outliers,
outliers skew the data of terror attack lethality by ethno-religious groups in
such a way as to improperly and negatively
impact Islamic and Middle Eastern
peoples. If the FBI/TSC seeks to use the No-Fly List as a correctly
proportionate tool against
potential terrorists, then the presence of Broadly
Islamic/Middle Eastern people needs to be lessened by a significant margin.
Significance of Findings
The significance of these findings lies not in this article’s analysis
so much as in the fact that this analysis is the first
conducted using primary
source data from the US No-Fly List. To this author’s knowledge, no such
academic study has been conducted
with similar data prior to this point. It is
hoped that these findings can serve as a starting point for future study of the
List specifically, and government anti-terrorism policies more broadly.
As evidenced by the lawsuits filed by those improperly placed in this
abstract and into
the daily lives of real people. Decisions made in the halls of power –
often hastily and shortsightedly –
will cause knock-on repercussions for
decades. It is the responsibility of individuals in democratic societies not
only to encourage
wise decision-making from their leaders, but also to guard
against their leaders’ worst impulses. Research, open discussion
open flow of information are key tools to make these aspirations a reality.
Data Availability Statement
The US No-Fly List dataset is available by special request through DDoSecrets
https://ddosecrets.com/wiki/No_Fly_List
The Global Terrorism Database is available by special request through the
University of Maryland at:
https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/contact/download
Correspondence:
Matteo Garofalo, University of Maryland, United States
Naval Air Systems Command, United States.
matteo.garofalo@outlook.com
ACLU (2021, 7 April)
Kashem, et al. v. Barr et al.:
ACLU challenge to government No-Fly List.
American Civil Liberties Union. https://www.aclu.org/cases/kashem-et-al-v-barr-et-al-aclu-challenge-government-no-fly-list.
Boustead A and Herr T (2020) Analyzing the ethical implications of research
using leaked data.
PS Political Science & Politics
https://doi.org/10.1017/s1049096520000323
Creta C (2016) The No-Fly List: The new redress procedures, criminal
treatment, and the blanket of ‘national security’.
Washington and
Lee Journal of Civil Rights and Social Justice
Crimew M (2021) Home page. maia.crimew.gay.
Crimew M (2023) How to completely own an airline in 3 easy steps.
https://maia.crimew.gay/posts/how-to-hack-an-airline
Croft S (2006, 5 October) Unlikely terrorists on No Fly List.
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/unlikely-terrorists-on-no-fly-list
Diachenko V (2021, 16 August) America’s secret terrorist watchlist
exposed on the web without a password: Report. LinkedIn.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/americas-secret-terrorist-watchlist-exposed-web-report-diachenko/?_ga=2.68694546.2038757569.1673977369-402314082.1673977369
Distributed Denial of Secrets (DDoSecrets) (2023)
No Fly List
https://ddosecrets.com/wiki/No_Fly_List
Donohue LK (2008)
The Cost of Counterterrorism: Power, Politics, and
. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) (2019) Expanded homicide data. Uniform
Crime Reporting.
https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2018/crime-in-the-u.s.-2018/topic-pages/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-3.xls
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) (2023) About the Terrorist Screening
https://ucr.fbi.gov/nsb/tsc/about-the-terrorist-screening-center
Feinstein D (2016, 23 June) Feinstein statement on Collins Amendment.
https://www.feinstein.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/press-releases?ID=F02871C5-A023-4DEF-AEC3-EDAF34BEA2BF
Florence J (2006) Making the No Fly List fly: A due process model for
terrorist watchlists.
The Yale Law Journal
115(8): 2148–2181.
https://doi.org/10.2307/20455686
Hamner J (2009) No-Fly List: The Ninth Circuit misapplies Congressional
49 U.S.C. Sec. 46110
, a decision that opens the doors of District
Courts to No-Fly List challenges.
Journal of Air Law and Commerce
https://scholar.smu.edu/jalc/vol74/iss1/4/
Harwell D (2021, 10 March) Massive camera hack exposes the growing reach and
intimacy of American surveillance.
Washington Post.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2021/03/10/verkada-hack-surveillance-risk
Ienca M and Vayena E (2021) Ethical requirements for responsible research
with hacked data.
Nature Machine Intelligence
3(9): 744–748.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-021-00389-w
Justia Law (2019)
Bartnicki v. Vopper
[2001] USSC 32
532 U.S. 514.
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/532/514.
Justia Law (2020)
Tanzin v. Tanvir, 592
. https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/592/19-71.
Ling J (2018, 21 June) Revealed: Canada uses secretive anti-terrorist
The Guardian
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/jun/21/canada-us-tuscan-anti-terrorist-database-at-borders
Nagra B and Maurutto P (2019) No-fly lists, national security and race: The
experiences of Canadian Muslims.
The British Journal of Criminology
60(3): 600–619.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azz066
Nichols C (2019, 11 October)
Baz v. U.S. Department of Homeland
https://www.leagle.com/decision/infdco20191011s24
PBS (2002) Global connections: Stereotypes.
https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/globalconnections/mideast/questions/types/index.html
Puentes P (2017, 25 August)
El Cordobés, the Spanish face of
Islamic State
https://english.elpais.com/elpais/2017/08/25/inenglish/1503659430_853709.html
Roe A (2019, 19 July) Airline ‘no-fly’ lists trample the rights
of people of color. ACLU Washington.
https://aclu-wa.org/story/airline-“no-fly”-lists-trample-rights-people-color-seattle-should-not-allow-hotels-create--0
Rusch M (2021, 20 October) Hackerin Tillie Kottmann: Tillie gegen die
Vereinigten Staaten.
Zeit Magazin.
https://www.zeit.de/zustimmung?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.zeit.de%2Fzeit-magazin%2F2021%2F43%2Fhackerin-tillie-kottmann-usa-justizministerium-klage-aktivismus-schweiz
Shane S (2010, 11 May) Senators demand tighter rules on No-Fly List and
addition to Terror Group List.
New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/12/world/americas/12investigate.html
Sharkey J (2008, 30 September) Not too small to appear on a big no-fly watch
New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/30/business/30road.html?_r=1
University of Maryland (2023) Global Terrorism Database.
https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd
US Census Bureau (2021, 1 March) About the topic of race.
https://www.census.gov/topics/population/race/about.html
US Census Bureau (2022, 6 December)
https://www.census.gov/data.html
US Department of Justice (2021, January)
Race and ethnicity of violent
crime offenders and arrestees, 2018
https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/revcoa18.pdf
US Department of Justice – Office of the Inspector General –
Audit Division (2007, September).
Follow-up audit of the Terrorist Screening
https://oig.justice.gov/reports/FBI/a0741/final.pdf
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (829 KB)
PDF format (498 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter